MASTER FILES ROOM C-525 DOCUMENT OF INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND NOT FOR PUBLIC USE 0451 EBS/95/149 CONFIDENTIAL September 8, 1995 To: Members of the Executive Board From: The Secretary Subject: Russian Federation - Staff Report for the 1995 Article IV Consultation and First Quarterly Review Under the Stand-By Arrangement Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staff report for the 1995 Article IV consultation with the Russian Federation and the first quarterly review under the stand-by arrangement, which is proposed to be brought to the agenda for discussion on Thursday, September 14, 1995. Draft decisions appear on pages 21 and 22. Mr. Citrin (ext. 38982) or Mr. Tiwari (ext. 38381) is available to answer technical or factual questions relating to this paper prior to the Board discussion. Unless the Documents Preparation Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the European Commission (EC), the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD), and the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), following its consideration by the Executive Board. Att: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public. CONFIDENTIAL INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND RUSSIAN FEDERATION Staff Report for the 1995 Article IV Consultation and First Ouarterlv Review Under the Stand-By Arrangement Prepared by the European II and Policy Development and Review Departments (In consultation with other departments) Approved by John Odling-Smee and Susan Schadler September 8, 1995 I. Introduction II. Overview III. Recent Developments Table of Contents IV. Performance Under the Program V. Policy Discussions 1. Monetary policy and exchange rate issues 2. Fiscal policy 3. Program financing 4. Structural policies b": Trade policies Oil export regime C. Other structural issues d. Exchange system 5. Medium-term outlook 6. Preparations for an EFF 7. Statistical issues VI. Staff Appraisal 18 1 3 4 6 7 9 11 12 12 13 14 14 15 17 18 Annexes I. August 25, 1995, Letter of Intent 23 I. Attachment 1. August 31, 1995, Letter of Intent 25 I. Attachment 2. Aide-memoire on a Supplementary Package of Fiscal Measures 26 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicII. Fund Relations III. Relations with the World Bank IV. Statistical Annex Tables 1. Basic Indicators 32 2. Consolidated Balance of Payments, 1993-95 33 3. Stand-by Arrangements 34 4. Summary Indicators of Money and Credit 35 5. Summary Federal Government Operations, 1995 36 6. Summary Operations of the Enlarged Government, 1994 and 1995 37 7. Monetary Authorities Accounts December 1994-1995 38 8. Medium-Term Outlook 39 Charts 1. Monthly 1nflat:ion Performance 2. Daily Exchange Rates: May 15-September 5, 1995 28 30 31 2a 4a Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicI. Introduction A staff team visited Moscow during August 2-15 to conduct the 1995 Article IV consultation discussions, and the first quarterly review under the stand-by arrangement. 1/ As part of this review, the team assessed the status of structural measures envisaged under the program. It also reached understandings with the authorities on a package of supplementary fiscal measures and a revised financial framework for the latter half of 1995, and continued preparatory work on an eventual medium-term economic program. The Russian representatives included First Deputy Prime Minister Chubais, Acting CBR Chairperson Mrs. Paramonova, First Deputy Minister of Finance Vavilov, and other senior government and CBR officials. Mr. Tulin (Executive Director) also participated in the discussions. Following completion by the Executive Board of the third monthly review on July 28, 1995, Rus s i a purchased SDR 359.4 million, bringing its total obligations to the Fund to SDR 4,672.7 million, or 108.3 percent of quota. If this review is completed, Russia would be able to purchase an additional SDR 359.4 million, or 8.3 percent of quota. II. Overview During the period 1992-94, Russia's economic policies were supported by three consecutive financial arrangements from the Fund (a first credit tranche and two purchases under the STF) for a total of SDR 2.7 billion, or the equivalent of about 63 percent of its quota. Policies introduced under these programs were directed at reducing macroeconomic imbalances and making major progress in structural reform with a view to transforming the economy to a market-based system. It was envisaged that, by the end of the program supported by the second purchase under the STF, the country would be in a position to formulate and carry out policies that could be supported by Fund arrangements in the upper credit tranches. Under these programs, important progress was made in reducing inflation and implementing structural reforms. On an annual average basis, inflation (CPI) declined from 2,300 percent during 1992 to 840 percent during 1993 and 200 percent during 1994. In the structural area, the major achievements during this period include the unification of the exchange rate; the adoption and maintenance of a liberal exchange system (for current account transactions); the liberalization of prices at the federal level; the liberalization of interest rates; and the pursuit of a rapid privatization. 1/ Consisting of Messrs. Horiguchi, Citrin, Valdivieso, Pastor, Lane (all EUR II), Gilman (PDR), Norregaard (FAD), Leckow (LEG), and Huh (MAE), and Ms. Toso (Administrative Assistant, EUR II). Messrs. Konovalov and McPherson of the World Bank, as well as the staffs of the Moscow offices of the Bank and Fund, also participated in the work of the mission. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicImportant progress was also made in liberalizing the trade regime, both with respect to exports and imports. By the end of 1994, prices with a key influence on macroeconomic developments--such as the exchange rate and interest rates --were largely free of administrative intervention. The progress, however, was clearly insufficient, and particularly so with regard to macroeconomic stabilization. A noteworthy feature of policy performance under these programs was the inability to sustain the required financial restraint that was envisaged throughout the entire annual program period, which also damaged credibility and raised uncertainty regarding the course of economic policies. It was particularly disappointing that the substantial decline in monthly inflation,through the early summer of 1994 under the second STF was not sustained and, instead was followed by a major setback in the latter part of the year and into early 1995 (see Chart 1). There also was a tendency for reform efforts to slow in 1994 even in areas where the authorities' commitment had been particularly strong (such as privatization). Progress in reforming agriculture--a sector of important concern, especially given its potential influence on credit and fiscal policies-- was very limited as land sales continued to be restricted by local authorities and an environment conducive to private farming remained to be developed. In view of the generally disappointing performance under the 1994 program, which followed limited progress in 1992 and 1993, the economic program for 1995 being supported by the stand-by arrangement has aimed at decisive progress in macroeconomic stabilization and structural reform, to set the stage for a sustained recovery of output and living standards over the medium term. The key objectives of the 1995 program have been: first, to bring inflation down very quickly (to a monthly rate of 1 percent in the course of the second half of the year) via a major tightening of credit policy and a substantial cut in the fiscal deficit; and second, to accelerate the move to a market economy through wide-ranging structural reforms, including, in particular, measures to liberalize further the e:xport regime and the oil sector as well as steps to reaccelerate privatization and strengthen the basis for agricultural reform. Since the main problem under the previous programs stemmed from the lack of sustained implementation-- as emphasized by Executive Directors at the conclusion of the 1994 Article IV consultation--the 1995 program has incorporated especially close monitoring arrangements. The key feature in this connection is monthly monitoring, with a focus on quantitative indicative targets for certain key financial policy parameters such as the fiscal deficit and monetary authorities' credit expansion. As discussed in the staff report for the first three monthly reviews under the stand-by arrangement, the authorities complied fully with quantitative indicative targets in April, May, and June. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicCHART 1 RUSSIAN FEDERATION 35 30 25 20 15 10 5 0 Monthly Inflation Performance (In percent) -Actual eza Program I ii 35 30 25 20 15 13 5 0 JFMAMJJASONDJFMAMJJASONDJFMAMJJASONDJFMAMJJASOND 1992 1993 1994 1995 1st Credit Tranche STF I STF II SBA Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 3 - III. Recent DeveIoDments Following a further sharp decline during the first eight months of 1994, output has since remained broadly stable. In the first half of 1995, real GDP is estimated to have registered a decline of 4 l/2 percent on a year-on-year basis, compared with 15 percent in 1994 as a whole (Table 1). Output is expected to recover slowly over the remainder of the year, bringing the decline in real GDP in 1995 to 4 percent on an annual average basis. The rate of open unemployment (IL0 definition) increased steadily from 5 percent in December 1993 to 7.1 percent by December 1994 and 7.7 percent by July 1995. After registering a low point of 4.6 percent in August 1994, monthly inflation (as measured by the CPI) accelerated to 17.8 percent by January 1995. As noted above, this reflected the effects of a substantial loosening in policies that began in the second quarter of 1994. Monthly inflation has since moderated under the stand-by program to 6.7 percent in June and to 5.4 percent in July 1995, but still remains substantially above the program objective (1 percent for July). Wage increases, while rapid, have been low in relation to those in consumer prices. After falling by 7 l/2 percent in 1994 (on an average annual basis), wages declined sharply in real terms in the first half of 1995--by about 30 percent over the first half of 1994--although there has been some recovery in the last few months. As indicated by this continued decline in real wages, autonomous wage pressures do not appear to have had an independent influence on price inflation. Balance of payments developments in the first half of 1995 were characterized by strong growth in both exports and imports. Owing mainly to a rise in exports to non-FSU countries, total exports rose to $37 billion, up by over 18 percent from the first half of 1994 (Table 2). u At the same time, imports rose by 11 percent to $29 billion. With the deficit on nonfactor services broadly unchanged, the consolidated current account registered a surplus of $3 billion (1 3/4 percent of GDP), compared with a deficit of $0.4 billion (l/4 percent of GDP) in the first half of 1994. As for the capital account, net outflows of medium- and long-term capital (mainly amortization of non-FSU debt) were more than offset by short-term capital inflows (in the second quarter) and sizable debt relief, and there was a substantial rise in net international reserves. 1/ Although the Russian balance of payments and trade statistics have undergone significant improvements, recorded exports and especially imports are substantially below levels indicated by partner-country data, suggesting that problems remain. The staff makes adjustments to the official data to account for such discrepancies. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 4 - IV. Performance Under the Program Russia observed all auantitative indicative targets specified under the program for end-July on the basis of operational data, and was in compliance with the end-June oerformance criteria measured on the basis of final data (Table 3). In addition, Russia complied with the performance criteria on external arrears, exchange restrictions, and the outstanding stock of government promissory notes (KOs). While the authorities have continued to meet quantitative objectives for net domestic assets (NDA) and net international reserves (NIR) of the monetary authorities, as well as those for net credit to the federal and enlarged governments, monetary expansion has been well in excess of that envisaged under the program (Table 4). During the second quarter of 1995, both base money and ruble broad money (M2:) rose at average monthly rates of 14 percent, owing mainly to foreign exchange intervention by the CBR. In July, base money growth remained high, registering 12 percent. In contrast to previous months, however, NIR of the monetary authorities remained roughly unchanged, and the expansion of base money reflected a significant NDA expansion caused by a drawdown in correspondent accounts of the commercial banks. This drawdown, in turn, appears to have reflected both an increase in effective compliance with the reserve requirement and a seasonal rise in the demand for currency. Accordingly, it was accompanied by a sharp fall in the multiplier and significantly slower M2 growth (estimated at around 5 percent). 1;/ Following the introduction of the exchange rate band on July 6, the CBR was a small net seller of foreign exchange during most of the month, and the exchange rate fluctuated in a narrow range around Rub 4,550 per dollar through the first three weeks or so (Chart 2). Beginning in the last days of July, there was some renewed pressure on the ruble toward further appreciation, bringing it close to Rub 4,400 per dollar during the first two weeks of August. Since mid-August, however, there has been a slight tendency for the ruble to depreciate (with its rate on August 30 being Rub 4,442 per dollar). As discussed in the staff reports for the second and third monthly reviews of the program (SM/95/105 and SM/95/121), the faster than anticipated growth of base money was a major factor in explaining the slower than envisaged reduction in inflation under the program. Reflecting that, there has been concern that the rapid monetary expansion would lead to an acceleration in inflation in the latter half of 1995, in a similar manner to that which occurred in 1994. In this connection, following the peak inflation rate registered in January, the movements in prices and the u These developments were reflected in a tightening of liquidity conditions in the interbank market, where average interest rates doubled over the course of July to above 100 percent. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicCHART 2 RUSSIAN FEDERATION 4800 4600 4200 3800 3600 Daily Exchange Rates: May KLSeptember 5, 1995 (rubles per US dollar) ‘-, ‘--__,* \ ‘---___ *. --__ ---___ ---__ -__*--__ --__ May June Source: MICEX daily quotations; staff estimates. l/ Obtained by deflating the nominal exchange rate by the index of relative prices between Russia and the US (May 15, 1995 = 100). 2/ The exchange rate band of Rub 4300-4900 per US$ was in!tially introduced for the period July 6 to October I, 1995; on August 24, the band wos extended through December 31, 1995. / , / / , / / / / / /. / / L 5200 5000 4800 4600 4400 4200 4000 3800 3600 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 5 - monetary aggregates during the February-July period of this year are indeed comparable to those recorded during the same period last year (see following tabulation), with measured velocity declining by a comparable degree. However, the composition of base money growth has been notably different. In 1994, the expansion in money was almost wholly accounted for by a rise in NDA, whereas this year it has been mostly on account of an increase in NIR. This suggests that the fall in velocity this year could, at least in part, be attributable to an upward shift in demand for money occasioned by the implementation of tight fiscal and credit policies, lessening the risk that it would be reversed in the latter half of the year provided the policy stance remains appropriately restrained. I/ Inflation and Monetary Developments: February-July 1994 and 1995 (Cumulative percentage channes during the DeriOd) 1994:2 to 1994:7 1995:2 to 1995:7 CPI inflation 54.1 59.2 Base money 103.9 87.0 NIR u 3.2 59.8 NDA u 100.6 27.2 Ruble broad money 89.4 83.2 Broad velocity money -14.9 -12.5 In the fiscal area, the cumulative deficit of the federal eovernment including all interest on outstanding Treasury bills 1/ for the period January-July 1995 amounted to Rub 31 trillion (3.4 percent of GDP, see Table 5), compared with the program's indicative ceiling of Rub 41 trillion (5.3 percent of GDP). This margin of Rub 10 trillion between the actual and program deficits was substantially higher than that registered in June. As for the deficit of the enlarged eovernment &/ for January-June 1995, it reached Rub 22 trillion, well below the performance criterion of u From August 1994 to January 1995, velocity rose by 47 percent on a seasonally adjusted basis as the inflation performance deteriorated sharply. u Changes in relation to base money at the beginning of the period. J/ i.e., the program definition 2. &/ The enlarged government deficit is defined as the consolidated state deficit (federal plus local government) plus the balance of the extrabudgetary funds. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 6 - Rub 33 trillion (Table 6). On top-of the margin registered for the federal balance, both the local government.sector and the extrabudgetary funds registered slight surpluses, compared with small deficits envisaged under the program. As in previous months, the reduction of the federal government deficit is being met through expenditure compression in excess of the shortfall in revenues. All major categories of revenue were below program projections for January-June in nominal .terms despite higher than expected inflation. The poor revenue performance reflected a number of factors, including (i) the delayed implementation of some measures envisaged under the program, in particular the increase in the oil excise tax and the elimination of exemptions for import duties and excises; (ii) a rise in tax arrears owing to the expansion of the "30/70 provision" that allows enterprises to make partial use of liquid bank balances to pay wages prior to the payment of tax liabilities; (iii) a fall in the compliance rate for both the VAT and the profits tax; and (iv) the impact of the nominal appreciation of the ruble on foreign trade taxes as well as domestic taxes indexed to dollar prices. With interest expenditures 30 percent higher than anticipated owing to the higher than expected inflation, the spending reductions fell upon noninterest expenditures which ran at 20 percent below program. Expenditure cuts were concentrated in the following areas: transfers to local governments, domestic and foreign net lending, foreign expenditures, and nonwage operational expenditures of the main spending departments. Wage payments, a protected spending category, which accounted for 13 percent of budgeted spending, appear to have been met in full. l-/ Local government operations during the first half of 1995 registered a surplus of Rub 1 trillion, compared with a projected deficit of Rub 1 l/2 trillion. Expenditures were 9 percent lower than envisaged, more than matching a sharp cut in transfers from the federal government as well as shortfalls on profit and personal income tax receipts. While only limited information is available on the operations of the extrabudgetary funds, these funds also recorded a surplus- of Rub 1 trillion, in the first half of the year, compared with .a small deficit under the program, primarily reflecting a surplus in the Pension Fund: V. Policv Discussions Notwithstanding the continued observance .of the quantitative targets of the program and a further moderation in inflation during July, the economic situation remains fragile. Inflation is clearly still too high, and the fact that the fiscal deficit targets have been met through severe compression in expenditures continues to cast doubts on the sustainability of the fiscal adjustment effort. 1/' The authorities report that there are no wage arrears. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicIn the context of the third monthly review in July, extensive discussions were held on the monetary and fiscal policies needed to enhance prospects for the achievement of the objectives of the program under the new exchange rate regime. During the current review discussions, understandings were reached on a supplementary package of revenue measures aimed at bolstering the fiscal adjustment effort under the program, as well as a revised financial framework for the latter half of 1995 geared toward attaining a monthly inflation rate of 1 percent in the fourth quarter of the year. The attached supplementary letters (see Annex I) from the authorities, and an aide-memoire (Annex I, Attachment 2), present a request for a revision of the quantitative targets under the program as well as the key features of the additional fiscal and other policy actions. 1. Monetary ~olicv and exchange rate issues The staff reiterated that even if some of the decline in velocity observed over the last several months was reflecting a rise in the demand for money, and even if some further decline in velocity could materialize, achieving a sharp reduction in inflation over the remainder of the year would require a marked reduction in monetary expansion. To the extent that the rapid growth in base money had been accompanied by a decline in the money multiplier during July, it was less of a source of concern. However, part of this decline represented a seasonal rise in the cash-deposit ratio that would be reversed in subsequent months. That, in turn, would imply some increase in the multiplier and the need for base money growth to be correspondingly lower in the coming months. The authorities agreed that a rapid disinflation would require a sharp slowdown in base money growth. Accordingly, understandings were reached on. a revised financial program that aims at achieving monthly inflation of 1 percent over the course of the fourth qusrter. As confidence continues to rise with the fall in inflation, velocity is assumed to decline by a further 9 percent, seasonally adjusted. Nevertheless, given the faster pace of disinflation now required as well as the projected rise in the multiplier, base money growth is set to decelerate to 3 3/4 percent on an average monthly basis during the last five months of the year, compared with 5 3/4 percent under the original program (Table 7). NIR is set to decline somewhat during August-December-- reflectjng a projected shift in the current account from a large surplus in the first half to a deficit in the second half and the assumed subsiding of short-term capital inflows u--although for the year as a whole NIR would rise by the equivalent of $3.6 billion compared with a decline of $0.6 billion under the original program. The revised program calls for an expansion in NDA of a pace similar to that envisaged under the original program. i/ A large part of the projected weakening in the current account is due to seasonal influences. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 8 - One element of uncertainty was the'possibility that the restrained p(ace of NDA expansion would bring.with it further pressures toward an appreciation of the rub-le, bringing to the fore the issue of the compatibility of the revised monetary program with the exchange rate band. The staff stressed that the. authorities would need to stand ready to meet such pressures with intervention to defend the band irhile offsetting the liquidity effect through sterilization operations'. This meant that, giveln the existence of the exchange rate corridor, the authorities would need to be flexible regarding the actual evolution of NDA and NIR under the program, so,as to contain the growth of base money in line with the revised monetary program. Operatio*ally, ,sterilization could be accomplished through reverse credit auctions of the CBR, the sale of CBR holdings.of Treasury bills, or sales of Treasury bills by the Government over and above immediate financing needs, with the proceeds deposited at the CBR. The authorities expressed.general agreement. with the views of the staff. They expressed concern, however, over the possible fiscal or quasi- fiscal costs of sterilization operations that might be needed. The staff acknowledged this consideration, .particularly in view of the high interest rates currently prevailing. l/ Accordingly, it once again recommended that, should inflows continue on a scale that was well beyond the authorities' capacity for'sterilized intervention, with a clear risk of undermining the fight against inflation, the authorities would need to consider an adjustment to the band. Regarding the type of exchange rate regime that should follow October 1, the authorities agreed with the staff on the need to announce well.in advance that the currentefforts toward increased exchange rate stability would-be continued in the context of a disinflation strategy supported by restrained financial policies. At the time of the mission, several policy options were still under consideration'with respect to the precise nature of the follow-up regime, including the introduction of a narrower corridor. The staff emphasized in this context that as the degree of flexibility in the exchange rate is reduced, more forceful and credible fiscal measures would be required. Moreover, the staff noted that, given the relatively shorttime that,had elapsed since the introduction of the band, there was a clear case for limiting any modifications at this stage to a minimum. In the event, the authorities announced on August 24 that the present exchange rate band would be extended through the end of 1995, A recurring theme in the past few missions has been the financial situation of commercial-banks ,in the face of the restrained credit policy being pursued by the CBR. Available data indicate that the number of loss- making banks and the share of nonperforming loans in.banks' portfolios have been on the rise for some time, reflecting the continued weakness of the I/ For example,. at current interest'rates, sterilizing a $1 billion increase in NIR would entail an interest cost of a similar amount (about l/2 percent of GDP) on an annual basis. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 9 - economy and the fact that the number of banks grew very rapidly in 1993 and 1994 in the face of a shrinking economy. The CBR has been dealing with the problem in part by issuing bank licenses at a much slower pace and tightening bank supervision. u The CBR also has dealt with actual problem cases firmly by avoiding the provision of bail-outs, with closure or merger as the basic options. The problems in the banking sector came to the fore on August 24-25, when the inability of a few banks to honor interbank obligations led to a sharp rise in overnight interest rates to as high as 1000 percent per annum and to a virtual standstill in interbank trading on those days. In response the authorities stepped in to provide liquidity through the provision of short-term credits and purchases of Treasury bills--altogether to the tune of some Rub 1 3/4 trillion (2 percent of base money). The authorities emphasized that these actions should be viewed as temporary measures to alleviate a short-term liquidity problem, and reiterated that they would not directly intervene to support any ailing bank. At the same time, they announced the formation of an inter-agency working group to work out a package of longer-term measures aimed at dealing with the structural problems in the banking sector. In the week following, interbank market activity has gradually moved towards resumption, starting with trading among a group of large banks, and interest rates returned to around previously prevailing levels. The situation obviously requires continuous close monitoring. In the meantime, preliminary data suggest that, despite the liquidity injected by the CBR, the credit aggregates and base money remain well within the framework of the revised monetary program. 2. Fiscal nolicy The disappointing performance of revenues has put the burden of fiscal adjustment on a severe compression of expenditures in nominal and real terms. Indeed, the level of federal expenditures in the first half of the year were some 3 l/2 percentage points of GDP lower than that envisaged under the program, a level which already had been deemed extremely low and difficult to achieve. In light of the risk that a continuation of such low levels of spending might not be sustainable, u discussions focused on the contents of a supplementary package of revenue measures to be implemented as soon as possible. Such a fiscal package would also help sustain confidence in the exchange rate band. lJ The new Central Bank law enacted earlier this year confers greater supervisory authority to the CBR. 2/ Aside from the issue of sustainability, there are questions concerning the costs of undue compression of productive expenditures and benefits of squeezing out unproductive expenditures that should be addressed. A meaningful assessment is not possible at this stage, however, in the absence of a thorough public expenditure review. Such a review is planned as part of a medium-term program to be supported by an EFF arrangement. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- .lO - During.th& mission, the authorities agreed with the staff's view on the need to introduce measures to strengthen revenue performance, and extensive discussions were held on the specific set of new measures under consideration. Subsequently, 'the authorities have decided to implement a package,that includes the following key measures: (i) the phased elimination of the "30/70 provision" beginning October 1, steps to collect tax arrears from the oil and railroad sectors and other measures to boost tax compliance; (ii) h'g1 1 ler taxation of the gas sector, effective September 1, consisting of an increase in the gas excise tax from 25 percent to 30 percent and the elimination off the tax deductibility of Gazprom's transfers to its stabilization fund based on operating costs; (iii) the elimination of exemptions on excises on goods imported by certain organization (such as the National Sports Foundation); and (iv) for certain industries, bringing forward;from'January 1, 1996 to October 1, procedures to move from a cash to an accrual basis in the calculation of the VAT. In addition, in order to further increase' the underlying strength of revenues, prior to January 1, 1996, the authorities intend to raise the gas excise tax furthe* to 35 percent, and during the first half of 1996, to eliminate the remaining tax deductibility of Gazprom's other transfers to its stabilization fund. The steps taken to eliminate tax deductions and exemptions as well as the measures to raise taxation of the gas sector, once fully implemented, would'be substantive measures that would have. a significant impact on revenue performance over the longer term. All told, the staff estimates that the measures being implemented now could yield additional revenues amounting to 1 percent of GDP on an annual basis during September-December 1995 relative to the program's current baseline projections. A revenue package of such a magnitude would help reduce the compression of expenditure and enhance credibility in the conduct of fiscal policy in the period ahead. At the same time, the staff stiessed that there was a strong case for preparing an additional revenue package beyond the one noted above, which would be implemented if inflation and inflationary expectations failed to start declining more visibly soon, or if a reinforcement'of supporting policies proved necessary to sustain or strengthen the exchange rate arradgement. The mission also reviewed with the authorities progress made in the implementation of the revenue measures already provided for under the program. It found that the large majority of these measures have been implemented broadly as envisaged under the program. I;/ Exceptions were the increase in compliance rates for oil and gas excises to 50 percent (intended to be,effective as of April l), as well as the elimination of import duty exemptions, which were to have been effective as of mid-March. 1/ The measures implemknted as foreseen include repeal of exemptions on oil and gas exports, increase in the export tax on oil and gas, increases in the excise taxes on oil, gas, and gasoline, increase in import duty rates, and restoration of a 1.5,percent speci'al VAT surcharge. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 11 - The new excise rate schedule for oil was introduced effective June 1, and based on preliminary data for production and tax collections, the compliance rates for the oil and gas excises appear to have reached the targeted level in June. With regard to the import duty exemptions provided to certain organizations such as the National Sports Foundation, while the exemptions had indeed been formally eliminated as of mid-March, deferrals on duty payment obligations had been extended through mid-July, leading to a buildup of significant tax arrears. The revenue package (discussed above) includes steps to recoup a portion of the overdue obligations and to eliminate further exemptions--except on a temporary basis for a small amount of imports already under contract as of September 1. The staff had further discussions on the revised draft 1996 budget, which was about to be submitted to the Durna. 1/ On the basis of the official budget accounting methodology, the draft budget envisages revenues of 15.7 percent of GDP and expenditures of 19.6 percent of GDP, leading to a deficit of 3.9 percent of GDP. 2/ While welcoming the authorities' efforts to trim planned expenditure from the level initially considered, the staff expressed continued skepticism concerning the revenue projection. Notwithstanding the revenue package currently under consideration, further significant steps would be needed to yield the level of revenues forecast in the 1996 budget, including through increases in direct taxes and concrete steps to improve tax compliance. Further discussions in this area would be held in the context of negotiations on a medium-term program to be supported by an EFF arrangement. 3. Program financing Despite delays in reaching agreements with the London Club of commercial bank creditors and national groupings of suppliers, as well as delays in Russia's initial approach to international capital markets as a sovereign borrower, the external financing of the 1995 program appears to be satisfactory. It is now estimated that external financing, including debt relief, will be of an amount similar to the $31 billion projected under the program. The larger rescheduling of debt service by the Group of Participating Official Creditors than originally envisaged under the program, assuming comparable treatment from other creditors, has more than compensated the delayed market financing. 3/ Further progress was made in discussions with commercial bank creditors at the meeting in Frankfurt in early July, but no agreement on a term sheet was reached. There continue to be some issues to resolve on terms, especially the maturity and interest capitalization of a debt stock l/ The budget was subsequently submitted to the Duma on August 28. 2/ The staff has considerable questions regarding the official macroeconomic assumptions, but efforts have been underway to reconcile the differences. J/ See Annex I to EBS/95/105 (6/30/95). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12 - operation which will not entail any debt reduction. 1. Both sides are optimistic that a final agreement can be reached by the end of 1995. Finally, preparations are underway to issue bills of exchange to suppliers with uninsured commercial claims. However, the authorities are awaiting the outcome of forthcoming negotiations with official creditors on a medium-term rescheduling in order to apply comparable terms across different types of creditors. 4. Structural policies a. Trade policies Further liberalization of the foreign trade regime has been introduced under the program, notably with regard to exports (as imports were already free of quantitative controls). A review of trade policies carried out in conjunction with World Bank staff indicates that the trade regime has been in general operating as foreseen under the program. Following the elimination of remaining export quotas and the system of specialized exporters, no new restrictive measures have been introduced, centralized exports apply now only to arms and defense-related goods, and there are no obligatory features in trade agreements with other FSU countries. In other areas, the authorities have been generally successful in resisting pressures to reinstate aspects of the earlier Soviet-style system. The recorded large increase in non-FSU exports in the first .half of 1995 (by 24 percent in dollar terms) seems to reflect, at least in part, the liberalization of the export regime that took place at the beginning of the year. Regarding the import regime, commitments under the program to adjust import duties have been met, particularly introducing a 30 percent ceiling and a 5 percent minimum duty. 2J At the same time, the Government did not, until recently, resolve the issue of import duty exemptions. As noted above, however, the Government has recently decided on a program to fully eliminate the remaining exemptions between September 1 and December 1. While the June 30, 1995 date specified in the program for harmonization of excise duty rates on imports and exports was not met, the authorities informed the staff that this process will be completed by September 1. y An issue of concern that needs to be reviewed during the next mission relates to the agreements which the Government has signed with certain L/’ Commercial bank claims on Russia are trading at an increasing discount, currently about 70 percent of face value. 2/ The monitoring of the average import duty rates under the program has been complicated by difficulties in obtaining the requisite data from the State Customs Committee, although discussions to resolve this issue are underway. 5' Among other developments in the trade policy area, Russia signed on July 17 a trade agreement with the ElJ which provides a consultation mechanism for bilateral trade relations, and the WTO working party on Russia's accession met .to begin the process of membership on July 17-19. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13 - foreign investors providing them with partial duty exemptions for a five- year period and the Government's intention to amend the law on customs duties to allow these exemptions to take effect. b. Oil export regime There has been considerable progress in liberalizing the oil export regime, another key goal under the program in the structural area. The abolition of export quotas and licensing, domestic market allocations, and the special exporters regime, have all contributed to meaningful liberalization within the oil sector. The best evidence of increased integration of the domestic and export markets can be seen in a narrowing of the gap between the domestic price and the international price from an estimated $62/tori in December 1994 to $44/tori in June of this year. L/ Taken together with reductions in the export duty over the same period, this has resulted in domestic prices approaching two-thirds of world levels. The elimination of the remaining export duty, scheduled for January 1, 1996, and investments to overcome apparent transport constraints to ,principal export markets, should permit further increases in domestic prices and closer alignment with world prices. 2/ In this connection, the staff called on the authorities to implement promptly the reduction in export duty that was to have taken place in the third quarter. Simple rules for the initial allocation of access to oil export capacity combined with tradability of access rights have resulted in a workable system. However, there remain some potential sources for concern in this area: (i) while transparency in allocating access has undoubtedly improved, it is still an issue, with present procedures leaving room for discretionary behavior; (ii) country coordinators, appointed by the Government from the ranks of the major oil producers, appear to have partly replaced special exporters in managing access to export markets; and (iii) intergovernmental agreements are being negotiated which call for volumes of exports in excess of those specified under the program and which may contain provisions allowing preemptive access to constrained pipelines. The authorities stated that they are examining ways to change the system of access, including the introduction of an auction-based scheme in line with conditionality related to pipeline access under the World Bank's Second Rehabilitation loan. L/ Of the remaining gap, $27 reflects the export duty, and most of the other $17 appears to be explained by the transportation costs incurred in exporting, notably in the use of "constrained" pipelines. 2/ Based on preliminary data, oil export volumes, like prices, are also in line with expectations under the program. Exports to non-FSU markets for the first half of 1995 are on the order of 45 million tons. Estimates for the year are in the 103 to 105 million ton range. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14 - C. Other structural issues The authorities have recently completed the compilation of a list of public enterprises whose privatization will continue to be restricted, and a schedule for the sale of packages of shares for the most important unrestricted enterprises has also been published. These actions were taken against the backdrop of developments in the first half of this year when the rate and scale of privatization had fallen behind that assumed in the program. These developments have been due to a number of factors, including changes in leadership in the privatization ministry and delays in deciding which properties will be retained by the State. Meanwhile, the so-called bank consortium proposal for the interim management of a number of companies remains under discussion, but with what appears to be a lessened momentum. As regards land reform, there remains a need for timely and clear legislation. A Law on Mortgages has been approved in first reading by the State Duma. A draft Land Code has also been submitted to the Duma but, while it provides for procedures for land registration, it does not adequately clarify the rights of land ownership. Also, progress has been slow in implementing programs that provide for abolishing existing restrictions on the sales of leased land earmarked for commercial activity to privatized firms. A draft of the new tax code has been nearly completed by the Ministry of Finance and the first section is under consideration by the Government:. As regards tax administration, the headquarters staff of the State Tax Service (STS) is being expanded and a number of measures are envisaged for the second half of 1995 which are designed to improve the rate of tax compliance during 1996 and beyond. Among these, the ones with high priority include the establishment of a task force to collect outstanding tax arrears, the creation of a team of audit experts to develop and implement more effective audit procedures, and mandatory use of VAT invoices to facilitate audit and compliance. In the area of structural policies with social dimensions, there are continuing problems with the adequacy and financial viability of major programs. It appears unlikely that the Government will introduce in the Duma during 1995 a proposal to increase unemployment benefits and improve the efficiency of the allocation of the resources of the Employment Fund. d. Exchange system As foreseen under the program, the staff conducted a comprehensive review of the exchange system with a view to preparing Russia's acceptance of the obligations under Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4. u Russia's I/ In addition, the staff is in the process of assessing the jurisdictional implications of a few other measures in existence in Russia including the tax certification requirement which applies in the transferability of certain ruble balances held by nonresidents. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 15 - exchange system has undergone a process of dramatic liberalization over the past few years. Authorized banks now freely purchase and sell foreign exchange in currency exchanges in several different centers across the country and in a growing interbank market outside of the exchanges. Moreover, the Russian Federation now maintains a liberal regime governing the making of payments and transfers for current international transactions. In this regard, resident individuals and enterprises are freely permitted to make payments for virtually all current international transactions. Nonresident individuals, however, are subject to some restrictions arising from limitation on the convertibility of ruble balances held by nonresidents in "T" accounts and in the ruble accounts of nonresident banks. L/ The Russian authorities are prepared to consider the appropriate timing of acceptance of Article VIII obligations in the context of a medium-term program. 5. Medium-term outlook The medium-term scenario discussed with the authorities illustrates a likely evolution of the Russian economy as the process of its transition to a market-based system deepens further under the conditions of increased macroeconomic stability. The scenario assumes that measures are taken during the second half of this year to ensure that the objectives of the SBA are achieved and that restrained financial policies continue beyond 1995. The overall deficit of the enlarged government is targeted to fall further in 1996 to about 4 percent of GDP and to about 3 percent of GDP in 1997, and to stabilize at 2 percent of GDP thereafter. 2J Under these assumptions, monthly inflation would decline to slightly less than 1 percent starting early 1996. Against the background of'increased macroeconomic stability and an intensification of the structural reform process, real GDP would rise in 1996, consolidating its initial recovery, and growth would be sustained at a relatively high rate over the rest of the decade (Table 8). I./ These measures are maintained under the transitional arrangements of Article XIV, Section 2. In addition, the Russian Federation continues to impose exchange restrictions against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia/Montenegro) in compliance with the relevant resolutions of the United Nations Security Council; these measures have been notified to the Fund pursuant to Decision No. 144-(52/51) (EBD/93/58). 2/ The Government should be able to finance a deficit of this size without any recourse to direct credit from the CBR, including CBR purchases of Treasury bills in the secondary market. (Of course, the CBR could buy and sell Treasury bills in the secondary market but strictly for monetary policy purposes). Also, a deficit of around 2 percent of GDP can be seen as appropriate on the grounds that infrastructure investment of some 4 percent of GDP that is estimated to be necessary for the medium-term growth path envisaged can be financed in equal proportion by current and future generations. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 16 - Reflecting a more favorable economic climate, domestic investment would rise gradually from a little below 28 percent of GDP in 1995 to 29 l/2 percent by 1998 and beyond. The higher investment ratio becomes a key factor in sustaining growth at a rapid pace over the medium term once the capacity utilization rate reaches high levels following the first few years of economic recovery. Initially, the rise in the investment ratio would require an increased reliance on foreign savings as the improved financial position of the enlarged government would be partially offset by a decline in private savings, that in time would result from the reduced pace of erosion of real wealth in an environment of sharply lower inflation. Once stability and the economic recovery become firmly established and financial market reform progresses, national saving is forecast to rise, with a turnaround in 1998. The current account of the balance of payments would move from deficit towards balance by the end of the decade. The baseline scenario envisages that Russian exports would increase at an annual average of 8 l/4 percent in dollar terms. Imports would rise at an annual average rate of 10 percent over the same period. I/ Trade would be increasingly redirected toward non-FSU countries. Gross international reserves would rise from the equivalent of nearly 2 months of imports of goods and nonfactor services projected for the end of 1995 to 3 months by the end of 1997. The scenario assumes a significant improvement in external investor confidence and the regularization of financial relations with creditors and debtors. Accordingly, there would be a substantial repatriation of flight capital and large increases in foreign investment. Disbursements of public or publicly guaranteed foreign loans would remain at moderate levels in keeping with the authorities' intention to reduce use of tied credits while making greater use of multilateral borrowing and regaining access to international capital markets. The authorities broadly agreed ,with the staff's projections, but noted that the above scenario might be somewhat optimistic in several respects. In particular, the authorities are less sanguine about the recovery in output in 1996 than the staff, although they agreed with the scenario's medium-term growth rate of around 6 percent. 2J Also, the authorities were not confident that the major boost in private direct and portfolio investment flows postulated by the staff scenario would materialize. At the same time, they argued that it was difficult to envisage a rapid growth of non-energy exports, given the outdated technology and product lines associated with much of Russia's current productive capacity and the long lags between new investment and resulting increases in exports. I./ Faster growth of imports (than exports) reflects not only the higher growth of the Russian economy relative to its trading partners that is projected but also a somewhat greater elasticity of imports with respect to domestic income than that of exports with respect to foreign economic activity. 2/ In the preparation of the 1996 budget, the authorities have set an inflation target which is similar to that assumed in the staff's scenario. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17 - With respect to the external public debt strategy, the staff has assumed a debt stock operation with the London Club of commercial banks by the end of 1995 and, vis-a-vis official creditors, a rescheduling of current maturities on pre-1992 contracts falling due through 1998, including a re-profiling of debt previously rescheduled in 1993. lJ After rescheduling, debt service would rise from $6.8 billion in 1995 to $11.0 billion in 1998. Without further rescheduling, debt service would jump to $16.1 billion in 1999 and $17.4 billion by 2000. ZX/ As a ratio to exports of goods and nonfactor services, payments would rise from 7.9 percent in 1995 to 13.9 percent in .2000. In view of the possibility that market concerns over such a jump could pose difficulties for the authorities and thereby delay market access on favorable terms for Russian borrowers, the staff also looked at an alternative debt scenario with the same characteristics but also involving an exit rescheduling of all remaining pre-1992 maturities falling due after 1998 toward the end of the three-year consolidation period. In the latter case, payments would reach $16.2 billion in 2000, or 12.9 percent of exports of goods and nonfactor services. The authorities were of the view that any significant bunching of payments would inhibit a return to capital markets. Accordingly, the staff also studied an alternative scenario involving a rescheduling of the entire stock of Soviet-era (i.e., pre-1992) debt other than bonds, with a -/-year grace period and substantial capitalization of moratorium interest. This is a scheme similar to the one currently under negotiation between the Russian authorities and the London Club. Under this scenario, payments would rise gradually and only peak in 2014 at just under $20 billion. One risk of such an approach would be that it may not be seen as justified in light of Russia's balance of payments prospects, would entail a ballooning of public debt, and could in fact impede, rather than facilitate, a regularization of financial relations with creditors. 6. Preparations for an EFF Technical discussions on the major elements of a medium-term program continued. Assuming that satisfactory performance under the current program continues, the authorities intend to request an arrangement under the Extended Fund Facility (EFF) in support of their medium-term program. Preparatory work, including studies and technical assistance, has been closely coordinated with the authorities and the staff of the World Bank; l/ Comparable terms are assumed for other creditors. 2/ These amounts exclude debt service due to former members of the Council of Mutual Economic Assistance, where some agreements remain to be finalized. On a preliminary basis, total payments due are estimated by the Russian authorities to decline gradually from $1.9 billion in 1995 to $0.6 billion by 1998, and remain close to that level through 2003, except in 2000 when $6.3 billion owed to the former German Democratic Republic falls due. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 18 - EBRD staff have also participated in the Twork. To date, a large number of position papers outlining options and issues in various areas of macroeconomic, institutional, and structural policies have been prepared and reviewed. u Some of the results of these deliberations, such as in the field of energy taxation, have already been at least partially incorporated into the current program's new fiscal package. 7. Statistical issues During the last twelve months, there has been significant further progress in solving weaknesses in the economic data base assisted in part by ongoing technical assistance from the Fund. Core statistical data for surveillance are produced and provided to the staff on a regular and timely basis, with continued efforts by the authorities toward improvements in (data coverage (see Annex IV). For purposes of monthly program monitoring, the staff has relied extensively on the CBR's operational data (as opposed to final balance sheet data), which have proven to be an adequate tool to assess compliance with monthly indicative targets soon after the end of the month. Remaining weaknesses in the data base relate, in particular, to the lack of an economic classification of federal and local government expenditures; inadequate revenue, expenditure, and financing data for the main extrabudgetary funds; estimation problems with dollar-denominated bank deposits of residents; and the computation of national accounts deflators. Although the number of statistical publications has increased in the past year, relatively little data on official foreign exchange reserves are published on a timely basis. VI. Staff Aupraisal Following another year of generally disappointing economic performance in 1994, the authorities launched an ambitious economic program for 1995 aimed at decisive progress in stabilization and structural reform to set the stage for sustained growth and development. Given that the main problems under previous programs stemmed from the failure to sustain policy implementation, the 1995 program incorporates especially close monitoring arrangements. The authorities fully observed the quantitative indicative targets for April, May, and June, and the reviews for these months were completed as scheduled. The Russian authorities continued to comply with the quantitative indicative targets in July, and also observed all performance criteria for June. This achievement reflects the authorities' continued commitment to the basic parameters of the economic program being supported by the stand-by arrangement. In particular, one cannot but be impressed with the firmness with which government spending has so far been kept under control, although &/ The work on structural policies focuses on reforms in such areas as agriculture, banking, energy and the enterprise sector, which have a major impact on macroeconomic performance. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 19 - the sustainability of-,such low spending levels is an issue of continuing concern. ,.- ,:- .,.:'1' : i ;:3 1. I~... : '_ -.:a ..J‘::.:, :, :, The moderation in monthly inflation from 6.7 percent in June to 5.4 percent in July is also encouraging. The current level of inflation, however, is clearly too high, and bringing it down to the pace of 1 percent a month during the fourth quarter remains a key objective of the economic :' '. proqam .,, ,? ..; 'The,cess~a~i;n'of the decline in economic activity and the strong export'growth indicatedby recent data are not only welcome in their own , . . . : right bjufshould also':-ficilitate the effort to reduce inflation. . . .' The revised monetary program for the remainder of 1995 is directed at accelerating the pace of disinflation. The program is appropriately tight while incorporating reagonably favorable assumptions concerning the behavior .., of .~Lefocit~;' ..,. . . F;II~::t~~~ementation of the program should bring about a visi61~ .re~u~~i~~' In iriflation. One element of uncertainty in this context is the behavior of the exchange rate under the band regime. The authorities recognize that, should:the restrained pace of credit expansion envisaged in the revised program bring with it further pressures toward ruble appreciation, such pressures would have to be met by intervention (to defend the band),,wh~ich, in .tur,n, ,would need to be accompanied by appropriate sterili:zation: operations.: ,.' ? -: .- -_:, ' :: ,: - . . .7 i The tight monetary and credit policy under the revised framework is predicated on the continued adherence to the fiscal deficit target in nominal terms set under.the stand-by program. Given the substantially greater than envisaged compression of spending in real terms thus far, necessi,ta,te<d by the weak revenue performance, a significant strengthening of policy or;.t~e'rk~~:~~~'-s‘i'de is needed to ensure the continued achievement of the def i'ki;. ';afgd‘;:' :.T‘g'.$e Sure, it may prove possible to meet the deficit target simply by the sheer will to cut spending. Such a policy posture, however, would remain subject to a high degree of vulnerability and skepticism, thereby failing to generate the favorable expectations needed for a prompt reduction of inflation. Accordingly, the strengthening of revenue performance remains a sine qua non of the authorities' strategy in pursuit of macroeconomic stabilization. The authorities' decision to introduce a package of new revenue measures aimed at generating 1 percent of GDP on an annual basis in the last four months of this year is welcome. That said, it is regrettable that the steps intended to raise revenues from the gas sector are only being introduced in a piecemeal manner, with full implementation possibly delayed until mid-1996. In the view of management and the staff, the elimination of the tax deductibility of all of Gazprom's transfers to its stabilization fund should be a prior condition for the next arrangement. More generally, the beneficial effects of the new revenue package on the public's expectations and on the underlying strength of the Government's fiscal position cannot be fully realized in the absence of genuine efforts Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 20 - to address the fundamental problem of low tax compliance. In this context, the elimination of remaining exemptions on import duties, efforts to raise compliance on oil and gas excises, as well as determined action to collect tax arrears, provide a strong signal of the authorities' policy intentions. Of course, these intentions need to be translated into actual results. Turning to structural policies, there has been substantial progress in a number of areas, including trade and oil sector policies. In particular, the liberalization of the oil export regime has led domestic oil prices to move well toward the world price level. However, some problems remain, characterized by lack of transparency. In this connection, the staff would urge the authorities to address the issues related to the role of countr]y coordinators, the operation of intergovernmental agreements, and the allocation of pipeline access (including through the prompt introduction of an auction-based scheme). The pace of privatization has fallen behind that envisaged under the program, but the authorities have recently taken steps aimed at accelerating progress in this area. In conclusion, the staff would underscore that the fuller benefits of the authorities' efforts since early this year to contain the fiscal deficit and credit expansion and to accelerate structural reform should be imminent, but their realization will require another push to reinforce the policy thrust, especially through steps to strengthen revenue performance. The authorities' commitment in this regard, as expressed in the supplementary letter of intent attached to this report, is certainly encouraging. The key task ahead is the full implementation of the policy commitments, and the track record thus far this year provides grounds for greater optimism in this regard than in the past. On the basis of the above appraisal, the staff recommends that the Executive Board complete the first quarterly review under the stand-by arrangement. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 21 - VII. Proposed Decisions The following draft decisions are proposed for adoption by the Executive Board. A. 1995 Consultation 1. The Fund takes this decision in concluding the 1995 Article XIV consultation with the Russian Federation, in the light of the 1995 Article IV consultation with the Russian Federation conducted under Decision No. 5392-(77/63), adopted April 29, 1977, as amended (Surveillance over Exchange Rate Pol.icies). 2. The Russian Federation maintains restrictions on payments and transfers for current international transactions, described in EBS/95/149, in accordance with Article XIV, Section 2. The Fund encourages the Russian Federation to eliminate these measures as soon as its balance of payments position permits. B. Review under Stand-bv Arrangement 1. The Russian Federation has consulted with the Fund in accordance with paragraph 3 (c) of the stand-by arrangement for the Russian Federation (EBS/95/46, Supplement 3) and Section XII of the Annex to the Statement on Economic Policies for 1995 attached to the letter from the Chairman of the Government of the Russian Federation, dated March 14, 1995. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 22 - 2. The letters of the Chairman of the Government of the Russian Federation and the Acting Chairperson of the Central Bank of the Russian Federation, dated August 25, 1995, and August 31, 1995, respectively shall be attached to the stand-by arrangement, and the letter, dated March 14, 1995, with the attached Statement on Economic Policies for 1995, as modified, shall be read as supplemented and modified by the letters, dated August 25, 1995, and August 31, 1995, respectively. 3. Accordingly, the performance criteria set out in paragraphs 3 (a>(i), 3 (a) (ii>, 3 (a) (v>, and 3 (a) (vi) of the stand-by arrangement for the Russian Federation For September 30, 1995 and December 31, 1995 shall be as specified in the table attached to the letter dated August 31, 1995. 4. The Fund decides that the fourth review contemplated in paragraph 3(c) of the stand-by arrangement for the Russian Federation is completed. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 23 - ANNEX I Moscow August 25, 1995 Dear Mr. Camdessus, The economic program for 1995 is more than half-completed and we can report some notable progress in terms of reduced inflation, the beginning of a turnaround in real growth, a stronger balance of payments, and a more stable exchange rate. These results need to be sustained, and the reform process deepened. We intend to begin discussions in the very near future on an ambitious medium-term program to complete Russia's transition to a market economy in conjunction with sustainable growth. In the meantime, we are determined to meet the program objectives for 1995. In light of developments thus far, certain adjustments to the program are warranted. This entails primarily a rebasing of the monetary program for the third and fourth quarters to take into account the need to make faster progress in reducing inflation. The slower decline in inflation to date relative to the program derives largely from the expansion of base money fed by a rapid build-up of international reserves. While welcome in view of the low level of reserves outstanding at the beginning of the program, this was incompatible with the program's inflation objective. To control the growth of money supply in the context of the exchange rate band regime that has been adopted, we have decided to revise downwards the ceilings on the stock of net domestic assets of the Monetary Authorities as well as the limits on the stock of net claims of the Monetary Authorities Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 24 - ANNEX I on the federal and the enlarged Government as set out in the attached table. Revised targets have also been set for the stock of official net and gross international reserves. Consistent with the revised monetary program, we will continue to aim at executing the nominal budget deficit approved by Parliament for 1995. However, in light of the disappointing revenue performance, in part owing to technical delays and administrative difficulties in implementing fully some of the measures under the program, a supplementary revenue package has just been introduced. This package comprises the phasing out of the so-called 30/70 rule and a set of measures to raise budgetary revenue from the gas sector and is expected to yield some 1 percent of GDP on an annual basis. In addition, strenuous efforts are being made to improve tax compliance. As a notable example, regulations have been issued eliminating remaining import duty exemptions for all contracts except a limited number of existing contracts where exemptions will be phased out and eliminated by October 1 for alcoholic spirits and December 1 for tobacco products, and September 1 for all other products. Only specific exemptions already provided for in existing customs legislation will be honored. With these measures, in conjunction with continued adherence to a tight expenditure plan, the Government is confident that the budgetary objectives for 1995 can be achieved. /S/ V. Chernomyrdin Chairman of the Government of the Russian Federation /S/ T. Paramonova Acting Chairman of the Central Bank of the Russian Federation Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 25 - ANNEX I Attachment 1 Moscow, August 31, 1995 Mr. Michel Camdessus, Managing Director International Monetary Fund Washington, D.C. 20431 Dear Mr. Camdessus: Further to our letter of August 25, 1995, we would like to inform you of the following: In view of revisions to the schedule of external debt payments, certain adjustments were made to 1995 monetary program indicators. They concern, primarily, the level of net claims of the monetary authorities on the federal government within the period in question; they do not change the final targets for the end of the year. The revised figures are shown in the attached table. The Government has adopted decisions with regard to additional budget revenues from the gas sector. Effective September 1, 1995, the excise tax on gas will be increased to 30 percent, and a concession involving deductions from production cost to the unified stabilization and development fund of the Russian joint-stock company Gazprom will be eliminated. We believe that these decisions, along with the measures mentioned in the letter of August 25, will yield additional revenue of about 1 percent of GDP per year. V. Chernomyrdin T. Paramonova /S/ /S/ Chairman of the Government Acting Chairperson of the Russian Federation of the Central Bank Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 26 - ANNEX I Attachment 2 Aide-memoire on a Supplementary Packaae of Fiscal Measures Representatives of the Government of the Russian Federation and the Fund staff discussed final details of a supplementary package of fiscal measures to be introduced in support of the program objectives. Understandings were reached on a number of issues. 1. The "30/70" rule will be phased out beginning October 1, 1995 and eliminated by January 1, 1996 (as noted in the letter of the Russian authorities dated August 25, 1995). The exact schedule of the phase out will be determined by September 15, 1995. It is expected in particular that, beginning on October 1, in those industries where the "30/70" rule applied, the proportion will be 20/80. 2. As noted in the authorities' letter of August 31, 1995, the tax deductibility of transfers to Gazprom's stabilization fund based on operating costs was eliminated on September 1, 1995. In addition, the Government will take measures to eliminate the remaining portion of tax deductible transfers to Gazprom's stabilization fund in the first half of 1996. The gas excise tax was raised to 30 percent on September 1, 1995. In addition, the Government intends to raise it further to 35 percent by January 1, 1996. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public9.0 1J.S lo J 2.56 345 I21 19.7 25 7 31s 409 114 33.1 . . 1.3 I .9 1.9 1.0 1.9 1.9 1.6 6.S 6.1 7.1 7 a B.1 n.1 8.4 &.O 44.0 85 7 66 I 7lR) no ¶O 101 6 5.6 Q-1 59.3 601 69 I 67 6 76 9 63.5 6.9 6.9 b.6 63 13 3 I3 I 13.6 14:s 1.0 6.3 lot.6 79 3 17 4 59 14.6 770 997 4.0 94.4 3.9 146 20 6.3 f ) ( ) 00 (.I ( ) ( ) ( J ( ) ( 1 (. 1 r*raIn d&l SMce pylmnu llf 1 6 2.0 2.4 2.9 3.7 44 .., J. I 6.0 6.1 f ) Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 27 - ANNEX I Attachment 2 3. The Government intends to bring forward, from January 1, 1996 to October 1, 1995, the starting date for the transition from cash to accrual basis in the calculation of the VAT in certain industries. 4. A major effort to collect tax arrears has been initiated. In particular, the Government, under the personal responsibility of the ministers concerned, has decided to take steps to reduce by half by January 1, 1996 the estimated Rub 7.5 trillion of arrears owed by 26 oil producing and refining companies, and also Rub 1.7 trillion from the railroads. In addition, working groups have been established to prepare and introduce measures to combat smuggling and tax evasion. 5. As noted in the letter of the Russian authorities dated August 25, 1995, the exemption on excise taxes for goods imported by certain entities (such as the National Sports Foundation) has been eliminated. 6. All in all, it is estimated that the supplementary package of fiscal measures would yield about 1 percent of GDP (on an annualized basis) during the remainder of the year. Yusuke Horiguchi Mission Chief IMF Anatoly Chubais First Deputy Prime Minister Government of the Russian Federation September 8, 1995 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 28 - II ANNEX RUSSIAN FEDERATION: Fund Relations (As of August 31, 1995) I. Membership Status: Joined 6/01/92; Article XIV II. General Resources Account: SDR Million Quota 4,313.10 Fund holdings of currency 8,985.Ol Reserve position in Fund 0.77 III. SDR Department: SDR Million Holdings 8.22 IV. Outstanding Purchases and Loans: SDR Million Stand-by arrangements 2,516.13 Systemic Transformation 2,156.55 V. Financial Arrangements: Expira- Amount Approval tion Approved X Ouota 100.0 208.3 -_ % Allocation ___ Quota X 58.3 50.0 Amount Drawn TVPe Stand-by Stand-by Date Date (SDR Million) (SDR Million) 4/11/95 -4/10/96 4,313.10 1,797.13 8/05/92 l/04/93 719.00 719.00 VI. Proiected Obligations to Fund (SDR Million; based on existing use of resources and present holdings of SDRs): Overdue Forthcoming 8/31/95 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 Principal -- -- 359.5 359.5 629.0 1,258.0 Charges/Interest -- 56.3 217.4 200.0 180.1 133.1 Total -- 56.3 576.9 559.5 809.1 1,391.l VII. Exchange Rate Arranpement: The exchange rate of the ruble is determined in the interbank auction market. Russia maintains exchange restrictions in accordance with Article XIV. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 29 - ANNEX II VII. Article IV Consultations: Twelve-month consultation cycle, September tl, 1994. last consultation concluded on b. The following decision was taken by the Board on September 21, 1994. (1) The Fund takes this decision in concluding the 1994 Article XIV consultation with the Russian Federation, in light of the 1994 Article IV consultation with the Russian Federation conducted under Decision No. 5392-(77/63), adopted April 29, 1977, as amended (Surveillance over Exchange Rate Policies). (2) The Russian Federation maintains restrictions on payments and transfers for current international transactions, described in SM/94/235, in accordance with Article XIV, Section 2. The Fund encourages the Russian Federation to eliminate these measures as soon as its balance of payments position permits. IX. Resident Representatives Mr. Thomas Wolf, Senior Resident Representative, since February 15, 1995. Mr. Alejandro Santos, Resident Representative, since July 31, 1995. Mr. Gunnar Tersman, Resident Representative, since June 16, 1995. Mr. Thomas Richardson, Resident Representative, since June 26, 1995. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 30 - ANNEX III Russian Federation: Relations with the World Bank As of August 1, 1995, IBRD loan commitments totaled $4.62 billion, including 19 separate lending operations, of which $753 million had been disbursed. The energy sector has received the largest share of IBRD lending to date (26 percent), followed by two fast-disbursing rehabilitation loans (26 percent). Other significant areas for IBRD lending include infrastructure (22 percent), financial sector/enterprise reform (11 percent), agriculture (7 percent), environment (4 percent), social sectors (2 percent) and technical assistance (2 percent). The principal objectives of the Bank's country assistance strategy include: (i) supporting the development of a market-oriented economy based on private sector initiatives; (ii) developing public sector institutions and procedures supportive of open and competitive markets and oriented toward the provision of physical, social, legal, and institutional infrastructure not normally provided through the private sector; (iii) moderating the impact of transition on socially vulnerable groups by supporting the development of a viable social safety net, maintaining social services and infrastructure while improving the efficiency of public expenditures, and promoting more flexible labor markets; and (iv) establishing the Bank as a trusted and reliable development partner through the financing of high-priority public sector investments and through policy advice on key economic and sectoral issues. In support of these objectives, the Bank has developed a four-pronged lending strategy that includes a core set of projects (largely in infrastructure, environment, and technical assistance), a set of somewhat more ambitious investment projects addressing key sectoral policy reforms, and guarantee operations to facilitate foreign investment in sectors that have already implemented reforms. The Bank is also working closely with the IMF on a series of macroeconomic policy loans (including the recent rehabilitation loans) and sectoral adjustment operations to address key structural issues unpinning the sustainability of the stabilization process, which could help provide the basis for a eventual EFF-type arrangement. During the coming year, the Bank expects to approve investment operations and guarantees on the order of $2-3 billion, including the possibility of additional fast-disbursing operations if there continues to be progress on financial stabilization and structural reforms. The IFC has been active in supporting Russia's program of privatization (including farm restructuring) and capital markets development through targeted technical assistance interventions. Over the medium term, the IFC's investment strategy aims to develop joint-venture projects in manufacturing, infrastructure, oil and gas, agribusiness, and capital markets development. The IFC had a diversified investment portfolio amounting to $260.5 million for 17 projects as of end-June, 1995. Russia is a member of MIGA, which has issued one guarantee for $9.9 million against war and civil disturbance for a metals processing project, and MIGA has a pipeline of over 160 preliminary applications, of which more than 100 are currently active. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 31 - ANNEX IV Russian Federation: Statistical Annex The economic data base in Russia has continued to improve during the last year. Most of the initial weaknesses of the data base are being addressed with ongoing technical assistance from the Fund and other IFIs. The authorities are cooperative in providing data to the Fund in a timely manner, mainly through the resident representative office. The number of Russian statistical publications has increased significantly in the last year, with Goskomstat now publishing an English version of its monthly statistical bulletin containing longer time series of key financial variables. A pending task relates to the publication of data on the gross and net reserve position of the CBR which are provided to the staff with a very short lag, but are not disseminated throughout the market on a regular basis. As of end-July 1995, the availability of statistical indicators may be summarized as follows: I./ Frequency of Data Frequency of Publication Daily Exchange rates Daily International reserves Weekly Monthly Weekly or bi- IMF Moscow weekly Office and CBR Central Bank balance sheet Weekly Weekly Weekly IMF Moscow Office and CBR Reserve/base money Weekly Monthly Weekly or bi- IMF Moscow weekly Office and CBR Ruble broad money Monthly Monthly Monthly Balance Sheet CBR Interest rates Weekly Weekly and Monthly Weekly IMF Moscow Office and other publication Consumer price index Weekly Weekly Weekly IMF Moscow Office and Goskomstat Exports/imports Quarterly Current account balance Quarterly Quarterly Quarterly Overall govt. balance Monthly Monthly GDP/GNP Monthly Monthly 1/ For monetary data, weekly reporting refers to five working day periods. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 32 - Table 1. Russian Federation: Basic Data, 1993-July 1995 1993 1994 1995 Est. Program Estimate Jan.-Jul. Jan.-Jul. (Percentage change over the corresvanding veriod in previous year) Real GDP Consumer price index (CPI) Average Within-period L/ Period average monthly wage (in thousands of rubles) Overall economy Industrial sector 2/ Registered unemployment 3/ Open unemployment 3/ Base A/ money Net international reserves A/ Net domestic assets of the monetary authorities A/z/ Net credit to banks i/ Velocity of ruble broad money I/ -12 -14 896 302 042 203 59 218 64 230 1.1 2.1 5.5 7.1 647 189 300 1 347 180 100 -10 10.5 11.4 -11 186 208 55 07 . . . . . * . . . . 20 -5 33 4 12.2 -4 400 449 2.7 7.7 71 30 33 -11 a/ 11.5 (In percent of GDP) Federal government deficit fi/ -0.7 -10.9 -5.3 -3.4 Enlarged government deficit z/g/z/ -7.6 -9.9 -5.0 -2.9 External current account balance 2/l0/ 1.6 -0.4 . 1.8 (In billions of U.S. dollars) External current account balance (deficit -1 z/g/ 5.4 3.4 9 . . 2.9 Trade balance z/g/ 14.1 14.6 . . . 8.1 Exports z/lO/ 58.3 69.1 . . . 36.9 Imports 2/l0/ -44.2 -54.5 . -20.9 Memorandum items: Average exchange rate (rubles/US$) End of period exchange rate (rubles/US$) 1,034 2,262 4,910 4,594 1,247 3,550 5,390 4,445 Sources: Russian authorities; and Fund staff estimates. I/ For 1995, data refer to CPI growth between December 1994 and July 1995. 2/ For 1995, data refer to period January-June only. 3/ End of period level, in percent of the labor force. 4/ Changes in relation to base money at the beginning of the period. I/ The monetary authorities are defined to include the CBH and the Government. a/ The decline reflects the implementation of a plan by the Government to assume the CBR's claims on banks on account of centralised credits extended during 1992-1994. I/ Calculated by dividing the annualised GDP of the last month of the period indicated by the end-of-period stock of ruble broad money. Actual data for January-July are staff estimates. g/ On a cash basis. z/ Includes the federal and local governments, all extrabudgetary funds, and unbudgeted import subsidies associated with foreign disbursements. lo/ Consolidated for both the FSU and the non-FSU countries. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 33 - Table 2. Russian Federation: Consolidated Balance of Payments, 1993-95 L/ (In billions of U.S. dollars) 1994 199J Pral. Revismd e. ~1 ;y'"'f lgg5 ~4 Ye&U! Current account &/ Non-FSU FSU Trade balance Exports, f.o.b. Non-FSU FSU 1mports.f.o.b. Non-FSU FSU Services, net Nonfactored services, net Non-FSU FSU Interest. not Receipts Non-FSU FSU Payments Non-FSU FSU Transfers, net Capital account Medium-long term, not Disbursements z/ Non-FSU FSU Amortization Non-FSU FSU Short-term y Non-FSU FSU -3.1 -3.1 -0.0 Other long-term z/ Non-FSU FSU 1.8 1.8 -- Errors and omissions -2.5 Overall balance a/ -9.5 Financing 22 Net international reserves -3.4 Arrf3arS -0.8 Non-FSU 1.6 FSU -2.4 Debt relief 10.0 Non-FSU 15.2 FSU -5.2 Other FSU financing 3.7 5.4 2.1 3.3 u 58.3 44.4 14.0 -44.2 -34.9 -9.3 -11.5 -7.1 -5.7 -1.4 -4.4 0.6 0.5 -- -5.0 -5.0 -- L.!? -12.j -11.1 4.3 4.0 -0.4 -15.4 -15.4 -- LA u -0.2 0.6 1.5 2.8 m UA 65.9 69.1 49.5 51.4 16.4 17.7 -53.6 -54.5 -39.6 -39.5 -14.0 -15.0 U-12.8 -0.2 -8.5 . . . -7.4 . . . -1.1 -5.1 -4.4 . . . 0.8 . . . 0.5 . * . 0.3 . . . -5.2 . . . -5.2 -- . . . u u -17.8 -19.3 -12.8 -11.9 2.3 2.3 2.5 2.5 -0.2 -0.2 -15.1 -14.2 -15.7 -14.8 0.6 0.6 -6.1' -6.3 . . . 3.2 . 3.4 1.1 -1.1 . * . -1.1 . . . -0.0 s!d u -16.3 -15.3 u u 4.1 3.9 -1.5 -1.0 . . . 2.8 . . . -3.9 13.6 12.4 . . . 12.4 . . . -0.1 0.1 0.1 Ls L2 -0.3 1.7 1.8 1.1 -- -0: a -2.6 0.8 0.8 u -0.9 -2.7 -4.4 0.8 3.5 22s u 2.7 Lz 2.5 13.2 70.8 18.1 18.8 19.4 21.8 78.1 55.1 13.6 14.5 15.0 17.4 60.5 15.7 4.5 4.4 4.4 4.4 17.6 -55.0 -12.7 -16.2 -16.7 -19.3 -64.9 -42.5 -9.4 -12.5 -13.0 -15.6 -50.5 -13.4 -3.3 -3.7 -3.7 -3.7 -14.4 -14.4 a -0.6 -1.4 -7.7 -1.3 -0.9 -0.1 -5.8 -1.2 0.8 0.4 0.4 0.3 0.4 0.1 -6.6 -1.6 -6.6 -1.6 -- -- u Ld u -2.2 -1.9 -0.3 -1.0 0.2 0.1 0.1 -1.3 -1.3 -- 9A -&g -3.1 -2.6 -0.3 -1.7 0.3 0.2 0.1 -2.1 -2.1 -- Lz u -15.7 -4.1 -10.8 -3.9 -9.9 -0.3 -0.9 -0.7 -4.9 0.4 1.1 0.2 0.7 0.1 0.4 -1.1 -6.0 -1.1 -6.0 -- -- a u -12.7 -3.4 Q -1.0 -1.0 u -8.3 -2.7 -2.1 -2.3 -1.7 -8.9 4.3 0.4 0.4 1.0 1.9 3.7 4.4 0.5 0.4 1.0 1.9 3.7 -0.1 -0.0 -0.0 -0.0 -0.0 -0.1 -12.8 -3.2 -2.5 -3.2 -3.6 -12.5 -13.3 -3.3 -2.6 -3.4 -3.7 -13.2 0.6 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.6 -6.7 -0.8 2.0 0.6 -0.1 2.5 -5.7 -1.3 3.2 1.2 0.3 3.5 -1.0 -0.5 -0.4 -0.6 -0.4 -1.0 2.3 0.1 0.6 0.7 0.5 1.7 3.3 0.1 0.7 1.0 1.0 2.7 -1.0 -- -0.2 -0.4 -0.5 -1.0 -- - 0.4 -- - -- - -- - 1.2 -2.8 -3.3 Au 0.6 -10.9 -13.2 2.3 21.5 24.2 -2.7 -- c2 -- -6.1 -4.1 -2.0 6.3 6.3 -- -- u -4.2 0.2 -2.1 2.3 2.8 5.5 -2.7 -- L.5 L.2 0.4 -- -4.4 -3.1 -4.4 -3.1 -0.0 -0.0 6.9 6.4 6.9 6.4 -- -- -- -- L.l -3.0 -13.4 -13.8 0.3 22.4 25.1 -2.7 -- Sources: CBR, State Customs Comnittse. GXS. Ministries of CIS Relations. of Econuny, and of Finance; and Fund staff estimates. L/ This balance of payments consolidates two regional accounts with different trade and asset valuation methods used in the compilation. The differences have becane less pronounced over time. but were sufficiently stark to warrant not showing a consolidation for 1992. For details, see SM/94/235, Supplement 1, Annex X. 2/ The presentation is changed from earlier versions in that transfers are included as a current account item. 3/ Disbursements of loans contracted or Euaranteed by the federal government. i/ Including contnercial banks. I/ Including direct and portfolio investment. 6/ The capital account and the overall balance in this table differ from the SM of the respective FSU and non FSU accounts. This results form the treatment of the FSU arrears which. in the FSU balance of payments. are treated as a capital account item. while in the consolidated balance of payments, they are treated as a financing item. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTsbl. 3 Ru*.i.” F.d.r.tion: stsnd-6, Arrmngsmnt Qumntlt.tiv. Qu.rr.rly P.rform.ns. Crit.ri. snd Uonthly 1ndic.t.l~. C.lLin~. .nd F1oc.r. for 199s I/ Usrch Indic. Rsvxssd Prorrsm m la5 r.r~.t/ JU”. Indicstiv. JULY Sspt D.C. March rctu.1 Prior Indic P.rf. Indic. t.rr*t. PVf. v Psrf Indic. D.C. Act”.1 Asru.1 T.rs*t b.ctu.1 TU‘.L Act”“1 I.r‘.r Act.“.‘ Crft.. ACta. 7.q.t ACt.“.l A‘-u. apt. ccit. ckt. NO”. D.C. crir. 12lrLl.t 1. 2. 3. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. N.t dcm..tic . . ..t. of th. mon.t.w .uth. z/ Plon.t.ry .uth. n.t cL.im. on th. .nl&. 6w-t. I/ Umstsxy suth. “st clslm. on th. fsd. (wt. L/ stoi: cf ?r.“ur; ob:i/*e:on. tram! I? D.f,sit of th. f.d. 6o.a. (dsfinitio” 1) a/l/ 9.0 6.5 D.ficit of th. f.d. 6cwt. (dsfinitio” 2) p/S/ 12.2 9.7 D.fisit of th. .nL6. ‘wt. (dsfinition 2) &/B/p/ 12.4 8.0 N.t fntl. r...rv.. of th. mon.t.ry suth. x./ 2.3 1.9 2.6 Gross ,nt* =...I-,.. of th. m”n.t.” .uth. U/ 6.5 6.1 b.6 ~t.bur..m.nt of .xt.m.L lo.“. to th. E..?n.t.~~ moth. rith m.turiti.. of: l-5 y..r. 1-12 y..r. 39.5 kk.5 66.3 1l.6 72.1 77.4 7 1 7.1 2.0 6.3 tl..wr.ndw itm: Pro6r.m d.bt ..N‘c. p.ym.nt. g/ 1.2 1.6 40.4 66.8 73.2 7.1 -- 0.5 57.0 4S.6 . . . 79.4 76.2 15.5 cl., 19.7 12.7 ,.. 1.9 3.2 7.2 8.2 1.6 2.1 mod stock. (in trillion. of rub1s.L 49.7 43.8 52.3 46.8 52.3 46.9 55.9 55.2 60.2 6,.0 64.0 68.1 72.3 77.0 77.0 [...I . 73.7 75.0 85.7 ,.. .,. 99.7 I...) 81.6 71.4 I,., 81.6 _.. 89.8 81.8 88.1 92.6 ._. 97.0 101.6 106.6 I...] 6.1 s.2 5.6 4.0 0.0 ClnmI .t Y. > . ” 20.5 14.4 2S.6 16.7 34.5 24.5 45.0 52.1 60.1 69.1 79.3 (...I 25.? 19.7 31.5 24.7 . . ,o.v 31.0 51.8 59.3 67.6 76.9 87.4 I...1 . . 33.1 22.3 . 63.5 94.4 I...1 2.0 5.6 1.9 7.4 1.9 7.4 1.6 7.5 7.1 6.9 6.9 6.6 6.3 5.9 5.9 I...1 7.8 11.1 1.2 12.5 8.2 12.5 8 , 12.8 13.0 13.3 13.3 13.6 14.5 14.6 14.6 [...I -tiv. fla with Um.ct to .“d-D.c.mb.r 199, (in billion. of U.S. do1L.r.l 2.0 -- 2.0 .,, 2.c :...: . 6.3 0.1 6.3 ._. ,, 6.3 I...1 Q,,..zL.tiv. flow. with r~p.st to snd-D.ss&.r 199, (in billion. of U.S. dol1.r.l 2.0 2.7 2.4 3.4 . . 2.3 4.3 3.7 4.4 . 5.1 6.0 6.8 ._. I...1 - not ,pplic.bL.: [...I - to b. d.t.rm1n.d. 1, As..,,m.“t of complisns. with qu.rt.rl, t.r&.t. will b. don. 0” th. b..i. of fin.1 i”fo”..ti”“. “hsr... c~Li.=. with =thLy i”dis.tiv. t.r‘.t, will b. . . . . . ..d on th. b..i, of op.r.tion.1 d.t.. D.fi”itio”. of th. p.rform.“c. crit.ri. .,,d i”dic.tiv. t.r‘.t, (includin, .~L.“.tion. of .utom.tiC .dju.tx.s”t.) .r. ..t out in th. A”“.x to th. St.t-“t of Economic PoL1ci.. for 1995. 2, Diffsrsnc. bstr..” th. md-wriod stock of b... (currmc, outsid. th. CBR plus CBR li.biliti.. to cw.rCi.L b.“k. on SCSOU”~ of l.,,.L I...,%‘.. of rubl. d.po.it.> md th. stack of nst 1”t.m.tion.L r...~.. of th;wA.ry suthorlti.. v.1u.d .I Rub 3.550 psr USSl. 3, Dsfinsd s‘ m~n.t.rv suth”rit1.s clsim. on th. f.d.r.L mv.r,mmmt .nd “st CBR clsims on th. 1os.L Be”.-t. .“d on .LL .xtr.bud‘.t.ry fund.. i. 4, Dsfinsd . . CBR nst clsim. o” th. f.d.r.1 a.“.-nt snd th. rubl. ~o~tsrpsrt of th. ‘w.m..nt stock of “St i”t.m.tio”.L r...~.., sdjustsd to sxclud. th. iq.st of ch.“‘.. in th. sxchm6. rst... ;/ Nst stock of Y.0. outstmdi” on sn, dst. 1, dsfinsd s. th. .m of tb. principsl of .I1 110. out.t.ndiw on thst dst. which h.v. . uturfty thst sxtsnd. bsyond thst dst.. 6, Cm . cssh bssi., .xc@, for tr.ra.ctio”. r.L.tin‘ to ‘.X0. snd sch.du1.d p.ym.“t. on sxt.m.1 dsbt s. projsctsd by th. RussI.” suthoriti... 1, Includfng only th. rs.1 ca.,mn.nt of L”t.r..t on G19. . . psrt of s~snditur... 8, Insludin~ sll 1”t.rs.t on GiW. (rs.1 .“d inflstion cct.Pm.nt.) s. put of sxpsnditur... 1, Th. snlsr‘sd public ..ct”r 1. dsfinsd to includ. th. f.d.r.1 .“d 1oc.L Lovs~snt.. .lL .rtr.bud&.t.rY fund.. lo, Dsfinsd ‘. th. diffsrsnc. bstr..” fer.1~” r...~. . . ..t. .“d Li.biLiti.. of th. CBR, th. Gov.r”Wnt. .“d th. “st short-tsrm li.biLiti.. hsld by VnsshskonombuJ or sny othsr in.titution on bshslf of th. Oovsmmsnt a/ Dsfinsd s. th. fcx.isn r...~. . . ..t. of th. CBR md th. Gov.B”t. g, tlonstsry dsbt ..,~ic. psymsnt. for Hsrch to Jul, sr. s. spscifisd 1” th. St.t.m.“t Of EeonoPiC Polici~m for 1995. Monthly dsbt ssrvic. p.,Ta."t. spscffisd for Au‘ust to D.s.&.r h.“. I,..” .dju.t.d to t&k. into .cco~nt modificstions to th. pro6r.a sst out sbovs: thsss dsbt ssrvic. p.7msnts will bs ussd for th. wrposss of ms.surin& net dcasstic ssssts. "se crsdft of ths mnsts~ suthoriti.. to th. fsdsrsl md snlsrEsd ‘o”.r”m.“t.. .nd “st i”t.m.tion.l r...rv... Of th. r.v;..d uuru.1 projsctio" Of USS6.8 billlo” 1” .xt.m.l dsbt ..N~c., USS6.4 billion 1. f1n.nc.d frca bud6.t sppropristio”. .“d $0.4 bilLi‘,” is pro”1d.d by th. r..LLoc.tlon of otbsr bud8.t ~SSOUIC... . . Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public. Table 4. Russian Federation: Summary Indicators of Money and Credit, December 1994-July 1995 Dec. 1994-June 1995 Dec. 1994-July 1995 June Julv Prog. Prel. Prog. Prel. Prog. Prel. Prog. Prel. Consumer prices Base money u Net international reserves (NIR) uv Net domestic assets of the monetary authorities u4/ Net credit to enlarged government u Net credit to federal government 2/1/ Net credit to banks 2/ Ruble broad money (M2) Memorandum items: Ruble M2 velocity CBR refinance rate (end of period, compounded) Average interbank rate (end of period, not compounded) u (Chances in percent within the oeriod unless otherwise indicated) 54 78 55 87 2 7 1 5 22 53 28 71 4 15 4 12 -3 38 -5 38 -0 10 -2 0 25 15 33 33 5 5 6 12 27 18 37 20 5 5 8 2 27 20 37 20 5 5 8 0 5 -17 4 -11 1 -11 -1 4 I w 19 62 24 . . . 4 14 4 wl . . . I . . . . . . . . . . . . 12.2 11.6 12.2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 180% . . . 180% . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83% . . . 107% Sources: Central Bank of Russia; Goskomstat; and Fund staff estimates. u Defined as the sum of currency issued and required reserves. u Changes in relation to monetary base at the beginning of the period. y Calculated using a constant accounting exchange rate of Rub 3,550 per U.S. dollar. k/ Net domestic assets are defined as the difference between base money and NIR. r/ Indicative limit. u Three-month equivalent basis. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 36 - Table 5. Russian Federation: Sumnary Federal Government Operations, 1995 Program Actual 1st 1st Jan.- 1st 1st Prel. Quarter Half Jul. Quarter Half Jan.-Jul. Total revenue L/ 3L.7 79.4 96.5 31.9 VAT 12.9 31.1 38.7 13.i Profit taxes 7.9 19.0 22.5 5.6 Other revenues &/ 11.9 29.3 35.3 13.1 Total expenditure 2/ Overall balance; definition 2 (deficit -1 3/ Net foreign financing Disbursements Principal repayment (scheduled) 44.9 -lz.z * 3.1 -4.0 110.9 -31 5 - u 6.0 -8.6 137.4 41.6 -40.9 -9 7 - -1.2 u 0.4 1.9 -9.5 -3.6 Domestic financing Banking system Monetary authorities Rest of banking system Nonbank financing Of which: Privatisation proceeds Net proceeds of gold sales Total revenue Total expenditure Overall balance; definition 2 (deficit -1 3/ Net foreign financing Domestic financing Banking system Nonbank financing Memorandum items: Federal government deficit (definition 1) 2/ In trillions of rubles In percent of GDP Nominal GDP (in trillions of rubles) z/ _1:1.1 8 . 7 !i . 3 3 . 4 4 . 4 0 . 7 0 . 0 10.5 _14.5 -3.9 -3.3 4.2 .2 . 8 1.4 9.0 2.9 310 (In trillions of rubles: cumulated) 74.3 89.6 29.2 . . . 17.5 . . . 27.6 . . . 99.0 -24 7 - -3.8 3.8 -7.6 120.6 -31.0 -2.8 5.5 -8.4 33.2 21.6 12.4 9.2 11.6 42.1 11.4 27.2 9.6 16.9 1.6 10.3 7.8 14.9 2.0 4.7 0.0 1.8 2.0 28.5 33.8 26.8 29.5 9.7 9.7 17.1 19.7 1.7 4.4 3.3 1.8 0.1 0.1 3.4 6.3 (In percent of GDP) 12.1 16.8 -4.8 -0.3 5.0 3.3 1.8 12.4 9.9 17.7 12 9 t -5.3 -3 0 A -0.2 A -0 5 5.4 3.5 3.5 2.9 1.9 0.6 u 13.2 -3.3 -0.5 3.8 3.6 0.2 9.8 13.2 -3.4 -0 3 .-L 3.7 3T3: 0.5 25.6 34.5 6.5 18.7 24.5 3.9 4.4 2.0 2.5 2.7 659 777 322 749 912 Sources: Ministry of Finance; and Fund staff estimates. L/ Includes tax payments using redemption of KOs in transit. Excluding debt service contingency. 2/ Including float and statistical discrepancy. Excluding debt service contingency. 3/ Including total interest paid and accrued on GKOs as part of expenditure. b/ Excludes inflation component of GKO interest from expenditure. z/ Based on staff GDP estimates. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 37 - Table 6. Russian Federation: Sumnary Operations of the Enlarged Government, 1994 and 1995 1995 Prorram Actual 1st 1st 1995 Quarter Half Jan.-Jul. 1994 1st Q 1st Aalf Consolidated state balance (deficit -1 Revenues Expenditures L/ -12,5 69.4 82.0 -33 0 - -43.0 -65 0 - 162.2 195.7 153.0 195.2 238.6 219.0 Federal government balance; definition 2 (deficit -1 2/ Revenue Expenditures L/ -12,2 -31.5 32.7 79.4 44.9 110.9 Local government balance (deficit- 1 2/ a -1.5 Revenues 45.2 101.4 Of which: federal transfers 8.5 18.5 Expenditures 45.6 102.8 Extrabudgetary funds balance (deficit -) 2/ u -0.1 Enlarged government balance (deficit -1 -33.1 Net foreign financing u -1.7 Foreign disbursements 3.1 6.8 Principal repayment (scheduled) -4.0 -8.6 Domestic financing Bank financing Monetary auth. net credit to Government Rest of the banking system Net credit from commercial banks Securities held by cocxnercial banks Nonbank financing Privatisation proceeds Net proceeds from sale of gold, gems and precious metals Securities held by nonbank sector Domestic principal repayment Other Enlarged government balance (deficit -1 Consolidated state balance (deficit -1 Extrabudgetary funds balance (deficit -1 Memorandum item: Nominal GDP (in trillions of rubles) m m 8.5 21.8 5.3 12.4 3.3 9.3 -0.1 0.1 3.4 9.2 4.0 13.1 1.1 4.8 0.0 3.9 -0.3 -- -4.0 -4.3 h_ 310 1.8 7.3 -0.9 -- -5.0 -5.6 -9.9 -5.0 -5.5 -10.3 -- -- 0.5 659 777 630 322 749 (In trillions of rubles) -40,9 -68.0 96.5 69.0 137.4 137.0 -2.0 3.0 122.3 110.0 23.1 25.0 124.3 107.0 -0.4 3.0 -43.3 -62 3 - u 0.2 8.4 5.4 -9.5 -5.3 u 62.1 27.6 52.8 1.9 49.3 10.7 3.5 0.4 -6.1 10.3 9.6 16.9 9.3 6.7 0.7 1.8 3.9 9.5 5.5 -1.1 -0.9 -- -- (In percent of GDP) -8.0 -22.3 65.0 160.1 73.0 182.4 -9.7 -24.7 31.9 74.3 41.6 99.0 1.3 1.0 37.6 94.0 4.5 8.2 36.3 93.0 1.3 1.0 -8.0 -21.7 -1.7 -3.8 1.9 3.8 -3.6 -7.6 9.8 25.5 7.3 22.0 2.5 3.5 6.2 13.3 -3.0 -6.4 9.3 19.7 2.5 3.5 0.3 0.7 2.0 0.3 -0.3 0.2 3.4 -1.2 -0.5 1.2 -2.5 -2.9 -2.5 -3.0 -- 0.1 Sources: Ministry of Finance, extrabudgetary funds; and Fund staff estimates. L/ Includes real and inflation components of interest accured on GEOs. 2/ Unconsolidated ravanues and expenditures (inclusive of transfers). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 7. Russisn Federation: Monetary Autboritia Accounts, December 1994 - Dcccmber 1995. (End period stocks in trillions of rubles, onlcsr otherwise noted) Monetary Autboritia Accounts Net Intermtioml Reserves 1/y NetDomestic &sets g Net Ctaiis on Enlarged Govwrtmen~ $I Net Credit to Federal Govemmeti 5J CER Net Credit to Fsdasl Gwarnme~ f?hb Camterparl of the stock of Gov’t NIR flncl. IMF) 4/ CER Net Credit to Local Governments CER Na Credit to Extra Eudgetsry Funds CBR Net Crsd# to Bsnks CER Grose Cmdit to bsti CBR Gross LiabWea to banks (sxcl WI reeawea) DqmilAuclkam Interststa loam other Items (ml) Base Momy (Marlh)y a-w% *w) Financial Indicators R&la Br@sd Money (MmW a-w% chrW Mullplii g Mation (monthlyaveqa% ctsqe in GDP daft&or) Memorandum Items Unadjusted Monetsty Ahwi6ea Accxwnb n Net lntermtbml Rasarwa Net Domestic Assets T RWISED PROGRAM FOR AUGUST - DECEMBER 1995 1994 1995 Q4 Ql Q2 Jurv ‘, ‘. A& ‘. .Sap. :, 43 ... Dct ‘.‘.:.. No-i.::: ..:.DsG 44 Pm&J. Actmi Prog,. Acbnl Pro&‘. Actml ‘,’ ,. . . 8.1 ‘6.7 Q., :: 6:;. 39.5 ,:: u:5 66.3 721 72.1 77.9 64.1 ‘. -..: 6.1 ‘.‘.’ . . . -3.3 . . . -25 : .;; 1.5 ‘. 3.1, 14.9 16.2 -13.4 -13.1: 2.2 ‘. 22 -30.5 : +i.O 47.7 51.2 a.5 2.4. 97’ 99 7.2 0.0 2.03 .. ,i: 8.1 6.7 39.5 44.5 49.5 i.1: ..52,3. 67.4 84.* 73.0 96.0 65.6 .. ‘, ,i 0.2 ‘. ..: -4.2 ‘. .‘. -22 7.3 -6: 19.8 0.2 -125 -15.1 21 ,2.2 -36.4 -27.2 49.6 59.0 1.3 4.1 , 107 ,115 3.4 4.1 216 i.95 165 I74 181 181 5.1 5.7 4.0 5.9 202 204 205 205 5.4 3.5 23 3.7 7.3 -6.i 225 ” 3s 21.5 21.5 21.1 21.1 423 52.3 59.6 I :: 569 60.2 64.0 67.4 67.4 26.2 5.6 5.6 46.9 46.9 56.9 56.9 74.9 74.9 63.2 63.2 01.8 01.8 m-0 m-0 66.7 66.7 . . . . 15.1 15.1 :.. :.. -4.5 -4.5 ,,. ,,. -24 -24 -3.1 -3.1 .3.% .3.% 16.7 16.7 19.2 19.2 -16.6 -16.6 -16.7 -16.7 -1.2 -1.2 ‘, ii ‘, ii 22 22 .’ 2.2 .’ 2.2 -27.0 -27.0 ,-32-s ,-32-s 73.1 $1.5 13.6 4.3 26.5 65.2 75.9 81.8 65.2 16.6 -3.9 -20 4.0 16.7 -127 -- 22 -26.9 81.7 11.7 25.3 60.2 81.2 88.1 . . . . . . . . 4.0 17.5 -13.5 -- 22 -27.2 05.5 4.6 24.5 64.0 85.7 92.6 . . . . . . . 3.7 16.7 -13.0 -- 22 -27.6 88.5 3.5 24.5 64.0 85.7 92.6 . .., 3.7 16.7 -13.0 22 -27.6 88.5 6.6 23.4 68.1 90.1 97.0 . . . . . . 3.5 16.7 -13.2 -- 22 -27.0 91.5 3.5 168 3.5 2.05 1.5 21.1 70.4 224 21.0 72.3 77.0 94.7 99.7 101.6 106.6 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3.4 3.3 16.7 16.7 -13.3 -13.4 -- -- 22 22 -28.0 -28.2 94.7 98.0 3.5 3.5 21.0 77.0 99.7 106.6 . . I 3.3 16.7 -13.4 22 -28.2 I W 98.0 co 3.5 I 194 201 201 3.5 3.5 3.5 205 205 205 1.0 1.0 1.2 21.3 21.0 21.0 73.4 J7.0 J7.0 IJ lnch.rdes hofdirga of for& sxchrge and fold dtfm Monecwy Authorfties. defined to include the CBA and Urs oavemmer* Zj Stocks for lQQ4arkl projwtionsfor 1995arovaluedatemi-Dec=sher1QQ4acmurting excfnn~amteof Rrh 35WperU.S. dollar. 3 ~~asmediffer~b~basemoneyandnetintema~l~ of tha Monatsry AutJkMss. $/ Includes tha Nbb eqhalerrt of the sale of STF and SBA resowwe. bLR exclti changes in tha value of the stock of forsig excfnrgs holdiis due to changes in Um exchange rste. 5J Excluding Govemmerl assmplion of CSR ctaiis on commerck~l banh on acansd of csrbaliied cmdtb extsndad duhg 1992-94. @/ End-period r&Is broad money dii by end-pedod base money. z/ Unadjusted for the axceasee/shotilb in debt serv+ce payme& between those achmlb msda and those fomewn under the proQrsm (as set OM in Table 3). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 8. Russian Federation: Medium-Term Outlook, 1994-2002 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 Production and prices -13.6 -4.2 3.1 4.4 5.7 6.1 6.1 6.1 6.2 Real GDP 302.0 180.8 25.4 9.3 6.9 6.2 6.2 6.2 6.2 Consumer prices (period average) Monthly average percent change in GDP deflator within period 11.0 6.2 0.9 0.7 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 (In Dercent of GDP) Enlarged government Overall deficit (commitment basis) Domestic financing L/ External financing 2/ 12.4 5.5 11.2 5.4 1.1 0.2 3.8 3.8 -0.0 2.8 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.4 2.0 2.9 2.9 2.7 2.8 0.4 -0.0 -0.9 -0.9 -0.7 -0.8 Savings and investment Gross national savings Public sector Nongovernment sector 20.9 27.5 27.3 27.5 27.7 28.5 28.8 20.0 28.9 -9.0 -3.5 -1.3 0.2 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 37.9 31.0 20.6 27.4 26.7 27.5 27.0 27.0 27.0 External current account (surplus = -1 -1.2 0.2 .2 1.6 1.9 0.9 0.7 0.7 0.6 Gross national investment 27.7 27.7 20.5 29.2 29.5 29.5 29.5 (In billions of U.S. dollars) 29.5 29.5 Total exports, fob Total imports, fob External current account (surplus = -1 Public external debt service due 3/ Public external debt service due after rescheduling i/ Public external debt service due a/ 25.2 21.1 Public external debt service after rescheduling G/ 4.5 7.9 Gross reserves coverage 1.1 2.2 2.7 3.0 3.0 3.0 3.0 3.0 3.0 Memorandum items: Nominal GDP in trillions of rubles 630 1,704 2,312 2,636 2,979 3,355 3,779 4,258 4,002 Exchange rate Rub per US$ (period average) 2,262 4,520 4,569 4.845 5,025 5,178 5,335 5,497 5,667 69.1 70.1 03.2 00.7 95.4 105.0 113.6 121.8 130.8 54.5 64.9 71.2 77.8 85.5 92.9 100.8 108.8 117.4 -3.4 0.9 6.1 8.9 11.2 6.1 5.2 5.5 5.4 19.2 18.2 19.9 13.6 14.9 17.0 18.3 16.7 17.3 3.7 6.0 0.5 a.9 11.0 16.6 17.4 16.0 16.9 (In percent of total exports of goods and nonfactor services) 21.7 13.9 14.1 15.0 14.3 12.1 11.7 9.3 9.1 10.5 14.4 13.9 11.9 11.7 (In months of total imports of goods and nonfactor services) (Annual uercentage change. unless otherwise indicated) Sources : Russian authorities; and Fund staff estimates. L/ Includes domestic bank financing, change in the stock of government secur!ties held with the private sector, proceeds from privatization and the sale of gold and other precious metals, and principal repayments to domestic non-banks. &/ Includes rescheduling of principal and interest plus (net) disbursements. 3/ Including debt service on rescheduling. 4/ Staff baseline scenario assuming a rescheduling of maturities falling due on pre-1992 contracts in 1996-98 and a reprofiling of the 1993 agreement with the Group of Participating Official Creditors, and comparable terms from other creditors. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public