. DOCUMENT OF INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND NOT FOR PUBLIC USE MASTER FILES ROOM HQ C-525 0451 : EBSi99/190 CONFIDENTIAL October 4, 1999 To: Members of the Executive Board From: The Secretary Subject: Djibouti-Staff Report for the 1999 Article IV Consultation and Request for Arrangements Under the Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staffreport for the 1999 Article IV consultation with Djibouti and Djibouti’s request for arrangements under the Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility. This subject, together with the policy framework paper for Djibouti (JSBD/99/115, 10/4/99), is tentatively scheduled for discussion on Monday, October 18, 1999. A draft decision appears on page 24. Mr Thai (ext. 37325) is available to answer technical or factual questions relating to this paper prior to the Board discussion. Unless the Documents Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the WTO Secretariat on Wednesday, October 13, 1999; and to the African Development Bank and the Islamic Development Bank, following its consideration by the Executive Board. Att: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicCONFIDENTIAL INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND DJIBOUTI Staff Report for the 1999 Article IV Consultation and Request for Arrangement Under the Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility Prepared by Middle Eastern and Policy Development and Review Departments (In consultation with the Fiscal Affairs, Legal, Monetary and Exchange Alfairs, and Treasurer’s Departments) Approved by Paul Chabrier and Thomas Leddy October 4, 1999 Contents page I. Introduction ._. ..__...._... .._. .___.. ,,.._._. ..__.. .__. .._. .._..__............. 5 II. Recent Economic Developments, 1996-99 ................................................................. 6 III. Medium-Term Macroeconomic Framework and Strategy, 1999/2000-2001/02 ............... . A. Fiscal Policies ................................................................................................... 10 B. Financial Sector Policies .................................................................................. .12 C. Structural and Sector Policies ............................................................................ 13 D. External Sector Policies, External Financing Requirements, and Repayment Capacity ......................................................................................... .15 IV. First Annual Program, 1999/2000 ................................................................................ 18 V. Program Environment, Performance Criteria and Reviews. ............................................ 19 VI. Staff Appraisal ............................................................................................................ 21 Text Box Demobilization of Military and Security Personnel.. .................................................... 8 Charts 1. Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 1993-99.. ................................................. 38 2. Real and Nominal Effective Exchange Rates, 1978-99 ................................................. ..3 9 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2- Tables 1. IMF Position Under the Proposed ESAF Arrangement, 1999-2002 __.__......... . ..25 2. Selected Economic and Social Indicators, 1995-2002 . . . .._.____._.. ..__._.... ..____.._.._._. 26 3. Central Government Fiscal Operations, 1995-2002 _._. .____. ,, ._. ._.., ,.., ,,_._.._.__.._, ,. ._. ..,.., ..28 4. Factors AiTecting Domestic Liquidity, 1995-2002.. _. _. _. __ _. __ _. ._. __ _. _. .3 1 5. Balance of Payments, 1995-2003 _, _, _, _. _. __. .33 6. Medium-TermMacroeconomicFramework: Selected Indicators, 199%2002.............35 7. Medium-Term Balance of Payments Sensitivity Analysis, 1995-2003... .__..____,,._._... ,..,., 36 8. External Financing Requirements, 1995-2003 _. _. _. ___ __. _. _. _. __ __ _. .,37 Appendices I. Fund Relations __....,.,,,...,...,......., ,,, ,.,._.._.,.,.,___, ,, ,...,,.,, ,...., ,,, ,.., ,, ,...,, ,_.... ._. .._. ,...,.._,...,, 40 II. Financial Relations with the World Bank Group ,._._.... ._____.. .._._. ..__._. ,......._. .__. .__.. . ..42 III. Statistical Issues.. .._. .__, ,.,.,._. ._. ..___._.., ,_., ._, ._. .__.__. .__. ..__. ..,. _. ..,..., 43 Annexes I. Three-Year Arrangement under the Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facil$. __ _. ._ _. __ _. ._ .46 II. Letter of Intent and Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies for 1999/2000... ._. .__. ., .._..._. .._. .__. .._. 49 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3- ~ECUTNE SUMMARY Recent Developments . During 1996-98, Djibouti made substantial progress under an SBA-supported reform program in reducing macroeconomic imbalances, Inflation declined, and in 1998 the price level was about stable. Over 1996-97 progress in restoring growth was limited. However in 1998 there was a growth recovery owing to Ethiopia’s mid-year decision to channel its transit trade through the port of Djibouti. However, this positive development was in part offset by the adverse effects of the French military retrenchment taking place largely over 1998-2000. . Important structural measures were implemented-m particular the demobilization of military and security personnel; a civil service downsizing and a reduction in the government wage structure; and banking system reforms. With the demobilization and civil service measures, the government wage bill was substantially lowered, and with also better expenditure control, tbe cash budget position moved from a deficit of 5 percent in 1995 to a small surplus. The external current account deficit was contained to 3 percent of GDP on average, and the gross foreign assets of the currency board continued to provide about the mandated monetary and lender of last resort (LOLR) cover. Economic developments continued to be favorable during January-June 1999. Medium-term program, 1999/2000-2001/02 . The authorities recognize that the consolidation of adjustment and in particular further far- reaching structural reforms directed at a restructuring of the economy are essential for realizing their overall policy goals of increased economic growth and per capita income, reduced unemployment, enhanced social indicators, domestic financial stability, and moving toward external viability The key aims of the restructuring are to establish an environment conducive to a recovery of private sector confidence and a private sector lead role in the growth process, as well as to enhance the economy’s responsiveness to policy measures. . The authorities’ macroeconomic objectives for the 1999-2002 period entail: real GDP growth of 3 percent on average; annual inflation of at most 2 percent; containing the overall balance of payments deficit to 2.5 percent of GDP on average; and maintaining tbe BND monetary and LOLR cover ratio at its mandated level. Commercial bank import cover is expected to average about 7 months. The growth target reflects the continued adverse effect on the economy of the French military retrenchment. The enhancement of social indicators is to be advanced by sizable increases in expenditures for education and health-and accompanying reform programs in these sectors-as well as for the social safety net. . The core structural reforms are: tax, revenue administration, and budget management reforms; completion of the demobilization program, adoption of a retirement program, and civil service reform-which together would ensure a further lowering of the wage bill; the reorientation of budget outlays toward priority purposes-particularly social outlays; pension fund reforms; banking sector reforms; a significant privatization program which will address the ownership/management of the six major public enterprises and related legal reforms; and Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4- deregulation and other legal reforms including reforms of the labor and commercial codes and the establishment of commercial courts . The fiscal consolidation entails a small cumulative surplus in the overall payment-order position. This is to be underpinned by increases in indirect taxes which are also intended to facilitate a lowering of income taxation in order to enhance incentives. Non-priority expenditures are to be contained-particularly through further reductions in the wage bill. This will permit substantially increased outlays for the priority purposes of education, health, the social safety net, public sector investment in infrastmcture, and its maintenance-particularly for the road link to Ethiopia. As the program aims at a signiticant reduction of domestic arrears, the cash budget position entails an average deficit of 3 percent of GDP which wig be financed hugely from concessional external resources. The tight budget stance underpins the program’s objectives for low monetary growth and low inflation, the sustaining of positive real interest rates, and the containment of balance of payments deficits. . The medium-term balance of payments au&ok entails an initial widening of the current account deficit to 6 percent of GDP before falling to 4 percent in 2003. The deficit reflects the program’s requirement for increased imports deriving from its restructuring strategy and its ambitious growth target at a time when service receipts are decliig owing to the French military retrenchment. However, with a sizable surplus in the capital account owing largely to the availability of concessional external resources, the overall deficit is expected to be moderate at 2.5 percent of GDP. . The authorities will maintain Djibouti’s presently free exchange and trade systems and its prudent debt management policy, and are committed to a policy of external competitiveness. Issues in the staff appraisal . Fiscal consolidation and full and timely implementation of the structural reform program are essential for achieving the program’s overall objectives and for attracting further financial support from the international community. . Judgements will need to be made regarding the appropriateness of the current exchange rate stance utilizing the program’s external performance indicators, and timely action will be needed if the indicators do not evidence improving trends. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-5- 1. INTRODUCTION 1. In the annexed letter dated October 2, 1999, the Djibouti authorities request a three- year arrangement under the Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility (ESAF) in an amount equivalent to SDR 19.082 million (120 percent of quota) in support of a macro-economic adjustment and structural reform program covering the period July 1, 19994une 30, 2002.’ The authorities’ program is set out in their Memorandum on Economic and Financial Policies (MEFP) that is attached to their letter and in their medium-term Policy Framework Paper (PFP) (EBD/99/115). Djibouti’s IMF position under the requested arrangement is shown in Table 1. The level of access is warranted by the substantial financing need in relation to Djibouti’s quota. All prior actions for submitting the request for approval of the arrangement to the Executive Board hav?. been implemented. The medium-term program would succeed the program supported by a stand-by arrangement (SBA) which Djibouti implemented over 1996-9s. 2. The Fund, World Bank and African Development Bank (AtDB) staffs have collaborated in assisting the authorities in formulating their medium-term program. The World Bank staff has initiated discussions with the authorities on strategies for the privatization component of their program and on reform policies in the transport sector.’ 3. In concluding the 1998 Article IV consultation, Executive Directors stressed the need to pursue fiscal consolidation by enforcing tax compliance and reducing the wage bill- particularly through the demobilization program and civil service reform. They also urged an acceleration of structural reform--especially of the public enterprises-in order to strengthen the supply responsiveness of the economy. ‘Program negotiations were undertaken by missions to Djibouti in November 1998, in March/Aptil and June 1999 in the context of 1999 Article IV consultation discussions, and in August. The Djibouti representatives were led by the Minister of tbe Economy, Finance, and Planning in Charge of Privattiation (Mr. Bouh), the Governor of the Central Bank (Mr Haid), and the Secretary Generals of the Presidency (Mr Hassan) and tie Ministry of Agriculture (h4r. Awaleh). The missions met with President Guelleh; briefed the cabinet; and also held discussions with the Ministers of Energy, Labor, and Transport, and representatives of public enterprises, commercial banks, and the private sector. The statTrepresentatives comprised Messrs. Thai (Head), Tbiam, Unteroberdoerster (all MED), and San @‘DR). Mr. Jakubiak (MED) participated in the policy discussions. Mr Hammoudi, the resident representative, assisted the missions. Mr. Ismael from the offrce of the Executive Director participated in the March discussions. Missions from the World Bank (November I998 and March and June 1999) and the Atiican Development Bank (November 1998 and June 1999) overlapped with the Fund missions and participated in the policy discussions 2 In support of the program, tie World Bank initially expects to extend to Djibouti a Public Expenditure Reform Credit @WC) (US%20 million). The AtDB will collaborate in this undertaking and provide related fmanc~al support (K3.4.8 million). Current World Bank loan progams are indicated in Appendix 11. The AtDB credit would be in addition to an ongoing Social Fund Credit (US%20 million) directed at the rehabilitation of education and health sector infrastructure and at a program for micro-enterprise credit, and a fisheries development credit (US3 1.6 million). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-6- 4. Djibouti’s statistical base is sufficient for surveillance and for program formulation and monitoring purposes. However, weaknesses affect in varying degrees the national income, price, fiscal, monetary, domestic debt and arrears, and balance of payments data. The authorities introduced a CPI in April 1999 and are pursuing efforts to improve other statistical data (Appendix III). II. RECENT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS, 1996-99 5. Over 1996-98, Djibouti implemented a macroeconomic adjustment and structural reform program that was supported by the SBA. Under the program the authorities succeeded in reducing macroeconomic imbalances, but progress in restoring growth was limited (Table 2 and Chart 1). Inflation declined and averaged 1.5 percent annually as against an average 5 percent inflation rate over 1993-95. The improvement in inflation performance reflected the strengthening of the fiscal position as well as the appreciation of the U.S. dollar-to which the Djibouti franc is pegged-vis-a-vis other major world currencies. The economy’s real growth performance is estimated to have been relatively flat over 1996-97, but a recovery took hold in 1998 due to Ethiopia’s decision at mid-year to channel its transit trade through the port of Djibouti. The recovery was constrained, however, by a decline in the provision of services to expatriates owing to initiation of the French military retrenchment that is taking place largely over 19982000. Consequently, while overall growth in 1998 is estimated at about 1.5 percent, the estimate would be 3 percent if the effects of the retrenchment were excluded. 6. The cash budget position moved from a deficit of 5 percent of GDP in 1995 to a small surplus in 1998 owing largely to reductions in the government wage bill (from 24 percent of GDP in 1995 to 16 percent in 1998) as well as strengthened expenditure monitoring (Table 3).’ The money supply contracted over 1996-97 as the flat growth performance and eroded private sector confidence in economic prospects resulted in a weak demand for credit and sizable placements of private sector resources abroad (Table 4). With the pick-up in economic activity in 1998, credit demand and monetary growth recovered although private sector placements abroad remained relatively sizable and suggested continued weak private sector confidence. Over the period, confidence issues also contributed to a shit? out of Djibouti franc deposits into foreign currency deposits.4 ‘In their MEFP, the authorities explain that new overall presentations off&al, monetay, and external sector data have been adopted for ESAF program purposes in order to enhance tnn~axncy and analysis. 4Beginning in 1998, the monetary survey data are presented on the basis of the three operating banks rather than the previous five-bank basis, as hvo banks are closed and under liquidation. One bank was closed in 1992. Virtually alI of its assets have been liquidated, and the bank has essentially paid off its depositors. The second bank was closed in mid-l 998. Clients shifted their borrowing activity to the operating banks; some assets have been liquidated, and small depositors have been paid. Remaining deposits are equivalent to about 10 percent of broad money. Given the low quality of the bank’s remaining loan patfolio, it is expected that reimbursements to remaining depositors will be limited and that ramifications for the monetary program would be similarly limited. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-I- 7. The balance of payments recorded overall deficits averaging 4 percent of GDP over 1996-98 (Table 5). They reflected an average current account deficit of 3 percent and a more than offsetting of a sizable capital account surplus by a large negative errors and omissions entry including private capital outflows. While the gross foreign assets held by the National Bank of Djibouti (BND)--which is a currency board-declined in line with its monetary liabilities, they continued at end-1998 to provide about the mandated cover for the board’s monetary and lender of last resort (LOLR) responsibilities, namely, monetary cover of 100 percent and the targeted margin for the LOLR function of 15 percent. The gross foreign assets of commercial banks-which are the major source for external payments under the currency board arrangement-also declined, but still represented at end-1998 7.5 month’s imports. Despite low inflation, there was an appreciation of the real effective exchange rate (REER) by 7 percent over 1996-98 owing essentially to the appreciation of the U.S. dollar- to which the Djibouti franc is pegged (Chart 2)’ The external performance also entailed debt service arrears attributable to certain public enterprises-equivalent to 2.5 percent of total public sector debt at end-1998. Most of these arrears related to a request for debt relief which is pending with one bilateral creditor; they also entailed some public enterprise arrears to multilateral creditors. 8. The core structural measures implemented under the SBA program included: initiation of the demobihzation program applying to military and security personnel mobilized during the 1991-94 civil war (Box 1); a major reduction in the government wage bill (apart from demobilization) achieved through a downsizing of civil service staB’and a lowering of the government wage structure; measures to enhance bank soundness and bank supervision- including initiation of on-site inspections; and some liberalization of government control over the labor market. 9. Over January-June 1999, macroeconomic developments were broadly favorable. There were indications-including a brisk growth of commercial bank lending to the private sector-that real economic activity continued to recover, and the new CPI data indicate that over the second quarter the price level continued to be stable. Fiscal developments were somewhat weaker than envisioned in the original 1999 budget. The budget was directed at a full-year cash deficit equivalent to 1.7 percent of GDP. In the event, the January-June deficit (1.2 percent of GDP) exceeded the originally targeted first-half deficit (0.9 percent) owing mainly to a shortfall in revenue collections and lower than expected disbursements of external cash grants for budgetary support (by US$5 million). The revenue shortfall was due in large part to delayed receipt of income tax withholding from civil servants who had been assigned to new positions following the April presidential elections. It is expected that the first-half revenue and external grants shortfalls will be largely corrected over the balance of the year. Monetary developments recorded only a small increase in broad money. While private sector credit growth remained strong, the delay in disbursements of foreign grants for budget ‘Qualifications regarding the estimates of domestic price developments utilized for the REER calculation are given in Appendix III. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 8- Box. Djibouti: Demobilization of Military and Security Personnel At end-1994, military and security personnel amounted to 17,803 persons, of which 5,305 persons were regular staff and 12,498 persons were personnel mobilized daring the internal conflict (1991-94). In order to strengthen the budget by reducing wage expcndihxes and to improve the quality of spending, the government in 1995 initiated a program to detnobilize all mobilized personnel. ‘The evolution of the demobilization program is set out below. Domestically-financed demobiliiion program Daring January 1995-July 1996,4,046 persons were demobilized. Severance payments were financed from domestic resources at a cost of USS7.8 million. Externally-financed demobilization program initially the demobilisation of the 8,452 remaining mobilized personnel was envisaged to take place over 1997-98 in three approximately equal phases utilizing external iinancial resources pledged at a Round Table organ&d by the UNDP in Geneva in h4ay 1997. The cost was estimated to be IJSS17.8 million and comprised of USSI3.95 for severance payments and USS3.9 million for a program to facilitate the reinsertion of demobilized personnel into the private sector. Subsequently, the estimate of severance payments was raised to US$18.6 million due to a higher proportion of personnel to be demobilked in combat rather than noncombat zones and who would receive higher severance payments.. * Firstphus+J7nancedby France: 2,785 persons were demobilked daring September 1997-April 1998 at a cost of USS5 million in severance payments. * Secondphose-jinancrd by the E. .!I: 2,574 persons were expected to be demobilized during April 1998%September 1998 at a cost of USS5.9 million. However, only 926 persons were demobiked by Deamber 1998 at a cost of USS2.6 million for severance payments. The remaining 1,648 persons are to be demobilked during July 1999-December 1999 at an estimated cost of USS3.3 million for severance payments. * Thirdphase-to befinancedfrom resources included in the program budget/or 2000: 3,093 pm~~ are expected to be demobilked daring 2000 at an estimated cost of USS7.7 million for severance payments. Reinsertion program The reinsertion program is being initiated in 1999 with technical and financial assistance from the World Bank and entails an estimated cost ofUS$3.2 million. It is intended to help demobiked personnel retam to the private sector by funding programs for labor-intensive projects and vocational training. ‘Ike program will be phased over three years. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-9- support entailed a rundown in the banking system’s foreign exchange position. There was also some unwinding of the earlier movements into foreign currency deposits-suggesting improved conftdence. m. MEDIUM-TERM M~ROECONOMIC FRAMEWORK AND STRATEGY, 1999/2000-2001/02 10. Although Djibouti made sound progress under the SBA-supported program in macroeconomic adjustment and structural reform, the authorities recognize that the consolidation of adjustment and in particular tmther far-reaching structural reforms directed at a restructuring of the economy are essential for realizing their overall policy goals of increased and sustainable growth, reduced unemployment, enhanced social indicators, domestic financial stability, and moving toward external viability. The key aims of the restructuring are to establish an environment conducive to private sector confidence and a private sector lead role in the growth process, as well as to enhance the economy’s responsiveness to policy measures. 11. The authorities’ macroeconomic objectives for the 1999-2002 period entail: real GDP growth of 3 percent on average;6 annual inflation of at most 2 percent; containing the overall balance of payments deficit to 2.5 percent of GDP on average; and maintaining the mandated BND monetary and LOLR cover ratio. Commercial bank import cover is expected to.average about 7 months. The enhancement of social indicators is to be advanced by sizable increases in expenditures for education and health-and accompanying reform programs in these sectors-as well as for the social safety net. 12. The core structural reforms encompassed by the restructuring strategy are: tax, revenue administration, and budget management reforms; completion of the demobilization program, adoption-of a retirement program, and civil service reform; the reorientation of budget outlays toward priority purposes-particularly social outlays; pension fund reforms; banking sector reforms; a significant privatization program which will address the ownership/management of the six major public enterprises and related legal reforms; and deregulation and other legal reforms including reforms of the labor and commercial codes and the establishment of commercial courts. 13. An anticipated positive private sector response to the restructuring strategy underpins the program’s growth target. On this basis, investment is projected to rise from an average of 9 percent of GDP over 1996-97’ to an average of 13 percent under the program owing mainly to increased nongovernment investment (Table 6). With the shift of Ethiopia’s transit 6 The gwti target reflects the continued adverse elect on the economy of the French military retrenchment. Abstracting from this development, the growth target would average 4 percent. ‘Data for 1998 are excluded owing to exceptionally high investment outlays r&&g substantial outlays for electricity generators for tbe public sector power company and a large drawdown ofresources in the govemment’s forage assistance pipeline. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-lO- trade to Djibouti, the lead growth sectors are envisaged to be the transport and related service sectors, namely, port and trucking services as well as cargo-handling, insurance, and tourism. Additionally, the export sector-which largely comprises the local processing of imported goods-is expected to contribute to higher growth. A. Fiscal Policies 14. The medium-term fiscal stance will be directed at maintaining macroeconomic stability and strengthening the external position, To this end, fiscal restraint will be pursued and will entail a cash budget deficit target of 3 percent of GDP on average. The deficit will be financed only from concessional foreign resources, the counterparts to IMF and AMP net purchases, and domestic nonbank borrowing as needed. At the same tune, the structure of the budget will be enhanced by measures to reform the tax system and contain expenditures while upgrading their quality. 15. The reforms of the tax system will be directed at enhancing efficiency and elasticity, tax simplification, and increased reliance on indirect taxation in order to reduce direct taxation and improve economic incentives. The indirect tax reform was begun in August 1999 with adoption of a program for the phased reform of petroleum product excise taxation and the reform of its administration. Under this program, the taxation of diesel and aviation fuel- which account for about 40 percent of domestic product consumption-will be raised gradually to levels equivalent to about USN per gallon.’ In August 1999, a front-loaded increase in the aviation fuel tax was introduced, and petroleum product trade and prices were fully hberahzed. The higher excise taxes are expected to contribute an additional 2 percent of GDP to revenue collections in 2001. For social purposes, the excise applying to kerosene- the cooking fire) for lower income groups-is to be eliminated. Regarding other indirect taxes, a comprehensive reform of the consumption tax will be introduced with the 2000 budget as well as reforms of other excise taxes and the government fee structure. 16. The government is committed to thoroughly reforming the personal and corporate income tax systems effective with the 2001 budget. The indirect and direct tax reforms will be accompanied by parallel reforms of the Investment Law in order to limit tax exemptions. Revenue administration is expected to benefit from the tax system simplifications, adoption of a mandatory taxpayer identification number system, and a revenue administration reform program-focusing on accounting, auditing, and enforcement. 17. The government’s expenditure reform program is directed at reducing the current spending/GDP ratio (excluding the expenditure counterparts of grants-in-kind) while improving the quality of outlays through higher spending for the priority purposes of education, health, the social safety net, public investment in infrastructure, and maintenance- particularly in the road sector. These objectives are to be facilitated by further reductions in ’ The diesel and aviation fuel excise taxes are presently about USO.05 per gallon and USSO. 13 per gallon, respectively. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- ll- the wage bill. The authorities would have preferred a higher level of social spending, but available resources are constrained by the need to clear domestic arrears and reduce direct taxation. However, they expect that increased resources for social spending will become available from the new-but yet unquantified-initiatives to reduce the wage bill (see below), and they plan to seek increased donor contributions. On this basis, the current expenditure/ GDP ratio (excluding the expenditure counterparts of grants-in-kind) is projected to decline to 26 percent of GDP on average over 1999-2002 compared with an average of 29 percent during the SBA period.’ 18. The program for wage bill reductions entails four components. First, the demobiliation program will be completed over 1999-2000. Second, the freeze on the total number of government staff(except for the education and health sectors) as well as on the total nominal wage bill that was introduced with the 1998 budget will be continued. Third, the government intends to pursue over 2000-02 a program directed at the early mandatory retirement of certain high-salaried civil service and military personnel and at enforcing regular and overdue retirements. This program is to be facilitated by cash settlements of a large proportion of government arrears to the pension funds, Fourth, civil service reform is expected to contribute to lowering the wage bill as it is anticipated that stafling will be reduced. Quantifications of the wage bill savings from the latter two refomis cannot be determined at this time, and no estimates have been incorporated in the present medium-term budget. Estimates would be incorporated into future revisions of the budget as information becomes available. Therefore only on the basis of the demobilization program and the hiring/ wage freeze, the wage bill/GDP ratio is presently projected to decline from 16 percent in 1998 to under 12 percent by 2002. 19. The present medium-term budget envisages a substantial increase in expenditures for priority purposes-from 12 percent in 1998 to 17 percent by 2002. Within this total, outlays for education, health, and the social safety net at present are targeted to double in terms of GDP-to 12.5 percent by 2002. The increased maintenance outlays reflect in particular higher spending for the national road system given the importance of the regional transit trade to the economy. Investment outlays are envisaged to average about 5 percent of GDP. While this ratio is lower than the exceptional level of 1998, investment spending in absolute terms would be on average 50 percent higher than the average for 1996-97. The program’s core structural reforms relating to the expenditure side of the budget entail a budget-and particularly an expenditure-management reform which is to be a central component of the World Bank PERC, establishment of an independent auditor general for the government, and a reform of government procurement procedures. 2‘0. The government intends to address in a far-reaching manner the problem of domestic payment arrears relating to the wage bill, the pension funds, and private suppliers while ‘A comparison including the expenditure counterparts of grants-in-kind is not possible owing to a lack of data on grants-in-kind for the paicd before 1998. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12- avoiding new arrears. Explicit schedules have been incorporated in the medium-term budget. All wage arrears and a sizable amount of arrears to the pension funds will be cleared by cash payments, while all arrears to private suppliers will be initially settled by issuing them treasury bills pending redemption as cash resources become available. In this regard, the European Union (EU) is considering providing financial assistance to help clear arrears to private suppliers. The treasury bill program would begin in 2000. On this basis, the stock of domestic arrears is to be reduced from 23 percent of GDP in 1998 to 3 percent in 2002. The issue of debt and arrears to the public enterprises is to be addressed in the context of the privatization program (see below) B. Financial Sector Policies 21. The tight fiscal stance is expected to underpin the maintenance of low monetary growth and low inflation. Broad money growth is projected to average 5 percent annually. Money demand and the private sector’s demand for credit are expected to rise about in line with the expansion in economic activity, while also improved economic prospects and confidence along with increased interest rate flexibility are expected to significantly reduce the attractiveness of private sector placements abroad. 22. Interest rates are presently positive in real terms, and the tight tiscal stance and low monetary growth and inflation are expected to sustain this situation. The authorities, however, have been concerned about collusion among banks in the setting of interest rates deriving from an agreement sponsored by the bankers’ association. Therefore, given their commitment to competitive financial markets, the BND in August 1999 instructed banks to cease their coordination of interest rate structures and to publicize and report their stNctures to the BND. Parallel instructions were issued regarding bank fee structures which also were subject to collusion. The authorities realize, however, that ultimately ensuring competitive financial markets and interest rates would best be addressed through liberal-but prudentially appropriate-bank licensing procedures. 23. The authorities are committed to continuing their efforts to strengthen the banking system. While the two largest operating banks are subsidiaries of major French banks and have strong net foreign asset and prudential positions, prudential issues relating to other banks need to be resolved. First, the BND has been in consultation with the parent bank of a third operating bank-which is a subsidiary of a bank located in a neighboring country-regarding nonobservance of certain prudential requirements. If these issues are not resolved by end- 1999, the BND intends to initiate action to close this hank. Second, the BND will continue to oversee the liquidations of the two closed banks-which are to be completed by mid-2000. Third the authorities have frozen the operations of Djibouti’s single development bank-apart from its loan collection operations-given that the bank has been assessed as insolvent and requiring restructuring or liquidation. They intend to approach certain donors to ascertain the feasibility of financing the bank’s restructuring or replacing it with private sector credit cooperative arrangements, If resources for restNCturing are not forthcoming by mid-2000, a liquidation program will be initiated. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13 - 24. The authorities recognize that the banking system confronts difficulties in enforcing loan contracts due to shortcomings in the judicial system and that for this reason inter- mediation is weak. To help alleviate these problems, the BND in July 1999 established a notification system under which banks are prohibited from lending to defaulting borrowers whose nonperforming credits exceed a threshold amount and arrears period until their loans are regularized. 25. The banking system’s legal framework will be addressed under the program, The BND intends to review with the IlvlF technical assistance the BND and the banking laws in order to identify reforms that would be beneficial to BND operations and the economy and to prepare reformed laws. Implementation of the reformed laws is expected to take place by end-2000. The program to strengthen ofBND’s prudential supervision capacity will be continued with a focus on increased staffing and training for the BND’s supervision department. C. Structural and Sectoral Policies Civil service and pension reform 26. The authorities consider that a durable fiscal consolidation and a durable improvement in the quality of public administration require comprehensive civil service reform. They therefore are committed to undertaking in collaboration with the World Bank a reform entailing the rationalization of civil service institutional arrangements, staffing, and salary structure beginning in 200 1. The pension fund reform will be directed at supporting the civil service reform, and will entail merging the present three funds and placing the merged fimd on a sound legal and financial basis-including a resolution of the cross debt and cross arrears between the pension iimds and the government. Privatization and public enterprise reform 27. The government is committed to accelerated public enterprise privatization in order to improve the operational efficiency of these entities and enhance their cbmpetitiveness- particularly of the port; reduce prices to consumers; and broaden the scope for private sector development. Nonviable enterprises which cannot be privatized will be liquidated. In line with these principles, over July-September 1999 the privatization of four small enterprises was completed. 28. Regarding the six major public enterprises,” an initial review of the privatization strategy for each of these enterprises was undertaken in June 1999 in collaboration with World Bank staff. On this basis the government has adopted the following strategies: for the port, privatization of its main operational fimctions and services; for the three utilities, sale of a controlling interest to a private sector strategic operator; and for the airport, privatization of ‘“N~cly, the post, the national electncity utility, the urban water utility ~II Djiboutiville, the hw national telecommunications utililies (which are to be merged), and the airport. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14- its management. To these ends, the authorities will adopt and publish by end-June 2000 the final core principles of the privatization strategy for each of the enterprises that would be consistent with the above decisions. They will also recruit by end-September 2000 financial advisors to carry out the strategies. Schedules have been established for offering the enterprises for bids and for completing the privatizations. The latter would occur in two stages-by end-2001 for the port and the merged telecommunications utility, and by end-June 2002 for the national power and urban water utilities and the airport. In each case offerings for bids would occur six months earlier. 29. The authorities will also put in place legal arrangements related to the privatization program. First, a reformed privatization law allowing for implementation of these strategies is to be enacted by end-June 2000. Second, a regulatory law would be enacted by end-2000. Its purposes would be to establish a new regulatory agency and framework for the private sector monopolies that would result from privatization of the three utilities and to ensure a competitive environment. Third, a reformed Public Enterprise Law will be enacted by end- 2001 in order to provide broad autonomy to privatized management on operational, labor, and pricing issues. 30. Also to facilitate the privatization program, the authorities will address the cross debt and cross arrears among the six public enterprises and the government as well as between the enterprises and third parties such as private suppliers. For these purposes, data compilations are to be completed by end-1999, and following a netting out exercise explicit annual schedules for the phased settlement of net debt and net arrears will be established by end- March 2000 for incorporation in the revised medium-term budget and macroeconomic scenario. It is not possible at this time to estimate whether the forthcoming privatizations will generate net receipts for the budget or their implications for the balance of payments. Such estimates are not included in the present medium-term scenario, but would be incorporated into titure revisions of the scenario as information becomes available. Given the significant technical and financial problems confronting most enterprises and the costs the government would confront in settling enterprise debt and arrears and executing retirement/buy out packages for redundant staff, net receipts to the budget may be limited. Other structural reforms 31. Other real sector reforms will be pursued in order to enhance the enabling environment for the private sector. First, the government attaches importance to domestic trade and price liberalization. In addition to the above-noted libertiition of petroleum product trade and prices, the government in August eliminated its authority to control the domestic grain trade and prices by closing the inactive public agency which previously administered this authority. Second, the government intends to introduce additional legal reforms. A reformed Labor Code will be prepared for implementation by end-June 2000 targeted at removing obstacles to competitive labor markets and at wage flexibility. A reformed Commercial Code and a new competition law are to be enacted in 2001 in order to establish legal environments conducive, respectively, to private sector development and competitive economic practices and markets. And finally, the government is committed to establishing commercial courts. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 15 - Sectoral policies 32. Given the private sector-led growth strategy, public sector investment will be limited to the education, health, road, and non-urban water sectors. In these sectors, the government intends to spell out by end-2000 in collaboration with World Bank staff long-term development programs that would be implemented beginning in 2001 and could be supported by World Bank technical and financial assistance. In implementing these programs responsibilities wherever possible will be delegated to the private sector. 33. Pending the privatizations and ILlI articulation of the sectoral development program& certain policy improvements are being introduced in 1999 to address pressing issues. First, to provide increased financial resources for maintenance of the main transit road-which has been adversely affected by the heavy traflic to Ethiopia-a road user charge applicable to trucks exiting the port was implemented in August 1999. Second, to increase maintenance and rehabilitation funding for the port, a reform of the port tariff structure will be implemented in collaboration with World Bank staff by end-1999. Other programs are to be directed at controlling the over-weighting of trucks in order to prevent deterioration of the main transit road and at improving the financial performance of the national power and the urban water utilities. Social safety net and poverty alleviation arrangements 34. The authorities’ poverty reduction strategy encompasses three components: higher economic growth; the increased outlays for education and health, and new social safety net arrangements. There are five initiatives in the latter category. The urban infrastructure/ employment creation program supported by the World Bank will be implemented over 2000-03 along with the Social Fund Program supported by the AfDB. The re-insertion program supported by the World Bank will provide training for demobilized personnel, Moreover two long-term rural development programs will be initiated in 2001, These are an agricultural development program focusing on livestock and oasis agriculture which is to be funded by FA0 and the fisheries development program being funded by the AtDB. D. External Sector Policies, External Financing Requirements, and Repayment Capacity 35. The authorities are committed to maintaining Djibouti’s free exchange and trade systems and its prudent debt management policy.” They intend to continue to seek external financial assistance in the form of grants or very concessional long-term credits and to strictly limit the contracting or guaranteeing by the government of nonconcessional debt. “Djibouti has a liberal trade regime rating of 1 on the Fund’s IO-point trade restrictiveness index. This re!lects the absence of ta&% and nontariff barriers. Djibouti is a member of the Lame Convention, African Economic Community, COMESA, Organization for AtTican Unity, and WTO. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 16- 36. Under the program external competitiveness will be monitored on the basis of developments in external indicators: namely, in exports of goods and services of local origin; the net foreign asset position of commercial banks; and relative prices and wages vis-a-vis relevant trade partner countries.‘2 Based on the recent performance of these indicators, the starTconsiders competitiveness to be a significant issue. The authorities, however, consider that at present the effectiveness of changes in exchange rate policy would be constrained by rigidities in the economy and weak private sector confidence, and that under these circumstances policy measures need to be appropriately sequenced. Therefore their approach is to first put in place key structural reforms under the restructuring strategy in order to enhance the economy’s responsiveness and to build confidence, and then to judge if further measures are needed. 37. The outlook for the medium-term balance of payments entails increased current account deficits of 6 percent of GDP over 1999-2000 before falling toward 4 percent in 2003. The higher deficits reflect three factors. First, the program entails increased imports- particularly of intermediate and capital goods-as a result of its restructuring strategy and higher growth target. However, the demand for imported consumption goods will be contained through the tight fiscal stance--and particularly by the reductions in the wage bill. Import growth is forecast to average 4 percent (after adjusting the 1998 base for the exceptional electricity generator imports noted above). Second, the French military retrenchment entails a 24 percent decline over 1998-2002 in earnings from the provision of services to expatriates, and the cumulative earnings loss from this development is expected to about offset the earnings gain arising from the increased provision of transport and related services deriving from the growth of the transit trade to Ethiopia. To some extent, the loss of service receipts will be compensated for by increased transfers over 1999-2000 associated with the new economic assistance agreement with the French government.” Third, while it is anticipated that the restructuring program will result in a more solid growth of locally- produced goods exports, the export base is small with the result that even with solid export growth the additions to earnings will be moderate. 38. The capital account is expected to be in surplus at an annual average of 3.5 percent of GDP. The surplus in large part reflects use of World Bank and AfDB credits as well as new borrowing by the port for rehabilitation and expansion. Foreign direct investment is projected to rise in response to the reform program and the increased transit trade, and is expected to contribute to the expansion in economic activity. On this basis, the overall balance of payments position is expected to record on average a deficit of 2.5 percent of GDP compared’ ‘* Presently the REER is not a robust indicator of historical competitiveness developments due to the lack of adequate CPI data for a sticiently long period. ‘%be agreement provides for cash grants of USSl 1 million-largely for the public investment program (54 percent) with the balance divided behveen budget support (15 percent) and assistance for the port. power, and water public enterprises. This assistance is in addition to new gnmts-in-kind for medical and defase purposes and to regular cash grants for budget support and grants-in-kind for education. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17- with the average deficit of 4 percent under the SBA-supported program. The BND gross foreign asset position is programmed to maintain the mandated ratio for monetary and LOLR cover, and commercial banks are expected to maintain import cover of 7 months. 39. The balance of payments projections are sensitive to changes in certain key assumptions. For instance, if transport and related services were forecast to grow over 1999- 2003 by only 6 percent instead of the 9 percent growth rate utilized in the baseline scenario, the current account deficits would average 7 percent of GDP rather than 6 percent (Table 7). The resulting larger cumulative financing gap would necessitate the adoption of further adjustment measures and/or the mobilization of additional exceptional financing. 40. The gross external financing requirements for 1999-2002 are identified in Table 8, and taken together are projected to necessitate annual average resource inflows of US%99 million. Regular financing through disbursements of official grants and loans from bilateral and multilateral sources, public enterprise foreign borrowing, and foreign direct investment are expected to contribute USS75 million annually. Moreover, secured debt rescheduling will contribute USS3 million.‘4 On this basis there is a total four-year exceptional financing gap of US%91 million. Presently, identified financing from the World Bank, the AfDB, and the AMF is projected to total US%22 million, while purchases from the Fund under the requested arrangement could provide financing of US%27 million. After considering these resources, the total residual financing gap for 1999-2002 is estimated at US%43 million. To address this gap, the government intends to request multi-year debt rescheduling on the most generous available terms from Paris Club and all other official bilateral creditors. If such rescheduling were granted, the residual gap for 1999-2000 would be closed, as well as the presently estimated gaps for 2001-02. 41. The debt rescheduling would assist in addressing the arrears of public enterprises to bilateral creditors and in a considerable lowering of Djibouti’s debt service ratio. On this basis, the external debt service-to-exports and debt-to-GDP ratios would average 5 percent and 67 percent,.respectively. Regarding public enterprise arrears to multilateral creditors, the government intends to settle these arrears by end-1999 utilizing resources to be provided by the EU. 42. Assuming all purchases under the arrangement are made, Djibouti’s outstanding obligations to the Fund would peak at 134 percent of quota in the thud quarter of 2002, and debt service to the Fund in percent of exports of locally-produced goods and nonfactor services would rise from 0.1 percent in 1998 to a peak of 2.1 percent in 2002. In view of the low level of debt service to the Fund, the strength of the program, and the government’s relatively good track record in servicing its debt, the staffbelieves that there are reasonable assurances that Djibouti will discharge its obligations to the Fund on a timely basis. “Separately, secured debt forgiveness ofUSO30 million is to be provided by France over 1999-2001 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 18- NV. FIRST &NlJAL PROGRAM, 1999/2000 43. The authorities’ macroeconomic objectives for the first annual program which bridges calendar years 1999-2000 are: average real GDP growth of 2 percent-but abstracting from the contractionary effect of the French military retrenchment about 4 percent; limiting inflation to at most 2 percent; and containing the overall balance of payment deficits to 2.5 percent of GDP on average. 44. The 1999 program budget targets a payment-order position of about balance and a cash deficit of 1.6 percent of GDP. The latter reflects cash settlements of wage arrears equivalent to about one-fifth of the outstanding amount. The original 1999 budget was amended in August to incorporate program objectives including the petroleum product excise tax and the related institutional reform; the road user charge; and the initiation of increased social expenditures. Tax receipts are programmed to rise by 1 percent of GDP owing essentially to the petroleum product tax increase and the road user charge. However, as nontax revenue is projected to decline as a result of lower profit transfers from public enterprises, the overall revenue/GDP ratio is projected to remain at its 1998 level of 25 percent of GDP. Total expenditure is forecast to rise by 1.5 percent of GDP to 35 percent. Within this total, current spending is targeted to rise by 3.5 percent of GDP to 30 percent due largely to higher outlays for social purposes, materials and supplies, and road maintenance. In part the increase in the current outlays/GDP ratio is attributable to higher grants-in-kind from France for medical and defense purposes. Social sector outlays are programmed to rise by 2 percent of GDP to 8 percent, while the wage bill is projected to decline by nearly 1 percent of GDP. The latter reflects the full-year effect of the completion in 1998 of the first phase of demobilization, implementation over 1999 of the second phase, as well as continuation of the government hiring and wage bill freeze. Public investment expenditure at 4.5 percent of GDP is lower than in 1998 owing to the sharp spending increase last year attributable to the rapid drawdown of the external resource pipeline. 45. The formulation of the 2000 budget is presently tentative and will be revisited during the first review discussions presently envisaged for December. Currently, the authorities anticipate that the payment-order position will move to a surplus of 0.5 percent of GDP owing to higher revenues and grants (taken together by 2 percent of GDP). The tinther reorientation of spending toward priority purposes would again be facilitated by a decline in the wage bill. The cash deficit is forecast to widen to 4 percent of GDP as the government intends to make large cash payments against its wage and pension fimds arrears. The structural reform content’ of the 2000 budget will entail the second-round increases in petroleum product excise taxation, implementation of the consumption and other excise tax reforms, and continued reorientation of expenditures. The estimated wage bill savings from the retirement program are still under preparation and have not been built into the 2000 budget. A public expenditure review is to be undertaken by end-March 2000 with World Bank staff in connection with the PERC. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 19- 46. The 1999/2000 financial sector structural reform program entails a number of important measures. Following introduction of the notification system and termination of commercial bank coordination of interest rate and fee structures, the program entails by end- 1999 liquidation of one of the two closed commercial banks and decisions regarding the treatment of the operating foreign bank subsidiary that is confronting prudential difficulties and the specialized bank. For the first half of 2000, the reform program encompasses preparation of reformed BND and banking laws, liquidation of the second closed commercial bank, and resolution of the status of the bank subsidiary and the specialized bank. 47. The real sector structural reform measures that are being introduced in 1999-beyond those already implemented (the petroleum product market liberalization, road user charge, and privatization of the four small enterprises)-entail: the reform of the port tariff structure and the programs to enforce the maximum road load limit for trucks and to improve the financial performance of the power and water utilities. The major reforms to be implemented in the first half of 2000 encompass: publication of the core principles of the privatization strategies for the six major public enterprises; finalization of the action plans for the privatization of the port and the merged telecommunications companies; and enactment of the privatization law and the reformed Labor Code. 48. For 1999-2000 the balance of payments outlook entails current account deficits averaging 6 percent of GDP and an average overall deficit of 2.5 percent. As noted above, the widening of the current deficit reflects the higher import growth (by 5.5 percent on average) required for the program’s restructuring strategy and growth target and the reduced service earnings-by nearly 20 percent over 1999-2000-associated with the French military retrenchment. The capital account is forecast to record an average surplus of 3.5 percent of GDP owing largely to use of World Bank and AfDB credits, foreign borrowing by the port authority, as well as increased foreign direct investment. 49. The 1999 gross external financing requirement is estimated to be US$lOl million and is expected to be mostly covered by regular financing. With these resources, an exceptional financing gap of US%22 million would remain. Identified financing is expected to become available from the AfDB (US$1.6 million) and the AMP (US$O.4 million). IMP resources under the requested arrangement could provide USIE3.8 million leaving a residual gap of US$l6.5 million. For 2000, the gross external financing requirement is presently forecast at US$107 million, and atIer considering regular financing, the exceptional financing gap would be US%24 million. Financing from the AfDB, AMP, IMP, and World Bank-totaling US$lS million-is forecast to narrow this gap to a residual of US169 million. The residual gaps for 1999-2000 would be closed if official bilateral creditors were to grant Djibouti’s request for multi-year debt rescheduling on the most generous available terms. V. PFCOGRAMENVIRONMENT,PERFORMANCEC~UTERIAA~-DREVJE~S Under the SBA the authorities made important progress in upgrading their * 50. administrative and technical program implementation capacity. However their present ambitious reform agenda will present heightened challenges in this regard. They therefore Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 20 - have put in place an upgrading of arrangements for program implementation and monitoring. In this regard the Minister ofEconomy and Finance has been appointed Chairman of the Interministerial Committee (IC) which acts as the economic policy formulation, implementation, and coordinating body, and the IC has appointed a technical implementation team which will be responsible for overseeing the implementation of the technical aspects of the program, technical coordination, and reporting to the IC on technical implementation. To complement these arrangements, the authorities believe that Djibouti will require the significantly increased technical assistance specified in their policy matrix in order to successfUlly implement the structural reform program. They therefore intend to request continued technical assistance from France and expanded assistance from multilateral institutions and other bilateral sources. Technical assistance would in particular be essential from the World Bank in the areas of privatization and related legal reforms; budget management reform; civil service and pension fund reform; and the long-run reform and development programs for the education, health, transport, and non-urban water sectors. Also technical assistance would in particular be essential from the IMF in the areas of tax and revenue administration reform; domestic arrears resolution; financial sector reform; and the legal reforms relating inter alia to the labor market and the commercial code. Ongoing political instabilities in the region present potential obstacles to implementation of the reform program as do domestic regional political loyalties. However in this latter regard, the newly-elected government has been seeking to foster a consensus in favor of national unity and in support of the reform program. 51. Implementation of the program will be monitored through prior actions, quantitative and structural performance criteria, structural benchmarks, and five reviews, The proposed schedule for disbursements under the arrangement and related requirements including program reviews are presented in Annex II, Table 1. The prior actions for submitting the request for the arrangement td the Executive Board and structural performance criteria for end-1999 are given in Annex II, Table 2. Additional prior actions and structural performance criteria or benchmarks may be established during program reviews. 52. The program will utilize semi-annual quantitative performance criteria, and such criteria have been established with respect to the first-year program for end-December 1999 (Annex II, Table 3). To assist in observing these criteria and those to be established for end- June 2000 during the first review, indicative targets have been established for end-September 1999 and for end-March and end-June 2000. The semi-annual performance criteria will entail ceilings on: the wage bill; the stocks of domestic arrears (as categorized) and external arrears;. government borrowing from the domestic banking system and from public enterprises; and the contracting or guaranteeing of nonconcessional public sector external debt with an initial maturity of more than one year. Semi-annual floors will apply to BND net international reserves. The standard nonquantitative performance criteria are also provided for in the MEFP, as well as continuous performance criteria that will apply to the accumulation of new domestic and external arrears. 53. There will be live reviews under the arrangement. The first review discussions are expected to take place in December 1999, and the Executive Board meeting is envisaged for Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2l- February 2000. The review will address progress in implementing the macroeconomic program for 1999 and an updating of the macroeconomic program for 2000. It will also undertake a review of competitiveness, assessments regarding the implementation of structural reforms already introduced in 1999, as well as the specification of and preparations for the structural reforms to be implemented by end-1999 and the first half of 2000. VI. STAFFAPPRAISAL 54. Djibouti made sound progress over 1996-98 under the SBA-supported program in macroeconomic adjustment and structural reform. The considerable strengthening of the fisti position contributed to lower inflation, and although deficits were recorded in the external position, the currency board monetary cover position and commercial bank cover for imports remained strong. The core structural reforms-namely, the demobilization program, civil service downsizing, and the reduction in the government wage structure-were appropriately focused on central problems confronting the economy. These reforms presented difficult political and administrative challenges to the authorities, and their determination in pursuing successful implementation deserves commendation. However, the economy’s growth performance was disappointing and reflected continued weak private sector confidence and the effects of structural impediments. 55. The authorities are aware that the-consolidation of adjustment and a significant broadening and deepening of their structural reform program are essential for achieving their goals of increased real growth and income, higher employment levels, enhanced social indicators, domestic financial stability, and a strengthened external position. Their medium- term program, for which support is being requested through an arrangement under the ESAF, has been formulated in order to make solid advances toward these goals. In the staff view, the program is comprehensive and appropriately focused. 56. The macroeconomic policy stance is anchored by a continued tight fiscal policy under which the overall position on a payment-order basis is directed at a small cumulative surplus. This objective is to be underpinned by increases in indirect taxes and the containment of non- priority expenditures-particularly reductions in the wage bill deriving from the ongoing demobilization program and from the envisaged retirement program and civil service reform. While the budget is tight, scope has been provided for major increases in outlays for social purposes and higher expenditures for public sector investment in infrastructure and its maintenance. The increase in indirect taxation is also directed at facilitating a lowering of income taxation in order to enhance incentives. The budget’s cash position entails moderate deficits as it reflects a significant program to address domestic payment arrears which have burdened economic performance and the credibility of government policy. The budget’s tight stance underpins the program’s objectives for low monetaty growth and low inflation, the sustaining of positive real interest rates, and the containment of external sector deficits. The medium-term balance of payments outlook entails some widening of the current account deficit owing to the program’s requirement for increased imports deriving from its restructuring strategy and its ambitious growth target at a time when service receipts are declining sharply owing to the French military retrenchment. The current account deficits are Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 22 - to be largely covered by concessional capital inflows as well as higher direct investment inflows, and consequently the overall external deficits are moderate. The program also targets maintaining the mandated currency board cover, and commercial bank import cover is expected to remain’relatively strong. 57. In the external sector, the staff welcomes the authorities’ commitment to maintaining Djibouti’s free exchange and trade systems and its prudent debt management policy. Regarding external competitiveness, while the staff considers exchange rate policy to be a significant issue, it also understands the authorities’ concern that the effectiveness of policy changes can be constrained by rigidities in the economy and weak private sector conftdence and their assessment that an appropriate policy sequencing is called for. However, judgements will need to be made utilizing the program’s indicators regarding the appropriateness ofthe current exchange rate, and timely action will be needed if the indicators do not evidence improving trends. 58. The authorities’ structural reform program is bold and can be expected to Sutda- mentally improve economic performance, At its center are the ambitious privatization strategy and a withdrawal of the government from other interventions in the economy through the freeing up of markets and through basic legal reforms including of the labor market. These efforts are to be supported by tax, civil service, pension, and financial sector reforms. In the staff view, the authorities are to be commended for their bold approach to economic restructuring. But full and timely implementation will be essential in order to provide a clear signal to the private sector regarding the government’s commitment and to the population in general regarding improvements in their welfare. The international community is also likely to watch closely the pace and quality of structural reform implementation-before reaching decisions regarding further financial support. Therefore it is important that the authorities stay on track in implementing the program. 59. The authorities’ reform agenda represents a major undertaking that will present heightened challenges to their administrative capacity for program implementation despite the improvements realized in recent years. Therefore the substantial technical assistance that is being requested from the international community is essential if the program is to meet with success. Regarding data issues, the staffurges the authorities to accelerate their efforts to address shortcomings-particularly in the quality of the national income, fiscal, and balance of payments data. In this area the international community could play a vital role. 60. Djibouti confronts external fmancing gaps over the medium-term, and therefore the timely availability of financial assistance from the international community on appropriately concessional terms will be important to the authorities’ reform efforts. The financing gap for 1999-2000 is relatively large at US%47 million, and after considering assistance from multilateral sources including under the requested arrangement with the Fund, closing the residual gap will require contributions through debt rescheduling. Therefore, the authorities intend to request multi-year debt rescheduling on the most generous available terms from Paris Club and all other bilateral creditors If this request were granted, the residual financing gap for 1999-2000 would be closed. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 23 - 61. The policies proposed by the authorities constitute a decisive effort to turn a new page for Djibouti’s economy. While the program’s outcome is subject to risks given its ambitious scope, its design and sequencing are appropriate to minimizing downside risks. The authorities’ commitment to carrying through on their reform strategy, the strength of the program, and the government’s relatively good track record in servicing its external debt provide assurances regarding its ability to meet its financial obligations to the Fund. The staff believes that the authorities’ program merits Fund support and recommends approval of the requested arrangement. 62. It is expected that the next Article IV consultation will take place on the standard 1% month cycle. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 24 - VII. PROPOSED DECISION The following draft decision is proposed for adoption by the Executive Board: 1. The government of Djibouti has requested a three-year arrangement under the Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility in an amount equivalent to SDR 19.082 million. 2. The Fund notes the Policy Framework Paper for Djibouti set forth in EBDl99lll5. 3. The Fund approves the arrangement set forth in EBS/99/190 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 25 - Table 1. Djibouti: lMF Position under the Proposed ESAF Arrangement, 1999-2002 1999 2000 2001 2002 outstanding July- Jan.- July- Jan.- July- Jan.- July- June 30 DCC. JUIIC DCC. JUnc DCC. JUW. Sept. (In millions of SDRs) Disbursements 7.271 2.126 2.726 2.726 2.726 2.726 2.726 2.126 Repayments 0 0.718 0.718 0.856 0.994 0.614 0.980 0.122 Total IMF credit outstanding (end of period) 7.271 9.219 11.287 13.157 14.889 17.001 18.747 21.351 (In percent of quota) Total IMF credit outstanding (end of period) 45.1 58.4 71.0 82.7 93.6 106.9 117.9 134.3 Source: IMF, Treasurer’s Department. I/ Djibouti’s quota is SDR 15.9 million Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 26 - Table 2. Djibouti: Selected Economic and Social Indicators, 1995-2002 Jm-lune ,995 1996 ,997 1998 1999 1999 *orJo 2001 2002 Pm”. Pmv. ESAF Ro~arn Nalicmal incane and picu GDP * CUrrml prices GDP at conslant prices Adjusted GOP at constant prices li conrumer priocs (amlual wcrage) 21 oo”cmme”t finmcc Total rewnw and panu Revenue Gram ‘Iota, expenditure Current expenditure Capital cxpendit”rc Ovcra,, balance @aymcn, order bsis) Change in arrcak (drcrcasc-) Overall balance (Cash basis) F,nancing Enend Domestic Banks 3, Nonbank Govemcnt domesik arrears (stock) 41 Govsmsnt domestic debt 4, Money and wedit Money and quasi money Net forci&?l Bsscu Net domestic asset.5 Claims on the central govcmmcnt (“et) 31 Claims on no”go”mment Sector Intern, r&s (in perce”,) Lendingrates oeposil rates Enema, seem, kzxpm ImaNy produced goods Ile-enparu knpom FM domsstlc use For rc-exports Services (na) lneome (net) Ofwhch : interest oblig&m Tradws (“cl, Ofwhich : Oaicisl transfers cunent accO”“t Capital account Net borrowing Dirbwsrmc”ts AmnOatianobligatiom E-and otisions (inch. priv. capital) Ovcnll b.lnna Fmncing Fmncing Mancmy nlO”emcntS (increase-) Mancmy nlO”emcntS (increase-) Change in overdue obligatim Change in overdue obligatim Cbmgc m non-ovcrdus obligalmm 6, Cbmgc m non-ovcrdus obligalmm 6, Secured debt relief Secured debt relief Financing gap Residual gap 1. E.m”OmiC an* Flnmlcid Hdluton (AMd por-ge dmngcr) 9.2-12.4 13.cLL4.0 ... ... 3.6-6.0 3.64.0 ... ... 4.4 2.3 4.1 2.0 36.2 26.3 9.9 35.5 30.0 5.5 0.7 4.5 -3.8 3.8 2.6 1.2 1.1 0.1 13.6 19.4 3.4 0,s 5.0 2.2 2.8 (In million ofU.S. dolls, urdsss ohwise indicnted) 42.6 12.9 29.7 *o‘l.o 174.7 29.2 85.3 12.2 -5.0 52.2 61.0 -11.5 20.4 18.0 24.2 -6.3 -20.9 -12.0 11.5 -3.8 0.0 4.3 0.0 0.0 59.1 13.9 45.3 238.8 190.8 48.0 85.6 ,.. 11.7 4.5 .,. 67.9 ,.. 72.2 -LO 22.5 19.1 30.7 -,I.6 -19.3 -11.4 10.4 d.5 0.0 L.6 0.0 0.0 65.0 14.7 50.3 242.9 193.4 49.5 62.0 12.5 -6.3 70.8 74.9 -32.9 17.6 14.3 26.9 -12.6 0.0 -15.0 -1.7 -8.9 -10.1 13.3 22.4 16.5 70.2 75.9 82.4 16.0 17.L 18.5 54.2 58.8 63.9 254.4 259.9 272.8 201.0 202.0 209.9 53.4 57.9 62.8 62.7 70.6 83.1 12.2 12.4 12.4 -6.7 -7.0 -7.3 73.3 65.4 61.5 77.1 68.7 64.5 -35.9 -35.5 -33.4 21.7 21.6 22.3 15.4 14.9 13.4 28.6 27.1 27.0 -13.2 -12.2 -11.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 -14.2 -14.0 -11.0 -9.8 0.0 -10.1 LO.1 24.1 9.0 5.2 3.2 4.1 2.0 6.3 4.3 4.3 2.0 34.9 26.8 8.1 34.4 28.9 5.5 0.5 4.3 -3.9 3.9 2.9 0.9 1.1 -0.2 34.5 27.0 7.6 35.0 29.5 5.5 -0.5 -2.8 -3.3 3.3 2.3 1.0 0.8 0.2 7.6 20.7 3.2 21.2 3.8 cl.4 5.4 2.1 3.3 6.4 0.8 5.6 1.7 3.9 -9.7 -10.1 0.0 0.0 -LO., 0.0 10.1 0.0 23.7 21.2 8.6 8.5 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 27 - Table 2. Djibouti: Selected Economic and Social Indicators, 1995-2002 Jadunc 1995 1996 199, ,998 ,999 1999 2cloo 2w1 2002 Pm”. Pm”. ESAF hnm Memorandum Ltenu: Currency board aos forei@ auets lnmilliau 0fU.S. dollars Monslary uld LOLR cover (in pnccn,) As 1 ratio to eumncy iswc As P rUio to short-lema d&d ammtimhn 71 Comtial bank gross foreign asseta In months of tipoN for dome& USC In percat of ODP cummt aEfo”nt Overdl bahncc Official dcb! 81 In million ofUS. dollars Before rescheduling A&, rschcduling In percent of ODP Before rcrcbeduhg AAc, rescheduling Debt swwce ratio To EUrrS”, aIcco”P rcccrpu Obligations basis before rescbcduling Obligations basis a&r rcscbcduling To expom of good? and SCrvlCCI 91 Obbgations basis before rescheduling Obbga~ions basis atIer rcschcdullng Public sector overdue obligatiorn In millions 0fU.S. dollars Excbangc rate Excbangc rate (DFNg$) end-of-period Real ctTwtivc exchange rate 10, (End-year change in psrccnt; depreciation-) 23,200 rq km O,-whch: 0.4 percsnt arable land Health Education Life expcflanq at birth (yeas) Infant maoality rate (pcrthousmd live births) ,‘opu,kw per physician (199 I) 50.0 Gross mmllmenl mtio, primacy (percent ofs*ool age children) L06.0 Pupil-leacher ratio, primary 5.916.7 Orms enrollmmi ratio, sefonaary (pcrcerd of rcbml age cbildrc”) 71.4 77.0 67.8 115.6 122.2 113.1 1.3 1.4 1.4 5.4 5.9 5.2 64.4 Ill.8 113.7 1.2 I.2 4.9 4.7 10.0 8.6 8.1 7.6 -3.5 -3.3 -2.3 -2.8 -2.0 -6.9 -2.4 -2.2 265.3 265.3 54.1 54.1 5.0 5.0 7.5 7.5 L-l,., 284.3 284.3 57.3 57.3 4.9 4.9 7.2 7.2 177.7 -0.5 316.6 321.0 62.8 63.7 337.0 352.6 338.5 365.2 65.7 66.0 3.6 2.0 5.4 3.0 177.7 13.9 5.3 4.8 8.2 7.4 8.9 10.1 177.7 177.7 4.1 67.9 7L.J 75.1 78.8 118.1 116.9 117.3 116.5 I.2 I.2 I.2 I.2 5.2 5.5 5.7 6.0 7.2 7.1 7.2 7.3 -6.2 -6.5 4.1 -5.4 -2.8 .2.6 -2.4 -1.8 66.4 68.8 368.1 382.9 398.3 375.2 389.9 405.5 66.4 65.7 64.2 67.7 66.9 65.4 6.L 6.3 1.6 3.8 9.8 10.1 2.6 6.1 5.9 3.5 9.1 5.4 0.0 5.7 3.2 8.5 4.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 II. social 8nd lkmpphie hdidon 111 660,000 (1996 tiimk) aate of gmti 3 percmt u”mlployme”t rdc 40 percat ““da 20 y- af age: 5 1 percmt 32.0 47.2 14.0 Sources: DjibouLi authorities, IMF staEcstimatcs; and World Bank rOnal and drmogqhic data. li ~tiatunatcs ofrsal GDP g~oti excluding the negatwc impan oftis French military retrmduncnf. 2, For 1995.98 computed by the s!&using Djiboutian conrumplaon weqqbts applied to sclectcd sub-indices from the French expatiate CPI. Sta.tTe?&n~te for Jmuq-June ,999 based on the o&i., ‘LX’, bsgtig Aprd 31 Bcghing 1998. dy the counlcrprts of .&IF and IMF net purchases. 41 hcm data include wags ureara, anears to private suppliers and public enterprises for goods and services, prehxnb%uy estimates ofanran to the pension fun&, md Ihe MUIR of tbhe liquidad public agency that formerly cmlrollcd the grain trade that have been aswned by the gov-cnL Rcdwtianr in gownmat wows and debt 10 public mlcrprises over 200142 through the USC of privalization proceeds have not been incorporated in tic forecasts owing to lack of infonrWim The MCUS da exclude arrears on govmunmt debt service to tic public mterprisn owing to lack ofinfmm~tim. Debt data include debt to public ente@%~ and to tbs danestic banking system 51 ~egiming 1998 da imlude only tin opcrattig b& and exclude two closed banks which are being liquitid. 61 For ,999.2001 @aim to debt fa which repaymmttmnr were previously pending. 71 Includes only amorttitim due or public sector medium- and lmg&mn debt mere is no public sector short-tmn debt. information is not available I cgarding private seaor debt, dq4l.s or dmvnic debt holdings by nm-residents. md offshore debt ofresidmrs. 8, Public and publicly-guaranteed debt ofthe centi go vmmmt and the public enterprise sector. 9, Exprtl of &ally-praduccd goods and nonfador services. 10, The REEK is c.IcuIalr.d”singthe CPI pay ncdedinroolnolc 2. I l, Data rcfsr to ,he I~ta-t fiyra available for 1990.96 in World Bank doc”mm!x Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 28 - Table 3. Djibouti: Central Government Fiscal Operations, 1995-2002 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 Pro". original ,m*June h*ea Pm". 1999 2000 2001 2002 ESAF FTogram Revenue and gram Revenue Tax IC”C”“C Diced taxes Indimataxcr Nontax ~S"S""uc Grant3 L, Medical DcfWLW Education Other (incl. budgetary as&tmce) l‘olal cxpcnditure Cuncm expendme li Wager md salares Before demobiltiion DcmobilizaCm (net) Mamid and supplies Civilian D&"S Mamtenance Road Mar"lcnmcc Fund odler Transferr Education and heal* o!her Inkrsstobligatiom Domeslic Ened Keinrcrtion program Incrcmenti SC&l Cxpc"di,urC Social Fund 21 PATARE 21 E*"cation Hedlh aher social safely net MedicA (forcipfmanccd) Olher Capital expcnditurc Balance (paym.mI-order) Arrears (payment-) Domdc ACC"lll"l~UO" Cash payment ofmcan Wages and salaries Pension fund Eficmal intcrcsl *ccumulalio" Senlcmcnt of arrears Rescheduled obligaionr "ahcc (Cash) 27,169 27,006 25,390 25,395 23,569 23,486 9,434 10,409 14,135 13,077 1,821 1,909 1,779 1,611 34,242 30,430 31,036 26,999 21,107 18,348 6.441 454 1.735 602 0 1.149 3.206 -7,073 2,773 -603 -4.300 -603 5,295 -5,898 0 0 -4.027 27,778 24,408 21.881 9,560 12,321 2,527 31,233 23.154 20,258 9,073 11,185 2,896 8,079 2,068 6,011 31,649 27,813 19.701 19.092 609 4,400 30,427 24.350 14,976 14,730 246 4,182 3,848 334 271 456 256 200 0 0 2,334 1.116 1.418 319 140 179 0 2,068 2,068 0 0 0 285 0 3.836 6.077 -3,871 2,193 1.939 6.IR.4 4,24s 806 2,049 -2,666 -723 -740 3,523 -4.263 17 0 0 17 83 (In million of Djibouti francs) 34,431 L3.058 32,463 24,412 9,666 23,765 22,401 9.009 21,891 9,557 3,315 9,042 12,844 5,694 12,849 2,011 657 1,874 10,019 3,392 8,698 750 375 750 870 435 870 2,145 1,073 2,145 6,254 1,509 4,933 35.692 25,914 14,468 9,322 IJJ47 1,446 9,777 750 360 2.145 6,522 32,382 (5,724 32,847 34,960 27.726 *4,033 28,473 29,562 15,251 7,476 14,845 14,643 14,468 7,476 14,440 L3.892 783 0 405 751 5,428 2,975 5,414 J,OIO 4,224 2,440 4,210 4,316 I.204 100 1.204 694 JIO 205 82, 1,132 0 0 311 622 510 205 510 510 2.706 1.427 2,706 2,600 1.627 JSO 1.627 1,800 1.079 0 L.079 800 367 167 458 488 116 48 ** 128 251 L19 373 361 569 0 229 242 2,895 1,691 3,908 J.446 0 12 355 355 0 23 78 178 2,145 1,181 2,362 2,695 0 100 200 700 0 0 162 768 750 375 750 750 0 92 92 0 4,656 1,691 4.374 5,399 731 -3,677 -3,677 0 -3,677 -3,677 0 0 0 0 0 1,580 I.580 4,662 -3,082 0 0 0 0 -384 -1,128 -1,179 0 -1,179 -1,179 0 5, 0 -13 64 -1,512 -4.462 -4,490 -3,127 -4.Sl7 -4,537 -3.166 0 0 0 4,517 -4,537 -3,166 -1,280 -3,046 -L,262 -3.237 -1,213 -2.182 55 47 39 0 0 0 -1,628 0 -1,086 55 -3.731 36,158 38.054 27,767 29,724 26,321 28,278 9,186 8,955 17,135 19,323 1,446 1,446 8,391 8,330 no 750 360 360 2,145 2.145 5,136 J.075 35,664 38,595 29,947 32,550 12,864 12,864 12,864 12,864 0 0 '694 I.132 622 510 2.900 '700 602 258 345 243 '35s J34 3,095 1,400 712 750 0 J.-n7 494 47 -3,996 5;225 694 1.132 622 510 3,300 2,600 700 668 347 321 0 8,667 363 534 3.545 1,800 1,675 no 0 6,045 -54, 39 -3,668 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 29 - Table 3. Djibouti: Central Government Fiscal Operations, 1995-2002 1997 1998 ,999 Rw. original Jul.-lunc Budget Fro". ,999 2wo 2OOl 2002 ESAF Pmgmm Financing Domestic fmancing Bank Cumnq board 3, CommAial banks Nonbank krs”ry bills (“et) P!Jblic mierprisc (net) Amars aclusme”t 41 Priwttiio” promds (“et) Extcml halIcing Net bo”o”ing Dlsbummcnts Ammtiion paymsntr Ammtkation obligations Change in ovcrduc oblig~titiom Chmgs in non-overdue obliguiom Debt relief Rsshdulsd amatlzation Debt fmgivcncss Revenus and ~W.T Revenue 'Tax revenue Dirccl taxes lndmn taxes Nmlm revenue Gram Ii 'lo,.4 sxpend,rurc Current cxpmdilurc li wagps and rsluia Befm denmbiliralion Demobilizalion (net) Mae,+., andsupplies Mai"tcnancc Road Maintenmcc Fund oibcr l‘ranlfen Education and health odw lntmest obligations DomestiC E-l aetitiion propm Lmemmtal social cxpcndihlre OttleT Capital sxpcnditurc Ualancs (papmt-order, Ancars (paymcn,., oomcnic E*,mml inleresl hIlance (Cash) 4,300 2,887 LIZI 140 981 1.766 0 1,766 0 0 1,414 1,414 1,784 -370 -3,640 0 0 3,270 3.270 0 31.1 29.1 27.0 LO.8 16.2 2.1 2.0 39.2 35.6 24.2 7.4 0.5 0.5 2.0 0.7 I.3 3.7 -8.L 3.2 4.9 4,027 1,085 -15 401 -416 1,100 0 LJOO 0 0 2,942 2,942 3.125 -183 -290 0 0 LO, 107 0 30.6 28.8 26.6 11.8 14.8 2.2 1.8 34.5 30.6 20.8 4.8 0.5 OS 2.4 0.7 L.4 3.9 -3.9 6.7 -0 7 0.0 -4.6 L.678 405 1,008 1,105 -97 -603 0 403 0 0 1,273 1,273 L,671 -398 -512 -1.119 0 1.233 1,233 0 0 31.0 27.2 24.4 10.7 13.8 2.8 3.8 35.3 31.0 22.0 21.3 0.7 4.9 0.5 0.5 2.8 0.5 0.3 0.2 0.0 0.0 0.3 4.3 -4.3 2.4 2.2 0.3 -1.9 -83 -780 -740 230 -970 40 0 -40 0 0 675 675 1,424 -749 -473 -434 0 158 158 0 22 34.2 25.4 22.2 9.9 12.3 3.2 8.9 33.4 26.7 16.4 16.2 0.3 4.6 0.3 0.3 2.8 1.2 1.6 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.0 2.3 0.0 6.7 0.9 -0.8 -0.8 0.0 0.1 1,629 81 795 1,104 -309 -714 0 -7L4 0 0 1,548 1,548 2,166 .618 -618 0 0 0 0 0 0 1,086 1,512 3,731 3,996 3,668 218 172 LJ86 961 1,109 475 308 I.097 1,122 931 597 608 1,097 1.122 931 -1-n -300 0 0 0 -257 -136 89 -161 178 0 0 L.820 1,173 1,069 0 -35, -II -II- 0 0 0 -1,720 .I,323 -89, 0 221 0 0 0 936 936 1,158 -222 -215 -7 0 0 0 0 -1, 1.340 1,340 2,024 -584 -593 -41, -1,800 2,126 326 1,800 2;544 3,020 -475 -708 0 -L,SOO 2,033 233 1,800 3.035 2.559 3,035 2,559 3,434 2,920 -398 -361 -597 -590 0 0 .1,800 0 1,999 229 199 229 1,800 0 0 0 0 0 (In pcrcmt of ODP) 37.0 13.8 34.4 36.2 34.9 34.5 26.2 LO.2 25.2 26.3 26.8 27.0 24. L 9.5 23.2 24.8 25.4 257 10.3 3.3 9.6 9.5 8.9 8.1 13.8 6.0 13.6 15.4 16.5 17.5 2.2 0.7 2.0 I.5 I.4 1.3 10.8 3.6 9.2 9.9 8.1 7.6 34.8 29.8 16.4 13.5 0.8 5.8 0.5 0.0 0.5 2.9 1.7 I.2 0.4 0.0 0.0 0.6 3.1 0.0 5.0 16.7 14.9 7.9 7.9 3.2 0.7. 1,s 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.0 1.8 0.1 1.8 -2.8 1.7 1.7 0.0 -1.2 34.8 35.5 34.4 35.0 30.2 30.0 28.9 29.5 LT.7 14.9 12.4 Il.7 15.3 14.L 12.4 11.7 0.4 0.8 0.0 0.0 5.7 5.1 5.2 5.4 0.9 L.1 1.1 I.0 0.3 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 2.9 2.6 2.8 3.0 1.7 1.8 2.1 2.4 I.1 0.8 0.7 0.6 0.5 0.5 0.6 0.6 0.1 0.L 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.4 0.3 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.0 4.1 5.5 6.6 7.9 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 4.6 5.5 5.5 5.5 2.2 -4.0 4.0 0.0 -*., -0.4 -L.2 -1.2 0.1 -1.6 0.7 4.J -4.6 0.1 -3.8 0.5 4.3 -4.4 0.0 -3.9 a5 -2.8 -2.9 0.0 -3.3 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 30 - Table 3 Djibouti: Central Government Fiscal Operations, 1995-2002 1995 ,996 1991- 1998 1999 F-m”. ori&iMl Jan.-June Budget Fro”. 1999 7.000 2001 1002 ESAF Rc.gm Finatwing Domestic fmancing Bank Cumoy board 3, commcroi* b* NOII-bulk Exiemd fmcing Net borrowing DilbU-C?ll.i Amok&m pymcn* Ammlizalion obligslmns Change in owduc obligaGonr Cbmge m non-overdue obhgatmu Debt relief Reschcdu,ed amom.?*tlo” Debt forgivencrr Memomdm items: Current expenditure (excluding pants-in-kind counterpart) Priority expenditures Social He&h 5, EducPtion 51 Social safety “et hfr~crurc (excl. Health and Education Maintenance btfhstmtie (insI. Heal!& and FAucation) Military expenditure ODP at marlrn prices 4.9 3.3 1.3 0.2 1.1 2.0 1.6 1.6 2.0 -0.4 -42 0.0 0.0 3.7 3.7 0.0 35.6 8.6 5.6 1.9 3.7 2.6 0.5 3.7 4.6 1.9 L.2 0.5 0.0 1.1 0.5 1.2 -0.5 6.1 l.2 4.7 3.3 1.4 3.3 L.4 3.5 1.9 a.2 -0.4 -0.3 -0.6 0.0 -1.2 0.0 0.0 0.1 1.4 0.1 1.4 0.0 0.0 30.6 31.0 8.5 9.2 5.2 5.5 1.7 1.8 3.5 3.6 2.9 0.5 3.9 10.7 8.0 87,241 88,167 3.2 0.5 4.3 8.5 89,583 al 1.8 I.2 1.6 3.8 3.9 3.3 a.9 0.1 0.2 0.2 I.2 0.9 LO 6.8 0.9 0.5 0.3 1.1 1.1 0.8 0.3 l.2 0.6 0.6 I.1 L.1 0.8 -I., -0.3 -0.1 -0.3 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 -0.8 4.3 -0.1 0.1 -0.2 0.2 0.7 1.7 1.0 L.4 2.6 2.9 2.3 0.7 1.7 1.0 L.4 2.6 1.9 2.3 1.6 2.3 1.2 2.1 3.1 3.3 2.7 -0.8 -0.7 -0.2 -0.7 -0.5 -0.4 6.3 -0.5 -0.7 -0.2 -0.6 -0.7 -0.6 -0.5 -0.5 0.0 0.0 -0.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 -1.9 -1.8 -,.7 0.0 0.2 0.0 0.0 2.3 2.1 1.9 0.2 0.2 0.0 0.0 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 1.9 1.8 1.7 0.0 24.4 25.7 14.9 11.6 Il.6 5.8 7.3 2.2 2.1 3.6 4.0 0.0 1.2 5.5 3.8 0.3 0.5 0.1 6.7 5.0 1.8 6.7 5.2 91,198 93,063 94,352 26.2 12.2 8.0 2.3 4.2 1.4 3.3 0.9 4.6 4.8 94,352 26.7 25.7 26.6 14.6 15.9 17.1 9.5 11.1 12.5 3.0 3.9 4.4 4.6 5.1 5.5 2.0 2.1 2.7 4.0 3.7 3.5 1.1 1.1 1.0 5.5 5.5 5.5 98,486 103,641 110.197 Source: Djibouti autiarik and IMF staffestimates 1 i Nonampambilities exist for data between 1995.1997 and later ycarr as pntp-&kind and their ~lt-rent expcndihlrs counterparts arc included only bsginning ,998 owing to lack of data for e.ulicT yeam 21 Tbc Social Fund and PATARE outlays UC to bc funded by tbc African Dcvc,opmmt Bank and World Bank, respectively, and imcludc funding for education, beal& and social safety net opatiom. 3, Far 1998.2002 limited to counterparts of net MF and AMP purchases and net of special deposits kcm privatization prow& 4, &rears settlrmcn~~ prtatig to privals suppliers and tbc liquidated public agency tit formerly controlled tbc pin trade wtucb will initially tic place through issuance 0fuoJury bills. 5, Muds capita, cxpmdilure which is considered 10 be 20 percent oft&A spending. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3l- Table 4. Djibouti: Factors Affecting Domestic Liquidity, 1995-2002 1995 1996 1997 1998 1, 1998 I/ 1999 1999 ZOO0 2001 --GE 2002 ESAF Pro- “road monsy I.828 Cunmcy in ctiulation -1,326 Demand dcposiu -657 Djibouti hna -1,216 Foreign sunency 559 Time dcposils 3,811 Djibouti francs -1,562 Fomgn currency 5.373 -5,756 319 -2,419 -1,387 -1,032 -3,656 -710 3,189 3,735 98 -236 -35, -351 -594 -1,232 2,639 2,953 44, -63, 534 813 1,001 -60 I 2,105 2.140 -560 758 901 1,133 *5, -1,061 .,,6L, -1,386 1.198 1,819 2,512 2,519 -947 1,081 -92 3,584 643 2,746 648 3,074 505 -2;oza NC, fore@ assets -1,992 -5,887 -2,090 .,,856 -1.21, -990 -441 240 215 437 Cumncy board (net) -1,277 255 -2,017 .I,139 -1,139 -693 -181 -448 -474 -257 Ass& -1,274 994 -1,630 -568 -568 -397 627 635 634 658 Lmbilitics 3 739 387 571 57, 296 807 LO82 1,107 915 Commercial banks (net) -715 -6.142 -73 -717 -72 -297 -26, 687 688 694 Asw.5 -280 -6,513 -1,082 -453 802 -1,653 -261 687 688 694 Lmbililia 435 -371 -1,009 .1,*70 874 -1,356 0 0 0 0 Net domclVc ass& 3,820 131 1,380 5,045 4,946 1,088 Clam 0” gwcmmed (net) *,121 -15 1,009 -739 -509 424 Cunmcy board 140 401 l,lO5 230 230 597 Commercial b* 981 -416 -96 -969 -740 -,73 Claims on “o”go”cmme”t sector 4,452 1.178 -I78 4,960 5,116 2,452 Public cntwprisez 45 ,35 179 1,337 1,372 88 PnvPtc ICcm 4,407 1,043 -357 3,623 3,744 2,364 Capoal PCCO”“ti -520 -18 30, -694 -557 -974 O!hr items (n*) -1,233 -1.014 248 1.518 896 -814 .30x 608 -300 3,003 -974 -814 2,506 1,097 1,097 0 1,409 0 0 5.4 1.3 0.5 -0.9 1.4 5.0 2.2 2.8 0.0 0.0 2,860 1.112 1,122 0 1,738 0 0 3,146 931 93, 0 2215 0 0 HI oad money 3.3 -10.0 Currency In CIrc”I.1IW -2.4 0.6 Dcmmd dep&Lr -1.2 -4.2 Djibouli hm -2.2 -2.4 Foreign cumncy 1.0 -1.8 Time deposits 6.9 -6.4 Djdwub francs -2.8 -2.8 Foreign CUrrem) 9.7 .3.5 Net fore& asset.9 -3.6 Currency board -2.3 Cammcrcial banks -1.3 Net domenic a.ue,s 6.9 Clainn cm gov-e”, (“et) 2.0 Claim on ncmgovemment senm 8.0 Public entscprise3 0.1 ktivaa Jector 7.9 Capital acco”“ls -0.9 odlcr items (“CL) -2.2 -10.3 0.4 -10.7 0.2 0.0 2.1 0.2 1.8 0.0 -1.8 -1.4 -0.5 -2.4 -1.2 -1.2 1.5 -2.1 3.5 4.0 -3.9 4.l 2.7 2.0 -0.3 0.3 6.7 0.6 0.5 (31 millioa9 OfDjibouti fmu-s) (Changes in percmt of broad money) 6.3 8.2 0.2 -0.8 -0.8 -1.2 5.2 6.5 0.9 I.0 1.8 2.0 4.1 4.7 -1.1 1.8 2.5 0.5 -3.2 -3.0 2.4 4.9 5.5 -1.9 1.1 -0.Z -3.5 -2.6 -2.0 -2.2 .2.5 -1.4 -1.3 -0.2 6.6 -0.9 -0.4 -0.5 9.8 10.8 2.2 -1.5 -1.1 0.9 9.7 11.2 5.0 2.6 3.0 0.2 7.1 8.2 4.8 -*.4 -1.2 -2.0 3.1 2.0 -1.6 3.1 0.6 6.1 -2.0 -1.6 5.8 0.9 0.4 -0.9 L.3 5.4 2.1 3.3 0.0 0.0 6.4 1.1 0.8 6.5 1.2 5.6 1.7 3.9 0.0 0.0 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-32- Table 4. Djibouti: Factors Affecting Domestic Liquidity, 1995-2002 ,995 ,996 ,997 ,998 ,, is98 1, ,999 ,999 loo0 2OQI 2002 lunc ESAF Pfopm Mcmormdumitem: Growlhofacdittononeave~nentseetor (In percent) Ratio ofcanwr cd twk nctforeigncumncydepasi~ 10 nctforcipl asset? 31 Broadmoney 57,365 51,609 50,899 54.088 49,471 49,569 50,552 Currency in c~rculatmn 9,367 9,686 9,450 9,099 9,099 8,505 9,007 Demand depepam ll.157 18,738 17,506 20,145 IS.997 19,438 Djibouti francs 13.066 Il.679 11.048 11,582 10,591 11,592 ForcieJlcumensy 8.09 I 7,059 6,458 8563 8,406 7$46 'Tune dspose3 26,841 23,,85 23,943 24,844 21,375 21,626 Djibouti hancs 7,039 $41, 4,350 2,739 948 2,146 Fore,gncumency 19.802 17,774 19,593 11,105 20,427 19,480 53,298 9,655 56,373 10,160 59,957 10,803 Net foragll asels 33,795 27,908 25,834 23,978 30,8,4 29,824 30,373 30,612 30,827 31,264 Cuncncyboard L2.67, 12,926 10.925 9.786 9.786 9.093 9,605 9,158 8,684 8,427 Comcrcialbanks 21.124 14,982 14,909 14.192 2,,028 20.73, 20,767 21.455 22,143 22,837 Ne,dom~sticBFsets ChinIs on go"cmment (net) Claims on "o"go"mment seam Public cnterpnscs Private sector, afwhich: lnfareigncumncy Capital acCD""b Oiher items (net) 23.570 23.7Ol 1,348 ,333 38,347 39,525 464 599 37,883 38,926 25,065 30.,,0 18,681 19,745 20,193 2,342 1.603 1,833 2,257 *,I41 39,347 44.307 29,015 31,467 32,018 778 2.115 2,114 2,202 38,569 42.192 26,901 29,265 7,,63 9,196 7,933 9,137 -11,481 -12,175 -LO,,88 -11,162 -11,162 -5,143 -3.625 -1,979 -2,817 -2.817 22.699 3,238 33.426 25,559 4,360 35,165 28,705 5.291 37,380 ,,I,764 -4,361 ., I,782 -5,375 -11,162 -2,817 -11,162 -11,162 -2,817 -2.817 L3.l 3.1 a.5 12.6 21.4 1, 8.5 LO.3 4.4 5.1 6.3 82.5 89.0 73.2 89.4 67.8 61.0 (Rock inmi,liomofDjibcati~ca) Swrces:Djibovtiwtharitia,andIMPJtlffcstlnates. UFor ESAF~m~-am~urpo~cs.Ulcmanc~faclonand~ulveydpt.andforecsFtsrcl.teonlytoUuthrccopcr~tln~commereialbanks~d excludcdatafor woclored bankrtbatare being liqui&ted.Dala for ,995.97ueprcsmtedon sfive-bmkb~i~.Forcompvisonpurpo.es,ihp,eft-hand 1998columpvidea ~hcmonekacyda~ ma five-barkb~~isandtbe right-h~dEo,~~~~~~~de~UICmOnelPrydatlonithrcc-bankb~is. 21lllhc large percentage mcreasc in nedittotheDongov-cnfscctorlnthcthrce-b~monstaryJurveyrencMtheE,oslngaf.bankinAugust ,998md the Shlfl ofil.5 cunomcr base to only the ,brec operating banlw. j/The rauosfor 1995-96 utilise only pssfoareign cumcncydcposits rsdatagnforci~surrencyclwnsanthcprivates~orarc availab,ebcgimingonlyin ,997. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-33- Table 5. Djibouti: Balance of Payments, 1995-2003 (ln millions ofUS. dollars; unless otbewix indicated) 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 PIW. ESAF Pmgmm Pmj. Current account -17.0 -16.3 -11.5 -14.4 32.9 -35.9 -35.5 -33.4 -29.4 .Tradc balance -169.2 ,161.l .161.4 -179.7 -111.9 -184.2 -183.9 -190.4 -192.3 Exports, f.o.b. 31.6 39.6 42.6 59.1 65.0 70.2 75.9 82.4 89.4 Of which: Localiy pmduwd goods 13.6 13.7 12.9 13.9 14.7 16.0 17.1 18.5 20.1 Imports, fnb. 206.8 2007 204.0 238.8 242.9 254.4 259.9 272.8 281.7 Of which: For domestic USC Ii 178.7 171.0 174.7 190.8 193.4 201.0 202.0 209.9 213.6 Serwccr and income (net) 103.2 98.0 91.1 97.4 74.5 75.0 83.1 95.6 101.5 %&es, net 85.9 82.3 85.5 85.6 62.0 62.1 70.6 83.1 89.3 Credit 165.6 1640 166.1 174.1 159.4 163.9 172.2 180.5 188.3 Debit -79.7 -81.8 -81.2 -88.5 -91.4 -101.1 -101.6 -97.3 -99.0 I.EOrnC, “Cl 17.3 15.7 12.2 11.7 12.5 12.2 12.4 12.4 12.2 Credit 25.9 24.2 21.7 21.5 22.9 23.5 24.1 24.7 25.2 Debit -8.6 -8.5 -9.5 -9.7 -10.5 -11.3 -11.7 -12.3 -13.0 llnrequited transfers 49.0 46.9 52.2 67.9 70.8 13.3 65.4 61.5 61.5 Pwate (“et) -11.1 -10.1 -8.8 -4.3 4.0 -3.8 -3.4 -3.1 -2.8 Official (net, 60.1 57.0 61.0 72.2 74.9 77.1 68.8 64.6 64.2 Of which Budgetary support 10.8 -9.1 20.3 33.8 36.2 43.0 35.2 31.8 31.8 Capital account 9.4 19.6 20.4 22.5 17.6 21.7 21.6 22.3 20.8 Foreign direct investment 21 3.2 3.3 2.4 3.5 3.4 6.3 6.7 7.0 7.1 public secfor (net) 6.1 16.3 18.0 19.1 14.3 15.4 14.9 15.4 13.8 Errors and omissions (including other private capital) -2.4 -31.4 -20.9 -19.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Overall balance (deficit -) -10.0 -34.0 -12.0 -11.4 -15.0 -14.2 -14.0 -11.0 -8.6 Financing Monetary rn~wn~nt~ (increase-) Currency board (net) Asxts Liabilities Of which: IMF (SBA) AMF Commercial banks (net) Assets Liabilities Change m ovorduc obligations (decrease-) Change in nonwcrdue obligations 31 Secured debt relief Rescheduling Debt forgiveness 10.0 34.0 12.0 11.5 -7.4 -9.8 -9.7 -10.1 -6.4 11.2 33.1 11.5 10.4 -1.7 -9.8 -9.7 -10.1 -6.4 1.2 -1.4 11.0 6.5 -3.1 4.0 -5.8 -5.2 -5.5 1.2 -5.6 9.2 3.4 -3.5 -3.6 -3.6 -3.7 -3.7 0.0 4.2 1.9 3.2 0.4 -2.4 -2.3 -2.5 -1.8 0.0 4.2 I.5 3.2 0.4 -2.4 -2.3 -2.5 -1.8 0.0 0.0 0.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 4.0 34.6 0.4 3.9 I.4 -3.9 -3.9 -3.9 -0.9 1.6 36.6 6.1 -2.1 1.4 -3.9 -3.9 -3.9 -0.9 2.4 -2.1 -5.7 6.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 -1.2 0.9 -3.8 -0.5 -8.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 -18.4 -0.6 0.0 0.0 -10.1 -10.1 -10.1 0.0 0.0 18.4 0.6 4.3 1.6 13.3 10.1 10.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 4.3 1.6 3.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 18.4 0.6 0.0 0.0 10.1 10.1 10.1 0.0 0.0 Financing Gap Exceptional Financing IMF (ESAF) AIDB AhIF World Bank 22.4 24.1 23.7 21.2 5.8 15.1 15.1 12.7 3.8 7.1 1.1 7.1 1.6 1.6 1.6 0.0 0.4 0.8 0.8 0.0 0.0 5.0 5.0 5.0 Res,dual gap 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 16.5 9.0 8.6 8.5 15.0 5.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 5.0 10.0 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-34- Table 5. Djibouti: Balance ofPayments, 1995-2003 (In millions ofU.S. dollars; ““less othcnvisc indicated) 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 Pro”. ESAF Program Proj. Memorandum items: In percent of GDP Current BCCO”“, Capital acco”“f Overall balance Currency board net f&g” assets Assets 51 Monetary and LOLR cover (in percent) 5/ Liabilities Of which: IMF Ahw Commercial bank net foreign assets 61 A.sscts In months of imports 71 Ltabilities Ollicisl debt 81 In millions ofU.S. dollars Obligations basis before rescheduling Obligations basis after rescheduling In percent of GDP Obligations bastes befare rescheduling Obligations basis after reschcdubng Debt sew& c&as In percent of current acco”nl receipts Obligatians basis before rescheduling Obligations basis atier rescheduling In percent of exports oflocally pr”duc.zd goods and nonfactor services Obligations basis before rescheduling Obligations basis a&r rescheduling Stock of public sector “verduc obligations -3.5 1.9 -2.0 -3.3 4.0 -6.9 71.3 72.7 71.4 77.0 115.6 122.2 0.1 4.3 0.0 0.0 118.9 210.0 10.0 91.1 4.2 0.0 84.3 173.3 8.6 265.3 284.3 265.3 284.3 54.1 54.1 57.3 57.3 5.0 5.0 7.5 7.5 4.9 4.9 7.2 7.2 -2.3 -2.8 -6.1 -6.5 4.0 4.4 3.3 3.9 -2.4 -2.2 -2.8 -2.6 61.7 55.1 54.0 51.5 67.8 64.4 67.9 71.5 113.1 111.8 118.1 116.9 6.1 9.3 13.9 20.0 5.4 8.5 12.7 18.0 0.7 0.7 1.1 1.9 83.9 80.0 78.6 82.5 167.2 169.6 168.5 172.4 8.1 7.6 7.2 7_1 83.3 89.9 89.9 89.9 -6.1 -5.4 -44 3.7 3.6 3.1 -2.4 -1.8 -1.3 48.9 47.4 52.9 75.1 78.8 82.5 117.3 116.5 116.5 26.2 31.3 29.5 23.4 28.6 26.8 2.7 2.7 2.7 86.4 90.3 91.2 176.3 180.2 181.1 7.2 7.3 7.2 89.9 89.9 89.9 316.6 337.0 352.6 368.1 321.0 338.5 365.2 375.2 62.8 65.7 66.4 66.4 63.7 66.0 68.8 67.7 382.9 398.3 412.1 389.9 405.5 420.7 65.7 64.2 62.1 66.9 65.4 63.4 3.6 5.3 6.1 6.3 5.9 2.0 4.8 1.6 3.8 3.5 5.4 8.2 9.8 10.1 9.1 3.0 7.4 2.6 6.1 5.4 8.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 5.7 6.0 3.2 3.2 8.5 8.9 4.9 4.8 0.0 0.0 Sources: Djibouti authorities; and IMF staff eslimatcs. li For ,998, inclvdcs imparts of clsctricity generatars equivalent to about UIIO million. 21 Estimates of privatization receipts for 1999-2002 are “at available. 31 For 1999-2001 pamins to debt for which repayment terms were previously pending. 41 Includes ES&F and AMF rcso”rccs. 51 Ratio of gross foreign assets l” cvrrcncy issue and commercial bank end govemmsnt deposits 61 For 1998-2003 includes only the three operating banks. 71 Imports of goads far domestic “SC and “““factor services. 81 Public and publicly-guaranteed debt Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-35- Table 6. Medium-Tam Macroeconomic Framework: Selected Indicators, 1995-2002 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2Wl 2002 Pmv. FSAF Program (PCrcCllta~C change) Real GDP -3.6 -1.5 0.0 1.7 1.4 2.3 3.2 4.2 Co”s”mcr prices (average) 4.5 2.6 1.6 0.1 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 (In percent of GDP unless othcwise indicated) Investment 8.6 9.2 9.5 Government 3.7 4.0 4.3 No”go”emmc”t l/ 4.9 5.3 5.2 15.3 6.7 8.6 11.7 4.6 7.0 13.8 5.5 8.3 13.6 13.5 5.5 5.5 8.0 8.0 Total savings Foreign savings 21 National savings 31 Domestic savings Government Nongovcrnmcnt 8.6 9.2 9.5 15.3 11.7 18.2 17.8 16.3 17.7 21.1 -9.7 -8.6 6.8 -2.4 -9.4 -13.2 -11.8 -9.8 4.7 -11.7 -8.0 -3.3 -5.3 -2.9 -6.4 -5.2 -8.5 4.4 -1.8 - -5.2 External current accounf balance (including grams), of which: -3.5 -3.3 -2.3 -2.8 -6.1 Net factor services 3.5 3.2 3.0 2.3 2.3 Central govcmmcnt finances Revcnuc and grants Current cxpcnditurc Caprtal cxpcnditurc Ovemll balance (payment order) Amars (reduction-) 41 Ovsra,, balance (cash) 31.1 30.6 31.0 34.2 34.4 36.2 34.9 34.5 35.6 30.6 31.0 26.7 30.2 30.0 28.7 29.3 3.7 3.9 4.3 87 4.6 5.5 5.5 5.5 -8.1 -3.9 -4.3 0.9 -0.4 0.7 0.5 -0.5 3.2 -0.7 2.4 -0.8 -1.2 4.5 -4.3 -2.8 4.9 4.6 -1.9 0.1 -1.6 -3.8 -3.9 -3.3 Mc,,,orsnd,,m item: ( In pcrccnt ofGDP) Consumption expaditurc 31 Non8ovemment GO”Wll!llC”t Eacmal gr&“tS Real GDP per capita (change in percent) 108.7 105.3 105.4 103.0 110.2 108.1 105.8 103.8 75.8 77.7 -77.7 79.5 83.3 81.2 80.3 77.8 32.9 27.5 27.7 23.6 26.8 26.9 25.5 25.9 14.7 14.5 14.0 14.9 14.9 14.6 12.4 10.9 -64 4.5 -3.0 -1.3 -1.7 -0.6 0.2 1.2 13.8 21.1 -7.3 -9.5 -5.1 -I.4 6.5 2.2 13.6 13.5 18.5 16.3 -4.9 -2.8 -7.0 -4.8 -3.4 -3.7 -3.6 -1.0 -6.1 -5.4 2.1 2.0 Source: Fund staff&mates and projections Ii IV98 data include imports of electricity g.Weramrs at a cost cquivalcnf to 2 percent of GDP. 2, Equivalent to tic cemal currenf account d&it excluding all grants. 31 The negative national savings and high level of consumption are pamilted by the large inflows of external granti 41 Relates to domestic arrears and extcrnal inlerest arrears. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 7. Djibouti: Medium-Term Balance of Payments Sensitivity Analysis, 1995-2003 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 zoo0 2001 2002 2003 Prov. ESAF Program Proj. In percent of GDP Current account d&it overall balance Debt service ratio (before debt relief) In percent of locally produced goods and nonfactor sewices Debt sexvice to the Fund 1n millions of U.S. dollars III percent of exports of locally produced goods aad nonfactor services In percent of GDP Cment account deficit overall balance Debt service ratio (before debt relief) In percent of exporls of 1ocaIly produced and nonfactor services Debt service to the Fund III millions of U.S. dollars In percent of 1ocaIly pmdooxI goods and nonfactor services -3.5 -2.0 7.5 0.0 0.0 -3.5 -3.3 -2.3 -2.8 -6.2 -7.1 -7.6 -7.4 -5.8 -2.0 -6.9 -2.4 -2.2 -2.8 -3.2 -3.9 -3.8 -3.7 1.5 0.0 0.0 -3.3 -2.3 -2.8 -6.1 -6.5 -6.1 -5.4 -4.4 -6.9 -2.4 -2.2 -2.8 -2.6 -2.4 -1.8 -1.3 7.2 0.0 0.0 5.4 0.1 0.1 8.2 9.8 10.1 0.3 1.2 2.7 0.2 0.7 1.5 Pessimistic Scenario l/ 9.1 8.5 8.9 2.5 2.6 1.9 1.3 1.3 0.9 z 7.2 9.1 9.6 0.0 0.0 5.4 8.2 9.8 10.3 9.5 0.1 0.3 1.2 2.7 2.5 0.1 0.2 0.7 1.5 1.4 2.6 1.4 1.9 1.0 Baseline scenario Source: Djibouti authorities; and IMF staff eshates. I/ Based cm average growth of transport aad related services of 6 percent compared to 9 percent over 2000-2003 in the baseline scenario. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 8. Djibouti: External Financing Requirements, 1995-2003 1995 1996 1997 1998 I999 2000 2001 2002 2003 PIOV. ESAF Program Pmj External financing requirements Current account excluding official grants, of which: Interest obligations Amortization obligations Gowmmmt Public ent&ses Change in ovAdue obligations (decrease +) Currency board monetmy and LQLR cover (incmse +) Cmnmercial bank net for&n asseLs (increase +) B4.F (SBA) AMF Rq+r financing Of&&l ‘%“” hzYmQ Public enterprises Foreign dii investment Other private capital net (incl. errors and ommissions) Change in non-ovenlue obligations I/ Secured debt relief Rescheduling Debt forgiveness Financing gap World Bank 37.1 13.8 35.3 57 5 100.5 106.5 97.0 90.7 84.4 37.3 38.3 31.1 55.8 77.3 83.4 75.0 69.0 64.9 3.9 3.7 5.0 5.4 6.0 6.7 7.0 7.3 7.7 9.1 9.6 6.3 Il.6 12.6 13.2 12.2 11.6 13.1 2.3 1.6 1.0 2.6 3.3 4.0 3.4 3.3 4.7 7.4 8.0 5.3 9.0 9.3 9.2 8.8 8.3 8.5 1.2 a.9 3.8 0.5 8.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 -7.2 5.6 -9.2 -3.4 3.5 3.6 3.6 3.7 3.7 -4.0 -34.6 -0.4 -3.9 -1.4 3.9 3.9 3.9 0.9 0.0 -4.2 -1.5 -3.2 -0.4 2.4 2.3 2.5 1.8 0.0 0.0 -0.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 37.0 13.8 31.3 56.0 75.3 82.4 73.2 69.7 20.4 18.6 25.6 41.4 44.7 47.5 39.4 35.7 15.9 26.0 24.2 30.7 26.9 28.6 27.1 27.0 10.0 17.6 9.4 8.0 9.8 7.7 9.7 8.4 5.8 8.4 14.8 22.6 17.1 20.9 17.4 18.6 3.2 3.3 2.4 3.5 3.4 6.3 6.7 7.0 -2.4 -34.0 -20.9 -19.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 69.5 35.5 26.9 8.5 18.3 z 7.1 0.0 -18.4 -0.6 18.4 0.6 0.0 0.0 18.4 0.6 0.0 2: 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 1.6 1.6 0.0 -10.1 13.3 3.2 10.1 -10.1 10.1 0.0 10.1 -10.1 10.1 0.0 10.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 22.4 24.1 23.7 5.8 15.1 15.1 3.8 7.7 7.7 1.6 1.6 1.6 0.4 0.8 0.8 0.0 5.0 5.0 21.2 12.7 7.7 0.0 0.0 5.0 16.5 9.0 8.6 8.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 15.0 5.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 5.0 10.0 (ln millions of U.S. dollars) Residual gap Source: Djibouti authorities; and &IF staff estimates. 11 For 1999-2001 pertains to debt for which “~8yment terms were pmim.~lY pending. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 38 - CHART 1 SELECTED ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL INDICATORS, 1993 - 99 REAL GDP AhTI CONSUMER PRICES EXP!ZNDITUR!ZANDREVENUE (Annual percentage changes) (In p”cnt of GDP) 15 10 5 0 -I -* -10 N -IS L9 ,993 1994 ,995 15% 1997 ,998 1999 MONEY AND CXEDlT (Changes as percent of initial bmad 5Mu Net domelti0 vvll / B&h 93 1994 1595 1996 ,997 1998 I ( .( 60 Expcn- \ \ L 4 -i:..* :..;;::...;~. 30 a- - ‘..Z 20 .::. 10 ‘. U’ u 0 ‘. Fisd &&sit :. -10 ‘. (Odl l!dioit; imlvding #rants) -20 ,993 1994 ,995 ,995 ,597 1598 1599 BALANCE OF PAYMENTS (In pzrcent of GDP) 30 Proj. uvfen (ndl 3;;., Net lcnicn brhlce ..- 20 ( - ---.-__.____..-.- _.--- ““i::: Source: Djibouti authmitics; and IMF staff estimates. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public140 130 120 Nominal effective exchanee rate II0 100 90 Real effective exchange rate 80 / I I’ 70 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 86 87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 CHART 2. DJIBOUTI: REAL AND NOMINAL EFFECTIVE EXCHANGE RATES, 1978 - 99 ” ” (1994=100) Sources: IMF. International Financial Statistics, and Lh4F staff estimates, 140 130 120 II0 100 30 SO 70 ” Excludes Ethiopia and Somalia due to data difficulties. u The real effective exchange rate is calculated begixmiig in I994 due to inadequate CF’I information for Djibouti for earlier years Ad ending January 1999. The nbminal effective exchange rate data are through March 1999. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicI. II. III. IV. V VI. -4o- Djibouti: Fund Relations As of August 3 1, 1999 Membershio Status: Joined 12/29/78; Article VIII APPENDIX1 General Resources Account: Quota Fund holdings of currency Reserve position in Fund SDR Million 15.90 21.71 136.6 1.10 6.9 SDR Deoartment: SDR Million Net cumulative allocation 1.18 Holdings 0.03 Outstandinc! Purchases and Loans: Stand-by arrangements SDR Million 6.91 Financial Arrangements: Approval m Date Stand-by’ 04/l 5196 Expiration Date 0313 l/99 Amount Approved (SDR million) 8.25 % Ouota 100.0 % Allocation 100.0 2.8 Ouota % 43.5 Amount Approved (SDR million) 7.27 Proiected Obliaations to the Fund: @DR million; based on existing use of resources and present holdings of SDRs); Overdue Forthcoming 08/3 1199 1999 2J.&o 2001 2002 2001 Principal -_ 0.4 -1.7 1.6 1.8 1.3 Chargetinterest = g.J 0_3 QJ gJ QJ Total -- 0.5 2.0 1.8 1.9 1.4 ‘The SBA was initially approved for 14 months beginning April 1996 for SDR 4.6 million (34 percent of quota on an annual basis) (EBS/96/53 and W/96/78). ‘Ihe first review was concluded on May 21,1997 (EBS/97/82 and W/97/119) with an SBA extension through end-March 1998 and an increase in access to SDR 6.6 million. The second review was concluded on June 1, 1998 with an extension through end-March 1999 and an increase in access to SDR 8.25 million (EBS/98/82 and W/98/1 11). The third review was completed on January 11,199P (EBS/98!228). Upon completion of that review, the fourth purchase was effected. The last purchase (SDR 0.97 million) was not made because of the nonobervance of the performance criterion on the nonaccumulation of new domestic arrears. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-41- APPENDIX I VII. Exchange Rate Arrannement Djibouti has a currency board arrangement. The Djibouti franc is pegged to the U.S. dollar at the rate ofDF 177.21 = US$l. Djibouti maintains an exchange system that is free of restrictions on payments and transfers for all international current and capital transactions. VIII. Last Article IV Consultations Djibouti is on an annual consultation cycle. Discussions for the 1998 Article IV consultation were held during February 22-March 5, 1998 in conjunction with the second review under the stand-by arrangement. The consultation and the second review (EBS/98/82, 5/18/98) were concluded by the Executive Board on June 1, 1998. IX. Technical Assistance a. Long-term experts who acted as Operations Manager of the National Bank of Djibouti, October 1984-March 1997. a. Staff mission on debt management (including the introduction of treasury bills), April-May 1997. a. Short-term experts on bank supervision, quarterly visits since June 1997. 2. &Q a. Staff mission on tax policy, March-April 1996. a. Staff mission on budget control and cash management of the treasury, July 1997. X. Resident Reuresentative: Posted since October 1998 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 42 - APPENDIXII Djibouti: Financial Relations with the World Bank Group’ 1. Djibouti joined the Bank and IDA on October 2, 1980. The Bank Group’s assistance has focused on human resource development, infrastructure, and capacity building, Eleven IDA credits have been approved for a total of USS75.6 million, of which Uf321.6 million remain undisbursed as of June 1999. The approved credits included: Technical Assistance (1984 and 1997); Road Maintenance (1982); Geothermal Exploration (1984); Urban Development (1984); Education (1985); Geothermal Development II (1989); Manpower Training (1989); Urban Development II (1991). The Bank approved in December 1998 a USS2.7 million Learning and Innovation Credit in support of the reinsertion of ex- combatants into the private%ector. This credit recently became effective. The Bank has also approved in May 1999 a Public Works/Social Development Credit (US% 14.7 million) to address urban infrastructure needs while also promoting increased employment, This credit is not yet effective. 2. Project implementation in Djibouti has generally not been satisfactory. Design complexity and weak government commitment have limited the development impact of most of the completed projects. The ongoing 1997 Technical Assistance project, which has the objective of providing support for the preparation of economic reform programs, is achieving mixed results. In this regard, the preparation of a public enterprise privatization program and the demobilization program are proceeding well, while little progress has been achieved in the area of civil service reform. 3. lDA has been engaged in a dialogue with the government in the area of public expenditure review and on poverty. The poverty assessment for Djibouti was finalized in October 1997. The Bank Group has begun preparation of a Country Assistance Strategy which is expected to be completed in FY 2000. Assuming significant improvement in the government’s readiness to implement structural reforms, the Bank would be ready to provide quick disbursing support to an adjustment program. The key elements of this program include: support to the privatization program, restructuring of public sector expenditures in favor of health and education for the poor, policy and infrastructure improvements in transport, and private sector development. ’ Prepared by the World Bank staff Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-43- APPENDIX III Djibouti: Statistical Issues Outstanding statistkal issues 1. Certain weaknesses attach in varying degrees to the quality, coverage, periodicity, or timeliness of Djibouti’s national income, fiscal, monetary, domestic debt and arrears, and balance of payments data. On an overall basis, however, data are sufficient for program purposes. Statistics in Djibouti are compiled by different institutions, and data reconciliation among these sources is limited. The National Bank of Djibouti (BND) is, therefore, making efforts to reconcile monetary, balance of payments, and fiscal data. 2. To improve statistical data, the authorities have recently introduced a consumer price index and are pursuing a program to develop national accounts data-both with assistance from the Organization for African Subsaharan Economics and Statistical Data (Afristat). Intensified efforts are needed to improve the fiscal and balance of payments data. National accounts 3. Djibouti currently does not compile national accounts or other real sector statistics. Preliminary national income estimates for 1996 were made available in mid-1997, but were not officially published pending improvements in the estimates for some sectors. 4. Under the SBA, the CPI compiled by the French government for French expatriates resident in Djibouti was used as a proxy for a Djiboutian CPI. This index, however, was of weak quality and not representative ofDjibouti’s consumption basket, and therefore in late 1998 the Fund staff began to track Djibouti price developments beginning in 1994 by utilizing sub-indices from the French CPI that were representative ofDjiboutian consumption and weights derived from a recent Djiboutian household survey. The new national CPI began to report on monthly price developments in April 1999. Governmentfinance 5. Although data compilation improvements were made under the SBA, the fiscal data remain weak as does coordination among government agencies in producing internally consistent data. Improvements in both areas are needed. The coordination unit in the MOEF established in July 1998 to improve data coverage and timeliness has not yet succeeded in fultilling its mandate in a satisfactory manner in part owing to inadequate staffing and insufficient support from higher levels within the government. Foreign-financed capital expenditure and its financing (namely grants and loans) are now reported starting with the 1999 budget. The fiscal data include full coverage of military expenditures. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-44- APPENDIX III Monetary accounts 6. The monetary data are generally good but their quality is impaired by inaccurate treatment by commercial banks of the residency status oftheir clients. Therefore, banks were instructed in July 1999 to initiate a program for accurately identifying the residency status of their customers and to report balance sheet data on this basis to the BND beginning with the end-December 1999 reporting. The BND maintains a computerized system for compiling monetary statistics and began to publish a quarterly bulletin in 1995 which includes the central bank balance sheet and the monetary survey. Interest rates I. Previously commercial banks reported only their end-quarter minimum and maximum deposit and lending rates. To enhance transparency and foster competition in domestic financial markets, the BTVD in August 1999 instructed all banks to publicly post and update at least weekly their 111 interest rate structure and to report these structures weekly to the BND External sectors 8. The balance of payments data exhibit numerous deticiencies. Data on external trade are compiled by the statistical offtce on the basis of information received from the customs offtce but only annually and usually with a six-month lag. Data on private capital flows are deficient as commercial banks do not provide information to the BND on the nature of foreign exchange transactions, and as noted information on the residency of the account holder is weak. Data on foreign grants and loans received by ministries, public sector enterprises, and other entities are now better centralized and coordinated at the MOEF. 9. The external debt data are comprehensive and on balance of good quality. Military debt is fully included in the debt data. Reporthg to STA 10. The table below surveys the reporting of core statistical indicators for surveillance. Djibouti was dropped from the 1994 GFS Yearbook because of non-reporting. The authorities do not report GFS data for publication in IFS. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDjibouti: Core Statistical Indicators as of end-July 1999 Date of latest observation Date received Frequency of Data Frequency of repofih source of data Mode of Reporting Confidentiality ’ lntenla- ReWXV.3 Exchange tional rate reserves I base money April 1999 JU”e 1999 M Q Central Bank Fax/ 3able to ( IMF C CEZ”tId Bank balance Broad interest sheet “lO”C?Y rate I I T June June June 1999 1999 1999 &I= M M A u/9j Central Ck”lId CO”Ull~- Bank Bf”Ik cial Banks I I current overall CO”SUmR- Exports/ acwunt Ro”-e”t price inde, Jan. 1999 March 1999 Q Q French resident tission Fax/Cable TOlMFOl Mission C 4*M DINAS/ DINASI Ministry of Central Central Fiice Bank Bank I I c I c I c I/ GDP is entirely estimated by the staff on the basis of partial data on some sectors, provided by the a”thorities. 2.’ c = unrestricted. GDP/ GNP Dec. 1998 J”“. 1999 ” A A Ministry of Finance Mission C EXtCIlXIl debt Dec. 1998 J”“e 1999 A A Minishy of Fii Treasuty Mission C Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 46 - ANNEX1 Djibouti: Three-Year Arrangement under the Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility Attached hereto is a letter (the “Letter”) dated October 2, 1999, with an annexed Memorandum on Economic and Financial Policies (the “Memorandum”), from the Minister of Economy, Finance and Planning, in Charge of Privatization and the Governor of the National Bank of Djibouti, requesting from the International Monetary Fund as Trustee of the Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility Trust (the “Trustee”) a three-year arrangement under the Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility, and setting forth: (a) the objectives and policies of the program that the authorities of Djibouti intend to pursue during the three-year period of the arrangement; (b) the objectives, policies and measures that the authorities of Djibouti intend to pursue during the first year of the arrangement; and (c) understandings of Djibouti with the Trustee regarding reviews that will be made of progress in realizing the objectives of the program and of the policies and measures that the authorities of Djibouti will pursue for the second and third years of the arrangement. To support these objectives and policies, ihe Trustee grants the requested three-year arrangement in accordance with the following provisions, and subject to the provisions applying to assistance under the Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility Trust. 1 (4 For a period of three years from October 18, 1999, Djibouti will have the right to obtain loan disbursements from the Trustee in a total amount equivalent to SDR 19.082 million, subject to the availability of resources in the Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility Trust. (b) Disbursements under this arrangement shall not exceed the equivalent of SDR 5.452 million until August 15, 2000 and the equivalent of SDR 10.904 million until August 15,2001. (c) During the first year of the arrangement: (9 the first disbursement, in an amount equivalent to SDR 2.726 million, will be available upon approval of the arrangement, at the request of Djibouti; and (ii) the second disbursement, in an amount equivalent to SDR 2.726 million, will be available on or after February 15, 2000, at the request of Djibouti and subject to paragraph 2 below. (4 The right of Djibouti to request disbursements during the second and third years of this arrangement shall be subject to such phasing and conditions as shall be Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 47 - ANNEX1 determined. The phasing of, and conditions for, disbursements during the second year of this arrangement shah be determined in the context of the first review ofDjibouti’s program contemplated in paragraph 2(d) of this arrangement. 2. Djibouti will not request the second disbursement specified in paragraph l(c)(ii) above: (4 if the Managing Director of the Trustee finds that the data as of December 3 1, 1999 indicate that: 6) (ii) (iii) (iv) (4 64 (vii) (viii) the ceiling on the wage bill, or the ceiling on the stock of outstanding domestic arrears related to the wage bill, private suppliers, pension funds, and the ONAC, or the ceiling on the stock of outstanding external arrears of the government and public enterprises, or the ceiling on National Bank net credit to the government, or the ceiling on commercial bank net credit to the government, or the ceiling on government borrowing from public enterprises, or the ceiling on contracting or guaranteeing by the government or public enterprises of nonconcessional external debt with a maturity of more than one year, or the floor on net international reserves of the National Bank, specified in paragraph 38 and Table 3 of the Memorandum, was not observed; or @I if the Managing Director of the Trustee finds that by December 3 1, 1999, Djibouti has not carried out its intentions with respect to the following structural performance criteria: (9 National Assembly approval of the 2000 budget described in paragraphs 3 1 and 40 and Table 2 of the Memorandum, or (ii) publication and implementation of the reformed port tariff structure described in Table 2 of the Memorandum, or (iii) completion and provision of the statistics on debt and arrears described in Table 2 of the Memorandum, or Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 48 - ANNEX1 (iv) completion of the second phase of the demobilization program described in Table 2 of the Memorandum, or (4 -- issuance by the national power and urban water utilities of the policy statements described in Table 2 of the Memorandum; or (c) if Djibouti: (9 has imposed or intensified restrictions on payments and transfers for current international transactions, or (ii) has introduced or modified multiple currency practices, or (iii) has concluded bilateral payments agreements that are inconsistent with Article WI, or (iv) has imposed or intensified import restrictions for balance of payments reasons, or 64 has accumulated any new domestic or external arrears in the categories set forth in Table 3 of the Memorandum; or (4 until the Trustee has determined that the first review of Djibouti’s program referred to in paragraph 40 of the Memorandum has been completed. When Djibouti is prevented from requesting disbursements under this arrangement because of this paragraph 2, such disbursements will be resumed only after consultation has taken place between the Trustee and Djibouti and understandings have been reached regarding the circumstances in which Djibouti may request further disbursements. 3. In accordance with paragraph 2 of the Letter, Djibouti will provide the Trustee with such information as the Trustee requests in connection with the progress of Djibouti in implementing the policies and reaching the objectives of the program supported by this arrangement. 4. During the period of this arrangement Djibouti shah remain in close consultation with the Trustee. In accordance with paragraph 2 of the Letter, Djibouti will consult with the Trustee on the adoption of any measures that may be appropriate at the initiative of the government or whenever the Managing Director of the Trustee requests such a consultation. Moreover, at?er the period of this arrangement and while Djibouti has outstanding financial obligations to the Trustee arising from loan disbursements under this arrangement, Djibouti will consult with the Trustee from time to time, at the initiative of the government or whenever the Managing Director of the Trustee requests consultation, on Djibouti’s economic and financial policies. These consultations may include correspondence and visits of officials of the Trustee to Djibouti or of representatives of Djibouti to the Trustee. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-49- ANNEX11 Djibouti, October 2, 1999 Mr. Michel Camdessus Managing Director International Monetary Fund Washington, D.C. 2043 1 Dear Mr Camdessus: 1. The attached Memorandum on Economic and Financial Policies spells out the government of Djibouti’s medium-term structural reform and macroeconomic adjustment program covering the period July 1999-June 2002. In support of this program, the government requests an arrangement under the Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility in an amount equivalent to SDR 19.082 million (120 percent of quota). The Memorandum also provides the specifics of the government’s reform and adjustment objectives and policies for the first year program beginning July 1, 1999. 2. The government believes that the policies set out in the attached Memorandum will achieve the objectives of the program. However, it stands ready to take any additional measures appropriate for this purpose, and will consult periodically with the Fund-in accordance with the Fund’s policies on such consultations-about the progress being made in implementation of the program and about any policy adaptations considered appropriate for the achievement of its objectives. The government will also provide the Fund with all information needed to assess progress in implementing policies and in achieving the objectives of the program. 3. The government’s assessment is that its reform program will require external financial support in order to ensure its success, 4. The President has indicated to government ministries and agencies that their full cooperation in implementing the reform program will be required. He has also designated the Ministry of Finance and the National Bank ofDjibouti to act as the coordinating agencies of the government in this collaborative effort. Our institutions are fully committed to tidtilling these responsibilities. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 50 - ANNEX II 5. The government appreciates the assistance provided by the IMF in formulating the economic reform program and looks forward to continued collaboration with the Fund in its reform endeavors. Sincerely yours, Is/ Id Yacin Elmi Bouh Djama M. Hard Minister of Economy, Finance Governor, and Planning, in charge of Privatization National Bank of Djibouti Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-5l- ANNEXII INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND REPUBLIC OF DJIBOUTI MEMORANDUM ON ECONOMIC AND FINANCUL POLICIES L RECENT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS, 1996-99 1. Over the period 1996-98 Djibouti implemented a macroeconomic adjustment and structural reform program supported by a stand-by arrangement (SBA) from the Ih4F.i Under the program the govemment succeeded in reducing macroeconomic imbalances. Intlation declined sharply and averaged 1.5 percent annually as against an average 5 percent inflation rate over 1993-95. The improvement in inflation performance reflected in particular the strengthening of the government’s fiscal position and the appreciation of the U.S. dollar-to which the Djibouti franc is pegged-against other major world currencies. The economy’s real growth performance is estimated to have been relatively flat over 1996-97, but a recovery took hold in 1998 due to Ethiopia’s decision at mid-year to channel its transit trade through the port of Djibouti. The recovery was constrained, however, by a decline in the provision of services to expatriates owing to initiation of the French military retrenchment that is taking place largely over 1998-2000. Consequently, while overall growth in 1998 is estimated at about 1.5 percent, the estimate would be 3 percent if the effects of the retrenchment were excluded. 2. The cash fiscal position moved from a deficit of nearly 5 percent of GDP in 1995 to a small surplus in 1998 largely owing to reductions in the government wage bill as well as strengthened expenditure monitoring. The financing of the budget relied primarily on concessional external resources. Recourse to the domestic banking system was limited apart from the counterparts to Ih@ and AMF purchases. In the monetary sector, the money supply contracted over 1996-97 as the flat growth performance and eroded confidence in economic prospects resulted in a weak demand for credit and siiable placements of private resources abroad. With the pickup in economic activity in 1998, there was a recovery in credit demand and monetary growth although private placements abroad remained relatively sizable and suggested continued confidence issues. Over the period, confidence issues also contributed to a shit? out of Djibouti franc deposits into foreign currency deposits. ‘New overall presentations of fiscal, monetary, and external sector data and forecasts have been adopted for ESAF-supported program purposes in order to enhance transparency and facilitate analysis. Also the coverage of certain data entries has been redefined. With these changes, noncomparabilities arise vis-a-vis the presentations and certain definitions of fiscal, monetary, and external sector data as utilized for the SBA-supported program. Therefore to afford comparability, data relating to the SBA-supported program period have been recast into the ESAF-supported program presentations and definitions. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 52 - ANNEXII 3. The balance of payments recorded overall deficits averaging 4 percent of GDP. They reflected current account deficits of 3 percent on average and the more than offsetting of a sizable three-year capital account surplus by a large negative errors and omissions entry including unidentified private capital outflows. Although gross foreign assets held by the National Bank of Djibouti (BND)-which operates as a currency boarddeclined in line with its monetary liabilities, they continued to provide at end-1998 the mandated cover for the board’s monetary and lender of last resort (LOLR) responsibilities, namely, monetary cover of 100 percent and nearly the targeted margin for the LOLR fimction of 15 percent. Commercial bank gross foreign assets-the primary source for external payments under the currency board arrangement-also declined, but still provided at end-1998 7.5 months of cover for imports for domestic use. The 1998 external debt service-to-exports ratio and the debt-to-GDP ratio (both after rescheduling) were 7 percent and 66 percent, respectively. The external performance also entailed debt service arrears attributable to certain public enterprises which were equivalent to 2.5 percent of total public sector debt at end-1998. Most of these arrears relate to a request for debt relief which is pending with one bilateral creditor. They also entailed some public enterprise arrears to multilateral creditors. 4. The structural measures implemented under the SBA included: tax policy improve- ments; initiation of a demobilization programapplying to the military and security personnel that had been mobilized during the 1991-94 civil war; a major reduction in the government wage bill (apart from demobilization) achieved through a downsizing of civil service staff by 20 percent and a lowering of the government wage structure by 20 percent; measures to enhance bank soundness and bank supervision-including the initiation of on-site bank inspections and improvements in off-site analysis; some hberalization of government control over the labor market; and permitting private equity participation in the public enterprises. 5 Over January-June 1999, macroeconomic developments continued to be broadly favorable. There were indications-including a brisk growth of commercial bank lending to the private sector-that economic activity continued to recover, and Djibouti’s new CPI data indicate that over the second quarter the price level continued to be stable in part reflecting the continued strong position of the U.S. dollar and the Djibouti franc against other world currencies. 6. Fiscal developments were somewhat weaker than envisioned in the original 1999 budget. The budget was directed at a continued tight fiscal stance and targeted a fit&year cash deficit equivalent to 1.7 percent of GDP. In the event, the January-June deficit at 1.2 percent of GDP exceeded the first-half deficit projected under the original budget (0.9 percent of GDP) owing mainly to shortfalls in revenue collections and delayed disbursements of external grants for budgetary support (by US%5 million). The revenue shortfalls were due in large part to temporary special factors. Therefore, it is expected that the first-half revenue and external grants shortfalls will be largely corrected over the balance of the year. Monetary developments recorded only a small increase in broad money. While private credit growth remained strong, the delayed disbursements of foreign grants for budgetary support entailed a rundown in the Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicANNEX II banking system’s foreign exchange position. There was also some unwinding of the earlier movements into foreign currency deposits-suggesting improved confidence. The monetary data for January-June indicate an overall external deficit on the order of USS5.5 million- which essentially reflected the delayed disbursements of foreign grants-and sizably diminished private capital outflows. II. ~MEDIUM-TERMNLACROECONOMICFRAMEWORKANDPOLICIES, 1999/200&2001/02 7. Djibouti made sound progress over 1996-99 in both macroeconomic adjustment and structural reform. However, the government recognizes that the consolidation of adjustment and in particular fiuther far-reaching structural reforms directed at a restructuring of the economy are essential for realizing its overall objectives of placing the economy on a higher growth path, raising per capita income, reducing unemployment, alleviating poverty, enhancing the country’s social indicators, ensuring domestic financial stability, and moving toward external viability. The restructuring is required-in order to establish an environment conducive to a recovery of private sector confidence and a private sector lead role in the growth process, as well as to enhance the economy’s responsiveness to policy measures. , 8. The government’s medium-term adjustment and reform program for the three-year period beginning July 1, 1999 is directed at providing a macroeconomic and structural environment conducive to achieving the overall program objectives cited above. For the four calendar year period 1999-2002, the government’s macroeconomic targets entail: real GDP growth of 3 percent on average; increasing real per capita income in order to maintain support among the population for the adjustment and reform program; annual inflation of at most 2 percent; containing the overall balance of payments deficit to 2.5 percent on average; and maintaining the mandated BND monetary and LOLR cover ratio. Commercial bank import cover is expected to average seven months. The growth target reflects the adverse effect of the French military retrenchment. Abstracting from this development, the growth target would be 4 percent per annum. Investment is projected to rise and average 13 percent of GDP vis-a-vis 9 percent on average during 1996-97. (In 1998 investment was exceptionally high due to sizable outlays for electricity generators and an unusually rapid drawdown of resources in the pipeline.). The targeted acceleration of economic growth will depend on a positive private sector response to the program’s structural reforms-particularly its fiscal, privatization, deregulation, legal, and sectoral reforms. With the shift of Ethiopia’s transit trade to Djibouti, the lead growth sectors are envisaged to be the transport and related service sectors, namely, port and trucking services as well as cargo-handling, insurance, and tourism. Additionally, the goods export sector-which largely comprises the local processing of imported goods-is expected to contribute to higher growth. To expand the delivery and improve the quality of social services and to enhance social indicators, budget expenditures for education, health, and the social safety net are to be sizably increased, and national development and reform programs will be implemented in the education and health sectors. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 54 - ANNEX II 9. The program’s macroeconomic objectives will also be advanced by tinther fiscal consolidation which would be consistent with low monetary growth and inflation and the maintenance of positive real interest rates. The core stnictural reforms are to be directed at: completion of the demobilization program, adoption of a retirement program, and civil service reform-which together will ensure a mrther lowering of the wage bill; tax, revenue administration, and budget management reforms; pension fund reforms; a restructuring of budget expenditures in order to improve the quality of spending; a significant privatization program which will address the ownership/management of the six major public enterprises and related legal reforms; deregulation and other legal reforms-including reforms of the Labor and Commercial Codes and the establishment of commercial courts; banking system reforms; and the further upgrading of bank supervision. Fiscal Policy 10. As the major macroeconomic policy tool, the medium-term fiscal stance will be directed at maintaining macroeconomic stability and strengthening the external position. To this end, a tight fiscal policy will be pursued as reflected in a cash budget deficit target of 3 percent of GDP. The deficits will be financed only from concessional foreign resources, the counterparts to IMP and AMF net purchases, and domestic nonbank resources as needed. There will be no noncounterpart domestic bank borrowing or borrowing from the public enterprises. At the same time the structure of the budget will be enhanced by measures to reform the tax system and contain expenditures while upgrading their quality. Consistent with these medium-term fiscal policies, the original 1999 budget was amended in August in order to initiate the revenue and expenditure policy reforms entailed by the medium-term program. The major reforms entailed reformed and increased petroleum product taxation and the related institutional reforms, introduction of a road-user charge on trucks exiting the port, and a start at the reorientation of expenditures toward quality improvements. 11. The program envisages far-reaching reforms of indirect and direct taxation in order to enhance tax efficiency and elasticity and achieve tax simplification, while increasing reliance on indirect taxation and reducing direct taxation in order to enhance incentives. The specifics of the government’s tax reform program and steps to enhance revenue administration are provided in the government’s Policy Framework Paper (PFP) (paragraphs 14-19). 12. The government’s expenditure reform program will focus on reducing the current expenditure/GDP ratio (excluding the counterparts of grants-in-kind)-particularly through reductions in the wage bill-while also realizing improvements in the quality of outlays through higher spending for the priority purposes of education, health, the social safety net, public investment in infrastructure, and maintenance-particularly for the road sector. This reorientation is less than the government would wish, but available resources are limited owing to the need to lighten the direct tax burden and clear domestic payment arrears. Under the program the current expenditure/GDP ratio (excluding the expenditure counterparts of grants-in-kind) is projected to decline to 26 percent of GDP on average over 1999-2002 compared with an average of 29 percent during the SBA period. The specifics of the Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 55 - ANNEXII government’s expenditure reform program and its programs to address domestics arrears and enhance expenditure management are elaborated in the PPP (paragraphs 20-27). Financial Sector Policies 13. The tight fiscal stance envisioned under the program will underpin the maintenance of low monetary growth and intlation. Broad money growth is projected to average about 5 percent annually. Money demand and the private sector’s demand for credit are expected to rise about in line with the expansion in economic activity, while improved economic prospects and confidence along with increased interest rate flexibility are expected to significantly reduce the attractiveness of private sector placements abroad. Interest rates are not controlled by the government, and are presently positive in real terms. The program’s tight fiscal stance and its low monetary growth and inflation targets are expected to sustain positive real rates. The government’s financial sector structural reform program-which addresses interest rate flexibility, maintaining the integrity of the currency board arrangement, and strengthening the banking system-is detailed in its PPP (paragraphs 29-33). External Sector Policies 14. The government is committed to maintaining Djibouti’s presently fully free exchange and trade systems. No exchange restrictions apply to current or capital account transactions, and trade is fully open without recourse to import bans or export prohibitions. Tariffs are not levied, but imports are subject to the consumption tax at the same rates as apply to the comparable domestic product, No changes are envisioned in these external policies during the program period. The reform program targets an improved export performance including in particular the accelerated growth of transport and related services. Activity in these sectors increased significantly in 1998 following the sbifl of Ethiopia’s transit trade to Djibouti’s port, and future prospects are promising. The government does not propose to intervene in the economy in order to directly promote exports. Instead its export promotion strategy will rely on improving the overall functioning of the economy through pursuit of appropriate macroeconomic policies and structural reforms 15. The government is committed to a policy of external competitiveness, This will be monitored under the program on the basis of developments in external indicators: namely, in exports of goods and services of local origin; net foreign assets of the commercial banking system; relative prices and wages vis-&is trade partner countries that are relevant for assessing Djibouti’s competitiveness; and for the future the conventional measure of real effective competitiveness. The latter measure presently is not a meaningful indicator for historically tracking competitiveness developments as Djibouti until recently did not possess a national CPI or an adequate CPI proxy for periods before 1994. As a temporary alternate approach, the analysis of relative prices and wages vis-a-vis relevant trade partner countries will be utilized in conjunction with the other external indicators listed above in order to form judgments regarding the appropriate competitiveness policy stance. The government considers that the effectiveness of changes in competitiveness policy is constrained by rigidities in the Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicANNEX II economy and weak private sector confidence, and that under these circumstances policy measures need to be appropriately sequenced. Therefore its approach is to first put in place under the restructuring strategy certain key structural reforms in order to enhance the economy’s responsiveness and in order to build confidence, and then to pursue revisions in competitiveness policy as may be indicated. This sequencing approach has been the motivation for the implementation of the measures to free up interest rates and the petroleum product market, and underlies the government’s commitment to early labor market and early tax reform. 16. The government intends to maintain Djibouti’s presently prudent debt management policy. In view of the country’s low per capita income, it will continue to seek fmancial assistance in the form of grants or very concessional long-term credits, and will strictly limit recourse to the contracting or guaranteeing of nonconcessional debt by the public sector. However to some extent, nonconcessional debt might prove unavoidable for certain public enterprises, for example, for the port for upgrading its infrastructure. Djibouti has relatively limited public sector bilateral debt40 percent of total debt-which is held by seven bilateral creditors. There are some bilateral debt servicing arrears which as noted earlier relate to credits extended to certain public enterprises and for which a rescheduling is pending with one bilateral creditor. In order to lower the country’s debt service obligations, the government intends in conjunction with the program to request from Paris Club creditors multi-year debt rescheduling on the most generous available terms. It also intends to request debt rescheduling from all other official bilateral creditors on at least comparable terms. Government multilateral debt accounts for nearly one-half of Djibouti’s total multilateral debt, and there are no arrears. However, the government has guaranteed the debt of certain public enterprises to certain multilateral creditors for which debt service is in arrears. The government intends to settle these public enterprise multilateral arrears by end-1999 utiliiing resources to be provided by the EU. Real Sector Policies 17. The government’s real sector structural reform program is broad in scope and addresses in particular: civil service reform and an accompanying pension fbnd reform; privatization of the six major public enterprises and concomitant legal reforms; the resolution of cross debt and cross arrears among the enterprises and the government; domestic trade and price liberalization; labor market, investment law, and commercial code reform; and government-led development and reform programs for the education, health, transport, and non-urban water sectors. The content of the government’s medium-term structural reform programs in the real sector is elaborated in the government’s PFP (paragraphs 39-56). Social Safety Net and Poverty Alleviation Arrangements 18. The government’s reform program contains several components directed at putting in place basic social safety net and poverty alleviation arrangements. First, the government will utilize AfDB financial assistance for a Social Fund Program to be implemented over Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-57- ANNEXII 1999-2002 which will fund programs for micro-enterprise credit and the rehabilitation of education and health sector infrastructure. Second, it will also establish with World Bank financial assistance a public works/jobs creation program to be implemented over 2000-2003 in order to provide income support for low income families. Third, the demobiliiation program is linked to a re-insertion program which is being financed by the World Bank in order to provide training for demobilized personnel. Fourth, the medium-term program incorporates rural development components which are directed at alleviating rural poverty. The content of these latter programs and the government’s long-term development and reform programs for the education and health sectors are detailed in its PFP (paragraphs 55 and 56). Balance of Payments and External Financing Requirements 19. The outlook for the medium-term balance of payments entails a current account position with increased deficits over 1999-2000 averaging 6 percent of GDP before falling to 4 percent by 2003. The higher deficits reflect three factors, First, the program entails a requirement for increased imports-particularly of intermediate and capital goods--as a result of its strategy for restructuring the domestic economy and its higher growth target, In particular with respect to external performance, the government considers that-as with the higher growth objective-realization of the goals of strengthening the balance of payments and moving toward external viability will also require the prerequisite restructuring of the domestic economy as the restructuring would facilitate an expansion of export capacity, better exploitation of import substitution opportunities, and increased foreign direct investment. However given the increased import requirement and that restructuring will take time, the current account initially will be adversely affected. The demand for imported consumption goods will be contained, however, through the tight fiscal stance-particularly the reductions in the wage bill. Import growth is forecast to average 4 percent (after adjusting the 1998 base for the exceptional electricity generator imports noted above). 20. Second, the French military retrenchment entails a 24 percent decline over 1998-2002 in earnings from the provision of services to expatriates. As noted most of the retrenchment is occurring over 1998-2000, and for this period the cumulative earnings loss from this development is expected to exceed the earnings gain arising from the increased provision of transport and related services deriving from the growth of the transit trade to Ethiopia. Consequently the services account surplus of earlier years would not be regained until 2002. To some extent, the loss of service receipts will be offset by increased transfers over 1999-2000 associated with the new economic assistance agreement with the French government, although subsequently the level of transfers from this source is projected to decline toward pre-1998 levels. Third, while it is anticipated that the restructuring program will result in a more rapid growth of locally-produced goods exports, the export base is small with the result that even with rapid export growth the additions to earnings will be moderate. 21. The capital account is expected to be in surplus over the program period-averaging 3.5 percent of GDP. The surplus in large part reflects credits to the government from the World Bank and the AtDB and borrowing by the port authority to finance imports for Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 58 - ANNEXII rehabilitation and expansion, Foreign direct investment is projected to rise in response to the restructuring program and the increased transit trade, and this development is expected to contribute to the expansion in economic activity. Owing to insuflicient information, the balance of payments projections do not presently incorporate estimates of foreign private capital inflows that might arise in conjunction with the privatization program. On this basis the overall balance of payments position is expected to record on average a deficit of 2.5 percent of GDP over 1999-2002 compared with an average deficit of 4 percent under the SBA- supported program. The program entails sustaining the mandated gross foreign asset position of the BND, and commercial bank gross foreign assets are expected to remain at about seven months of import cover. 22. The external gross financing requirements for 1999-2002 are projected to average about US$99 million annually. These resources are necessary in order to cover the current account deficit (excluding grants)-particularly the higher import level consistent with the program’s growth target; address amortization obligations failing due and payment arrears; maintain BND monetary and LOLR cover; accommodate commercial bank import cover; and execute IhIF and AMF repurchases. To cover these requirements, regular financing through disbursements of official grants and loans from bilateral and multilateral sources, public enterprise foreign borrowing, and foreign direct investment are expected to contribute on average about US%75 million annually. Meoreover secured debt rescheduling will contribute US%3 million-apart from secured debt forgiveness to be provided by France totaling about USS30 million. This would leave a total four-year financing gap of US%9 1 million. Presently, identified exceptional financing from multilateral institutions other than the Fund (including the World Bank, the AfDB, and the AMF) is projected to total US.%22 million. Total disbursements under the requested Fund ESAF arrangement could provide external financing of nearly USS27 million, 23. After considering identified exceptional financing, the total residual financing gap for 1999-2002 is estimated at USS43 million. To close these gaps, the government, as noted earlier, intends to request multi-year debt rescheduling on the most generous available terms from Paris Club and all other official bilateral creditors. If such debt rescheduling were granted, the 1999-2000 residual financing gaps would be closed as well as the presently estimated gaps for 2001-02. Technical Assistance, Statistical Issues, Program Implementation, and Currency Board Transactions 24. The government believes that Djibouti will require significantly increased technical assistance to implement its structural reform program, and therefore intends to request continued technical assistance from France and expanded technical assistance from multilateral and bilateral sources. The government considers the provision of the technical assistance requirements identified in the policy matrix attached to its PFP to be critical for the effective implementation of its reform program. Moreover the government will request that the UNDP Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 59 - ANNEXII and IMF establish the multi-faceted joint technical assistance program-as has been done for other countries-which hopefblly would receive financial support from bilateral sources. 25. Djibouti’s data base is sufficient for macroeconomic program formulation and monitoring although there are weaknesses that attach in varying degrees to the national income, fiscal, monetary, domestic debt and arrears, and balance of payments data. Therefore the reform program aims at upgrading the statistical data base. To this end, the government will undertake some of these upgradings on its own. However as self-improvement efforts may not be possible in most statistical areas, the government believes that extensive tecbnic~ assistance in statistical techniques and institution building will be required. 26. The challenges of the program require an upgrading of institutional arrangements for program implementation and monitoring. To this end, a presidential decree was issued in July 1999 appointing the Minister of Economy and Finance as Chairman of the Interministerial Committee which acts as the economic policy formulation, implementation, and coordinating body. In this capacity the Minister is recognized within the Cabinet to be acting on behalf of the government. 27. The government recognizes that as the BND is a currency board its transactions with the Ih4F and the AMF and its related counterpart transactions with the government create specific obligations of the government toward the currency board. In this regard, as the government draws down its counterpart deposits at the BND and the economy utiiiies the foreign exchange assets made available by the IMF and Ah4F transactions, the BND will be left with claims on the government and foreign exchanges liabilities to the IMF and AMF which the BND in the future will need to service. Since the currency board does not have the capacity to acquire foreign exchange except in exchange for domestic currency issued- against which the acquired foreign exchange must be held in order to maintain the board’s mandated monetary cover, the government must assume responsibility for ensuring that the BND is supplied with the free foreign exchange needed to service its liabilities to the IMF and AMF. This will essentially need to be done by reversing the transactions that gave rise to the BND liabilities, namely, by the government paying down its counterpart debt to the currency board either by utilizing foreign exchange it acquires from other sources or by acquiring and surrendering domestic currency to the board in order to execute the pay down. Therefore during the period of IMF and AMF repurchases it will be necessary for the budget to be sufficiently strong in order that the government will have the financial capacity to service its debt to the BND in the manner described. III. FIRSTANNUALPROGRAM.~~~~/~OOO 28. The growth objective for the first annual program-which bridges calendar years 1999-2000-is to realize average real GDP growth of 2 percent. While this objective appears modest, it reflects the contractionary effect on the economy of the French military retrenchment. Abstracting from this factor, the growth target is 4 percent per annum. The other central macroeconomic objectives entail: limiting inflation to at most 2 percent; Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 60 - ANNEX II containing the overall balance of payment deficits to 2.5 percent of GDP on average; and maintaining the mandated BND monetary and LOLR cover. Commercial bank import cover is expected to average 7 months. 29. The 1999 program budget is directed at maintaining a tight fiscal stance--with the payment order position targeted at about balance. The cash position reflects the programmed clearance of domestic wage arrears and therefore entails a deficit of 1.6 percent of GDP. The wage arrears settlement provides for cash payments equivalent to about one-fifth of the outstanding amount. As noted earlier the original 1999 budget was amended by a supplementary budget approved by the National Assembly in August in order to incorporate measures adopted for the program. 30. The budget entails an increase in tax receipts equivalent to 1 percent of GDP over their 1998 level owing essentially to the tax increases under the petroleum product excise reform and the road user charge. However as this revenue gain is expected to be offset by lower profit transfers from public enterprises, the overall revenue/GDP ratio is projected to remain at about its 1998 level of 25 percent of GDP. Total expenditures are projected to rise by 1.5 percent of GDP over their 1998 level to 35 percent. Current spending is targeted to rise by 3.5 percent of GDP to 30 percent largely owing to higher outlays for so&d purposes, materials and supplies, and road maintenance, In part the higher current outlays/GDP ratio is attributable to increased grants-in-kind from France for medical and defense purposes. Social sector outlays are programmed to rise by 2 percent of GDP to 8 percent, while the wage bill is projected to decline by nearly 1 percent of GDP due to the full-year effect from completion of the first phase of the demobilization program in 1998, the implementation over 1999 ofthe second phase, and continuation of the freeze on government hiring and the wage bill. Public investment expenditure at 4.5 percent of GDP is lower than in 1998 following the sharp increase in these outlays last year owing to the rapid drawdown of the external resource pipeline. 31. The formulation of the 2000 budget is presently tentative and will be revisited during the first review discussions in December. At &is time the government anticipates that the payment-order position will move to a surplus of 0.5 percent of GDP owing to higher revenues and grants (taken together by 2 percent of GDP). The Ruther reorientation of spending toward priority purposes would again be facilitated by a decline in the wage bill owing to the continuation of both the demobilization program and the hiring and wage freeze. The cash deficit is forecast to widen to 4 percent of GDP as the government intends to make large cash payments against its pension timd and wage arrears. Financing of the deficit would be as in 1999. The structural reform content of the 2000 budget will entail the second-round increases in petroleum product excise taxation, implementation of consumption and other excise tax reforms, as well as the continued reorientation of expenditures. A public expenditure review to be undertaken in collaboration with World Bank statTin connection with its Public Expenditure Reform Credit (PERC) will be completed by end-hlarch 2000. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-61 - ANNEXII 32. The 1999/2000 financial sector structural reform program entails a number of important measures. In July-August 1999 a notification system to address delinquent bank credits and enhance intermediation was implemented along with measures to terminate commercial bank ooordination of interest rate and fee structures, Following these steps, the BND by end-1999 will complete the liquidation of one of two closed commercial banks and reach decisions regarding the treatment of an operating foreign bank subsidiary confronting prudential difficulties and Djibouti’s specialized bank, For the fnst half of 2000, the reform program will entail preparation of reformed BND and banking laws, liquidation of a second closed commercial bank, and resolution of the status of the foreign bank subsidiary and the specialized bank. 33. Far-reaching real sector structural reform measures are being introduced in 1999. Following measures introduced over July-September 1999 to eliminate government control over the petroleum product market and to effect the privatization of four small public enterprises, the measures to be implemented later this year will entail: a reform of the port tariff structure; establishment of a program to enforce the maximum road load limit for trucks; and a program to improve the financial positions of the national power and urban water utilities. The major structural reforms to be implemented in the first half of 2000 entail: publication of the core principles of the strategy for privatisation of each ofthe six major public enterprises; finalization of action plans for the privatizations of the port and the telecommunication companies; and enactment of a privatization law and a reformed Labor Code. 34. The balance of payments outlook for 1999-2000 entails current account deficits of some 6 percent of GDP on average and an overall deficit of 2.5 percent. As noted earlier, the widening of the current account deficit vis-bvis 1998 reflects essentially the higher imports required for the program’s restructuring strategy and growth target and the adverse effect on service receipts from the French military retrenchment, With the 1998 import base adjusted for the exceptional outlays for electricity generators, import growth is expected to average 5 percent, The capital account is expected to be in surplus-averaging 3.5 percent of GDP-largely owing to use of World Bank and AfDB credits, foreign borrowing by the port for rehabilitation and expansion, and increased foreign direct investment. 35. For 1999, the gross external financing requirement is estimated to be US0101 million. This requirement is expected to be mostly covered by regular financing. With these resources,. an exceptional financing gap of US$22 million would remain, Identified financing is expected to become available from the AfDB (USS1.6 million) and the AMF (US.SO.4 million). IMP resources under the requested arrangement could supply USS3.8 million. After taking these resources into account, a residual gap of USIE16.5 million would remain, For 2000 the gross external financing requirement is presently forecast at US% 107 million, and after considering the resources available from regular financing, the exceptional financing gap would be US%24 million. Resources from the AfDB, AMF, IMF and World Bank-totaling US%15 million- are forecast to narrow this gap to a residual of USS9 million. The residual gaps for Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 62 - ANNEX II 1999-2000 would be closed if official bilateral creditors were to grant Djibouti’s request for multi-year debt rescheduling on the most generous available terms. 36. The challenges of program will require an upgrading of institutional arrangements for program implementation and monitoring. To this end, a presidential decree was issued in July 1999 appointing the Minister of Economy and Finance (MOEF) as Chairman of the Interministerial Committee (IC) which acts as the economic policy formulation, implementation, and coordinating body. In this capacity, the Minister is understood within the Cabinet to be acting on behalf of the government. The IC has appointed a technical reform program implementation team that will be responsible for: overseeing the implementation of the technical aspects of the reform program; technical coordination among implementing agencies; and reporting on technical implementation to the IC. In its policy coordinating capacity, the IC will vet the information provided by ministries and agencies and oversee the provision of information on program performance to the higher Djibouti authorities, the IMF, the World Bank, and other concerned parties. Aspects of the procedures for the vetting and provision of information have been spelled out in a technical memorandum of understanding agreed with the IMF staff. 37. Implementation of the program under the requested arrangement will be monitored through prior actions, quantitative and StNCtUrd performance criteria, structural benchmarks, and five reviews. The schedules for disbursements under the arrangement and the attached conditions as well as for Executive Board completion of reviews are presented in the attached Table 1. The prior actions for submitting the request for the arrangement to the Executive Board and structural performance criteria for end-1999 are given in the attached Table 2. All prior actions have been implemented. Subsequently under the arrangement, additional prior actions and structural performance criteria or benchmarks may be established during program reviews. 38. The program will utilize semi-annual quantitative performance criteria and under the first-year program such criteria have been established for end-December 1999 (Table 3). To assist in observing these criteria and those to be established for end-June 2000 during the first review, indicative targets have been established for end-September 1999 and end-March and end-June 2000. Semi-annual quantitative limits will apply to: the wage bill; the stocks of domestic and external arrears; National Bank and commercial bank net credit to the government; government borrowing from public enterprises; and the contracting or guaranteeing by the government or public enterprises of nonconcessional external debt with an initial maturity of more than one year, Semi-annual quantitative floors will apply to the currency board’s net international reserves. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 63 - ANNEX II 39. Other performance criteria include the commitment of the government that it will not: impose or intensity restrictions on payments and transfers for current international transactions; introduce or modify multiple currency practices; conclude bilateral payments agreements that are inconsistent with Article VIII of the Fund’s Articles of Agreement; or impose or intensity import restrictions for balance of payments reasons. In addition, continuous performance criteria will apply to the accumulation of new domestic and external arrears (excluding arrears on external debt service obligations under rescheduling negotiations). 40. There will be five reviews under the arrangement, The first review discussions are expected to take place by end-December 1999, and the Executive Board meeting is envisaged for February 2000. The review will address progress in implementing the macroeconomic program for 1999 and will entail an updating of the macroeconomic program for 2000 including confirmation of the consistency between the medium-term program and the proposed 2000 budget. Competitiveness policy will also be addressed. 41. The review will moreover consider the 1999 and 2000 structural reform programs. The status of structural reforms already implemented in 1999 will be assessed-in particular the petroleum product excise tax reform and the related market liberalization; the road user charge; the expenditure re-orientation; the demobilisation program; the notification system; and the measures to promote independent interest rate and fee setting by banks. The preparations for and specifications of the structural reforms to be implemented before end- 1999 will be reviewed and in particular: the banking sector reforms; the port tariffreform; the program to enforce the maximum truck load limit; and the programs to enhance the financial positions of the power and water utilities. The status of bilateral external debt relief and multilateral arrears regularization will moreover be addressed. Additionally the review will assess preparations and specifications for the structural reforms pertaining to the first half of 2000 and in particular: consumption and other excise tax reforms; an envisaged mandatory retirement program applying to civil service and military personnel; publication of the privatization strategies for the five major public enterprises and preparation of action plans for the privatizations of the port and the merged telecommunications utilities; public sector domestic arrears resolution; the reformed BND and banking laws; resolution of the status of the foreign bank subsidiary and the specialized bank; and the reformed Labor Code and Investment Law. 42. The government will consult periodically with the Fund about the progress being made in the implementation of the program and about any policy adaptations considered appropriate for achievement of the program’s objectives. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 64 - ANNEXII Table 1: Djibouti: Proposed Schedule of Disbursements Under the Requested ESAF Arrangement, 1999-2002 I/ Amount Date Available Requirements for Disbursement SDR 2.726 million AtIer cmditions for disbursemmt are met. Executive Board approval of the ESAF arrangermnt. SDR 2.726 million DnorafterFebruary 15,2WO Observance of end-December 1999 performance criteria and Executive Board completion of the first review SDR 2.726 million On or after August 152000 Observance of end-June 2000 performance criteria, Executive Board completion of the second review, and presentation of the second annual program SDR 2.726 million On or after February l&2001 Observance of end-December 2000 performance criteria and Executive Board completion of the third review. SDR 2.726 million On or after August 15,200l SDR 2.726 million On or after February 15,2002 SDR 2.726 million On or after August 15,2002 l/ The program year starts July 1,1999 Observance of end-June 2001 performance criteria, Executive Board completion of the fourth review, and presentation of the third annual program Observance of December 2001 performance criteria and Executive Board completion of the fifth review Observance of end-June 2002 performance criteria. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 65 - ANNEXII Table 2: Djibouti: Prior Actions and Structural Performance Criteria for the 1999/2000 Program 1. Prior actions for Executive Board consideration of the request for an ESAF arrangement 1. National Assembly approval of a 1999 supplementary budget enacting the program budget and incorporating the deregulation of petroleum product trade and prices and the implementation of the 1999 petroleum product excise tax increases and the programmed increases in social expenditures. 2. Issuance of a BND circular to commercial banks regarding interest rate structures and bank fee and charge structures, as specified in paragraph 13, 3. Issuance of a BND circular to commercial banks establishing a notification system, as specified in paragraph 13. 4. Completion of the privatization (or liquidation as applicable) of the four public enterprises listed in the policy matrix attached to the government’s Policy Framework Paper. 5. Issuance of a government decree establishing a road user charge of US%1 per ton of cargo to be paid by all trucks exiting the port and earmarking the tax revenues to the Road Maintenance Fund. 6. Issuance of a presidential decree designating the Minister of Finance as Chairman of the Interministerial Committee for Reform Program Co-ordination. II. Structural performance criteria for end-December 1999 1. National Assembly approval of a budget for 2000 consistent with the medium-term program’s macroeconomic objectives and incorporating the structural reform measures programmed for 2000 as applicable--and in particular the consumption, excise, and export tax reforms; the 2000 demobilization program; the civil service and military retirement program; and continuation of the hiring and wage bill freezes implemented in 1998. 2. Implementation of a port tariff reform consistent with strengthening the financial position. of the port authority in order to allow for implementation of its program for rehabilitation and expanison. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-66- ANNEX II Table 2. Djibouti: Prior Actions and Structural Performance Criteria for the 1999/2000 Program 3. Completion and provision to IMP staRof compilations (as of end-1998) of the debt and arrears of all public enterprises to other public enterprises, the government, and third party suppliers; and of the debt and arrears of the government to each public enterprise. 4. Completion of the second phase of the demobilization program which shall entail the demobilization of the remaining 1,648 persons scheduled for demobilization under the second phase. 5. Issuance by the national power and the urban water utilities of policy statements setting forth their revenue collection reforms. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 3. Djibouti: Quantitativ: Performance Criteria and Indicative Targets, 1999/2000 (In millions of Djibouti francs; unless othetise indicated) 1998 1999 2ooo .Dec.31 June 30 Dec. 31 Sept. 30 MarFh Actual Actual Target Criteria Target 1. Ceiling on tie wage bill l! 2/ II. Ceilings on sIocks of arrears 3/ 1. Domestic arrears a. Wage bill II outstanding 4/ 5/ New 6/7/81 b. Private suppliers gy$%- 51 c. Pension foods 111. IV. V. VI. d. Other 91 Outstanding 5/ New 6/8/ 2. Externalarrears a. Govemmerd f3lx&$ng 51101 1 II b. Public ente@ses ch&ta$ng 51 1011 II Ceiling on National Bank net credit lo the government 131 Ceiling on commercial bank net credit to the government 141 Ceiling on government borrowing from public enterprises 6/ 15/ Ceiling on contracting or guaranteeing of noncessional external debt with a maturity of more than one year (excluding trade-related credits) a. Government b. Public enterprises VIII. Floor for net intemational reserves (in millions of US dollars) 161 Memorandum items: 171 Total extemal budgetaxy assistance External budgetary loans External budgetary grants External debt regularization Other extemaI budgetary assistance IMP net disbursements AMF net disbursements 3,670 7,476 10,830 14,440 3,473 6,946 6,167 3,574 0 7,291 0 360 0 8,197 5,709 1,200 1,200 3,854 3,574 0 0 7,291 7,291 0 0 360 360 0 0 5,588 1,200 3,574 1 0 5,588 1,150 3,234 0 6,389 0 270 0 5,588 1,150 2,894 0 7,291 0 360 0 6,229 0 180 0 i 908 217 1,500 333 0 0 0 776 119 121 2,097 160 0 i E i 643 643 643 119 119 119 2,133 2,108 2,621 108 33 33 0 0 0 0 0 643 119 2,657 33 0 0 0 6.7 0 0 7.4 0 0 1,800 1,800 10.4 10.4 1,*0: 10.6 0 1,800 10.4 1,61(: 175 371 240 131 0 212 284 293 586 492 2,084 2,779 785 1,570 0 1,594 2,126 508 1,016 244 853 829 514 549 244 800 758 478 478 0 53 71 36 71 -. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public11 The wage bill Includes. but IS not limited to, all gross wages, salaries, indemnities, benetits, and allowances thar the government agrees to pay to civilian, military, and secutity personnel, (whether permanent or temporary) and all other employees of general government, regardless of the means ofpayment used (cash, check, or other instmments) or the paying agent (Treasury or other entities acting on behalf of the government). The ceilings and targets exclude the costs and swings from the program for the demobilization of security and militay personnel. The ceilings and targets till be revised for the costs and savings from the envisaged retirement program when the elTcct of this program is quantified. 2/ Cumulative flows from January I of each calendar year. 31 Stocks at end-of-period. 4/ If net external budgetary timancing flows fall short of the amounts assumed under the program. the ceilings or targets on wage wears will &Z adjusted up-d by the shortfall. If net external budgetary financing flows exceed the amounts assumed under the program, the government till consult with the It& staff on the use ofthe excess. 51 All limits or targets are based on the end-1998 actual stock. 61 Cumulative flows from January I, of the calendar year. 7/ This amount includes a delayed administrative payment of about one month of salaries equal lo DF I, 200 million. 8/ The performance cntaia will apply conlinuously. 91 Arrears owed by Office National de l’approvisionnemml des c&&les (ONAC). IO/ Any subquent upward (downward) revision of this stock due to improved data till give rise to an equivalent upward (downward) adjustment ofthe ceilings ad targets for each subsequent peticd 1 I/ The ceilings or targets till be reduced by the amount that may be obtained under debt reschedulings or debt forgiveness. l2/ Cumulative flows from January I, l999-May 30, 1999. The reduction represents payments to AfDB and other multilateral orga&ations. 13/ National Bank net credit to the government is defmed as total claims of the National Bank on the government less all gov-ent deposits with the National B&, These deposits include, but are not Iunited to: the Reserve Fund, cash holdings of the Treasury; and other deposits. Other deposits include, but are not limited to: deposits in blocked accounts; deposits of exceptional external grants; amen1 accounts; deposits in special .scmunts; and cbtmlerpti funds Gem loans and grants for external budgetary support Deposits do not include counterpart funds generated from external loans and grants not intended for budgetary support. l4/ Commercial bank net credit to the government is defied as total claims of commercial banks on the govemment (including overdmfts and securities and notes issued by the government and held by commercial banks) less all government deposits with commercial banks. Deposits include, but are not limited to: deposits in blocked accounts; deposits of exceptional external grants, current accounts; deposits in special accounts; and counterpart funds from external loans and *ants for budgetary support. Deposits exclude counterpart funds from external loans and grants not intended for budgetary support The cotmnercial banks consist of the three presently operating banks. IS/ Borrowing from public enterprises is defmed as all receipts that give rise lo debt of the government lo the enterprises. Borrowing includes, but is not limited to: certificates of deposit; loans and advances; and deposits of public enterprises with the Treasury. The coverage of public enterprises is de!inai lo include all domestic nonfiancial enlaprises, agencies, funds, and other non-central government entities. l6/ Net international reserves of the National Bank are defmed as gross international reserves less external liabilities and currency issue. The exchange rate to be used is DF 177.721 perU.S. dollar. (i) Gross international reserves are defmed as the sum of sight deposits abroad; time deposits abroad, checks in process of collection from foreign entities; operations pending regularization; foreign exchange in cash; sight and lime deposits of the Treasury abroad; accmnts with the IMF; SDR holdings and any reserve position in the l&W; and all other foreign assets. Capital subscriptions to foreign linancial institutions are excluded Gem gross international reserves. (ii) External liabilities are defied as the sum of: external accounts having a credit position and all other foreign exchange liabilities (excluding use of IMF and AMF credit). (iii) Currency issue is defmed for program purposes as: Djibouti bmc bills and coins in circulation (outside cmrnercial and development tanks and the tieasuy); cash held by commercial and development banks and the treasury; and deposits of commercial banks and the govemment al the National Bank. l7/ The memorandum items are defmed as follow: external budgetary loans and grants are only those in cash and exclude all loans and grants which are listed in the Public Investment Program or those which are earmarked by the donor for spzcitic projects. External debt regularization consists of debt forgiveness and rescheduling, excluding i&rest. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public