DOCUMENT OF INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND NOT FOR PUBLIC USE MASTER FILES ROOM HQ C-525 0451 EBY991117 CONFIDENTIAL July 9, 1999 To: From: Subject: Members of the Executive Board The Secretary Uruguay-Staff Report for the 1999 Article IV Consultation, First Review Under the Stand-By Arrangement, and Request for Modification of Performance Criteria Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staff report for the 1999 Article IV consultation with Uruguay, the first review under the Stand-By Arrangement, and Uruguay’s request for modification of performance criteria, which will be brought to the agenda for discussion on a date to be announced. A draft decision appears on page 20. Mr. Traa (ext. 36876) or Mr. Tanner (ext. 38608) is available to answer technical or factual questions relating to this paper prior to the Board discussion. Unless the Documents Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the WTO Secretariat on Monday, July 19, 1999; and to the European Commission, the European Investment Bank, and the Inter-American Development Bank, following its consideration by the Executive Board. Att: (1) Other Distribution: Departments Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public. CONFIDENTIAL lNTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND URUGUAY Staff Report for the 1999 Article IV Consultation, First Review Under the Stand-By Arrangement, and Request for Modification of Performance Criteria Prepared by Western Hemisphere Department Approved by Claudio M. Loser and John Hicklin July 8, 1999 Contents Page Executive Summary ,... .3 I. Introduction ..... 4 II. Background. .......................................................................................................................... . III. Policy Discussions.. .............................................................................................................. .8 A. Fiscal and Wage Policies.. .......................................................................................... .8 B. Credit and Banking Policies ....................................................................................... IO C. External Policies.. ..................................................................................................... 12 D. Structural Reforms.. .................................................................................................. 14 E. Medium-Term Scenario ............................................................................................. 14 F. Other Issues.. ............................................................................................................. I5 IV. Staff Appraisal 16 Tables 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. I. 8. 9. Economic and Financial Indicators.. ................................................................................... .25 Performance under the 1999 Economic Program.. ............................................................. .26 Public Sector Operations.. ................................................................................................. .27 Summary Accounts of the Financial System ...................................................................... .28 Summary Balance of Payments.. ........................................................................................ .29 Banking Soundness Indicators.. ......................................................................................... .30 Net Position in Foreign Currency and External Debt and Debt-Service Indicators.. ........... ,3 1 Medium-Term Macroeconomic Framework ....................................................................... ,32 Availability of Purchases under the SBA during 1999-2000 ................................................ 33 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2- Appendices 1. Fund Relations ................................................................................................................. .34 2. Relations with the World Bank.. ........................................................................................ .36 3. Statistical Issues.. .............................................................................................................. .38 Figures 1. Selected Economic Indicators.. .......................................................................................... .22 2. Financial Indicators .......................................................................................................... .23 3. Real Exchange Rates (January 1986=100). ........................................................................ .24 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public. -3- EXECUTIVE SUMMARY The Uruguayan economy has performed well in recent years. Inflation fell steadily, real GDP growth was strong, unemployment declined, and the external current account deficit remained modest. Nevertheless, the external environment weakened significantly starting in mid-1998, and conditions took a further turn for the worse with the depreciation of the Brazilian real in January 1999. Indeed, the Uruguayan economy appears to have been affected more adversely by these events than originally thought and real GDP is now projected to drop by 2 percent in the year. At the same time, inflation is also declining faster than was expected and is projected to drop to 4% percent by year-end. Exports dropped sharply in the first quarter, and the increase in uncertainty led to a pull-back in domestic demand, bringing imports down with it as well. Together with a downturn in the terms of trade, the external current account deficit is expected to reach 2% percent of GDP in 1999. In Februaty, the authorities took emergency measures to cut public spending and keep the fiscal deficit under control and, notwithstanding a diflicult first quarter, they met all quantitative objectives through end-March under the Fund supported program. Nevertheless, there were some slippages in the implementation of structural reforms, notably the failure to sell an intervened bank, and there were increased pressures for state-owned banks to refinance credits to several sectors in the economy. The authorities are requesting a modification in the program ceilings for the public sector deficit and debt, equivalent to the effects of automatic stabilizers on the fiscal balance. A modest widening of the deficit based on the cyclical downturn seems reasonable, given Uruguay’s still moderate external current account deficit and the prospect of a continued reduction in inflation. Within the deficit target, the authorities are accommodating small tax cuts and some easing of selected tariffs to help lower costs in the economy and assist sectors most severely affected by the recession, The January 1999 crisis in Brazil let? Uruguay’s financial markets, and access to the international markets, largely unaffected, and the authorities are not expected to encounter undue difficulties in financing a slightly larger deficit, Deposits in the banking system have held steady and official international reserves remained well above the program target. Also, short-term peso interest rates have recently dropped to below their levels just prior to the Russia crisis and, adjusted for expected exchange rate depreciation, are now slightly lower than short-term U.S. dollar interest rates. There has been no significant pressure on the exchange rate regime so far and the exchange rate has remained mostly in the appreciated half of the band. The authorities view the adjustable band exchange rate regime as an important guide for inflation expectations and as confidence has remained high, they wish to continue with this regime. However, to assist in recovering from the competitiveness shock in January, they will forego, for now, the planned downshift in the exchange rate band and keep the pace of depreciation at an amtualized 7% percent (i.e., above domestic inIlation). The staff supports the authorities’ approach, under the circumstances, and as a move toward greater flexibility likely would be seen as a regime shift and trigger new wage demands. Nevertheless, this approach gives added importance to structural reforms and cautious macroeconomic policies which are needed to bolster efficiency in the economy and manage domestic demand. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4- 1. INTRODUCTION 1. A mission visited Montevideo during May 17-28, 1999 to conduct discussions for the 1999 Article IV Consultation and the first review of the program supported by the 12-month stand-by arrangement that was approved on March 29, 1999.’ The arrangement is in an amount equivalent to SDR 70 million (23 percent of new quota) and the authorities are treating it as precautionary. Uruguay’s outstanding use of Fund credit is SDR 114 million (37 percent of quota). 2. The 1998 Article IV Consultation was concluded on September 3, 1998. On that occasion, Directors welcomed Uruguay’s progress in fiscal consolidation and structural reforms, which had improved confidence and supported strong output growth and a significant reduction in inflation. Moreover, during the Executive Board discussion for approval of the SBA at end-March, Directors noted the authorities’ quick policy response to the depreciation of the Brazilian real in January 1999, and agreed with the partial accommodation of the effects of automatic stabilizers on the public sector deficit objective of the program. At the same time, Directors said that further structural reforms and continued cautious economic policies are needed to complete the transition to inflation at industrial country levels and increase economic efficiency. 3. Presidential elections are scheduled for October 1999. Primary elections were held in April to select party candidates. While the parties did not compete directly, the candidate from the coalition Colorado party achieved the largest number of votes, slightly ahead of the opposition National Front party, in turn followed by the (smaller) coalition Blanc0 party and a more recently established party. It is unlikely that a candidate will reach an outright 50 percent of the votes in October, and a runoff would then take place between the two leading candidates in November. Uruguayan society uses a consensus approach to public policy making. This tends to moderate differences between the parties, but, sometimes, it also slows down structural reform. II. BACKGROUND 4. Since 1990, two successive governments have implemented a gradual anti-inflation strategy based on de-indexing the economy and slowing the rate of depreciation of the exchange rate band; strengthening the public finances; and implementing structural reforms, including trade liberalization, reform of the social security system, and the privatization of certain public services. The economy has responded well to these sustained efforts. Per capita real GDP growth averaged 3% percent a year between 1990 and 1998-the highest rate for any decade since the 1940s; inflation fell steadily to a single digit by end-1998; and the current account deficit remained modest. However, unemployment, which had increased sharply in the period 1993-96 with the ’ The mission comprised Messrs. Traa (head), Tanner, Jaramillo, and Braumann (all WHD). Mr. Figuerola, resident representative in Argentina, also participated in the discussions. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-5- restructuring of the economy, remained high at over 10 percent (Figure 1 and Table 1). The Fund has supported Uruguay’s economic plans with successive SBAs in recent years which, with the exception of a single cumulative drawing in 1998, the authorities have treated as precautionary. 5. The authorities achieved all main objectives under the program for 1998. Inflation nearly halved during the year to 8% percent by December, while real GDP growth was 4% percent. Unemployment dropped from 11% percent in 1997 to just over 10 percent in 1998 with strong employment growth in the services sectors. All quantitative performance criteria for end-December were met and the structural reform measures were observed, except for the sale of an intervened bank, which was postponed to mid-1999. The consolidated public sector deficit was 1 percent of GDP, slightly below program, and the external current account deficit remained modest at just under 2 percent of GDP. Notwithstanding this favorable performance, economic conditions had started to worsen significantly around mid-year, owing to uncertainties in Russia and Brazil, and access to global capital markets was temporarily interrupted during the third quarter, prompting the authorities to make the drawing, noted above, under the Fund supported program.* At the same time, while output growth still appeared buoyant, prices and demand weakened and, toward the end of the year, output growth was based mainly on stockbuilding in the agricultural sector. 6. The program for 1999 agreed in March aimed at reducing the 12-month rate of inflation to 5% percent by end-1999, while limiting the uptick in unemployment, maintaining a viable external current account position, and preserving gross offkial reserves at around six months of imports of goods and services, or the equivalent of nearly two-years of scheduled external debt service. The program assumed that the negative effects from the depreciation in Brazil, Uruguay’s most important merchandise export market, and the slowing ofgrowth in Brazil and Argentina would lead to a contraction in output of 1 percent in 1999. The structural measures under the program comprised the preparation of an action plan to prepare Uruguay for subscription to the SDDS, ending the intervention in three banks, reducing the reporting lag of monetary data from the Bank of the Republic (BROU) to that equivalent for private banks, revising the national accounts, and conducting an independent external audit of the state-owned financial institutions. 7. All quantitative performance criteria under the program through end-March 1999 were met, and the BCU put in place a plan to prepare Uruguay’s subscription to the SDDS, as agreed under the structural reform measures (Table 2). Nevertheless, the economy was affected more severely than anticipated by the devaluation of the real in January and the accompanying economic slowdown in the region. Merchandise exports in U.S. dollars, including both manufactured and agricultural goods, fell by about 24 percent in the first quarter (y-o-y), while imports fell by nearly 14 percent; the summer tourism season of early 1999 was weaker than expected and, adjusted for seasonal factors, real GDP dropped by nearly 3% percent from the ’ When access to international financial markets opened up again in November, the authorities also pre-borrowed some of their anticipated financing needs for 1999, further boosting international reserves. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public. -6- previous quarter. At the same time, inflation came down somewhat faster than expected to just over 6 percent by June 1999, while unemployment rose by a percentage point from end-1998 to just over 1 I percent by April 1999. In April and May, it appeared that the drop in output was leveling off, but with lower activity than foreseen in the program; while Brazil’s outlook had improved, the economic prospects for Argentina, Uruguay’s largest trading partner in services, including tourism, were revised downward. 8. In the public finances, the authorities met their objectives for end-March mainly through expenditure restraint. Consistent with cyclical developments, revenues were slightly lower than expected. VAT revenues dropped by 4 percent in real terms (y-o-y) as consumers held back spending. Receipts from imports were also down. At the same time, there were improvements in the administration of social security contributions as the introduction of computerized employment records boosted receipts. Expenditures were reduced in February with an emergency package of measures (mostly already reflected in the program), and the authorities tightly controlled discretionary spending. Wage costs were slightly below program, and the pace of capital spending was reduced, including in the public enterprises where higher oil import prices reduced the surpluses of the petroleum and electricity companies. The municipalities generated a small surplus in the first quarter of the year, apparently as automobile and real estate taxes were stronger than expected. 9. By and large, the January 1999 crisis in Brazil left Uruguay’s financial markets unaffected, apart from a temporary increase in the interbank interest rate (Figure 2). Access to foreign capital was not interrupted, and by May peso interbank interest rates had dropped to below their level just prior to the Russia crisis in 1998. Moreover, in late June the BCU reduced official short-term interest rates from 12% to 9’% percent so that, adjusted for expected exchange rate depreciation, these interest rates dropped to slightly below the equivalent U.S. dollar rates. In late April, the government placed a US$250 million, lo-year eurobond at a modest spread of 213 basis points over the comparable U.S.Treasury issue. 10. The private banks, mostly foreign owned, and comprising just over half of all bank assets, had a successful year in 1998, with average profitability close to 14 percent on equity. Excluding the intervened banks, the ratio of non-performing loans to total assets in private banks has remained low (under 2 percent) and relatively stable in recent years. An exception was the Banco de Credito, where deteriorating loan quality, management problems, and a run on deposits caused an intervention by the BCU in October 1998. In early 1999, the Banco de Credit0 was combined with another intervened bank (Banco Pan de Anicar), with 51 percent of the fimds for recapitalization coming from the public sector.’ The new bank is now majority owned by a public sector corporation (the National Development Corporation), subject to private sector regulations, and the authorities plan to return the new and larger Banco de Credit0 to private hands at some future date.4 In June 1999, the Central Bank again postponed (to 2000) the planned sale of the third 3 The cost of this operation (0.1 percent of GDP) is included in the program debt target. 4 So far, the four-year recovery plan for the bank is ahead of schedule. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-l- intervened bank, the Caja Obrera, reportedly as not all conditions in the bidding process were observed, thereby missing the relevant structural benchmark under the program for end-June. 11. The performance of public banks, which account for some 45 percent of assets in the banking system, improved during 1998, but remained weaker than that of the private banks. Both the Bank of the Republic (BROU) and the National Mortgage Bank (BHU) earned small profits in 1998. However, profit rates for these banks are substantially below those for private banks, and the current downturn poses challenges for public banks in particular. The BROU faces pressures to refinance loans, especially in agriculture, where its portfolio is about $800 million (just under l/3 of its total loans).5 The public banks have a substantial cushion of capital on their books, some US$750 million in the BROU and more than US%1 billion in the BHIJ, but these figures likely overstate the underlying value of the capital base. The BROU has been restructuring in recent years, reducing costs and employment while improving efficiency and credit monitoring. However, progress has been slow. The BROU also is making its operations more transparent and has recently published, for the first time in its history, the annual profit and loss statement. While some progress was made in improving the reporting of monetary data from the BROU to the BCU, as envisaged under the structural benchmark for end-June 1999, the reporting lag is still much longer than for the private banks and, on the whole, the benchmark was not met. The BROU and the BHU have recently issued bids for the (first ever) independent external audit, but these efforts are not expected to clarify the economic position of the banks until sometime next year. 12. Between December and March, the real effective exchange rate value of the peso appreciated by some 12 percent, largely reflecting events in Brazil (Figure 3).6 To deal with this competitiveness shock, private sector firms both reduced employment and restrained wage growth. In some cases, labor and management agreed upon nominal wage reductions. For their part, the authorities cancelled a previously planned slowdown in the rate of depreciation of the exchange rate band,’ keeping it at 0.6 percent monthly (7% percent annualized), and granted some lowering in fuel-oil prices and an extension of tax payment deadlines for some sectors. In recent months, the exchange rate has remained mostly in the appreciated half of the band. ’ According to a recent internal evaluation by the BROU, as much as US$l50 million of agricultural loans are either high risk or unrecoverable. 6 There is limited information on unit labor costs in Uruguay. However, staff calculations suggest that following a peak in 1994, relative bilateral unit labor costs in manufacturing through end-1998 have dropped by a cumulative 10 percent vis-a-vis Argentina, and by 23 percent vis-a-vis the U.S. These figures follow mainly from improvements in hourly productivity which averaged around 7 percent a year during this period. 7 The width of the band is 3 percent. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-8- 13. The external current account deticit is widening beyond 2 percent of GDP, as a result of weaker commodity prices and reduced foreign demand. Export earnings were basically flat in 1998, and, for the first quarter of 1999, falling export volumes and prices pushed the current account deficit from an original projection for the year of 2 percent to about 2% percent of GDP. Agricultural goods, such as rice normally destined for Brazil, found other buyers beyond Mercosur, but at substantial discounts, Also, tourism, a key service export, turned out slightly weaker than expected. Moreover, reduced import volumes were partially offset by increased oil prices. As noted above, developments in the capital account of the balance of payments remained relatively unaffected by the recent turmoil. Direct investment activity held steady, deposit inflows slowed but remained positive, and the authorities maintained access to international markets at favorable terms. Uruguay’s investment grade credit rating, first granted in July 1997, has recently been renewed. Tranquil capital markets also have meant better performance on reserves than expected, and NIR has remained substantially above the program floor thus far in the year. ill. P~LI~YDIXUSSIONS 14. As economic activity had been affected more severely than expected by the devaluation of the real in January and the slowing of growth in the region, the policy discussions centered on how best to adjust the economy to the more difXcult circumstances, and place it in a favorable position for sustained output growth in 2000 and beyond. The authorities stressed that, in fiscal policy, there was some room for the automatic stabilizers to work, as the financing conditions had remained relatively favorable, but they would accommodate the stabilizers only partially for the year as continued prudent fiscal and credit policies were essential to maintain confidence and assist the recovery beginning in the second half of the year. This policy stance was consistent with a further consolidation of the public sector finances in the medium-term. At the same time, they did not want to overreact to the difficulties, and viewed the economy as stabilizing after an uncertain first quarter. They felt that the exchange rate regime offered enough flexibility to deal with the short-term weakness in the external current account and there was no need to alter the regime at this moment. 15. The authorities and the staff agreed that output growth in 1999 would likely be less than originally envisaged, and real GDP is now projected to drop by 2 percent, instead of 1 percent in the original program. However, 12-month inflation also had been lower than expected and is projected to decline to 4% percent by December 1999, from 5% percent in the original program. A. Fiscal and Wage Policies 16. The authorities are requesting a widening in the program target for the public sector deficit from 1.8 to 2.1 percent of GDP. This widening is equivalent to the effect of automatic stabilizers on the deficit; the underlying cyclically-adjusted fiscal position would remain slightly contractionary, as in the original program. The staff agreed that a small increase in the deficit based on the cyclical downturn seemed reasonable, given Uruguay’s still modest external current account Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-9- deficit and the prospect of a continued reduction in inflation. At the same time, the trend toward lower structural deficits needs to be preserved as this has been the linchpin for confidence and medium-term sustainability in Uruguay’s gradualist anti-inflation process. Indeed, the expenditure target under the program was not modified, so that in the event the economy were to recover more rapidly then foreseen, the deficit would automatically decrease. The government intends to finance the US%60 million in additional borrowing needs in the international capital markets. 17. Public sector revenue is projected to be slightly lower than in the original program. There were small downward revisions in the projection for corporate and agricultural income tax receipts and the surplus of public enterprises, the latter reflecting lower sales and the impact of higher oil import prices on the petroleum and electricity companies (Table 3). Also, in May, the government granted a reduction in wealth taxes and employer social security contributions, costing less than 0.1 percent of GDP, for the agricultural sector only, which had been affected most severely by the regional downturn in demand and weak commodity prices. Overall social security contributions would continue slightly stronger than envisaged earlier, owing to the administrative improvements discussed above. On the expenditure side, the emergency cuts amounting to some 0.4 percentage points of GDP announced in February are being implemented on schedule. Moreover, the elimination of inflation correction to spending ceilings was extended from May through September 1999; and capital spending would continue lower than in the original program. Social security spending will be higher than originally thought, owing to cyclical pressures (unemployment insurance), and as more formalization in the work force has increased outlays in the official health care system. 18. The staff urged the authorities to reduce costs further and bolster external competitiveness through additional tax cuts, in turn facilitated by spending cuts. The authorities noted the cuts in employer social security contributions to lower labor costs in agriculture this year (which follows similar cuts for manufacturing in 199596), and that certain enterprise tari& were declining in real terms. Also, the budget already included a small reduction in the bank asset tax from January 1999 (from 1.8 to 1.5 percent), which was helping to reduce intermediation costs. At the same time, the authorities wanted to proceed with caution as their good record at fiscal consolidation had become the benchmark for economic stability and confidence. In any event, the authorities and the staff agreed that pro-active tax cuts without offsetting expenditure reductions would undermine confidence and be counterproductive. 19. On wage policies, the authorities explained that basic public sector wage adjustments in July would be based on the expected rate of inflation during the second half of the year. Since inflation expectations had been revised downward, the July wage adjustment would be lowered, relative to the original program, by one percentage point. In real terms, however, public wages would still increase by nearly 3 percent (reflecting special adjustments in education, the police, and the military, and in the context of the reform of the state)‘, against stagnant (possibly declining) real wages a The reform of the state included a reduction in public sector employment, with 70 percent of the savings used to make pay scales in the public sector more competitive. The public sector suffers (continued.. .) Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-lO- expected in the private sector. While the staff acknowledges the special circumstances of an election year, a more even sharing of the adjustment burden between public and private sector employees would seem appropriate. A deficit-neutral way to achieve this could include a slowing of the public sector wage bill, coupled with further reductions in employer’s social security contributions. B. Credit and Banking Policies 20. Developments in the money and capital markets during the first quarter of the year were better than expected and the (NDA and NIR) program targets for the remainder of the year remain unchanged. The relative calm in financial markets confirmed that the spillovers from the Brazil crisis so far had primarily affected output markets rather than asset markets. However, based on the weakness in economic activity, and to retain a margin of safety in the program related to the regional uncertainties, deposits, currency in circulation, and credit to the private sector were projected to grow little if any in real terms this year. Moreover, the projections incorporate some shift in the composition from peso to U.S. dollar deposits and cash, which is normal in Uruguay during an election year (Table 4). 21. The authorities have taken several measures to promote prudent credit policies and assure bank soundness. In September 1998, the BCU raised minimum capital adequacy requirements from 8 to 10 percent of risk weighted assets (phased in over two years), and increased the risk weighting attached to consumer lending. Also, the BCU suspended a credit facility from the IDB, intermediated by the banking system, directed at selected investments in the economy. Then, in early 1999, to restrict maturity mismatch, the BCU limited the ability of banks to convert short- term deposits into longer term lending with a maturity mismatch in excess of three years. These measures led to more cautious lending practices and increased use of collateral, especially in the private banks. 22. The staff expressed concern that while the private banking system had turned more cautious in its lending practice, the two large public banks were relinancing significant amounts of credit in their portfolios. In December 1998, Congress had approved a refinancing law for the National Mortgage Bank (BHU) which provided relief for households with four or more installments in arrears, principally by waiving some penalties, capping monthly installments, and rescheduling the amount in arrears toward the end of the loan. The authorities noted that the final version of this bill came after lengthy negotiations and included better safeguards for bank sound- ness than earlier versions. The Bank of the Republic (BROU), in turn, was rescheduling, on a case by case basis, portions of its credit to the agricultural sector and extending the maturity of the loans. BROU officials noted that the credit classification of borrowers would not improve in refinancing their obligations, and that interest rates on the longer-dated loans would be higher than for the shortages in certain high skill occupations, where employees may be paid half as much as their private sector counterparts. The staff endorses the state reform policy and, indeed, would recommend that the next administration intensify the program. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- ll- original shorter maturities. In light of such precautions and the current difficulties in the agricultural sector, officials felt that their approach was balanced and warranted. The staff said that these issues underscored the importance of an audit, already in the program, as unrecoverable assets should be recognized. Moreover, the refinancing operations should be limited, as the criteria by which they are granted tend to be opaque. Such actions also create moral hazard, and could involve quasi-fiscal operations which should be managed through the budget. 23. Overall bank soundness indicators suggest that the banking system has sufficient liquidity and is relatively well capitalized, but that it suffers from inefficiencies and high costs (Table 6). Capital markets in Uruguay are being developed and most credit is obtained through traditional deposit intermediation. The banks use virtually no debt-creating funding other than deposits, in part facilitated by the deposits Uruguay receives from abroad. Performance indicators show particularly high overhead expenses which reach over 5 percent of total assets and include high average wages and generous benefits packages. These relatively high expenses, in turn, are financed by high interest margins, especially in the (small) peso market where spreads between loans and deposits vary between 25 percent for lending to manufacturing to over 50 percent for lending to households, thus imposing substantial costs on the economy. Banking costs in Uruguay are high in part as the result ofthe strong positions adopted by the employee’s union, the relatively small scale of the domestic market, and as bank secrecy obliges banks to maintain fi~ll back offices in Uruguay.’ 24. The authorities have employed structural reforms to enhance competition and promote lower costs in the banking system, but progress has been slow and significant ineffkiencies remain. Competition has been enhanced through developing the capital markets with the liberalization of the insurance and mortgage market, and through the establishment of a mutual finds market, and a market for negotiable obligations. Growth in the capitalized private pension system will provide additional depth in the capital market. For its part, the Bank of the Republic is lowering costs and improving efficiency; and the BCU has been attempting to sell the intervened banks. These reforms are steps in the right direction, but it is disappointing that the problem of intervened banks still has not been resolved, and that progress with reforms in the BROU is slow (the National Mortgage Bank should also undertake to improve transparency and streamline its costs and operations). Moreover, there has been no progress in addressing the rigidities and high cost of labor relations, nor has there been much progress in facilitating entry or exit in the banking sector. The authorities recognize the need for fiuther structural work in the financial system and are completing negotiations with the World Bank on a comprehensive financial system structural adjustment loan, covering all aspects just mentioned and likely extending well into the next administration. The staff strongly supports this new initiative. The staff also welcomes the external audits in both banks, which will be underway shortly. ’ For instance, foreign banks can not centralize credit analysis through the back office of the home country as they can not submit information to abroad under present bank secrecy statutes. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12- C. External Policies 25. The external current account deficit in the revised program is projected to widen from 2 percent of GDP in 1998 to 2% percent in 1999 (Table 5). The widening is by-and-large equivalent to the effects of the 4 percent deterioration in the terms of trade expected for this year. Merchandise exports in U.S. dollar terms would drop by 12 percent for the year, and imports by nearly 9 percent. The authorities explained that export conditions had been particularly adverse during the first quarter, with a virtual interruption of sales to Brazil and another bout of (agricultural) commodity price weakness in world markets.” During the second quarter, export conditions and prices were beginning to stabilie, and various trade missions had been undertaken to the United States, Iran, and India to expand exports to these markets. A recovery in the region later this year, and the incipient turnaround in Asian markets was expected to gradually improve conditions for exports. Tourism earnings are tied to the strength of the Argentine economy and, with the recent downward revision for growth in Argentina, projections for tourism receipts in the second half of 1999 have been reduced. 26. The authorities and private sector analysts said that the depreciation of the real early this year was a competitiveness shock to the Uruguayan economy, and that the economy needs to adjust to the new circumstances. As described above, the government has made some adjustments in fiscal and credit policy to help lower costs, and several private sector firms and labor organizations were negotiating wage moderation, while others were exploring potential mergers or cooperation agreements with larger enterprises from abroad. The authorities estimated that the real appreciation of the peso in the first quarter of the year could be reversed in about another year’s time, based on the efforts to lower costs, the exchange rate band depreciating somewhat faster than internal inflation, and assuming that the Euro recovers some strength vis-&vis the U.S. dollar. In any event, the authorities agreed with the staRthat such projections were necessarily tentative, and that this scenario also depended on a recovery in the region in the second half of the year. Clearly, developments in exports, imports, and capital flows would need to be monitored carefi,dly for signs of a rebound and, if this were not materializing in a few months, tirther efforts at cost cutting would be needed. 27. The authorities intend to continue with the adjustable band exchange rate system which has eflectively guided inflation expectations while allowing some flexibility to deal with exchange market pressure. Notwithstanding the weakening in the trade balance, and without support from the ECU through direct intervention, the exchange rate has remained mostly in the appreciated half of the band. Indeed, the regime itself has not been a source of capital account pressures. Even with short-term interbank interest rates relatively low, confidence in the exchange rate mechanism and the financial markets has remained strong. There are no calls for a modification in exchange rate policy in Uruguay at this moment. On one hand, the economy is adjusting, with lo The depreciation of the Euro and some Brazilian imports of (subsidized) European agricultural commodities (normally purchased from Uruguay) also had limited exports in the first quarter. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13 - lower structural fiscal deficits, and some demonstrated flexibility in private sector labor markets. Moreover, a modification in the exchange rate would likely be seen as a regime shift and trigger new wage demands, and debt burdens may be aggravated to the extent that incomes are earned in pesos, while most debt is denominated in U.S. dollars. On the other hand, the authorities do not favor offkial dollarixation at this moment. They instead propose that domestic policies be strengthened in Mercosur and additional policy convergence achieved, before the currencies are tied immutably to each other (or the dollar). Also, the competitiveness shock for Uruguay needs to be reversed, and dollarizing now would lock in the unfavorable effects of the events of January 1999. 28. The authorities support trade liberalixation both inside the Mercosur and vis-&is its external trading partners, as they believe that trade protection eventually damages competitiveness. The 3 percent import surcharge in effect for the Mercosur block is to expire at the end of 1999. Moreover, Uruguay has been implementing on time the four-year schedule toward the elimination of exemptions from the zero internal tariff on some 300 products. The elimination of these exemptions will be completed on January 1,200l. At that time the special regimes for sugar, textiles, and automobiles would be replaced by the relevant Mercosur common agreements, and the oil import monopoly status of the petroleum company would end. 29. While Uruguay has experienced some episodes of a sudden tightening of international capital flows in recent years, the external vulnerability of the economy to such events has been moderate. Public sector external debt has remained around 25 percent of GDP in recent years, with the short-term portion of this debt at less than 1 percent of GDP. Nonfinancial private sector external debt, in turn, is low at 2 percent of GDP, limited to trade financing and some suppliers credits. The financial sector, however, accounts for some 38 percent of GDP in external debt, reflecting Uruguay’s position as a regional safe haven for deposits.” Most of this debt comprises short-term deposits. External debt servicing ratios are manageable, with total principal and interest flows equivalent to around 25 percent of exports of goods and services. With the ample availability of nonresident deposits in the banking system, nonfinancial private sector enterprises have little direct exposure to foreign debt; moreover, the use of derivatives and other financial instruments is rare, even in the banking system which is a traditional deposit intermediator. Nevertheless, the data on external debt (BOP concept) understate the exposure to foreign currency debt as in Uruguay the domestically extended credits are nearly always denominated in U.S. dollars. Also, the high exposure of the banking system to short-term foreign deposits is a source of vulnerability which underscores the importance of maintaining banking soundness, as well as the need to preserve an extra margin of international reserves in the ECU. The official international reserve coverage of total short-term external debt, including nonresident deposits, is 30 percent; the coverage ratio is 88 percent when including liquid international assets held by the banks themselves (Table 7). Moreover, when considering total exposure to foreign currency liabilities, the financial system is ” Banks’ total reserve requirements are 21 percent for domestic and foreign currency deposits, held at the Central Bank and in short-term Uruguayan Treasury bills. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14- fully hedged (Table 7, panel A); and banks match their liquid foreign currency assets held abroad to the amount of short-term deposits of nonresidents. D. Structural Reforms 30. In this election year, the authorities are concentrating on completing structural reforms already approved by Congress and continuing those that do not require new legislation. A number of services, investments, and maintenance activities previously carried out in the public sector, such as cleaning and custodial services, printing, road building and maintenance, and managing airport and seaport facilities, are increasingly being contracted out to the private sector. Similarly, although the public enterprises maintain for now their respective monopoly status in core activities, they are expanding their operations in new activities or investing in new technologies through joint ventures or with leasing and buy-back operations with private sector enterprises. In this context, joint ventures, under private sector law, have been created in the markets for lubricants, cement, natural gas distribution, gasoline sales abroad, and electricity generation. Also, wireless telephony and data communications are increasingly carried out by private sector corporations. Important laws are in Congress to expand mrther the capital markets (a law on factoring and discounting); to overhaul the outdated bankruptcy legislation; and to reform special pension regimes for notaries, banking employees, educators, and the police and military. As noted, while reforms and modernization efforts in the capital markets have progressed satisfactorily, those to address directly high costs in the banking system (due to inflexible labor relations, overstafling in official and intervened banks, and special conditions to safeguard bank secrecy, even on the lending side) have been disappointingly slow. E. Medium-Term Scenario 31. The authorities presented a medium-term scenario based on real GDP growth recovering to about 3% percent a year and a decline in inflation to 2 percent a year. Some important structural events will affect the fiscal position in the near future and the medium-term projections were presented as an illustrative base-line scenario. On the expenditure side, the authorities assumed that growth in discretionary current outlays in real terms would be maintained below real GDP growth, and that the public sector wage bill would drop gradually in relation to GDP (reflecting reduced employment, but with more competitive wages). Moreover, the 1996 reform of the social security system is to begin generating cost savings in the public pay-as-you-go pension system, leading to about a percentage point (net) decline in transfers from the Treasury to the social security office (BPS) during the next five years. On the revenue side, tax policies were assumed to remain broadly unchanged. However, a decision needs to be made how to respond to the potential reduction in transfers from public enterprises when domestic markets are opened, beginning in 2001, in the context of the Mercosur agreements. Some surcharges and implicit taxes are now levied on the producer side (Le., retlected in the cost base of the enterprises) and passed on in the form of higher public sector tariffs. In a cost-competitive market place, these receipts would be lost for the budget or need to be replaced by specific taxes levied at the consumer level. The loss to the budget could amount to close to 1 percent of GDP. The present scenario assumes an even Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public. - 15 - split between lower tariffs versus consumer taxes. With these assumptions, the pubhc sector deficit would be eliminated by 2002, and the public debt-GDP ratio would gradually decline. 32. National saving would increase from 12 percent in 1999 to 13.8 percent in 2003, reflecting the restraint on public sector current expenditure and the effects of the pension reform and continued GDP growth on private sector saving.” Investment would increase to 15 percent of GDP, as the restructuring of the economy continues and enterprises respond to opportunities for growth in the Mercosur and beyond. The current account deficit would improve to below 1% percent of GDP, with export and import volume growth of around 7 percent a year (twice as fast as output growth), continued success in expanding the tourism sector, and gradually falling debt service obligations. In trade, Uruguay has excellent potential in agriculture and forestry, and in certain specialty lines of industry. Indeed, the substantial investments in forestry during the 1990s are expected to yield a noticeable increment in U.S. dollar merchandise exports when the trees begin to be harvested in few years time. 33. While the medium-term prospects for Uruguay are favorable, there are also policy risks. Uruguay is strongly tied to the fortunes of Mercosur, and extended weakness in Mercosur partner countries would dampen Uruguay’s performance. Also, the scenario assumes that Uruguay will shortly overcome the recent competitiveness set-back through lowering costs in the economy and improving productivity, consistent with increased export penetration in extra-Mercosur markets. Moreover, the countries in the region are improving their domestic financial systems which could imply a gradual erosion of the position of the Uruguayan financial system as a haven for deposits. The necessary transfer of resources to other growth sectors in the economy, such as tourism and services (a process that is already underway) calls for continued cautious policies and a strong underlying financial position with low debt and ample official international reserves. F. Other Issues 34. Uruguay has a good income distribution and low incidence of poverty (Box 1). However, in recent years the authorities have become concerned about some marginalization of small groups in society. Uruguay has a low population density, and environmental pollution is limited and confined to urban areas. The main concern involves water pollution around Montevideo. 35. Economic and financial statistics are provided to the Fund as they become available and are adequate for economic analysis and program monitoring. Nevertheless, there is a need to improve the currentness of monetary and financial statistics, and STA has been providing technical assistance i* Ratios of saving and investment to GDP in current prices continue low in Uruguay and, in part, reflect outdated national accounts surveys. Also, capital good prices (investment deflators) have risen less than other prices in the economy since 1983 (the national accounts base year). When measured in constant prices investment in relation to GDP tends to be 2X-3 percentage points higher than indicated by current prices. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 16- in this area. The national accounts are available with a five-month lag, they are based on outdated activity surveys and base year, and do not include quarterly nominal data. The authorities have started a two-year program to improve these statistics. With assistance from STA, the authorities are also improving information on the international investment position, and are preparing their subscription to the SDDS. The authorities noted with interest the Fund’s efforts to promote transparency and adherence to international standards and they indicated the willingness to work with the staff to prepare a transparency report for Uruguay for the next Article IV Consultation, Regarding the Y2K computer problem, the Central Bank has purchased a new server and has conducted a performance simulation of the bank clearing system, without encountering major difficulties. The private banks generally are in compliance with the schedule to guard against service interruptions from the Y2K problem. The public banks have made less progress in their diagnostics, but are also less computerized. The public sector enterprises have set up internal working groups to address the problem, where necessary, and the Office of Budget and Planning is coordinating these efforts for the country as a whole. TV. STAFF APPRAISAL 36. The gradual anti-inflation strategy has worked well in Uruguay in recent years. The 12-month rate of inflation declined to a single digit by end-1998, and per-capita real GDP growth in the 1990s has been stronger than in any decade since the 1940s. Unemployment went up sharply with the restructuring in 1993-96, but started to drop thereafter (it remains above IO percent), and the external current account deficit was modest. Notwithstanding these favorable developments, the underlying level of economic activity started to slow after mid-1998 and the January 1999 devaluation of the Brazilian real has affected the economy more severely than was expected when the Executive Board approved the new 12-month standby arrangement for Uruguay in March 1999. 37. The economic program for 1999 aimed at reducing inflation to 5% percent by year- end, while limiting the uptick in unemployment, and maintaining a viable external current account position. While the growth outlook for Brazil has improved in recent weeks, the prospects for Argentina have been adjusted downward and the projection for real GDP growth in Uruguay has also been revised downward to a drop of 2 percent. At the same time, inflation is coming down faster than envisaged and is expected to decline to 4% percent. All quantitative performance criteria under the program through end-March 1999 were met. However, the authorities did not meet two of three structural reform benchmarks under the program through end-June 1999. 38. The authorities are requesting a widening of the program target for the public sector deficit consistent with the effects of automatic stabiliiers on the deficit. The fiscal impulse would remain slightly contractionary, as in the original program. The staffviews a small increase in the deficit to reflect the larger cyclical downturn as reasonable, given Uruguay’s modest external current account deficit and the progress in reducing inflation. However, the trend in lower structural deficits needs to be preserved as it has been the linchpin of confidence under the gradualist anti- inflation program. Indeed, the expenditure target under the program will remain unchanged so that Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17- in the event the economy were to rebound faster than now expected, the deficit should be reduced proportionately. Uruguay’s investment credit rating has recently been confmned and the authorities have maintained access to the international financial markets at modest spreads, which should allow them to meet the small incremental financing need without undue difficulties. 39. To preserve the trend of medium-term fiscal consolidation, the authorities continue with their overall cautious fiscal policies. Tax policies will remain essentially unchanged, except for some concessions to those sectors most affected by the economic downturn. The costs ofthese concessions is small and is offset with better-than-expected social security receipts and fiuther expenditure restraint. The staff recommends that the authorities attempt to lower costs in the economy huther and strengthen competitiveness thorough additional tax reductions, say in employer’s social security contributions and in enterprise tariffs, offset by equivalent expenditure cuts, In this context, and while the authorities have adjusted somewhat the nominal public sector wage increase for the second half of this year, the staff recommends that the public sector wage bill be moderated hnther to help spread the adjustment burden more evenly between the public and private sector. 40. By and large, the January 1999 crisis in Brazil left Uruguay’s financial markets unaffected, and the monetary program targets for the remainder of the year remain unchanged. The NDA and NIR targets for end-March were met with ample margin, and interbank interest rates, afler temporarily rising in January, have recently fallen to below their level just prior to the Russia crisis, While these developments are reassuring as they signal confidence, the authorities need to remain cautious with their interest rate policies, given that capital flows have proven to be able to turn around, and in substantial volume, at short notice. 41. The authorities have taken measures to promote prudent credit policies and assure bank soundness and, taken together, these have led to more cautious lending practices and increased use of collateral. However, the staff is concerned that while the private banking system has turned more cautious in its lending activities, the two large public banks were refinancing significant amounts of credit in their portfolio. While such refinancing is a reflection of the impact of the economic downturn on the quality of selected bank assets, it could also provide adverse incentives to fall behind in servicing financial obligations as the economy weakens. The authorities are making efforts to proceed in a sound way, while providing some relief to sectors that had been hardest hit by the sudden economic downturn. The staff, however, remains concerned that the criteria applied to these operations are necessarily discretionary, could create moral hazard, and involve quasi-fiscal operations that are best reflected directly in the budget. 42. While there have been several valuable reforms in the capital markets to bolster competition and improve credit allocation in the economy, the reforms in the banking system are progressing too slowly. It is especially disappointing that the problem with the intervened banks has still not been resolved, and that progress with reforms in the Bank of the Republic have slowed this year. These delays provide the wrong signals for Uruguay. While the Uruguayan banking system appears well capitalized and has sufficient liquidity, it suffers from inefficiencies and high costs-which are paid by all in the economy. The authorities have taken some steps in the right Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 18- direction, but progress needs to accelerate. In particular, there has been insufficient progress in dealing with the rigidities in labor cost structures in the banking system, and banks can be faced with significant direct and indirect costs when entering or exiting the financial system, or adjusting their size in Uruguay. The staff sees a need for more structural reform in the financial system and it endorses strongly the initiative by the authorities to seek a comprehensive financial sector structural adjustment loan from the World Bank, covering all aspects just mentioned. 43. The external current account deficit in the revised program is projected to widen to 2% percent of GDP, reflecting the effects of a deterioration in the terms of trade. Exports dropped sharply in the first quarter of the year owing both to demand weakness in the main trading partners and because of the competitiveness shock with the depreciation of the real early this year. The government has made some adjustments to help lower costs, and the private sector is aiming for wage moderation, intensified cooperation, sometimes leading to mergers with iirms abroad, and by expanding its presence in markets outside Mercosur. These efforts will help the recovery of competitiveness but exports, trade and capital flows need to be monitored carehrlly for signs of a rebound. If the recovery does not materialize, the authorities will need to reconsider the tax and expenditure structure, including wages, in order to promote further cost cutting. 44. The authorities will continue with the adjustable band exchange rate system which has eflectively guided inflation expectations while allowing some flexibility to deal with exchange market pressures. Notwithstanding the weakening in the current account and the drop in short term interest rates, confidence in the exchange rate regime has been strong, international reserves remained high, and the exchange rate remained mostly in the appreciated half of the band. The economy is adjusting, with lower structural fiscal deficits, and some demonstrated flexibility in private sector labor markets. In these circumstances, the staff agrees with the authorities that it would be a mistake to overreact to developments of early this year and the present exchange rate arrangements seem appropriate for Uruguay at this time. A move toward even greater exchange rate flexibility likely would be seen as a regime shift and trigger new wage demands. Instead, the authorities will forego, for now, the planned downshift in the pace of adjustment of the exchange rate band and keep it at an annualized rate of some 7% percent, or in excess of domestic inflation. Nevertheless, this approach gives added importance to the oft-mentioned structural reforms and tight macroeconomic policies which are needed to bolster efficiency and manage domestic demand. 45. The authorities do not favor a move to full dollarixntion of the economy at this time. They first would like to see additional policy strengthening and convergence within Mercosur before committing to a single currency for the region, with or without linking to the dollar. The stafi agrees with the authorities that moving to full dollarization now might furthermore lock in the unfavorable competitiveness position for Uruguay following the events in January 1999. Also, to the extent that a move toward full dollarization is seen as an instrument to help reduce the currency risk premium in the spread on foreign debt, such premium in Uruguay’s interest rates, adjusted for the planned pace of depreciation of the band, is virtually nonexistent, and this benefit from full dollarization would be commensurately small. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 19 - 46. With a recovery of economic activity in the region and a successful transition to lower output costs, the medium-term prospects for Uruguay seem bright. Uruguay enjoys excellent potential for investment and export growth. The nonfinancial public and private sectors do not have excessive foreign debt and external vulnerability to shifts in capital flows has proven moderate thus far. However, the presence of substantial amounts of nonresident deposits, and the intensified competition for banking services in neighboring countries underscores the need to maintain banking soundness and to preserve a substantial cushion of official international reserves. 47. The economic and financial statistics are broadly adequate for program monitoring and surveillance. However, the timeliness of monetary statistics f%om the BROU needs to be improved. Also, the national accounts have become less accurate in recent years, and the authorities have started a two-year program to revise them, as part of a project to prepare Uruguay for subscription to the SDDS. 48. Uruguay is to be commended for its good income distribution and its success at fostering one of the most socially cohesive societies in Latin America. Extreme poverty is low, and there are relatively few environmental problems. The government will work with the stafFto prepare a country transparency report for the next Article IV consultation cycle. The authorities are aware of the importance of being vigilant about the Y2K computer problem and are conducting the necessary diagnostic tests of the banking system and large public sector utilities. 49. The authorities are requesting a modification in the quantitative performance targets for the public sector de&it and the public debt, for the remainder of the year, as presented in the attached table to their letter of June 16,1999, and are requesting completion of the review. There have been some slippages in the program with regard to the structural reform benchmarks and, while recognizing the special limitations imposed by an election year, the staff urges the authorities to persevere with these efforts at the earliest occasion. Based on the policy intentions presented in this report, the authorities good track record in maintaining cautious policies and their demonstrated willingness to take t%ther measures as needed, the staff recommends approval of the program modification and completion of the review. 50. It is recommended that Uruguay remain on the standard 12-month cycle. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 20 - V. PROPOSED DECISION 1. Uruguay has consulted with the Fund in accordance with paragraph 3(b) of the stand-by arrangement for Uruguay (EBS/99/40, Sup. 1, April I, 1999) and the second paragraph of the letter dated March 12, 1999 from the Minister of Economy and Finance and the President of the Central Bank of Uruguay in order to assess progress in program implementation. 2. The letter dated June 16, 1999 from the Minister of Economy and Finance and the President of the Central Bank of Uruguay, together with its table, shall be attached to the stand-by arrangement for Uruguay, and the letter dated March 12, 1999, with its attached memorandum and table, shall be read as supplemented and modified by the letter of June 16, 1999 and its table. 3. Accordingly, the quantitative liits and targets referred to in paragraph 3(a) of the stand-by arrangement for Uruguay shall be as specified in the table attached to the letter dated June 16. 1999, 4. The Fund decides that the review contemplated in paragraph 3(b) of the stand-by arrangement for Uruguay and the second paragraph of the letter dated March 12, 1999, is completed. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 21 - Box 1. Poverty and Income Distribution Iruguay’s social indicators are among the strongest in Latin America. Poverty levels are low and income kstribtttion is more even than in most countries. Moreover, doting the 1990s Uruguay combined economic ilwakation with continued improvements in social conditions. The share of households living below the poverty line is the lowest in Latin America, and has declined from 14 percent in 1986 to 6 percent in 1997. ktxme. poverty (households living &low the indigence line) has fallen from 3 percent in 1986 to less than percent in 1997. legarding income distribution, the Gini cceffkient for Utugoay (0.30 in 1997) is comparable to that in Western hropc (Germany 0.32, Netherlands 0.28). Inequality has continuously declined since the mid-19805 when the ki coefficient stood at 0.39. This stands in contrast to many other Latin American countries, which :xperienced an increase in ineqoality during the 198Os, and little or no improvement thcreafkx. Two factors may help explain Uruguay’s good social performance: f-t, the country’s labor force is well due&d. At 85 percent (1997), eorohttettt in secondary schools is the highest among Latin American countries, md has continued to increase over the last three decades. Second, Uruguay has the largest share of social pending in GDP in the region. Pensions, which form the bulk of these cxpendihues, have more than doubled in eal terms since 1986, as backward-looking index&on (since 1990) combined with a process of gradual lisinilation. Nevertheless, the strong gains for retirees have come at the price of high tax pressure on domestic abor and ftm~s, and have contributed to high costs in the economy. Sources: UNESCO, ECLAC, ILO, and Fund stafT calculations. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 22 - FlGURE No 1 URUGUAY Selected Economic Indicators .“. Source: Ministry of Economy; Central Bank of Uruguay; and staff estimates Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 23 - FIGURE No 2 URUGUAY Financial Indicators Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 24 - FIGURE No 3 URUGUAY Real Exchange Rates (January 1986=100) l/ Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 25 - Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 26 - Table 2. Uruguay: Performance under the 1999 Economic Pmgram -3.100 20.500 1,450 -230 7,355 7.56 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 27 _ Table 3. Uruguay: Public Sector Operations 1999 - 199s 1996 1991 1998 Pr0g. RW. (In millions of pesos) Revenue 37303 49,060 62,130 73495 76344 75,139 TZXes 24,041 32,203 42,777 50,312 52,871 51,925 VAT and excise taxes 13,529 17,904 23,594 27,327 28,007 21,669 On income and profits 4,583 6,483 8,765 11,079 I 2,80 I 12,462 On foreign trade 1,232 1.564 2,155 2,517 2,341 2,333 On property and other 4,697 6,252 8,263 9,329 9.722 9.46 1 Social security contributions l/ 8,421 10,492 12,166 14,285 14,988 15,188 Nontax revenue 1,489 2,145 2,351 2,771 3,017 2,973 Current surplus of public eotcrprises 21 3,552 4,220 4,836 6,127 6,068 5,653 Noninterest expenditure current Wages 3.1 Goods and services Social secmitv benefits other ’ Capital (Government and enterprises) 36,693 48382 31,793 42,868 7.676 lo;876 4,812 6,378 17,472 23,298 1,833 2.316 4,900 5,714 60,819 71,082 76,027 75307 53,383 61,792 66,561 66,409 13,292 15,253 16,039 15,999 7,831 9,163 9,839 9,760 30,371 35,622 38,940 39,006 1,889 1,754 1,743 1,644 1,436 9,290 9,466 9,098 Primary balance 810 478 1411 2,413 917 232 Interest 2,750 3,155 3.998 4,450 4.967 4.952 Overall balance (deficit -) -1940 -2,677 -2,687 -2,037 -4,050 -4,720 Revenue Taxes VAT and excise taxes On income and profits On foreign trade On property and other Social security contributions I/ Nontax revenue Current surplus of public enteqxises 21 Noninterest expenditure current Wages 31 Goods and services Social security benefits 0th Capital (Government and enterptises) Primary balance Interest Overall balance (deficit -) Memorandum items Cost of reforms @ercent of GDP) Overall balance, excluding the cost of reforms (31 percent of GDP) 32.1 32.2 21.0 21.1 11.8 11.7 4.0 4.3 1.1 1.0 4.1 4.1 7.4 6.9 1.3 1.4 3.1 2.8 32.0 31.9 27.7 28.1 6.7 7.1 4.2 4.2 IS.2 15.3 1.6 1.5 4.3 3.1 0.7 0.3 2.4 2.1 -1.7 -1.8 0.0 0.6 -1.7 -1.1 33.0 33.7 33.9 33.7 22.7 23.1 23.3 23.1 12.5 12.5 12.3 12.3 4.6 5.1 5.6 5.5 1.1 1.2 1.0 1.0 4.4 4.3 4.3 4.2 6.5 6.5 6.6 6.8 1.2 1.3 1.3 1.3 2.6 2.8 2.7 2.5 32.3 32.6 33.4 33.6 28.3 28.3 29.3 29.5 7.1 7.0 7.1 7.1 4.2 4.2 4.3 4.3 16.1 16.3 17.1 17.3 1.0 0.8 0.8 0.7 3.9 4.3 4.2 4.0 0.7 2.1 -1.4 1.4 0.1 ::i -0.9 1.3 0.4 0.4 2.2 -1.8 i::. -2.1 1.2 1.3 -0.6 -0.8 GDP (millions of pesos) 114,571 152,449 188,528 218,145 227,300 225,000 Sources: Ministry of Finance, and Fund staff estimates. l/ Excludes contributions that are transferred to the private pension funds 21 Before interest expenditures. 3/ Includes severance payments under the Reform of the State. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public. -28- Table 4. Uruguay: Summary Aowunts of tbe Financial System 6,499 78,822 5,466 88.322 -314 -14,6,2 9qi45 1228 83.687 33,372 3,324 1lnJIS 6,499 12,158 83.687 -13;558 328,879 7,521 14.516 106.842 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-29- Table 5. Uruguay: Summary Balance ofPayments 1999 1995 1996 1997 1998 Prog. Rev. (In millions of U.S. dollars) Current account -213 -234 -288 -400 -410 -493 Trade Balance -563 -687 -705 -762 -775 -772 Exports, f.o.b. 2,148 2.449 2.793 2,832 2,546 2.504 Imports, f.o.b. -2,711 -3,135 -3,498 -3,594 -3,321 .3,276 Nonfactor services (net) 502 560 536 480 579 430 Of which : Travel receipts 611 717 759 695 749 649 Factor services (net) -227 -189 -193 -185 -294 -218 Transfers (net) 76 83 74 67 80 67 Financial account Foreign direct investment Portfolio investment other hvesttnent Commercial credit Net assets Errors and omissions Overall balance Net intemstional reserves (increase -) Memorandum items Current account/GDP Overall balance/GDP Public &em&l debVGDP Gross official reserves (in months of 404 225 539 157 137 113 192 276 174 55 -189 252 -47 -17 44 102 -172 208 18 153 73 209 144 324 -209 -144 -324 (In percent. unless otherwise indicated) -1.2 -1.2 -1.4 -1.9 -2.0 1.2 0.8 1.6 1.7 -1.0 24.5 24.5 23.8 25.3 28.7 671 210 293 164 180 180 415 249 357 98 -219 -244 22 0 0 76 -219 -244 85 0 362 -200 -362 200 0 -200 200 -2.5 -1.0 29.0 imports of goods and services) 6.1 5.8 5.7 6.9 6.4 6.9 Sources: Central Bank of Uruguay; and Fund tiff estimaks. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public.30- ‘lablc 6. Uruguay: Banking Soundness Indicators I/ Dee DW D.% De4 Dee 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 Profitzability ratios 2/ (Percent ofaveragl : total assets) Operating revenue Operating expenses Operating margin from interest from fees 0verhce.d expcnscs (id labor casts) Pre-tax profits (nominal) A&r-tax profits (adjusted for inflation) 38.0 35.5 31.0 25.6 20.4 29.2 26.5 23.5 19.2 14.8 8.8 9.0 7.5 6.5 5.6 7.8 8.0 6.4 5.4 4.6 1.0 1.0 I.1 1.0 1.0 5.2 5.4 5.5 5.2 4.9 6.0 5.2 4.3 2.4 I .2 0.8 1.4 1.1 0.7 0.9 Pre-tax return on equity (nominal, percent) 31.2 26.8 23. I 12.8 7.3 A&-tax return on equity (adjusted for intlation, percent) 4.1 7.2 6.1 3.7 5.0 Private banks, excluding intervened banks 6.6 II.5 14.5 11.4 13.6 BROU 2.5 8.0 4.0 1.7 6.4 BHU 6.3 4.9 2.2 -2.3 2.4 Asset qudity ratios Nonperforming IoansJtotal loans (percent) Loans with qualification “I or 2” 3/ Private banks 41 0ROU and BHLI 8.4 10.6 10.4 9.3 10.7 92.8 93.0 93.8 93.6 82.9 81.1 Loans with qualirication “3 - 5” Private banks 41 BROU and BHU 7.2 Loan provisionsitotal loans (percent) Uncovered nonpcrforming lonnsitotal loans (pcrcont) Loan provisions/past-due loans (percent) I.1 7.3 5.2 5.4 48.1 7.0 6.2 6.4 17.1 18.9 6.4 6.5 6.1 4.0 2.8 4.6 58.4 61.1 62.8 Liquidity rntios Total loans/total deposits (percent) Total liquid asset~total deposiU (percent) 97.7 18.5 103.8 99.9 98.3 loo.4 16.7 19.0 18.8 16.6 Capital adequacy ratios capiwassets (percent) Capital/risk-adjusted BSSSC~S (percent) 5i Private banks, excluding intervened banlw BROU BHU CapiteJ(assets plus contingencies) (percent) 61 Dcpositslcapital = leverage (pcrccnt) 19.9 19.1 18.0 16.3 15.5 31.2 29.7 28.2 25.2 22.6 13.3 13.0 13.4 11.4 11.0 28.1 25.3 22.0 16 I 24.1 54.7 53.5 52.9 50.7 45.3 4.7 4.6 4.5 4.5 5.2 378.7 398.3 432.9 479.4 514.4 51.9 55.7 54.5 48.1 45.5 44.3 Memorandum itcm Private banks share of total ass& BROU and BHU share oftotal assets Sources: Central Bank OfUNgUay - Banking Supcrintendcncy Ii Comprising private banks: Bank of the Republic and National Mortgage Bank: and three intervened banks. 21 Except where noted, the decline in profitability indicators reflects in pat the reduction in the statistical intlstian bias 31 Loans with I rating are highest quality, 5 are lowest quality. 41 Includes intcrvcned banks. 51 As ofend-1998, minimum is 8.5 percent, to increase to 10 pcrccnt by end-2000. 61 Minimum requirement is 4 percent. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 31 - Table 7. Uruguay: Net Position in Farcig3 Currency and Emal Debt and Debt-Service Indicators ,997 10,371 4.426 3,767 659 422 18 404 5,524 895 4,629 1,082 727 355 (I” pcrccd OfCDP) 57.5 24.5 23 30.6 *,,545 12,485 13,663 14211 4,682 4,754 5,275 5.823 4,141 4,383 4,788 5,365 541 371 487 458 397 465 486 486 30 32 33 33 367 433 453 453 6.516 7,266 7,902 7,902 936 830 850 850 5.580 6,436 7.052 7,052 1,363 749 613 1.079 749 329 60.6 24.5 2.1 34. L 1,047 969 L.025 345 222 288 702 747 737 696 345 351 596 222 374 680 288 392 62.5 23.8 2.3 36.4 70.8 29.0 2.4 39.4 Extend debt 295.7 301.4 296.0 323.4 364.9 Nonfinancial public sector 126.2 121.7 112.7 124.8 149.5 No,,ti,,mcial private sector IZ.0 10.3 11.0 11.5 12.5 Financial system 157.5 169.4 172.3 187.0 202.9 Total debt service 37.5 35.4 24.8 22.9 26.3 Rincipal Ii 20.7 19.5 8.2 5.2 7.4 Interest 16.8 15.9 16.6 17.7 18.9 Deb, ,cni.x NFTS 30.9 28.0 16.5 14.1 17.4 Principal 1, 20.7 19.5 8.2 5.2 7.4 lntcrsst 10 1 8.6 8.3 8.9 10.1 Total short term enema, debt (US% mi,,ions) Gross international as*cLs in the financial system (US* millions) 7.1 Liabilities lo tbc Fund h millom of U.S. dollars I” percent of “CW quota Debt srfice to the Fund In muons of U.S. dollars In percent of NFPS debt service obligatiam I” percent of cxpo* of goods an* nonfactor sewiCe* Source: Ccntrd Bank of Uruguay and Fund statTca,cu,at,am. 5,692 6.488 5.295 6,004 20.8 LO.1 6.2 3.1 11.2 12.2 1.0 I., 7.240 7.991 7,963 6,688 7,179 6,979 0.0 160.8 160.8 0.0 50.8 37.3 8.2 0.0 5.7 1.2 0.0 0.8 0.3 0.3 02 0.0 o., li Excluding short term debt. 21 In the Central Bank, BROU, and private b&. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public. -32- Table 8. Uruguay: Medium-Term Macroeconomic Framework Pd. Fl+diom 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 @pcmtIt0fGDP) 12.6 3.4 9.3 12.8 3.3 9.4 11.4 2.0 9.4 113 2.3 9.0 15.8 3.6 12.2 13.9 3.4 10.5 14.5 14.2 14.6 14.8 14.9 15.0 15.0 3.6 3.6 3.5 3.4 3.4 3.3 3.2 10.8 10.6 11.1 11.4 ‘1.5 11.7 11.8 If.7 13.2 13.4 13.8 u.7 13.6 2.6 3.3 3.9 3.9 3.9 3.9 10.1 9.9 9.6 9.9 9.7 9.7 1.2 1.4 1.9 1.5 I.4 1.4 1.1 1.4 al.6 62.5 55.6 24.5 23.8 25.3 2.1 2.3 2.3 34.1 36.4 37.9 70.6 68.7 665 64.3 61.7 61.2 29.5 28.9 27.8 26.7 25.7 24.9 2.4 2.3 2.2 2.2 2.1 2.1 38.7 37.5 36.5 35.4 34.8 34.2 32.2 33.0 XL 22.7 6.9 6.5 31.9 32.3 7.1 7.1 15.3 16.1 0.3 0.7 2.1 2.1 -1.8 -1.4 33.7 23.1 6.5 32.6 7.0 16.3 1.1 2.0 4.9 12.0 1.8 t0.7. 2.5 70.8 29.0 2.4 39.4 33.7 23.1 6.8 33.6 7.1 17.3 0.1 2.2 -2.1 33.4 33.2 33.0 32.5 32.2 32.0 22.8 22.8 22.8 22.6 22.5 22.4 6.6 6.5 6.4 6.2 6.0 5.9 32.2 31.3 30.7 30.3 30.1 29.9 6.8 6.5 6.2 6.1 6.0 6.0 16.7 16.2 15.9 15.7 15.6 15.4 1.1 1.8 2.3 2.2 2.1 2.1 2.3 2.3 2.3 2.2 2.1 2.1 -1.2 0.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 (lnmillicm 0fU.S. dollam) -7.34 -287 -408 2.449 2,793 2,832 -3,135 -3.498 .3,594 364 536 480 -189 -193 -185 83 74 67 493 2,504 -3.276 430 -218 67 -381 383 -387 -160 -334 -367 2,892 3,184 3.473 3.771 4,034 4,317 5,607 -3.934 4.232 -4.507 -4,871 -5,ZLZ 544 588 594 610 627 644 -208 -225 -227 -220 -212 -205 78 85 86 87 88 89 3'17 137 276 -36 612 113 174 325 325 762 164 415 183 -362 180 357 -244 425 42, 431 200 220 230 112 104 101 113 103 100 240 72 72 450 491 250 260 IO4 116 104 1,s -144 ma -324 -114 -124 -124 -124 -114 5.3 24.3 -3.0 17.4 0.4 15.5 -3.4 5.1 4.5 -2.0 IS.2 8.6 4.7 -1.9 -1.1 -5.0 16.1 2.5 4.0 -3.1 -5.9 -2.0 15.1 9.2 -7.0 1.2 4.8 4.0 (InpcmUofnportsofONFS) 3.5 4.0 3.3 3.3 3.3 3.3 4.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 1.5 1.5 5.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 LO.0 9.0 8.0 7.5 5.9 5.9 2.9 1.0 1.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 7.0 8.0 6.5 6.5 8.1 7.0 2.1 0.0 0.0 1.0 1.0 LO 301.4 296.0 323.3 376.8 329.6 307.6 195.2 282.9 274.9 267.3 16.6 17.6 19.7 29.6 18.7 20.7 19.7 18.8 18.1 17.4 8.6 8.6 8.6 10.1 8.3 7.8 7.4 7.1 6.8 6.5 0.2 0.0 3.5 3.2 3.0 2.8 1.3 I.2 0.0 0.0 Funddurgnandqwchws 0.3 0.2 0.0 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-33 - Table 9. Uruguay: Availability of Purchases under the SBA during 1999-2000 Amount In Availability Millions of SDRs Conditions May 31, 1999 17.5 Compliance with end-March perfolmance criteria August 3 1,1999 17.5 Completion of review and compliance with end-June performance criteria November 30, 1999 17.5 Compliance with end-September perfcxmance criteria February 28,ZOOO 17.5 Compliance with end-December pcrfomlance criteria Total access 70.0 Percent of (new) quota 22.8 Annual ~CCCSS (in percent) 22.8 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 34 - APPENDIX I I. II. III. IV. V. VI. Membership Status: Joined March 11, 1946; Article VIII General Resources Account: Quota Fund holdings of currency Reserve position in the Fund SDR Department: Net cumulative allocation Holdings Outstanding Purchases and Loans: In millions In percent of SDRs ‘of auota Stand-by arrangements 114.20 37.3 Financial Arrangements: SDR Millions Approval Expiration Amount Amount Trpe Date Date Aooroved Drawn Stand-by 3129199 3/28/00 70.00 0.00 Stand-by 6120197 3119199 125.00 114.20 Stand-by 3/01/96 313 1197 100.00 0.00 Projected Obligations to Fund: (SDR millions; based on existing use of resources and present holdings of SDRs): Uruguay-Fund Relations (AsofMay 31, 1999) A. Financial Relations In millions of SDRs 306.50 385.03 35.38 In millions of SDRs 49.98 0.33 In percent of Ouota 100.0 125.9 11.6 Percent of Allocation 100.0 0.7 Overdue Forthcomina 513111999 1999 ~~20022003 Principal 57.1 57.1 Charges/interest 0.0 3.1 6.2 6.2 5.5 3.3 Total 0.0 3.1 6.2 6.2 62.6 60.4 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public. -35- APPENDIX I B. Nontinancial Relations - - VII. Exchange Rate Arrangement: The currency of Uruguay is the Uruguayan peso (UrS). Since November 2, 1982, Uruguay has followed a crawling peg system within a band whereby the Central Bank announces periodically its intervention buying and selling rates. On June 24, 1999 buying and selling interbank rates for the U.S. dollar, the intervention currency, were Ur$ll.365 and Ur$l1.370 respectively. Uruguay’s exchange system is free of restrictions on payments and transfers for international transactions and there is no parallel market for foreign exchange. VIII. Last Article IV Consultation: The 1998 Article IV Consultation was concluded by the Executive Board on September 4, 1998 (EBS/98/128). Uruguay is on the standard 12-month cycle. IX. Technical Assistance: An STA mission on money and banking statistics took place in July 1998. The mission reviewed with the authorities the currentness, coverage, and classification of the data reported for publication in IFS and made recommendations for improvement. The mission also proposed a unified reporting system for WHD and STA. Technical assistance in the areas of tax and customs administration has been provided by the Fiscal Afftirs Department, and by having stationed a resident expert in Montevideo for a period of one and a half years in 1993-94. In 1993-94, the Monetary and Exchange AfTairs and Legal Departments provided technical assistance to the Central Bank of Uruguay in the preparation of a reform of the central bank law aimed at increasing the Bank’s autonomy and strengthening its supervisory role. In 1993-94, the Monetary and Exchange AfTairs Department also provided technical assistance on short-term monetary management, money markets development, the payments system and banking supervision. X. Resident Representative: The Fund Resident Representative post in Uruguay was closed in July 1995. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 36 - APPENDIX11 _ Relations with the World Bank Bank projection lending has traditionally been focussed on infrastructure and agriculture development. In addition, in the late 198Os, the Bank began providing support through structural adjustment lending. The first SAL 1987 was aimed at supporting export growth through incentives and tariff reform; strengthening public finances and the social security system; improving public investment programming; and strengthening the banking sector. A subsequent SAL in 1989 focussed on restructuring/privatization of domestic banks intervened by the Government in early 1980s as well as other structural reforms, including strengthening the central bank’s regulatory and supervisory role, improving public sector management and investment programming revamping the revenue collection unit of the social security administration and additional reforms in the social security system. A stand-alone debt and debt service reduction operation (DDSR) was also approved in 1991. The Bank’s recent lending has continued to support infrastructure in reforming public enterprise and agriculture development, but has also begun to focus more on the social sectors, with loans to support improved quality and performance of public education and health. Based on recent programming discussions Cuther lending for infrastructure and the social sectors and natural resource management is anticipated. In addition, a proposed Financial Sector Adjustment Loan (FSAL) will support actions to strengthen the framework for the functioning of the financial system. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 37 - Financial Relations with the World Bank Group (In millions of U.S. dollars) APPEhDIX II .- Commitments (Net of Can- Undisbursed cellations) Disbursements Amount I. IBRD Operations (as of May 31,1999) Sectors Agricultural and rural development, and natural resources management 260.2 245.2 15.0 Industrial credit 34.3 34.3 0.0 Power 338.0 230.1 107.9 Transport and telecommunications 361.9 243.5 118.4 Education 68.0 33.9 34.0 Health 10.6 5.7 4.9 Refinery 24.4 24.4 0.0 SALIandTALI 80.9 80.9 0.0 SAL II and TAL II 145.5 145.5 0.0 Contractual savings 100.0 100.0 0.0 Water supply 22.3 22.2 0.1 Debt and debt service reduction 65.0 65.0 0.0 Public enterprise reform 6.6 6.6 0.0 Private sector development 0.0 0.0 0.0 Total 1,517.8 1,237.S Repayments (includes repayments third parties) 744.2 Total outstanding (due IBRD) l/ 493.2 II. IFC Operations (as of March 31, 1999) 280.3 Committed Disbursed Loans Equity 10.98 7.99 10.98 7.99 Quasi Participation 9.28 7.27 9.28 7.27 III. IBRD Loan Transactions (calendar year) 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 Disbursements 51.0 80.9 173.9 40.5 37.0 31.7 38.7 50.4 143.9 Repayments 42.7 42.1 44.5 49.2 56.2 77.8 69.7 67.9 64.1 Net lending 8.4 38.8 129.5 -8.7 -19.2 -46.1 -31.0 -17.5 79.7 Source: World Bank (IBRD data); and 01s WEB (IFC data). l/ Uruguay’s total obligations to the lBRD, including exchange adjustment, amount to US$477.7 million. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-38- ‘, APPENDIX III Uruguay - Statistical Issues 1. Real sector National accounts statistics have a number of shortcomings, including the use of an outdated base for constant price estimates (1983) limited coverage of the formal sector, long publication lags, inadequate information on the informal economy, and incomplete quarterly accounts. The authorities do not provide trade price and volume indices for publication in the IFS. Both the consumer and wholesale price indices are reported on a regular and timely basis for publication in the IFS. The consumer price index has a base period of December, 1985=100, and the wholesale price index has a base of 1988=100. No producer price index has been reported for publication in the IFS. 2. Government finances Official data on the central administration, the state enterprises and the social security system are complete and current, but there are problems with the currentness of the data on the local governments; there are also problems with the currentness of the financing and debt data reported for inclusion in the Fund’s statistical publications. 3. Monetary accounts Data on the monetary accounts are subject to frequent revisions because of problems with the information provided by the banks’ branches in the provinces. The accounts of the large official banks, the Bank of the Republic and the Mortgage Bank, are available only with considerable delays and are subject to a number of shortcomings, but ongoing advancements in technology are expected to improve the situation. An STA mission on money and banking statistics visited Montevideo in July 1998. The mission reviewed with the authorities the currentness, coverage, and classification of the data repotted. A follow-up mission took place in March 1999 to assist the authorities in implementing the July 1998 mission recommendations for compiling financial system statistics and developing a &tied system for reporting data to the Fund for depository corporations. The new monetary balance sheet for the Central Bank of Uruguay (BALMON), which was introduced in December 1998, and the proposed sectorized balance sheet of the other depository corporations (Balance de Suldos Contables), incorporate the recommendations made during the July 1998 mission. Overall, the mission found that the new monetary balance sheet formats for the Central Bank of Uruguay (CBU) and the other depository corporations contain all the breakdowns of accounts needed for economic analysis. However, some additional changes were agreed upon with the authorities in order to improve the sectorization of accounts, facilitate the coherence of interbank positions and reduce the number of accounts reported as unclassified assets and liabilities. New report forms were developed for reporting Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-39- APPENDIX III data to STA for publication in International Financial Statistics and for operational use by WHD. .- The mission recommended: (i) adopting, immediately, the new formats of BALMON and Balance de SuZdos Confables for all depository corporations, including the Banco de la Repliblica Oriental de1 Uruguay (BROU); (ii) permanent updating of the list of institutions of the public sector; (iii) monitoring and appropriate sectorization of external debt securities, accrued interests, repurchase agreements and financial derivatives; (iv) adopting the new methodology for the compilation of interest rates; and (v) creating a database for the other depository corporations and providing historical data in the new format for the WI-ID. 4. Balance of payments Although balance of payments statements are prepared on a quarterly basis, Uruguay’s balance of payments are only published on an annual basis. The classification of accounts generally corresponds to the recommendations of the Balance ofPayments Manual (5th edition). Data on direct investment flows are obtained through the annual survey of enterprises with foreign capital participation. The coverage of private investment flows is incomplete, particularly as regards portfolio investment and no data are available on portfolio investment income receipts. Uruguay recently started reporting to the Fund annual data on the international investment position (IIP). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicUruguay: Core Statistical Indicators as of June 23,1999 Central Overall Intema- Bank Reserve/ Consumer Current Govem- External Exchange tional Balance Base Broad Interest Price Exports/ Account ment GDP/ Public Rates Reserves Sheet Money Money Rates Index Imports Balance Balance GNP Debt Date of Latest Observation Date Received Frequency of Data Frequency of Daily Daily Monthly Daily Monthly Daily Monthly Monthly Quarterly Monthly Quarterly QwterIy I Reporting z? Ministry source of Central Central Central Central Central Central histitute of Central Central of Central Central Update Baok Bank Bank Bank Bank Bank Statistics Bank Bank Finance Bank Bank Mode of Fax Fax Fax Fax Fax Fax Fax/Web Fax Fax Fax FL?X Fax Reporting Confidentiality None None None None None None None None None None None None Frequency of Daily Monthly Monthly Monthly Monthly Daily Monthly Monthly Quarterly Quarterly Quarterly Monthly Publication 5 1 1 a Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public