DOCUMENT OF INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND NOT FOR PUBLIC USE EBS/95/67 CONFIDENTIAL April 17, 1995 To: Members of the Executive Board From: The Secretary Subject: Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia - Staff Report for the 1995 Article IV Consultation and Requests for a Stand-By Arrangement and for a Purchase Under the Systemic Transformation Facilitv Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staff report for the 1995 Article IV consultation with the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, its requests for a stand-by arrangement in an amount equivalent to SDR 22.3 million, and for a request expected to be received for a purchase under the systemic transformation facility in an amount equivalent to SDR 12.4 million. Draft decisions appear on page 19. This subject is tentatively scheduled for discussion on Friday, May 5, 1995. Mr. Thomsen (ext. 38808) or Mr. O'Callaghan (ext. 38219) is available to answer technical or factual questions relating to this paper prior to the Board discussion. Att: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public. CONFIDENTIAL INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND I. II. III. IV. Tables FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC OF MACEDONIA Staff Report for the 1995 Article IV Consultation and Requests for a Stand-by Arrangement and for a Purchase Under the Svstemic Transformation Facilitv Prepared by the European I Department and the Policy Development and Review Department (In consultation with other departments) Approved by Jacques R. Artus and Jan van Houten April 14, 1995 Contents Introduction Background for the Discussions Report on the Discussions 1. Main objectives and strategy 2. Monetary and exchange rate policies 3. Public sector policies 4. Incomes policy 5. output, employment and structural reforms 6. Balance of payments 7. Medium-term outlook Staff Appraisal 1. Main Economic Indicators 2. Monetary Survey 3. National Bank Accounts 4. Summary of General Government 5. Central Government Operations 6. Balance of Payments 7. Summary of 1995 Fiscal Program 8. Sources and Uses of Foreign Exchange During the Period April 1, 1995-March 31, 1996 Page 1 2 4 4 5 7 9 10 12 14 15 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public9. Medium-Term Balance of Payments Scenarios, 1995-2000 28 10. Indicators of Fund Credit, 1994-2000 30 11. External Debt and Arrears by Creditor 31 12. Proposed Phasing of 1995-96 Purchases from the Fund 32 13. Observance of Structural Benchmarks Under the 1994 STF Program 33 APPENDIX I APPENDIX II APPENDIX III APPENDIX IV APPENDIX V APPENDIX VI Charts Memorandum on Economic Policies Stand-By Arrangement Statistical Issues Medium-Term Scenarios Fund Relations Relations with the World Bank Group 34 55 59 61 63 65 1. Inflation and Exchange Rate Developments 2a 2. Nominal Effective Exchange Rate 2b 3. Real Effective Exchange Rate 2c 4. Gross Foreign Reserves 2d 5. Industrial Production 2e 6. Monetary Aggregates 2f 7. Industrial Wages and Productivity 2g 8. Components of Inflation and NEER 4a Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicI. Introduction The authorities of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia (FYRM) have requested a stand-by arrangement for 13 months in the amount of SDR 22.3 million or 45 percent of quota in support of a program for 1995-96 (see the letter dated April 5, 1995, and the accompanying Memorandum on Economic Policies in Appendix I). They have also indicated their intention to request a second purchase under the Systemic Transformation Facility (STF) in an amount equivalent to SDR 12.4 million or 25 percent of quota. The program was discussed with a mission that visited Skopje during the period January 27 to February 10, 1995. 1/ The mission also conducted Article IV Consultation discussions. The World Bank is at an advanced stage of discussions with the authorities on a Financial and Enterprise Sector Adjustment Credit (FESAC). Discussions on a program that could be supported by a stand-by arrangement commenced in mid-1994 and agreement on the main objectives and policies of such a program was reached by September 1994. In light of parliamentary and presidential elections scheduled for November 1994, the outgoing Government delayed the finalization of the program until after the elections, but implemented its key stabilization policies. The elections increased the majority in Parliament of the parties in the previous coalition Government and the new Government has been formed from the same parties. President Gligorov also won a second term. The Executive Board approved a request for a first purchase under the STF on January 28, 1994 (EBM/94/7). At that time, Directors welcomed the authorities' intention to proceed with an ambitious economic program to overcome the severe imbalances originating in the regional crisis. They also commended the intention to impose a much tighter monetary policy, to restore budgetary discipline, and to adopt an effective incomes policy. They warned, however, that stabilization policies would not be sustainable unless accompanied by broad-based reforms centered around privatization and bank rehabilitation. The text of the stand-by arrangement is contained in Appendix II; the limitation on economic analysis arising from the still rudimentary statistics is discussed in Appendix III; the medium-term balance of payments outlook is discussed in Appendix IV; and relations with the Fund and the World Bank are summarized in Appendix V and VI, respectively. u The mission consisted of Mr. Thomsen (Head), Mr. O'Callaghan, Mr. Kalra, Ms. Desai (all EUl), Mr. Rogers (AFR, Resident Representative designate), Mr. Annunziata (FAD), Mr. Cerisola (PDR), and Ms. Williams (administrative assistant, EUl). It met with President Gligorov, Prime Minister Crvenkovski, the Governor of the National Bank, all economic ministers and key senior officials. Mr. Mucibabici, Advisor to the Executive Director for the FYRM, attended some of the discussions. The last Article IV Consultation was concluded by the Executive Board on August 25, 1993 (EBM/93/115). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 2 - II. Background for the Discussions The program launched in early 1994 with support under the STF achieved a notable financial stabilization, entailing a marked break with the near- hyperinflationary conditions prevailing in 1991-93. From a monthly rate of 22 percent in January 1994, inflation dropped precipitously during the first semester and has averaged 2 percent per month since mid-1994 (Chart 1). The denar stabilized even faster and there was a small, albeit steady, nominal appreciation against a trade-weighted basket of currencies between February and October 1994 (Chart 2). As a result, the currency appreciated by 19 percent in terms of unit labor costs during the first half of 1994, to about the same level as that prevailing before the onset of the regional crisis (Chart 3). Despite thds real appreciation, foreign reserves increased steadily throughout 1994 (Chart 4), to the equivalent of six weeks of imports by year-end. Industrial output fell sharply, partly due to the loss of transshipment routes when Greece barred the FYRM from using the port of Salonika in early 1994, but stabilized at mid-year (Chart 5). GSP fell by 7 percent in 1994 (Table 1). The financial stabilization was due to three measures to correct long- standing policy weaknesses. First, monetary policy was refocused on inflation control, in contrast to the National Bank's traditional concern with enterprise liquidity and sectoral support. This refocusing was reflected in the termination of the policy of ,passively rediscounting commercial bank credits. The attendant deceleration in money growth, in conjunction with a sizeable recovery in the transactions demand for money resulting from the sharp reduction in inflation, ensured a progressive tightening of monetary conditions during the first half of 1994 (Chart 6 and Tables 2 and 3). Second, a major fiscal effort lowered the general government deficit from 11.1 percent of GSP in 1993 to 2.6 percent of GSP in 1994 (Tables 4 and 5). This effort includled cuts in pensions, agricultural subsidies and public sector wages and a broadening of the revenue base through reductions in the number of personal incomes and sales tax rates and a curtailment of exemptions. Third, a Wage Control Law was relatively successful in countering the inherent tendency of self-managed social enterprises to protect wages and employment. Wage increases in such enterprises remained below inflation throughout 1994 and the large gap between labor productivity and real wages that had opened up in the industria:L sector ,during 1991-93 was partly reversed (Chart 7). The stabilization was also helped by a persistent surplus in the foreign exchange market. Imports rose significantly before leveling off during the second half of 1994, but the attendant increase in the current account deficit of US$240 million in 1994 was offset by a sharp increase in private capital inflows, including "errors and omissions" (Table 6). Such inflows were partly due to the tightening of monetary policy. They are also likely to have been the result of a surge in unrecorded exports to neighboring countries, especially reexports of (recorded) imports, Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public25 20 15 10 5 0 -5 r CHART 1 FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC OF MACEDONIA INFLATION and EXCHANGE RATE DEVELOPMENTS Monthly Percent Changes s95 I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I OCT NOV DEC JAN FEB MAR APR MAY JUN JUL AUG SEP OCT NOV DEC JAN 1993 1994 1995 25 20 15 10 I N 5 0, I 0 -5 Source: Data prowded by the FYRM authorities. l/ Data 15 not seasonally adjusted Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 2b - Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public90 70 150 130 110 90 70 50 30 REAL EFFECTIVE EXCHANGE RATE ,. Lea1 Effective Exchange Rate j .‘,‘,‘. :‘-. : ‘,: ,: ‘. /.: i, ,, ‘/ ::,::,,’ Deflated by ULC 1990= 100 l/ : r; stal.gra IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIt1III111.tItIIIIIIIt~IIIIIlIIIIIIIIIIIIII JAN APR JUL OCT JAN APR JUL OCT JAN APR JUL OCT JAN APR JUL OCT JAN APR JUL OCT 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 CHART 3 FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC OF MACEDONIA 1 190 1 1 70 50 30 10 0 '0 ;0 9 30 I 0” I Sources: Data prowded by the FYRM authorltles; and staff estimates l/ Trade welghted. The shaded area represents a per-rod when there were large dlscrepencies between offlclal and parallel market exchange rates Are&able series on pa-allel market rates 1s not avaIlable An Increase denotes an apprecIateon Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicCHART 4 FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC OF MACEDONIA Gross Foreign Reserves _-.- Gross Foreign Currency Reserves Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public?89 160 140 120 100 80 60 40 CHART 5 FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC OF MACEDONIA INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION 199 l= 100 / 1989 \ ‘\\ 1990 ----___ ---_ _______-------.* Indprd I I I I I I I I I I I JAN FEB MAR APR MAY JUN JUL AUG SEP OCT NOV DEC 180 160 140 120 80 Sources: The FYRM authorities; and staff estimates. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 2f - CHART 6 FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC OF MACEDONIA MONETARY AGGREGATES Broad Money .2.1..$0 25 20 15 1C 5 L -5 61 5( 4( 31 2( LI ( -l( -2( ~Growtb of Y3 mContribution of NFA eaContribution of NDA -- I I a.---- 31 IV I II III IV 1993 1994 Reserve Money mResme Money Growth mContribution of WA eaContribution of NDA ‘IO .?5 .!O 15 10 3 ,3 -5 -I III IV I II JiI IV 1993 1994 Sources: The FYRM authorctles; .ind staff estimates Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 2g - I I I I I ,” li z Z Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 3 - reflecting exceptional trading patterns originating in the regional crisis. lJ The FYRM cleared arrears and resumed current payments to the Fund in February 1993, and to the World Bank in February 1994, but has made no other significant debt servicing payments to other creditors since independence in April 1992. The emergence of acute problems in the banking system and the labor market and increased concern about export competitiveness during the second half of 1994 were a reminder of the fragility of the financial stabilization. Two problems stood out. First, a lack of progress on structural reforms weakened money demand and control over reserve money growth. u The abolition of the policy of passively rediscounting commercial bank credits was not accompanied by measures to eliminate deficits in large loss-making enterprises that had been financed by easy access to credits. Thus, a failure to lift restrictions on lay-offs, provide adequate funds for unemployment compensation, and initiate restructuring of enterprises, caused a sharp increase in arrears and wage delays. Within a few months, the number of enterprises incurring arrears had tripled and the share of workers that had not received wages for three months or more rose to 30 percent. Failure to rehabilitate the banking sector, in turn, led to severe liquidity problems in banks that are heavily exposed to loss-making enterprises. The largest bank saw an increase in non-performing loans from 15 to 85 percent of its total portfolio within a few months. This made it increasingly difficult to enforce reserve requirements. Moreover, in an attempt to improve their liquidity position, banks entered into an informal inter-bank agreement to force down deposit interest rates. The reduced attractiveness of time deposits forced the National Bank, on several occasions, to provide special credits to enable banks to meet obligations to depositors. While a run on the banking system was avoided, holdings of time deposits declined steadily in real terms during the second half of 1994. Second, the real appreciation of the currency caused growing concern about export competitiveness and the National Bank stepped up its foreign exchange purchases to arrest the nominal appreciation. The stabilization of the nominal exchange rate from October, in conjunction with a slowing of wage increases and an incipient recovery in output, stabilized the currency in terms of unit labor cost at about the level that prevailed before the onset of the regional crisis. However, this de facto exchange rate I/ The increase in imports and in the recorded current account deficit of 7 percent of GSP occurred despite a large decline in the public sector deficit and in real wages, suggesting that the sizeable positive "errors and omissions" in the balance of payments partially reflect unrecorded re-exports. 2J While all financial benchmarks and targets were complied with, not all structural benchmarks were met (see Table 13) and compliance was generally achieved with a significant delay. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- ,i - targeting was associated with some loss of control over reserve money growth as the National Bank found it diffyicult to sterilize its foreign exchange purchases because of the limited effectiveness of instruments for reserve money management. The increase in velocity and reduced control over reserve money growth have caused a small but steady increase in inflation since August 1994. While persistent external inflows and the attendant stability of the nominal exchange rate contained prices of tradeable goods, indicators of non- tradeable goods prices suggest that the underlying inflationary pressures were significant (Chart 8). A build-up of excess liquidity in the banking system pointed to further potential inflationary pressures. III. ReDort on the Discussions 1 #. Main obiectives and stratezv The authorities explained that the swift and sustained stabilization of the economy has generated broad po.Litical support for the continuation of restrained monetary, fiscal, and incomes policies. They were aware of the underlying inflationary pressures and the threats to the sustainability of the stabilization program, and are undertaking two important changes in their economic strategy. First, a significant acceleration of bank rehabilitation and labor shedding from large loss-making enterprises should soon alleviate the acute problems in the banking system and the labor :market that have weakened control over monetary aggregates. The 1995 Budget includes resources of 2 l/2 percent of GSP for this purpose. Second, fiscal policy will also provide support to monetary policy in the form of an increase in public sector deposits with the National Bank equivalent to 1.3 percent of GSP. Such deposits will considerably enlarge the scope for unsterilized interventions in the foreign exchange market and enable the National Bank to continue to build up reserves and stabilize the nominal exchange rate without losing control over monetary aggregates. On the basis of such a broadening of policies, the primary objective of the program for 1995 will be to secure a further reduction in inflation. The authorities are confident that inflation will soon begin to subside from the currently entrenched level, falling to a monthly rate of 1 l/2 percent by mid-1995 and 1 percent by year-end, resulting in an annual rate of 18 percent (December-December). The authorities are aware that this deceleration is relatively slow in comparison to that achieved in 1994. They explained that it will only be possible to reduce inflation to single digit levels in 1996, once programs for bank rehabilitation and for the downsizing and restructuring of the largest loss-making enterprises have been completed. In addition to inflation reduction, the program aims to increase foreign reserves to the equivalent of two and a half months of imports and normalize relations with official bilateral and multilateral creditors. Given large non-reschedulable debt servicing payments in the coming years, Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public350 300 250 200 150 100 50 0 CHART8 FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC OF MACEDONIA COMPONENTS of INFLATION and NEER Dec. 1993= 100 chllgra I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I JAN FEE MAR APR MAY JUN JUL AUG SEP OCT NOV DEC JAN FEB MAR APR MAY JUN JUL AUG SEP OCT NOV DEC 1993 1994 350 300 250 200 150 100 50 0 Sources: The FYRM authorltles; and staff estimates. l/ Services are treated as non-tradeables, and agricultural and Industrial products as tradeables The IndIces are based on RPI Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 5 - and the close correlation between inflation and exchange rate changes, the authorities stressed the need for an early build-up of foreign reserves to ensure that timely debt servicing will not trigger pressures on the exchange rate and prices. 2. Monetarv and exchange rate policies National Bank officials strongly welcomed the Government's decision to accelerate reforms and to place large deposits with the National Bank, and argued that these measures would strengthen the demand for money and the control over reserve money growth. The officials also welcomed the extension of the Wage Control Law, which they saw as the key to preventing excessive wage increases from causing an irreconcilable trade-off between inflation control and preservation of export competitiveness. It was on the strength of such support from other policies that the National Bank had tightened monetary policy in early 1995 and adopted a program for the remainder of the year that was firmly set on inflation reduction. In designing the monetary program for 1995, the National Bank had made conservative assumptions about the demand for money. While inflation is targeted to decline steadily during the year, inflationary expectations are expected to subside slowly in response to this decline. Moreover, while bank rehabilitation should improve confidence in the banking system, such confidence is unlikely to be fully restored before the situation in the region normalizes. In light of these considerations, velocity is assumed to remain constant in 1995, with a seasonal increase of 2-3 percent during the first quarter. Taking into account the build-up of excess liquidity at end-1994, reserve money growth would have to be limited to only 10 percent in 1995. It was this small permissible increase in reserve money, and the limited scope for using reserve money instruments for sterilization, that had made it necessary to call on the Central Government to absorb about 50 percent of reserve money through deposits with the National Bank. This would permit an injection of a similar amount through foreign exchange purchases. lJ National Bank officials also underscored that the attainability of the reserve money target hinges on the assumption that early rehabilitation of banks will curtail the need for special liquidity credits to troubled banks. There was consensus that the objective of a further reduction in inflation in 1995 could only be achieved in the absence of a depreciation of lJ The monetary program is based on the finding that the present surplus in the foreign exchange market is primarily a reflection of temporary current account inflows (see footnote 1 on page 3). There is little evidence to suggest that the surplus in the balance of payments is mainly due to an excess demand for money and an attendant differential between domestic and foreign interest rates. There is thus no reason to expect that the sterilization, through an increase in government deposits, would be defeated by further capital inflows. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 6 - the currency. The National Bank has publicly announced that a tendency of the denar to depreciate from its current value against the deutsche mark of about 27 will be taken as an indication of incipient inflationary pressures and trigger a reduction in reserve money below the predetermined target. Such a reduction will primarily involve lowering of net domestic assets of the National Bank below the programmed target, because of the importance being attributed to achieving the planned accumulation of foreign reserves. In this regard, the National Bank stands ready to impose high marginal reserve requirements in the event that its market-based instruments should prove inadequate to absorb reserve money. Should foreign exchange inflows exceed expectations again and generate a tendency for the currency to appreciate, the National Bank intends to increase its reserve accumulation above the program target, provided that the associated liquidity injection can be effectively sterilized through a reduction in net domestic assets below the targeted level. In this regard, there was consensus that there is no evidence that the persistent external inflows reflect a decline in velocity. The National Bank, therefore, should refrain from interventions that could jeopardize the predetermined reserve money ceiling and allow the currency to appreciate. National Bank officials emphasized, however, that a persistent tendency of the currency to appreciate could not be tolerated as the temporary foreign exchange inflows associated with the regional crisis should not be allowed to crowd out traditional exports. In this case, support from other policies would be reconsidered, especially the need for a further fiscal unburdening of monetary policy. In considering the impact on the balance of payments of the aforementioned monetary and exchange rate policies, it was noted that the current value of the real effective exchange rate in terms of unit labor cost was comparable to the value prevailing before the onset of the regional crisis; that calculations of unit labor cost fail to capture what is believed to be a significant increase in private sector production in recent years; and that privatization, lifting of restrictions on lay-offs, and increased resources for unemployment compensation should enable enterprises to improve competitiveness through restructuring and reductions in excess employment. In light of these considerations, there was consensus that the proposed policies should not jeopardize export competitiveness. National Bank officials did not share the staff's concern that the informal agreement among banks to limit interest rates was exacerbating the liquidity problems of troubled banks and restricting the effectiveness of interest rate changes as an instrument of monetary policy. They argued that many banks do not comply with this agreement and they felt that changes in the discount rate will not become an effective instrument before bank and enterprise rehabilitation and restructuring have reduced interest rate- insensitive distress borrowing. The National Bank will, however, maintain the discount rate at a positive level in real terms. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 7 - 3. Public sector nolicies Fiscal policy will gradually assume an increasingly important role as quasi-fiscal deficits in the banking and enterprise sectors are reduced and the associated expenditures transferred to the Budget. The authorities expect the annual budgetary cost of structural reform to increase as the privatization and restructuring processes gain speed. It is hoped such an increase will coincide with a reduced need for the Budget to support the National Bank in the absorption of the temporarily large external inflows. In 1995, incremental expenditures on bank rehabilitation, redundancy payments, unemployment compensation, and support for restructured enterprises amount to the equivalent of 2.4 percent of GSP. 1/ Deposits with the National Bank and the elimination of all central government arrears will require additional budgetary resources of 2.0 percent of GSP. To enable this broadening of the program, additional fiscal measures yielding 4.4 percent of GSP were taken at the beginning of 1995 (Table 7). The mission was reminded that this adjustment followed an extraordinary effort in 1994 that reduced the general government deficit by 8 l/2 percent of GSP. In designing the fiscal program for 1995, the authorities have taken into account that the tax burden is already high and unequally distributed due to the still limited ability to tax the emerging private sector. Efforts to increase central eovernment revenues have, therefore, focused on broadening the revenue base. Following the unification of tax rates and curtailment of exemptions under the personal incomes and sales tax regimes in 1994, exemptions from import duties will be reduced by about 25 percent in terms of import values in 1995, yielding revenues of 0.7 percent of GSP. u While in general it is the policy to avoid increasing tax rates, excises levied on oil derivatives have been raised by 20 percent since last December. The authorities are confident that this increase will not weaken compliance as this tax is easily collected from the oil companies and the retail price of oil derivatives will not rise above the levels prevailing in neighboring countries. Revenues from excise taxes are set to increase by 1.6 percent of GSP in 1995. Finally, tax compliance is expected to improve lJ This includes 0.7 percent of GSP for bank rehabilitation. This amount covers only non-performing denar-denominated assets. Foreign currency- denominated assets and liabilities of the banks, including foreign currency deposits, have already been assumed by the Government. As mentioned below, foreign currency deposits remain frozen and the Government is incurring interest arrears on such deposits equivalent to about 1.2 percent of GSP annually. Liabilities to foreign creditors taken over from the banks will mostly be rescheduled. Interest payments on such liabilities amount to 1.7 percent of GSP in 1995. 2J Excluding the elimination of exemptions from duties on imports from former Yugoslav republics. This elimination, which amounts to about 18 percent in terms of import values and is expected to yield 0.5 percent of GSP, was adopted through a government decree in mid-1994 and enacted into law by the new Parliament following the elections last November. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 8 - as a result of integration of the tax assessment and collection functions of the Ministry of Finance and the Social Accounting Office, although the projections for 1995 had been based on conservative assumptions about the impact of this measure. As to central eovernment exDenditures, the authorities explained that: the process of gradually reducing wages, subsidies and social transfers is continuing. Appropriations in the 1995 Budget for wages, untargeted child and meal allowances, and transportation and agricultural subsidies have been reduced by 1.3 percent of GSP. 1/ The authorities reminded the mission that current expenditures, excluding reform-related outlays, had been reduced by 9 percent in real terms in 1994 and will decline by 9 percent in 1995. Outlays on wages and salaries in the public sector would decline by 24 percent and agricultural subsidies by 67 percent in real terms during 1994-95. The authorities felt that there is limited scope for cutting central government current expenditures further, except for a reduction in what is considered excessive public sector employment. They were confident that an ongoing review of employment levels in all agencies and ministries would eventually generate important savings net of redundancy payments. They believed, however, that part of these savings would have to be used to improve, at some point in the future, the remuneration of experts and seni.or civil servants in light of an increasing concern about the public sector's; ability to retain qualified staff. As to the Pension Fund, the authorities observed that pension payments are currently delayed by 11 weeks and were concerned about projections suggesting that, without corrective measures, delays would lengthen to 14 weeks by end-1995. They believed that such a lengthening could undermine confidence in the program. There was consensus that taxes earmarked for the Pension Fund were already very high, and that its current problems reflect generous entitlements and an explosive growth in the number of workers that took early retirement in 1992-93. 2J Having successfully stopped the surge in the number of recipients in 1994, the corrective measures were focusing on further cuts in pensions of about 1 percent of GSP in 1995. 'I'o achieve this reduction, the monthly adjustments to pensions will be limited to one-third of the monthly rate of inflation in 1995 and a number of special pension benefits have been eliminated. Measures have also been taken to reduce administrative costs. lJ Entitlements under the child allowance program have been curtailed by tightening eligibility criteria based on family income; transportation subsidies have been abolished; and the average rate of interest subsidization for agricultural credits has been reduced by 25 percent. 2/ It was noted that the FYRM ranks first or second when the ratios of average pensions to average wages, total pensions to total public sector expenditures, and total pensions to GDP are compared to those of other former socialist countries. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 9 - Pointing to the sharp reduction in pensions that took place in 1994, the authorities explained that the new measures will entail a cumulative reduction in pensions of 33 percent in real terms during 1994-95 as well as a lowering in the ratio of average pensions to average wages from 82 percent as of end-1993 to about 60 percent by end-1995. The ad hoc measures to alleviate the acute financial problems of the Pension Fund are being accompanied by an actuarial study, which is expected to be completed by mid-1995. At that time, the authorities intend to propose fundamental reforms to restore long-term financial viability, taking into account the need to eliminate the outstanding stock of arrears. 4. Incomes nolicv The still weak financial discipline in the social enterprise sector has prompted the authorities to extend the Wage Control Law through 1995. They shared the view of National Bank officials that inflation reduction and preservation of export competitiveness can only be reconciled if the Wage Control Law is implemented effectively. The government officials did also, however, express concern that the extension of the Law is causing an unwelcome rigidity in the wage structure that could have an increasingly adverse impact on productivity. They had, therefore, excluded enterprises with, at least, 70 percent private capital from the Law on the ground that such enterprises would exercise financial discipline. lJ The staff questioned this assumption. It pointed to data suggesting that wage increases in the private sector in 1994 had been significantly higher than those permitted in social enterprises. The staff also expressed concern that privatization often appears to involve buyouts by existing managers and workers and worried that the fundamental break with the vestiges of the self-management system might still be eluding the authorities. The authorities were, however, confident that the hardening of budget constraints was sufficient to justify excluding privatized enterprises from the Wage Control Law. When determining the partial indexation coefficients described in paragraph 23 of their Memorandum on Economic Policies, the authorities have aimed at fully reversing the gap between real wages and labor productivity that had opened up in 1992-93. They are also seeking to restore the relationship between economic and non-economic sector wages to its 1990- level, The partial indexation coefficients take into account the assumptions about output growth and labor shedding built into the program. Assuming that inflation is as programmed, the partial indexation will entail reductions in real wages in the economic and non-economic sector in 1995 by 3 and 9 percent, respectively. This would bring the cumulative decline since end-1993 to 18 and 29 percent, respectively. lJ Last year's Law excluded only enterprises that were fully privately owned. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 10 - 5. Outnut. emDlovment and structural reforms The authorities noted that the prolonged drop in output that started with the onset of the regional crisis in 1990 has not been associated with a similar decline in employment because of formal and informal constraints on lay-offs. The resulting drop in labor productivity had been a major reason for the deterioration of the financial situation of the enterprise sector. Industrial output fell by about 47 percent between 1990 and 1994 while employment was reduced by only 3 percent, suggesting a decline in labor productivity of 43 percent during this period. However, the authorities also warned the mission that official data for output and employment fail to capture what is believed to have been a sizeable increase in private sector activity in recent years. They were convinced that the private sector now accounts for a significantly larger share of total employment than the 15 percent suggested by official data. Nevertheless, there was no doubt that the private sector, starting from a low base, had been able to offset only a fraction of the loss of output and employment in the social sector. Looking to 1995, the authorities noted that the drop in output appears to have bottomed out and GSP is expected to increase by about 1 percent. They also expect average aggregate labor productivity to increase by 15 percent in 1995, mainly as a result of planned retrenchments under the enterprise restructuring program. They emphasized, however, that a sustained recovery in output is unlikely before a normalization of the situation in the region has restored access to traditional markets and transshipment routes. They were also keenly aware that such a recovery hinges crucially on alleviating the uncertainties about ownership and the financial viability of enterprises that are compressing investments. Thus, significant acceleration of reforms is not only necessary to safeguard the financial stabilization, but also to create the conditions necessary to allow a recovery in output.and employment once the situation in the region normalizes. The authorities acknowledged that structural reforms had been delayed but explained that they have advanced the preparatory work that will enable a rapid acceleration of such reforms in 1995. The legislative basis for reforms has been adopted, the institutions entrusted with the implementation of reforms have been established, and the necessary budgetary resources appropriated. The comprehensive legislative framework needed for the proper functioning of a market economy has also been prepared. The development of the financial sector had been impeded by the large share of impaired assets in the portfolios of two of the largest banks, and the process of reform has begun with audits of all major banks and the establishment of a Bank Rehabilitation Agency (BRA). The bank rehabilitation program will seek to: (a) safeguard liquidity in the troubled banks and prevent them from undermining the monetary program; (b) ensure that banks do not extend further bad loans before adequate private control can be established; (c) eventually liquidate or completely Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 11 - recapitalize and privatize these banks; and (d) promote competitiveness by eliminating the largest bank's dominance of the banking system. Stopanska Banka, which comprises 65 percent of the deposit base, is in the process of being restructured. The non-performing loans of this bank will be transferred to the BRA and will be replaced by a government bond. In addition, Stopanska Banka has been split into two separate successor banks. The smaller bank, thus created, has been privatized through a management buy-out while representatives of the BRA and the National Bank will be placed on the governing board of the larger bank. The recapitalization and privatization of at least 51 percent of the larger bank will be completed before end-1995. The Bank for International Trade, which comprises 15 percent of deposits, has already been closed and the process of its liquidation has begun. The bank will be run as a depository until such time as its assets can be distributed to creditors. The Privatization Law of June 1993 established the Privatization Agency to approve plans and audit valuations of individual enterprises. The Law placed the onus for developing plans on the existing management and allowed an employee buy-out as the first option with adverse consequences for the speed of privatization and eventual efficiency of enterprise governance. Also, the Law requires that a minimum price for each enterprise be established on the basis of an extensive review of its valuation. Socially- owned small- and medium-sized enterprises were given until end-1994 to present privatization plans, while larger firms have until end-1995. These late deadlines, in conjunction with a complicated valuation methodology, had resulted in few enterprises being privatized. However, valuation and sales procedures have recently been simplified and this should accelerate the privatization process. The authorities believe that, by end-1995, over 1,000 enterprises will have been privatized, leaving about 600-700 small socially-owned enterprises still in existence. To facilitate the process of denationalizing business premises, the authorities have adopted a Dutch- style auction procedure, with no minimum price, and will permit the use of frozen foreign currency deposits for investment in such premises. The authorities emphasized that the transformation process is fraught with potential social difficulties. They had, therefore, been reluctant to proceed with the downsizing and restructuring of some of the largest socially-owned enterprises until an appropriate strategy was developed and adequate resources had been allocated to alleviate the social costs of reform. Both of these elements are now in place: (i) A Snecial Restructuring Program has been introduced to restructure 23 of the largest loss-making enterprises and the two largest utility companies, accounting for about 80 percent of total losses in the enterprise sector and 20 percent of registered employment. All of these enterprises have been prohibited from borrowing from the banking system, except for fully collateralized short-term trade credits. They have also been required to implement detailed operating plans for the year. These plans, which involve severe cost-cutting measures, will be prepared with the assistance Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12 - of international consultants and the World Bank. The main source of expenditure reduction will be redundancies and, a total of about one-third of the workforce at these enterprises is expected to be laid off during 1995. These other enterprises will either have been placed in bankruptcy or offered for sale to private investors by end-1995. The utility companies will be allowed to increase their tariffs in stages, but only in conjunction with the introduction of cost-cutting measures. (ii) The Law on Labor Relations has been revised so as to substantially reduce requirements on advance notice of termination. A Labor Redeployment Fund has been established to help workers who are laid off find alternative employment. In addition, other elements of the social assistance nroeram have been reformed and expanded, and pension and disability legislation has been revised, in an attempt to provide equal benefits and access across all categories of individuals. The Budget for 1995 provides adequate resources for redundancy payments for displaced workers and unemployment compensation. The authorities also informed the mission that the legislative and rezulatorv framework needed to ensure the proper functioning of a market economy is being put in place: Parliament has approved legislation governing securities, concessions, banks and savings institutions, accounting and financial standards, labor relations, foreign investment, and customs. In addition, a new commercial code has had its first reading in Parliament, and a new bankruptcy code and Laws on Denationalizatidn and Restitution and on the Governance of Public Enterprises have been prepared and will be adopted before end-1995. 6. Balance of navments The authorities emphasized that early normalization of relations with external creditors is essential to unlock the foreign assistance needed to support the reform program and preserve an open and liberal exchange and trade system. To facilitate this normalizatlon, the FYRM has recently accepted to assume 5.4 percent of the so-called unallocated debt of the former Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (SFRY) to official bilateral creditors, i.e., debt that cannot be allocated among the successor states according to the residency of the original borrower. I/ The authorities emphasized that the assumption of this debt has been politically difficult because of the absence of an agreement on the division of the foreign assets of the former SFRY. However, the Government had decided, after some reflection, to assume unconditionally this debt in order to further the process of normalizing relations with creditors. - IJ This share is similar to the FYRM's share of the former SFRY's assets and liabilities at the Fund. The FYRM has also accepted to assume that part of the debt of the SFRY that can be allocated among successor states according to the residency criterion. Such debt includes liabilities that were assumed by the Federal Government in 1989 under a law to unburden certain enterprises from debt servicing obligations. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13 - In preparing balance of payments projections, the authorities had made the following three main assumptions. lJ First, it was expected that the small trend increase in exports and imports observed during the second half of 1994 will continue, except for increased imports linked to larger project-related financing from IBRD and EBRD. The large unidentified foreign exchange inflows associated with unrecorded exports to neighboring countries have also been assumed to continue. These assumptions are consistent with the consolidation of monetary policy, the marginal change in the general government deficit, the extension of the Wage Control Law, and the conservative assumption that there will be no noticeable easing of access to traditional markets and transshipment routes in 1995. Second, the normalization of creditor relations will require clearance of arrears and resumption of current debt servicing payments to official bilateral creditors, the EIB, the IFC, and the European Fund for Reintegration in the amount of US$343 million. Third, gross reserves will be increased by a little over US$lOO million to achieve the objective of increasing reserves to the equivalent of 2 l/2 months of imports by the end of the program period. Under these assumptions, there is a gross external financing gap of US$391 million during the program period (Table 8). 2J In light of the large financing gap, the authorities have initiated discussions with the Paris Club Secretariat on a rescheduling arrangement. Under the assumption that such an agreement would be on terms similar to those given to the former SFRY in 1988, payments of arrears and current obligations totaling US$207 million could be deferred. The authorities also expect US$53 million from the World Bank, which includes a first tranche of the FESAC, and hope to receive Fund support in the amount of 70 percent of quota under a stand-by arrangement and from a second purchase under the STF. 3J Under these assumptions about exceptional balance of payments support, there would remain a residual financing gap of approximately US$90 million during the program period. The authorities noted that the residual financing gap is matched by non-reschedulable payments, of which US$75 million is due to official bilateral creditors and about US$20 million to the EIB. They are presently engaged in discussions with creditors on the mobilization of additional exceptional financing to close this gap. They are concerned that, to date, creditors have not been able to provide the FYRM with support under the G-24 initiative because of a de facto veto by one country. Such a veto is also stalling support from the EIB. The authorities hope ,that the creditor community would soon be able to overcome this obstacle. There will be quarterly reviews of the adequacy of external financing under the program. l-J The projections refer to a 12-month program period beginning April 1, 1995. 2/ The gross financing gap for calendar year 1995 is US$381 million. 3J The FYRM continues to experience balance of payments difficulties in an amount at least equivalent to 50 percent of quota as a result of the factors set out by the Executive Board in the decision on the STF (Decision 10348-(93/61)). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14 ~ Discussions on normalizing relations with commercial banks are at an embryonic stage. The banks have not accepted to allocate debt of the former SFRY according to the residency of the original borrower, and have made a proposal that would allocate a relatively large share of the debt to more affluent former SFRY republics. Pending completion of discussions between the banks and such republics, there has been little interest among commercial banks to advance discussions with the FYRM. In the meantime, all debt servicing payments to banks by the FYRM remain suspended. In the balance of payments projections, interest and principal payments are shown on an accrual basis, fully matched by an implicit deferral of these payments. Hence these flows do not affect the external financing as presented in Table 6. The authorities underscored their commitment to an open exchange and trade system. They noted that the break-up of the SFPY entailed a dramatic truncation of the domestic market, making it particularly important to maintain unrestricted external trade flows. In this regard, they were keen to establish closer cooperation with the European Union and achieve early full membership of the WTO. The authorities noted that almost 98 percent of import categories are not subject to restrictions and that the effective average rate of duty is close to 10 percent. They do not plan to impose or intensify exchange restrictions on payments and transfers for current international transactions; introduce or modify multiple currency practices; conclude any bilateral payments agreements which would be inconsistent with the Fund's Articles of Agreement; or impose or intensify restrictions for balance of payments reasons. 7. Medium-term outlook Medium-term balance of payments projections (Tables 9 and 10) prepared by the staff suggest that the substantial external imbalances facing the FYRM at present are mostly due to a large overhang of external arrears, some of which were accumulated before the break-up of the WRY. This conclusion is in line with the relatively low ratio of current debt servicing payments to exports of goods and services of 15 percent (Table 11). While external financing gaps are projected to persist beyond the program period, such gaps are declining and of a size that, in the staff's view, could be closed through additional adjustment and diminishing exceptional balance of payments support. Projections beyond the program period do not allow for the possibility that bilateral creditors, in an effort to close the 1995 gap, could agree to stretch the repayment period for non-reschedulable payments well beyond the end of the program. For instance, in the case of a four-year repayment period, such an agreement could increase the annual financing gaps by US$15-20 million. Moreover, given the uncertainty surrounding discussions with commercial banks, the projections do not incorporate net payments to banks. A full debt reduction operation could, according to very preliminary projections, increase the financing gap by up to US$lOO million in the year that such an operation takes place and add about US$lO million to the annual Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 15 - financing gaps thereafter. These uncertainties do not fundamentally change the aforementioned conclusion that the gaps are manageable. The base line scenario assumes that a normalization of the situation in the region will restore access to traditional markets and transshipment routes from 1997 onwards. This assumption is reflected in some acceleration in exports and imports and a robust recovery in output. Considering the uncertainty about the need for larger imports to facilitate the reform process, the staff has prepared an alternative scenario that assumes a higher import growth than the base line scenario. While the external financing gaps under this alternative scenario are somewhat higher, they still show a declining trend and will remain, in the staff's view, at manageable levels. A second alternative scenario has been prepared to analyze the implications of a failure to restore access to traditional markets and transshipment routes. Under this scenario, exports, imports and output are assumed to remain virtually stagnant. Not surprisingly, the scenario suggests very large and increasing financing gaps. The three scenarios are described in detail in Appendix IV. IV. Staff Aooraisal The impressive stabilization in 1994 has been the result of the Government's willingness to address long-standing weaknesses. The refocusing of monetary policy on inflation control, the extraordinary fiscal adjustment, and the implementation of a Wage COntKOl Law have all involved a clear break with the past and a courageous denial of resources to important political constituencies that had previously successfully resisted reforms. The Government must be commended for having initiated politically difficult cuts in consumption in the midst of a very precarious social situation; for having persevered with the implementation of these cuts in the face of the unanticipated loss of the important transshipment route through the Greek port of Salonika; and for having maintained the focus on inflation control through the election period. The Government's program for 1995 maintains tight stabilization policies while establishing a much stronger foundation for them through a significant acceleration of bank rehabilitation, downsizing and restructuring of enterprises, and privatization. This well-placed emphasis on reform, the associated mobilization of budgetary resources to cover quasi-fiscal deficits, and the welcome fiscal unburdening of monetary policy, should soon start to alleviate problems in the banking system and the labor market that are threatening the sustainability of the financial stabilization. The staff believes that the macroeconomic targets are attainable, provided that the broadening of the program is implemented as planned. Notwithstanding the strengthening of the foundation of the program, the authorities should be aware that they are at a particularly critical juncture in the stabilization process and that policy implementation will be difficult. Enterprises are accustomed to a history of stop-and-go policies Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 1.6 - and are increasingly testing the National Bank's resolve to persevere with its anti-inflationary monetary policy. Some enterprises appear to have given excessive wage increases, in contravention of the Wage Control Law, anticipating a relaxation of monetary policy and a depreciation of the currency. Such enterprises can often sustain excessive wage increases for prolonged periods despite a non-accommodating monetary policy--through credits from dependent banks, drawdown of stocks, delaying of investments, and accumulation of arrears. The authorities should be mindful that enhancing the credibility of the program and lowering inflationary expectation will require an acceptance of some loss of exports, output, and employment in enterprises that grant excessive wage increases. In line wi.th the anti-inflationary thrust of the program and taking into account the balance of payments position, the staff feels that the authorities should firmly commit monetary policy to a defense of the current value of the exchange rate. The staff is aware, however, that the uncertainties regarding the external outlook preclude a formal fixing of the exchange rate at this stage. There are three areas where the authorities might be more ambitious to ensure a successful implementation of the program. First, the staff would have preferred the fiscal program for 1995 to place a larger emphasis on expenditure reduction because of the already heavy tax burden on the economy. The authorities should also be mindful that their program assumes that the private sector will mobilize the necessary resources needed to recapitalize enterprises after privatization, and that this would be greatly facilitated by a reduction of the public sector's claim on resources. In particular, as suggested in a comprehensive expenditure review by Fund technical assistance experts, there appears to ‘be scope for further reductions in agricultural and export subsidies, pensions and public sector employment. Future fiscal efforts should focus on such reductions. Second, the staff is concerned that commendable efforts to unburden banks and enterprises of excess labor and non-performing assets are not being accompanied by sufficient efforts to improve governance. Many privatizations to date appear to involve no more than a formal transfer of ownership rights to existing workers or worker-elected managers, thereby preserving the decision-making problems characteristic of the self- management system. In this regard, the sta,Ef is concerned that wage increases in this "newly" privatized sector appear to consistently exceed the limits set by the Wage Control Law on socially-owned enterprises. There is little indication that such increases are justified by improvements in productivity. The authorities must monitor this development very closely and, if it persists, review both the Privatization Law and the appropriateness of excluding privatized enterprises from the purview of the Wage Control Law. Third, the informal agreement among commercial banks to limit interest rates is likely in part to be responsible for the gradual weakening of the Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17 - demand for time deposits and the attendant need for the National Bank to provide special liquidity credits to illiquid banks. The rigidity in interest rates unnecessarily limits the flexibility of the National Bank in a situation in which it is already constrained by what is a very rudimentary arsenal of monetary policy instruments. The National Bank should use moral suasion to ensure commercial banks offer more competitive deposit rates. Barring a further deterioration in the regional crisis, the medium-term outlook is in many respects encouraging. The emphasis on accelerated reforms should generate the increased domestic savings and investment that will be key to a sustainable recovery in output. Compared to other former socialist countries, the FYRM is helped by a long tradition of decentralized economic decision-making and an extremely open economy. Many enterprises are already using relatively modern production technologies and are producing goods that have withstood the test of the market. The staff has also noted that the current large external financing gap mainly reflects an overhang of arrears and that the debt servicing ratio of about 15 percent is relatively low. This suggests that the FYEM has the debt servicing capacity to justify a temporary increase in the current account deficit during the early phases of the reform process. The staff shares the concern of the authorities that the creditor community's inability, so far, to overcome the obstacles stalling support from the G-24 and the EIB could jeopardize the reform process. The authorities' concern that these obstacles could erode domestic support for the program is understandable. The staff, therefore, welcomes indications made by official bilateral creditors at the Paris Club meeting in February 1995 that they would, in view of the special circumstances facing the FYRM, be willing to consider a repayment period for post-cut-off date arrears that extend beyond the period of a Fund stand-by arrangement. Provided that such an arrangement will not risk jeopardizing the prospect for support from official export credit agencies, the initiative of the Paris Club will be key to securing sufficient financing assurances under the stand-by arrangement. It would be unwise, however, to ignore the considerable risk to the progr=, and to the FYRM's capacity to repay foreign debt, arising from the regional crisis. A further loss of traditional markets and transshipment routes could entail adverse shocks to the economy that would seriously test the social and political cohesiveness of the country. The staff believes, however, that the risk to the Fund is relatively modest considering the relatively low outstanding use of Fund resources of 28 percent of quota, the relatively low debt service ratio, and the targeted build-up of reserves. Projected repurchases and charges are expected to peak at only 1 l/2 percent of exports, equivalent to about 33 percent of quota, by the year 2000. Should the regional crisis persist, further use of Fund resources, beyond those requested by the authorities in the Letter shown in Appendix I, would have to involve a careful analysis of the associated risks. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 18 - Overall, the proposed program is in line with the main policy recommendations previously made by the Executive Board and the staff. The notable stabilization achieved to date and the strong resolve to persevere with the adjustment effort that the authorities demonstrated in 1994 augur well for a sustained implementation of the key policies and attainment of the main objectives of the 1995 program. The staff considers the program to be fully deserving of the Fund's support. Although the FYRM continues to avail itself of the transitional arrangements under Article XXV, the staff is not aware of any exchange restrictions on the payments and transfers of current international transactions, either maintained under Article XIV, or subject to approval under Article VIII. The authorities have expressed their readiness to accept the obligations of Article VIII once the external circumstances permit. The staff proposes that the next Article IV Consultation with the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia take place on the standard 12-month consultation cycle. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 19 - Proposed Decisions The following draft decisions are proposed for adoption by the Executive Board: A. Reauest for a Stand-Bv Arrangement 1. The Government of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia has requested a stand-by arrangement in an amount equivalent to SDR 22.3 million for a period of 13 months from May 5, 1995. 2. The Fund approves the stand-by arrangement as set forth in EBS/95/67. B. Purchase under Svstemic Transformation Facility 1. The Fund has received a request by the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia for a purchase equivalent to SDR 12.4 million under the Systemic Transformation Facility (Decision No. 10348-(93/61) STF). 2. The Fund approves the purchase in accordance with the request. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 20 - Table 1. FYRM: Main Economic Indicator8 - 1991 1992 1993 1994 1994: 1995 STF Est. Proj. Prog. Real GSP Industrial production GSP deflator Retail prices (December over December) Unemployment rate (average) A/ -10.7 -13.1 -15.7 -8.0 -7.2 0.8 -17.2 -16.1 -15.9 -7.0 -10.5 -- 130.9 1.528.2 428.5 156.0 122.6 22.0 114.9 1.935.3 229.5 70.0 55.0 19.2 19.8 20.0 . . . . . . 17.8 . . . @~lic finance (Percent of GSP) General &overnment balance -3.6 -7.2 -11.1 -6.6 -2.6 -1.8 General government expenditures 40.4 36.1 44.3 48.0 45.4 44.3 General &overnment revenues 36.8 28.9 33.2 41.4 42.7 42.6 Central government balance z/ -- -5.6 -7.1 -4.0 -2.2 -0.9 Central &overnment expenditures 21 18.2 19.6 25.8 27.1 27.9 28.2 Central government revenue* 18.2 14.0 18.8 23.1 25.7 27.3 knev and credit (Chenne in Dercent) Private domestic credit (monthly average) Private denar M2 (monthly average) Short-term lending rate z/ Discount rate a/ . . . 16.3 14.5 3.5 3.3 . . . 15.2 23.2 5.0 3.1 . . . 1.100-2.355 275-368 . . . 77-81 . . . 250 295 . . . 33 &lance of payments (In millions of U.S. dollars) (Channe in Dercent) Exports i/ 1,150 Imports 4J -1.375 Trade balance -225 Current account balance -262 (in percent of GSP) -4.5 Reserve ratio (reserves in months of regular imports) . . . Debt service ratio 5/ . . . Bchanno rates Official exchange rate (end-of-period): denar per U.S. dollar Official exchange rata (period average) denar per U.S. dollar Real exchange rate (1991 * 100) changes (in percent) z/ 19.7 19.6 100.0 10.5 Selected social indicators Population Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births) Consumption selected goods (in kg) Meat Cereals TV subscribers 2,153 29.28 33.0 68.0 337,035 1,199 -1,206 -7 -19 -0.6 0.6 . . . 1,235.6 509.1 60.3 -40.0 2,172 I/ 27.6 33.6 67.0 345,465 1,055 1,008 1,050 1,100 -1,227 -1,061 -1.483 -1,619 -172 -54 -433 -519 -88 -43 -327 -418 -2.9 -1.3 -9.6 -9.9 1.2 1.5 1.4 2.0 13.1 14.2 15.5 15.1 44.5 y 54.4 40.6 23.2 h/ 50.5 43.3 81.6 . . . 96.9 35.0 . . . 19.0 45.1 43.2 . . . . . . 2,191 . . . . . . . . . . . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 0.9 1.4 . . . . . . - Sources : The authorities; and staff estimates. lJ This reflects the registered unemployed in percent of the total domestic labor force and are estimated by the FYRM authorities. ,g/ Includes transfers to extrabudgetary funds, as in Table 5. z/ End-December. ,J The gradual inclusion of exports to (and imports from) other republics of the former SFRY from 1991 resu:Lts in a discontinuity in the series. From 1993 on, imports include those related to humanitarian aid. ,v Service on allocated debt stock plus estimated service on una.Llocated debt stock (including arrears), as percentage of exports of goods and services. i/ Expressed in new denar (= 100 old denar). ,l/ Based on the official exchange rate. A minus sign denotes a depreciation. E/ Refugees not included (who represent 30-60,000). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 2. FYRM: Monetary Survey (In millions of denars) Period Ending 1993 1994 3 1994 +4 9. 1994 12 1995 ii- 6 ., 3 w 6 1995 9 1995 12 .m 3 Net foreign l ssats L/ Net domestic asseta Domestic credit Domestic money bsnks in denar Government New credit Accrued interest in foreign currency NBRM credit to government Other items net Broad money (M3) Currency in circulation Demand deposits Tim. deposits in denar in foreign currency Memorandum items: Private denar broad money Reserve money multiplier Reserve money Real private Ml (index) Real private M3 (index) -13,593 -14,253 -11,143 -9,873 -9,652 -9,445 -7,150 -6,555 -6,845 -7.330 67,515 74,070 75,705 77,435 45,423 78,900 80,610 82,265 44,740 80.705 81,790 83,310 25,492 61,025 61.985 63,375 87 80 80 80 14,388 23,235 23,375 24,075 11.017 37,710 38,530 39,220 19,248 19,680 19.805 19,935 683 -1,805 -1,180 -1,045 22,092 -4,830 -4,905 -4.830 53,922 67,515 68.860 70,105 2;825 4.705 4.845 4,955 3,315 6,935 7.125 7,275 47,782 55.075 56,890 57,875 5,181 7,530 7,745 7,900 42,601 48,345 49,145 49,975 71.013 57,244 54.250 34,585 72 16,277 18,236 19,665 2,994 13,769 72.052 63,698 62,142 41,599 84 18.152 23,363 20,543 1,557 8,354 72,626 66,745 65,069 45,937 83 19,813 26.041 19,132 1.676 5,881 73,053 76.914 75,187 55,864 78 21,231 34,555 19.323 1,727 -3,861 73,490 77.715 76,795 57,360 80 21,570 35,710 19,435 920 -4,225 72,870 77.470 78.770 59,215 80 22,370 36,765 19,555 -1,300 -4,600 56,760 60,909 62,753 63,401 64,045 65,720 3,044 4.321 49,395 6,234 43,161 3,523 5,704 51.682 6,830 44,852 3,911 6,426 52,416 6,702 45,714 4,075 6,660 52,666 6.550 46,116 4,205 6.260 53,580 6.755 46,825 4,445 6.580 54,695 7,130 47,565 10,876 18,375 18,920 19,335 3.22 3.53 3.53 3.53 3,382 5,200 5,360 5,480 92.6 101.0 101.0 101.0 106.0 101.0 101.0 101.0 12,831 3.65 3,512 80.5 93.7 14.827 3.78 3,924 91.8 101.7 15,249 3.56 4,282 97.8 102.8 15,914 3.28 4,849 100.0 100.0 16,425 3.53 4,655 98.0 98.0 17,355 3.53 4,915 99.0 99.0 Sources : Data provided by the authorities; and staff projections. &/ Stocks valued at constant end-December 1993 exchange rata; flows valued at current exchange rata. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 22 - Table 3. FYRM: National Bank Accounta (In millions of donors) Period Ending 1993 1994 1994 1994 1994 1995 19% 1995 1995 1996 12 3 6 9 12 3 6 9 12 3 Net foreign assets Net domestic asaets Credit to banka Credit to Government (net) Credit Deposits Instrumenta u Other items nmt Reaerv. money Currency in circulation Other 21 Memorandum item: Growth in reserve money Contribution of net foreign amets Contribution of net domestic assets Foreign reserves (in U.S. dollar*) 5,133 9,170 8,880 8,390 -1,751 1.275 -3,970 -3,525 -2,915 2,540 2.540 2,890 683 684 -1 -129 -3.580 3,571 5,899 -59 -1,974 1,331 1,307 2,994 1,557 3,003 1,573 ;9 -16 -657 -754 -3,727 -4.084 3,382 3,512 3,924 2,825 3.044 3,523 557 468 402 6,193 6,316 6,275 8,575 -1,911 -1.467 -1.620 -3,660 1,534 1,415 2,080 2,295 1,676 1,727 920 -1.300 1.694 1,790 2,111 495 -18 -63 -1,190 -1,795 -1,127 -758 -765 -795 -3,994 -3.851 -3,855 -3.860 4,282 4.049 4,655 4,915 3,911 4,075 4,205 4,445 371 774 450 470 -1,805 -1.180 1,215 1,830 -3,020 -3,010 -835 -1,010 -3,870 -3.870 -1,045 2,660 -3,705 -885 -3.875 5,200 5,355 5,475 4,705 4,845 4,955 495 510 520 50.0 3.8 11.7 9.1 13.2 -4.0 5.6 5.8 3.0 2.2 4.4 17.8 lS.2 12.3 7.4 5.8 14.7 26.8 6.3 6.3 45.6 -14.0 -3.5 -3.2 5.8 -9.8 -9.1 -21.0 -3.3 -4.1 119 103 156 163 165 165 218 232 225 214 So"rc.s : Data provided by the authorities; and rtaff.projections. J/ Compulsory reaervoa and holdings of National Bank deposit inatrumenta. 2J Vault cash and banka' excess reserves. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 23 - Table 4. FYRM: Summary of General Government IJ 1993 Act. 1994 1995 Act. Proj. 1994 1993 1995 Act. Act. Proj. Total revenue and grants 23,767 63,157 Central government 13,411 37,993 Tax revenue 11,754 35,492 Non-tax revenue 1,657 2,501 Foreign grants -- -- Extrabudgetary funds 10,176 24,710 Pension Fund 6,115 14,441 Health Care Fund 2,398 6,032 Employment Fund 342 952 Other funds 1,320 3,286 Local budgets 180 453 77,313 49,626 46,026 3,600 -- 27,102 15,619 6,551 1,127 3,805 585 Total expenditure and net lending Central Government Current expenditures Capital expenditures Reserves Extrabudgetary funds Pension Fund Health Care Fund Employment Fund Other funds Local budgets 31,690 67,061 80,503 44.3 45.4 44.3 17,658 36,843 45,590 24.7 24.9 25.1 17,081 33,187 41,001 23.9 22.5 22.6 527 3,466 4,389 0.7 2.3 2.4 49 190 200 0.1 0.1 0.1 13,852 29,765 34,328 19.4 20.1 18.9 8,513 16,505 17,457 11.9 11.2 9.6 3,556 7,992 10,008 5.0 5.4 5.5 464 734 1,254 0.6 0.5 0.7 1,320 4,534 5,610 1.8 3.1 3.1 180 453 585 0.3 0.3 0.3 Overall balance (accruals) Central Government JJ Extrabudgetary funds Pension Fund Health Care Fund Employment Fund Other funds Local governments -7,923 -4,247 -3,676 -2,397 -1,157 -122 WV -- -3,904 -3,190 1,150 4,037 -5,055 -7,226 -2,064 -1,838 -1,960 -3,456 218 -127 -1,249 -1,805 -_ -- Financing 7,923 3,904 3,190 Foreign financing, net 1,332 1,806 3,097 Domestic financing 6,591 2,098 93 Interest arrears 1,751 2,055 2,111 Other arrears 4,840 442 357 Banking system -- -399 -2,375 (In millions of denars) (In nercent of GSP) 33.2 42.7 42.6 18.8 25.7 27.3 16.4 24.0 25.3 2.3 1.7 2.0 -- -_ -- 14.2 16.7 14.9 8.5 9.8 8.6 3.4 4.1 3.6 0.5 0.6 0.6 1.8 2.2 2.1 0.3 0.3 0.3 -11.1 -2.6 -1.8 -5.9 0.8 2.2 -5.1 -3.4 -4.0 -3.4 -1.4 -1.0 -1.6 -1.3 -1.9 -0.2 0.1 -0.1 -- -0.8 -1.0 -- -- -_ 11.1 2.6 1.8 1.9 1.2 1.7 9.2 1.4 0.1 2.4 1.4 1.2 6.8 0.3 0.2 -- -0.3 -1.3 Sources: The authorities; and staff estimates. I/ Excludes transfers within the General Government. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 24 - Table 5. PYRM: Central Government Gporations 1993 1994 1995 1993 1994 1995 Actual Actual Projact zrl Actual Project Total revenues 13.4 38.0 49.6 18.8 Personal income tax 4.2 9.2 9.8 5.9 Profit tax 0.6 2.3 2.9 0.8 Saloa tax 4.6 7.0 7.5 6.4 Exciaea -- 11.2 16.7 -- Import duties 2.0 5.8 8.6 2.8 Othar taxoa 0.3 -- 0.5 0.4 Nontax revmums 1.7 2.5 3.6 2.3 Foreign grants -- -- -- -- Total expenditures I/ 18.5 41.2 Currant 17.9 36.3 Intereat expenditure 3.1 5.2 Wagas and aalarioa 7.6 13.8 Other Sooda and services 2.3 5.5 Transfexs 4.9 11.8 Agricultural subsidies 2.1 1.8 Export subsidies 0.2 0.3 Social programs z/ 0.8 4.1 Pension Fund 0.8 2.9 Other transfers a/ 1.0 2..7 Capital expenditures 0.5 4 ,. 7 Reserves -- 0.2 Balance -5.1 -3.2 Pinancin~: National Bank, net Commrcial banks, not External finaucinS flows, net Payments arrsara Arrears on interest on frozen foreign currency deporits -- 1.0 -- -1.4 -- 1.8 3.3 -0.3 1.8 2.1 -2.9 -- 0.6 -- 3.1 -- -1.2 4.6 2.1 2.5 Memorandum items: Primary deficit -2.0 2.0 3.5 -2.8 Military exponditurea 1.6 3.2 4.7 2.3 (In billions of denars) (In oercent of GSP1 51.2 25.8 44.8 25.0 5.2 4.3 15.6 10.7 6.6 3.2 17.5 6.8 1.9 2.9 0.4 0.3 7.4 1.2 2.8 1.1 5.0 1.4 6.2 0.7 0.2 0.1 -1.6 -7.1 25.7 6.2 1.6 4.7 7.6 3.9 -- 1.7 -- 27.3 5.4 1.6 4 ,, 1 9.2 4.7 0.3 2.0 -,- 27.9 28.2 24.6 24.7 3.5 2.9 9.3 8.6 3.7 3.6 8.0 9.6 1.2 1.0 0.2 0.2 2.8 4.1 2.0 1.6 1.8 2.7 3.2 3.4 0.1 0.1 -2.2 0.7 -0.9 1.2 -0.2 1.4 1.4 2.2 -0.9 -1.6 0.3 1.7 -0.7 1.2 1.9 2. 6 Sources : The authorities; and staff l rtimates. A/ Figures includs transfers to axtrabudgatary funds. and tberoforo differ from those in Table 4. z/ Of which, in 1995, denar 1.3 billion (0.7 percant of GSP) for severenca pay, and denar 1.5 billion (0.8 portent of GSP) for unamployment ccmponsation (including a procautionary unallocated amount of denar 0.5 billion). u Of which, in 1995, denar 1.4 billion (0.7 portent of GSPl for bank rehabilitation, and denar 0.4 billion (0.2 psrcont of GSP) for working capital for restructuriq enterprises. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 25 - Table 6. FYFH: Balance of Payments (In millions 0f'U.S. dollars) 1992 1993 1994 Prel. 1995 1996 Proj. Proj. Current account Trade balance Exports Imports (including aid) Services and transfers, net (excluding interest) -19 -88 -7 -172 1,199 1,055 -1',206 -1,227 60 159 Intereat, net -72 -75 Capital account -162 15 Medium- and long-term capital 2/ -96 -2 Direct investment -- -- Disbursements, excluding IMP (and now IBRD) 9 57 Amortization, excluding IMF -105 -59 Repayment of arrears -- -- Short-term capital -66 17 Errors and omissions 87 61 Overall balance -94 -12 Financing Change in net foreign assets c-increase) y New arrears Gross financing gap 94 12 -61 -60 155 72 -- -- Memorandum items: Current account (in percent of GSP) Gross reserves (in montha of regular importa) -0.6 -2.9 0.6 1.2 -327 11 -433 1.050 -1,483 201 -95 72 1 5 202 -96 -110 71 218 A/ -38 38 -30 68 -- -9.6 11 1.4 -418 -382 -519 -509 1,100 1,162 -1,619 -1,671 197 -97 -100 -196 10 144 -97 -253 96 218 -300 -81 -95 14 i/ 381 I/ 228 -101 194 40 15 131 -72 -26 147 200 12 -101 -101 -- 89 -9.9 2.0 -0.4 2.7 Sources : The authorities; and staff estimates. A/ The large increase in the current account deficit is mirrored in an increase in the "errors and omissions" item of a similar magnitude, partly reflecting that official data on exporta exclude unrecorded re-exports to neighboring countries. The large "errors and omissions” might alao reflect methodological problems in data compiletion, and private capital inflows associated with the tightening of monetary policy in 1994. z/ For 1995, US$53 million of interest payments and USS42 million of principal payments, totaling US$95 million, to commercial creditors are l aaumed to be rolled over and are included in disbursements. The same assumption is made during 1996, for a total of USS89 million, comprising USS32 million of principal and USS57 million of interest payments. The only new financing incorporated in the cepital account for 1995 is the disbursement of USS49 million from the EBRD. The assumed repayment of arrears consists of US8226 million in 1995 and US817 million in 1996 to Paris Club craditors, USS9 million in 1995 and USSB million in 1996 to the IFC, and USSl8 million in 1995 and US86 million in 1996 to certain European multilateral creditors, mainly the EIB. a/ Including funds disbursed by the Fund to data. The changa in 1995-96 refers to gross foreign assets. P_/ Includes the estimated debt service due to Paris Club creditors (USSlO million) and other multilaterals (IFC, EIB, EFR) (US84 million) in the first quarter of 1995. z/ The gap during a ll-month program period commencing April 1, 1995, is estimated at USS391 million. Potential sources for covering this gap are: us. of Fund resources; a World Bank FESAC; a Paris Club rescheduling; and new money from bilateral sources. Under current assumptions about support from the Fund and the World Bank, and assuming a Paria Club rescheduling on terms similar to that granted the former Yugoslavia in 1988. there remains a residual financing gap of about US890 million during the program period. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 26 - Table 7. FYRM: Summary of 1995 Fiscal Program 1/ (In nercent of GSP) I. EXPENDITURE SAVINGS AND REVENUE MEASURES Total impact in 1995 on the Central Government budget and extrabudgetary social funds Expenditure savings Central Government Reduction in agricultural subsidies Reduction in public sector wages Reduction in public sector employment Other discretionary expenditures Extrabudgetary funds Pension fund Other funds Additional revenues Central Government Change in excise taxes Reduction in custom duties exemptions Change in administrative fees - ii 0.2 0.5 0.2 2 0:2 LQ 1.2 0.7 0.1 II. ADDITIONAL RESOURCES FOR REFORMS. ASSOCIATED SOCIAL PROGRAMS. AND SUPPORT OF MONETARY POLICY Increased expenditures on structural reforms Lu Bank rehabilitation -0.7 Severance pay -0.7 Unemployment compensation a/ -0.8 Working capital for restructuring of enterprises -0.2 Increased net deposits with the National Bank -1.3 Arrears clearance Sources: The authorities: and staff estimates. 1/ The effect in 1995 of fiscal measures compared to the projected outcome for 1995 without such measures. 2/ Including 0.3 percent of GSP for unallocated reform spending. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 27 - Table 8. FYRM: Sources and Uses of Foreign Exchange During the Period April 1, 1995~March 31, 1996 (Jn millions of U.S. dollars) Sources Uses Current account deficit Of which interest payments to: A/ Multilateral creditors Of which: IBRD Official creditors Pre-Decsmber 1982 Post-December 1982 Other Commercial creditors Others Official Multilateral Creditors: Disbursements (excluding IMF) EBRO IFC Principal payments (excluding Of which: IBRD Reduction in arrears IFC Other multilaterals Official Bilateral Creditors: Bilateral donor support Paris Club creditors Principal payments Pre-December 1982 Post-December 1982 Reduction in arrears A/ Pre-December 1982 Post-December 1982 . . . -407 . . . -17 . . . (141 . . . -23 . . . (-71 . . . (-11 . . . (-161 . . . -54 . . -10 35 . . . 51 . . . 3 . . . IMF) . . . -21 . . . 17 . . . -36 . . . -12 . . . -24 2/ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32 . . . -26 . . . -6 . . . -243 . . . -175 . . . -68 Comnercial Creditors 3/ Principal payments Suspension of principal payments Suspension of interest payments Short-term capital, direct investments and errors and omissions Gross Official Reserves Gross Financing Gap 94 -40 . . . -40 40 . . . 54 . . . 343 . . . . . . -103 J91 4/ . . . Total Sources : The authorities: and staff estimates. I/ Includes estimates of interest on arrears on allocated and unallocated debt. 2/ Includes the repayment to the EIB and EFB. 3/ All payments to commercial creditors are assumed to remain suspended during the period of the program. 4/ See footnote 5, Table 6. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 28 - Table 9. FYRM: Medium-Term Balance of Payments Scenarios, 1995-2000 (In millions of U.S. dollars) Estimate 1995 1996 Prelections 1997 1998 1999 2000 Scenario I: Baseline Current account Trade balance Exports Imports A/ Services 6. Transfers, net Interest, net Capital account (incl. errors 6 omissions) Medium- and long-term capital, net Direct investment Disbursements 2/ Amortisation 2/ Repayment of arrears a/ Other, net incl. errors & omissions Overall balance Change in foreign assets &/ Financing.gap Memorandum items: Currant account (in percent of GSP) Export volumes (annual percent change) Import volumes (annual percent change) Gross Reserves (in months of imports) Debt service, (in percent of exports of goods and services) z/ External debt, (in percent of GSP) 6/ Scenario II: High-Imuort Growth Current account Trade balance Exports * -382 -226 -519 -509 -366 1,100 1,162 1,271 -1,619 -1,671 -1,637 197 228 252 -97 -101 -111 132 .E 246 -182 48 72 10 15 20 144 131 108 -97 -72 -56 -239 -26 -- 314 347 174 -286 12 22 -95 -101 -70 381 89 so -9.9 0.0 0.0 2.0 14.8 29.5 -418 -519 -1,100 -8.4 -5.0 -5.6 -4.7 -4.0 4.1 7.4 8.8 9.7 9.8 3.5 6.3 7.3 5.6 6.1 2.7 3.3 3.5 3.9 4.3 12.9 10.7 10.9 9.3 9.2 29.8 30.2 30.5 31.5 32.1 -390 -516 1,162 -1,679 228 -102 395 48 15 131 -72 -26 347 4 -101 97 -271 -406 1,271 -1,676 250 -115 275 72 20 108 -56 -- Imports L/ -1,619 Services 6 Transfers, net Interest, net Capital account (incl. errors 6 omissions) Medium- and long-term capital, net Direct investment Disbursements 21 Amortisation 21 Repayment of arrears a/ Other, net incl. errors 6 omissions 197 -97 132 -182 10 144 -97 -239 314 -286 -95 j8l& -327 -295 -467 -438 1,411 1,581 -1,878 -2,019 262 272 -122 -128 293 316 79 85 30 30 120 111 -71 -56 -- -- 214 231 -34 21 -73 -118 108 24 -276 -422 1,774 -2,196 280 -133 328 88 30 125 -67 -- Overall balance Change in foreign assets i/ Financing gap 203 2 -70 66 241 53 -151 23 Memorandum items: Current account (in percent of GSP) Export volumes (annual percent change) Import volumes (annual percent change) Reserve ratio (in months of imports) Debt service (in percent of exports -9.9 -8.6 -6.0 -7.2 -6.5 -6.1 0.0 4.1 7.4 8.8 9.7 9.8 0.0 4.0 8.4 8.7 5.6 6.1 2.0 2.7 3.2 3.4 3.7 4.2 of goods and services) J/ 14.8 13.0 10.8 11.1 9.7 9.7 External debt (in percent of GSP) a/ 29.5 30.0 30.8 31.8 33.3 34.7 -253 -212 -401 -367 1,411 1,580 -1,812 -1,947 264 273 -116 -118 259 268 79 86 30 30 120 111 -71 -56 -- -- 180 183 a 56 -73 -118 67 62 -183 -345 1,773 -2,118 282 -120 281 90 30 125 -65 -- 191 ss -151 53 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 29 - Table 9 (concluded). FYRM: Medium-Term Balance of Payments Scenarios, 1995-2000 (In millions of U.S. dollars) Estimate 1995 Projections 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 Scenario III: Status Quo Current account Trade balance Exports Imports A/ Services & Transfers, net Interest, net Capital account (incl. errors 6 omissions) Medium- and long-term capital, net Direct investment Disbursements g/ Amortisation 2/ Repayment of arrears 3/ Other, net incl. errors & omissions Overall balance Change in foreign assets A/ Financing gap Memorandum items: -418 -519 1,100 -1,619 197 -97 132 -182 10 144 -97 -239 314 Current account (in percent of GSP) -9.9 Export volumes (annual percent change) 0.0 Import volumes (annual percent change) 0.0 Gross Reserves (in months of imports) 2.0 Debt service (in percent of exports of goods and services1 5/ 14.8 External debt (in percent of GSP) a/ 29.5 -393 -518 1,153 -1,671 228 -103 393 48 15 131 -72 -26 345 -8.9 -6.1 -7.3 -8.1 -9.4 3.0 2.0 2.0 2.2 2.2 3.5 3.5 3.0 3.2 3.2 2.7 2.9 2.9 3.0 3.0 13.1 11.3 12.5 11.6 12.7 30.9 32.0 34.3 37.6 41.5 -269 -323 -399 -454 1,197 1,245 -1,596 -1,699 243 251 -112 -120 236 244 72 74 20 25 108 120 -56 -71 -- -- 164 171 -33 -79 -15 -23 -358 -414 -485 -532 1,299 1,357 -1,785 -1,889 255 257 -129 -139 258 274 80 89 25 30 111 125 -56 -67 -- -- 178 185 -100 -140 -43 -46 143 &3J Sources: Data and estimates provided by the authorities; and staff projections. L/ Including imports for humanitarian purposes and projects, which average USS70.-80 million annually. The projection for regular imports in 1997 has bean adjusted downwards by approximately 8 percent of the 1994 estimate.to eliminate the effect on unrecorded re-exports khich are not included in the official data. 2/ Excluding the IMF. 3/ Figure for 1995 includes estimated repayments, net of new arrears accumulated during the first quarter (USS14 million), and therefore'differs from those presented in Table 6. b/ Increase denoted by a minus sign; from 1997 on including repurchases to the IMF. 5/ Estimated debt service on allocated and unallocated debt based on a working assumption regarding the FYRM's share of the unallocated debt of the former SFRY, which is calculated on the basis of the key used to divide assets and liabilities in the Fund. The repayment of arrears in 1995 and 1996 is not included. The figures differ from those in Table 1 because of the exclusion of debt service to the IMF. 6/ Estimated stock of debt including arrears, penalty interest, and incorporating a working assumption regarding the FYRM's share of the unallocated debt of the former SFRY which is calculated on the basis of the Fund key. The data exclude debt to the Fund. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 30 - Table 10. FYRM: Indicators of Fund Credit, 1994-2000 L/ 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 Outstanding Fund credit relative to: Quota Exports Reserves 2/ Total external debt u Fund charges and repurchases relative to: Quota Exports Reserves u Total external debt w Memorandum items: Fund purchases Fund repurchases Fund charges SDR/US$ exchange rate 27.8 75.8 94.8 94.2 89.3 64.1 35.7 1.9 5.0 5.9 5.4 4.6 3.0 1.5 13.4 26.5 23.4 18.7 14.8 8.4 3.7 1.8 4.3 4.9 4.4 3.8 2.5 1.2 3.9 5.3 9.3 9.6 13.5 32.8 33.3 0.3 0.4 0.6 0.6 0.7 1.5 1.4 1.9 1.9 2.3 1.9 2.2 4.3 3.4 0.3 0.3 0.5 0.5 0.6 1.3 1.2 17.4 1.4 1.3 1.43 (In nercent) (In millions of U.S. dollars) 36;l 14.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 1.1 0.9 0.4 3.4 18.2 20.7 2.8 5.8 6.6 6.4 5.6 3.5 1.46 1.46 1.46 1.46 1.47 1.47 Source: Staff estimates. lJ Assuming purchases of SDR 12.4 million under the STF in April 1995 and purchases of SDR 22.3 million under an SBA during 1995-96. The projections from 1997 on are based on the baseline scenario presented in Table 9. u Net international reserves. 2/ Estimated stock of debt, including a working assumption regarding the FYRM's share of the unallocated debt of the former SFRY calculated on the basis of the Fund key. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 31 - Table 11. FYEM: External Debt and Arrears by Creditor lJ as of December 31, 1994 (In millions of U.S. dollars) Stock of Stock of Arrears Debt u Principal Interest J/ Total Official creditors 487 Multilateral creditors 221 IMF 20 IBRD/IDA 133 IFC 9 EIB 53 EFE 7 Bilateral creditors 4/ 266 161 40 201 Paris Club pre-cut-off 207 115 31 146 Paris Club post-cut-off 59 46 9 55 Private creditors 448 32 113 145 Commercial banks w 394 -- 102 102 EUROFIMA 30 8 5 13 Other creditors 24 23 7 30 Total (in percent of export of goods and services) 936 207 169 376 76.0 16.9 13.8 30.7 176 15 -- -- 8 4 3 56 16 -- -- 2 13 1 232 31 -- -- 10 17 4 Sources: Data provided by authorities; and staff estimates. IJ Estimated medium- and long-term debt only. The Fund quota key, which allocated 5.4 percent of the assets and liabilities of the former SFEY, has been used to obtain an estimate of the FYEM's share of the unallocated debt and is included in the total stock. 2J Including principal and regular interest in arrears, excluding penalty interest on arrears. z/ Excluding penalty interest on arrears. 4J Including debt guaranteed/insured by government/government agencies only. 5J The debt stock and debt service figures are adjusted for estimated repurchases of debt by the NBY, the National Bank of the FYRM and enterprises during 1990-91. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 32 - Table 12. FYRM: Proposed Phasing of 1995-96 Purchases from the Fund (In millions of SDRs) Credit Tranches STF Purchase on approval 2.5 12.4 Based on end-June 1995 performance criteria 5.0 Based on end-September 1995 performance criteria and completion of first review 5.0 Based on end-December 1995 performance criteria 5.0 -- Based on end-March 1996 performance criteria 5.0 -- Source: Staff estimates. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 33 - Table 13. FYRM: Observance of Structural Benchmarks Under the 1994 STF Program Structural Benchmarks Complete actuarial study of Pension Fund, implement recommendations Review the unemployment compensation system with a view to eliminating disincentives to labor-shedding by enterprises Introduce global personal income tax with progressive rates Submission of plans for privatization by at least 150 enterprises Complete review of ownership status of at least 150 enterprises partially privatized under the former law on Social Capital Complete external, comprehensive audits of the two largest troubled banks in preparation for rehabilitation Complete a review of outstanding liabilities to official creditors, in order to determine payments to be collected by the Government from liable enterprises Produce and publish a monetary survey, and external trade statistics, on a regular monthly basis ProPress Ongoing No comprehensive review undertaken Achieved Achieved Achieved Achieved Achieved Produced but not yet published Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 34 - APPENDIX I April 5, 1995 Dear Mr. Camdessus: The robust financial stabilization under our 1994 economic program has created the conditions necessary to embark on a more comprehensive stabilization and reform program. As described in the attached Memorandum on Economic Policies, we have recently started implementing such a comprehensive program. In support of it, we hereby request on behalf of the Government of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia a 13-month stand-by arrangement in the amount of SDR 22.3 million and we also intend to make a request for a second purchase under the Systemic Transformation Facility of SDR 12.4 million. In order to advance the process of normalizing relations with external creditors, we have informed the Paris Club Secretariat of our willingness: (i) to assume a share of the debt of the fo,tmer Yugoslavia to official bilateral creditors as defined in paragraph 37 of the Memorandum; (ii) to accept the same rescheduling terms for both the allocated and unallocated debt of the former Yugoslavia; and (iii) not to make these agreements contingent upon a resolution of the issue on the division of the foreign assets of the former Yugoslavia. The legislation necessary for our assumption of debt of the former Yugoslavia to official bilateral creditors has already been adopted and Parliament has also approved the 1995 Budget referred to in paragraphs 14 to 18 of the Memorandum, the changes to the Pension Law referred to in paragraph 20, the Wage Control Law for 1995 referred to in paragraph 23, and the legislation necessary to initiate the rehabilitation of banks and the restructuring of enterprises referred to in paragraphs 27-32. The Board of Governors of the National Bank has approved the monetary program for 1995 described in paragraphs 7 to 13. We believe that the policies and measures described in the attached Memorandum are sufficient to achieve the objectives established for our program, but we will take additional measures and seek new understandings with the Fund, if necessary, to keep the program on track. The Government of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia will remain in close consultation with the Fund in accordance with the Fund's policies on such consultations and will provide the Fund with all information that it requests to assess implementation of the program. The program will be reviewed with the Fund before September 30, 1995. At the time of this review, the performance criteria for end-December 1995 and end-March 1996 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 35 - APPENDIX I will be established. We understand that progress towards normalizing our relations with foreign creditors, and securing external financing for the program, will be reviewed prior to each purchase under the stand-by arrangement. Sincerely, /s/ Dr. Jane Miljovski Minister of Finance Ministry of Finance /s/ M.A. Borko Stanoevski Governor of the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicAPPENDIX I Memorandum of the Government of the former Yugoslav ReDublic of Macedonia on Economic Policies 1. The economic program adopted by the Government of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia (FYRM) in January 1994, with support from the Fund"s Systemic Transformation Facility, has achfeved an unexpectedly rapid and sustained financial stabilization. From a situation of near hyper-inflation in 1992-93, inflation dropped sharply before becoming entrenched at about: 2 percent per month in mid-1994. The annual rate of 55 percent was well below the original target for 1994 of 70 percent (December-December). Large and persistent foreign exchange inflows emerged soon after the adoption of the program, and the denar has been stable against the deutsche mark since February 1994 while the increase in foreign exchange reserves of the National Bank has been higher-than-programmed. Additional shocks associated with the regional crisis caused output to contract further during the first half of 1994 before stagnating around mid-year. For the year as a whole, output declined by 7 percent. 2. The significant financial stabilization has been a result of three major changes in economic policies. First, the National Bank took control over reserve money growth in early 1994 when it abolished its long-standing policy of passively rediscounting commercial bank credits. This change reflects a fundamental refocusing of monetary policy on inflation reduction, away from sectoral support and concern about enterprise liquidity. Second, an extraordinary fiscal effort at the beginning of 1994, followed by additional corrective measures at mid-year, reduced the general government deficit to 2.6 percent of GSP in 1994, compared to 11.1 percent in 1993. This adjustment was based on curtailment of generous entitlement programs and broadening of the tax base through a reduction in exemptions and the unification of tax rates. Third, a wage control law was successful in restraining the tendency of self-managed enterprises to protect real wages. Nominal wage increases were kept well below the rate of inflation and the large gap between real wages and labor productivity that had opened up in 1992-93 narrowed substantially. 3. Two important constraints on stabilization policies became evident during the second half of 1994. First, the admittedly slow progress in structural reforms has posed a growing threat to the stabilization gains. The largest bank, which accounts for two-thirds of the banking system, has found it increastngly difficult to comply with legal reserve requirements and the National Bank has been forced to provide it with special liquidity credits. Moreover, the curtailment of selective credits has been associated with a considerable lengthening of delays in wage payments in enterprises that had previously been accustomed to relying on such credits. Formal and informal constraints on lay-offs and the delayed privatization process have stalled the restructuring of enterprises. These developments have clearl:y demonstrated to the Government that financial stabilization can not be sustained without sharply accelerated efforts to rehabilitate banks, privatize enterprises, and reform labor markets. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 37 - APPENDIX I 4. Second, while the current excess supply in the foreign exchange market has afforded a p,otential opportunity to achieve a much needed increase in reserves without putting pressures on the currency to depreciate, the National Bank has increasingly been forced to refrain from such interventions in order to stay within its reserve money target. This problem partly reflects the still rudimentary nature of available instruments for reserve money management. It has also been compounded by a stagnation in the demand for money since mid-1994; following a rapid rise in the transactions demand for money during the first half of 1994 when inflation dropped sharply, the recovery has stalled since mid-year as monthly inflation has become ingrained at about 2 percent. Main Obiectives and the Nominal Framework 5. The primary objectives of the Government's program for 1995 are to achieve a further and lasting reduction in inflation and a much needed increase in foreign reserves. The program's anti-inflationary thrust will rely on a tight monetary policy, strict budgetary discipline, and wage controls, thus continuing with the broad policies adopted in early 1994. The main changes in our strategy compared to last year are: (i> an acceleration of bank rehabilitation and enterprise restructuring to enhance the sustainability of stabilization policies; and (ii) provision of significant fiscal support for monetary policy in order to facilitate the National Bank's efforts at increasing its foreign reserves without losing control over reserve money growth. On the strength of these policies, the program will target a reduction in inflation to 18 percent in 1995 (December-December), with a monthly rate of 1.5 percent by June and 1 percent by year-end. Inflation should be reduced to the levels of our main trading partners during 1996, once completion of bank rehabilitation has given the National Bank full control over reserve money growth. Net foreign assets of the National Bank are targeted to increase by US$60 million in 1995, with gross reserves reaching the equivalent of 8 weeks of imports by year-end. 6. We are confident that the reduction in inflation to low levels and the acceleration of structural reforms will create the necessary conditions for sustainable growth. The precipitous drop in output that has taken place since the onset of the regional crisis appears to have come to a halt and we expect to see an incipient recovery before end-1995, barring further adverse shocks to the economy. However, we are keenly aware that a major recovery hinges crucially on a resolution of the regional crisis and on the attendant restoration of access to traditional markets and transshipment routes. Monetarv and Exchange Rate Policies 7. The fundamental refocusing of monetary policy on inflation reduction will remain the cornerstone of our program. The entrenchment of inflation at monthly rates of about 2 percent has halted the decline in velocity; further decreases can not be expected before the public has seen clear evidence that inflation is again on a sustained downward path. To achieve the targeted reduction in inflation to 18 percent in 1995, the National Bank Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 38 - APPEND.u will, therefore, have to retain strict control over the growth of monetary aggregates. Given significant excess liquidity in the banking system at the beginning of 1995, the increase in reserve money should be limited to only 1.5 percent during the first semester; during the second semester, it could increase by 9 percent. The increase in private sector Ml should not exceed 9 percent during both the first and second semesters of 1995. Quarterly indicative limits are spelled out in Attachment I of this Memorandum. 8. Ihe growth in reserve money will be a main intermediate target of monetary policy. However, we believe that our inflation target can be attained only in the absence of a significant depreciation of the denar. It ,will, therefore, also be an important objective of monetary policy to maintain the value of the currency at its current level of almost denar 2'7 to the deutsche mark. Our balance of payments projections suggest that such exchange rate 'stability is consistent with the targeted increase in foreign reserves. However, should there be pressure on thy currency to depreciate, the National Bank will promptly reduce the growth in reserve money relative to the aforementioned limits. In order not to jeopardize the target for foreign reserve accumulation, such a reduction in reserve money growth would mainly have to be secured through a lower-than-programmed increase in the National Bank's net domestic assets rather than through reduced foreign exchange purchases. Should it prove impossible to arrest a persistent tendency of the currency to depreciate through a tightening of monetary policy- -suggesting a deterioration in the underlyidg balance of payments position-- the National Bank intends to consult witH the Fund on appropriate modifications to the program. In the case that foreign exchange inflows exceed expectations, the National Bank will refrain from any intervention that threatens to increase reserve money above the aforementioned limits and will, instead, allow the currency to appreciate. In the event of a persistent tendency of the currency to appreciate, the National Bank will consult with the Fund on how to modify the program. 9. Given tight constraints on permissible reserve money growth and the limited effectiveness of our instruments for reserve money management, the projected foreign exchange market intervention by the National Bank will be feasible only if there is significant fiscal support for monetary policy. For this purpose, the Central Government intends to increase its net deposits with the National Bank by denar 2.4 billion in 1995, with quarterly targets as described in Attachment I. Such fiscal support for monetary policy, which will enable the National Bank to absorb almost the entire projected excess supply in the ,foreign exchange market through unsterilized interventions, is clearly central to the reconciliation of our targets for inflation reduction and foreign reserve accumulation. 10. A major threat to inflation reduction has been the gradual erosion of the National Bank's control over reserve money management that has resulted from illiquid banks' failure to comply with legal reserve requirements, and from the need to provide special liquidity credits to such banks. Our bank rehabilitation program, which we began to implement in March 1995 (paragraph 27), will eventually provide a permanent solution to this problem. In the interim, we have taken the following measures: (i) a ban Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 39 - on the extension of any new credits for at least 10 banking days by a bank that reduces its reserves, net of its holdings of National Bank deposits, below the legally required level; (ii) a ban on the extension of new credits for at least 20 banking days by a bank that reduces its reserves, as defined in (i), below 80 percent of the legally required level; and (iii) an increase in the penalty interest rate for the use of required reserves. These measures have already had the intended effect of improving compliance with legal reserve requirements. 11. Control over reserve money growth will also improve significantly as a result of the partial transfer of Central Government's current account balances from Stopanska Banka to the National Bank. Short-term variations in such balances amount to as much as 15 percent of reserve money. By failing to exercise prudent asset management and matching government deposits with liquid assets, Stopanska Banka has occasionally been unable to meet the Central Government’s liquidity needs without reducing its reserves considerably below legally required levels. Since March 6, 1995, the Central Government has kept its deposits with Stopanska Banka unchanged, at a level of denar 600 million, and has conducted all payments through an account with the National Bank. 12. The National Bank intends to ensure that individual banks' free reserves do not exceed 3.3 percent of their denar monetary deposits which, at present, implies a limit for the banking system as a whole of about denar 350 million. High marginal reserve requirements will be imposed in the event that market-based instruments can not be effectively employed to absorb such excess liquidity. The new market-based instruments for reserve money management, which include National Bank bills and deposits, should prove increasingly useful as commercial banks become familiar with them. However, until the National Bank's credit auction is fully effective, the existing formula for determination of the discount rate--which sets the rate at the annualized average of inflation in the past two months plus 5 percentage points--will be maintained. Moreover, until improved financial discipline in the banking and enterprise sectors has reduced interest rate insensitive distress borrowing, banks will be subject to maximum limits on their use of National Bank credits from the auction, and bank by bank credit ceilings will remain in effect. The National Bank has announced monthly credit ceilings for the first half of 1995. The method for calculating these ceilings has recently been modified to reward banks that increase their deposit base. As of November 1, 1994, banks have been banned from extending loans to the 25 enterprises covered by our Special Restructuring Program (SRP), except for fully collateralized trade credits, until such enterprises have successfully implemented rehabilitation programs approved by the Government. 13. We have established the following limits, consistent with the monetary and exchange rate policies described above: (i) quarterly ceilings for reserve money, net domestic assets of the banking system, private sector narrow money, and National Bank net credits to the Central Government; and (ii) a quarterly floor for net foreign assets of the National Bank. These limits, except for those on reserve money and private sector narrow money, Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public1 - 40 - APPENDIX I contain provisions for automatic adjustments in the event of unexpected foreign net flows. The ceilings and floors for net domestic assets, central government net credit with the National Bank, and net foreign assets will serve as performance criteria under the stand-by arrangement. The limits are detailed in Attachment I. Fiscal Policy t 14. Despite an extraordinary fiscal effort in 1994, considerable further adjustment is required in 1995 to bring fiscal policy into line with the anti-inflationary thrust.of gur prbgram. This adjustment is necessitated by the increased demand on budgetary resources arising from: (i) the aforementioned fiscal unburdening of monetary policy, requiring the Central Government to increase its net deposits with the National Bank by 1.3 percent of GSP in 1995; and (ii) the mobilization of incremental budgetary resources, amounting to 2.4 percent of GSP, to finance programs for bank rehabilitation and enterprise restructuring. Other important objectives of public sector policies in 1995 include the elimination of outstanding central government arrears amounting to 0.7 percent of GSP, preservation of the policy of non-recourse to the banking system by public sector entities, and the balancing of current revenues and expenditures of the Pension Fund from late 1995. To achieve these targets, our fiscal program for 1995 includes new measures yielding 4.4 percent of GSP, which will limit the general government deficit to 1.7 percent of GSP, on an accrual basis, compared to 2.6 percent in 1994 and 11.1 percent in 1993. 15. We have adopted four measures that are expected to generate incremental revenues for the Central Government of denar 3.5 billion or 2.0 percent of GSP in 1995: (i) an increase in excise taxes on oil products of 10 percent, which became effective on December 14, 1994, will yield denar 1.2 billion; (ii) a further increase in such excises of 9 percent, which became effective on March 1, 1995, will yield denar 1.0 billion; (iii) a reduction in customs duties exemptions by 25 percent in terms of import values, which was approved on December 28, is projected to increase revenues by denar 1.2 billion; and (iv) a general increase in administrative and court fees, which became effective on March 1, 1995, will generate denar 0.1 billion. The increases in excise taxes have raised domestic prices of oil derivatives to levels prevailing in neighboring countries. The change in customs duties is in line with our policy of greater reliance on measures to broaden the revenue base. 16. Our fiscal program, excluding spending on reforms, incorporates four measures that will yield savings in current exoenditures of the Central Government of denar 2.5 billion or 1.3 percent of GSP: (i) entitlements under the child allowance program have been curtailed by denar 800 million; , (ii) cuts in agricultural subsidies, involving a reduction in the average rate of interest subsidization by 25 percent, and the abolition of -. transportation subsidies, will save denar 400 million; (iii) the wage determination formula for the non-economic sector described in paragraph 23 will curtail expenditures by denar 900 million; and (iv) reductions in public sector employment will yield savings of denar 400 million, net of Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 41 - APPENDIX I severance pay and incremental unemployment compensation. These measures have been incorporated into the 1995 Budget, except for the planned reduction in the public sector workforce. All central government institutions have been requested to prepare plans for reducing employment by 10 percent. Some entities will not be able to meet this target because the process of institution-building following independence is still incomplete. We expect that the reduction in employment will amount to only 2 percent by end-May 1995, but will reach understandings with the Fund, before June 30, 1995, on a timetable for further reductions to achieve the targeted savings in the wage bill. 17. Appropriations for reform related exDenditures in the 1995 Budget have been increased by denar 4.6 billion or 2.4 percent of GSP, including an unallocated provision. The allocated expenditures are as follows: (i) denar 1.4 billion have been allocated for bank rehabilitation; (ii) denar 1.3 billion will be spent on redundancy payments related to the planned lay-off of 35 percent of workers in the 25 enterprises under the SRP; (iii) denar 1.0 billion have been earmarked for unemployment benefits for these workers and for the clearance of a small amount of existing arrears of the Unemployment Fund; and (iv) denar 400 million have been allocated for working capital increases in the 25 enterprises following restructuring. No other subsidies or loan guarantees will be provided to these enterprises. The estimated budgetary cost of programs for bank rehabilitation and enterprise restructuring is subject to considerable uncertainty: the total value of non-performing bank loans will not be known until April 1995, when final accounts of the commercial banks for 1994 become available, and the estimated cost of enterprise restructuring incorporates the optimistic assumption that all enterprises can avoid liquidation by restoring a positive cash flow. In light of these uncertainties, the 1995 Budget includes an unallocated appropriation of denar 0.5 billion for structural reforms. Any shortfall in reform spending, compared to the budgeted appropriations, will be deposited with the National Bank, as described in Attachment I. 18. The deficit of the Central Government will decline from denar 3.2 billion or 2.2 percent of GSP in 1994 to denar 1.6 billion or 0.9 percent of GSP in 1995. This decline is consistent with an increase in the Central Government's deposits with the National Bank by denar 2.4 billion and with the elimination of denar 1.2 billion of outstanding arrears, excluding interest arrears on frozen foreign currency deposits. Quarterly targets have been established for net central government credit from the National Bank and for the reduction in arrears, and the limits for end-June and end-September are performance criteria under the stand-by arrangement. These are detailed in Attachment I. The external net inflows of denar 3.1 billion are equal to the foreign interest payments of the Central Government, implying that net external payments are projected to amount to zero in 1995. Any cumulative surplus (deficit) in such net payments will be fully offset through a corresponding reduction (increase) in the Central Government's net credits from the National Bank, as described in Attachment I. Except for this offset, the Central Government will not borrow from the banking system. Central government deposits at Stopanska Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 42 - APPENDIX Banka shall not be substantially lowered from present levels (of about denar 600 million), as this is likely to increase the need for the National Bank to provide special liquidity credits to this bank. The Central Government will incur interest arrears on frozen foreign currency deposits amounting to denar 2.1 billion in 1995. The fiscal situation is unlikely to permit an unfreezing of foreign currency deposits in the foreseeable future, except for certain payments to low-income households and the use of such deposits towards the purchase of social property in the context of our programs for privatization of enterprises, business property, and apartments. 19. The Government will monitor Budget developments closely and, if necessary, take corrective action to ensure that they remain within the program targets. The Government stands ready to implement further reductions in exemptions from import duties and increase excise taxes on beverages as contingency measures in the event of unforeseen developments in 1995. To improve expenditure control, the first phase of the plan prepared by IMF technical assistance experts for setting up of a Treasury within the Ministry of Finance will be implemented before September 30, 1995. Performance relative to this structural benchmark will be assessed at the time of the review under the stand-by arrangement. 20. While the abolition of schemes for early retirement and for full indexation of pensions to the average wage in the non-economic sector resulted in a significant reduction in the deficit of the Pension Fund in 1994, the financial position of this fund remains extremely precarious. Without additional corrective measures, the deficit would amount to 1.6 percent of GSP in 1995 and delays in pension payments would increase from the present level of 11 weeks to about 14 weeks by end-year. In order to finally restore balance between current expenditures and revenues of the Pension Fund and begin the process of reducing arrears, we have implemented changes in pension entitlements that will reduce total pensions by denar 1.5 billion. Monthly pensions will be increased by only one-third of actual inflation during 1995, which is projected to yield savings of denar 1.2 billion, and a number of special pension entitlements totalling denar 0.3 billion will be eliminated. Savings on administrative outlays will yield denar 0.3 billion. The total savings of 0.9 percent of GSP will reduce the deficit of the Pension Fund to 0.7 percent of GSP in 1995. By end-1995, the ratio of the average pension to the average wage will be 63 percent, compared to 82 percent at the end of 1993. 21. We are in the midst of undertaking an actuarial study of the Pension Fund and intend to prepare, before end-June 1995, a plan for restoring the financial viability of the Pension Fund over the medium term, taking into account the need to eliminate outstanding arrears. Given the still large share of pension payments in the social product, this plan will focus on modifications in entitlements. Performance relative to this structural benchmark will be assessed at the time of the review under the stand-by arrangement. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 43 - APPENDIX I Incomes Policy 22. Self-managed enterprises continue to display an inherent tendency to protect incomes and employment and direct wage controls remain essential to prevent a renewed wage-price spiral and to provide support to monetary and exchange rate policies until privatization takes hold. Accordingly, we have recently secured parliamentary approval of a new Wage Control Law that limits monthly income payments in social enterprises. Enterprises with a minimum of 70 percent privately-owned capital-- currently accounting for an estimated 17 percent of total employment--are exempt from the law. We hope that this will encourage an early adoption of privatization plans by socially-owned enterprises. 23. In light of the effectiveness of incomes policy in 1994, the new Wage Control Law has preserved the partial indexation mechanism of last year's law. The indexation coefficients for the first half of 1995 are as follows: (i) in the economic sector, monthly percentage increases in net personal income payments per employee will be limited to 0.5 percentage points below the actual monthly rate of inflation, for rates of inflation up to the targeted rate; (ii) in the non-economic sector, a similar formula limits income payments to 1 percentage point below actual inflation, for rates of inflation up to the targeted rate; and (iii) in both sectors, income payments will be adjusted by only half of any inflation above the monthly target. For the second half of 1995, the coefficient referred to in (i) will be lowered to zero and that referred to in (ii) will be lowered to 0.5. The law also pertains to benefits and payments in kind. The basis for calculation of the increase in monthly incomes is the permissible net personal income payments for December 1994 as defined under the 1994 Wage Control Law. The 1995 law is detailed in Attachment III. 24. The effectiveness of the Wage Control Law will be reviewed in consultation with the Fund staff in the context of the first review under the stand-by arrangement, taking into account developments in output, enterprise privatization and nominal wages as measured by the wage index published by the Statistical Bureau. 25. Our incomes policy for 1995 should entail a reduction in real wages of around 3 percent in the economic sector and 9 percent in the non-economic sector. Taking into account developments during 1994, the cumulative decline in real incomes would amount to 18 percent in the economic and 29 percent in the non-economic sector from end-1993 to end-1995. Such reductions, along with a projected increase in productivity, would close the remaining gap between real wages and labor productivity that opened up in 1992-93, and would lead to a full reversal of the relative increase in non- economic sector wages that took place in 1990-93. Structural Reforms 26. We are keenly aware that a major acceleration of structural reform is needed, not only to underpin the sustainability of stabilization policies, but also to lay the foundation for an economic recovery once the situation Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 44 .- APPENDIX I -- in the region has been normalized. The main components of our reform prog,ram are bank,rehabilitation, privatization of social enterprises, and the aforementioned SRP--a program for the restructuring of the 25 largest loss-making enterprises. Having already adopted new basic legislation in each of these three areas, and established agencies for overseeing implementation of bank rehabilitation and enterprise privatization, we are now well poised to undertake the necessary acceleration of structural change. Also, the reforms will be fully supported by improvements in the social safety net for disadvantaged workers and others. 27. Bank rehabilitation is a matter of particular urgency as the illiquidity of two major banks poses an imminent threat to the National Bank's control over reserve money growth. Therefore, the first phase of our bank rehabilitation program will be completed by mid-April, 1995, and the second and final phase will be completed within a year thereafter. The Bank for Foreign Trade- -which constitutes 15 percent of the deposit base of the banking system--has already had its license revoked by. the National Bank and is operating solely as a depository.with a prohibition on the extension of new loans. Formal liquidation proceedings will be introduced by mid-April, 1995., 28. Stopanska Banka-- which constitutes 65 percent of the deposit base of the banking system--will be restructured by mid-April 1995: (i) non- performing loans will be transferred to the balance sheet of the Bank Rehabilitation Agency and a large part- of the bank's capital will be written-off; (ii) a government bond of sufficient magnitude will be placed in thle asset portfolio of the bank so that the earnings from this bond will restore and maintain liquidity; and (iii) with a view to reducing the dominant position of Stopanska Banka in the financial sector, one or more branches which together account for at least 10 percent of the balance sheet will be split off from it. 29. The smaller banks which are created by the separation of Stopanska Banka will be privatized before mid-April 1995. Within a year of the division of the bank, the remainder of Stopanska Banka will be fully recapitalized and at least 51 percent of its shares will be sold to private investors. In this regard, the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development has indicated an interest in becoming a large shareholder. Until it is privatized, the Board of the bank will be strengthened with representatives from the Government and the National Bank who will have the power to veto large loans. 30. Kestructurinz of the 25 largest loss-making socially-owned enternriscs will take place under the SRP. These enterprises, which account for about 60 percent of the bad loans of the banking system and about 14 percent of total employment, are required to submit detailed operating plans for the year by mid-April 1995, including a strategy to shed surplus labor and liquidate non-viable business units. Any enterprise failing to implement cost-cutting measures by mid-July, 1995, will be placed in bankruptcy. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 45 - APPENDIX I 31. Cost-cutting plans for 22 enterprises have already been approved by the Government, and.significant progress has been achieved in instituting labor shedding. In this regard, at least 8,000 surplus workers are expected to be laid-off by mid-April, 1995. Before the end of the year, about 16,500 of a total number of 55,000 employees in the 25 enterprises covered by the SRP, are expected to have lost their positions. Appropriations have been made in the 1995 Budget for redundancy payments and unemployment compensation for these workers. Also, before the end of the year, 23 of the enterprises-- excepting two utility companies--will either have been offered for sale to private investors or placed in bankruptcy or liquidation. 32. The two utilities --the electricity and railway companies--will be permitted administered price increases, upon the implementation of satisfactory, time-bound action plans that include major cost-cutting measures. By mid-April 1995, the envisaged increases in rates are 16 percent and 15 percent, respectively, for the two companies. A further price rise will be introduced by the end of the year aimed at restoring the profitability of each enterprise and eliminating budgetary subsidies. 33. The Law on Privatization was enacted in 1993 and we expect to have privatized 91 enterprises with about 20,000 employees by mid-April, 1995. This process, which is being conducted under the aegis of the Privatization Agency, is expected to accelerate significantly during 1995 as the deadline for the submission of voluntary privatization plans by small establishments lapsed at the end of 1994; large firms will have until end-1995 to register their plans. As a result, we expect to privatize another 700 enterprises with 50,000 employees by early 1996. At that stage, the share of workers employed in enterprises with at least 70 percent privately owned capital should have increased to 35 percent, compared to the current proportion of 17 percent. 34. Improvements in the social safetv net are an integral part of our strategy of structural reform. The program for the Protection of the Socially Endangered Population was recently reformed to equalize benefits under a uniform schedule of means-tested income support payments open to all families. Previously, the program provided benefits only to workers, pensioners and persons registered as unemployed. Consequently, it discouraged necessary layoffs and the launching and registration of private sector activities. By January 1996, we intend to further refine the program and introduce a new social protection scale, based on the construction of a poverty line rather than on average wages, and adjusted for household size and urban/rural cost of living differentials. 35. A number of legislative and other institutional changes have been undertaken to establish the basis for a well functioning market economy. In the financial sector, all major banks have been audited according to international standards, the process of introducing a prudential regulatory framework has begun, and banking supervision has been strengthened with technical assistance from the Fund. Also, the balance sheets of all relevant banks have been sanitized by the removal of assets and liabilities relating to frozen foreign currency deposits and any foreign currency loans Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicAPPENDIX2 extended by Paris Club creditors prior to April 30, 1992. A new commercial code has been prepared and will receive its first reading in Parliament by mid-April, 1995. Draft laws on Bankruptcy, the operation of Public Enterprises and De-nationalization and Restitution will be submitted to Parliament before the end of the year. A new Law on Labor Relations, which is under preparation, will significantly reduce the requirement on advance notice of termination of employment, to one month and three months respectively for small-scale and large-scale layoffs. This law will be implemented by the end of the year. External Sector Policies 36. The sharp rise in imports by about US$250 million in 1994, and an increase in the current account deficit of a similar magnitude, may partly reflect some deterioration in competitiveness during early 1994 when the tightening of policies lead to a rapid stabilization of the currency while wage and price increases decelerated more slowly. The decline in the current account balance was, however, more than offset by large private capital inflows, and the National Bank purchased about US$SO million from the foreign exchange market in 1994. Such large private capital inflows were due, in part, to the tightening of monetary policy, but may also be attributable to unrecorded exports that originate in exceptional trading patterns, an unavoidable consequence of the regional crisis. Taking into account recent trends, and considering that our program maintains the restrictive policy stance prevailing last year, we expect the current account deficit, as a percentage of GSP, and autonomous private capital inflows to remain largely unchanged during 1995. The National Bank should, therefore, be able to increase its net foreign assets by about US$60 million in 1995. Gross reserves could increase lby about US$95 million but will still be only the equivalent of about two months of imports by end-1995. We will consult with the Fund staff on modifications to the program if underlying changes in the balance of payments situation threatens attainment of the targeted increase in net foreign assets. 37'. As a first step towards normalizing relations with external creditors, the clearance of arrears and resumption of current payments to the World Bank took place in early 1994 and we intend, as the next step, to regularize payments to official bilateral creditors and certain other multilateral creditors. To this end, the Government informed the Paris Club Secretariat on March 29, 1995 that it would be willing to: (i) assume all debt of the former Yugoslavia that was originally contracted by entities residing on the territory of the FYRM, including the portion of such debt that was assumed by the Federal Government of the former Yugoslavia in 1989; and (ii) as an interim solution, to assume 5.4 percent of the debt of the former Yugoslavia to official bilateral creditors that can not be allocated among the successor states according to the residency of the original borrower, pending ,sn agreement on the division of the assets and liabilities of the former SFRY among the successor states. Following this clarification of our relations with bilateral crelditors, we expect soon to begin rescheduling discussions under the auspices of the Paris Club. As to multilateral cretditors, we have already reached an agreement with the International Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 47 - Finance Corporation on the magnitude of our outstanding liabilities and on a plan for the clearance of arrears. We have also informed the European Investment Bank (EIB), EUROFIMA, and the European Fund for Reintegration about our willingness to seek an early normalization of relations with these institutions. As a third and final step in the process of fully normalizing creditor relations, we hope that it will soon be possible to commence negotiations with commercial banks. 38. To avoid excessive foreign borrowing in the future, we intend to limit the contracting or guaranteeing of new external debt with an original maturity of more than one year and up to, and including, twelve years by the General Government and the National Bank. We have also set sub-limits on the contracting of such debt with one to five years maturity. Similarly, we have placed ceilings on outstanding short-term external borrowing and on guarantees for such borrowing. These limits, which are detailed in Attachment I, will constitute quantitative performance criteria under the stand-by arrangement. 39. As a performance criterion under the stand-by arrangement, the Government will not accumulate new external payment arrears, excluding on debt currently under renegotiation. Debts under renegotiation are owed Paris Club creditors until the signing of the bilateral rescheduling agreements, commercial creditors, the EIB, EUROFIMA and the European Fund for Reintegration. Arrears to multilateral institutions will be eliminated by the end of the program period. 40. Under the aforementioned assumptions about external transactions, our balance of payments projections suggest a gross financing gap of US$381 million in 1995. Under the assumption that the Paris Club could agree to a full rescheduling of all arrears and current debt servicing obligations on debt contracted before the December 1982 cut-off-date, and taking into account indications of external assistance from the World Bank, there remains a residual financing gap of about US$125 million. This gap is mostly matched by non-reschedulable payments to the Paris Club and the FIB. We are in the process of discussing with external creditors the mobilization of additional exceptional balance of payments support towards closing this gap. Progress in normalizing relations with external creditors, and the adequacy of external financing, will be reviewed with the Fund prior to each purchase under the stand-by arrangement. 41. We are fully committed to maintaining a liberal exchange and trade system in order to promote competitiveness within domestic markets and foster exports. In this respect, we have continued to liberalize the trade regime in 1994, and tariffs have been set at very low levels. During the program period, the Government does not intend to impose or intensify any exchange restrictions, introduce or modify multiple currency practices, conclude any bilateral payments agreements that are inconsistent with the Fund's Articles of Agreement, or impose or intensify any new import restrictions for balance of payments reasons. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 48 - APPENDIX I ATTACHMENT I Definition of Ouantitative Performance Criteria 1. Net domestic assets (NDA) of the banking svstem are defined as broad money M3 minus net foreign assets (NFA) of the banking system. NDA so defined stood at denar 73,053 million at end-December 1994. Broad money M3 includes currency, demand deposits, quasi-deposits in denar and foreign currency and non-monetary deposits in denar and foreign currency. L/ Foreign currency deposits are defined to include frozen deposits. Broad money M3 so defined stood at denar 63,401 million at end-December 1994. NFA of the banking system are defined as the banking system's foreign assets minus foreign liabilities. NFA, so defined, stood at denar -9,652 million at end-December 1994. lJ The ceilings on NDA of the banking system referred to in paragraph 13 and in Table 1 of this Memorandum will be automatically adjusted in an amount equal to any adjustment to central government net credit from the National Bank, as described in section 3 of this Appendix. 2. Net foreign assets of the National Bank of Macedonia are defined as the National Bank's foreign assets minus foreign liabilities. Net foreign assets, so defined, stood at US$145 million at end-December 1994, or at denar 6,316 million. u It is understood that the National Bank will undertake all foreign exchange transactions of the Central Government, which are defined to include all disbursements minus current interest and principal payments, as well as payments for the clearance of arrears to official bilateral and multilateral creditors inciuding the IBRD, IDA, IFC, EIB, and European Fund for Reintegration. It is also understood that the cumulative net foreign exchange transactions of the Central Government in 1995 are projected to 'be zero. Cumulative positive foreign exchange inflows, as herein defined, will be offset by a corresponding cumulative de,posit with the National Bank, and cumulative negative foreign exchange inflows will be offset by an equivalent cumulative credit from the National Bank. The floors on net foreign assets of the National Bank, as referred to in paragraph 13 and in Table 1 of this Memorandum, will be automatically adjusted upward for any unexpected net foreign inflows to the Central Government from official bilateral and multilateral creditors, excluding the IMF, and will be adjusted downward for any unexpected shortfalls in such inflows. The projected inflows are outlined in section 4 of this Appendix. lJ Any assets or liabilities, domestic or foreign, that are denominated in foreign currency terms, are valued according to the conventions employed in the monetary accounts. In particular, the stocks of assets and liabilities outstanding at December 31, 1993, were valued at the prevailing market exchange rate of that day. Any subsequent increase in foreign assets and liabilities to residents and non-residents compared to end-December, 1993 are valued at the exchange rate prevailing on the date of their transaction. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 49 - APPENDIX I ATTACHMENT I 3. Central government net credit from the National Bank is defined to include total National Bank credit to the Central Government, minus total central government deposits at the National Bank. At the end of December 1994, net credit, as so defined, stood at denar 1,727 million. u Changes in the quarterly ceilings on net credit, as outlined in Table 1 of this Appendix, will be made up of the following components: First, the Central Government is assumed to steadily build-up deposits with the National Bank in order to unburden monetary policy, as described in paragraph 9 of the Memorandum. It is assumed that the cumulative value of such deposits, which stood at zero at end-December 1994, will be: end-March 1995: Denar 555 million end-June 1995: Denar 1,160 million end-September 1995: Denar 2,385 million end-December 1995: Denar 2,385 million The Government will make the deposits programmed for each quarter in bi-weekly installments on a pro-rata basis. Such deposits will at no time be reduced to meet the Government's liquidity needs. Second, the Central Government: has transferred part of its current account deposits from Stopanska Banka to the National Bank as described in paragraph 11 of the Memorandum. The balance of central government deposits maintained at the National Bank for the purpose of conducting current transactions, which stood at zero at end-December 1994, will not fall below denar 300 million. Third, the National Bank will extend credits to the Central Government for the purpose of conducting foreign exchange transactions as described in paragraph 18 of the Memorandum. The net value of such credits will correspond to the projected balance on foreign transactions outlined in section 4 of this Appendix. The ceilings on net credit to the Central Government from the National Bank, will be automatically adjusted downward for any unexpected net foreign inflows to the Central Government from official bilateral creditors and multilateral creditors, excluding the IMF. The ceilings will be automatically adjusted upward for any unexpected shortfall in net foreign inflows to the Central Government from the same sources. I/ Any assets or liabilities, domestic or foreign, that are denominated in foreign currency terms, are valued according to the conventions employed in the monetary accounts. In particular, the stocks of assets and liabilities outstanding at December 31, 1993, were valued at the prevailing market exchange rate of that day. Any subsequent increase in foreign assets and liabilities to residents and non-residents compared to end-December, 1993 are valued at the exchange rate prevailing on the date of their transaction. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 50 - APPENiDIX I -- ATTACHMENT I Fourth, it is also understood that the cumulative unspent portion of the quarterly allocation of resources for structural reforms will be deposited with the National Bank, as referred to in paragraph 17 of the Memorandum, and that the ceilings on central government net credit from the National Bank will be automatically adjus.ted downward for any such amounts. The quarterly amounts for structural reforms are: denar 787 million for the first quarter, denar 1,173 million for the second quarter, denar 1,250 million for the third quarter, and denar 1,330 million for the fourth quarter of 1995. 4. Unexpected net foreign exchange inflows from official bilateral and multilateral creditors, excluding the IMF, will trigger a corresponding reduction in the ceilings on NDA and net credit to the Central Government from the National Bank, and a corresponding increase in the floor on NFA. Unexpected net foreign exchange outflows, from the same sources, will trigger a corresponding increase in the ceilings on NDA and net credit to the Central Government from the National Bank, and a corresponding reduction in the floor on NFA. For the purpose of measuring these external flows, multilateral creditors are assumed to include the IBRD, IDA, IFC, EIB, European Fund for Reintegration and EUROFIMA, and official bilateral creditors are defined as those governments represented at the Paris Club. For the purpose of calculating this automatic adjustment, the cumulative projected foreign inflows, outflows and net flows are as follows: Net flows Inflows Outflows end-March 1995: -US$B million US$O million US$B million end-June 1995: US$30 million US$53 million US$23 million end-September 1995: US$14 million US$53 million US$39 million end-December 1995: US$O million US$53 million US$53 million Foreign flows are here defined on a cash basis. The following is also understood: (i) to ensure timely payments, the Central Government will make payments on debt to official multilateral and bilateral creditors even in cases where the liability for such payments remains with non-government entities; (ii) the Government will subsequently try to collect the denar equivalent from such non-government entities; and (iii) any such denar collections will be treated, for the 'purpose of implementing the financial program, as a foreign inflow of the Central Government. 5. Indicative limits for reserve money and private sector denar narrow money Ml are prescribed in Table 2 of this Appendix. For the purpose of prescribing these limits, reserve money is defined to include currency in circulation, vault cash retained by the commercial banks, and monies held in the Giro accounts of commercial banks with the National Bank. Reserve money, so defined, stood at denar 4,849 million on December 31, 1994. Private sector denar narrow money Ml includes currency in circulation and denar demand deposits held by the private sector (including self-managed funds) with commercial banks. Private sector denar narrow money Ml, so defined, stood at denar 9,561 million on December 31, 1994. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 51 - APPENDIX I ATTACHMENT I 6. Ceilings on contractinv or guaranteeinn new external debt apply to the Central Government. They consist of ceilings on new non-concessional external debt with an original maturity of more than one year and up to and including twelve years. The ceilings so defined include a sub-ceiling for contracting or guaranteeing debt with an original maturity of more than one year and up to and including five years. The outstanding stock of such debt stood at US$O million at end-December 1994. A ceiling also applies to the stock of Central Government external debt, including guaranteed debt, of up to and including one year, with the exception of normal external trade related credits. The stock of short-term debt so defined stood at US$O million at end-December 1994. These ceilings will exclude new borrowing from the World Bank and other multilateral institutions, and changes in indebtedness resulting from refinancing or rescheduling, by official bilateral creditors, including capitalized late interest on arrears. Debt falling within each ceiling shall be valued in U.S. dollars at the exchange rate prevailing at the time the contract or guarantee becomes effective. 7. Central government domestic arrears are defined to include all payments delays by the Central Government, except for delays pertaining to: (i) interest payments on frozen foreign currency deposits; and (ii) normal delays of one month in wage payments by the Central Government. According to this definition, Central Government arrears stood at denar 1,219 million as of December 31, 1994, comprising arrears on agricultural subsidies, export subsidies, child allowances and outlays related to the Social Assistance Program. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 52 - APPENDIX I ATTACHMENT I Table 1. FIRM: Puantitative Performance Criteria Under the Stand-By Arrangement, 1995-96 1994 1995 1996 Dec.31 March 31 1/ June 30 Sept. 30 Dec. 31 1/ March 31 u Prel. Ceiling on net domestic assets of the banking system (in millions of denars) Ceiling on Central Coverrment net credit from the National Bank (in millions of denars) 73,053 73,490 R,870 74,070 75,705 77,440 1,727 920 -1,300 -1,805 -1,180 -1,045 Ceiling on Central Coverwnt domestic w-rears (in millions of denars) Floor on net international 1,219 460 reserves of the National Bank (in millions of U.S. dollars) 145 145 195 206 200 190 Ceiling on Contracting or Guaranteeing of 1-12 year external debt (cunulative change, in millions of U.S. dollars) Subceiling on Contracting or Guaranteeing of l-5 year external debt (cunulative change, in millions of U.S. dollars) Ceiling on stock of debt up to one year (in millions of U.S. dollars) 250 250 250 250 250 50 50 50 50 50 40 40 40 40 40 - 1/ Indicative limits. Performance criteria for December 31, 1995 and March 31, 1996 will be determined at the time of the first revieu under the stand-by arrangement. Table 2. FYRH: Indicative Limits Under the Stand-By Arrangement, 1995-96 1994 Dec.31 Prel. 1995 1996 March 31 June 30 Sept -30 Dec.31 March 31 Ceiling on reserve money of the National Bank (in millions of denars) Ceiling on private sector narrou money Ml (in millions of denars) 4,849 4,655 4,915 5,200 5,360 5,480 9,561 9,870 10,425 11,040 11,375 11,630 - Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public. - 53 - Structural Benchmarks APPENDIX I ATTACHMENT II Implement labor shedding plans for firms included in the Special Restructuring Program Implement privatization of socially-owned enterprises not included in the Special Restructuring Program File for liquidation of the Bank for Foreign Trade Spin off and privatize 10 percent of Stopanska Banka and restore liquidity to the remaining core of the bank Prepare a plan to restore medium-term viability of the Pension Fund, taking into account the need to clear arrears, as described in paragraph 21 Implement first phase of the plan for establishing a fully-functioning Treasury within the Finance Ministry Complete plans to downsize central government employment, initially by 2 percent, and subsequently by 3 percent Compile trade data on a timely basis Publish a monetary survey and external trade statistics on a regular monthly basis Increase the staff of the Bank Supervision Department in the NBM by five persons Cumulative layoffs of: 10,650 by June 30, 1995 19,000 by Dec. 31, 1995 Cumulatively divest: 250 firms by June 30, 1995 750 firms by Dec. 31, 1995 April 15, 1995 April 15, 1995 June 30, 1995 September 30, 1995 May 31, 1995 and December 31, 1995 June 30, 1995 July 31, 1995 May 1, 1995 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public'- 54 - APPENDIX I ATTACHMENT III Indicative Targets for 1995 1. The monthly inflation targets for use in the application of the wage adjustment formula, mentioned in paragraphs 22 and 23 of the text are as follows: 1995 January 1.75 February 1.75 March 1.75 April 1.50 May 1.50 June 1.50 July 1.25 August 1.25. September 1.25 October 1.00 November 1.00 December 1.00 2. The monthly ceilings for the average net personal income per employee in 1995 presented below are calculated on the assumption that actual and target inflation are equal, using the parameters detailed in the text. The base used to calculate the January 1995 ceiling has been defined according to the new definition of private enterprises. The base for December 1994, as measured by the Payments Bureau for the economic sector is denar 7,966 and for the non-economic sector is denar 9,431. 1995 Economic Non-Economic Sector Sector Aggregate Economy January 8,066 9,502 8,353 February 8,166 9,573 8,448 March 8,268 9,645 8,544 April 8,351 9,693 8,620 May 8,435 9,741 8,696 June 8,519 9,790 8,773 July 8,626 9,864 8,873 August 8,733 9,938 8,974 September 8,842 10,012 9,076 October 8,931 10,062 9,157 November 9,020 10,112 9,239 December 9,110 10,163 9.321 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 55 - APPENDIX II Former Yuzoslav Republic of Macedonia - Stand-By Arrangement Appendix I contains a letter, with an attached Memorandum on Economic Policies ("memorandum"), dated April 5, 1995, from the Minister of Finance and the Governor of the National Bank of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia requesting a stand-by arrangement and setting forth: (a) the objectives, policies and measures that the authorities of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia intend to pursue for the period of this stand-by arrangement; and (b) understandings of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia with the'Fund regarding reviews that will be made of progress in realizing the objectives of the program and of the policies and measures that the authorities of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia will pursue for the period of this stand-by arrangement. To support these objectives and policies, the International Monetary Fund grants this stand-by arrangement in accordance with the following provisions: 1. For the period from I to the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia will have the right to make pur;hases from the Fund in an amount equivalent to SDR 22.3 million, subject to paragraphs 2, 3, 4, and 5 below, without further review by the Fund. 2. (a) Purchases under this stand-by arrangement shall not, without the consent of the Fund, exceed the equivalent of SDR 2.5 million until August 15, 1995, the equivalent of SDR 7.5 million until November 15, 1995, the equivalent of SDR 12.4 million until February 15, 1996, and the equivalent of SDR 17.4 million until May 15, 1996. (b) None of the limits in (a) above shall apply to a purchase under this stand-by arrangement that would not increase the Fund's holdings of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia's currency subject to repurchase beyond 25 percent of quota. 3. The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia will not make purchases under this stand-by arrangement that would increase the Fund's holdings of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia's currency subject to repurchase beyond 25 percent of quota: (a) during any period in which the data at the end of the preceding period indicate that (i) the limit on the net domestic assets of the banking system, described in paragraph 1 of Attachment I to, and in Table 1 of, the memorandum, or (ii) the limit on the Central Government's net credit from the National Bank, described in paragraph 3 of Attachment I to, and in Table 1 of, the memorandum, or Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 56 - APPENDIX II (iii) the limit on the Central Government's domestic arrears,. described in paragraph 7 of Attachment I to, and in Table 1 of, the memorandum, or (iv) the floor on the net international reserves of the National Bank, described in Table 1 of the memorandum, or (v) the limit on the contracting and guaranteeing of new external debt with maturity of more than one'year and up to and including 12 years, described in paragraph 6 of Attachment I to, and in Table 1 of, the memorandum, or (vi) the limit on the contracting and guaranteeing of new external .debt with maturity of more than one year and up to and including five years, described in paragraph 6 of Attachment I to, and in Table 1 of, the memorandum, or (vii) the limit on the outstanding stock of external debt with maturity of up to and including one year, described in paragraph 6 of Attachment I to, and in Table 1 of, the memorandum, is not observed; or (b) if, at any time during the period of the arrangement, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia incurs any external payments arrears other than those incurred with the creditors referred to in paragraph 39 of the memorandum; or cc> after November 14, 1995, until the review contemplated in the last paragraph of the April 5, 1995, letter is completed; or Cd) after August 7.4, 1995, November 14, 1995, February 14, 1996, and May 14, 1996, until the financing assurances reviews contemplated in the last paragraph of the April 5, 1995, letter are completed, provided that no such review shall be necessary after the Fund determines that satisfactory arrangements with the foreign creditors referred to in paragraph 39 of the memorandum for the financing of the program have been reached, or (e> if, at any time during the period of the stand-by.arrangement, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia (i> imposes or intensifies restrictions on the making of payments and transfers for current international transactions; or (ii) introduces or modifies multiple currency practices; or (iii) concludes bilateral payments agreements which are inconsistent with Article VIII; or (iv) imposes or intensifies import restrictions for balance of payments reasons. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 57 - APPENDIX II When the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia is prevented from purchasing under.this stand-by arrangement because of this paragraph 3, purchases will be resumed only after consultation has taken place between the Fund and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and understandings have been reached regarding the circumstances in which such purchases can be resumed. 4. The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia will not make purchases under this stand-by arrangement during any period in which the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia has an overdue financial obligation to the Fund or is failing to meet a repurchase expectation (a) in respect of a noncomplying purchase pursuant to Decision No. 7842-(84/165) on the Guidelines on Corrective Action, or (b) in respect of a purchase in support of debt and debt service reduction operations pursuant to Decision No. 9331-(89/167), as amended, or (c) pursuant to subparagraph 16(a) or 33(a) of Decision No. 8955-(88/126), as amended, on the Compensatory and Contingency Financing Facility. 5. The.former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia's right to engage in the transactions covered by this stand-by arrangement can be suspended only with respect to requests received by the Fund after (a) a formal ineligibility, or (b) a decision of the Executive Board to suspend transactions, either generally or in order to consider a proposal, made'by an Executive Director or the Managing Director, formally to suppress or to limit the eligibility of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. When notice of a decision of formal ineligibility or of a decision to consider a proposal is given pursuant to this paragraph 5, purchases under this arrangement will be resumed only after consultation has taken place between the Fund and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and understandings have been reached regarding the circumstances in which such purchases can be resumed. 6. Purchases under this stand-by arrangement shall be made in the currencies of other members selected in accordance with the policies and procedures of the Fund, unless, at the request of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia the Fund agrees to provide SDRs at the time of the purchase. 7. The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia shall pay a charge for this stand-by arrangement in accordance with the decisions of the Fund. 8. (a) The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia shall repurchase the amount of its currency that results from a purchase under this stand-by arrangement in accordance with the provisions of the Articles of Agreement and decisions of the Fund, including those relating to repurchase as the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia's balance of payments and reserve position improves. (b) Any reductions in the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia's currency held by the Fund shall reduce the amounts subject to repurchase under (a) above in accordance with the principles applied by the Fund for this purpose at the time of the reduction. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 58 - APPENDIX II 9. During the period of the stand-by arrangement, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia shall remain in close consultation with the Fund. These consultations may include correspondence and visits of officials of the Fund to the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia or of representatives of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia to the Fund. The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia shall provide the Fund, through reports at intervals or dates requested by the Fund, with such information as the Fund requests in connection with the progress of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia in achieving the objectives and policies set forth in the April 5, 1995, letter and annexed memorandum. 10.. In accordance with the last paragraph of the April 5, 1995, letter, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia will consult the Fund on the adoption of any measures that may be appropriate at the initiative of the government or whenever the Managing Director requests consultation because any of the criteria in paragraph 3 above have not been observed or because the Managing Director considers that consultation on the program is desirable. In addition, after the period of the arrangement and while the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia has outstanding purchases in the upper credit tranches, the government will consult with the Fund from time to time, at the initiative of the government or at the request of the Managing Director, concerning the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia's balance of payments policies. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 59 - APPENDIX III Statistical Issues The quality and availability of statistical data has improved significantly since the adoption of the STF supported program in January 1994, but economic analysis is still hampered by some remaining deficiencies, especially in the external sector. I/ This'appendix reviews the current status of the statistical base. 1. In the real sector, there are serious doubts regarding the reliability of the currently available GSP statistics. The magnitude of the measured decline in GSP, as well as the composition of output, should be regarded as being subject to large margins of error. There are two problems with regard to the comprehensiveness of the coverage of GSP: (i) there is probably serious under-reporting of economic activity, especially in the private sector and among socially-owned firms attempting to avoid taxes and labor regulations; and (ii) measured GSP excludes value added by government, financial, and some personal services, and will thus diverge widely from GDP. Also, with respect to accuracy, the most serious problem relates to the treatment of stocks which may have been significantly overvalued in the available GSP statistics, especially during periods of hyperinflation. Lastly, the external sector of the national accounts has serious deficiencies, which are ,discussed below in conjunction with the external sector. 2. In the monetarv sector, a new plan of accounts for the National Bank has been introduced. A monthly monetary survey is now prepared with a lag of about six weeks, but is only available beginning with December 1993. Due to difficulties encountered in compiling the survey, frequent revisions to the available data are required. As of January 1, 1995, the balance sheets of commercial banks have been relieved of the large assets and liabilities relating to frozen foreign currency deposits and foreign currency loans extended by Paris Club creditors, following a transfer of such assets and liabilities to the Central Government. However, the accounts of the commercial banks may still be subject to classification errors because they continue to use an out-dated chart of accounts. 3. In the fiscal sector, the major cause of concern is that records are kept on a cash basis rather than an accrual basis, with the result that the government accounts are always recorded as being in balance. .The staff has attempted to estimate the fiscal accounts on an accrual basis but, while arrears on transfers to individuals can generally be quantified, arrears to I/ Extensive technical assistance from the Fund has played a significant role in data improvement. National accounts and price statistics have been reviewed by missions from STA. The authorities have been assisted in the preparation of a new budget classification system by an FAD mission and visits by an FAD technical expert. MAE and STA have fielded missions relating to banking statistics. In addition, there have been missions from STA and FAD to facilitate improvements in external sector statistics. The discussion of statistical problems in this appendix is consistent with the findings and recommendations of technical assistance missions. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 60 - APPENDIX= enterprises by individual ministries are not easily traceable because individual ministries are not required to report their liabilities to the Ministry of Finance (MOF). Such arrears are believed to be small but do render the estimated fiscal accounts somewhat inaccurate. More generally, the FYRM does not have a Treasury in the MOF, and there are serious delays in gathering data regarding payments and revenues. Such delays impede the ability of the MOF to effectively control expenditures even though a new budget classification system was successfully introduced in mid-1994. 4. In the external sector, balance of payments data are now compiled at the National Bank. Monthly trade statistics are being prepared with a lag of about one month and are published on a quarterly basis in the National Bank Bulletin. However, serious difficulties remain: (I) Customs data on trade with other former republics of the SPRY have been collected since independence, but these data are less than comprehensive and are of a low quality. A large "errors and omissions" component in the balance of payments is thought to be largely due to the fact that exports to these republics are significantly under-recorded; (ii) Data on trade with other countries also suffer from serious deficiencies in quality, coverage, and availability. Since independence, there have been substantial difficulties in obtaining customs information since a customs service had to be established and new international borders monitored. Estimates on trade have been published in the Fund's Direction of Trade Statistics, but have been derived from partner country information. No official disaggregation of trade data by price or volume is available; and (iii) There are serious problems with data on services, interest and debt. Data for imports of merchandise include some service items, such as freight and insurance services, and exclude imports related to humanitarian aid and goods directly imported by consumers. Government service receipts have not been recorded, even though receipts from abroad may have been channeled through the banking system. Some private capital transactions have been recorded in the "transfers" categories of the current account instead of in the capital account. Historical estimates of accrued interest are poor, data on official transfers before 1993 are unavailable, and data on some types of capital transactions, such as foreign direct investment prior to 1994, are incomplete or unavailable. External debt statistics may be incomplete regarding short-term debt and debt to commercial banks as certain transactions may not have been reported to the National Bank. In some cases, it has been possible to derive staff estimates of balance of payments items (based on supplementary information provided by the authorities) that attempt to correct for these distortions and omissions in the official data. However, the current external sector data should be treated as estimates that are subject to future revision. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 61 - APPENDIX IV Medium-Term Scenarios This appendix presents a more detailed account of the alternative scenarios discussed in section III.7 of the main text. Scenarios I and II are based on the common assumption that the implementation of the stabilization and structural reform program is undertaken successfully during 1995 and 1996; Scenario II assumes a need for larger growth rates in imports. Scenarios I and II (Table 9) are based on the assumption of a resolution of regional tensions late in 1996, while Scenario III assumes their continuation through the year 2000. JJ Scenario I: Baseline The resolution of regional tensions would allow increased access to markets through traditional trans-shipment routes and result in a sharp and sustained increase in net export volume. Export-led growth, which is expected to receive a further boost from enhanced competitiveness following the implementation of the structural, averages 6 percent in 1996-2000 reforms. This recovery would contribute to a significant increase in national savings over the medium term, with the current account deficit declining to 4 percent of GSP by the year 2000. From 1997 on, financing gaps are expected to be partly closed by new disbursements related to policy based and project lending from the IBRD. This would leave a residual gap of approximately US$20-25 million on average in 1997-2000. In the capital account, there is a rapid recovery in foreign direct investment with a deferral of debt service to commercial creditors. 2J The scenario targets an increase in the ratio of gross foreign reserves to regular imports of more than two months over a five-year period. Gross financing gaps are projected to decline through the medium term. About half of the financing gap in 1995 is rescheduled on terms similar to those obtained by the former SFRY with Paris Club creditors in 1988. Debt incurred to cover these remaining gaps is assumed to be repaid in 10 years after a three-year grace period at a cost of LIBOR plus 1 percent. Trade financing is expected to continue to increase in 1997-98 in line with the elimination of regional tensions, but is then projected to level off through the year 2000. lJ The deterioration in the current account in 1994 and the rise in the "errors and omissions" is believed to be partly attributable to unrecorded re-exports to neighboring countries, reflecting exceptional trading patterns originating in the regional crisis. In line with the assumption of an easing of this crisis, such unrecorded re-exports are assumed to abate. The projection for regular imports has, therefore, been adjusted downwards by US$120 million in 1997, and errors and omissions have been assumed to be zero. 2/ Alternatively, a buyback of the FYRM's commercial bank debt in 1997 would require additional financing of approximately US$lOO million, at a current secondary market discount of 72 percent. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 62 - , APPENDIX IV * High Imnort Growth Scenario II: The comprehensive and ambitious structural reform process which will be carried out in the next two years may require higher growth in the volume of imports than is assumed in Scenario I, and projected private net savings would be lower. With similar growth rates in the volume'of exports, the current account deficit is still projected to improve from 1998 on, although at a slower pace. The capital account is projected to remain largely unchanged, except for higher trade financing. With a similar target for the ratio of gross reserves to imports as in Scenario I, the financing gaps are projected to be somewhat larger and, after projected disbursements from the IBRD are included, the residual financing gap would amount to US$50 million on average in 1997-2000. Scenario III: Status Quo Without an early resolution of regional tensions the initial boost to exports, imports, and growth from stabilization and structural reforms is muted, and there is no permanent recovery in trade growth. Export volume is projected to increase by only 2 percent from 1997 on while import volume is projected to rise by 3 percent on average. Lower economic growth will result in stagnant and even deteriorating private and public net savings, and the current account is projected to deteriorate by 3 percentage points of GSP between 1998 and the year 2000. In contrast to the previous two scenarios, the ratio of gross reserves to imports is assumed to increase only slightly after 1996. Notwithstanding this assumption, the projections indicate a substantial increase in financing gaps over the medium-term. A higher ratio of gross reserves to imports could only be achieved through a contraction in imports and growth, or would otherwise lead to even larger financing gaps in 1997-2000. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 63 - APPENDIX V I. II. III IV. V. VI. FYRM: Fund Relations (As of March 31. 1995). Membershio Status: Joined 12/14/92 Succeeded to Membership on April 21, 1993, Article XIV General Resources Account SDR Million Quota 49.60 Fund holdings of currency 63.63 SDR DeDartment SDR Million % Allocation Net cumulative allocation 8.38 100.0 Holdings 0.02 0.2 Outstanding Purchase and Loans SDR Million % Quota Stand-by arrangements 1.63 3.3 Systemic Transformation 12.40 25.0 Ouota % 100.0 128.3 Financial Arrangements None Proiected Oblieations to the Fund (SDR Million; based on existing and prospective use of and present holdings of SDRs): Overdue ForthcominP (3/31/95) 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 Principal _- 0.7 0.6 0.3 1.0 2.1 Charges/Interest -- 0.9 1.2 1.1 1.1 1.0 Total -- - -1.81.42.13.1 VII. Exchange Arrangement The currency of FYRM is the denar. The FYRM maintains a managed floating exchange rate system, where enterprises and households deal in separate markets. The participation of banks in both markets should prevent the emergence of multiple exchange rates. Whereas households can transact only through commercial banks or through foreign exchange bureaus that act as agents of banks, enterprises can sell foreign exchange to each other in addition to transacting through the banking system. Enterprises must sell export proceeds within 90 days. Commercial banks' holdings are limited to US$38 million. Bureaus can hold overnight foreign exchange positions equivalent to 50 percent of the preceding day's purchases. On March 31, 1995, the official exchange rate was denar 36.80 per U.S. dollar. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 64 - &PPENDIX V ' VIII.Article IV Consultatiom The first consultation with the FYRM was concluded in August 1993. The FYRM is on the standard consultation cycle. IX. Technical Assistance June-July 1993: August-September 1993: September-October 1993: October 1993: February 1994: April 1994: April-May 1994: May 1994: June 1994: July-December 1994: August 1994 - : September 1994 - : September 1994: January 1995: January 1995: February-March 1995: FAD -- Multitopic Mission STA -- Multisector Statistics Mission FAD -- Expert visit: Budgeting FAD -- Mission: Budget Preparation INS -- IntroductLon to Financial Programming MAE -- Central Bank Modernization Mission FAD -- Public Expenditures Mission STA -- Money and Banking Statistics Mission MAE -- Central Bank Information Technology Mission MAE -- Resident Expert: Central Bank Accounting MAE -- Resident Expert: Bank Supervision MAE -- Resident Expert: Monetary Policy Implementation MAE -- Central Bank Organizational Structural Mission STA -- National Accounts and Price Statistics Mission FAD -- Mission: Introduction of Treasury STA -- Balance of Payments Statistics Mission Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 65 - APPENDIX VI Relations with the World Bank GrOUD 1. The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia became a member of the World Bank, IDA and IFC on December 30, 1993 and a member of MIGA on March 19, 1993. A limited Country Assistance Strategy statement was discussed by the Bank's Board on February 8, 1994, and a report titled "Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia: An Economic Review" was prepared for the first meeting of the Consultative Group in June 1994. A Country Economic Memorandum and an Irrigation and Water Resources Review are currently under preparation, and a second meeting of the Consultative Group is scheduled for September 1995. 2. The Bank's first operation in the FYRM, the Economic Recovery Loan (US$40 million) and Credit (US$40 million), was approved in February 1994 and has been fully disbursed. Since then, the Bank has completed negotiations for a Transit Facilitation Project. It has also completed appraisals for a Financial and Enterprise Sector Adjustment Credit (FESAC) and a Social Reform and Technical Assistance Project. These three operations are scheduled to be presented for consideration by the Bank's Board in the spring of 1995. 3. The Transit Facilitation Project is intended to: improve the physical condition of the east-west road corridor and modernize customs procedures; strengthen road management capabilities of the Ministry of Transport and the Roads Organization; and ensure implementation of pricing policies to preserve allocative efficiency. The FESAC would support implementation of the key elements of the Government's enterprise, banking and social sector reform program. A compendium to the FESAC, the Social Reform Project would help reduce the individual and community impacts of worker displacement; improve public awareness of the rationale for reform policies; and support the continuing implementation of the enterprise restructuring program. 4. The Bank's medium-term assistance program envisages further policy- based and investment operations. The former would aim to address public sector management issues and advance structural reforms in the enterprise and financial sectors. The investment lending program would be aimed at: (i) assuring adequate infrastructure for economic growth by financing power supply, irrigation rehabilitation, water supply and sanitation projects; (ii) promoting post-privatization restructuring and a supply response from the private sector through technical assistance and lines of credit; and (iii) maintaining an adequate social safety net through institutional strengthening of cash benefit programs, development of employment services, and restructuring of health and education systems. 5. The International Finance Corporation (IFC) has agreed on a plan for clearance of arrears. The IFC has begun identifying prospective investments to support in the country once the arrears are cleared. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public