DOCUMENT OF INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND NOT FOR PUBLIC USE MASTER FILES ROOM HO C-525 0451 EBS/99/42 CONFIDENTIAL March 16, 1999 To: Members of the Executive Board From: The Secretary Subject: Ukraine-Staff Report for the 1999 Article IV Consultation and First Review Under the Extended Arrangement Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staff report for the 1999 Article IV consultation with Ukraine and the first review under the Extended Arrangement, \ which will be brought to the agenda for discussion on a date to be announced. Draft decisions appear on pages 33-36. Mr. Shadman-Valavi (ext. 34532) or Mr. Trines (ext. 35639) is available to answer technical or factual questions relating to this paper prior to the Board discussion. Unless the Documents Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the WTO Secretariat on Wednesday, March 24, 1999; and to the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the European Commission, and the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development, following its consideration by the Executive Board. Att: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicCONFIDENTIAL INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND Staff Report for the 1999 Article IV Consultation and First Review Under the Extended Arrangement Prepared by European II Department (In Consultation with Reviewing Departments) Approved by Gbard Bblanger and Mark Allen March 16, 1999 Contents Page I. Introduction .............................. . .......................... 3 II. Recent Developments ................................................. 4 m. Policy Discussions and Steps Ahead ........ A. Macroeconomic Outlook ........... B. Fiscal Policy .................... C. Monetary and Exchange Rate Policy D. Structural Reforms ............... E. Other Issues. .................... 16 16 16 21 24 26 IV. Balance of Payments Prospects, External Financing, and Capacity to Repay the Fund ........ 27 .. ... ...... ................... V. Phasing and Program Monitoring ... .... ..... .. ........ .. ........ 28 v1. Staff Appraisal .. ..... 29 ......... ........ ............ ......... Text Boxes 1. Rigidities in Revenue Structure, 1998 .................................... 8 2. Social Safety Net and Poverty Issues ................................... 20 3. Key Structural Reform Policies for 1999 ................................ 25 4. Environmental Issues ................................................ 26 5. TheMillenniumBug ............................................. ..2 7 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2- Tables 1. Selected Economic Indicators, 1997-99 2. Quantitative Performance Criteria and Financial Benchmarks For the First Year Under the EFF Arrangement 3. 4. 5. 6. I. 8. 9. 10. I I. 12. Status of Structural Benchmarks for End-December 1998 Consolidated Government Finances, 1996-99 Monetary Survey, 1997-99 Accounts of the National Bank of Ukraine, 1997-99 Medium-Term Balance of Payments, 1997-2004 External Financing Needs, 1997-2000 Indicators of Fund Credit, 1995-2004 Projected Payments to the Fund as at January 3 1, 1999 Indicators of External Vulnerability Timetable of Purchases and Reviews in 1998-99 Under the First Year of the EFF Arrangement Figures 1. Macroeconomic Indicators, 1996-2001 2. Monetary Indicators, 1995-98 3. Exchange Rate Developments 4. Gross International Reserves and NBU Intervention, July I997-December 1998 Annex I. Letter from the Authorities Supplemental Memorandum of Economic Policies : Table 1. Prior Conditions for Circulation of Documents to the Executive Board Table 2. Quantitative Performance Criteria and Financial Benchmarks for the Period March-September 1999 Technical Memorandum Table 3. Structural Benchmarks 6 : ‘11 13 Appendixes I. Fund Relations ___. II. Relations with the World Bank III. Relations with the EBRD IV. Statistical Issues V. Status of Selected Policy Measures Under the Extended Arrangement 37 38 39 40 42 43 44 45 46 41 48 49 23 50 55 58 60 64 84 85 93 95 96 105 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3- 1. INTRODUCTION 1. Discussions for the 1999 Article IV consultation with Ukraine and the first program review under the extended arrangement (BFF) approved by the Executive Board on September 4, 1998 were held in Kyiv from October 26-November 6, 1998 and lanuary 12-26, 1999,’ and continued in Washington on February 2-5, 1999. During these periods, the staffrepresentatives met with senior officials of the government, the National Bank of Ukraine (NBU), and the President’s administration.2 The Managing Director met with Prime Minister Pustovoitenko in Washingtoh in February, and the First Deputy Managing Director met President Ku&ma in Davos in January. 2. The 1997 Article IV consultation was completed on August 25,1997, when the Executive Board also approved a one-year stand-by arrangement (SBA).3 At that time, Directors welcomed the progress the authorities had made in stabilising the economy in late 1996 and early 1997. They urged the authorities to implement growth-oriented structural reforms and to work toward a medium-term program that could be supported by the Fund under an extended arrangement, 3. As reported to the Executive Board earlier,’ after several interruptions, the program supported by the SBA went irretrievably off-track in early 1998.’ To a large extent this was associated with political difficulties in the run-up to parliamentary elections in March 1998, which contributed to weak fiscal discipline and a general slowdown in the ‘The staff members participating in at least one of these discussions were Messrs. Shadman- Valavi (Head), Arvanitis, Lissovolik, Shiells, Trines (alI EU2), Petri (FAD), Robinson (PDR), Leckow (LEG), Mrs. Fisher (Research Assistant, EU2), and Mrs. Baker and Ms. Nikdjou (Assistants, EU2). Messrs. Ghesquiere and Lenain of the Fund’s resident representative office in Kyiv participated in the discussions. Mr. Yakusha, the Alternate Executive Director for Ukraine, also attended several of the meetings. *This included meetings with President Ku&ma, Prime Minister Pustovoitenko, First Deputy Prime Minister Kuratchenko, Deputy Prime Minister Tihipko, Chairman of the NBU, Youshchenko, the Minister of Finance Mityukov, Minister of Economy Rogovoy, and other senior officials from the government, the NBU, and the President’s administration. ‘EBS/97/144,08/1 I/97. The SBA was for the equivalent of SDR 398.92 milhon (40 percent of quota). All references to quota in this document are to the Ninth Review quota of SDR 997.3 million. Ukraine’s quota was increased to SDR 1,372 million under the Eleventh Review. The authorities have consented to and paid the quota increase, but have not yet accepted the Fourth Amendment to the Articles. ‘EBS/97/206, 11/17/98, and EBS/98/11, 01/21/98. ‘Only five purchases for a total of SDR 18 1 million (less than 50 percent of the available resources under the SBA) were made. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4- implementation of structural reforms, Following the elections, the authorities formulated a medium-term macroeconomic adjustment program that culminated in the approval by the Executive Board of an extended arrangement in an amount equivalent to SDR 1,645.55 million (165 percent of quota) in early September 1998. To date, two purchases totaling SDR 245.55 million have been made under the arrangement, the second following a financing assurances review on October 29, 1998.6 4. The first program review under the EFF arrangement could not be completed on time, because: (i) cash revenues fell far short of expectations; (ii) fiscal prospects for 1999 remained unclear, in view of continued difficulties between the government and parliament; and (iii) some structural reforms were behind schedule. In the attached letter to the Managing Director, the authorities describe the steps they have taken and intend to take to bring the EFF-supported program back on track. They also propose a rephasing of purchases. 5. Since the last Article IV consultation, the quality of statistics in Ukraine has improved, but problems remain in a number of areas. The Fund continues to provide assistance to enhance coverage and methodology. Data are in general reported on a timely basis, and the authorities regularly publish a broad range of statistics. II. ~ECENTDEVELOPMENTS~ 6. Since the last consultation, Ukraine has made progress in containing inflation, especially in the first half of 1998. However, the conduct of economic policy became complicated as investors lost confidence in emerging market economies, following the developments in Southeast Asia and, more recently, in Russia. As portfolio investors started to pull out of the treasury-bill market in the second half of 1997, Ukraine’s international reserve position weakened significantly, despite large Eurobond placements in early 1998. Nevertheless, as described below, the authorities were able to avert a Russian-type crisis in Ukraine, although they departed in several areas from the program. However, the impact of the crisis in Russia has been substantial, because of a sizable reduction in bilateral trade with Ukraine’s largest trading partner and continued pressure on the hryvnia amidst heightened capital outflows. 7. Ukraine was poised for a resumption of economic growth in the first half of 1998, but the adverse effects of the external shocks stifled this recovery and contributed to 6EBS/98/176, 10/22/98 and Supplement I, 10/27/98. ‘A comprehensive description of macroeconomic developments during the second half of 1997 and 1998 is provided in the Recent Economic Developments report accompanying this paper. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-5- renewed inflationary pressures. Real GDP declined by almost 2 percent for the year as a whole, in part owing to the difficulties in trade with Russia and some other markets (in particular for ferrous metals), although the slow progress on structural reforms also played a role. After increasing by 6 percent in the first nine months of 1998, the consumer price index (CPI) increased sharply in October, and to a lesser extent in November and December, mainly due to the large depreciation of the hryvnia in September. For 1998 as a whole, the CPI increased by about 20 percent from December to December, compared to about 29 percent projected under the program (Table 1, Figure I).’ 8. Despite a sizable fiscal adjustment in 1998, the budgetary situation remained diff~cult9 The overall cash deficit of the consolidated government was reduced from 5.6 percent of GDP in 1997 to 2.7 percent in 1998, within the limit established under the program. However, budgetary arrears on wages, pensions and social benefits (outstanding more than 1 month) increased by about Hrv 300 million during the year, while a reduction of IIrv 1 billion had been programmed. lo Adjusted for these arrears, the budget deficit in 1998 was equivalent to 3.0 percent of GDP, compared to 5.2 percent in 1997.” Despite some improvement in November and December, cash revenues were significantly weaker than expected, partly because of the general slowdown in economic activity, but also related to continued offset operations (see Box 1) and delays in the introduction of the accrual method for VAT (this was subsequently done retroactively to October 1). In addition, while expenditures were reduced from the levels envisaged earlier, the authorities did not implement *To some extent this was due to parliament blocking the increase in communal service tariffs that had been foreseen (as reported in EBS/98/176). Adjusted for this inflation would have been about 26 percent. wore detailed information on developments in January and February 1999 will be provided in a supplement to this report. “At end-1998 these arrears amounted to nearly Hrv 2.9 billion compared to Hrv 1.6 billion programmed. “However, total arrears on wages, pensions and benefits (including those outstanding less than one month) are estimated to have increased by Hrv 1.1 billion during the year. A comparison of the deficits in 1997 and 1998 adjusted for total arrears is not possible because these data have only been reported since 1998. Furthermore, information on arrears is based on monthly surveys conducted by the Ministry of Finance and not on treasuty data and therefore the reliability of the data (both for arrears outstanding more than one month and for arrears of less than one month) is uncertain. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-6- Figure 1. Ukraine: Macroeconomic Indicators, 1996-2001 Real GDP t.Pmi change from previous year) Public Finances Extemal Current Account Deficit Adtlal 2 /\ / 0 \ , \ \ \ \ \. GDP) Broad h4oney and Prices (In percent of GDP) Rqatin Sources: Ukrainian authorities; and Fund staff estimates, Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-7- expenditure control mechanisms as contemplated under the program and there were delays in implementing the treasury project.‘* 9. Following tbe reduction in the payroll tax by 5 percentage points at the onset of the program, further structural improvements in the fiscal area were implemented in 1998. VAT exemptions on local transportation and gas for households were eliminated and, as of January 1, 1999, critical imports are no longer VAT exempt. Furthermore, major improvements to the VAT were introduced, including the calculation of VAT obligations on an accruals basis mentioned above, and the levying of VAT on barter transactions. The remaining 5 percent payroll tax channeled to the Chernobyl Fund was eliminated in the context of the 1999 budget.” At the same time, partly due to the diffkulties with parliament, a number of measures envisaged under the program were not put in place. In particular, parliament did not approve a reduction in the payroll tax contribution to the Social Insurance Fund; the zero rating of the VAT on electricity, coal and imports of gas was extended for 1999;r4 and the state duty on secondary market transaction for securities was not eliminated on time.iJ Parliament has also not yet adopted a new personal income tax law. Turnover taxes earmarked for the Road and Innovation Funds were not reduced (In addition, in late 1998 the authorities introduced a two-year moratorium on all tax payments by the agricultural sector).i6 Finally, parliament lowered excise duties on alcohol and petroleum “The November mission found that the coverage of the treasury had not been extended to almost all spending agencies as had been reported earlier (this was a prior action under the program). However, by December, all spending units had been brought under the treasury except for 3 intelligence-related agencies. At the same time, however, agencies continued to use extrabudgetary accounts that were not controlled by the treasury. Rough estimates provided by the authorities suggest that spending through extrabudgetary accounts may have amounted to as much as 15 percent of budgeted expenditures although this information could not be verified. The State Tax Administration and the Customs Administration had some of the largest accounts. “To preserve Snancing for the Chernobyl Fund a portion of the VAT was earmarked. “The estimated impact of this measure is equivalent to about 1 percent of GDP in 1999. “The double taxation of treasury-bill earnings for residents of countries with which tax treaties exist was formally abolished only in January 1999. This elimination had been a prior action for the approval of the EFF arrangement but, despite a decision in August, the State Tax Administration pursued tax payers for a while. %hile the staff does not have adequate information to accurately assess the impact of this decision, it could result in a revenue loss of about 0.548 percent of GDP in 1999. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-8- Box 1: Rigidities in Revenue Structure, 1998 Ceneal eannarkcd rcveOES 6% 34% Ukraine faces * serious stmchd revenue problem. Although the central gcv ernment receives 67 penxnt of alI revenues, a large part of revawes is either earmarked far special purposes (e.g. Pension Fund) of not in cash es a result of netting cperaticr~. In 1998. only 27 percent of revenue came to the cuttral gwzmmen tinthefcrmcf mearmsrked cash (about 10 percent of GDP). The central go” emment used its cash revenue to psy, amcng other things. wages. social bend&, and tc service debt. The present revenue structure severely restrict.3 the ability of the government to implement the budget cr ta set priorities in the face cfrevenue shcrtfalls. The problem is compcunded by seascdity in revenue pufotman~. In sane months, cash expendi- that are pmteded by law (ix, wages, bendits, etc.) exceeds unearmarked cash revenue of the centd gowmmmt. The EVF-supported propfun stipulates a steady increase in cash revenue as a percentage of non-earmadud revenue tc provide the cdnl gcvanmcn t with greater tlexibility and ta reduce the risk of accumulating new arrears on wages. social benefits and interest payments In the last quarter of 1998, unuamarked cash revenue was about 60 p-t higher relative to the same p&xl in 1997. In addition, the prdminay results for the tirst two mcntbs of 1999 show an increase of about SO percent relative tc the same period in 1998. products starting in January 1999,” although the change in the taxes on petroleum was vetoed by the president, and also rejected proposals by the govermnent to ebminate budgetary privileges. 10. Progress toward pension reform has been slow. A draft law on the introduction of private pensions, in line with World Bank recommendations, is currently under consideration by parliament. A draft law to reform the state pension system was also submitted, but this “Since excise rates had been established in ECU terms, the rates became higher than intended in domestic currency terms following the depreciation of the hryvnia. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-9- draft was inadequate and further work is underway. Effective January 1, pensions were increased due to indexation.” 11. During most of 1998, the conduct of monetary policy was compromised by the government’s heavy reliance on the NBU to finance its deficit and to service public debt. In an effort to contain the inflationary effects of such operations, the NBU used its reserves to absorb liquidity and to keep the exchange rate broadly stable. However, given the loss of access to international capital mark&s and the substantial decline in of%cial reserves, this policy was discontinued in late August. To tighten liquidity, the NBU increased the reserve requirement from 15 percent to 16.5 percent in September. This decision, accompanied by the restructuring of government debt in August through October which reduced the need for. central bank credit to govemment,‘9 enabled the NBU to implement a tight monetary policy. Banks’ liquidity remained tight in October and early November, mainly because the NBU changed the requirement, and reframed from providing refinance credit.*O 12. In the last two months of 1998, redemptions of treasury bills held by banks led to the emergence of excess liquidity in some banks.” The additional measures undertaken by the NBU were enough to eliite this excess liquidity.” In mid-December, in the face of ‘*According to law, pensions (and wages) are indexed ifintlation during a given period exceeds 5 percent. However, the authorities have made a decision to limit the amount of indexation due to resource constraints, ‘?By September 1998, the NBU had become the sole purchaser of treasury biis. Demand for t-bills by banks disappeared in late August, after about Hrv 800 million of existing treasury bills were rescheduled over a period of 6 years, with interest in the first year at 40 percent and thereafter linked to the 6-month yield on treasury bills. zr’During this period, interest rates in the interbank market remained above 60 percent per annum. “Liquidity was distributed unevenly amongst individual banks and, for the banking system as a whole, banks did not meet reserve requirements. Interest rates in the interbsnk market dropped to below 15 percent in the first weeks of December. *%e NBU eliminated the possibility for commercial banks to count treasury biis held as insurance against household deposits as part of required reserves. Because the banks with excess reserves also held most of these treasury bills, this decision automatically forced these banks to use other liquid assets to meet the reserve requirement. At the same time, however, the NBU allowed banks to count a share of cash in vault towards their required reserves. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 10 - strong political pressures, the NBU’s refihancc rate was lowered from 82 to 60 per& (Figure 2), and, effective January 1, the required reserve ratio was lowered from 16.5 to 15 percent. The end-December performance criterion on net domestic assets of the NBU was exceeded by a sign&ant margin, as was the indicative target on base money. The performance criterion on net in&national reserves was also not observed (Table 2). Despite these developments, as noted above, intlation did not increase toward the end of the year, partly because of the banks’ reluctance to lend and due to restrictions on purchasing foreign exchange (see below). 13. Aa reservc~ declined, the authorities could no longer protect the strblllty of the hayvnia. Pressures on the exchange rate were compounded by developments in Russia. The hryvuia depreciated rapidly to Hrv 3.4 per dollar by end-September after the introduction of the new exchange rate band ofHtv 2.5 to 3.5 pe.r dollar, although it subsequently was kept stable at HIV 3.43 per dollar. This was achieved mainly through the introduction of measures to control demand for foreign exchange, including closure of the interbank ma&et for foreign exchange, strict enforcement of documentation requirements, limits on cash transactions in foreign exchange bureaus, and, on occasion, foreign exchange rationing. Furthermore, the authorities imposed a ban on the transfer of interest proceeds received by certain nonresident \ inveators,W limited advance import payments, restricted the provision of trade credits, and effectively denied access to foreign exchange for the servicing of foreign loans on which the interest rate exceeded a designated limit. 14. As expected, following the introduction of the restrictions, an offshore market for foreign exchange emerged quickly.” As the NBU tightened liquidity, the parallel market disappeared in late October and early November, and the NBU purchased a Q&ant amount of foreign exchange in the market. However, with the monetary expansion in December, the spread between the official and the parallel market exchange rates increased to about 20 percent. To contain pressures on the exchange rate and limit the scope for distortions in the market, the NBU did not inbzrveue. in the foreign exchange market in December and January.” By end-January the parallel rate was about Hrv 3.7-3.8 per dollar, about 10 percent %I practice this move was symbolic, as the rate was essentially not applied to actual trausactions. ?%is restriction was imposed in the context of the conversion of treasury biis held by nonresidents to prevent a loss of reserves from repatriation of proceeds by nonresidents that chose not to participate. %ates in this market were quoted as high as HIV 4.5 per dollar in late September/early October. -or most of January, daily demand was around $100 million, with supply less than (continued...) Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- ll- Figure 2. Ukraine: Monetary indicators, 1995-98 Money and prices (January 1995=100) .t.n Apr Jut Od Jan A+, Jul Cct Jan APT J”l act JWl APT Jut Cct 1995 19Qe 1997 1999 25 20 15 10 5 0 -5 Interest Rates and Intlation (In pen%nt per month) Jul Ott Jan APT Jut Ott JCI” APT Jul Ott Jan Apr Jil Cct 1986 1997 1998 Sources: Ukminisn authorities; and Fund staff estimates. l/New aocounting standards inlroduced January 1.1998. 2/End of month observations. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12- more depreciated than the official rate. While there has been a strong real appreciation of the hryvnia against the Russian ruble since September, the real effective exchange rate has not moved significantly in recent months (Figure 3). 15. The situation in the banking sector, while diffkult, did not deteriorate following developments in Russia and the exchange rate depreciation.” Diagnostic studies of the seven largest banks (accounting for about 55 percent of banking assets), coordinated by the Fund and with participation of the World Bank, TACIS, and USAID, were completed by end- December as scheduled under program, The results of the studies suggest that five of the seven banks are insolvent and initial estimates suggest that a capital increase of about Hrv 1.8 to 2.4 billion (1.7 to 2.3 percent of 1998 GDP) would be needed to bring the insolvent banks into compliance with capital adequacy ratios.** During the period September-December 1998;banking supervision was strengthened along the lines of the program and procedures to liquidate some insolvent banks were initiated. At the same time, because of the existing problems in the banking system, full implementation of some prudential regulations as well as strict enforcement of reserve requirements were delayed until an action plan for bank restructuring can be put in place. The Law on the National Bank, which had been expected to be in place by November, has still not been approved by parliament. This has also delayed the Law on Banks and Banking Activity, which will be crucial for a general restructuring of the banking system. 16. Trade volumes declined in the second half of 1998, in response to a tightening of the financing constraint, disruptions in trade with Russia, and a reduction in demand for Ukraine’s principal exports. Trade with Russia, and to a lesser extent, other BR0 countries, fell sharply in the third quarter of 1998. Nongas imports from Russia are estimated to have declined by 27 percent, while exports to Russia fell by almost 35 percent (relative to the same quarter in 1997). At the same time, exports to non-BR0 countries were down by about 16 percent in value terms relative to 1997, but the bulk of this decline was in the metals sector and was accounted for by price declines in international markets, Imports were also lower due to reduced energy imports and the impact of the exchange rate depreciation. For the year as a whole, the external trade and current accounts are estimated to have been slightly stronger than programmed. However, lower than projected exceptional financing flows (from “(...contmued) $20 million. However, this imbalance could have reflected in part the market’s expectation of a change in exchange rate policy and a possible depreciation in the near future. *‘Demand deposits grew somewhat in the fourth quarter of 1998 and foreign currency deposits remained stable in dollar terms after having dropped in September. Direct exposure by Ukrainian banks to Russia appears to have been limited. ‘*The higher estimate would bring the capital up to a minimum of 8 percent of total assets (not risk weighted). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13 - Figure 3. Ukraine: Exchange Rate Developments Nominal Exchange Rate, Janwy I9%-January 1999 (I” tqwi. per U.S. ddu) 2.5 . 2.0 . Real Bilateral Exchange Rates, January 1995-December 1998 Real EffectiveExchange Rates. January 1995-November 199g 140 . 120 . ea. Sources: Ukrainian authorities; and Fund st&estimates. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14 - the World Bank and the Fund) and unprogrammed cash payments to certain creditors (see below) resulted in a lower level of external reserves ($950 million or less than 3 weeks of imports).29 r” 17. Ukraine was ,rucccssful in rescheduling a substantial part of the treasury-bill debt held by nonresidents. In September, a substantial amount of the treasury bills was converted into a 2-year zero coupon Eurobond with an annual yield of 20 percent and a good- faith up-front payment of 20 percent.“’ In October, Ukraine reached agreement with clients of Chase Manhattan to convert a fiduciary loan that fell due into a new loan at an interest rate of . 16.75 percent, maturing in October 2000. Thrs agreement involved an up-front payment of 25 percent of the value of the original loan. 18. On the structural side, besides the reforms envisaged in the fiscal and banking areas discussed above, the program focused on five broad areas namely: (i) deregulation and public administration reform; (ii) privatixation, enterprise restructuring and demonopohzation, (iii) trade reform; (iv) agriculture reform; and (v) energy sector reform. Progress was made in a number of these areas, in&ding in administration reform, deregulation, privatisation and demonopoliition, and trade reform. However, reforms in other areas, especially in the agriculture and energy sectors, fell short of those envisaged under the program. The status of the structural benchmarks for end-December is shown in Table 3 and the detailed status of implementation of other structural measures is shown in the matrix in Appendix V, ‘%is excludes $100 million that were reclassified as domestic assets after the NBU failed to recover a foreign exchange deposit in November 1998. The contract specitied that if the depository would be unable to repay the deposit, the NBU would receive Gazprom bonds issued by the govermnent of Ukraine and held by the depository as a collateral. Subsequently, in late December, the contract was amended to extend the maturity of the deposit and to increase the amount of the collateral. At this time, it is uncertain whether the depository would be able to repay the $100 million to the NBU or give the Gazprom bonds to the NBU instead. MAt end-December, usable international reserves amounted to $796 million. The difference between the $950 million and S796 million is explained by about $104 million encumbered reserves and S49 million in precious metals that have been excluded from international reserves in accordance with international standards. For 1999 onward, the definition of net (and gross) international reserves has been adjusted to continue to exclude these items. The reserve levels were confirmed in a review by an international accounting tirm in late 1998, although this review did not entail a check with the depositories of the reserves. A lirll audit of the international reserves of the NBU at end-1998 has been contracted. “‘For more details, see EBS1981176, 10/22/98, and Supplement 1, 10/27/98. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 15 - 19. In the area of administrative reform, significant progress was made in reducing the size of the public sector. The number of public sector employees was reduced by 280,000 (nearly 6 percent of public sector employment), close to the program target of 300,000 by end-December 1998. Most of this reduction took place in the military, the size of which was reduced by 190,000, and there were significant cuts in other areas, especially public administration, The authorities are, with World Bank assistance, developing a comprehensive program for the general reform of public administration although actual implementation has been slower than programmed. In this regard, a Cabinet of Ministers decision was taken in early March 1999 that implements the reorganization of the Ministry of Finance, which was a structural benchmark for end-December 1998 under the program. 20. Substantial steps have been taken to promote private enterprise activity and enterprise restructuring, including deregulation, demonopolization, and strengthening bankruptcy procedures, In the area of deregulation, procedures for licensing and registration have been reviewed as required under the program and are being gradually liberabzed. Also, most license fees are now transferred to the treasury, although under the program all fees were to have been transferred by January 1, 1999. Steps have been taken to reduce the number of inspections at enterprises, although there have been problems with implementation especially because of simultaneous efforts to improve tax payment compliance In the area of demonopolization, as programmed, five state monopolies, mostly in the agricuhural sector, were reorganized and the government has taken steps to promote competition in a number of activities, including in the areas of communications, air and rail transport. Measures to improve bankruptcy procedures have been implemented as envisaged, and are continuing with the assistance of the World Bank, TACIS, and other donors. 21. The mass privatization program is now almost completed, and the end-December 1998 target under the program appears to have been met (with some delay) at end-January 1999. After an initial period of inaction, significant progress was made in late December 1998 and early January 1999 in the privatization of units under Bread of Ukraine, although the specific target of 300 units was missed by a small margin. In addition, the authorities have offered for sale shares in 24 large enterprises (compared to a program target of 20) using their own revised tender procedures. A plan for privatizing Ukrtelecom was developed as envisaged by end- December 1998, but was rejected by parliament. 22. The authorities have resisted calls for more protectionism despite the diicult situation and the imposition of some controls on foreign exchange transactions, and have made further progress in liberalizing the trade system. The structural performance criterion on the reduction in the number of commodities subject to combined ad valorem and specific tariffs was observed. 23. At the same time, the implementation of reforms in the agricultural and energy sectors was disappointing. Agriculture continues to be hampered by delays in privatizing enterprises in the agro-industrial complex and by the absence of a functioning land market Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 16- (land reform measures under the program, even though modest, were not implemented), as well as by pervasive government interference. In the energy sector, while steps were taken in developing a competitive electricity market, including in privatizing regional electricity distribution companies, and tariffs have been raised, cash collection remains low. The coal sector continues to consume budgetary resources as its restructuring has been delayed. A transparent, competitive market for gas has not yet been developed. Several gas auctions have failed to generate cash sales, partly because the minimum prices set for the auctions were too high to attract demand. Nevertheless, some progress has been made in separating the various activities of the newly established gas conglomerate. III. POLICY DISCUSSIONS AND STEPS AHEAD 24. The authorities stressed the importance for Ukraine of continued Fund support under the EFF arrangement They acknowledged the deviations from the EFF-supported program, but noted that the external environment had been much more difficult than expected and that the government had done everything possible to prevent a default on external obligations, high inflation, a continuously depreciating currency, and a run on banks. Furthermore, relations between the parliament and the government bad deteriorated and, in several areas, presidential decrees had been overturned or populist measures were introduced. At the same time, the authorities have recently undertaken strong measures to bring the structural reform agenda largely back on track. A. Macroeconomic Outlook 25. The original objectives of the program for 1999 have to be modified. The crisis in Russia and weak international commodity prices, the loss of access to international capital markets, and the slower-than-expected structural reforms in a number of areas have likely set back the resumption of growth by at least a year. Prospects for recovery in Ukraine’s industry will continue to be adversely affected by: (i) lower import demand in Russia; (ii) higher cost of imported inputs due to the depreciation of the hryvnia; (iii) weak markets for metals and agricultural products (Ukraine’s main export commodities); and (iv) reluctance by foreigners to invest in Ukraine in the current uncertain environment. Under the circumstances, real GDP is projected to decline by about 3% percent. The authorities aim to contain inflation to under 20 percent (end-of-period). With the impact of expected increases in communal service tariffs (see below) estimated at some 9 percentage points, underlying inflation would be only slightly higher than originally targeted for 1999. B. Fiscal Policy 26. A strong Tical adjustment in 1999 will he key to maintaining macroeconomic stability. Parliament approved the 1999 budget on December 31, 1998 with a deficit Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17. equivalent to 1.5 percent of GDP (EMP definition),3* baaed on somewhat optimistic revenue projections. Given that little external financing can be expected, this would either have resulted in more arrears or the authorities would have had to borrow heavily from the NBU which would have negatively at&ted macroeconomic stability. The authorities agreed with these shortcomings, but noted that the approval of the 1999 budget was a major achievement because, for the first time, the budget included a provision that allows the government to reduce expenditure commitments in the case of shortfalls in revenues or financing without parliamentary approval. 27. Taking advantage of the latter provision, the authorities have since adopted realistic revenue projections, and will contain the budget deficit to no more than Brv 1.34 billion (1 percent of GDP) in 1999 (Table 4). This would imply a commitment surplus equivalent to 0.6 percent of GDP, taking into account a planned reduction of expenditure arrears on wages, pensions and social payments by HN 2.15 billion,” and a primary surplus of 1.6 percent. To achieve these targets, a substantial fiscal adjustment is required as shown below, involving expenditure cuts across the board, except when protected by law (mostly social expenditures). While acknowledging that it would be difficult, the authorities were confident that these targets could be achieved, although there would be little’ room for slippages or unexpected expenditures. The fiscal situation will be especially difficult in the first quarter because of seasonal@ in revenue performance, and substantial external debt service payments that fall due, requiring heavy reliance on financing from the NJ3U. Limits on expenditure commitments for the first quarter consistent with the revised revenue projections and the reduced budget deficit have been issued to spending agencies. 28. Total revenue is expected to decline from 35.2 percent of GDP in 1998 to 32.6 percent in 1999. This is attributable mainly to the tkrther reduction in the payroll tax by 5 percentage points by eliminating the Chernobyl tax,3’ lower projected profit taxes associated with an increase in the depreciation coefficient, and a fail in revenues from the agricultural sector as a result of the moratorium on tax payments. Expenditures would be cut from ‘*In the Ukrainian classification, which counts privatization receipts as revenues, this represents a deficit equivalent to 1 percent of GDP. “The amount of arrears the authorities intend to pay off includes arrears with maturities of less than one month. 34The overall payroll tax rate now stands at 39 percent, compared to 49 percent at the beginning of 1998. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 18. 38 percent of GDP in 1998 to 32 percent in 1999,3’ including a reduction of the wage bill in relation to GDP compared to the 1998 budget.36 Ukraine. Consolidated Govemment Fimmx Summary, 1997-99 29. As noted before, significant improvements to the tax system, especially in the areas of VAT and payroll taxes have been implemented already, despite some backtracking and some delays in implementation of measures originally envisaged in the program. However, the staff expressed disappointment that many other measures in the tax area that had been envisaged were either not included in the 1999 budget or rejected by parliament. The staff expressed particular concern about the moratorium on taxation of the agricultural sector and the continued zero rating of VAT on energy products, which lead to significant revenue losses. The authorities acknowledged this but noted that, given the strained relation with parliament, they had no choice. They stressed, however, that they would continue to work with parliament on these issues with a view to introducing appropriate amendments as soon as possible although, in most areas, this would only be possible in the context of the year 2000 budget, 351ncluding cuts in the Chernobyl Fund, capital spending, basic research, and defense. 36Effective January 1, 1999, the monthly minimum wage was increased from Hrv 55 to Hrv 73.7. This increase has a relatively modest impact on the wage bill, as civil service wages are not linked to the minimum wage. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 19. 30. While progress has been made in strengthening tax administration and the treasury, these efforts need to be continued. The staff expressed concern about the large increase in tax arrears during the year. 37 The authorities agreed that additional steps were still necessary to reduce tax arrears and to sell for cash property seized in lieu of tax payments. They noted that the large share of barter transactions made tax collection especially difficult. The authorities were encouraged to immediately stop the apparent increase in transactions being channeled through extrabudgetary accounts following the expansion of the coverage of the treasury to all main spending agencies and to move these accounts to the treasury no later than September. In the meantime, to better monitor these accounts, the government has decided to freeze ail extrabudgetary accounts of spending agencies if they do not report on a timely basis. 31. The staff also expressed concern about delays in rationalizing the government expenditure program, in particular the elimination of budgetary privileges (subsidies) and the failure to increase communal service tariffs. The authorities stressed that although parliament had rejected proposals to eliminate budgetary privileges, they intended to press for their removal again. As to communal service tariffs, the parliamentary decision to block increases was overturned by the Constitutional Court on March 9, and electricity and gas tariffs, which are in the purview of the central government, were increased by 20 and 25 percent, respectively.” The authorities have instructed the local governments to ensure that the tariffs for heating, rent, sewage, hot water and local transportation will be increased to full cost coverage.39 This process is to be completed no later than end-April 1999 and will be examined in the second program review. The approved budget contained some allocations for subsidies on energy and these allocations will be used to pay the higher energy bills. 32. The reduction in the number of employees in budgetary organizations is expected to have a significant fiscal impact over time and, in particular, the large reduction in military employees should contain military expenditure.“’ The important progress in this area in 1998, combined with further reductions planned under the program, should make it easier for government to reduce expenditures, while improving remunerations for remaining “Tax arrears (including contributions to the Pension Fund) increased by an estimated HIV 8.9 billion (8.6 percent of GDP) to HIV 13.9 billion in 1998. Comparisons with earlier years are problematic due to frequent tax amnesties in 1996 and 1997. ‘8The authorities believe, that combined with measures to reduce the costs of providing these services, these increases will be sufficient to ii~lly cover costs. This issue will be reassessed at mid-year and, if necessary, further adjustments will take place at that time. 390n average, tariffs for these services would need to increase by about 57 percent 401n the last two years, in real terms, military expenditures in the budget have been reduced by 17 percent. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 20 - workers over time. However, the staff stressed that these steps would not be possible without comprehensive reforms of the health and education sectors. Action plans for the reform of these sectors are being prepared with the assistance of the World Bank, although implementation, especially in the education sector, could take more time than envisaged when the extended arrangement was approved. Box 2. Social Safety Net and Poverty Issues A viable and effective social safety net is essential for the success of Ukraine’s economic transformation. While Ukraine has made some. improvements in the structure of social protection programs in recent years, many of the programs remain poorly targeted and complex. These deficiencies, combined with severe financing constraints, have limited the provision of assistance to those most in need. While many privileges are granted under a plethora of social laws, very few are being paid. There is a continued need to strengthen the means-tested aspect of subsidies and ration&e the pension and unemployment insumnce systems. Current indicators of poverty in Ukraine cannot be interpreted easily. The percentage of the population living below the ofticial poverty lcvel (Hrv 73.7 per month in 1998) IS around 17 percent. However, this measure is a crude indicator, since it is not adjusted for unpaid wages, nor for the value of transfers and in-kind income that households may receive. From another, also imperfect, perspective, household surveys indicate that the number of people who classified themselves as poor was 68 percent in 1998, or more than 20 percentage points higher thani” 1993. One of the main elements in the targeted social protection are subsidies for housing and other communal services, which cover between 14 and 22 percent of Ukraine’s population, depending on the time of year. While there has been important progress since 1995 regarding the means-tested nature of the subsidies, delays with the installation of gas meters have so far impeded futher progress in tbis area. Ukraine also has a complex system of family benefits, as well as various budgetary privileges that cover activities in the health, education, culture and transport sectors. These apply to various groups of population, includiig adolescents, military personnel and war veterans. An example of poor targeting are subsidies for public transportation, whereby 60 percent of the population are exempted from covering these costs Also, there appear to be incentives to abuse the. privileges of the extrabudgetary Social Insurance Fund, which administers sickness, health, and resort benefits on the part of trade onions. The unemployment insnmnce program was under used in its fist few years of operation, largely because of the increased employment opportonities in the informal economy, the small opportonity cost implied in the low level of benefits, and the social stigma associated with people registering as unemployed With the growth in the number of officially unemployed, by 1997 the program’s resources became strained, with 70 percent of its budget used for the “passive” payment of benefits, leaving very little for such activities as retraining and job search. In mid-l 998.47 percent of recipients were paid Ihe minimum benefit of Hrv 16.6 per month, while only 4 percent were being retrained. Given the projected further increases in of&al unemployment, the program will fmd it diflkult to comply with its insurance role, let alone succeed in its “proactive” activities. 33. The staff enquired about the budgetary impact of the increase in pensions as of January 1, 1999 and about progress with pension reform. On the first, the authorities noted that the increase would only affect a limited group of poor pensioners, as other pensions would not be increased due to resource constraints. Furthermore, to raise more revenues for Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-21- the pension timd, a special fee on mobile phones and real estate transactions was introduced. As to pension reform, the authorities stressed that the proposals that had been presented to parliament had been inadequate, but that they were now again working with World Bank staff to develop a comprehensive pension reform plan which could be finaliied by end-June 1999. Finally, the authorities plan to reduce pension arrears by around Hrv 650 million in 1999 (about half from the central government). C. Monetary and Exchange Rnte Policy 34. Monetary policy in 1999 aims to contain underlying inflation, and to minimise pressures on the exchange rate, especially since the authorities intend to liberalize the exchange rate system. Accordingly, the NBU monetary policy will serve as the anchor, with a tight monetary program, which, in view of the financing requirement of the budget, at this time would permit only a modest increase in credit to the economy. 35. On February 9 the authorities widened the exchange rate baud from Hrv 2.5-3.5 to Hrv 3.4-4.6 per dollar, as an initial step toward liberalization of the exchange rate system. In view of the economic uncertainties in the region and lack of investors’ confider&in emerging markets, the authorities have been reluctant to move quickly toward liig exchange restrictions and reopening the interbank market. They believe that a significant move in this area needs to be postponed until the reserve position of the NBU has improved to strengthen market confidence. In the staffs view, however, the authorities have little choice but to move at this time, especially since the external position is weak and is not expected to improve signilicantly in the near future. Furthermore, while a stable exchange rate might be desirable as an anchor for macroeconomic stability, this cannot be sustained through administrative measures. The existing measures have already led to the emergence of a distortionary and nontransparent mechanism for the determination of the exchange rate and there are clear indications of pressures in the system. Accordingly, and despite their reservations, the authorities have agreed to reopen the interbank market for foreign exchange prior to the Executive Board consideration of the first program review under the EFF arrangement in order to remove the existing exchange restriction and to introduce more transparency in the determination of the exchange rate. At the same time, the restrictions on debt service for loans with interest exceeding 20.5 percent per annum and on the provision of trade credits were removed, and understandings were reached to eliminate the remaining restrictions and the surrender requirement no later than end-June 1999. 36. To relieve pressure on the exchange rate the authorities have already begun to significantly tighten monetary policy. In the beginning of February, the NBU eliminated the possibility to count cash in vault as part of required reserves and increased the required reserve ratio to 17 percent. To Cuther absorb liquidity, the NBU also started to sell Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 22 - certificates of deposit.” As a result, interbank interest rates increased to above 60 percent at end-February.” With these changes in place, the move to a more flexible exchange regime should not cause a significant depreciation ofthe exchange rate, although this possibility cannot be ruled out. The staff stressed that, given the low level of reserves, there is no room for sales of foreign exchange to defend the new band if the rate were to come under pressure and that monetary policy will have to provide the nominal anchor. The authorities agreed with this assessment. 37. A major constraint on monetary and exchange rate policy for 1999 is the low level of reserves (Figure 4). At end-January gross reserves of the NBU had declined to just over $640 million, equivalent to 2 weeks of imports, and with about $160 million in debt service payments in February they declined to about $520 million. After that, with purchases from the Fund and resumed disbursements by the World Bank, gross reserves would increase for the year as a whole, but only by a very modest amount. 38. Taking the above into account, and expecting a small increase in velocity, broad money is projected to grow by about 10 percent in 1999, substantially less than in 1998.” (Tables 556). The authorities realieed that faster monetary growth at this point could have a seriously adverse impact on price and exchange rate stability, and are prepared to tighten the monetary stance further, if warranted. 39. As the diagnostic studies of the seven largest banks confirm, the banking system faces diffkult problems that need to be addressed. The authorities have begun to work closely with the Fund staff and other interested parties to design a restructuring strategy for the banking system. As a first step, the authorities intend to design action plans for the individual banks by end-March 1999. The size of a potential capital injection by the government at this time is not clear and will have to be examined once the action plans have been finalized. At this time, the aim would be to achieve most, if not all of the capital increase, through the shareholders of the banks (mainly out of retained earnings)” and over a two year “These certificates are sold through weekly auctions. The NBU intends to offer a range of maturities. 4*Both for overnight and longer maturities “The monetary program for 1999 assumes an increase in velocity by about 8 percent, as the uncertainty introduced by recent developments is expected to continue to impact the demand for money, particularly in the first half of 1999. “According to the studies, all but one of the seven banks appeared to have net positive earnings and to be liquid, although this was based on data from.before the depreciation of the hryvnia. If a capital injection by the government will be required this may require some (continued...) Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 23 - 5.0 2.5 2.0 1.5 1.0 \ 0.5 Figure 4. Ukraine: Gross International Reserves end NBU Intervention, July 1997-December 1998 GTOSS lntuYlaticmrd Rcscrv*i (In billions of U.S. dollars) -100 -200 Sourixs: Ukraiiian authorities, and Fund staff estimates. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 24 - period. At the same time, efforts are confirming to improve banking supervision. The banking supervision department has been rcorganized to enhance its capacity to monitor implementation of prudential requirements, in particular those related to loan loss provisioning. The staff stressed the importance of moving quickly with the reforms as delays could fiuther increase the level of nonperforming loans and raise the potential costs of recapitalization. D. Structural Reforms 40. As described in Section II, progress has been made in introducing reforms in a number of structural areas. Nevertheless, the authorities are aware that further progress is urgently needed to achieve a resumption of economic growth and to attract foreign investment. In addition, delays in implementing reforms in some areas have contributed to postponement of disbursements by the World Bank. The authorities remain committed to implementing the reforms outlined in theii request for the extended arrangement and, in cooperation with the Fund and World Bank staff, have taken steps to address outstanding issues, particularly in the energy sector, administrative reform and expenditure control. The details of the steps that will be taken in the next few months are outlined in the attached Supplemental Memorandum ofEconomic Policies. The key structural measures for 1999 are summarized in Box 3. Specific targets for structural reforms in the second half of 1999 will be fiuther elaborated in the context of the second program review. 41. The staff particularly welcomed efforts by the authorities to establish a more business friendly environment, including in the area of deregulation. However, there is still considerable swpe for corruption and red tape, and other practices continue to hamper private sector development and foreign investment. The authorities noted that these issues continue to be high on their agenda and that several of the steps that have been taken (including improved transparency of fiscal operations, audits of the NBU’s reserves and the planned audit of the gas company) would contribute to improving the situation. 42. Significant preparatory work had been done in designing a program of public administration reform, but until recently few concrete actions had been taken. As the initial step, the authorities have now initiated the consolidation of Ministries and Committees, which would bring most Committees under relevant Ministries. Under the new structure, Ministers would have substantial input in the appointment of heads of Committees. This reform should strengthen Ministers’ authority and capacity to implement reforms. This will be liuther enhanced by specific reforms of the organization and structure of several ministries. In particular, reforms of the Ministries of Fiice, Agriculture, Labor, and the Environment have already started and action plans for other ministries will be final&d shortly. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 25 - Box 3: Key Structural Reform Policies for 1999 Administrative reform: It is intended ta move forcefully on the consolidation and streamhning of ministries, committees, and agencies under the Cabinet of Ministers, ta strengthen the govemment’s policy implementation capacity, and on the rcorganization of several individual ministries Agriculture: The key element in agticulhual reform is tbe development of a competitive land market. although progress will be vay diicult given parliamentsly opposition. The program will also aim ta reduce the government’s role in this sector and to improve its tinancial disciplii. Banking sector: Following completion of the diagnostic studies for the seven large banks, the program will focus on preparation and implementation of comprehensive action plans for the reform of these banks, and on further strengthening of banking @pervision. Exchange and trade system: The exchange system will be 1iberaIized by opening the interbank market, and exchange restrictions will be removed. Average and maximum import tari!% will be tiuther reduced. Energy sector: The authorities intend to continw to improve transparency, cash collection rates, and timancial discipline in the energy market, includiig by raising communal service tariffs to fidl cost-recovery levels and by improving &ec.tiveness of the gas auctions. Fiscal sector: Structural reform will focus on a further reduction in the number of budge&y employees; rationalization of the expenditure program in areas such as health and education; elimination of extrabudgetary accounts; strengthening of expenditure control; increasing cash revenue; and rationrdiiation of tax policy by reducing or eliminating exemptions, and reducing the tax burden. The introduction of a new tax code is planned. Privatization and deregulation: The program will include the completion of voucher privatization, includiig privatization (at least 70 percent of shares) ofremaining enterprises under “Bread of Ukraine,” sale of 100 percent of shares in large attractive grain silos, and privatization of large enterprises for cash including in the telecommunications and energy sectors It is also intended to make further progress in deregulation to improve the climate for entrepreneurs. 43. The agriculture sector reforms have run into diffkulty in parliament. Indeed, as noted earlier, given the strong lobby for agriculture in parliament, the authorities introduced a two-year tax moratorium for this sector. They also continue to provide energy at subsidiied rates to fertilizer producers. In the staffs view, these measures delay adjustment, and in the meantime, increase budgetary pressures. The authorities explained that the tax moratorium had been introduced to preempt a sbnllar initiative by parliament. However, notwithstanding the political constraints, the authorities have decided to introduce a number of steps to accelerate privatization and improve financial discipline in this sector, as described in the attached supplemental MEP. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicI Box 4: Environmental Issues Ukraine’s large industrial and energy base is a source of continuing environmental challenges. At present, Ukraine’s main current environmental problems BTC air and water pollution and municipal waste management. These are especially heavy in traditional mining and industrial regions, mostly in the eastern part of the country. In addition, there is the pivotal problem of damage control from the Chernobyl nuclear disaster, which would include an eventual closure of all blocks of this power station. Finally, there is a need for industry-specific actions in certain areas, mainly related ta the prevention of environmental accidents Tom the deteriorating infrastlucti. The authorities are addressing these problems with the help of bilateral and multilateral agencies, although the effectiveness of their response is constrained by the lack of funds and institutional hmitatia~.. In particular. the World Bank has been actively involved in project support in these areas, with close to $75 million across all projects. Regrettably, though, tbe implementation of some projects, including an Institutional Development Fund grant for improvement of environmental policy, has so far been slowed or stalled by parliament. Also the closure of all of the Chernobyl reactors is held up compared to the original schedule of 1998, since the authorities are waiting for the campleticm of additiona\ capac.iQ at two other nu&a stations. wticb has been delayed due to fmancing issues. 44. Energy sector reforms continue to aim at creating a more transparent market. Five auctions for gas were held in 1998, with little success, partly because of unrealistically high minimum prices that had been established for participation in the auctions. To accelerate progress in this area, steps have been taken to increase participation in the auctions. In particular, budgetary organizations (including local governments) and communal service companies will now be required to purchase gas at the auctions and the minimum price for the auctions will be unified.‘5 The results of the auction held in February were not encouraging, although some budgetary organizations purchased gas for cash. E. Other Issues 45. Progress has been made in improving statistics, although in some instances, particularly in the area of national accounts, serious data problems persist. Furthermore, implementation of past technical assistance has been slow, due to staf%ng and resource constraints. The authorities are aware of the need to continue to work in this area but noted that tinther technical assistance is needed. They have made efforts in a number of areas to bring statistics in line with international standards and they are investigating the possibility for Ukraine’s subscription to the Fund’s SDDS. Continued progress with the implementation of 45The authorities applied a dual minimum pricing system, one for gas produced domestically, and one for gas received as payment for transit of Russian gas to Western Europe. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 27 - the treasury project should also allow more meaningRt1 classification of fiscal accounts in the near future. Preliminary results are already available. The authorities expressed hope that they could count on continued technical assistance from the Fund and other organizations in these areas. Box 5: The Millennium Bug Ukraine’s susceptibility to the YZK problem is a serious challenge, although exposure varies greatly across sectors and economic agents. On tbe one hand, problems for most of the newly-created private banks and cntaprises are likely to be minimal, since much of the equipment sold in Ukraine atIer independence has updated codes, while use of older cotnputcrs among these is fairly rare. On the other hand, many formerly state- owned banks (about 30 percent of all commercial banks) and enterprises appear to have inherited older sothvare that may need complete rewriting. Among enterprises, the power sector may be especially vulnerable as computer crashes there have the potential ta block the entire power grid. The authorities have made some et&t aimed at fixing these problems. The NFN has been involved in overseeing the software in commercial banks and that used in settl~nents on the interbank market, with the testing of the latter scheduled in the first half of 1999. With the respect to the power sector, in August 1998, the Cabinet of Ministers issued B decree demanding that nuclear power enterprises introduce necessary changes to the soilware end report to the Cabinet in the summer of 1999. However, the authorities’ &orts, as well as those of enterprises and banks, are seriously conslxained by the lack of funds, and very little action appears to have been undertaken so far in comoliance with the authorities’ messurcs. IV. BALANCE OF PAYMENTS PROSPECXS, EXTERNAL FINANCING, AND CAPACII’Y TO REPAY THE FUND 46. Despite the developments in Russia, the overall balance of payments outlook for Ukraine in 1999 and beyond has not changed significantly in terms of the path of the current account, compared to the original program (Table 7). However, the levels of both exports and imports are now expected to be significantly lower based on developments in the second half of 1998. Exports and imports are expected to be relatively flat in 1999 before recovering in 2000 and beyond, although at a slightly slower pace than expected before. As before, capital intlows in 1999 are expected to be limited to disbursements on project loans and some balance of payments support from the World Bank and the European Union, with no access to international capital markets (Table 8). The lower level of exports will raise the ’ debt service ratio slightly compared to the original program. 47. However, the level of international reserves is now projected to be lower than in the original program. As explained in section II, this is the result of somewhat lower disbursements by the World Bank in 1998 and 1999, payments to private creditors as part of restructuring agreements and the unexpected decision by a western bank to take possession of a $75 million deposit that the NBU had placed with the bank to guarantee payment of treasury-bills it held (see also EBS/98/176 and Supplement 1). As noted earlier, it also reflects Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 28 - a redefinition of reserves by the staff. As a result of this, and the limited amount of new financing that is available, the level of gross reserves is now projected to remain below 4 weeks of import coverage until 2002. As noted at the time of the Board approval of the extended arrangement, there is a bunching of debt service to the Fund in 1999-2001. The lower than earlier projected reserves significantly increase the ratio of payments to the Fund to reserves in these years (to an average of 75 percent), and increase the risk to the Fund (Tables 9 and 10). However, with continued program implementation this risk should be manageable, although developments should be monitored closely. 48. The s&is confident that, with continued program implementation, the program continues to be fully financed during the first half of 1999 and possibly for 1999 as a whole, albeit at a low level of reserve coverage. However, total external debt service payments due in 1999 (including to the Fund) amount to about $2 billion. Under the circumstances, and in view of the projected foreign financing flows, the reserve target for the year as a whole might be diicult to achieve. The next program review will also comprise a review of financing assurances. V. PHASING AND PROGRAM MONITORING 49. Due to the delay in completing the first program review under the extended arrangement, the staff proposes some rephasing of purchases. This rephasing would essentially make two purchases (originally related to end-October and end-November performance) available upon completion of the first review. Other delayed purchases have been rephased. The proposed timing of the remaining purchases and program reviews is shown in Table 12. 50. Given the difficulties encountered thus far with program implementation and the fragility of the economic position, the authorities have requested that the purchases continue to be scheduled on a monthly basis, and be subject to monthly and continuous performance criteria as shown in Table 1 of the attachment. Performance criteria have been proposed for the period March-August, 1999.‘6 Because of the importance of increasing cash revenues to the budget, quarterly performance criteria and monthly indicative targets on non- earmarked cash revenues of the central government have been added.” As noted, in view of the uncertain financing outlook, it is proposed that the second program review also review ‘6For monitoring of developments before Board consideration of the authorities request for completion of the first program review, indicative targets had been established for January and February 1999. All the targets for end-January were observed. “Originally these were indicative targets. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 29 - financing assurances. Structural benchmarks for the period through mid-1999 are indicated in Annex Table 3 .‘* VI. STAFFAPPRAISAL 51. The staRwelcomes the authorities’ efforts to maintain relative stability despite severe external shocks. The appropriate monetary policy and a tight expenditure program in the second half of the year enabled the authorities to reduce inflation quickly afler a spike in September/October. Progress was also made on the structural front in a number of areas, notably in reducing the number of budgetary employees, privatization, demonopohzation and deregulation. Improvements to the tax system were introduced, in particular in the area of VAT, and payroll taxes were reduced substantially. 52. Although budgetary arrears were accumulated, the overall fiscal deficit of the consolidated government was reduced. Nevertheless, expenditure controls were strengthened only with some delays and this was not sufficient to prevent some transactions from moving outside the budget. Monetary policy was loosened somewhat toward the end of 1998 and pressures on the hryvnia emerged, despite the exchange controls that had been introduced in September. Furthermore, reforms in the agricultural and energy sectors lagged behind and communal service tariffs were not increased. As a result of these developments, completion of the first program review under the extended arrangement was delayed. 53. The staffwelcomes the measures that have been taken in recent weeks to bring the program back on track and strengthen it in some areas, including in public administration reform, expenditure control, energy sector reform, tightening of monetary policy, and adjustment of communal service tariffs. It urges the authorities to fi11ly implement the measures outlined in the Supplemental Memorandum of Economic Policies and in the authorities’ September request for an extended arrangement in order to preserve economic stability and to strengthen the still fragile market mechanisms in Ukraine. Only then will Ukraine be able to achieve the development of a private sector and attract foreign investment and foreign financing which will be essential to achieve a lasting resumption of economic growth. 54. Despite political pressures, a budget for 1999 was approved by parliament which can form the basis for an appropriate stabiliiation package in 1999. While revenue projections contained in the budget are somewhat optimistic, the government is authorized to reduce expenditure in case of a revenue shortfall. Indeed, the authorities recognize that adoption of ‘*The original structural benchmark for the corporatization of Ukrtelecom by end-March was dropped as it is no longer possible to achieve until parliament takes a decision on the privatization of Ukrtelecom. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 30 - an even tighter fiscal stance than the one approved by parliament is necessary for the credibility of their adjustment efforts. 55. In the staffs view, the additional fiscal adjustment that is planned for 1999 is appropriately ambitious. The authorities are determined to reduce expenditures in line with more realistic revenue projections. The staff also welcomes the reduction in the payroll tax and the improvements to the VAT that have been introduced. At the same time, the St&is concerned that a number of important fiscal structural measures such as the reduction in turnover taxes, and the revisions to the personal income tax, are not in place either because of government or parliamentary decisions. It also regrets the decision to impose a tax moratorium on agriculture and to continue zero rating of VAT on electricity, imported gas and coal. These two measures will have a significant negative impact on revenues and make it more difficult to solve the difficult fiscal situation. The stti urges the authorities to continue working with parliament to reverse these measures to improve the structure of the tax system and increase revenues, and to reduce the structural rigidities of the budget which severely constrain the government’s spending options. In the stafl’s view, the revised expenditure program, while difficult, can be implemented without much loss of quality of services provided by government. Over time, however, finther reductions in expenditures would only be sustainable if accompanied by structural reforms. The staff also urges the authorities to extend treasury control to all extrabudgetary accounts as soon as possible and to make every effort to fiuther strengthen the treasury. 56. The staffwelcomes the recent changes to the exchange rate system, which should lead to a more transparent determination of the exchange rate and instill confidence. The recent tightening of monetary policy is necessary for exchange rate and price stability, and the authorities should stand ready to tighten f&her, if necessary. In view of the low level of international reserves, the authorities are urged to allow the hxyvnia to float if the exchange rate cannot be contained within the new band. Monetary policy should continue to be tight and the money supply should serve as the nominal anchor. To implement this policy and to minimize the crowding-out impact of government operations, fiscal policy must be kept firmly under control. 57. Over the past few months, the authorities have introduced several measures which are subject to Fund jurisdiction under Article VII1 of the Articles of Agreement. These were: (i) a restriction arising from a limitation imposed on the transferability of interest proceeds received by certain nonresident investors, (ii) a restriction arising from imposition of limits on advance import payments; (iii) a restriction arising Tom foreign exchange rationing; (iv) a restriction arising from effective denial of access to foreign exchange for debt service under foreign loan agreements with interest rates exceeding a particular threshold; and (v) a restriction arising from the imposition of restrictions on the provision of certain trade credits in domestic and foreign currency. The latter two restrictions have now been eliminated. The restriction arising 6om foreign exchange rationing will be removed with the reopening of the interbank market, prior to the Executive Board’s consideration of this review. The first two restrictions described above will be eliminated no later than end-June 1999. In view of the above and the Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3l- difficult circumstances Ukraine is facing, the staffrecommends that the Executive Board grant a waiver for the nonobservance of the performance criterion on the introduction of exchange restrictions and approve the retention of the two remaining restrictions until June 30, 1999. 58. While external shocks played an important role in derailing a resumption of economic growth in 1998, it should also be stressed that Ukraine’s own structural reform efforts could have helped attenuate the impact of the shock. Under the circumstances, the staBurges the authorities to forcefully implement the structural measures that are specified under the program. The acceleration of reforms in the energy and agricultural sectors, a further downsizing ofthe government, and more progress in deregulation must be accorded high priority. The authorities should also begin to address the diiculties in the coal sector without further delay. 59. The staff welcomes progress in improving statistics but notes that further work is needed in several areas. It encourages the authorities to continue to seek technica) assistance from the Fund and other sources to help in this regard. The staff also urges the authorities to provide the necessary financial and other resaurces to enhance the absorption of previous technical assistance. 60. Ukraine, at the moment, finds itself in a very difficult situation. The fiscal situation remains fragile and the 1999 fiscal targets, in terms of the deficit, revenue collection, and arrears reduction, are ambitious and will require strong discipline by the authorities, Continued liiction between parliament and the government could undermine efforts in this regard. Furthermore, pressures to settle wage and pension arrears will be strong in the period leading to the presidential elections in October, and the authorities may find it difficult to stay the course. Further efforts to strengthen expenditure control and cash management will be vital to forestall this. The reserve position of the NBU is weak, and the authorities face heavy debt service obligations in the next few years. Vigorous implementation of the program will be essential to ensure continued support from international creditors. 61. The list of prior actions and other measures that were implemented by the authorities leading up to their request for completion of the first program review under the EFF arrangement demonstrate the commitment and importance that the authorities attach to the reform program. The continued monthly monitoring will provide early warning signals if the program is deviating from its course and additional measures are required. This will be combined with a continuous policy dialogue and quarterly reviews. 62. Ukraine’s performance under the EFF-supported program has been mixed. In several areas, especially regarding structural reforms, progress has been slower than envisaged under the program, partly due to domestic political difficulties. Indeed, given these difficulties, measures that require parliamentary approval are likely to face serious opposition. Nevertheless, on balance, the staff believes that the authorities have been making determined effort to weather the shocks originating from abroad and to strengthen their reform program. The adoption of an ambitious fiscal stance and the tight monetary program for 1999, as well Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-32- as the decision to liberaliie the exchange rate system under very difticult circumstances, are strong indications of the authorities’ commitment to the program. Therefore, despite the risks, the staffrecommends that, based on the authorities’ new policy actions and commitments, the Executive Board complete the first program review, approve the authorities’ request for modifications of the extended arrangement, and grant their request for waivers for the nonobservance of the end-December 1998 performance criteria on net domestic assets of the NBU, net international reserves of the NBU, and the stock of arrears on budgetary wages, pensions and benefits. 63. It is recommended that the next Article IV consultation with Ukraine take place on the standard 12-month cycle. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 33 - VII. PROPOSED DECISIONS The following decisions are proposed for adoption by the Executive Board. A. Review under Extended Arrangement 1. Ukraine has consulted with the Fund in accordance with paragraph 3 of the extended arrangement for Ukraine (EBS/98/144, Supp. 3), and paragraph 4 of the letter of the Prime Minister of Ukraine and the Chairman of the National Bank of Ukraine, dated August 14, 1998. 2. The letter of the Prime Minister of Ukraine and the Chairman of the National Bank of Ukraine, dated March 16, 1999 with the attached memorandum (the “memorandum of March 16, 1999”) shall be attached to the extended arrangement for Ukraine and their letter dated August 14, 1998, with the attached memorandum of economic policies for July 1, 199%June 30, 2001, as modified, shall be read as supplemented and modified by their letter dated March 16, 1999, and the attached memorandum. 3. Accordingly, the extended arrangement for Ukraine shall be modified in the following manner. a. Paragraph 2 (a) of the arrangement shall be deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following: Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 34 - “Purchases under this extended arrangement shall not, without the consent of the Fund, exceed theequivalent of SDR 190,000,000 until October 20, 1998, the equivalent of SDR 24S,SSO,OOO until November 20, 1998, the equivalent of SDR 356,650,OOO until April 20, 1999, the equivalent of SDR 405,2SO,OOO until May 20, 1999, the equivalent of SDR 453,8SO,OOO until June 20, 1999, the equivalent of SDR 502,450,OOO until July 20, 1999, the equivalent of SDR SSl,OSO,OOO until August, 20, 1999, the equivalent of SDR S99,6SO,OOO until September, 20, 1999, and the equivalent of SDR 648,2SO,OOO until November 19, 1999. b. There shall be added “or” at the end of paragraph 3 (b)(iv) of the extended arrangement, and the following shall be added as paragraph 3 (b)(v) of the extended arrangement: “the floor on uneannarked state cash revenue described in Table 2 and in the technical annex attached to the memorandum of March 16, 1999,“. C. Paragraphs 3 (e) to 3 (g) shall be renumbered as paragraphs 3 (fI to 3 (h) respectively, and the following shall be added as a new paragraph 3 (e) of the extended arrangement : “after March 3 1, 1999, if Ukraine has not increased the tariffs for gas and electricity services regulated by the central government by 25 and 20 percent respectively as described in paragraph 9 of the memorandum of March 16, 1999; or”. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 3s - d. In paragraph 3 (g), “February 19, 1999” shall be deleted. e. The penultimate paragraph of paragraph 3 shall be deleted and replaced with the following: “For the purposes of paragraph 3 (a), the relevant preceding period shall for test dates: (i) prior to September 1, 1999, be a monthly period; and (ii) afler August 31, 1999, be a quarterly period.” f The performance criteria set out in paragraphs 3 (a), 3 (b), and 3 (d)(ii) of the extended arrangement for Ukraine for the period from March 3 1, 1999 through August 3 1, 1999 shall be as specified in table 2 and in the technical annex attached to the memorandum of March 16, 1999. 4. The Fund decides that the first review specified in paragraph 3 (g) of the extended arrangement for Ukraine is completed and that Ukraine may continue to make purchases in accordance with the provisions of the arrangement notwithstanding the nonobservance of the performance criteria for December 3 1, 1998 specified in paragraphs 3 (a)(ii), 3 (a)(iii) and 3 (a)(iv), and the performance criterion specified in paragraph 3 (h)(i) of the arrangement. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-36- B. Exchange System 1. The Fund takes this decision relating to Ukraine’s exchange measures subject to Article VIII, Section 2 (a), in the light of the 1999 Article IV consultation with Ukraine conducted under Decision No. 5392-(77/63), adopted April 29, 1977, as amended (Surveillance over Exchange Rate Policies). 2. As describedin EBS/99/42, Ukraine imposes restrictions on payments and transfers for current international transactions in the form of limitations on the transferability abroad of proceeds of current international transactions by certain nonresident investors, and limitations on the making of advance import payments. In the circumstances of Ukraine, the Fund approves the retention of these measures until June 30, 1999. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 37 - Table 1. Ukraine: Sclecied Economic IndiAon, 1997-99 -5 3 2 28.9 29.7 1.3 -0.8 1.4 0.1 0.8 9 1 7 7 -336 -3.9 929 2.7 835 2.5 37.1 10.3 3.8 3.4 1 23 7 35.3 36.3 0.3 -1.0 2.6 0.6 cl.4 -1.8 1.m 3.3 1,090 2.6 35.5 11.4 3.2 4.1 4 28 19 32.6 33.6 0.6 -1.0 1.6 0.4 0.6 27 7 9 10 -829 -2.5 960 2.8 866 2.5 38.1 13.1 4.0 4.5 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public2.825 %7x 3,163 -Mea 0 700 ml 500 50 0 270 7,055 70 80.0 mo,ooa 2.407 3.62J -1.524 0 270 20 0 0 0 476 6,734 293 64.7 107.mo 2.8884 2,OlO a 0 829 465 7,590 9,905 293 170 n.8. Il.. 4.729 -1,602 0 0 IL. 1.ma I. 150 a. 950 n.. 75 0 0 1.328 405 8,521 11.415 393 220 ILL 80.0 IL. 300,ow 2.822 a.899 4.667 0 9sa 39 585 0 0 9606 807 66.2 180,892 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 39 - Table 3. Ukraine: Status of Structural Benchmarks and Performance Criteria for End-December 1998 Benchmark Status Develop a comprehensive pension reform In process. Work is underway with program with assistance from the World help from German and Canadian Bank that will include a tidly Gmded experts, and discussions with the component and a gradual increase in the World Bank are expected in the near pension age. future. Complete a review of all normative acts related to licensing and registration, with participation of the private sector, to flnther tiberalize the regulatory environment for domestic and foreign businesses; publish results and submit proposals for deregulatory action to the Cabinet of Ministers. Done. The review has been completed, including for the following ministries and departments: Ministry of Transport, State Construction Committee, Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economic Relations, Ministry of Internal Affairs, and State Standards committee. Privatize 300 enterprises under “Bread of Ukraine” (cumulatively). In process. 282 enterprises had been sold to 70 percent as of February 12. 40 more will be offered for sale in March. Auction 6 billion cubic meters of gas. Not yet done. Auctions have not been successful, partly because the authorities insist on a high minimum price. Only 27.5 million cubic meters of gas was sold through auctions during 1998. Performance Criteria Status Reduce the number of commodity positions (at the 4-digit level) subject to mixed specitidad valorem import tariffs to no more than 25. Done. The number of commodities subject to mixed tari& was reduced to 25 effective December 29. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4o- Table 4. Ukraine: Consolidated Government Finances, 1996-99 1996 1997 199s 1999 1999 EFF hl. Ql CG EPF Budget Ra%issd Pmg. ActlIds Pmj. Pmj. OWJook 29,943 35,476 28.266 33,237 10.276 10,190 8.743 10.369 6.988 8.455 802 1,002 7,437 10,162 444 704 563 811 1,677 2,239 40.665 1,485 4,959 3,912 13.840 8.394 3,961 3,126 7.025 IJJl 445 836 15,896 Financing Net extemd Disbursemenu Amortization Net domestic Net soahmk bmming Bank bxmwing Bank amnthation PliVh?.¶tiOII 2,608 5,189 -92 235 1,241 1,498 1,333 1.263 2,500 4,826 200 Memorandum items: Nea mmam accvmul.,iicm 3/ 2,339 Commitmeat b&ncc 31 -4,947 End-period stock of ancars (over 30 days) 2,981 Primary b&nce -1,327 ccnile.l gowmmmt un- u.43 ,,, Ealmarkcd rcymu.2 9,948 1.689 930 759 14,780 1.086 -5,189 128 -367 -1,000 285 108 -654 4.822 -I,%9 -3.108 -559 304 2,614 I.610 2,899 3.040 2,440 -3,500 -22 -398 798 3% 8,338 Il.415 9.606 2,668 3,616 12,386 13.916 13,654 2,996 3.759 36,240 36,892 34,694 35,236 8630 9.696 LO.404 IO.803 8.504 8.930 1.015 l.lO5 12.384 Il.605 952 972 1.310 1,054 I.546 1.656 39,229 39.714 1.936 1.875 1.586 I.338 1.718 1.599 3,989 4.483 3,750 3,620 14,377 14.411 8.504 8.801 LOS4 1,582 391 521 4,652 5,983 2,%7 2,424 I.663 761 2,777 1.878 1.000 320 -2.989 -2,822 2.989 2,822 1.720 1,867 4,650 -2,783 559 4S4 710 471 8.450 10,354 8.124 10,133 2,382 2.390 2,403 2,909 2,141 2.692 251 204 2,668 4,085 343 367 75 I78 326 221 8.901 416 194 367 912 793 3.224 2.141 123 89 1.113 1.249 323 927 419 193 IO.704 470 387 437 945 819 4.412 2,692 I28 128 102 1.447 736 428 308 820 518 -451 -350 451 350 183 267 556 781 -373 -514 200 -134 68 218 45,578 44,978 42955 42,367 43.537 41,664 9,307 10,602 11,075 Il.137 12.700 11.503 10,613 11,746 10,749 1,349 1,100 1,100 16,893 16,708 15.558 1.793 1,588 1,588 1.889 840 840 3,211 1,850 1,291 46.858 46,938 44.294 2.281 2.207 2,082 I.861 1.703 1.613 2.008 1,856 1.836 4.531 4,662 4,562 4,237 3,967 3,967 17.859 l7.%5 16,969 10.613 11,746 10,749 2,259 282 961 623 613 440 486 446 4.600 5,646 .5,566 4.678 3.545 3,473 1,536 1.536 2.009 1.937 3,404 4.277 3,168 1,614 2,099 1,861 -1.280 -1.960 -1,340 1,280 I.%0 1,340 471 630 820 2,992 -2,172 209 610 -200 -335 .., 560 425 600 720 720 -1,614 -4,357 -2,144 334 2,397 804 970 3,398 1,585 2,133 14.643 14,988 17,356 15,240 Nominal GDP 41 81,519 93,365 105.658 104,729 25,071 29,855 129.082 13l.922 131.922 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-41- Table 4. Ukraine: Consolidated Government Finances, 1996-99 (concluded) 1996 1997 1998 1999 1999 EFF PWl. Ql 42 EFF Budget /4 R&sed Pmg. Actds Pmj. Pmj. oudcak Revmuc and grants 36.7 38.0 34.3 35.2 33.7 34.7 35.3 34.1 32.6 Tax nv~nw 34.7 35.6 32.8 33.6 32.4 33.9 32.8 33.0 31.6 Taxes on income, profit 12.6 10.9 8.2 9.3 9.5 8.0 7.2 8.0 8.4 Taxes on payroll 10.7 11.1 9.8 IO.3 9.6 9.7 8.6 9.6 8.7 awhich: Pension Fund 8.6 9.1 8.0 8.5 8.5 9.0 8.2 8.9 8.1 M-Y-s 1.0 1.1 1.0 I.1 1.0 0.7 1.0 0.8 0.8 ~,o,“&c taxes 0” @,dS and SCN~CCS 9.1 10.9 11.7 11.1 10.6 13.7 13.1 12.7 II.8 Taxes on iotcmationel trade 0.5 0.8 0.9 0.9 1.4 1.2 1.4 1.2 12 Glhcr taxes 0.7 0.9 1.2 1.0 0.3 0.6 I.5 0.6 0.6 Nordax revawe l/ 2.1 2.4 I.5 1.6 I.3 0.7 2.5 1.4 1.0 Grants 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Expenditure 2/ Goneral public sewicss LkfC”Se Public order and safety &airs Education dliirs and services He&b alSirs and services Sacid sswity and welfare &airs ofwhldr: Pension Fund of which: pension -s repayment Housing and community seticss Recreational, cultural. religious affiirs Energy, agricultwe, and industry kdcrcst paymcnIs Domestic intcrcst pe,ymcnts Foreign interest payments Other ofwhich: repaymm~~ of budge: MUIS 39.9 43.6 1.5 1.6 4.9 5.3 3.8 4.2 14.8 8.6 9.0 L.6 1.8 0.5 1.0 1.0 0.8 19.5 15.8 ,.. 1.2 37.1 I.8 1.5 1.6 3.8 3.5 13.6 8.0 1.0 0.4 4.4 2.8 2.6 0.9 37.9 1.8 1.3 1.5 4.3 3.5 13.8 8.4 I.5 0.5 5.7 2.3 I.6 0.7 1.8 0.3 35.5 35.9 36.3 35.6 33.6 1.7 1.6 1.8 I.7 1.6 0.8 1.3 1.4 1.3 1.2 1.5 1.5 1.6 1.4 1.4 3.6 3.2 3.5 3.5 3.5 3.2 2.7 3.3 3.0 3.0 12.9 14.8 13.8 13.6 12.9 8.5 9.0 8.2 8.9 8.1 0.0 0.4 1.7 0.2 0.5 0.4 0.7 0.5 0.5 0.4 0.3 0.3 0.4 0.3 4.4 4.8 3.6 4.3 4.2 5.0 2.5 3.6 2.7 2.6 1.3 I.4 1.2 1.2 3.1 1.0 1.5 1.5 1.7 2.7 2.6 3.2 2.4 0.8 1.7 1.3 1.6 1.4 overdl cash bdmcc -3.2 -5.6 -2.8 -2.7 -1.8 -1.2 -I .o -1.5 -1.0 Financing Net cxtcmal Disbursements Amortizsrion Net domestic PriVA&iOIl 3.2 5.6 2.8 2.7 1.8 1.2 1.0 -0.1 0.3 1.6 I.8 0.7 0.9 0.4 I.5 1.6 4.4 2.2 2.6 1.6 1.4 -2.7 -1.5 -1.7 3.1 5.2 0.5 0.5 0.8 6.4 0.2 0.2 0.1 0.7 0.5 0.3 0.7 0.5 1.5 1.0 0.5 0.6 2.3 -1.6 0.5 -0.2 OS 0.5 Memorandum items: Commitment bdancc 31 End-period stock of a,rea,s (aver 30 days) Ptimary la&xx Non-interest expenditurss Non-intercsl commihncnt expenditures -6.1 -5.2 -1.9 -3.0 -2.2 I.0 3.7 2.8 1.5 2.8 12.1 8.2 -1.6 -3.7 0.0 -0.4 3.2 1.3 38.4 41.7 34.3 35.6 30.5 33.4 41.2 41.4 33.4 35.9 30.9 31.2 0.3 I.8 2.6 1.2 32.7 32.9 31.4 29.6 0.6 0.7 1.6 30.9 29.3 11 Includes capiral wenus. 21 Due to a new budgn classification intmduccd far tic 1998 budget, the 1998 and later year columns am not strictly cmnpambls to earlier year columns. In aid&ion, demiled information on some cxpcndilwe items before 1998 is not available. ,/For 1998 and before, the net accumulation of cxpenditum B(TSBTS was calculated using -8 older than 30 days. Sting in 1999, the ncf accumulation of all cxpcndibxe arrears will be used The commitment balance is adjusted for the net accumulation of arrears on wages, pensions, and benefits. 4/Far c.omptrability, the 1999 budgct GDP uses the stat% estimate instead of the authorities cslimato at the time of budget formulation (HI-V 117.5 billion). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 5. Ukraine: Monetary Swcy, 1997-99 Net foreign assets -125 80 Net domestic sssets 12,666 12,881 rlomstic omlit 15,930 16,495 Netmdittogcmmmt 8,107 9,040 credit ta !Mmgovemmmt 1,823 7,455 In dcmcstic CulIency 5,723 5,088 In foreign currmcy 2,100 2,367 Ottmitems,mt -3,264 -3,614 Bmd tnomy 12,541 12,%0 Fbymia broad money 10,869 11,082 For&p a.mency deposits 1,672 1,879 Velocity of broad mooey 2/ Velocity of hqvnia broad money 21 1991 March 1998 June Sept. Dec. March 1999 June Sept. Dec. Pmjc&m 2 3 -7 -17 -2 -20 8.9 10.4 3 2 4 -5 2 -6 (Stocks in millions of hrymia at end of period) -1,285 -5,268 -5,340 6,423 6,708 14,742 19,593 21,059 21,537 22,389 18,664 23,602 23,464 24,282 25,134 10,856 14,205 14,336 14,574 14,845 7,808 9,391 9,128 9,708 10,289 5,256 5,191 5,431 6,107 6,677 2,552 4,207 3,697 3,601 3,612 -3,922 -4p9 -2,405 -2,745 -2,745 13,457 14,325 15,719 15,114 15,681 11,462 11,014 12,377 11,995 12,631 1,995 3,311 3,342 3,119 3,050 (percentage change from the end of the peviws quarter) 6,417 -6,145 23,219 23,392 25,964 26,131 14,112 14,585 11,192 11,552 7,523 7,826 3,669 3,726 -2.745 -2,745 16,802 17,247 13,717 14,163 3,084 3,084 4 6 10 4 4 7 3 3 -4 12 -3 5 9 3 13 26 -1 3 4 3 1 5 20 -3 6 6 9 3 2 3 -3 -11 -2 3 17 -14 3 0 5 7 1 1 6.5 1.2 8.3 8.3 6.5 7.6 8.7 9.4 7.6 8.5 10.2 10.7 8.2 9.1 10.9 11.8 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 6. Ukraine: Acwunts of the National Ban!~ of Ukraine, 1997-99 1997 March 1998 1999 June Sept. Dec. Dec. II tvfamh June sept Dee Pmjation Net intrmational resmves -53 173 (In millions of U.S. dollars) -28 85 Net domestic assets 7,111 6,923 Net domestic credit 8,079 8,436 Net credit to govanment 7,096 7,754 Net credit to nongovemment -18 7 c1aimsonbm!a l,ooo 674 Gthm items, net -968 -1,512 Base money 7,058 7,0% currency in circlllation 6,132 6,365 Banks’ -es 926 731 Money mdtipha 1.78 1.83 3 10 1 -3 (Stocks in millions of hryvnia at end of period) -1,353 -5,517 6,31 I -6,842 -7,531 -656 -1,623 -1,842 -1,997 -2,197 8,623 13,051 14,915 15,447 15,911 10,105 14,224 14,381 14,381 14.8% 9,386 13238 13,479 13,479 13,872 43 83 49 49 49 676 903 853 853 974 -1.482 -1,173 534 1,066 1,016 7,270 7,534 WJ4 WJ4 8,381 6,390 6,310 7,158 7,158 654’3 880 1,224 1,447 1,447 1,740 (Percentage change from the md of the previous qtwter) 2 4 14 14 -3 25 51 14 18 3 Orstio) 1.85 1.89 1.83 1.83 1.80 -7,816 -7,456 -7,184 -2,281 -2,176 -2,096 16,404 16,610 16.554 15,439 15,595 15,539 14,291 14.337 14,150 49 49 49 1,098 1,208 1.339 966 1,016 1,016 8,588 9,154 6,756 7,185 1,833 1,969 9.371 7.354 2;017 v e 2 3 1.83 7 1 1.84 2 0 1.84 Sow: Data provided by the Ukrainian authorities; and staff estimates. I/ New propam dehition of international xsxves. A full description is cmtained in the technical appendix Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-44- -3.722 3.n7. 1.579 283 3w 689 314 1.124 -842 500 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 45 - Table 8. Ukraine: External Financing Needs, 1997-2000 (lo millioos of U.S. dollars) 1997 1998 1998 199w99 199al99 1999 1999 2000 2000 Rogsmn Year ACW bg. RCV. pm. Rev. pw Rev. Rag Rev. Fmj. Roj. Roj. Pmj. Merchandise tmk balance 4.205 -2,799 -2,592 -2,324 -2,202 -2,477 -2,373 -2.596 -2,278 ticesbalancc 2,025 923 1,314 1,053 1,173 1,298 1,045 1,289 1.062 AmoI-tization of medium- and long-term cre -794 -1,813 -1,880 -1,605 -1,622 -895 -705 -1,491 -1,957 plus payments of other obligationa change in payments arrears 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Otha short-~ capital II 61 -2,222 -2,456 -1,613 -1,676 -820 -950 200 0 Innrase in official -vcs -381 1.135 1,579 550 1,105 -160 -70 -919 -100 omss fma&lg needs (-) -3,294 4,776 4,035 -3,939 -3222 -3,054 -3,054 -3,517 -3.272 Official transfers 845 694 638 600 550 500 500 500 500 Omss medium- and long-term credit 21 698 912 528 912 559 1,063 978 1,069 925 Ofwhich: EBRD 150 150 49 175 74 200 140 150 150 World Bank @poject) 100 150 45 100 66 200 160 200 200 Rivate lolders 0 0 0 0 0 0 70 0 0 Foreign direct investment 581 609 726 625 614 650 670 700 750 &oss fimnctig gap (-) -1.170 -2,561 -2.143 -1,802 -1,499 -841 -906 -1248 -1,097 lh@ (net) ,286 425 283 391 375 181 169 -97 -102 World Bank 200 440 340 690 630 550 560 700 300 Privatelending(inc~.&nds) 495 1,696 1,520 610 435 0 0 MO mu other creditors 189 0 0 110 59 110 177 145 110 Gap 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 488 Sources: Ukrainian authorities; and staff estimates. l/ Includes intmnterprisc arrears and unidentitied short-term capital. 2/ World Bank Sectoral Adjustment lams are placed below the line as exceptional tiicing. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 9. Ukraine: Indicators of Fund Credit, 1995-2004 I 1995 19% 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 Guts- Fbd credit I/ In millims of SDRS blpemmtof: Eqmts of Sods and Jlonftiscrvion Total public extemd liibilities Gmsroffioialresaves2/ GDP Quota 31 Debt service due In millio,u of SDRS hpercentof: ~:~z Public debt service due Gross 05cial- 21 GDP Quota 31 1,037.2 1.573.1 1,780.4 1,984.s 2.105.2 2,032.9 2,014.O lJ36.9 1.691.5 12.5 10.7 19.4 18.0 102.4 73.5 7.0 6.0 184.2 169.6 251.5 218.2 1.7 1.4 16.4 11.7 14.0 9.3 1.0 0.8 25.2 21.9 1.454.3 9.6 11.2 12.1 15.1 17.3 15.9 14.7 19.3 24.9 20.8 23.9 23.6 22.4 21.9 138.8 114.5 103.4 344.7 342.0 2%. 1 193.3 4.6 5.3 4.9 6.4 9.0 8.7 8.1 104.0 157.7 178.5 199.0 211.1 203.8 201.9 0.6 15.8 53.0 4.8 145.8 27.2 54.1 78.4 165.5 488.2 651.6 473.1 294.3 i? 1.8 , 0.3 0.4 0.5 1.3 4.0 5.1 3.5 2.7 6.4 7.5 7.9 32.5 24.8 22.1 3.6 3.9 4.6 28.7 79.3 94.9 45.4 0.1 0.2 0.2 0.5 2.1 2.8 1.9 2.7 5.4 7.9 16.6 48.9 65.3 47.4 15.4 10.9 1.0 29.5 2/Fmm 1998, refas ta gmss usable reserves. 3/Relah to tmtb tie-w quda of SDR 997.3 millii. lix apyxcmd quota index the eleventh review is SDR 1,372 millim Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 10. Ukmhz Pmjeckd Paymmtsto the Fund as 8, January 31, Iv (ii miticm9 of SDRa) 1999 2000 200, 2001 2003 2004 ZOOJ 2006 2007 2008 Ekycmd Tocll 368.4 0.0 72.3 -1.2 439.4 44.1 571.0 0.0 52.4 0.0 623.3 62.5 393.0 0.0 33.2 0.0 426.2 42.7 l77.0 0.0 21.3 0.0 198.3 19.9 128.6 0.0 IS., 0.0 143.6 14.4 124.0 0.0 10.3 0.0 134.3 13.5 61.7 0.0 6.0 0.0 67.7 6.8 40.9 0.0 4.1 0.0 45.0 4.5 40.9 0.0 2.3 0.0 43.5 4.4 40.9 0.0 1.0 0.0 41.9 4.2 0.0 ,,946.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 218.1 0.0 -1.2 0.0 1.163.3 0.0 216.9 l.PlincipaJ EsAFtsAF ltep?.ymellb *.clurgeMdintacst1/ OlllUdQ-dit OoweofSDRs 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 21.4 108.7 l9l.S 233.3 233.3 233.3 378.1 lAOO.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 4 8.9 28.3 47.0 33.2 53.2 51.3 46.1 38.1 29.2 20.4 16.9 392.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 8.9 28.3 47.0 33.2 74.6 160.0 137.9 271.4 262.6 lS3.7 395.0 1.792.6 0.9 2.8 4.7 3.3 7.3 16.0 23.9 27.2 26.3 15.4 39.6 179.7 I.Rindpol WJ- 368.4 EsAPlsAF Repa- 0.0 2.chlrSmuld~ll OnFundadt 81.1 OnupdSDIlr -1.1 571.0 0.0 393.0 0.0 177.0 0.0 150.0 0.0 z32.7 0.0 253.5 0.0 274.3 0.0 274.3 0.0 274.3 0.0 378.1 3.346.4 0.0 0.0 so.6 80.2 74.5 68.2 61.6 Jl., 42.2 31.8 21.4 16.9 610.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 -1.2 Towob~om 448.3 651.6 473.1 151.5 218.2 294.3 303.6 316.5 306.0 293.6 395.0 3.9558 @aanlofPw 44.9 65.3 47.4 15.2 21.9 29.5 30.6 31.7 30.7 29.6 39.6 396.7 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 48 - Table Il. Ukraine: Indicators of Exteinal Vulnerability (In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated) 1995 1996 1997 1998 prel. 1999 proj. Financial indicators Broad money @ercent change, 12-month basis) Private sector credit Qerccnt change, 12-month basis) Domestic credit Commercial bank reserves Cash Reserves at the NBU of which: Required reserves Share of foreign exchange loans in total lending Share of foreign deposits in total deposits Exports @acent change, 12-month basis in US%) I/ Impr% (percent change, 12-month basis in USS) Terms of trade (penxnt change, 12-m&h basis) current accOllnt balance 11 G&s official reserves (in millions of U.S. dollars) Offkid reserves in months of imports of GNFS Gross usable reserves (ii millions of U.S. dollars) Usable reserves in months of imports of GNFS Broad money to reserves Public external debt Public external debt to exports of GNFS External interest payments to exports of GNFS I/ 21 External amortimtion to exports of GNFS 2/ Exchange rate (per US& period average) RFER appreciation (-) (12 month basis) 117 35 34 116 29 24 19.2 16.0 18.3 1.7 1.0 1.0 0.3 0.2 0.2 1.3 0.8 0.8 0.0 0.0 0.8 42.1 22.3 26.8 36.6 32.3 26.1 12.7 13.9 -0.8 10.2 24.4 -1.1 -1.8 -14.1 0.1 -4.4 -2.7 -2.7 1,134 1,994 2,375 3.7 4.8 5.6 4.2 23.6 49.5 3.3 6.1 1.47 -41.3 2.6 2.8 21.2 23.8 45.1 58.0 2.5 3.2 3.5 3.9 1.83 1.86 -29.6 -6.3 25 10 17 27 23.4 1.4 0.3 1.1 1.5 40.5 39.0 31.2 -15.8 -18.0 -7.0 -3.5 949 2.1 796 2.2 5.6 26.9 63.5 5.1 11.0 2.45 -1.8 -6.0 -4.1 -2.8 960 2.8 866 2.5 4.5 38.1 73.3 4.5 6.2 Sources: Ukrainian authorities, and Fund staff estimates. l/Excludes the Black Sea Fleet transaction. 2/Medium- and long-term debt. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-49- Table 12. Ukraine: Timetable of Purchases and Reviews in 1998-99, Under the First Year of the EFF Arrangement Amount of l3rcbases (SDR million) Expected dates of pwcbases conditions for pwcbnsc 190.00 Mid-September, 1998 55.55 After October 20,1998 111.10 At&r March 10.1999 48.60 After April 20.1999 48.60 At&May 20.1999 48.60 At%3 June 20,1999 48.60 After July 20,1999 48.60 A&Au@ 20,1999 48.60 Alter September 20.1999 Follow& Board approval Ohsavanu of end-septwbm &nmance criteria and cmpletion of financing rwiew Completion of fust review Observance of end-March pm-f- criteria Observance of end-April perfommce criteria and completion of the second review Observance of end-May performance criteria Observance of end-June performance cxiteria Observance of end-July performance criteria and completion of tbe third review Observance of end-August performance criteria Sources: RAF Treasurer’s Department; and Fund stafTestim&s. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 50 - APPENDIX I UKRAINE: FUND RELATIONS As ofJanuary 31, 1999 1. Membership Status: Joined: 09/03/1992; Article VIII II. General Resources Account: SDR Million Quota 997.30 Fund Holdings of Currency 2,942.68 Reserve position in Fund 0.01 In percent of Quota 100.0 295.2 0.0 III. SDR Department: Holdings SDR Million 90.87 In percent of Allocation N/A IV. Outstanding Purchases and Loans: In percent of SDR Million Quota Stand-by arrangements 1,202.18 120.5 Extended arrangements 245.55 24.6 Systemic Transformation 498.65 50.0 V. Financial Arrangements: Approval Expiration Amount Approved Amount Drawn Tvpe J&L -IaL GDR M illion) EFF 09/04/l 998 09/03/2001 1,645X 245.55 Stand-by 08/25/1997 08/24/1998 398.92 181.33 Stand-by OS/1011996 02/23/t 997 598.20 598.20 VI. Projected Obligations to Fund: (SDR Million; based on existing use of resources and present holdings of SDRs): Overdue Forthcow l.LxLEB m 2QQQJQQl.m~ Principal 368.4 571.0 393.0 177.0 128.6 Charges/Interest - 72.352.4 33.2 -2L3AJ.J Total 440.7 623.4 426.2 198.3 143.7 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-5l- APPENDIX I VII. Exchange Arrangement: In September 1996, the authorities introduced the hryvnia (HIV) at a conversion rate of karbovanets (Krb) 100,000 to Hrv 1. The rate was initially informally pegged to the dollar. In September 1997, the peg was replaced by a formal band of Hrv 1.7-Hi-v 1.9 per U.S. dollar, The limits of the band were moved on several occasions, most recently on September 4, 1998 to Hvr 2.5-3.5 per U.S. dollar. On January 31, the hryvnia stood at HIV 3.427 per U.S. dollar. On September 24, 1996, Ukraine accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4 of the Fund’s Articles of Agreement, and two remaining restrictions were eliminated in May 1997. A number of new restrictions were introduced in September 1998. VIII. Article IV Consultation: (4 Ukraine is on the standard 12-month consultation cycle. The last Article IV consultation was held during various missions over the period January-July, 1 1997. (b) The S&Report (EBS1971144, 08/l l/97) and the RED (SM/97/208, 08/l l/97) were considered by the Executive Board on August 25, 1997. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 52 - APPENDIX I UKRAINE: IWND TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE MISSIONS, 1996-98 (As of December 3 1, 1998) Tax administration Tax policy MAE Fiscal Management Article VIII Workshop on systemic bank restructuring Article GlII Issues in Monetary Operetims, Banking Supervision and Central Banking accounting Banking sqxrvision Banking supervision and restructuring, monetary operations, and fcnvard foreign exchange market Banking supervision, reserve management, operations, foreign exchange market Jan. 31-Feb.16,19% March 36.19% Augost l-10,19% October s-12,19% Novemk4-12.1996 March 26-April4,1991 Septemba21-26.1991 April 17-25,1998 September 14-18,1998 March 1 l-25,1997 Febmmy g-April 9,1998 March31-April IS, 1998 February 16-Mar&2,1998 Sept. 2l-October2.1998 February 8-26.1998 August 12-16.1996 October 8-18,19% March 17-19.1997 May 13-22,1997 February 6-March 4,1998 Feb. 23-March 5,1998 Oct. 22-November 3,1998 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 53 - APPENDIX I INS Department Type of Mission Timing STA Money and banking statistics Febnmry 5%19,1997 Producer price index February 16-27,1998 October 26-30,1998 National accounts February 19-March I,1996 October S-23- 1998 Consumer price statistics May 21-June 5.1996 Balance of payments statistics February 17-28,1997 Course on ma~~oewnomic and financial policies June4-14.1996 LEG Seminar for Ukrainian parliamentarians at JVl Course on the Macroeconomic Impact of the Budget Financial Progmmming and Macrowmomic Policy Article VIII tick vln Article Vlll March 24-28.1997 June 23-July 3,1997 August 25-ScptcmbR- 4,1998 August 12-16,1996 March 17-19.1997 November l-5,1998 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 54 - APPENDIX1 UKRAINE: FTJND RESIDENT REPRESENTATIVES AND ADVISORS, 1995-98 Resident Representatives Resident Rep-tive Deputy Resident Representative Advisors Tax administration Fiscal advisor -0mic Policy AdvisoI to the Ministry of Finance Generel&lvisorat National Bank of Ukraine Gcnaaladvisorat National Bank ofU!uaine Accounting advisor et National Bank of Ukraine Flcmmic Rexarcb advisor at National Bank of Ukraine Banking Supervision Advisor at National Bank of Ukraine Multisector statistical advisor Mr. Justice Mr. Lenain Mr. sundakov Mr. Kwon Mr. sosnoski Mr. Biber Mr. King Mr. Wilson Mr. Scullion he. Platis Mr. wlite Mr. Wilson Mr. Todd Mr. Mmicm Mr. Staleppel Mr. lalers Mr. D’Emic. Mr. Auikko Mr. Harm Mr. At&&y Mr. Blackburn January 1995-January 1997 Since January 1997 Jmary 1995-June 1997 July 1997-July 1998 Novcmba 1993~May 1997 July 1997~December 1997 Novembc~ 1995-October 1996 O&be-December 1996 March 1997-June 1997 Since June 1998 March 1994~March 19% Octobc&kccmber 19% November 1996-December 1997 since octoba 1998 octobu l994-Octobex 1995 April 1 V%-April1998 sinceh4ny 19% since September 1997 Since July 1998 March 1995-Much 1996 sii septemk 19% Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 55 - APPENDIX II UKRAINE: RELATIONS WITH THE WORLD BANK General Since Ukraine joined the Bank in September 1992, the Bank has been helping Ukraine with its transition to a market-based economy. The government’s reform program has been supported by the Bank through lending, policy dialogue, and assistance in resource mobiliition and aid coordination. The objective of the Bank’s strategy is to assist the government of Ukraine in restoring sustainable economic growth and improving Iiving standards for the population. For the immediate future, the resolution of the fiscal imbalances and improvement of the public sector management have become key priorities for the World Bank program. World Bank program The current Bank portfolio consists of 12 projects totaling over $1.7 billion and two guarantee operations amounting to $220 million. About another 20 operations are in the pipeline. The public se&or reform program includes the Institution Building Loan ($27 million) to support the strengthening of government institutions, and the Treasury System Project ($16.4 million) designed to help the government in creating an efficient budget management system. Two new adjlistment loans- Public Administration Reform ($200 million) and Public Resource Management ($200 millionc are being prepared to improve the government’s policy making capacity, increase the efficiency of the civil service and improve the budget preparation and execution processes. The Bank has also started the preparation of a new adaptable program lending instrument (APL) ($200 million) aimed at supporting tinther capacity building in the government. This proposed program would include assistance to such institutions as Tax Administration, Statistics, Customs, Ministry of Justice, etc. Given the importance of the agriculture sector for the country’s economy, the Bank has selected Ukraine as the primary rural focus country in the ECA region for which additional resources have been allocated. The Seeds Development Project ($32 million) was approved in May 1995 to improve agricultural productivity and boost agricultural exports through private production of high quality commercial seed. The Agricultural Sector Adjustment Loan (AgSECAL) ($300 million) which supported trade liberalization, privatization of land and agricultural enterprises, and farm restructuring, was tUly disbursed. However, a very important follow-up project-the Pre-Export Guarantee Facility-whose aim was to insure a conducive investment environment in agriculture failed to be ratified by the Verkhovna Rada, and is likely to be canceled. As a result, the Bank has decided to limit its program to a low case at this time, until the government can demonstrate its commitment to further reform in agriculture. Two new projects remain in the most-likely pipeline scenario-Rural Finance ($25 million) and Title Registration (SSO million). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-56- APPENDIX II The Bank’s program in the energy sector was designed to complement Ukrainian and G-7 initiatives, Until early 1997, the government had been making good progress in reforming the energy sector. A $114 million loan was approved in April 1995 to help rehabilitate hydropower plants and improve power system control in the country, followed in late 1996 by the Electricity Market Development Project (S3 17 million) to support the modemization of Ukraine’s power sector and place the generating companies on a financially sound basis by creating a &ee market pricing mechanism for generated electricity. Disbursements under the EMDP were however suspended in August 1997 because the government intervened with the regulator’s decision to increase tariffs, without offering alternative means of improving the financial viability of the generation companies, Progress has been t%her slowed by the passage of law prohibiting the increase of tariffs on communal services, making it possible to raise electricity tariffs su&iently to meet the cost recovery requirements of energy supplies to households. The President has sent this law to the Constitution Court for review, and the government believes that the law may be deemed unconstitutional, hence allowing the increase of tariffs. These tariff increases would pave the way for the removal of the EMDP loan suspension. Good progress has been made in energy elkiency and district beat. A District Head Project ($200 million) was approved in May 1998, and two additional projects are under preparation. In the coal sector, the Coal Pilot Project ($15.8 million) demonstrated that it was possible to close coal mines in a socially and environmentally responsible way. The Coal SECAL ($300 million), approved in December 1998, has been partly disbursed, and has been restructured to take into account the lessons learned t?om the Coal Pilot. The restructured loan now awaits a legal opinion on the Loan Amendment. Ifthis loan proceeds well, additional lending will be provided in this sector. In the gas sector, a strategy note has been prepared with the government and the World Bank is now providing technical assistance in implementing specific reforms. Privatization and financial sector reform have also received strong attention in the Bank’s program. In June 1996, the Bank approved a $3 10 million Enterprise Development and Adjustment Loan (EDAL I) to support trade and price liberaliition, privatization, capital market development and post-privatization restructuring programs. This program was successfully implemented and a follow-up operationEDAL II ($300 million) was developed to continue the support to this important undertaking. To promote a stronger banking system, a Financial Sector Adjustment Loan @AL) (S300 million) was approved in September 1998, which is complemented by the existing Export Development Project ($70 million) and the proposed Financial Services Project ($200 million). In order to attract private investment, the Commercial Sea Launch guarantee operation ($100 million) was approved by the Bank in 1997. Although the Bank has devoted large resources to the social sector, only one project has been approved to date- a $2.6 million Social Protection Support Project, which is providing computerization and technical support to agencies that provide housing and other municipal Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicAPPENDIX II service subsidies. The Bank is currently working with the government to prepare a $200 million loan to support the development of poor communities. Also, the current health and education expenditure review will help define finther actions in these sectors, which may then lead to jointly developed programs. The Bank is also providing significant nonlendmg support. Economic and sector work (ESW) included to date: a Country Economic Memorandum (CEM), reviews of the social sectors, food and agriculture sectors, the financial sector, energy sector, the coal sector, and the environmental sector. A poverty assessment was done in 1996 and the public expenditure and public investment reviews were completed in 1997. A joint paper with the EBRD on impediments for foreign direct investment has been prepared as well. A large number of informal policy notes were prepared on the education sector, external trade, housing, water, land reform, energy updates, debt management, and enterprise development. More recently, a power transmission study, a gas strategy paper, and a transport sector review have been completed. New economic work is underway-an in-depth study of intergovernmental fiscal relations, a review of expenditures in health and education and a financial sector update. A new Country Economic Memorandum, currently under preparation, would serve as a basis for the Wure Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) and operations in a number of sectors. Future lending program The Bank has decided not to prepare a full CAS until after the Presidential elections scheduled for fall 1999. Instead, the Bank will prepare a CAS progress report this fiscal year. In the near Wure, it is expected that new lending priorities will focus on balance-of-payment support for public sector reform, as well as investment projects which can succeed in the difficult circumstance of Ukraine. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 58 - APPENDIX IB UKRAINE: RELATIONSWITHTHE EBBB Ukraine joined the EBKD in 1992. The EBKD pursues a strategy of supporting Ukraine’s transformation toward a market economy, promoting the business environment and improving the investment climate for all investors. The EBKD’s first country strategy for Ukraine was approved in October 1992 and was revised inNovember 1993. These two documents underlined the need for fmancing private sector projects, developing the financial sector and rehabilitating existing infrastructure. A revised strategy was proposed in March 1995 to respond to the needs of transition and this guided the EBRD’s activities during 1995 and 1996. In June 1997, the Board ofDirectors approved a new strategy for the Bank’s activities in Ukraine., The Bank’s portfolio in Ukraine has increased from 5 projects in 1994 to 29 by the end of 1998. These amount to commitments of EURO 605 million, ofwhich almost half (EURO 297 million) had been disbursed by the end of last year. The outstanding commitments to Ukraine represent almost 6 percent of the total of the Bank’s commitments to all its countries of operation. In accordance with the latest strategy, the EBRD’s current operational activities include the financing of (9 (ii) (ii) (iv) (v) 64 local private Ukraine companies with particular attention to enhancing their export generating capacity; private joint venture projects; selected investments to strengthen the banking sector and to enhance its intermediation capacity for small and medium-sized enterprises; pre- and post-privatization financing for large scale investments in utilities and other large enterprises which will have a significant impact on structural reform and foreign investment. The EBBD places particular importance on the privatization in the telecommunications and power distribution sectors; promotion of private investment in the agribusiness sector; continued efforts to improve nuclear safety in the context of the Bank’s Energy Operations Policy. Projects in the financial sector account for 30 percent of the Bank’s commitment to Ukraine, with much of this represented by the loans provided under sovereign guarantee to support the development of small and medium size companies in Ukraine through lending via participating banks. The first of these loans (for ECU 103 million) was signed at the end of 1994, and is now almost fully disbursed. A second credit line (for ECU 38 million) was signed at the time of the Bank’s Annual Meeting in Kyiv in May 1998. The energy sector (mainly the power sector) accounts for a further 20 percent of all commitments, projects in the oil and gas sector Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 59 - APPENDIX III represent 13 percent, the agribusiness sector 12 percent, telecommunications 10 percent and transport 9 percent of all commitments. The current portfolio includes 22 projects with private borrowers and investors with a corresponding commitment of EURO 340 million. There are a further 7 projects with sovereign guarantees to which EURO 264 million of fimds are committed. The Bank’s portfolio ratio was estimated at 57 percent to the private sector and 43 percent to the state sector at the end of 1998. Technical cooperation activities currently include 111 projects for EURO 24.3 million and are mainly related to project preparation and implementation. The current operational pipeline includes around ten projects with EBRD financing of between EURO 200-300 million (which includes an EBBD contribution to the financing of the completion of two nuclear generating units). A further increase in the volume of Bank activity in Ukraine will partly depend on the Rada approving the sovereign guarantees for some of the loans which have already been agreed with the Ukraine government, and in particular in an improvement in the business environment, especially for private investors. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 60 - APPENDIX IV With technical assistance from the Fund and other multilateral and bilateral sources, the authorities have made si&cant efforts and improvements in a number of key areas over the past year. The country’s IFS page has been published since July 1996. Ukrainian authorities are actively working towards subscribing to the special data dissemination standard (SDDS) by mid-1999. Despite progress, however, there remain substantial shortcomings with Ukraine’s economic statistics, particularly in national accounts, which suffer from a variety of coverage and methodological problems inherited from the command economy period, and in balance of payments data. A general statistical advisor sponsored by the Fund has been in place since September 1996. Key statistical data are geneially provided in a timely manner, as summarized below. 1. Real Sector The national accounts suffer from many weaknesses, including: (i) a large informal economy and inadequate coverage of source data for these activities; (ii) unduly heavy reliance on complete censuses of enterprises as opposed to sample surveys, (iii) insufficient elimination of holding gains, which leads to an overstatement of the value of recorded production; (iv) the use of “comparable price” methodology which is liable to conceptual errors for quarterly data; and (v) collection of most data on a cumulative, as opposed to discrete, basis and the ensuing adherence to an inappropriate revision policy. Following a technical assistance mission in early 1996, the State Statistics Committee has implemented some of the necessary methodological changes and started to produce quarterly national accounts for 1998, although a number of methodological problems have not been fixed yet. In addition, progress is constrained by financing and stat&g problems, as well as inadequate prioritization of some activities. A mission of the Statistics Department (STA) visited Ukraine in October, 1998 and provided recommendations on further improvements in these areas. Ukrainian consumer price statistics have benefitted from a series of Fund missions. The development of a 26-c@ monthly CPI has resulted in the availability of a broad-based measure of price change that meets international standards for price collection and index calculation. A number of problems remain with the wholesale price index-mainly related to the use of cumulative data for industrial production, and valuation of production, sales, and inventories under the high inflationary period. A STA mission conducted in February, 1998 agreed on a plan for improvement of producer price statistics. However, a subsequent mission conducted in October 1998 found that the plan was considerably off-track, in part related to the stafling and financing problems. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-61 - APPENDIX IV It should be noted that there were considerable delays in reporting real sector data since the Ukraine country page was introduced in the July 1996 issue of IFS that required a follow-up by the resident statistical advisor. 2. Government Finance Ukraine made considerable progress in the presentation of fiscal data. For the 1998 budget government finances were for the first time presented in a functional classification which complied broadly with GFS standards for both the federal and the local governments. In addition, federal budget expenditure was broken down by economic categories and the authorities are currently working on an economic presentation of local governments expenditures. The Treasury reports monthly data (on expenditure in a functional classification) to the European II Department (ELK?). These data are subsequently adjusted by EU2, which requests additional data to cover the operations of the Pension Fund and to make the data conform fully with GFS standards. The Treasury has started providing monthly expenditure data by economic classifications in November 1998. The State Statistics Committee is interested in reporting GFS data on a monthly basis for publication in IFS when possible. The Statistics Department has requested the Resident Statistical Adviser to follow up on this issue with both the Ministry of Finance and the Treasury. 3. Money and Banking Statistics Substantial improvements have already been made in monetary statistics, Further progress requires improvements in the reliability of the data reported to the National Bank of Ukraine (NBU) by individual commercial banks. Commercial banks are expected to fully implement a new system of accounts consistent with international standards starting from 1999. Two money and banking statistics missions to Kyiv in 1995 improved the procedures for compiling monetary data needed for financial programming purposes and publication in IFS. The missions assisted the NBU in preparing a series of new balance sheet accounts to separate foreign currency positions of nonresidents from the positions of residents and uniquely classified the resident sector positions according to the economic sector of the bank’s clients in the balance sheets of the NBU and commercial banks. The management of the NBU has implemented most of the mission’s recommendations. A follow-up money and banking statistics mission took place in February 1997. The mission focused on assessing the suitability of the proposed new plans of accounts for the NBU and the commercial banks for the compilation of monetary statistics and reviewing the definition of international reserves. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 62 - APPENDIX IV 4. Balance of Payments Statistics Ukraine reports balance of payments statistics to STA on a regular and timely basis. The principal data sources are administrative data sources, a closed ITBS, and balance of payments surveys of enterprises. There are problems in coordinating the work of the National Bank (responsible for compilation and management of the ITBS), the State Committee on Statistics (responsible for conducting surveys), and the State Customs Committee. Major data weaknesses exist in trade in goods (shuttle trade, smuggling, valuation), private portfolio and PDI flows (undercoverage of transactions), and survey data are subject to bias resulting from large non-response and the use of an outdated busiiess register. Over 1992-1998, there havebeen six balance of payments statistics missions to Ukraine. No further technical assistance is planned at present although the IlvIP resident statistical advisor has reported interest in receiving technical assistance in developing international investment position statistics. A delegation from the NBU visited STA during May 24-29, 1998, to discuss issues of current interest concerning the ITRS (reporting of transactions on accounts held abroad by resident enterprises, and the supervision of commercial banks in completing the ITBS), ways of addressing deficiencies in external trade statistics (particularly concerning shuttle trade) and the scope for using partner country sources in adjusting official trade statistics. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicUkraine: Core Statistical Indicators (As of February 5, 1999) -31 Fcbnuy3 Fehe.3 I -31 F-5 I JuapyZO F-3 F-5 D D A c M D I M DI M A AIA c c I c B c c I c c M M M I M M Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicI STATUS OF SELECTED POLICY MEASURJZS UNDER THE EXTENDED ARRANGEMENT’ (As of February 19) Part I: Fiscal Reform Timing Remarks I. Galera fuenl pay !. (ii) Take skps to privatize operations of msing Fund. Throughout 1998 Not yet done. The euthmities have started to work with the World Bank, but a plan has not yet been developed on how to proceed. (iii) O&kg leasing tind for sale (iv) Include local extrabudgetary funds and ‘rivatizaticm Fund in the budget January I,1999 January 1,1999 In p-a. Article 18 of the bud@ included all funds. except pmiotq social innuance, SPF, of which 90 percent of p+hati.m proceeds come ta the budget. Not done. The CoM has id a series of resoluti~~olls in which they approved certain netting operations during the period July- October 1998. There are also plans for additional offsets and for exemptions of taxation if pmducts are wed to pay for gas shipments from Russia Nettingat opmticm have also been arranged for emergency reIiefto flooded areas in Tram- Carpathia. I. Develop action plan ta reform ntmgovrmmcntal r&icmhips in cmperlJtion with World Bank December 1998 In proem. A World Bank report with rccmmddans is expected shortly, cm the basis of which a plan will be dmlqed. However, revenue sbatiq formulas for the 1999 budget were blocked by MinFin. k Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicPolicy Measurer Timing 7. (ii) Eliminate all local payroll taxes January 1999 Remarks In pmcess. while there are no formal local payrall taxes, the local commmmltaxmaybebwdontbe size of a firm’s payroll. It is to be elimiMed under a law under consideration by parliament; this has passed the first rading (iii) Eliminate remaining Chernobyl tax of January 1999 Dam 5 percentage points (iv) Reduce Social Insuma= tax by January 1999 Not done. Was included in Presidential decree, but 1 percentage point parliament reversed decision. 8. Reduce the taxes for Road Fund and Innovation 1999-2001 Not done for 1999. Furthermore, a new stamp Fund in the context of the annual budgets duty was edopted which is effective BS of January 1,1999. 9. Reduce IOX erempfiok (i) Eliminate VAT exemptions on local Prior actiorl Done transportatioR gas for households and most critical impcnts (ii) Eliminate remaining VAT zero-rating on Jauuluy 1999 Not done. The zermdng was cxtmd.cd until electricity, coal, and imports of gas. January 1, zom. (iii) Refrain l?om introducing any further Throughout pe-riod Not done New VAT exemptions were gumted to exemptions and providing tax privileges without fanners by Presidential duxee other tax c4xlsultation with IMP staff exemptions and privileges were intmdwxd (k&ldii tax amn.zsIy for penalties, witing off of budget loams, energy cam&u&m projects exemptions). IO. Improve VAT (iv) move to aaxul acc0Unting Prior action Dam The measure was introduced by decree and approved by parliament, and at end-O&ok it was implemented r&oactively limo Octobex 1. Parliament approved a law that reverts to the cash m&cd in 1999, but the President vetoed this law on November 26. 12. Amendtbepasonalincomctaxlawinline with recAmmm&ticms of IMF St& October 1998 In p-s. Drat? submitted to Parliament and passed in tile second reading. The authorities might still issue B Presidential decree Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicPolicy -Measure3 Timing Remarks 14. Taxation of t-bills (i) Eliminate double taxation for countries with Prior acticm Dam This has been inc1uded in the recently which tax treaties exist. approval amendments to the profit tax law. (ii) Submit to Parliament and obtain approval for September 30,199s Not done. On September 22, a draft law was amendmalts to law to eliiate 30 percent SUbmittedThiShadbeendonebydecr&iIlJuly withholding tax on t-bill earnings. but was subsequently rcvased On January 14, parliament passed a law that elites witbholdiog for nonresident% However, withholding is still in place for residents. (iii) Remove the state duties on saxmday market September 30,199s Not doa Draft law submitted to parliament in tnmsactioos. July 1998; drat? law has passed 6rst reading. 16. Sbwgthen tar odminishotton (iii) Prepare a plan and timetable for merging the December 1998 Not done 3,OGU auditors tiom the Tax Militia Department into the audit divisions of the Legal Entities and Physical Persons Department. (v) and remove the authority of the “temp‘xary Septanber 1998 Doac According to Co!.4 resolution 1141 of c.nnmi~S” (set October 16, ,xnnmiti have ta ensure timely up under Axticle 1 of February 28,1997 Law on plxyments of tax payments and clesrance of wage Me-es to Secure State Budget Reveouz (No. and social payments arrears. 187/‘97)) to change tams and timing of tax Psyments. (viii) Complete study on altemative income tax Septemh 1998 Doau STA is now in the process of creating oblast return processing m&s, includi district and regiotlal fentcrs for data plw&ng and analysis municipal level processing sy&ms, taking into with the idea of cutting the number of staff. acuxmt administrative, technical, cost, and revBlue factors. Dose. (ix) contain tax arrears: September 30,199s - Complete national arrears survey (according to maturity, t?ecbr ad type of taxpayer). 17. Adopt *new cust0m.v code that is consistent Decunk 1998 In p-s. Adopted in tint rca%ng on December with international standards. 16. 18. Impmve customs administration (ii) Consult with the World Customs Organization December 1998 Done Four interoational seminars conducted or other appropriate agency to develop 8 velwtion CoM resolution adopted on October 5. database on import prices. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicP&y Measures m. Expcaditurc policy Timing Remarks 19. Employment in budgetary organisations Ii) Reduce the number of employees in mdgetary org&tions by 100,000. :iii) Reduce the number of employees in mdgetmy orgenimtiom by 300,000. !O. Budgetary arrears on wages, pensions and mid benefits i) Reduce budgets r m-ears on these items by at leti Hrv 1 billion SqXcmber 1998 December 1998 Deccmba 1998 Done. Reduced by 107,000. Mostly done Redwed by 282,682 employees as ofJaawy 1.1999. Not don& Amears increased in Q4 of 1998. !I, Other budgetary arrean: :ji) Adopt plao to restnlcture the verified claims September 1998 Partially done, with regard to amears on energy. n consultitim with IMF St& A CoM decree dated Octoba 20,1997 provided for lketting out of ceniral go”ermneo tenagy al-ream and, for local govemm~ energy arreaa were to be mb-octmcd over 5 years. while the plan for rm local govanment aTears has not been complied with fully, the share of cumnt obligations falling due has increasul fkom 30 percentin1996to80percentia1998.Dataon non-encrgysupplier-~~to tc-come available firm the Treasury in March. Iii) Refrain from accumulating any new bodgetaty Tbmugbout period Not done. While no new c&ml govemment lITears (hAding for energy, gads) energy arre~ls wae t~~~umulatcd during 1998, mcrgg arrears of local budgets itmtx.4 during 1998. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicPolicy Meuuns Timing Remarks 22. Health and education sectors: (i) Complete expenditure review of he&b and Septemba 1998 Mostly &me The World Bank is exp&ed to issue cdueation s‘zctors. B summay note shortly. ‘Ibe govemment has completed its review. (ii) Based on the review. develop, with tbx September 1998 Partly donu Action plans developed by the assistance iium the World Bank, a plan to reform government for health and education Several the education end health sectors and improve their -hnvealready bamtakentoredwe efficiency. bcdgetary costs of sectors. A joint World addkmhim action plan could be developed for Lth by end-June; for &cation it would take at least a year. Subsldk 23. Eliminate budgetary subsidies to communal prior action Not done Parliament adopted a law (9125/98) on B services, andpublic trampoti with oorresponding tempomy breeze of utility tari& (including public decrease in expenditures. Fort transport) until all the budget arrears in sakries hisplqmeadopttaritfstolilucQstmv~for and other social payments have been repaid in folk these, services. with simultaneous improvmeuts in w appeal to the constihltional court was payments and rationalization of existing privileges. submitted. 24. State Reserve Fund (ii) Ensure that the Fund is balam-ed, taking Throughout period Not done The State Reserve Fund is being used account of possible debt service obligations extensively to subs&e agriculti sector and enteqniscl and was not bald in 1998. The aulhoritics said that the &nd is projected to be in balance in 1999. 26. Budgetmyprivileges (ii) Submit to parliament &at? laws to eliminate September IS,1998 Several dml? laws have been submitted to pliVilCgCS. parlimmt proposing eliicm of budgetary privileges including those related to: pensions, Chernobyl-related benefits, clechicity, public tmqvrtatim housing and wmmmal services, and raumnmi~ons. Howeva. padiament rejected these changes. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicPoltcy Measures Timing Remarks 27. Reform thepentionsystem: (ii) Adopt amended Law on Compulsory State November 1998 h process. A draft law submitted but not Pension Insurance. approved. The World Baok is recommending timber work on preparation of a revised law. (iii) Move payment of unemployment benefits to January 1.1999 Done. Certain unemployment benefits are paid by Employment Fund. the Pension Fund but now these are provided from the budget of tbe Employment Fund (iv) Develop comprehensive pension reform December 1998 In process. Discussions with World Bank program with the World Bank. (Benchmark) expected and work is undenvay with help &XII German and Canadian experts. (vi) Adopt law on non-state pension funds. November 1998 Not done Law which is in line with World Bank recommendations has been submitted. 28. ChernobylFund (ii) Complete audit of the fond. September 1998 Done The audit canmittee completed 80 audit of the Chemobyl Fund’s balance sheet and use of funds and rep& WBS completed, considered by C&f, and a resolution was adopted based on the findings. (iv) Eliminate fund and move expenditures to the January 1999 Done. budget 29. Social Insurance Fund (i) Submit to parliament a law inducing a flat October 1998 Done Reduction in tax was rejected by wage-replacement rate of 80 percent for sickness parliament. A draft law that would implement the bcnetits ad ai!?ing the cost of the initial two other reforms was submitted in January. weeks of sick leave to enterprises, with a reduction in the pqoll tax rate by 1 percentage point (item 7 above) for implementation in 1999. (ii) Conduct extemal audit of fimd. December 1998 Done. The audit by the Acwunting Chamber of the Parliament was completed on Dexmber 3; a report was completed. 3 1. Improve the targeting of allowances: (i) Submit proposal to parliament to transfer the December 1998 Dame. A special draft law is under consideration by administration of child allowances to the Ministry parliament; passed flnt reading. of Social Protection. (ii) Develop B canprehensive plan to consolidate September 1998 Not don% According to tbe World Bank, more various allowances, including child allowances, to time is needed. provide better targeting. - Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicPdky Measurea Timing Remarks 32. Housing subsi& scheme: (ii) Consider the repl- toftbesmitqnonn September 1998 Dame. CoM Resolution No. 1156,7/27&X, with a social nom that reflects more accwately the covered these issues. actual living space of low-income households in calculatioos of housing subsidy. other 33. strmgtlmn TreoJury opm4ions: (i) Extend the coverage of the Treaty to alI central govermnmt expenditures. with limited exceptions which would be covered by other qortingand ocunmting srrangements to: Main spending units. May I,1998 Done. Most spending units are now covered, rxcept for State Security Sake, The Department of Govemmental Communications and tbe presidential commiti on lntelligme. All lower level units. September 1,199s Done. However, many state agencies have established exkabudgekxy acauats wbi& are expected to be fully merged into theTm.my by end-September 1999 in line with Fund staff rccclmmdm. (iii) Develop the transaction based Treasury September 1998 Done. Delays in computer softwrxe and hardware Ledger System (TLS) and embody the new chart of pm p-t implmtation; ml llccounts. (iv) Establish a Cash Management Unit in the implementation expect4 by end-February 1999. June 1,199s Done. Unit establiskd, but capacity of unit is still Treasury to impmve the system of cash fomxsting limited for operational cash mmagmmt. CoM and operational cash management. resolution is being rnnsidered to improve operatiGnelcashmanagcmeot (v) Establish a prclimimy system of qmting July 31, 1998 Doac A new rcpmting form and regulations have on smxrs. bemdevelopedandfirstrepatwasi.?medinearly November. (vii) Establish specitications for a fully functioml September 30,199s Mostly dona Dr& fmarded to World Bank on tn?asmy system. November 30. Some outstending issues need to be solved, which in agreement with World Bank will ktakmupatthetimeofpreparingthetmderfor the sofhvs.re. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicPolicy Measures Timing Remarks 34. Strengthen eapendihtre control: (i) Review and adjust commitment ceilings as Throughout period In process. Rospis, consistent with program, was necessmy issued in February 1999. (ii) Submit a &at? “Law on the Budget System September 30,199s Dorm The draft wss submitted on November 16. and Budgetary processes” to parliament. (ii) Reduce the number of key spending agencies January 1,1999 Not done The 1999 budget includes same amount at least by half (to less than 120) in context of of agencies as in the past. 1999 budget 3 5. Develop the tressmy- bill market: (iii) Continue to offer short-term maturities, including 3 and 6 months. (v) Further reduce the numbs of auctions to no more than one B week. Throughout period Not done No short-term bills are being offered. September 30,199s Done Announced in the press in October Part II: Fiianhl Se&or Reform 36. Adopt new NBU law that eosmes the independence of the NBU. November 1998 Not done. 37. (i) Submit to Parliament a new “Law on December31,1998 Not done Draft law is to be tinalized in February. Banks and Banking Activity” consistent with It@ NBU proposes to submit draft law to parliament and World Bank recomm&m. witbin two months 6cm approval of tbe NBU law. 38. Complete tbe introduction Of iUWtiOna1 December 31,199s Dmc swmmting standards in commercial banks. 39. (i) Secmitize liabilities to tbrw former state banks. December 31,199s Not dam There is a letter t?om the State Treasury that the liabilities from one bank will be secmitized in 1999. (ii) Continue to refrain from govemment Throughout period There SIC indications that intafRence continues interfercnw in commercial banks lemiing andthatfrequentlybanksaretoldtolendtocatain decisions; abstain t%m directing OanmRcial enterprisaa-. banks to provide credits to specific indwhies. (iii) Eliminate govemment’s share in commercial Dexmber 31,199s Not yet done. The governmen t’s share was banks in line with tbe program elimimtcd for one of tbe three banks. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicPolicy Measures Timing Remarks 40. Ebmimte the limit on the number of bank Decemk31.1998 Done The limit oftwo expired at end-1998. accounts that legal entities (enterprises) can hold 41. Jmpkmmt a stmtegy to deal with lage banks: (iii) Complde diagmstic analysis for 3 large December 31,198 Dose. banks. (iv) Complete diag~~ostic analysis for all large December31.1998 DOlIe. banks (v) Fomulatc an action plan to deal with large February 28,1999 In p-s. Action plan to be formulated with the banks cmsistent with IMF !wmmmdations. assistance of MAE by ad-March. (vi) Involve the “Large Bank Department” in all Throughout period h pmcess. diagnostic a nalysis. 42. SW banking sopervision: (i) Stm@hen the Banking Supervision December31,1998 DOllIS Department of the NBU and initiate procedures fw liquidation of imwlvcnt banks in accordance with World Baok recommendations. (ii) Conduct audits of 30 largest bsnks. acmding December31.1998 DOlW. ta illtemetialsJ standards. (iii) Apply reserve requirements onifmml~ October31,1998 DOIN. eliminate the provision that allows t-bills to be comlted against qlired -a. (iv) Rais stmdm& of infonmtion disclosue and Throughout paicd In profas. acwuntability to improve govcxmnce inbmksto ensure Umt cmmercial banks improve tbeii intemal control and liquiditg management system. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicPolicy Measures Timing Remarks 43. Enforce bank reshuctming (i) Establish an asset managemeotkestroctuing February 28,199P Not yet done. To be formulated with the regime. sssistance of MAE. (ii) Continue to tighteo NBU provision of liquidity Throughout period In p-s. support to banks in distress and subject it to tight CditiOdity. (iii) Review the NBU practices of lender-of-last September 30,199s Doac Guidelines were prepared. NBU resolution resort with a view to develop general gui #396 csme into et&t on December 1. delilIes. (iv) Require that banks full provision for all loans October31,1998 Not done. A large number of banks is substantially classified as “loss” irrespective of tax deductibiity below full loan-loss provisions. Banks that do not provisions. provision can no longer provide credits, guarantees, etc. (NBU Res. #347,9/4/98). Not done A significant numba of banks do not (v) Remove tbe licenses of all banks that fail to comply with capital requirement. Throughout peed meet tie minimum capital requirement. In additios banks can use 811 exchange rate of Hn 2.25 pa $ to establish that compliance through the period to March 1999. (vi) Contimu to ensure compliance of all banks with prudential regulations. Throughout period Not done. A large number of banks do not comply with prudential regulations. (vii) Develop and implement B strategy to restructure, close and merge banks in distress. October 31,199s Done. NBU res. 352 of 09/1)8/98 on “MeUmdolo~ to tenqmdy manage and liquidate commercial banks.” 44. Issue Presidential decree on deposit insurance June 30,199s Done. presidential decree issued on September 10. consistent with recommendations of the IMF and World Bank. 45. Reduce barriers to the entry of foreign banks. 46. Provide NBU credit to the budget only through &asmy-bill pmcbases; gradually phase out NBU purchases in tbe primary t-bill market. June 30,199s Throughout period Done. Partly done. NBU is the main purchaser of t-bilk intheprimuymmkei Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicPolicy Messurcs Timing Remarks 4:. Stmgtben NEU management of bank Tllmughout pemd In process. Audit of NBU reserves being reserves and international reserves. Refrain from conducted and MAE has provided technical moving international maws hm domestic assistance on reserve management, but commercial banks to the NBU. r-tiorls not yet implemented in tidl. 48. Manage liquidity ofthe banking system Throllghout period Ia p-s. throw& open market operations a nd the Lombard facility, so as to maintain a positive real interest rate, consistent with JMF recommendations. Provide emergency liquidity to banks only through fully collateralized and short- term iIls!mmcnB. Part JlE Structurnl Reforms Deregulation and publk ~dministratiw reform 49. (ii) Complete review of all normative acts related December 1998 Done. This review has been completed, including to licensing and registration, with participation of (Benchmark) for the Minisby of Transport, State Construction the private sector, to fbrther liberal& the Committee, Ministry of Foreign Trade and regulatory environment for domestic and foreign Emmmic Relations, Ministry of Internal Affairs, businesses; publish the results and submit and State Standards Committee. proposals for deregulatory action to the Cabii of Ministers 50. (i) Start to transfer all fees and lines collected by October I,1998 Started. All license fees now no33 to be Ministries and agencies to the Treasury. transferred. (ii) Complete transfer of all fees and tines. January 1.1999 Not dose. A substantial part of fees still accrw to extra-budgetary accounts. (iii) Lit fees and fines, and establish legal basis January 1,1999 Done An instruction providing for tight control for all fees and tines in 1999 budget overtheentRingoffimdsintoaccwntsandthc~ of funds came into effect on October 1, The atiolities claim that there are no such tines. (iv) Eliminate all fees and Iins not covered by January 1,1999 This issue is being exam&d by the staff legal base. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicPolicy Measures 51. (i) Review and simplify the procedures for examinations and inspections of businesses in order to signifmantly reduce the number of illspections at the entaplises. Timing November 1998 (iii) Adoption of legislation ta define rights to conduct examinations. November 1998 Remarks Pwtly done presidential decree issued, followed by order by State Committee cm Business Development. Howwer, there have been delays in implementation and business surveys do not umfirm that inspectim (especially those related to taxes) have in fact been reduced Done. Parliament adopted on September 16.1998. 52. [ii) Adopt a specitic plan with the overall reform September 30,1998 Not yet done. Plan developed with the World strategy developed in ccqeration with the World Bank. Expected to be approved shoitly. Bank for further consolidation of the state committees, state agencies and ministries. 53. Streh the state administr*tion: (i) Adopt the Law on the Cabinet of Ministers. (ii) Review functions and raorganize the apparatus of the Cabinet of Ministers. (iii) Adopt a plan for the twrganization of the Ministries of Finance and EIomomy. September 30,1998 December31,1999 September 30,1998 (iv) Complete the reorganimtion of the Ivlinistq December31,1998 of Finance. (&nchmd) Not done In process. A detailed set of organizational charts for the Ministry of Finance has been prepared and is expected to be put in place in F&tuary, followed byh&istlyofEconomy. In process. Orgmizatioml charts will be tkalized in the near !i~tm-e Expected to be implemented by end-Februaty. Not done Passed by Parliament but vetoed by the President. (v) stat implementation of the reorganization January 1,1999 Not done Need to work tier on plan for plan for the Miaishy of Economy. mganization. 54. Complete survey of wages and benefits of September 1998 Partly done Shady by CIDA completed. The public servants and budgetary sector employees authorities have not yet provided information on and publish wage grid aad information about other the content of the sh&y. blTn&s. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicPoiicy iiieuuru Timing Remarks 55. Take steps to refcmn civil service (i) hlop plan of a&n with tbz World Bank December 1998 Not done for civil service refmm for its impMan in 1999 and beyond 56. Gmpkte the privatizaticm of at least 70 percent of ahares (cumulative since January 1, 1995) in: Doac. As of Septembu 29,8,512 enteqrises had (i) 8,500 enterprises. September 30.1998 bcmprivatizfd V&j (ii) 9,500 entelpli~. Lkcemtm31.1998 DoacAccoldiogtothcSPF,9,515entapriscshad bmsoldto70perccntasofFebnmyl7. 57. Pliv*tion (at leasf70 percent of shares) of aUbutlOOofthe&nsilosmdprcmmmt enterprises under “Bread of Ukraine” identiiied in Cabinetofi’histmRcsolutionNo. 1218: (ii) Approve privatizntion programs for September 30, 1998 Done. ramihg 93 emtqnises and privatizt 160 0 enterprises (cmmlatively). (ii) F%ivatize 300 clltqiscs (cmmllatively). DccemLm31,199S hpmcess.282entaptiscshadbecnsoldto70 -1 pacentasofFebmql7.lOmoreareexp&dby end-February. 58. Am&rate case-by-case cash prhtimtion of large entaprises, includinS those in tdecummmiicatioas. air tIfmspmtaticQ, and mergy sectors: (ii) O&x for privatization 20 large mtcrprk December 1,1998 Doa& Slmtes in 24 1arSe en- offend for flccording to the new .2asc-by-case procedures. sale using the SPF’s revised mn-comrmcial tcderproceduns. (iii) Pnpwaticm and .&mission to parhment dr& law on the privatization of Ukrtelemm. (iv) Develop privatization plan for Ukrtelecom. September 30.1998 Decembm31,1998 DoabSubmittcdonAugus117. Not done Parliament rejected a drafl law cm plivstization of lJlatclec4mt al Dlxxmber 15. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicPolicy Meaaurw Timing Remarks 59. (i) Put in place a workable bankruptcy Tluoughout period Otlg0ing. mechanism in line with World Bank recommmdations. (iii) Complete two bankruptcy pilot projects December31,1998 Done with help from TACIS. (iv) Submit ta parliament a revised draft law “On December 1998 Done. Second reading in parliament begun on Introduction of Changes and Additions ta the December 8, but was not completed Bankruptcy Law” in line with agreement with the World Bank 61. (i) Establish independent agencies ta regulate During-d halfof I998 ia p-a. Authorities are working on activities of natural monopolies (including in independent agencies to regulate natural teleoxmmmications and enqy sectors). mmmpous in telecullm unicatiom and in transport&m; expected in the near tilture. Presidential decree #335 ofApril 21.1998 gave tht National Energy Regulatory Commission the fumtims of regulating natural oil acd gas monopolies. (ii) Introduce licensing for businesses that During second halfof 1998 Done. Presidential decree of November 17 came provide goods and services to natural monopoly into effect cm December 17 and from January 1 is entexpri~s (atIer &ption of Law of Ukraine “On beiig enforced At same time amendments to Intiwtion of Changes and Additions to Article 4 legislation were submitted. of Law of ukraine ‘on Entreprrneurship”‘). (iii) Separate monopolistic activities of natural During secondhalfof 1998 Done. monopolies frcm their other business activities. (iv) Create conditions to improve cnmp&ion for Dmingsecondhalfofl998 Done. businesses providing goods and services to natural monopoly enterprkes. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicPolicy Measurm Timing Remarks 62. (i) Liquidate (reorganize) five state monopolies December31,1998 Done Liquidated or rcorgaaized five state which operate at the national level; complete demcmopolization of mmmpolies in the agm- monopolies (Ukragmkhim, Ukrkhlibprmn, lkptawloprom, Ukragroteklsehcc. and Khlib industrial sector operating at tie regional level. Ukminy), 8s well as demonopolizing mmoplies operating in regional markets. (ii) Streamline oper*ticms Second half of 1998 In process. of the road conshwtion industry through separation of fund raising for the conshuction, repair and maintenance of roads kom control over pafommnce and client/contractor relations. (iii) Establish procedure for procurement by Second half of 1998 Done. CoM Res. #lo58 of Septemba 24,1998. enterprises of raw materials, etc., tinauad tkm budgetary funds or foreign credits guaranteed by the Cabinet of Ministers, in excess of Hrv 10,000, on a competitive basis. (iv) Place all state contracts and allccate state moughout period Jn process. Medmnkm has been put in place. cent~alized capital investments. quotas, etc., only on a competitive basis. External trade nnd payment system 63. (ii) Eliminate remaining export duties on animal November 15,1998 Not done Dr& has been submitted to parliament skim and hides. and has been cleared by the parliamentary sub- committees. (iii) Eliminate advance export deposit requirement December 3 1.1998 Done. The advance deposit requirement was on smlilower seeds. repealed cm Sepbber 3,1998. Presidential lkcm #974/98. (iv) Refrain fmm introducing any new reshictions Throughout period cm exports. 64 Reduce the number of ccmmcdity positions December31,1998 Done. CoMresolution #1935, signedDecember 9, (at 4 digit level) subject to mixed specific/ad (perfonnane criteria) effective Dexmber 29. valorem impott tariffs to no more than 25. 65. (ii) Refrain from granting any new import t&f Throughout period Aerospace pmdwtion related imp&s exempted in CGlIlpti0nS. late October by Presidential decree. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicPolicy Measures 67. Ensure. that any import protection measure, which could become necessary to prevent injury to domestic producers, is price-based, precisely defined, temporary, and nondiscriminatory. Such measures will be intmduxl only atIer appropriate cLmsultatioIl procedures wnsistent with WTO rules are followed, taking into *ccomlt the costs to consumers and users of such mot&ion. Timing Remarks ThrDughout period Oagohlg. 68. Further harmcmiz Ukrainian legislative and normative acts with intematimd and Eu ropean ones, conclude and implement agreements on mutual ruwgnition of conformity assessments (cextiftcation) in order to remove obstacles in the aTea of trade in line with WTO principles. COlltinue ensuring the nondiscriminatory characta of confamity assessment (cmtitic*tion) procedures. 69. Improve extemal debt management; develop a debt reporting system that includes all foreign debt guaranteed by the govemment and NERJ and monitor shmt term private sector foreign blnTov/illg; improve the NBU’S statistical system to collect information on the use of tiv*tive instlumetlts. Agriculture and energy sector reform 71. Landreform: (iii) Introduce changes and additions to documents to authenticate land titles in cases of joint ownership of land. (iv) Adopt the law cm the use of land as collateral. Throughout period In process. 5 new laws prepared! one adopted, 4 1 in~aticmal agrecmmts concluded on mutual recognition of Cxzoificates. Estimated that 80 to 90 percent of legislation brought into conformity with WTO l-ides. , In process. World Bank pmjcct expected. I I January 1.1999 Not done -Ihe changes M’RC submitted to parliament but not adopted. October31,1998 Not done. The law on use of land as collateral was not yet submitted to parliient although chances for *oumval are low. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicPoky Measures Timing Remarks 72. (ii) submit lcg&ticltl to parliament ta provide Septmnbcr 30,1998 Formally dose. Cd4 re&Uion #I461 (9/18/98) legal basis to prevent regional and local elimimdedrestrictionscmgrain. ThcMinistryof gcmmmc?nts~imposingrcstTictionsofthe JusticestatedinalettardakdJanmy6,1999that movements of grain and other a8ricultmal -xi* law provides the legal basis for pmmting products. the introdtion of limits on the movement of grain and&erfmmpmdu&Unclaarwh&eritwill ftcmlly pment interf... Fowally done. The legal basis apparently exists (iii) Provide legal basis to prevent regional and December 31.1998 local governmen All procurem~t is supposed to be done through t.9hmreintrcduciIlgstateordR open tenders. The ammmt of local gowmmmt system (at the l~orlal level). pmcmemcnt is not large, (0.5 million tom of Wheat). 73. (i) Develop a plan (in wopemticm with the October 1998 Not &me Plan was prqxed, however, witbout World Bank) to mstma~ture the sugar sector. involvcmmt of the World Bank. (ii) Implement plan. StartingJanuaty I,1999 Not done. The plan cannot be implemented in its present form. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicPolicy Measures Timing Remarks 77. Develop a competitive domestic gas market: (ii) Auction 6 billion cubic metem of gas. During 1998 Not yet done. Awtioas have not been swxesstid, (Benchmatk) partly because aullmrities insist cm a minimum price that is not acceptable for clients. Only 27.5 mh. cubic meters of gas was sold through auctions during 1998. (iii) Adopt a medium-tam plan to increase the Decembm 1998 Psrtly done. The procedure for provisioning of share of gas auctioned, tied to liberalizing prices natural gas in 1999 envisages wider we of gas for gas supplied to households, budgetary auctions and gas exchanges as a source of gas organiz*tions and municipal services. supply. The power sector and indushies will buy gas either diitly under contract with suppliers or at auctions. While a plan to auction 20 billion cubic maters of gas during 1999 hns been approv4 it does not contain the measures that would lead to an increase in the amount sold. (iv) Continue to let gas pIiCeS for commercial and Throughout period Prtces we not truly market determined. industrial users be marketdeImmined. (v) Establish the regulatory batnew~ to D.~xmber31,1998 P~tiy done. The National Energy Regulatmy libemlii prices of gas supplied to households, Commission (NERC) was given reqonsibility to budge9 orgtitiona and commuoal services. rqpdate the gas sector by Coh4 resolution, including price settbq However, NERC was StiIl not capable of fuMing its gas regulation fimctions so a CoM “protocol order” was issued specifying that MinFmn would to set initial prices. DOIU. (vi) colltinue the tkc impmt of gas. Throughout period Partly dwc The separatirm of @u&n& (vii) separate the tiansmissioIl network from the Dexmber31,1998 transmissionldishibmion and trading has begun otim activities of Ukrgazprom’s system and Three colnpanies have been established under establish it as a joint-stock company. N&gas Ukrainy as subsidiaries, each responsible for one of these activities However, mmvqment of the subsidiaries is not independent 78. (i) Accelerate installation of gas meters. November 1998 Ongolag. 18 percent of budgetary organizations now have meters. The main problem is fimding. (ii) Achieve collection ratio for gas of 80 percent for non-budget and 100 for budgetary Mgallizations. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicPolicy Measurea Timing Remarks 80. Provide fox the distribution of coal sector Tixci@llout period Done More than 70 pemnt of the amount budgetary financing by way of allocating 70 received from the bwlget was allocated to UDKR percent of iimds to UDKR for coal sector in 1998. restructuring, and 30 percent to finance closing of mines, carried out by the holding companies of the coal Ministry 81. Stop providing production subsidies to Throughout period and as specified. Jn process, progress sbw. Orders have been category 1 ties; transfer 17 tie issued for *an&r of all of the 17 ties to IJDm s ta UDKR in 1998 and 7 ties in 1999; create and 10 of these have been fully tzmsfexred. The new jobs for tiers laid off in connection with dmrities plan to close 30 ties in 1999. Have closing of ties; transfer social sphere objects to fmished closure of 12 of the 28 &es previously local governments; close at least 20 ties per trrmsferred to UDKR year. 82. R&i” l?om providing govemnxnt grants or Throllghout period Mostly don& According to the World Bank, a loans (i”cl”di”g guarantees) for investnlent in new modest Bmount of government funds are still being coal mines, except for those approved in the 1998 budget. provided for investment in new mines. 84. Implement the Plan of Financial Recovery for Throughout Period In process. rnlple”Ie”tatio” of the plan has ken the Electic Energy Sector in line with World Bank delayed due to the ban on raising camnxmal recommendations, in particular enforce measmes service tariffs since this covers electricity tariffs. to improve cash couectio”s (inchlding by enmri”g Collection has dropped dramatically following the payment by budgetary institutions, and more imposition of VAT on barter transactions. &gent measm-es against nonpayment); refkin &om interfering in the commercial relations between licensed electricity suppliers and their customers. Statistical development 85. Revise the periodicity of GDP by production starting 1999 In procew. An STA mission provided tndhod and focussing, with technical assistance reco”“ne”datio”s, including *project plan for 6om the UvfF. on quarterly GDP wing pmd”ctioh development of quarterly output volume measures, income and expenditure methods umsistent with SNA wnve”tions. in October. Quarterly accounts already started to be partially compiled in 1998. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicPolicy Measures Timing Remarks 86. (i) Continue to improve transparency and quality of macro-economic statistics. (ii) Investigate the possibility of Ukraine’s subscription to the M’s SDDS and/or GDDS. (iv) Commence systematic dissemination of macroeconomic indicators for a wide public. Throughout period 1998 January I,1999 In process. There was some progress on national accounts but little progress on PPI. Done. Sample pages for the “special” standard have been reviewed and informally completed. A STA mission was requested for 1999 Ql to help to subscribe to the standards by mid-1999. Done. The dissemination of oficial statistics data in the press is widespread and timely. Web page of Derzhkomstat was tested but not yet posted for lack of resources. 87. Within the context of the public administration and civil service reform programs agreed with the World Bank, strengthen the function and statling of the head oftice of the State Statistics Committee, including through structural reorganization of regional statistics bodies. Throughout period In process. The function has been marginally reorgtized household budget surveys, wider use of sampling techniques. StatXmg is constrained by lack of resources. Jn December 1998 a request was made to the Fund on help with organizational issues. l/This matix is limited to measures that were expected to be implemented during tbe period September 1998-February 1999 or throughout the program Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 84 - ANNEX March 16, 1999 Mr. Michel Camdessus Managing Director International Monetary Fund Washington, D.C. 2043 1 Dear Mr. Camdessus: In the period since the approval of the extended arrangement, the government and the National Bank of Ukraine have continued to implement the program supported by the Fund, despite difftculties stemming gem the financial crisis in Russia and continuing volatility in international capital markets. The economic position remains gagilc but we have broadly managed to maintain stabiity. Nevertheless, in a number of areas the structural reforms and financial policies have deviated from our program. In addition, a number of restrictions were introduced to relieve pressures on the foreign exchange market. \ The attached Supplemental Memorandum of Economic Policies (MEP,) describes the steps we are taking to bring our economic program for 1999 back on track and supplements our letters (and MEPs) to you of August 14, September 4, October 17, and October 27, 1998. The present MEP includes an extensive list of measures, including prior actions, on the basis of which we request completion of the tirst program review under the extended arrangement approved by the Executive Board on September 4, 1998. In addition, we would like to request waivers for the nonobservance of performance criteria, as specilied in the attached Supplemental Memorandum, and a rephasing of purchases under the arrangement. We believe that the policies detailed in the attached MEP are adequate to achieve the objectives of our economic reform program, but we remain prepared to take additional measures as necessaq for this purpose. The second review under the program, now scheduled to be completed by mid-May 1999, will focus on the implementation of the program, and will be conducted jointly with a financing assurances review. Sincerely, ISI Valeriy Pustovoitenko Prime Minister ISI Victor Youshchenko ChailRlall National Bank of Ukraine Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 85 - ANNEX UKRAINE SUPPLEMENTAL MEMORANDUM OF ECONOMIC POLICIES I. INTRODUCTIONANDPERFORMA~TEIN 1998 1. Macroeconomic performance in 1998, and especially since the approval of the extended arrangement, was influenced by the financial crisis in Russia. This factor restrained the development of the real economy, resulting in an estimated 1.7 percent decline in real GDP. The external position remained highly vulnerable, and, in the face of strong pressures on the exchange rate and depreciation of the rate, the National Bank of Ukraine (NBU) introduced a number of administrative measures to reduce the demand for foreign exchange and limit capital flight. At the same time, a voluntary restructuring of debt obligations falling due to private creditors, both residents and nonresidents, was successfilly negotiated. However, this restructuring contributed to a sharp shifl in market sentiment and the effective cessation of demand for treasury bills by commercial banks. Consequently, the NBU became the sole purchaser of new bills, which, coupled with the liquidity injections stemming from the redemptions of outstanding treasury bills, placed severe constraints on the ability of the NBU \ to pursue a tight monetary policy. 2. Despite the problems experienced in the treasury bill market, monetary and fiscal policies during the second half of 1998 were generally appropriate; although there was some loosening during December. The budget deficit for 1998 is estimated at Hrv 2.8 billion on a cash basis (2.7 percent of GDP), which is slightly below the program target and considerably less than the deficit of 5.6 percent of GDP in 1997. Since the beginning ofthe program, cash non-earmarked revenues of the central government have increased substantially compared to the same period in 1997. On the expenditure side, operations of the treasury have been strengthened and almost all remaining agencies at the level of the central government were brought under treasury control, including, as of January I, 1999, the remaining structures of the Ministry of Defense. However, contrary to the program, domestic budgetary arrears on wages, pensions and benefits that were outstanding for more than 1 month are estimated to have increased by about Hrv 300 million. Consequently the performance criterion on the stock of budgetary arrears on wages, pensions and benefits, was not observed at the end of December for which we request a waiver. The heavy reliance of government on financing from the NJXJ also led to nonobservance of the end-December performance criterion on the net domestic assets of the NBU, for which we also request a waiver. Finally, we request a waiver for nonobservance of the performance criterion on net international reserves for end- December, which was not observed due to the difficult external environment. At the same time, notwithstanding the absence of external financing since the beginning of November, all external debt service obligations were met on time. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 86 - ANNEX II. MACROECONOMIC Fomc~s~s m mumwom 3. Recent developments are likely to continue to influence macroeconomic performance in 1999. We now expect that real GDP will continue to decline and, taking into account the effect of increases in communal tariffs scheduled for the next few months, the consumer price index is targeted to increase by no more than 19 percent. Consistent with this objective, the monetary program foresees broad money growth of about 10 percent during the year. The external position is expected to remain difficult. In light of the large debt service obligations falling due in 1999, and given the limited availability of external financing, net international reserves of the NBU are projected to decline by no more than $100 million, although gross usable reserves are targeted to increase modestly. 4. A strengthening of the fiscal stance is the cornerstone of the economic program for 1999. While the approved 1999 budget envisages a deficit of nearly Hrv 2 billion, or 1.5 percent of GDP (IMP definition), in light of the difficult macroeconomic situation, we have determined that a more ambitious fiscal adjustment is required and are taking steps to contain the deficit to no more than Drv 1.34 billion, or 1 percent of GDP, significantly lower than the 1998 outcome. This revised target includes a reduction in the stock of budgetary arrears on wages, pensions and benefits of Hrv 2.15 billion. Revised monthly liits on the level of expenditure commitments for the state budgetary units consistent with the revised fiscal targets for 1999 will be issued by March 24 by the Cabinet of Ministers. 5. On the revenue side, the approved budget eliminated the Chernobyl tax, reducing the payroll tax by another 5 percentage points, and eliminated VAT exemptions for critical imports. A recent parliamentary decision to revert the VAT calculations to a cash basis has been vetoed by the President and this veto was sustained. A parliamentary decision to reduce oil excises was also vetoed. The accrual method has been in effect since October 1, 1998. The State Tax Administration (STA) has also prepared a more aggressive plan to pursue enterprises with large tax arrears and will accelerate the sale of seized assets from such tax debtors. Finally ,we will also take measures (including the introduction of a special fee on real estate transactions and on mobile phones) to increase revenues of the Pension Fund, without which it will not be possible to reduce pension arrears. Indexation of pensions will be strictly limited. 6. We realize that a number of important structural fiscal measures that had been envisaged have not been implemented, mainly due to insuflicient support in parliament. In particular, coal and imported gas continue to be zero-rated under the VAT, earmarked taxes for the Road Fund and the Innovation Fund as well as the Social Insurance tax have not been reduced, and amendments to the personal income tax law have not yet been approved. We will continue to work with parliament on these measures to help ensure that they will be implemented in the budget for the year 2000, if not before. By then, we also intend to propose to parliament to eliminate the stamp duty that was introduced in the 1999 budget. A special two-year moratorium on the payment of taxes by the agriculture sector, including an explicit VAT exemption, was granted in December. While it is not possible to remove these Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 87 - ANNEX exemptions, at this time, no new tax exemptions or privileges-including for special economic zones-will be granted during 1999. A number of additional measures have been identified to remove distortions from the tax system: (i) the taxation of unrealized capital gains on statutory capital of banks with foreign capital has been eliminated; (ii) certificates of deposit issued by commercial banks will not be considered as gross earnings under the enterprise profit tax; (iii) the parliamentary decision on the avoidance of double taxation has been enacted; and (iv) the state duty on transactions in the secondary market for securities will be repealed. 7. Fiscal operations continue to be constrained by the use of various noncash means for settling tax obligations. We have attempted to limit the use of such instruments but it has not been possible to completely eliminate this practice. We are keenly aware ofthe need to collect more revenues in cash, both to improve the transparency of the budget and reduce the difficulties that we have encountered in meeting certain expenditure obligations, To this end, we propose that quarterly targets on the collection of unearmarked cash revenues by the central government be included as a performance criterion under the program, which will target a significant increase in 1999. 8. On the expenditure side, the approved budget reduces noninterest expenditures on a commitment basis by about 6 percent of GDP relative to 1998 and further reductions will be necessary due to expected revenue and financing shortfalls. The expenditure reductions are to be achieved by cutting non-priority expenditures, A mrther sizeable reduction in budgetary employees will be achieved during 1999, after a reduction of nearly 300,000 in 1998. Over time, further expenditure savings without a reduction in the quality of services are likely to be possible following the implementation of the public administration reform program. 9. Delays in obtaining a ruling by the Constitutional Court prevented the increase in tariffs for communal services in 1998. In light of the depreciation of the hryvnia since the start of the EFF program, substantial increases in the tariff rates relative to their levels in 1998 will be necessary to achieve full cost recovery. Following the decision of the Constitutional Court, tariffs for gas and electricity (services regulated by the central government) will be increased by 25 and 20 percent, effective April 1, 1999 (a structural performance criterion). In addition, the central government has instructed local governments to bring tariffs for heating, water supply, sewage, rent, and public transportation to full cost recovery levels no later than April 30, 1999, in line with the understandings reached with the Fund staff We understand that the observance of these targets will be prior action for the Fund staffs recommendation to complete the second program review under the extended arrangement. In addition, should the recent increases for electricity and gas prove insufficient, these tariffs will be increased to full cost recovery levels not later than June 30, 1999. 10. Expenditure control will be enhanced through a strengthening of the treasury system. We intend to accelerate the implementation of this project, and to bring all extrabudgetary accounts under its control. A full listing of these extrabudgetary accounts has been provided to the Fund staff. In addition, a presidential decree and Cabinet of Ministers resolution have Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 88 - ANNEX been issued that prevent the opening of new accounts and require freezing of the balances on such accounts if the monthly reporting requirements are not adhered to. An explicit timetable for the transfer of all extrabudgetary accounts to the treasury has been approved by the Cabinet of Ministers and all agencies concerned informed of this decision. The extrabudgetary accounts of the Ministry of Health have been transferred to the treasury. The extrabudgetary accounts of the STA will be transferred to the treasury by end-March 1999 (while keeping the STA properly funded), while treasury control of the extrabudgetary accounts of the State Customs Service will be a structural benchmark for end-June 1999. All other extrabudgetary accounts will be brought under the treasury by end-September 1999. We will also seek immediate parliamentary approval of the World Bank’s treasury project loan. IV. MONETARY AND EXCHANGE RATE POLICY 11. The monetary policy pursued by the NBU, together with the system of controls on the foreign exchange market introduced in late 1998, was instrumental in minimizing the pressures on the hryvnia. However, the system of controls has become increasingly distortive and by early January a significant excess demand for foreign exchange had accumulated. As a first step, in a move to a more flexible exchange system, a new band for the exchange rate of HIV 3.4 to 4.6 per U.S. dollar was announced on February 9, following a significant tightening of the monetary stance, as explained below. and the rate has already adjusted. At the same time, a number of restrictions were removed (see below), and following the stabilization of the rate within this new band, the interbank market will be reopened starting March 19. The NBU continues to monitor developments in the foreign exchange market closely and is prepared to tighten its monetary policy further to support the exchange rate. The NBU will refrain from intervening in the market to control the rate. 12. The NE%U has taken strong measures to tighten liquidity in the banking system substantially, especially in view of the scheduled opening of the interbank market. Beginning February 5, the NBU started to auction its own certificates of deposit. Reserve requirements were raised to 17 percent and the definition of required reserve balances was tightened to exclude cash in vault. Liquidity in the banking system has also been reduced as a result of the recent restructuring of treasury bills held by commercial banks that would fall due in February. Treasury bills will henceforth be redeemed as scheduled. 13. Together with Fund staff and representatives of other creditor and donor organizations, we are in the process of working out a bank restructuring program, based on the results of the diagnostic studies that were completed with the assistance of these parties in late 1998. The broad outline of the strategy is given in the Presidential Decree ofJanuary 23 “On Comprehensive Measures to Improve the Banking System of Ukraine in 1999-2000” To strengthen our implementation capacity, we have recently reorganized the banking supervision department, and the new large bank unit will be fi~lly staffed by end-February By end-March we will reach agreements with the seven large banks on required reform measures and on a timebound action plan to bring them back to the normal capital adequacy level, or withdraw Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 89 - ANNEX their license if this is not feasible. Prudential requirements and their implementation, in particular those related to loan loss provisioning will be strengthened in line with the need demonstrated by the diagnostics studies. These, and other measures will be contained in a comprehensive action plan that will be prepared by end-March 1999. Finally, to strengthen our implementation capacity, we will attempt to secure passage of the second reading of the Law on the NBU by end-March, and adoption of the law by end-June. A draft law on commercial banks and the banking system will be submitted to parliament shortly thereafter. An agreement has also been signed between the NBU and the Ministry of Finance on the treatment of treasury bills held by the NEKJ. 14. The NBU has continued to improve the liquidity of its international reserves, and the transparency of its operations in this area. Apart from a small number of transactions for which there are contractual constraints, all of the transactions that had earlier tied up a portion of our international reserves have been unwound. The international reserves of the NBU at end-October were reviewed by an international firm and a copy of their report has been provided to the Fund staff A contract has been issued for a full audit of the international reserves of the NBU at end-1998. 15. As noted, administrative procedures for screening and allocating foreign exchange were introduced during the third quarter of 1998 in response to concerns over possible contagion from the financial crisis in Russia. After careful review with the Fund staff, four exchange restrictions were identified that are inconsistent with Article VIII ofthe Fund’s Articles of Agreement. These are: (i) a restriction on the availability of foreign exchange to meet debt service payments on foreign borrowing exceeding a designated interest rate; (ii) limitations on the extension of certain trade credits in hryvnia and foreign exchange; (iii) a restriction on the repatriation of interest by certain nonresident investors, and (iv) a restriction on the making of advance import payments. In conjunction with our move to a more flexible exchange system we have now removed the first two restrictions identified above. The third restriction arose Corn the creation of special blocked hryvnia accounts for nonresident holders of treasury bills that chose not to participate in a debt restructuring operation. The balances in the special blocked accounts have been largely drawn down. We will continue to work with these creditors to help ensure that the remaining balances can be used in a manner satisfactory to all parties concerned and intend to eliminate this restriction and the one on advance payments by end-June. Remaining requirements regarding the provision of supporting documentation are used exclusively for purposes of verification. In light of the extraordinary circumstances facing Ukraine, we request waivers for the nonobservance of the performance criterion on the introduction of exchange restrictions, and the approval of the remaining exchange restrictions subject to Fund jurisdiction through end-June 1999. v. Ch’HER STRUCNRAL POLICIES 16. We have made significant progress in a number of structural reform areas, including privatization and deregulation and demonopolization, although in some other areas progress Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 90 - ANNEX has lagged. Efforts are underway on a number of important initiatives. In this context, administrative reform remains an important priority on the government’s agenda. A comprehensive reform program in this area has been developed with the assistance of the World Bank. A number of important measures have already been implemented. In particular, a presidential decree on the system of central bodies of Ukrainian executive authorities has been issued that formally establishes the framework for public administration reform and the liquidation or merger of ministries, committees, and agencies, and raises to 38 the number of committees that are subordinated to the.relevant ministries. This decree gives greater authority to ministers in the area of appointing and dismissing of heads of committees under their jurisdiction. This decree is a first step and tirther, more comprehensive measures in this area will be taken by end-July 1999 in cooperation with the Fund and World Bank staff. A Cabinet of Ministers decision has been taken that implements the restructuring program for the Ministry of Finance. The latter decision specifies the transfer of all tax policy functions from the STA to the Ministry, merges the two debt departments, centralizes all macroeconomic fUnctions in one department, and centraliies the authority on all the work done by various sectoral departments of the Ministry under the First Deputy Minister for budgetary issues. STA will cease to have responsibility in the tax policy area and will reassign the remaining staff currently carrying out this function to other responsibilities. We intend to review the new structure of the Ministry of Finance in consultation with the World Bank and Ih4F staff by no later than end-1999. Finally, action plans, in line with World Bank recommendations, for the reform of the Ministries of Agriculture, Labor, and the Environment, were approved by the Cabinet of Ministers. Some more work will be needed to finaliie a plan for the restructuring of the Minis@ of Economy. Completion of a plan, in line with recommendations of the World Bank, and its implementation will be condition for completion of the second program review. Action plans for the Ministries of Health and Education will be finalized no later than end- June. 17. The privatization program has progressed largely as contemplated in the program. Case by case procedures for the privatization of large enterprises have been initiated and a substantial block of shares in 24 large enterprises have been offered for sale using new, revised tender procedures. Both the end-December targets established for sales of shares in enterprises and the target for the sales of units under “Bread of Ukraine” will be achieved, with only a small delay by mid-March. To enhance the effectiveness of the privatization of Bread of Ukraine, the focus of the privatization program for 1999 will shift to the sale of 100 percent of shares, rather than the 70 percent shares offered previously. To this end, share allocation plans have been approved for the sale of 100 percent of shares in no less than 100 grain silos. Of this number, at least 10 large attractive grain silos will be sold by end-March, which will assessed as part of the second program review. 18. We realize that reform of the agriculture sector is essential to provide a strengthened basis for future economic growth. While there has been some progress in developing a market based structure in this sector, the momentum of reform has so far been slow. To remove key constraints in this sector, we now have: (i) prepared a resolution that introduces amendments to documents to authenticate land titles in cases ofjoint ownership of land; (ii) identified a list Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-9l- ANNEX of 170 collective farms with large outstanding debts. These farms have been informed that they have one month to resolve their debts or bankruptcy procedures will be initiated; (iii) adopted changes to the by-laws of Bread of Ukraine that eliminate its role as a government agent dealing with issues of provision of agricultural inputs and debt collection; and (iv) taken measures to improve the operations of the state leasing fimd. All receipts of this fimd are now channeled through the treasury and by end-March is will be established as a legal entity separate from the Ministry of Agriculture. Furthermore, to improve financial discipline in the agricultural sector efforts will be made to collect overdue budgetary loans. By mid- March, the STA will take charge of debt collection. 19. There has been some progress in the development of the gas sector but a market for gas has not yet emerged. The regulatory framework to support liberaliition of gas prices is now in place and five gas auctions were organized in 1998. However, these auctions were not successful and only a very small amount of gas was sold. In order to promote the development of a more meaningfU1 auction mechanism, we have issued a Cabinet of Ministers resolution that requires budgetary organizations-including local governments and heating companies-to procure natural gas only at the auction, where all payments are made in cash. The minimum price will be unified for all consumers and set between $27.50 and $30 per 1000 cubic meters for the auction scheduled for March. If interest in the auctions remains low we will consult with the Fund on additional measures to take, including on the need to have a minimum price. ln the circumstances , we understand that understandings with the Fund staff. on a strategy would be necessary for the staff‘s recommendation for completion of the second program review. We are committed to sell at least 500 million cubic meters of gas by March 4. We are continuing to investigate mechanisms for making the gas auction more effective and plan to offer a minimum of 20 billion cubic meters of natural gas for sale via the auctions during 1999. Moreover, to improve transparency, a tender will be opened by mid- March for an audit of the production costs and the accounts of Naf’logas Ukrainy in 1998 by an internationally reputable company, the terms of reference for which were drawn up in coordination with the World Bank and USAID. VI. EXTERNALPOLICIES 20. The balance of payments position remains vulnerable due to the bunching of debt service obligations in the next two years and the relatively low level of international reserves. However, the recent depreciation of the hryvnia and the liberalization of the foreign exchange market coupled with the implementation of a strong budget and appropriately tight monetary policy and an acceleration of structural reforms should facilitate a strengthening of the current account and boost foreign investment. The government is, however, well aware of the vulnerability of the external position in the near term and will continue to monitor the position closely. We remain committed to meeting our obligations in a timely manner. 21. The government is committed to the maintenance of a liberal trade regime. TariErates have been reduced in line with program commitments and the reduction in the number of Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Publiccommodity positions subject to mixed specific/ad valorem tariffs, a structural performance criterion, was achieved on schedule. Protectionist pressures in response to the regional crisis have been successfilly resisted. However, the elimination of the export duty on animal skins and hides has not yet been approved by the parliament, but this measure will be done before end-April. VII. PROG~MM~~~RZNG 22. The prior actions for the first review are summarized in Annex Table 1. Monthly performance criteria have been established for the period March-August on: (i) the deficit of the consolidated budget; (ii) the stock of budgetary arrears on wages, pensions, and benefits; (iii) net domestic assets of the NBU; (iv) net international reserves of the NBU; (In addition, quantitative performance criteria have been set for the contracting or guaranteeing of nonconcessional external loans, with sub-ceilings on maturities of up to three years and on credit lines. There are also continuous performance criteria on, inter alia, the nonaccumulation of external arrears by the government and the NFlU, and the accumulation of short term debt. In addition, we propose quarterly performance criteria on unearmarked cash revenues of the central government. Finally, there will be a structural performance criterion on increasing gas and electricity tarif& by April 1, 1999. The performance criteria, indicative targets, and the adjusters, as well as structural benchmarks under the program are set out in Annex Tables 2 and 3, and the technical memorandum. 23. The second review under the program based on end-April 1999 performance is scheduled to be completed by May 14, 1999. It will focus on the implementation of monetary and fiscal policy; the implementation of the public administration reforms; progress with the development of the gas market; and the formulation of a strategy for the reform of the banking system. The second program review will also review financing assurances. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 93 - ANNEX Table 1: Prior Conditions for Circulation of Documents to the Executive Board The following measures need to be implemented before the documents for the first program review under the extended arrangement can be circulated to the Ih4P’s Executive Board. . Quantitative targets: Observance ofthe targets established for end-January; reaching of understandings on monthly targets for February through August 1999. . Fiscal and tax measures: Issuing of a Rospis for first quarter 1999 expenditure commitments, consistent with targets specified in consultation with the IMF. Issuing of a public statement that the authorities intend to limit the budget deficit in 1999 to no more than 1 percent of GDP (IMF definition) and cut expenditures by 2 percent of GDP due to expected revenue and financing shortfalls. Elimination of taxation of unrealized capital gains on statutory capital of foreign banks. Issue instructions to tax administrators not to apply profit tax on the value of certificates of deposit issued by commercial banks. Veto of the reduction in oil excises. . Treasury: Approval of a timetable for the transfer of all extra-budgetary accounts to the Treasury by September 1999; transfer of extra-budgetary accounts of the Health Ministry to the Treasury. Issuing of a Presidential decree and Cabinet of Ministers resolution that prohibits the opening of new accounts and requires freezing of the balance on such if the monthly reporting requirements are not adhered to. . Monetary and exchange rate policy: Introduction of new exchange rate band. Elimination of restrictions on servicing foreign loans with interest rates exceeding a maximum level, and of ban on provision of trade credits in domestic currency or foreign exchange. . Elimination of vault cash from required reserves. Increase in the required reserve ratio to 17 percent, Initiation of auctions of NBU certificates of deposit. Increase compliance of banks with reserve requirements, (especially for those that will receive proceeds from redemptions of treasury biis). . Signing of a contract with an internationally reputable firm to conduct a Ml audit of the NBU’s international reserves at end-December 1998. . NBU treasury bills: Formalize agreement between the government and the NBU to restructure HIV 1.15 billion of treasury bills purchased by the NBU prior to September 1998 on terms comparable to those previously agreed with commercial banks. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 94 - ANNEX . Communal service tariNs and transportation: Announce increase in electricity tariffs by 20 percent and gas tariffs by 25 percent, effective April 1, and issue instruction to regional governments on the increase in communal service tariffs to fi~ll cost recovery, to be achieved no later than May 1, 1999. . Public administration reform: Adoption and implementation of the Presidential decree on the system of the central bodies of Ukrainian executive authorities in line with World Bank staff recommendations, implementation of the plan for reorganization of the Ministry of Finance in line with recommendations from the Fund and the World Bank staff adoption by Cabinet of Ministers of restructuring plans for the Ministries of Agriculture, Labor, and Environment . Privatization: Privatization of 70 percent of shares of 9,500 medium- and large-scale enterprises and 300 grain silos and procurement enterprises under “Bread of Ukraine” identified in Cabinet of Ministers Resolution No. 1218; approval of share allocation plans for 100 grain silos with a view to privatizing 100 percent of shares. . Gas sector: Decision to require budgetary organizations (including local governments) as well as heating companies to procure natural gas only at the auction and to pay cash. . Agriculture: Issuing of a Cabinet of Ministers resolution that changes the by-laws of Bread of Ukraine, eliminating its role as a government agent dealing with issues of provision of agricultural inputs and debt collection. Decision that State Tax Administration will take charge of collection for debt to the government of agricultural enterprises. Identification of list of 170 collective farms-including 10 large units--which are chronic debtors that will be notified that bankruptcy procedures will be initiated if within one month period they do not settle their debts. Prior Conditions for the StatI’s Recommendation of Board Approval . Observance of end-February fiscal and monetary targets. . Reopening of the interbank foreign exchange market. . Unification of the price of gas at auctions for all types of consumers in the range of %27.50-$30 per 1000 cubic meters, and actual sale of at least 500 million cutiic meters of gas by March 4. . Issuing of decree on resolution to introduce changes and additions to documents to authenticate land titles in case ofjoint-ownership of land. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Publicna. 0 II 0 0 0 0 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 96 - ANNEX UKRAINE-TECWNICAL MEMORANDUM Performance Criteria and Financial Benchmarks Net international reserves of the National Bank of Ukraine (performance criterion) Net international reserves of the NBU (NJR) are defined as the difference between gross usable foreign reserved and short-term liabilities to nonresident institutions with an original maturity of up to and including one year, and includii all Fund purchases. For the purposes of the program, gross usable foreign reserves and short-term liabilities to nonresident institutions will be baaed on the following classiication.’ Type of Foreign Reserve Asset or Liability 1. Gross foreign reserves (In convertible currencies) NBU Balance Sheet Accounts Monetary gold 1100,1107 Monetary gold in foreign banks 1101 Foreign exchange in cash 1011,1017 Demand deposits at foreign banks 1201,1202 Short-term time deposits at foreign banks 1211,1212,1213 Holdings of SDRs IMF, Treasurer’s Department Securities 1301,1305 2. Short-term liabilities to nonresident institutions (Tn convertible currencies) Correspondent accounts of nonresident banks 3201 Short-term deposits of nonresident banks 3206,3207,3211 Operations with nonresident customers 3230,3232-S IMF accounts No. 1 and No. 2 3220,3221 Use of Fund credit JMF. Treasurer’s Denartment The definition excludes any foreign assets held at domestic institutions. These assets comprise all foreign currency claims of the NBU on domestic banks, and NBU deposits held at the Interbank Foreign Currency Exchange market and domestic banks for trading purposes. The detinition also excludes any precious metals or metal deposits, other than gold, held by the ‘The detinitions used in this technical memorandum will be adjusted to reflect any changes in accounting classifications introduced during the period of the program, The definitions of the foreign accounts here correspond to the system of accounts on January 1, 1998. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 97 - ANNEX NBU. Finally, the definition excludes any international reserves that are (a) encumbered, (b) pledged as collateral for foreign loans, (c) tiozen (d) pledged through forward contracts. The NJR of the NXJ for February-August 1999 will be subject to two automatic adjusters. The tirst will adjust the NIR for the amounts that foreign financing’ deviates from the programmed levels (specified in the table below). Specifically, if the proceeds from foreign Snancing: (4 exceed the program limits, the NJR floor for the month will be increased by 100 percent of the additional financing; fall short of the program limits, the NJR floor for the month will be reduced by 100 percent of the shortfall but the amount of the adjustment can not exceed $100 million. I Ukraine: Cumulative Foreign Financing, January-August 1999 (In millions of dollars, from January 1, 1999) I January February 0 0 March April May 150 190 249 June 349 July Augllst 389 389 The second adjuster will automatically increase the NJR of the NBU by 100 percent of the amount of any new SDR allocation from the IMF. For the period January 1999, through the end of the program, the international reserve assets and liabilities of the NRU denominated in currencies other than the dollar, except those held in SDRs, will be converted from other currencies into dollars at the official NBU fixed cross exchange rates prevailing on December 3 1, 1998. SDR assets and liabilities, which will be taken from the records of the IMF Treasurer’s Department, will be converted into dollars at the exchange rate of $1.40677 per SDR. Official gold holdings will be valued for the period of the program at $286.80 per ounce, which was the London gold price on December 3 1, 1998. On December 3 1,1998, the NIR as defined above amounted to -S1,997 million. The adjuster could be reconsidered during program reviews. ’ Foreign Snancing is defined as disbursements of balance of payments support loans with a maturity of more than a year from multilateral and bilateral creditors and resources with a maturity of more than one year raised in international capital markets by the government or the NRU, including restructuring or refinancing of existing foreign loans and treasury bills held by nonresidents. This excludes use of IMF resources, Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 98 - ANNEX Information source: Monetary statistics (10R) provided monthly by the NBU. For daily monitoring purposes, the NBU will continue to provide the standard daily data sheet throughout the period of the program. Net domestic assets of the NBU (performance criterion) The net domestic assets of the NBU are defined as the difference between monetary base and the NJR of the NBU, with the NIR as defined above and valued at the accounting exchange rate of Hrv 3.427 per dollar and expressed in hryvnia. On December 3 1, 1998, NDA of the NBU amounted to HIV 15,447 million. The NDA of the NBU for February-August 1999 will be subject to an automatic adjustor for the amounts that foreign financing deviates from the programmed levels specified in the table below. Programmed Levels of Foreign Financing for the Budget, January-August 1999 Cumulative since January 1, 1999 (in millions of hryvnias) Foreign financinn Jan. Feb. 0 0 Mar. Apr. May 514 651 853 June 1,196 July August 1,333 1,333 If the proceeds from foreign financing: (4 exceed the program limits, the NDA ceiling for that month will be reduced by 100 percent of the additional financing; (b) fall short of the program limits, the NDA ceiling for that month will be increased by 100 percent of the shortfall in financing. Foreign currency amounts will be converted to hryvnia at the accounting exchange rate of Hrv 3.427 per dollar. Informafion source: Monetary statistics (IOR) provided monthly by the NRU. For daily monitoring purposes, the NBU will continue to provide the standard daily data sheet throughout the period of the program. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 99 - ANNEX Deficit of the consolidated budget (performance criterion) The consolidated budget is defined as (i) the state budget, which consolidates the republican budget, the local budgets, the Chernobyl, Pension, Employment, State Reserve, and Innovation Funds, and ah budgetary foreign currency operations; (ii) all other extrabudgetary timds included in the monetary statistics compiled by the NBU; and (ii) all credit to nongovemment units that is guaranteed by the government or the NBU, excluding on lending of official credits. For the purposes of the program, the deficit of the consolidated budget will be measured as: Total net treasury bib sates as measured by the information kept in the NBU registry of treasury bill sates (net treasury bill sales are defined as the cumulative total timds reahxed from the sates of treasury bills at the primary auction less the cumulative total redemption of principal on treasury bills) plus other net banking system credit to government as measured by the monetary statistics provided by the NJ3U (this consists ofail non-treasury-bii financing in either domestic or foreign currency extended to the budget by banks less all government deposits in the banking system) plus receipts from privatixation plus all credit to nongovemment units that is guaranteed by the government or the NBU, excluding on-lending of official foreign credits plus net proceeds from bonds issued by any local authority for the purpose of financing deficits of the consolidated budget plus net proceeds from any bonds issued by the government or the NBU to nonresidents for purposes of financing the deficit of the consolidated budget plus the difference between disbursements of foreign credits to the consolidated budget and the amortization of foreign credits by the consolidated budget. For the purposes of measuring the deficit of the consolidated budget, ah flows to/from the budget in foreign currency will be converted into hryvnia at the birxha exchange rate prevailing at close of business on the date of the transaction. Znfonafion source: NBU daily treasury bill sheet for net treasury bill sates; monetary statistics provided monthly by the NBU for other net banking system credit to government; monthly budget execution data for pt‘ivatixation receipts; State Commission for Securities and Exchange for net proceeds from bonds issued by local authorities; Ministry of Finance or Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-lOO- ANNEX NBU, as appropriate, for net proceeds from foreign borrowing from the capital markets for purposes of tinarming the deficit of the consolidated budget; and Ministry of Fiice for disbursements of foreign credits to the consolidated budget and amortization of foreign credits by the consolidated budget. For daily monitoring purposes, the NBU will continue to provide the standard daily data sheet and the Ministry of Finance will continue to provide weekiy data on foreign credits to the consolidated budget and amortization of foreign credits by the consolidated budget throughout the period of the program. Unearmarked state cash revenue (performance criterion) Unearmarked state cash revenue includes all taxes, fees, and charges levied by the central government that are not earmarked by law for specific expenditure programs and collected in cash. Not included in the detinition of revenue are any proceeds from loans or other banking system credits, the issuance of securities, or tiom the sale of state assets. Stock of budgetary arrears on wages, benefits, and pensions (performance criterion) Budgetary arrears include all arrears of the consolidated budget on wages, social benefits (including arrears on Chernobyl pensions), pension obligations of the state budget owed to the Pension Fund, and pensions owed by the Pension Fund. Arrears are defined as payments more than one month overdue. Wages are defined to include all forms of remuneration for work performed, including, but not limited to, payments in cash and m-kind for standard and overtime work. Pension obligations of the Pension Fund include retirement pay and all other obligations of the Pension Fund. The stock of budgetary arrears as defined above was Hrv 2,899 billion on December 31,199s. Information source: hfinistry of Finance, External arrears by the government and the NBU (performance criterion) External arrears include all arrears to official creditors. The criterion for non-accumulation of external arrears applies on a continuous basis. Contracting or guaranteeing aonconeessional external debt (performance criterion) The ceilings on contracting or guaranteeing nonconcessional external debt apply to the contracting or guaranteeing by the government or the NBU of new nonconcessional extemal debt with an original maturity of more than one year; and within this limit, with an original maturity of more than one year and up to and including 3 years. Concessional loans are defined as those with a grant element of at least 35 percent of the value of the loan, using currency-specitTc discount rates based on the commercial interest rates reported by the OECD (CIRBs). Discount rates for assessing the concessionality of loans with a maturity of at least Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- IOl- ANNEX 15 years will be bused on the average CIRRs over the last ten years. The assessment of concession&y for loans with maturities of less than I5 years will be based on the average CIRRs of the precedii six-month period.’ In addition, during the program period, neither the Government nor the NBU shall contract or guarantee debt of an original maturity of one year or less, other than normal import financing. Excluded from the limits is the use of Fund resources; but other balance of payments support-including loans from official creditors and foreign banks, and bond issues-is included within these limits, Also excluded are net sales of Ukrainian government treasury bills to nonresidents. The amount of debt contracted or guaranteed will be valued at the relevant currencies of denomination and converted into dollars using the NBU’s official exchange rates prevailing at the time the debt is contracted. Zuzormu~rou source: Ministry of Finance for amounts and terms of all external debt contracted or guaranteed. Commund services tariik a. Structural Performance Criterion for April I, 1999 Tariffs on gas and electricity will be increased by 25 percent and 20 percent, respectively, by no later than April 1, 1999. b. Condition for completion of second program review In line with understandings reached with the Fund statTon communal services tariffs, local governments will raise tariffs that are in the purview of local governments (heating, water supply, sewage, rent, and public transportation) to tit11 cost recovery levels no later than May 1, 1999. Tariffs will increase, on average, by 50 percent for heating, 67 percent for water supply, 65 percent for sewage, 68 percent for rent, and 35 percent for public transportation. The central government will, on a monthly basis, report summary information on actual tariff increases in all regions to Fund staff. In addition, tariffs for gas and electricity (services for which tariffs are centrally regulated) will be raised to fill cost recovery no later than June 30, 1999. ’ Margins added to CIRRS will be 75 basis points for loans with maturity of less than 15 years; 100 basis points for loans with maturity of at least 15 years and less than 20 years; 115 basis points for loans with maturity of at least 20 years and less than 30 years; and 125 basis points for loans with maturity of at least 30 years. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 102- ANNEX Monetary base (indicative indicator) The NBU’s monetary base (base money) comprises domestic currency outside banks and banks’ reserves, including cash in vault.’ a. Currency outside banks is defined as: Currency issue (NBU accounts 3000 (net)+3001 (net)-3009) minus NBU currency holdings (NBU accounts 1001, 1004, 1005, 1007, 1021, and 1027) minus cash in vault at deposit money banks (DMBs) @MB accounts 1001,1002,1003, 1004, and 1007). b. Banks’ reserves are defined as cash in vault at DMBs (as defined above) plus DMB correspondent account deposits at the NBU in hryvnia (accounts 3200,3206,3207, 321 I, 3212) On December 31, 1998, base money as defined here amounted to Hrv 8,604 million. Znfonnation source: Monetary statistics provided monthly by the NBU. For daily monitoring purposes, the NBU will continue to provide the standard daily data sheet throughout the period of the 1998-2001 program, ‘The detinitions set out here will be modiied to include any other accounts that may be identified or created in the limue in connection with domestic currency issue and the deposit money banks’ deposits at the NBU. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 103 - ANNEX Gross purchase of treasury bills in the primary market by the NBU (indicative target) The maximum amount of treasury bills purchased by the NBU in the primary market cannot exceed the cumulative monthly limits shown in the following table. Ceilings of Treasury Bills Purchased by the NBU in the Primary Market Cumulative since January 1, 1999 (in millions of htwnias) NBU purchases of T-bills JfUlUiUjJ February March April May June July Aug. 227 727 727 727 727 1,002 1,252 1,275 Starting from March 1, 1999, the monthly ceilings will be subject to an adjustor for the amounts of conversion of t-bills held by commercial banks. That is, in case that treasury biis to commercial banks, are rescheduled the ceiling for the month will be reduced by 100 percent of the rescheduled amount. Other 1. Exchange rates The program exchange rate is the end-December rate ofHrv 3.427 per dollar. 2. NBU accounting All foreign assets and liabiities of the NBU will be included in the NBU balance sheet, valued at the official exchange rate prevailing on the day for which the balance sheet is compiled. All NEW claims on and liabilities to the IMF will be included in the NBU balance sheet. Reporting requirements and monitoring information To monitor performance under the arrangement, the NBU will provide to the JMF, no later than the twenty-fifth day of each month, an aggregate balance sheet for the NBU and a consolidated balance sheet for the deposit money banks. The NBU will communicate to the Fund stafT any changes in accounting conventions and valuation principles incorporated into the balance sheet data. Every ten days, the NBU will provide the Fund with the operational monetary survey and the operational monetary survey of the NBU. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-104- ANNEX Every day, the NBU will report to the Fund the standard daily reporting sheet, inchxiii the figure for total net treasury bill sates from the registry information of the NFW, nontreasury- bill credit to the budget from both the NBU and commercial banks, the stock ofNIR, base and broad money, foreign exchange intervention on the birzha and the interbank market, and the official exchange rate for the previous day. The Ministry of Finance wig report operational data on cash unearmar ked state revemre to the Fund on a weekly basis. Monthly revenue and expenditure figures of the consolidated, state and local government will be reported no later than 25 days afer the end of the month. Information on the amounts and terms of ah external debt contracted or guaranteed by the general government will be reported to the Fund once a month, no more than 15 days after the end of the month. The NBU will report data on non-official debt. The Ministry of Finance will provide data on the stock of budgetary arrears on wages, pensions and social benefits on a monthly basis, no more than 25 days after the end of the month. In addition to these reporting requirements, the Ukrainian authorities will provide all other information as specified in the above sections on information requirements. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 105- ANNEX Table 3. Ukraine: Structural Benchmarks By end-March 1999 . Transfer the extrabudgetary accounts of the State Tax Administration to the treasury. . Prepare comprehensive action plans for the restructuring of the seven large banks in line with Fund staff recommendations. . Sell 100 percent of shares in at least 10 large attractive grain silos. . Initiate bankruptcy procedures for all of the identified 170 collective farms that did not settle their debts. By end-April 1999 . Bring tariffs for heating, water supply, sewage, rent, and public transportation to till cost recovery levels. By end-June 1999 . Consolidate bank accounts into the Treasury Single Account (TSA) at the NBU (covering the central NBU account and accounts at NBU branches in oblasts), except for Treasury balances with commercial banks in locations remote from NBU branches, where balances should not exceed 24-hour payment needs. . Complete privatization of 443 enterprises under “Bread of Ukraine” (70 percent of shares). . If necessary, raise tariffs for electricity and gas to tirll cost recovery levels. . Establish treasury control over the extrabudgetary accounts of the State Customs Service. . Eliminate the exchange restriction on the repatriation of interest by nonresidents and the restriction on the making of advance import payments. . Fiialixe action plans for restructuring the Ministries of Health and Education Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public