DOCUMENT OF INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND NOT FOR PUBLIC USE MASTER FILES ROOM HQ C-525 0451 EBS/99/96 CONFIDENTIAL June 14, 1999 To: Members of the Executive Board From: Subject: The Secretary Republic of Mozambique-Staff Report for the 1999 Article IV Consultation and Request for Arrangements Under the Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staff report for the 1999 Article IV consultation with the Republic of Mozambique and its request for arrangements under the Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility. A draft decision appears on page 25. This subject, together with the policy framework paper for the Republic of Mozambique (EBD/99/70, 6/14/99), is tentatively scheduled for discussion on Monday, June 28, 1999. Mr Reitmaier (ext. 37443), Mr. Ramlogan (ext. 35698), or Mr. Gelbard (ext. 34418) is available to answer technical or factual questions relating to this paper prior to the Board discussion. Unless the Documents Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the WTO Secretariat on Tuesday, June 22, 1999; and to the African Development Bank and the European Commission, following its consideration by the Executive Board. Att: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicCONFIDENTIAL INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE Staff Report for the 1999 Article IV Consultation and Request for Arrangements Under the Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility Prepared by the African Department (In consultation with the Fiscal Affairs, Legal, Monetary and Exchange Atlairs, Policy Development and Review, Statistics, and Treasurer’s Departments) Approved by Jose Fajgenbaum and Leslie Lipschitz June 14, 1999 Contents Page Executive Summary .._................... 3 I. II. III. IV. V. VI. VII. Introduction.. ............................................................................................................. 5 Recent Developments and Performance Under the E&W-Supported Program ........... .5 Medium-Term Objectives and Strategy .................................................................... 10 The Economic Program for 199992000. ................................................................... 13 A. Financial Policies ............................................................................................ 13 B. Structural Reforms ......................................................................................... 16 C. Program Monitoring and Statistical Issues.. ................................................... .20 The Balance of Payments Outlook and Capacity to Repay the Fund ........................ .2 1 The Environment for Program Implementation and Risks to the Program.. .............. ,22 Staff Appraisal ......................................................................................................... 23 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2- Boxes 1. The Value-Added Tax ................................................................................................ 8 2. Financial Sector Reforms Since 1996.. ....................................................................... .9 3. Summary ofFiscal Measures, 1999-2000.................................................................1 5 Figures 1. 2. 3. Effective Exchange Rate and Inflation, January 1995-April 1999 ............................... 7 National Accounts, 1997-2002 ................................................................................ 11 Central Government Finances, 1997-2002 ............................................................... 12 Tables 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 1997-2001 ......................................... .26 National Accounts, 1997-2005 ............................................................................... .27 Government Finances, 1997-2001 (In billions of meticais) ....................................... 28 Government Finances, 1997-2001 (In percent of GDP) .......................................... .29 Monetary Survey, 1997-2001 .................................................................................. 30 Balance of Payments, 1997-2005.. .......................................................................... ,3 1 External Financing Requirements and Sources, 1997-2005 .................................... ..3 2 Indicators of Financial Obligations to the Fund, 1999-2005 ..................................... 33 Appendixes I. Three-Year Arrangement Under the Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility...........3 4 Letter of Intent and Memorandum on Economic and Financial Policies ............... .37 Table 1. Quantitative Performance Criteria and Benchmarks Under the First-Year ESAF Program, April 1999-March 2000 ......................................... 44 Table 2. Structural Performance Criteria and Benchmarks Under the First-Year ESAF Program, April 1999-March 2000 ......................................... 45 II. Relations with the Fund.. ......................................................................................... ,46 III Relations with the World Bank Group......................................................................4 9 IV. Statistical Issues ....................................................................................................... 5 1 V. Social Indicators.. ............. ...................................................................................... 55 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3- EXECUTIVE SUMMARY l Economic performance during the expiring three-year ESAF arrangement was strong, fostered by prudent fiscal and monetary policies, political stability, and favorable external developments. Real GDP growth increased to over 10 percent per year, inflation fell to single- digit levels, and international reserves rose substantially. Increased confidence in the economy was reflected in higher levels of foreign aid and long-term capital inflows and a stable exchange rate. l Substantial progress was also made with structural reforms. Key fiscal reforms comprised the development of a medium-term expenditure framework, a revision of the civil service career and compensation systems, and the introduction of a value-added tax. In the financial sector, interbank foreign exchange and money markets were established, a new law of financial institutions was drafted, and banking supervision was strengthened. Other reforms included the privatization of numerous state-owned enterprises and the simplification of import and licensing procedures. l Despite these improvements, pressing economic problems remain. Poverty, a small export base, dependence on foreign aid, low domestic savings, insufftcient human capital, limited technical capacity in the public sector, and poor infrastructure all point to the need for continued adjustment and reform and for substantial technical assistance. . A new three-year program has been prepared as part of the authorities’ request for a successor ESAF arrangement to accompany the completion point of the Initiative for Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC Initiative). The program addresses key structural problems while consolidating the macroeconomic gains achieved. l During the first year of the program, the domestic primary fiscal deficit is projected to rise temporarily as a result of a number of tax and expenditure reforms intended to encourage private sector development and improve public administration. Despite the larger deficit in 1999, the government is expected to increase its deposits in the banking system because of large inflows of foreign aid. In 2000, higher revenue and reduced spending pressures are expected to lead to a smaller deficit. The monetary program is designed to maintain relative price stability and ensure a healthy supply of credit to the private sector. l The structural component of the program will focus on mobilizing government revenue through the strengthening of tax administration and the widening of the tax base; improving the efftciency and transparency of government operations; divesting government shares in privatized enterprises; simplifying the regulatory framework; and eliminating obstacles to private sector participation in the transport, communications, energy, and water sectors. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4- * The environment for program implementation is favorable, based on the authorities’ good record of policy implementation and the close dialogue between the government and stakeholders. The main risks to the program are related to Mozambique’s vulnerability to changes in external and weather conditions, its limited technical capacity, and possible domestic pressures to increase government spending and delay structural reforms. . The staff recommends that Mozambique’s request for a new three-year ESAF arrangement be approved. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-5- 1. WRODUCTIOI~ 1. The commitment period of the current three-year arrangement under the Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility (ESAF) expires on June 20, 1999. While macroeconomic stability has been achieved in Mozambique, as noted in the last staff report,’ many structural impediments to economic growth remain. To consolidate the macroeconomic gains and advance further on the structural front, the Mozambican authorities have requested a successor three-year ESAF arrangement in the amount of SDR 58.8 million (52 percent of quota). 2. The staffand the authorities have agreed on a three-year economic program that could be supported by the new arrangement.’ The structural component of the program is described in detail in the accompanying policy framework paper (PFP) for the period April 1999-March 2002 (EBD/99/70). The financial component and key structural benchmarks for the first year of the program (April 1999-March 2000) are described in the government’s memorandum on economic and financial policies attached to the three-year ESAF arrangement (Appendix I). Mozambique’s relations with the Fund and the World Bank Group are summarized in Appendixes II and III, respectively. The major data weaknesses that hamper program design and monitoring are discussed in Appendix IV. Selected social indicators are contained in Appendix V. 3. Assurance of continued satisfactory policy implementation, represented by Fund Board approval of a new three-year ESAF arrangement, is a condition for Mozambique’s reaching the completion point under the Initiative for the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC Initiative). The HIPC Initiative completion point document for Mozambique is scheduled to be considered by the Executive Board at the same time as the request for the new ESAF arrangement. This staff report does not, therefore, discuss in detail issues related to the HIPC Initiative. Il. RECENT DEVELOPMENTS AND PERFORMANCE UNDER THE ESAF-SUPPORTED PROGRAM 4. Macroeconomic performance improved markedly during the period of the expiring three-year ESAF arrangement (June 1996 to June 1999), which helped Mozambique consolidate its recovery from civil war and from severely depressed per capita income. Economic ’ Staffreport for the midterm review under the third annual ESAF arrangement (EBS/99/55; 4/13/99). ’ Discussions were held in Maputo in February and April 1999. The missions comprised Mr. Reitmaier (head), Mr. Ramlogan, Ms. Udovicki (February mission), Mr. Gelbard (April mission), Ms. Fabrizio (all AFR), Ms. Castello-Branco (PDR) (April mission), Ms. Catvalho (Research Assistant-PDR) (April mission), Ms. Lefever (Staff Assistant-AIR) (April mission), and Mr Pihon-Farah (Resident Representative). Ms. Pate], Advisor to the Executive Director for Mozambique, participated in the discussions of the February mission. The missions collaborated closely with the staff of the World Bank. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-6- growth rose from an average of 6.7 percent a year during 1987-95 to 10 percent a year during 1996-98,’ while inflation declined from about SO percent in I995 to virtual price stability in 1998 (Tables 1 and 2 and Figure 1). The disappearance of some inflation-reducing factors (namely, lower oil prices and lower import prices from South Africa) and increases in some administered prices in early 1999 translated into a pickup of the 12-month rate of inflation to 1.6 percent by May 1999. The external current account deficit (before grants) narrowed substantially in 1996- 97 but widened to 21 percent of GDP in 1998 as a result of higher imports in the first year of construction of the US$l.3 billion Mozal aluminum smelter. The current account deficits were more than fi~lly financed by large inflows of foreign aid and the private financing for the Mozal project, and gross international reserves rose from the equivalent of 2.7 months of imports of goods and nonfactor services in 1995 to 6.7 months in 1998. Confidence in the economy has grown, and the nominal exchange rate has been stable, with only limited direct intervention in the emerging foreign exchange market. In real effective terms, the metical appreciated during 1996-97, which raised concerns about a possible loss of external competitiveness; however, in 1999 it stabilized before depreciating more recently, reflecting the progressive restoration of relative price stability in Mozambique and movements of the South African rand against international currencies (Figure 1). 5. To an important extent, these favorable developments stemmed from the government’s steadfast implementation of the economic program. Fiscal and monetary policies were kept appropriately tight. The domestic primary budget balance improved in 1996 97, but it deteriorated in 1998 because of a reduction of the personal income tax rate and the decompression of civil service salaries as part of a civil service reform (Tables 3 and 4). Broad money growth, which averaged 56 percent during 1994-95, was brought down to 18 percent in 1998 as an improvement in monetary control followed legal and regulatory reforms in the financial sector and the privatization of the two state-owned banks in 1996-97 (Table 5). Meanwhile, credit to the private sector, which had contracted in real terms during 1994-95, expanded rapidly during 1997-98. The budgetary and monetary results for the first quarter of 1999 were stronger than was expected at the time of the midterm review of the third annual ESAF arrangement in early April I999 (Tables 3 and 5). 6. Significant progress has also been made in recent years with structural reforms, although at a slower pace in certain areas than originally envisaged. The twice-postponed value- added tax (VAT) and supplementary excise taxes finally became effective in June 1999 to replace 3 The comparison may be distorted by a break in national accounts statistics. Data from 1997 onward incorporate the results of the 1996 household survey. For 1997, the revision implies a higher nominal GDP (by some 25 percent) and a substantially different mix of demand components. In particular, the investment-to-GDP ratio is now lower and the consumption-to- GDP ratio higher, resulting in a downward revision of gross domestic savings to 1.6 percent of GDP from 13.6 percent. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 7 - Figure 1. Mozambique: Effective Exchange Rate and Inflation January 1995April 1999 100 Effective Exchange Rates 90 (1990=100) X! 40. 3" 20 ..-.., NOrn,nal eJf~ctius ‘-. . . . . ..__ ezchange rate E---.~-~--.-- 10 0 -I--.-.~ .-.-I-I..- 1995 1996 1997 1998 :999 100 90 “0 10 60 50 40 3” 20 10 0 XI inflation (Consumer price index; 12-month percentage change) ,A.,” __, ,_,_.-._, I1 ,996 1997 1990 1999 sources: IMF. Inf.xnl(l+io” Notice system; and the Bank Of Mozambique. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-8- the turnover and consumption taxes (Box 1); corporate and personal income tax rates were lowered; major reforms to improve the budgetaly process and strengthen the civil service were initiated; and the program of privatizing large enterprises was completed in September 1998, while a similar program for s&all and medium-sized enterprises will be completed in the near future. In the financial sector, interbank foreign exchange and money markets were established; treasury and central bank bills are being issued, albeit irregularly; the payments system is being modernized; and a new financial institutions law has been submitted to parliament (Box 2). TO improve the business environment, procedures for industrial and commercial licensing and for imports have been simplified, and work has begun on an overhaul of the commercial code. Except for the price of cotton, all producer prices are now market-determined,4 and a land law has been passed to, inter alia, increase land tenure security, Box 1. The Value-Addcd Tax Background. The idea of introducing a value added tax (VAT) to replace the tumover and consumption taxes was tist put to the authorities by n Fiscal Affairs Department (FAD) mission to Mozambique in August 1987, to eliminate the distortions caused by the cascading turnover tax However, the authorities were concerned about the lack of administrative capacity to implement such a tax. A&r the peace ogeement was signed in October 1992, the authorities requested FAD assistance to dcsigu a progrnm of tax refofolm and of technical assistance in tax administration. An FAD mission in April 1993 drew up a detailed 30month implementation plan for a VAT; hut because of lbe c~untry’s first presidential and parliamentary elections, which were held in October 1994, and delays in securing extemnl financing, serious prcpamtions for the introduction of the tax only bcgau in late 1995. hnplenwatation was set for July 1998, but preparatory delays led to a postponement of this date to April 1999. There was strong pressure from the private sector and from some local donor representatives Lo postpone the introduction further to JLanuary 2000. However, the authorities settled only for a two-month delay to allow smaller fim~s more time 1o prepare, and the tax was evenhlally introduced on June I, 1999. Main features of the tax. The value added lox--supplemented by excise taxes on alcoholic beverages, tobacco, twain luxury goods, and motor vehicles--replaced the turnover and consumption taxes in June 1999, and will replace the tourism accommodation tax in 2000. There is a single general rate of 17 percent. About 5,000 firms with annual sales of more than Mt. 100 million (US8,OOO) will be part of‘llx gmerol VAT regime. Another 12,000 firms with sales of Mt 50-100 million (LJS$4,000-US$8,000), that do no1 have organized nccounling records, are taxed at 5 percent on the volume of sales and do nol receive credit for lax paid on inputs Finns wiib sales of less than Mt. 50 million (US$4,000) pay VAT only on their inputs and are thus Weated on par with final consumers. The tax is broadly-based; the main exemptions are medical services and drugs, nonprofit acrivities (educational, recreational. cultural, religious, and so on); b&g, fmnnce, and insurance; housing rent; gambling; funeral services; wheat flour, rice, bread, and tomatoes; agriculture and fishing (though producers could qx to have their operations taxed, in which case they would he able to claim a refund on any VAT paid on inputi). 4 A minimum price of cotton continues to be set as protection for small farmers in face of a few large buyers. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-9. Box 2. Financial Sector Reforms Since 1996 Financial development. Increased macroeconomic stability and finsncinl rcfonns have encouraged remonctization and fmancial intermediation. Between 1995 and 199X. credit to the private sector in real terms more than doubled, though from a low base The share of deposits in broad money, another measure of financial intemxdiation, increased Gem II percent to 81 percent in this period, nnd the share of time deposits in total deposits rose from I1 percent to 4 percent. The entry of two additional banks increased competition within the financial sector, and the two state-owned banks, which at the end of 1995 held 7 1 percent of total commercial hank assets, were privatized. At present, there are ten financial institutions: seven commercial banks, a credit union, a leasing company, and an investment bank, all of which are privately owned or controlled. An interb.ank money market was introduced in September 1997, and a market for short-term central bank and treasury bills is being developed. The regulatory environment. Several legal and regulatoty reforms have hccn implemented, including regulations governing the reserve requiremenl rcyime and the central hank rediscount rate, a law on the use of checks, and B new law on financial institutions. The lnttcr provides safeguards to cnsu~e eticctive banking supcwision. It obliges the Bank of Mozambique to take action when specific pmdential st~nndards arc breached and provides legal immunity to supervisoq staff against lawsuits related to acts performed io canying out their duties. Enforcement measures include the authority to suspend managcmcnt or to impose temporary management in troubled banks. Banks can also be liquidated and hew their licenses withdrawn. Bank supervision. The bank supervision department at the Bank of Mozambique has been strengthened and its supervisory authority reinforced through the new law on financial institutions. The central bank is enforcing the Core Principles for effective banking supervision of the Bale Committee, and commercial banks are-with the exception of foreign currency exposure regulations-in compliance with existing pmdential norms. l3anks BIG subject to an~~ual on- site inspections, are required to review asset quality twice a yea: undn- a risk-weighted asset quality criterion, and are required to publish half-yearly financial statements. A new chart oiaccouots, conforming to internationally accepted accounting standards, will be applied from the beginning of 2000. The recent rapid expansion of bank credit does not appear to have posed B risk to the stability of tbe banking system All banks, witb the exception of a recently privatized hank that will be recapitalized later this year, have risk-weighted capital asset ratios well in excess of the minimum international standard of 8 percent; in 1998, the average ratio for all banks was IS percent. The share of nonperfonning loans iu the total loan portfolio of commercial banks was I7 pewat at the end of 1998; it falls to 8 percent when the two recently privatized banks, whose loan portfolios are being restructured, are excluded. Mozambique’s loan clnssitication standards comply with international standards. Tba-e is 110 deposit insumoce scheme. Instruments of monetary policy. III the past, the Bank of Mozambique relied mainly on direct instruments ofmonetary policy, such as quarierly ceilings on the net domestic assets of individual banks. Thr reliance on direct instruments has been gradually reduced by moving to amwd credit ceilings and by cngaging in sporedic money market operations. The extension of the reserve requiremalt to all time deposits in May I999 will also help indirect monetary management. Treasury cash management and foxcasting will bc improved in support of this process, and the Bank of Mozambique will acquire tbc authority to regularly issue treasury bills as needed for monetruy control purposes. At the same time, the ongoing development of the interbank money market hmld indoce b&s to lower their lx&y holdings of excess reserves and namw fWher the spread between lending and deposit interest rates. As the lender of last resort, the Bank of Mozambique has a high-interest rediscount facility for solvent banks. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-lO- 7. The import tariff regime was simplified in October 1996, resulting in a reduction of the import-weighted average tariff rate from 1R percent to 11 percent, a narrowing of the tariff dispersion, and a reduction in the number of tariff rates from 12 tb 5. The maximum rate waslowered from 35 percent to 30 percent in April 1999, which reduced the average tariff to 10 percent. There remain import surcharges on sugar, cement, and steel sheets and tubes. The tax on exports of raw cashew nuts was lowered from 26 percent to 20 percent in 1996, and tirther to 14 percent in 1997, but its elimination was blocked by opposition from domestic processors. In 1997, on the basis of an independent study, the government agreed to retain the tax at 14 percent for a period of three years, after which time the issue of its elimination would be revisited.5 There are no other export taxes in place. Nontariff trade barriers have been largely eliminated; the remaining ones are standard prohibitions relating to firearms and public health. Under the Fund’s trade restrictiveness index, Mozambique’s overall trade regime is judged to be open and is expected to remain so during the period of the proposed program. Mozambique is a founding member of the Southern African Development Community (SADC) and is in the process of joining the Cross Border Initiative (CBI). III. MEDIUM-TERM OBJECTIVES AND STRATEGY 8. Despite the impressive macroeconomic achievements of the last three years, poverty remains a compelling issue. The national poverty assessment of 1998 revealed that about 70 percent of the population still lived below the poverty line, and social indicators for Mozambique are less favorable than the corresponding averages of sub-Saharan African countries. Furthermore, there are still areas of madroeconomic concern. Government revenue collection is relatively low as a percent of GDP which, together with very pressing needs for infrastructure and social services, has led to heavy dependence on foreign aid (Figures 2 and 3). Domestic saving is low, the legal and regulatory environment for private sector activity needs strengthening, and public administration is handicapped by a lack of qualified staff. 9. The government’s medium-term program addresses the key structural problems while aiming to consolidate the macroeconomic gains. Thus, the program seeks to create the conditions for broad-based real economic growth of nearly 10 percent in I999 and 7 percent a year during 2000-01. The expected slowdown in 2000, after a three-year spurt of double-digit growth, is due in part to the end of the construction phase of the Mozal aluminum smelter. Annual inflation is expected to be held near 5 percent from 1999 onward. Coming from virtual price ’ In February 1999, some members of the ruling political party introduced a bill in Parliament that would reinstate an earlier ban on exports of raw cashew nuts (except for any surplus exceeding local processing capacity). The government has defended its current policy in the concerned parliamentary committees, and the present legislative session ended without the full Assembly considering the bill. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 11 - Figure 2. Mozambique: National Accounts, 1997-2002 GDP Growth Total Saving and Investment (Annual percentage change) (In percent of GDP) ,d”SlQ A iCWlCES \ \ 1 Government Saving and Investment Private Saving and Investment (In percent of GDP) (In percent of GDP) 30 25 25 - 20 20 - LS . LS - 10 IO- - -. / ‘. National .------- 5 5 . swing own saving ” ” - --z-4 -5 -5 1997 ,998 ,499 2000 2001 2002 ,997 ,998 Sources: Mozambican authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections 30 25 10 5 0 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12 - Figure 3. Mozambique: Central Government Finances, 1997-2002 (In percent of GDP) Revenue and Expenditure :/‘)I Domestic pnmery balance ,997 ,998 ,999 mm *ool 2002 Main Components of Revenue 30 25 20 IS 1” 5 0 ------- Taxues on good and servkes ---_ 'TaxeS on i"Cmm and prolit - Taxes on intendional trade Nontax rCYe""e ,997 ,998 19% 2000 7.00 1 2002 IX 11 14 12 1” 8 6 4 2 0 Foreign Financing (iros budgetary aSSistmce “‘\_ Cash debt wvice paymen(s ,997 1998 ,999 2000 2001 ml* Main Components of Expenditure Total expenditure Capital expendihlre and net lending O!her current expenditure Wagw and salaries ,997 1998 ,999 2000 200, zooz Sources: Mozambican authorities; and JMF statrestimates and projections. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13 - stability in 1998, several factors may account for inflation at this level in 1999. First, the decline in import prices and the depreciation of the South African rand are not expected to recur; second, rent and water rates were increased in early 1999; and third, a recent substantial increase in the minimum wage and the introduction of the VAT may exert upward pressures on prices. Gross international reserves are expected to remain at the equivalent of about five months of imports of goods and nonfactor services during 1999-2001 before stabilizing near the equivalent of three months of import cover in subsequent years (Table 6). 10. To achieve these objectives, the medium-term program continues to emphasize financial discipline, outward-looking policies, and the creation of an environment conducive to private investment. It is envisaged that private investment would peak in 1999, as construction of the Mozal aluminum plant gains intensity, before falling back to a more normal level of about 10 percent of GDP (Figure 2). The government would aim to keep its own investment also at about 10 percent of GDP. However, national saving is projected to fall far short of investment. The savings gap peaks at 25 percent of GDP in 1999 (despite a more than doubling of the national saving rate owing to large foreign aid inflows) and narrows subsequently to below 10 percent by 2004 (Table 2). 11. On the social front, the government’s medium-term objective is to improve poverty indicators to levels that at least match those of sub-Saharan Africa. A national poverty action plan has been completed that aims to eradicate poverty through (a) rapid and sustained growth; (b) increased access to education, health care, potable water, and sanitary living conditions; (c) increased productivity on family farms; (d) promotion of employment-oriented projects in urban and rural areas, including self-employment schemes; and (e) targeted assistance to the most disadvantaged households. 12. To improve the quantity and quality of social services, the government is implementing integrated expenditure programs in education and health. In support of these programs, the government is committed to increasing the share of current expenditure on health and education in total current expenditure from 9 percent and 18 percent, respectively, in 1998, to 10 percent and 20 percent in 2000. In addition, income support is being targeted to the poor through a cash transfer scheme, a school lunch program, a social fund for medicine, a nutrition rehabilitation program, and a schoolbook distribution program. IV. THEECONOMICPROGRAMFOR~~~~-2000 A. Financial Policies 13. The stance of financial policies in 1999-2000 is geared to maintaining stable macroeconomic conditions and coping with the peak of foreign aid expected in 1999. The budget deficit will increase in 1999, but so will government deposits in the banking system, in recognition of Mozambique’s limited capacity to absorb the exceptionally large foreign aid inflow. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14- An appropriate degree of monetary expansion will be accommodated by an increase in net international reserves. In 2000, an expected decline in foreign aid will entail a smaller budget deficit and lower net international reserves, with the desired monetary expansion resulting from a drawdown of government deposits and higher central bank credit to commercial banks. 14. As described in the government’s policy memorandum attached to the letter of intent in Appendix I, the budgetary program targets a domestic primary budget deficit, before grants, of 2.6 percent of GDP in 1999, compared with a deficit of 0.6 percent of GDP in 1998 and a projected deficit of 1.7 percent of GDP in 2000 (Tables 3 and 4 and Figure 3). The larger deficit in 1999 reflects the net effect of a number of recent fiscal reforms that are intended to encourage private sector development and improve public administration (Box 3). Meanwhile, higher revenue and reduced spending pressures are expected to lead to a smaller domestic primary deficit in 2000. 15. Total revenue is projected to increase by 1 percentage point ofGDP during 1999-2000. Measures that have been or are being taken to produce this result are the replacement of the turnover and consumption taxes (and of the tourism tax from 2000) by the VAT and selected excise taxes; a substantial increase in rents in January 1999; and improvements in customs administration. In 1999, these measures are expected to more than offset the decline in revenue arising from the cuts in income tax rates introduced in 1998 and the reduction in the maximum import tariff in April 1999. The full impact of the most recent revenue measures will be felt in 2000. Steps are also to be taken to strengthen internal tax administration and widen the revenue base. These steps, and the efforts to improve customs administration, are described below in the section on structural reforms, The government does not propose to adjust tax rates further in 1999-2000 but will take offsetting revenue measures in the event of a revenue shortfall. 16. Current expenditure is programmed to increase by 1 percentage point of GDP in 1999, accommodating, inter alia, (a) a 27 percent increase in the economy-wide minimum wage that took effect in April 1999; (b) the decompression of civil service salaries under the civil service reform; (c) outlays for presidential and parliamentary election later in the year; and (d) an increase in income transfers to the poor. The staff cautioned that the large wage increase could jeopardize the hard-won gains on inflation, particularly if it set an economy-wide precedent. The authorities agreed, but pointed out that they did not have much scope for limiting the increase because the minimum wage was set largely by collective bargaining in the private sector, with the government intervening only to overcome a deadlock. The increase in current expenditure in 1999 is expected to be partially reversed in 2000, when the phasedown of the private management contract with customs and the nonrecurrence of the 1999 election costs would more than offset a further increase in the wage bill. Capital expenditure will increase significantly in 1999, partly on account of onetime expenses such as election-related capital outlays, the construction and refinbishment of customs posts, and the emergency road repairs necessitated by the,recent floods. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 15- Beginning in 2000, the share of locally financed capital expenditure in the total capital budget is expected to rise. Net lending will rise somewhat in 1999 but decline sharply in 2000, after the debts incurred on account ofthe privatization of two state-owned banks in 1996-97 are paid off Box 3. Summary of Fiscal Measures, 1999-2000 (Change from previous year, in percentage points of GDP) 1999 2000 Revenue (increase: +) Tax re"ell"e Reducfion in direcl lax rates iu 1998 Reduction in impart tariffs Introduction of vnluc added tax (net impact) ImprovemenL i&l cusroms ndministratio~~ Nonrecurrence of petroleum ta* arrears ccdlcctio~~ li Nontax revenue Increase I” property rents Miscellnllcous Expenditure and net lending (increase: +) Non-interest current expenditure Decompressiml of salaries Minimum IncreaSe wage increased employment in education and health Elections Increased lranafer pnyments C”st”ms restructunng Other goods and services Other 21 Locally-financed capilnl cxpcndtture Locally-financed net lending Domestic primaiy deficit befote granti Ii Arrears collected ill 1998 and nof repeated HI 1999. 21 Change in net flout of commitments from one period to the other. 0.3 0.7 0.2 0.6 -0.6 -0.2 -0.2 0.7 0.6 0.4 0.2 -0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 2.3 -0.2 I .(I -0.5 0.2 0.5 0.2 0.1 0. I 0.5 -0.5 0.3 -0.2 -0.2 -0.1 -0.3 0.X 0.6 0.5 -0.3 2.0 -0.9 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 16- 17. Broad money growth will be limited to 17 percent in 1999 and 13 percent in 2000 (Table 5). These targets assume that the demand for money will continue to increase roughly in line with nominal GDP. In 1999, the monetary expansion is expected to be driven mainly by the central bank’s accumulation of reserves, with the projected substantial increase in government deposits making room for an adequate expansion of bank credit to the private sector. In 2000, the central bank’s net foreign assets and government deposits are projected to decline, while credit to the private sector will continue to grow. 18. The central bank has made considerable progress in preparing the ground for the use of indirect instruments of monetary control. In May 1999, the reserve requirement was extended to time deposits of all maturities, and the minimum reserve ratio was lowered from 9 percent to 6.8 percent. In recognition of the uncertainty surrounding the projected demand for money, and in order to permit a flexible response to unforeseen capital inflows, the monetary performance criterion under the program will relate to the net domestic assets of the central bank. At the same time, the central bank will monitor closely changes in the stock of reserve money as an important and early indicator of the expansion of broad money and of liquidity conditions in the system. 19. While the exchange rate is floating, the central bank is an active participant in the foreign exchange market. It sells foreign aid funds provided by donors and buys foreign exchange for government debt servicing and to meet the net international reserves target. The authorities agree that their intervention policy will be directed at smoothing exchange rate fltctuations, subject to attaining the desired reserves target. The Fund is providing assistance in foreign exchange management, beginning with improved forecasting of foreign exchange flows. B. Structural Reforms 20. The government’s medium-term structural reform program is described in detail in the PFP, while specific first-year targets are contained in the policy memorandum in Appendix I. Through structural reforms, ,the government seeks to l promote fiscal sustainability primarily by mobilizing revenue through a strengthening of tax administration and a widening of the tax base; . improve the efficiency and transparency of the budgetary process and ensure the sustainability of public expenditure programs by revamping budgetary practices, adopting a new accounting system, and reducing off-budget transactions; . reduce further the extent of state participation in the economy by divesting remaining government shares in privatized enterprises and privatizing where possible activities currently undertaken by the government; Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17- l develop an efficient and accountable public administration by reforming the civil service, increasing the human capital of the public sector, and paying more attention to internal auditing; l improve monetary management by strengthening the instruments of indirect monetary control and by developing the financial sector; . create a competitive and sound banking system by reinforcing bank supervision; l increase economic security and reduce the cost of conducting business by strengthening the legal system and simplifying the regulatory framework; l promote economic efliciency, by eliminating legal obstacles to entry in key sectors (transport and communications, energy, and water), restructuring public enterprises, and reducing barriers to trade; and . increase the openness of the economy, through participation in regional integration efforts and further multilateral tariff reduction. The core macroeconomic reforms are summarized below; those concerning sectoral development, including environmental protection, are described in the PFP. 21. Tax administration. The foreign private company that has been managing and restructuring customs since May 1997 is expected to complete its assignment as scheduled in December 1999. If post-contract support is deemed necessary, the company will be retained for a period of time afterward. In any event, the government will continue to provide adequate budgetary support to customs. Efforts to strengthen internal tax administration, which have been undertaken in the context of the introduction of the VAT, will be broadened to cover direct taxes. They encompass the use of a common taxpayer identification number and common computerized database for the VAT, customs duties, and personal and corporate income taxes; in addition, the auditing timction of the tax office will be strengthened. The staff strongly recommended the establishment of a central revenue authority that would oversee the operations of the customs department and the internal revenue office and possibly act as an advisory body on tax policy issues. The authorities expressed skepticism about the usefulness of such an authority, but nevertheless agreed to study the options for setting one up. 22. Tax base. Some broadening of the tax base was achieved in 1996, when the reduction in the average import tariff rate from 18 percent to 11 percent was accompanied by a cutback of benefits granted under the investment law and a widening of the base of the turnover tax.’ Tax ’ The revenue loss from import tax exemptions in 1998 is estimated by the authorities to have been equivalent to 0.5 percent of GDP. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-IX- and tariff exemptions are presently being granted mainly through the investment law, through special authorizations, and through bilateral agreements with large companies. A documentation of the legal basis, terms, and duration of existing tax and customs exemptions was recently completed, and will be used to identify possible areas for trimming in the first year of the program. The use of customs exemptions is already being monitored, and a system for recording and monitoring exemptions on domestic taxes will be created shortly. Finally, a review of the tax and tariff system, to be completed by end-March 2000, will help prepare the ground for a further rationalization of the exemptions regime during 2000-O 1. The authorities will likely request assistance from the Fund’s Fiscal Affairs Department in conducting this review. 23. Expenditure management and budget reform. A package of budgetary reforms is being implemented. Beginning with the 1998 results, the budget accounts will be formally closed and submitted to the auditing offrice and to Parliament within one year aRer the end of the budget year. Institutional and legal impediments to eliminating off-budget transactions will be removed,’ and the annual budget will be prepared in the context ofa medium-term expenditure and financing framework to ensure the sustainability of expenditure programs. The new public accounting system is expected to be approved by end-September 1999. To complement these efforts, the government is initiating steps to improve cash management at the treasury. 24. Privatization and public enterprise restructuring. Public enterprises now account for less than one-fifth of industrial output, compared with over two-thirds in 1990. A total of over 1,200 enterprises will have been privatized or restructured when the privatization program comes to an end in mid-1999. As of then. only 11 wholly owned public enterprises and 22 companies with government majority shareholding will remain. Measures are being taken to increase efficiency in some of these enterprises, such as privatization of management, restructuring, establishment ofjoint ventures, the granting of concessions to the private sector, and removal of legal barriers to the entry of private firms. In addition, public enterprise tariffs will continue to be adjusted regularly in accordance with approved formulas. By March 2000, the government will prepare a policy statement on the future of these enterprises and soon thereafter will decide on a strategy for divesting its minority shareholding in privatized enterprises. 25. Public administration reform. In April 1999, revised career streams and a new compensation system were adopted, and a tinther step was taken in the decompression of civil service salaries between the highest and lowest paid. The ratio between the two has been raised from 9.6 in 1997 to presently 15 in the education and health sectors, and 13.4 in most other career streams in the civil service. The government will continue to increase incentives to attract and retain qualified staff. New civil service regulations are being prepared that will contain incentive ’ Examples of such impediments are laws governing certain extrabudgetary operations, and accounting and other conditions attached to some donor assistance. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 19- mechanisms and set performance standards. A training scheme for civil servants has been designed, internal auditing is being strengthened, and a law governing the management of public assets will be submitted to parliament in 2000. Because of payments to demobilized soldiers under the terms of the 1992 peace agreement, government pension payments in 1998 substantially exceeded contributions by workers. The government has therefore decided to assess the long- term viability of the public sector pension scheme and the pension system administered by the National Social Security Institute. It will commission actuarial studies of both schemes in 1999. 26. Monetary management. In support of the central bank’s switch from bank-by-bank ceilings on net domestic assets to indirect instruments of monetary control, the current system of sporadic central bank money market operations will be converted to a regular system of treasury bill auctions. In preparation for this conversion, the central bank will be authorized by the end of 1999 to issue treasury bills as needed for monetary control purposes. To enhance central bank autonomy, this authorization is expected to take the form of a written directive from the Ministry of Planning and Finance. The central bank will collaborate closely with the treasury in developing more accurate projections of government cash flows. The authorities are aware that the treasury will have to cover the interest costs of treasury bills issued for monetary control purposes, and that the proceeds of any such issues cannot be used to finance additional expenditure.’ 27. Bank supervision. The central bank’s capacity for on- and off-site supervision is being strengthened with technical assistance from the IMP, to keep pace with the recent rapid expansion of the financial sector. The annual on-site inspection of banks will continue, the Core Principles for effective bank supervision of the Basle Committee will be enforced, and banks’ compliance with the limits on their foreign exchange exposure will be closely monitored. The recently drafted new chart of accounts for commercial banks will be adopted by the end of 1999; it will cover operations not previously included and will conform to internationally accepted accounting standards. 28. Private sector development. Steps will be taken to increase economic security and eliminate administrative barriers to investment and trade. A plan for strengthening the judiciary is being developed, work on revising the commercial code has begun, and regulations governing the implementation of the land law in urban areas are being prepared to facilitate the transfer of ownership of zoned plots and permit their use as collateral. Following the recent passage of enabling legislation, a commercial arbitration court will soon be established by the private sector, with active support by interested donors. Finally, the Inter-Ministerial Commission for the * A small amount of domestic interest payments is programmed to take into account possible treasury bill issues and an issue of Mt 60 billion of treasury notes in May 1999, intended to stimulate capital market development. There is currently no other domestic debt by the government, although the government is paying a small amount of interest under a bank restructuring agreement. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 20 - Removal of Administrative Barriers, which oversees the effort to reduce red tape, will begin to report publicly on its activities. 29. Trade and exchange liberrlization. Following the recent reduction in the top import tariff rate from 35 percent to 30 percent, the government originally did not intend to cut this rate any further under the new three-year program. The staffs of the Fund and the World Bank argued for a further bold step-to perhaps 20 percent-soon, but in the end the authorities committed themselves only to cutting the top rate to 25 percent by January 2002, pointing in part to revenue concerns. Mozambique will continue to participate in regional integration efforts but the government will not introduce measures that run counter to progressive multilateral trade liberalization. The continued justification for the import surcharges on cement, steel sheets and tubes, and sugar is currently being reviewed. The government has stressed that it does not support a reinstatement of the ban on exports of raw cashew nuts; this is reflected in its commitment not to introduce any new import surcharges or restrictions on exports. Mozambique intends to accept the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4, of the Fund’s Articles of Agreement in the near future.’ C. Program Monitoring and Statistical Issues 30. To monitor implementation of the program, quantitative and structural performance criteria and benchmarks are specified in Tables I and 2 of the government’s policy memorandum attached to the ESAF arrangement (Appendix I). The quantitative targets will be evaluated quarterly, beginning with end-June 1999; those for end-September 1999 constitute performance criteria, with the exception of the benchmark relating to central government revenue. The first review of the program, covering all quantitative and structural performance criteria, is expected to be completed by the end of January 2000, at which time conditions for the completion of the second review will be determined. 31. The government attaches high priority to improving the accuracy, coverage, and timeliness of statistical data. The main data weaknesses, discussed in Appendix IV, are in the areas of national accounts, prices, employment, and the balance of payments, By end-1999, the National Institute of Statistics (INE) will prepare a plan for strengthening statistics that will include a timetable for priority data collection and estimates of financing requirements. A new policy on the dissemination of statistics will also be adopted. 9 The staff is not presently aware of any restrictions on payments and transfers for current international transactions. The staff is engaged in a detailed examination of the applicable laws and regulations. Should any exchange restrictions be found prior to the Executive Board meeting, they will be communicated to the Board. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2l- V. TIE BALANCE OF PAYMENTS OUTLOOK AND CAPACITY TO REPAY THE Fu~n 32. Substantial external current account deficits and a heavy external debt-service burden mean that Mozambique’s external financing needs will remain large in the medium term. As noted above, sizable savings gaps are projected for the period 1999-2005, which are manifested in large external current account deficits (Table 6). The deficit (before grants) peaks at 34 percent of GDP in 1999 before declining to 9 percent by 2005. An updated debt sustainability analysis for Mozambique is contained in the accompanying HIPC completion point document. 33. Mozambique’s external financing requirements amount to about USS.2.6 billion in 1999 and US$1.4 billion in 2000 (Table 7). Identified financing, including private investment flows, and already agreed debt relief are expected to total about US$l.6 billion in 1999 and almost US$l billion in 2000. Financing gaps are therefore projected at about USSO. billion in 1999 and US$O.4 billion in 2000. These are expected to be closed by debt relief from non-Paris Club creditors on terms comparable to those granted by the Paris Club under Naples terms, and by exceptional assistance from bilateral and multilateral creditors under the HIPC Initiative. Bilateral agreements have been signed with all Paris Club creditors except Russia and Japan. In the case of Japan, an agreement has been reached but not yet signed. The authorities are seeking comparable treatment from non-Paris Club creditors, but no agreement has yet been signed. 34. On the assumption that the proposed ESAF loan will be Lilly disbursed, debt-service payments to the Fund in relation to exports ofgoods and nonfactor services are projected to peak at 5.4 percent in 1999 and to average 3 percent during 1999-2005 (Table 8). In relation to scheduled debt service of the nonfinancial public sector, alter already committed~debt relief under the HIPC Initiative, payments to the Fund are projected to peak at 20 percent in 1999 and to average 14 percent during 199992005. 35. Mozambique has a good record of servicing its debt to the Fund, and several factors point to a continued low risk of default. First, Mozambique’s participation in the HIPC Initiative is expected to bring its external debt-service payments down to sustainable levels. Second, the authorities are expected to continue to implement a strong adjustment program and a prudent debt policy, which, barring adverse shocks, would maintain confdence and keep the external debt and the international reserves at reasonable levels. Third, apart from the HIPC Initiative, Mozambique has been receiving bilateral donor contributions to assist with debt-service payments. Nevertheless, the country is vulnerable to terms of trade and weather-related shocks and to an unexpected decrease in foreign aid; any adverse developments in these areas could increase the Fund’s risk of not being paid on time. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 22 - VI. THEENVIRONMENT FORPROGFUMIMPLEMENTATIONANDR~SKSTOTHEPROGRAM 36. The salient features of the environment in which the program will be implemented are listed below. These features-and associated risks-will largely govern the degree of success with which the program is implemented. l Over the years, Mozambique has built a good track record of policy implementation. The authorities have been encouraged by the favorable results of the last three years and appear determined to maintain their good record. l Mozambique is highly dependent on foreign aid. A significant weakening of policies would entail the risk of a large and sudden loss of aid. . The technical capacity to implement the program is limited by a lack of qualified staff in the civil service. Mozambique will continue to require substantial technical assistance in the areas of tax policy and tax administration, budget execution and accounting, treasury operations, financial sector reform, bank supervision, legal and judiciary reform, and statistics. These needs are mostly already being met. The authorities may request further technical assistance from the Fund in the areas of tax policy and tax administration. l There are strong pressures from within and outside the government to increase spending, particularly on infrastructure and in the social sectors. l Presidential and parliamentary elections are due later in 1999, requiring the authorities to be vigilant to prevent policy slippages in the run-up to the elections. l The government maintains a close policy dialogue with the private sector and with donors, and seeks to build a broad consensus on reform This approach has the benefit of spreading ownership of the program. On occasion, however, interest groups have succeeded in delaying or reversing certain reforms. This happened, for instance, with the VAT, whose introduction was delayed by two months (from April to June 1999) and with the cashew export liberalization policy. l A large number of aid donors are involved in Mozambique. Each donor has its own priorities and conditionalities, and coordination among donors is needed to avoid cross-conditionalities and inefficient resource allocation. Fortunately, donors are increasingly collaborating in the context of sector-wide approaches to programming their resources. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 23 - VII. STAFFAPPRAISAL 37. The expiring three-year ESAF program has been highly successful in reducing Mozambique’s macroeconomic imbalances and leading the economy toward self-sustained growth. While favorable external factors undoubtedly helped, economic performance would not have improved as much without the strong commitment the authorities have shown to the program. 38. To be sure, pressing economic problems remain. Poverty, a small export base, dependence on foreign aid, low domestic savings, lack of human capital, limited technical capacity in the public sector, and poor infrastructure all point to the need for continued adjustment and reform. Furthermore, Mozambique’s external financial and technical assistance requirements will remain large in the medium term, and donors will want continued assurance of satisfactory policy implementation. 39. The proposed medium-term policy framework and the program for 1999-2000 aim at maintaining a prudent stance of financial policies and advancing the agenda of structural reforms. Key structural reforms include the ~improvement of the efficiency and transparency of government operations, the simplification of the regulatory environment, the strengthening of the legal framework, and improvements in the financial sector. The staff agrees with this approach and considers the proposed program an appropriate response to Mozambique’s economic challenges. 40. The increase in the domestic primary budget deficit in 1998-99 is the result of policies geared toward removing tax distortions, stimulating the private sector, and strengthening public administration, not of a relaxation of fiscal discipline. The fiscal stance envisaged in the program is consistent with adequate growth of credit to the private sector and makes appropriate provision for an increase in spending on the social sectors. Now that low inflation and a reasonably secure international reserves position have been attained, the time is ripe for the govem,ment to begin to utilize the large stock of deposits it holds in the banking system, as is being programmed from 2000 onward. Of course, should external aid flows be larger than anticipated, the immediate impact would be to lower the drawdown of government deposits, with the appropriate fiscal reaction being subsequently examined. 41. The staffs major concern in the fiscal sector is that revenue collection remains low in relation to GDP. The program’s emphasis on revenue mobilization to create a sustainable fiscal platform is thus important, and the recent introduction of the VAT is especially welcome. The need to strengthen tax administration and reduce tax exemptions is particularly urgent in view of future reductions in customs duty rates and the government’s desire to keep tax rates down to encourage private sector development. Also, the authorities will need to consult closely with the social partners to prevent the recent large increase in the minimum wage from re-igniting inflationary pressures. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 24 - 42. The shit? to indirect instruments of monetary control and the targeting of the net domestic assets ofthe central bank is welcome. As a complement to these steps, it is important that the central bank be granted the authority to issue treasury bills as needed for monetary control purposes. Inability to exercise this authority would not only compromise the central bank’s autonomy, but also jeopardize the monetary program and ultimately force the central bank to resort again to the issuance of central bank bills in the still narrow market. 43. The continuation of the flexible exchange rate policy is appropriate in view of the economy’s vulnerability to external shocks. Continued low inflation and the expected accumulation of reserves in 1999 will help to consolidate the real effective depreciation observed since mid-1998, which has tended to alleviate some of the earlier concerns about a possible loss of competitiveness. 44. In the area of trade reform, the staff welcomes the recent reduction in the maximum import tariff rate from 35 percent to 30 percent, The staffstrongly recommended a tirther significant reduction, to perhaps 20 percent, early in the period of the new three-year program, but the authorities agreed only to a reduction to 25 percent from the beginning of 2002. The possibility of speeding up the tariff reduction process should nevertheless be kept under review. The draft bill to reinstate the ban on exports of raw cashew nuts would reverse the government’s policy on liberalization of these exports, and the staff welcomes the authorities’ determination to resist this change. 45. The environment in which the program will be implemented is generally favorable. Private sector interest groups may oppose certain elements of the program, but the maintenance of a close dialogue between the government and stakeholders. a participatory approach to decision-making, and the visible results of the policies being implemented have helped engender broad acceptance of the program. The authorities will nevertheless need to be vigilant to prevent policy slippages in the run-up to the elections. 46. In view of the above considerations, the staff recommends that Mozambique’s request for a new three-year ESAF arrangement be approved. It is proposed that the next Article IV consultation be held on the standard 12-month cycle. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 25 - VIII. PROPOSED DECISION The following draft decision is proposed for adoption by the Executive Board: Request for Three-Year Arrangement Under the Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility 1. The Government of the Republic of Mozambique has requested a three-year ESAF arrangement. 2. The Fund notes the policy framework paper set forth in EBD/99/70. 3. The Fund approves the arrangement set forth in EBS/99/96. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public26 Table I, Mozambique: Selected !%mmk and Finansial Indicators, 1997-2001 I YY7 19% ,999 2000 2001 Prwg hj Pmj. (Annual percentage change. ““less otherwise qecirled) National income and pricer Nominal GDP (in billions ofmetimis) 39,693 46,134 52,913 60,177 67,790 Nominal GDP (i” lnilliO”6 0fU.S. dollars) 3.438 3,m 4,147 4.505 4,940 Res, GDP II.3 IZ.0 9.7 7.0 7.2 Real GDP capita per 8.9 9.5 7.3 4.6 4.9 GDP deflator 11.1 3.8 4.5 6.3 5.1 Conr”mer price index (annual average) 6.4 0.6 I.5 6.6 5.0 consumer price index (end oPperiad, 5.8 -1.3 5.5 5.0 5.0 Cum”, erpalditure Caphal expenditure an* net lending Money and credit hkr domestic aEsc,s “,‘WhiCh : ne* crem f” Ihe eoYemme”t External debt SeNiEC (nontinancial public rector, 4, Scheduled, t&ore d&l relief Scheduled after debt re,iet in Naples tcmls Scheduled. after “WC ‘WirLlncc 31 External eu-rent account after grants ““era,, balance ot’paymentr Gross international reserves (end ofperiod) in monrhr ofimponr otgwds and “OnfactOr JcrvIces 8” percent otbroad money Total external debt (end ofperiod) External mrears (public scctq end ot period) 51 Exchange rate (meticais per U.S. dollar; end alperiud) 1.7 -2.9 1.7 5.7 8.8 1.5 9.4 31.8 34.7 38.8 31.3 7.9 14.3 13.0 19.3 -0.3 -5.7 -9.7 14.9 7.5 23.3 -5.5 18.6 60.8 15.9 57.6 0.3 -2.4 -6.9 IT.9 28.9 24.2 33.7 9.4 -20.5 7.2 -22.3 -0.2 20.2 5.6 9.0 2.2 57.8 -3.1 54.4 4.3 0.9 17.0 Y.0 10.2 7.8 (Annual change in percent ofbeginning-period broad money, unless otherwise speciticd) 11.8 9.3 1.6 23.” 21.6 32.3 -16.0 .,I., 3.7 1.3 31.1 17.7 17.5 18.9 IY.4 24.4 19.2 16.5 12.8 12.6 5.5 5.1 5.6 5.6 5.6 13.” 10.0 10.0 (I” percent OlCDP) Sources: Mombican authorities: and rtattestimates and projections. ii A minus rip indicates depreciation. Figure Ibr 1999 represents change over 12 monrhr through March, Zi Public and publicly guaranrced dcht alter rescheduling, in percent ollhree-year export average. 3 Based on tile amount Committctl at the decision point. 41 Excludes IMF debt. 5, In view ofthe best ettbnr being undertatcn by Mwambique lo fanflude debt-rescheduling agreements, the country is deemed fO have no anear outrlanding Ibrprogmnmi”g purposes. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 27 - T&k 2. Mozambique: Nalionvl Account2. 19972005 ,996 weigh” ,997 ,998 ,999 2000 2001 2002 mm 2004 2005 Overall GOP Nomind (in billions afmeticair) Real (percentage change) “rhtor (prrcentilge ChqC) sccto,a, compancntr. d-GDP Agriculbre I’irhing lndu*lr! Mining ,M~““liCl”!illg Elec,ricity and water Comlrucllon Demand con,ponenl\ of OOF C”nn”mptl”n Gavenlment I/ OLlm sectors hlYCStltlC”t Go”emnle”t 1, olhcr secton I:Oqgl balance 21 Cnporu hnpom National swing and i”Yestms”t O”“emlnm”t 1, svving OfWhiCh Ownsaving hIYest”lrm~ Hslnnce Nwlgo”cn”lmt SCcmrs SWl”g lll”eSLnlrnt Balwco NI SFC,“rj savmg Of which I,“,,lerhc rawng I”Yestmellt For@ .saving (-)3 29.3 5.3 17.0 n.2 9.5 0.6 6.6 46.3 100~8 7.5 93.2 IX., 10.” 8.2 IS.9 14.5 33.4 39.693 11.3 11.1 8.4 -1.2 19.3 19.4 23.2 13.1 14.2 14.6 8.5 9.9 8.5 17.1 20.1 13.6 4.5 -1.9 0.7 9.7 1.8 10.7 -1.0 -4.3 8.3 -12.6 5.5 1.6 19.1 -13.6 46.134 52,913 60.177 67.790 77,479 87,284 97,135 II” 9.7 7.0 7.2 8.7 7.4 6.1 3.x 4.5 6.3 5.1 5.1 4.9 4.9 (Amud percentage change in red Lem, unless olhrnvivc spccilied) 7.3 1.6 24.1 -5.6 4.4 ,849 40.0 Y.” 13.0 32.2 11.5 29.4 4.7 61.2 -6.5 6.5 24.2 7.6 0.0 Y.3 -1.7 -3.3 11.1 -14.5 4.2 1.7 20.4 -16.2 7.4 I.5 12.6 18.8 11.5 28.0 9.0 10.7 8.8 9.3 8.7 R3.Y Z1.l 136.4 -17.5 8.3 55.3 10.6 -0.5 10.6 0.0 0.1 24.8 -24.7 10.7 2.5 35.5 -24.8 6.7 I.5 2.Y IX.0 8.” 10.0 -5.0 Y.3 4.6 1.” 5.0 -21.4 7.3 -36.5 11.1 7.8 -21.4 5.” I.5 8.7 IS.0 20.6 -1.0 -4.3 8.3 6~1 4.4 6.2 -16.4 5~7 -32.4 5.7 31.9 -5.4 5.0 I.5 19.1 15.” 29.5 I.3 7.0 7.5 5.6 8.X 5.3 10.0 7.5 12.4 1.3 40.8 15.5 (I” percent OfGOP) 7.0 7~4 7.2 0.6 1.4 1.8 10.7 10.5 10.3 -3.5 -3.1 -3.1 -0.6 0.1 1.4 14.x 9.3 9.5 -15.4 -9.2 -8.1 6.7 7.5 8.6 4.4 5.5 8.2 25.6 19.8 19.8 -18.9 -12.3 -11.2 5.” I.5 12.8 IS~O 17.1 I.3 7.0 6.9 5.8 7.5 5,7 Il.2 9.3 13.3 -0.3 5.” 3.9 7.0 2.2 10.4 -3.4 3.0 ,“.” -6.9 10.0 Y.5 20.4 -10.4 5.0 1.5 7.5 15.0 8.2 1.3 7.0 6.4 5.” 6.1 4.‘) 7.” 5.” 9.2 0.0 5.2 3.0 6.9 2.4 10.2 -3.4 3.7 10.2 -6.5 10.5 10.3 20.4 -9.9 108,031 6. I 4.9 5.0 I.5 7.5 IS.” 8.2 1.3 7.0 6.3 4.x 5.5 4.8 7.7 5.2 IO.2 0.0 5.3 3.1 (1.7 2.7 10.1 -3.4 4.4 ,0.5 -6.1 IL2 11.2 20.6 -9.4 Snurrvr: hlamnbican ruthoritics; and Fund sWffcstMacr and projsstionr. l, Gmrcs fobr lhC gnvcmmcnl .“cct”r am &rid ti”rn Ik go”C”,“lC”f Ldgct. u r;i!@rcs ,~CpmSE., hC conlnbvuml of lhc dwlngc in lhc toreign balansc (0 growh 3, EIlcma, current ;,cCOY”t, incldinggmts (imcrcst paymon,s “” a Fash bh). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 28 - Table 3. Mozambique: Oovemment Finawes. 1997-2001 (lo billions or mtimis) -rold~mdncllmdii curmat elpadilurt canpmi.6.a u) anpbyem otb~ gocda mid sctvicw btcrwt m public debt Dcalulic - Trader pqlrm” oflvhlch: bcu*c.ldt QfwMch: mtsrpriru Olhcr Crpibl sxpmdi!u~ ofrhirh: kdly rmrmcsd NM leading Qfvhidr: bxdy anand “Mllocati revmIle (+M.xpea4iblm 1.) ‘1 ovcd - before *ram 21 CmDu ti”cA Rojcct Nmpmjcet OVCnllbbQ3*g-2/ Ndcsemll bmmarblg Du(utommu Project Ncmpmjrst cdl mntintiaJ lid dQllulic finmEhg ofwhich: bmlr FmMcii Mmlorcndum iwal: 4,623 4.2% 879 2,389 817. 155 388 9.498 4.m 1.445 L3.l 530 34 496 750 420 47 213 4.816 742 410 -14 Lb 4,736 3.703 ,,w* 1,743 -I,031 2.329 2,752 w-7 sss 423 -1,298 -1,298 rhmaedtic primuy bdmw bcfom gnnts u 3, 2% 5.31, 4,946 951 2,866 951 178 365 1cl,207 5,268 2.076 1,480 458 19 439 891 489 50 357 4.64 I,@52 298 -291 -27 4,923 3,818 I.894 1,924 -l.lOS 2,172 2.671 1,641 I,mo 499 -1.067 -L.o57 -287 *.2.5* 1,161 117. 775 223 5, 91 3.123 1.558 501 283 135 3 132 243 1% 11 3% 1,617 33 32 -52 0 -1,871 1.535 ,,E -336 593 685 481 ?.a 92 -257 -257 -,I2 1.286 1.194 141 762 234 51 92 2,361 I.447 5‘7 28, 118 4 114 247 130 11 282 963 218 49 49 0 .1,0x 1,656 39, ,263 581 214 329 329 0 *Is -795 -795 -211 2,682 2,466 285 1.599 479 ,m 216 5,838 3,m l.Mo 591 1% 8 187 542 295 27 338 2.594 653 218 -38 0 -3,156 3.563 1.M 2,507 407 620 821 821 0 20, -I.ozS -m* -76.4 4.337 3.975 453 z.60, 767 1% 362 9.832 4,813 2,019 I.122 309 13 296 832 459 39 501 4,590 1.216 429 -1 0 -5,495 4,794 I.1147 2.947 -701 1.116 1,420 1,420 0 3rd 415 475 -1,382 6,262 5.762 806 3,683 LQ= 207 499 13,154 6.549 2.9-n 1,591 539 17 522 ,,I?2 6.53 54 34, 6,US I.665 490 46 cl -6.892 6,381 2,464 3.915 -511 lAZO 1,854 1,8Y 0 433 -903 -969 -L.MS I.540 1,434 ,811 959 234 Y 1M 2.?m 1.623 618 342 140 4 135 261 149 12 262 1,093 2% 144 -56 0 -,,3*0 831 423 408 490 267 36, 363 0 96 223 223 -186 7,524 6.944 ,,a29 4,631 1,066 218 580 13.892 7,139 3.4336 1,734 616 17 598 1.341 m 62 I, 6,712 2,212 41 -211 0 4.368 4,234 2,329 1,9-n -2.134 1.761 2,204 2,070 134 442 373 37, -1,Lno 8.8M 8,115 1,310 5,288 1,208 310 684 lJ,M4 7,865 3,856 1,696 699 *7 682 1.478 851 66 I36 7,380 2,928 -101 -189 0 4,344 4,337 2,394 1,943 =&co7 I.855 2.250 2,114 136 395 153 153 -1.106 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 29 - Table 4. Maambique: Government Finmc-zs. 1997-200 I (In percent of GDP, udcss otherwise specified) 1997 ,998 1999 x03 2001 Q1 Ql-Q2 91.43 QI-Q4 Ql Ql-Q4 Rev. En. FmE. m. Proi. nxw m inccmc and prom3 TUM 00 gads ad services TUC3 m ir.temltioMl trade 0tb.x uxcd ToNI cxpmdilurc ad “cl lending currml CrpmdiDvc cmlpmutim to mlploycca Wager ad dsriu other other gocds arid lCrviCCI lmcnat cm public debt Damwlie L%xlcrml Tnnskr p.ymmts ofwl!ich: hwacholdr ofwhich: mtcrpnaca Other c.pitd cxpdiDJc ofwhich: loca”y fiiccd Net kdii o/vhidl: locdiy l-d “mumti ,evmuc (+,/capendiauc (-) I/ ORDta rceclvd Pmjcct Nmpmjcct 11.6 10.7 2.2 6.0 2.0 0.4 1.0 23.9 10.8 3.6 0.0 0.0 3.4 I.3 0.1 12 1.9 I.1 0.1 0.5 12.1 1.9 1.0 0.0 0.4 -11.9 9.3 4.9 4.4 -2.6 5.9 6.9 4.8 2.2 1.1 -3.3 -3.3 0.7 1.9 0.9 2.1 39,693 11.5 10.7 2.1 6.2 2.1 0.4 0.8 22.1 11.0 4.5 4.3 02 3.2 1.0 0.0 1.0 1.9 1.1 0.1 0.8 10.1 2.3 0.6 -0.6 -0.1 -10.7 8.1 4.1 4.2 -2.4 4.7 5.8 3.6 2.2 1.1 -2.3 -2.3 -0.6 2.0 1.0 2.2 46,133 2.3 2.2 0.2 I.5 0.4 0.1 0.2 5.8 2.9 0.9 0.9 0.1 0.5 0.3 0.0 0.2 0.5 0.2 0.0 0.7 3.0 0.7 -0.1 -0.1 0.0 -3.5 2.9 1.0 1.9 -0.6 1.1 1.3 0.9 0.4 0.2 -0.5 -0.5 -1.0 .., i3,430 2.4 2.3 0.3 1.4 0.4 0.1 0.2 4.5 2.7 I.0 0.9 0.1 0.5 0.2 0.0 0.2 0.5 0.2 0.0 0.5 1.8 0.4 -0.1 4.1 0.0 -2.0 3.1 0.7 2.4 1.1 0.4 0.6 0.6 0.0 0.2 -1.5 -1.5 -0.4 52,913 5.1 4.7 0.5 3.0 0.9 0.2 0.4 11.0 5.7 2.6 2.4 0.2 1.1 0.4 cl.0 0.4 1.0 0.6 0.1 0.6 4.9 1.2 0.4 -0.1 0.0 4.0 6.7 2.0 4.7 0.8 L.2 I.6 1.6 0.0 0.4 -1.9 -2.1 -1.4 12.913 8.2 7.5 0.9 4.9 L.4 0.3 0.7 18.6 9.1 3.9 3.6 0.3 z.1 0.6 0.0 0.6 1.6 0.9 0.1 0.9 8.7 2.3 0.8 0.0 0.0 -LO.4 9.1 3.5 5.6 -1.3 2.1 2.7 2.7 0.0 0.6 4.8 -0.9 -2.6 52.913 11.8 10.9 1.5 7.0 2.0 0.4 0.9 24.9 12.4 5.5 5.1 0.4 3.0 1.0 0.0 LO 2.2 1.3 0.1 0.6 11.6 3.1 0.9 -0.l 0.0 -13.0 12.1 4.7 7.4 -1.0 2.7 3.5 3.5 0.0 0.8 -1.7 -1.8 -2.6 2.2 1.1 2.6 2.4 0.3 1.6 0.4 0.1 0.2 4.8 2.7 1.0 1.0 0.1 0.6 0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.2 0.0 0.4 1.8 0.5 02 6.1 0.0 -2.2 1.4 0.7 0.7 -0.8 0.4 0.6 0.6 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.4 -0.3 2.3 52,913 60,177 12.5 11.5 1.7 7.7 1.8 0.4 1.0 23.1 11.9 5.7 5.4 0.3 z.9 1.0 0.0 1.0 2.2 1.3 0.1 0.0 11.2 3.7 0.1 a.4 0.0 -10.6 7.0 3.9 3.2 -3.s 2.9 3.7 3.4 0.2 0.7 0.6 0.6 -1.7 2.3 I.2 2.2 60.177 13.0 IZ.0 1.9 7.8 1.8 0.5 1.0 22.3 11.6 5.7 5.3 0.3 2.5 I.0 0.0 1.0 2.2 1.3 0.1 02 LO.9 4.3 -0.1 -0.3 0.0 -9.4 6.4 3.5 2.9 -3.0 2.7 3.3 3.1 0.2 0.6 0.2 0.2 -1.6 67,790 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 30 - Table 5. Mozambique: Monetary Survey. 1997-2001 (In billions of mctk.is. unlm krwis~ specified) 1997 19% 1999 *WI *ool DC<. occ. Mmch hoc scp. Dec. MIrcb Dec. kc RWid Pro*. PI.3 hag. hog. h?. hag. Pmj. Pmj. -1.916 -154 5.299 426 -7.374 159 4.423 -5,391 545 75 9,194 2.507 I.500 1.007 217 790 549 241 1,730 139 5.532 I,272 -549 -723 -725 7.092 2.003 -1.560 7.262 5.540 1.722 -185 8.947 1.053 -6.114 7:w 7.894 260 8,762 1.500 7262 2,750 221 18.3 24.1 17.1 4.4 3.5 -1,324 -107 5,825 19.2 19.6 16.6 3.8 3.5 -1,078 -782 -82 do 6.503 6,798 4% 518 -7,793 -7,793 213 7.13 3.742 3.702 -5.373 -5.86, -80 45, 75 75 9,119 9.037 2654 2.920 1,658 1.870 1.006 1.050 208 268 798 783 593 612 205 170 1,827 1.82, 139 139 6.173 6.463 I.038 1,082 197 -340 -714 -714 -724 -714 7,374 8.262 2.266 2,150 -I,722 -1,828 8.030 8289 6.075 6.295 I .925 1.994 749 1.044 8.909 9.115 1,362 1,756 -6.08, -6581 7.449 8.33, 7.547 7.359 IS0 IS0 9.658 10.159 1.658 1.870 8,ooO 8.289 2.947 2.98, 224 227 17.2 16.5 22.9 24.0 17.2 18.4 5.6 2.0 8.5 3.6 3.5 -1.041 -114 6.550 498 438 -7.804 213 3.737 -5.645 266 75 9.MI 2.696 1,717 979 217 762 615 147 1.829 139 6,504 1.011 -148 -714 -714 8.354 *.145 -1,999 8.333 6.312 2,021 -614 10,093 2.221 ! ,494 9.369 7,097 2.273 788 5 9262 I I A54 2.071 3.959 -6.359 -6.209 8.430 10.168 7.191 7.495 150 130 m50 Il.459 1,717 2.090 8,333 9,369 2,962 3.100 225 IS., 23.2 17.1 8.3 3.7 - I.873 -139 5,915 -8.006 218 224 5.019 -5.595 1.681 75 8.859 3.146 *.090 1.056 269 788 679 109 6.370 -5,44* 2,797 75 8.941 3.41, 2.333 I;078 228 850 760 89 1,878 1,929 139 139 7.492 864, 972 -IA64 -614 *30 12.8 12.6 23.2 21.8 18.2 IS.1 5.6 5.6 8.1 8.4 3.6 1.8 -2,959 -213 5.042 3M -8,225 993 -2.582 -614 -614 12.314 2.179 -1.471 IO570 8M16 2.564 -1,030 13.933 6333 -6.056 12,389 7.601 no 12.903 2.333 10570 ,217 232 8o”rc.c: Brnl; ofMoumbig”c, an* Fund suffcllim.lcI and projsction.. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 31 - Table 6. Mommbiquc: Balnncc of I’aymcnls. 1997-2005 (In million of U.S. dollars, unlcs otbsrwi~c spifisd) 1997 ,998 ,999 *ooo 2OOl 2002 2003 2004 2005 ITS,. Prog. hoj Pm. Pmj. Proj. Proj. Pmj. Trade bahEc Export3 (Cd.) Import. (C.i.i) Sclviosr (“et) tkecipu ExpcndilureE Ofwhrch: inicrcrt Cvncnl DCCOYIII. excluding granl( Lhrcquilsd &i&l tmmfcrn Ii Cuncn, occour,t. inclvding .pnu C.l”iLII rccoun, ikrcign k’nowing Public Private u Amartuatmn uicct inYcStmc”t (“Cl) She*-lcrm capiul, and Errors and omis.iom (nst) O/which : oommemid banks (net) -297.x 180.8 317.4 227.4 90.” -201.0 64.4 19.4 33.5 -97.6 97.6 -148~1 -167.7 19.6 0.0 -3.932.2 4.177.9 4.177.9 0.” 17.8 8.7 532.” 6.8 m.o.1 -1,111,.6 -787.5 248.2 294.4 3?2.1 -868.3 -1,396.O -1.109.‘ -176.3 -311.4 -280.3 332.5 349.3 373.6 .5”8.8 -660.7 -653.9 -163.3 -180.2 -238.5 -796.4 -1.413.0 -,.067.9 313.2 482.0 309.0 483.2 -931.” 270.0 7,5.2 306.7 642.3 225.3 147.0 81.4 495.3 -249.4 -251.5 212.7 344.4 8.8 0.0 15.3 0.0 -204.4 -191.8 204.4 195.X -77.2 -IO”.0 -92.9 -109.0 9.6 9.0 6.1 4.0 20.4 -761.5 261.2 1.oYE 261.2 127.2 0.” 930.1 20.5 34.1 12.4 22.4 624.9 733.9 6.7 5.” 72.8 68.0 20.1 24.6 15.5 Sourscr: Mozambicm nuthoriticr nnd rtn(fenlimakr and projccticms. - -758.9 485.3 79.2 86.5 -7.3 0.0 0.0 -567~1 508.2 1.075.3 -399.3 844.1 1243.3 -309. I 402.8 ‘432.7 -620.4 -741.8 -227.8 -217.4 -784.7 -7U8.4 306.6 -401.7 2.2 -34.5 275.7 266.4 165.0 187.1 L LO.7 79.3 -352.3 -392.7 78.8 91.8 472.8 74.8 80.5 -5.8 0.” 0.0 0.0 0.0 436.2 436.2 51.8 63.8 -12.0 0.0 0.0 384.5 0.” 15.9 9.6 566.8 5.0 384.5 12.9 7.3 503.0 3.8 39.5 13.2 6.2 -43 1 .o 884.4 1.315.4 -252.1 466.9 -719.0 -205.1 -683.2 303.6 -379.6 -4.2 318.7 225.0 93.7 -429.3 106.5 0.0 0.” -383.7 383.7 290.9 9.9 -27.3 30.6 -4.5 -20.7 -22.8 0.0 0.0 U.0 0.0 373.8 0.0 373.8 11.3 6.3 472.4 3.4 37.” 12.9 6.0 - 450.3 928.8 L.379.0 -222.1 504.2 -726.3 -192.9 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 32 - ‘Tnble 7. ~laznmbique: ,iflrmnl I’innnsing Req”irLmsnlr md sourccn. 1997-2005 (I” millioru 0fU.S. dollars) 199, ,998 ,999 2000 ZO”, mu2 2003 2004 2005 Est. Proj. Pmj. Pmj. Ikj. Proj. Proj Proj. Lxl*tsmul fmancing rquirmnmnlr Cuncnt BccDYnt dcfid (.%I~ net offi.ial tmnrfcn) 4907.3 610.7 AmOrli7A”ll li Cbangcr in curcan (increase .) Changca in rcSCrvCI (incrw.?c +) 21 E*or%miJsio”r (0”ulOW 1) ‘TOLil, idcntiircd fmoncing I>irbu,rsmenu from czisting and new co”?milmc”L? iirant.s 3, 1.011.1 IHa,crsl M”bilutcr”I 1, In4 LMJ oum PrIv.tc lCC,‘x 4, mrbulssm~nu ‘mm cxirting cOnlmitmC”tS (iranLI I,O.ns Bilshml M”ltilntsm, l, IDA n.c othsr Commcrcia, 4, Ikbtmc”>snu from cxpcclcd “CW Eommilmcnk Grants 3, 1_08n! “il~l~~~l Mullilntcra, 1, IIJA IMI: cnbrr Cwnmcrfia, 4, Dirsct fvrcign invsrtment Ikh, did 51 Kcnwining gap 61 1.128.” 2.566.3 796.4 1.413.” 274.” 282.X -2”,4 761.5 71.5 109.0 6.5 0.0 866,X 1.509.” 216.1 382.9 3.932.2 0.0 134.2 -86.5 14.1 0.0 729.4 958.1 665.0 838.2 312.9 309.0 352.1 529.2 0.0 0.0 262.1 188.” 148.1 130.” 34.7 23.” 79.3 35.0 90.0 34L.Z 665.0 654.1 472.8 426.5 312.9 313.2 332.” 309.” 352.1 340.9 140.8 117.5 0.0 0.” 0.0 0.0 262. I zs9.5 140.8 117.5 148,l L33.9 100.0 I”“.0 X4,7 34.2 17.1 U.0 79.3 45.7 23.5 17.5 90,” 0.0 0.” 0.0 654.1 1.164.6 313.2 482.0 340.9 682.6 0.” 0.0 259.5 187.3 133.9 100.0 34.2 40.3 91.4 47.0 81.4 495.3 0,” 0.0 691.8 411.7 0.0 0.0 IS”.” 0.0 “0 0.0 541.8 411.7 “,” 0.0 0.0 I,.” 0.0 0.0 46.5 70.5 0” 0.0 0.0 30.0 0.0 0.” 23.” 23.” 0.0 0.0 23.5 17.5 0.0 0.0 495.1 341.2 64.4 212.7 344.4 I19.9 4.177.9 261.2 127.2 0.” 0.0 0.0 930.1 406.1 1364.2 I.085.4 1.060.8 708.4 1.102.6 416.3 1,095.” 672.4 L.073.1 I,“679 784.7 683.2 381.2 0.0 -8U.S 0.0 0.” -63.8 0.0 450.1 0.0 -30.6 0.0 418.1 0.0 4.5 0.0 387.5 0.0 25.2 0.0 687.4 676.4 728.8 776.8 815.3 608.6 584.6 622.3 654.3 673.1 309.7 306.6 303.6 300.7 2911.8 298.9 278.” 318.7 353.6 374.4 0.” 0.” 0.0 0.0 0.0 188.2 198.7 22s.” 245.0 260.0 130.0 ISO. 190.0 200.0 ZL”.” 23.2 11.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 35.0 37.1 35.0 45.0 50.0 I10.7 79.3 93.7 I”8.6 114.4 97.5 68.6 67.5 72.5 5” 0.0 0.” 0.0 0.0 0.0 97.5 68.6 67.3 72.5 35.” 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 97.5 68.6 67.5 72.5 35.0 R”.” 50.0 50.0 50.0 10.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 17.5 18.6 17.5 22.5 25.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 511.1 309.7 201.4 0.0 90.7 50.0 23.2 17.5 110.7 516.0 306.6 5*4.* 581.8 209.4 0.” 130.1 1tlO.O 11.6 l8.6 79.3 303.6 251.2 0.0 157.5 L40.0 0.0 17.5 93.7 300.7 281.1 0.0 172.5 IS”.0 0.0 22.5 108.6 638.1 298.8 339.4 0.0 225.0 *oo.o 0.0 25.0 114.4 78.8 91.8 106.5 122.5 142.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 398.0 384.5 373.8 318.2 257.9 Sowccr: Mozamhm authorilic5 and stticrtimalcr and projectmu I/ hd”&ig “lC FM u ,irclu*npUlr Fund, 3 l”d”dcx IDA ‘mEti, c”i.lMr. “n*sr Ihs lilPC ltitiativc s ,999 (llS61S” ma”“) 4I Ptiva Iccmr bnotig 5, Anrmcr rc3Ehduhnp afptiuolc &!A orllx C&um iaaatld l~ydropuwc~ pmjscb ul1tid-1991, lnclullcr ody con&dad BqrrtnenU wiul Pad Club crodtmr md Orad mkbt rdxm 1WR and ,999 includcr 11ss21 rniuh <ormb-d,, ras.lu>.c p,o,cdd by Pai5 Cl”h rro*,o,r vnnsr tar H,Pc 1rudntlvr, Pa,, “l”%i3 titmce eh hypvlg Yy 0141: I596 nw rs.shm”llnglo I.ysnr Imu) h Indaded nbow Ihe bC a* rcclucca dcb, wcko ,>q”“onts Cd h”“c’“s paps alkr “6Is% I” bc “JKWd by HWC a%.umncr old *c apylicruon ol~mcli”“L,rl rcxhod*lg .!rchtiam by Inon-Ymk cl”h crcmtorr. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 33 - Table 8 Mozambique: Indicators of Fund Credit, 1999-2005 Projections Debt service to the Fund In millions of SDRs 23.6 23.0 Alter committed HIPC assistance 13.7 II.4 After proposed HPC assistance 13.6 9.2 21.x 17.8 15.5 lb.8 6.8 4.9 4.8 7.3 4.0 2.4 2.7 5.5 3.5 2.0 I.7 1.7 I.1 0.5 0.5 0.7 0.6 0.3 0.3 0.6 19.7 13.6 12.3 In percent ofexports of goodslnonfactor services 5.4 4.8 Ancr committed HIPC assistance 3.1 2.4 Alicr proposed HlPC assistance 3.1 1.9 1.9 1.3 I.2 ln percent of debt service of nonfinancial public sector net-ore HPC After committed HIPC assistance ARer proposed HPC assistance 22.0 18.2 18.0 15.1 12.9 13.5 14.8 20. I 17.9 12.0 8.9 8.6 12.3 20.0 21.7 16.5 8.1 5.1 5.7 10.9 21.2 In pcrccnt of debt ser.& to multilaterals Bcfore HIPC After committed HIPC assistance After proposed HIPC assistance 45. I 44.9 44.7 4.4 41.2 53.6 43.3 In percent of gross international reserves 4.9 40.4 35.2 30.4 29.5 29.5 38.4 29. I 25.4 29.5 39.7 22.2 14.2 14.3 22.0 36.1 5.3 4.9 4.6 5.0 5.5 Gross Fund financing In millions of U.S. dollars 40.3 23.0 23.2 11.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 In millions of SDKs 29.4 16.X 16.8 8.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 In percent of Mozambique’s financing needs I/ I.6 1.7 2.1 I.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 Fund credit outstanding ln millions of U.S. dollars In millions of SDRs In percent of quota 210.7 153.8 I In percent of exports of goods and nor&actor services In percent of total debt outstanding 21 135.4 35.2 3.2 203.2 198.8 186.8 169.1 147.6 14X.5 144.3 135.6 120.8 104.6 130.7 127.0 119.3 106.3 92.1 31.2 22.9 15.1 12.9 10.6 3.1 3.1 3.0 2.8 2.5 20.3 85.3 75.1 8.1 2. I Memorandum item Debt service to the Fund (in millions ofU.S. dollars) 32.4 31.4 After committed H7PC assistance 18.7 IS.6 After proposed HPC assistance 18.7 12.6 30.0 24.6 21.7 23.7 9.4 6.X 6.7 10.3 5.4 3.3 3.8 7.7 I.38 1.38 1.40 1.41 27.7 19.1 17.4 UWSDR exchange rate 1.37 1.37 I.41 1999 2000 200 I 2002 2003 2004 2005 Sources: Hank oCMozamhique; and staff estimates and projections. I/ Gross financing needs are defined as the sum of the current account deficit before grants, amortizatioo ofmedium- and long-term debt, repayment to the Fund, reduction in payments arrears, and targctcd accumulation of gross assets of the benkmg system 21 After the application of traditional debt rescbcduling mechanisms. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 34 - APPENDIX 1 Mozambique: Three-Year Arrangement under the Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility Attached hereto is a letter (the “Letter”) with annexed Memorandum on Economic and Financial Policies (the “Memorandum”) dated June 10, 1999, from the Minister of Planning and Finance and the Governor of the Bank of Mozambique requesting from the Fund as Trustee of the Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility Trust (the “Trustee”) a three-year arrangement under the enhanced structural adjustment facility, and setting forth: (a) the objectives and policies of the program that the authorities of Mozambique intend to pursue during the three-year period of the arrangement; (b) the objectives, policies and measures that the authorities of Mozambique intend to pursue during the first year ofthe arrangement; and (c) understandings of Mozambique with the Trustee regarding reviews that will be made of progress in realizing the objectives of the program and of the policies and measures that the authorities of Mozambique will pursue for the second and third years of the arrangement. To support these objectives and policies the Trustee grants the requested three-year arrangement in accordance with the following provisions, and subject to the provisions applying to assistance under the Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility Trust. 1. (4 For a period of three years from June 28, 1999, Mozambique will have the right to obtain loan disbursements from the Trustee in a total amount equivalent to SDR 58.8 million, subject to the availability of resources in the Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility Trust. @I Disbursements under this arrangement shall not exceed the equivalent of SDR 25.2 million until June 1, 2000 and the equivalent of SDR 42 million until June 1,2001 Cc) During the first year of the arrangement: 0) the first disbursement, in an amount equivalent to SDR 8.4 million, will be available upon approval of this arrangement, at the request of Mozambique; and (ii) the second and third disbursements, each in an amount equivalent to SDR 8.4 million, will be available after December 3 1, 1999, and May 3 1, 2000, respectively, at the request of Mozambique and subject to paragraph 2 below, Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 35 - APPENDIX I (4 The right of Mozambique to request disbursements during the second and third years of this arrangement shall be subject to such phasing and conditions as shall be determined. The phasing of, and conditions for, disbursements during the second year of this arrangement shall be determined in the context of a review of Mozambique’s program with the Trustee, the timing of which shall be established at the review contemplated in paragraph 2(e) of this arrangement. 2. Mozambique will not request a disbursement provided for in paragraph l(c)(ii) above: (4 if, with respect to the second disbursement, the data as of September 30, 1999 indicate that: (9 (ii) (iii) the ceiling on the central government domestic primary deficit, or the ceiling on the net domestic assets of the Bank of Mozambique, or the floor on the net international reserves of the Bank of Mozambique, or (iv) the ceiling on external borrowing on nonconcessional terms contracted or guaranteed by the government or the Bank of Mozambique with maturity of more than one year, or (4 the ceiling on public short-term external debt, as specified in Table 1 of the Memorandum, respectively, was not observed; or (b) if, at any time during the period of this arrangement, Mozambique accumulates any new external payments arrears except for arrears that are subject to debt-rescheduling agreements as specified in Table 1 of the Memorandum; or Cc) if, with respect to the second disbursement, (9 by September 30, 1999, Mozambique did not carry out its intentions regarding the computerization of at least ten customs clearance points, or (ii) by December 3 1, 1999, Mozambique did not carry out its intentions regarding: 1. the preparation of new civil service regulations providing for performance standards and incentive mechanisms, or Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 36 - APPENDIX I 2. the submission of revised customs legislation including a basic customs act, a customs code and a law establishing customs tribunals to the National Assembly, or 3. the adoption of a new chart of accounts for commercial banks, as specified in paragraphs 6, 14, and 15 and Table 2 of the Memorandum; or (4 if Mozambique: (4 has imposed or intensified restrictions on payments and transfers for current international transactions, or (ii) has introduced or modified multiple currency practices, or (iii) has concluded bilateral payments agreements which are inconsistent with Article VIII, or (iv) has imposed or intensified import restrictions for balance of payments reasons; or (4 until the Trustee has determined that, with respect to each of the second and third disbursements, the corresponding review contemplated in Paragraph 4 of the Letter has been completed. When Mozambique is prevented from requesting disbursements under this arrangement because of this paragraph 2, such disbursements will be resumed only after consultation has taken place between the Trustee and Mozambique and understandings have been reached regarding the circumstances in which Mozambique may request further disbursements. 3. In accordance with paragraph 3 of the Letter, Mozambique will provide the Trustee, with such information as the Trustee requests in connection with the progress of Mozambique in implementing the policies and reaching the objectives of the program supported by this arrangement. 4. During the period of this arrangement Mozambique shall remain in close consultation with the Trustee. In accordance with paragraph 3 of the Letter, Mozambique will consult with the Trustee on the adoption of any measures that may be appropriate at the initiative of the government or whenever the Managing Director of the Trustee requests such a consultation. Moreover, after the period of this arrangement and while Mozambique has outstanding financial obligations to the Trustee arising from loan disbursements under this arrangement, Mozambique will consult with the Trustee from time to time, at the initiative of the government or whenever the Managing Director of the Trustee requests consultation on Mozambique’s economic and financial policies. These consultations may include correspondence and visits of officials of the Trustee to Mozambique or of representatives of Mozambique to the Trustee. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 37 - APPENDIX I ATTACHMENT Maputo, June 10, 1999 Dear Mr. Camdessus: I. The government of Mozambique has prepared a new program of economic and structural adjustment that it intends to implement during the next three years. The main elements of this program are described in a new policy framework paper, covering the period April 1999-March 2002, which has been prepared in collaboration with the staffs of the Fund and the World Bank. The attached memorandum on economic and fmancial policies sets forth in detail the objectives and policies that the government intends to pursue during the first year of the program 2. In support of its program, the government of Mozambique hereby requests a new three-year arrangement under the Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facilily (ESAF), in an amount equivalent to SDR 58.8 million (52 percent of quota). 3. The government of Mozambique believes that the policies and measures set forth in the attached memorandum on economic and financial policies (MEFP) are adequate to achieve the objectives of the program to be supported by the new ESAF arrangement, but it will take any further measures that may become necessary for this purpose. Moreover, the government will continue to consult with the Fund from time to time on its economic and financial policies, in accordance with the Fund’s policies on such consultations, and to provide the Fund with such information as the Fund requires to assess the government’s progress in implementing the economic and financial policies described in the MEFP. 4. The government will conduct with the Fund by end-January 2000 a midterm review of the tirst- year program under the three-year ESAF arrangement, based on performance criteria for end- September 1999. A second review will take place at the end of the first-year program; it will be based on performance criteria for end-March 2000 and will specify the second-year program Sincerely yours, ISi Tomti Augusta SalomZlo Minister of Planning and Finance Ministry of Planning and Finance Attachment: Memorandum on Economic and Financial Policies ISI Adrian0 A. Maleiane Governor Bank of Mozambique Mr. Michel Camdessus Managing Director International Monetary Fund 700 19th Street, N.W. Washington, D.C. 2043 1 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicMOZAMBIQUE Memorandum on Economic and Financial Policies 1. Introduction. This memorandum sets forth the government of Mozambique’s economic objectives and policies for the period from April 1999 to March 2000, the first year of a program to be supported by a new three-year ESAF arrangement under the Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility (ESAF). These objectives and policies are an integral part of the government’s economic strategy for the medium term, which is described in the policy framework paper (PFP) supporting the request for the new ESAF arrangement. 2. Economic objectives for 1999-2000. The first-year program seeks to (a) contain the 12-month rate of inflation to 5-6 percent; (b) maintain gross international reserves at five months of imports of goods and nonfactor services; and (c) establish the conditions for average annual real GDP growth of around 8 percent. In setting these macroeconomic objectives, the government can build on the record of growth with stability achieved in recent years. Preliminary estimates of GDP suggest that 1998 was the second consecutive year of double-digit real growth. The 12-month rate of inflation, which had fallen to 5.8 percent during 1997, continued to decline and was negative at end-1998. At the same time, Mozambique has accumulated gross international reserves (to 6.7 months of import cover at end-1998) and maintained a relatively stable average exchange rate, implying a significant appreciation against the South African rand. The latter development, together with falling world commodity prices helped to lower inflation. While the government will maintain its strong policy stance, it recognizes that the external environment may not remain so favorable. Inflation will likely rise with the combination of higher prices for South African goods and a possible turnaround in commodity prices, as has already been the case with oil prices. Domestically, the recent substantial increase in the minimum wage and the introduction of the value-added tax (VAT) will also exert some upward pressure on prices. 3. Fiscal adjustment in 1999-2000. The domestic primary deficit, before grants, is projected to increase from 0.6 percent of GDP in 1998 to 2.6 percent in 1999, but to narrow to 1.7 percent in 2000 because of both higher revenue and reduced spending pressures. A number of recent fiscal reforms are expected to have an adverse budgetary impact in 1999, but they will likely improve the economic environment for the private sector and build abetter- performing public administration. These reforms include the restructuring and reduction of personal and corporate tax rates in 1998, the reduction of the maximum import tariff in April 1999, a strengthening of customs administration, a further step in the decompression of civil service salaries, and increased employment of teachers and health care personnel. In addition, there are budgetary costs associated with the recent increase in the minimum wage and with the presidential and parliamentary elections due by October 1999, and the petroleum tax arrears collected in 1998 will not be repeated in 1999. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 39 - APPENDIX I ATTACHMENT 4. Revenudmobilization. The government considers revenue mobilization to be the foundation of a sustainable fiscal platform. Therefore, measures have been or are being taken to increase revenue by about % of 1 percentage point of GDP a year in 1999 and 2000. These comprise the replacement of the turnover and consumption taxes (and of the tourism tax from 2000) by the VAT and selected excise taxes; a substantial increase in rents in January 1999; and improvements in customs administration. In 1999, these measures will at least offset the decline in revenue arising from the cuts in tax rates mentioned above; their full impact will be felt in 2000. Other actions (discussed below) will be taken to widen the revenue base and strengthen internal tax administration. The government does not propose to adjust tax rates tinther in 1999-2000, but it will take offsetting revenue measures in the event of a revenue shortfall. 5. Tax base. To maximize revenue and increase the equity and efficiency of the tax system, the government will step up its enhrts to widen the tax base. The recently introduced VAT is broadly based, with a single rate and few exemptions. A documentation of the legal basis, terms, and duration of all existing tax and customs exemptions has just been completed and will be used to begin paring down exemptions. The use of customs exemptions is already being carefully monitored by the customs department, and a recording system for monitoring exemptions on domestic taxes will be created shortly. In addition, the tax and tariff system itselfwill be reviewed by end-March 2000, and in this context, the government will decide on further rationalizing the exemptions regimes. 6. Customs administration. The ongoing customs reform is a key element of the government’s efforts to improve tax administration. The contract with the foreign company that has been managing customs since May 1997 ends in December 1999, at which time control of customs is expected to be passed back to Mozambican hands. The government will continue to provide the necessary financial and other support to customs to ensure that the management company completes its scheduled work by end-1999. In particular, the government will see to it that the computerization of at least ten customs clearance points is completed by end-September 1999, and that 500 redundant customs personnel are redeployed by the end of 1999. If necessary, the government will consider retaining the private company as a consultant for a period oftime after 1999 to provide post-contract support The government intends to submit to the National Assembly by end-December 1999 revised customs legislation, comprising a consolidated customs act, the customs code, and a new law establishing customs tribunals. The updated legislation will provide for an integrated customs department. the criminalization of customs offences, and authority for the customs department to prosecute customs offenders. The VAT refund mechanism for exporters has been made fully operational, with the establishment of the relevant forms, control procedures, and payment arrangements. 7. Internal tax administration. Efforts to strengthen internal tax administration have been undertaken as part of the preparation for the introduction of the VAT. These efforts will soon be broadened to cover direct taxes. The taxpayer identification number-newly Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 40 - APPENDIX I ATTACHMENT introduced for the VAT and domestic excises-will be applied to personal and corporate income taxes and customs duties, and work will begin on extending the VAT and customs computerized databases to include direct taxes. The auditing capacity of the internal tax office will be boosted with the recruitment of at least ten additional audit officers and the organization of at least two training courses. Finally, consideration will be given to the creation of a central revenue authority. 8. Expenditure policy. The recent increase in the minimum wage, the decompression of civil service salaries, election-related costs, and an increase in income transfers to the poor, together, are expected to raise current government spending by almost 1% percentage points of GDP during 1999. In view of this, the government will keep other current expenditures in 1999 at their 1998 level in relation to GDP, and the phasedown of the private management contract with customs and the non-recurrence of election costs will reduce spending pressures in 2000. Thus, notwithstanding a relative increase in the wage bill, current expenditure is expected to decline by about % of 1 percentage point of GDP in 2000. In line with the expectations under the Initiative for Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC Initiative), the government has budgeted increases in real current spending on education and health of 15.8 percent and 16.4 percent, respectively, over the period 1999-2000. 9. Expenditure management and budget reform. To increase the efliciency and transparency of the budgetary process, improve expenditure management, and guarantee the sustainability of public expenditure programs, the government has been implementing an expenditure management reform program. From 1999, the government will formally close the budget accounts for the previous year in December and submit the audited accounts to parliament. The government has begun to identify and will progressively remove any institutional and legal impediments to the inclusion in the budget of previously off-budget revenue and expenditure flows. Coverage of foreign aid flows in the budget has already been broadened with the inception of the present program. A medium-term expenditure fiamework will be prepared and linked to the annual budget so as to match sectoral expenditure priorities with resource availability and thereby enhance the sustainability of programs. Also, a new system of public accounting is expected to be approved by end-September 1999. To clarify the government’s domestic claims and liabilities for use in the upcoming budget, the government has recently established inventories of its outstanding claims on public and private entities, and of its liabilities stemming from the privatization and restructuring of large enterprises and banks. 10. Social security system. Because of payments to demobilized soldiers under the terms of the 1992 peace agreement, government pension payments in 1998 substantially exceeded contributions by workers. The government has therefore decided to assess the long term viability of the public sector pension system as well as the pension system administered by the National Social Security Institute. It will commission actuarial studies of both schemes in 1999. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 41 - APPENDIX I ATTACHMENT 11. Monetary policy. The monetary program seeks to limit broad money growth to 17 percent in 1999 and 13 percent in 2000, on the assumption of a continued gradual slowdown in velocity in connection with the development of the financial sector. Given a projected substantial increase in government deposits in 1999 stemming from foreign aid disbursements, there will be room for both an increase in net foreign assets and a healthy expansion of bank credit to the private sector. In 2000, however, government deposits and the central bank’s net foreign assets are projected to decline, while credit to the private sector will continue to grow. 12. Targets and instruments of monetary policy. Currently, monetary policy targets the net domestic assets of the banking system, and the target is achieved primarily through limits on the net domestic assets of individual banks. For some time now, the central bank has been preparing the ground for the use of indirect instruments of monetary policy, and considerable progress has been achieved along this route. Most recently, minimum reserve requirements were extended to time deposits of more than one year maturity. With the ultimate objective of influencing liquidity conditions primarily through operations in treasury bills, the central bank will seek to phase out operations in its own bills, as it acquires authority and experience in issuing treasury bills for monetary control purposes. In recognition of the difficulties of projecting accurately the demand for- money, and to permit a flexible response to unforeseen capital inflows, the monetary performance criterion under the program will target the net domestic assets of the central bank. At the same time, the central bank will monitor closely changes in the supply of reserve money as an important and early indicator of the expansion of broad money in the system. 13. Open market operations. The new approach to monetary targeting will require that the central bank deal primarily and actively in treasury bills, and continued efforts will be made to develop the market for such bills. Specifically, by the end of 1999, the Bank of Mozambique will be authorized to hold regular auctions of treasury bills; it will determine the amounts of the auctions on the basis of cash-flow forecasts shared with the Ministry of Planning and Finance, as needed for monetary control purposes. Meanwhile, the treasury’s capacity to forecast and manage its cash flow will be enhanced through technical assistance, the source and terms of reference of which have already been identified. 14. Bank supervision. The rapid development of the financial sector in recent years underscores the need for effective bank supervision. The central bank will monitor closely the restructuring of the two banks that were privatized in 1996-97 to ensure that capital adequacy and prudential requirements are observed, and it will actively enforce the Core Principles for effective bank supervision of the Basle Committee. In this context, the limits on the foreign exchange exposure of commercial banks will be monitored closely. The Bank of Mozambique’s capacity for on- and off-site inspection of banks has been strengthened, and annual on-site inspections of all banks will continue. By the end of 1999, the recently drafted new chart of accounts for commercial banks will be adopted for application starting in the year 2000. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 42 - APPENDIX I ATTACHMENT 15. Other structural reforms. Major reforms are being undertaken to improve public administration and encourage private sector development. These include the ongoing revision of career streams, pay scales, and compensation structure in the civil service; the preparation of new civil service regulations that include performance standards and incentive mechanisms; the development of a strategy for a major public sector reform including a functional review of ministries; the improvement of the judicial system; the revision of the commercial code; the continued reduction of bureaucratic obstacles to investment and trade; and the adoption of regulations to define and protect urban land-use rights. The earlier program of privatizing selected large enterprises was completed in September 1998, with the exception of the national airline, which-in the absence of acceptable bids-was converted into a limited liability company with the intention of selling the government’s shares on the future stock exchange. The program of privatizing and restructuring small and medium-sized enterprises will be completed in June 1999. By end-March 2000, the government will prepare a policy statement regarding the future of the remaining public enterprises and of companies with majority state ownership. Details of these and other structural reforms are provided in the government’s policy framework paper supporting the request for a new three-year ESAF arrangement. 16. Exchange rate policy. The program envisages that an accumulation of net international reserves of about US$IOO million in 1999 will be followed by a drawdown of about the same amount in 2000, reflecting mainly the expected disbursement pattern of foreign aid. Subject to meeting its reserves target, the Bank ofMozambique will intervene in the foreign exchange market primarily to smooth out fluctuations in the exchange rate. Where it is necessary to exceed the target in order to prevent an excessive appreciation of the currency, appropriate monetary sterilization will be considered. 17. Trade policy. Mozambique’s trade regime is relatively open. The government will continue to participate actively in negotiations on regional integration in the Southern African Development Community (SADC), while avoiding the introduction of measures that run counter to a progressive multilateral trade liberalization. In this context, the government will further reduce the level and dispersion of import tariffs during the period of the new three- year ESAF arrangement. Following the recent reduction in the top import tariff rate from 35 percent to 30 percent, a further reduction to 25 percent is envisaged to take effect in January 2002. In addition, the justification for the existing surcharges on imports of cement, steel plates and tubes, and sugar will be reassessed in the near future. The government will not adopt new or increase existing general import surcharges or export taxes and restrictions. 18. External debt and the HlPC Initiative. Once Mozambique’s request for a new three-year ESAF arrangement has been approved, a Luther key condition required for reaching the completion point under the HIPC Initiative will have been met, Mozambique expects to fulfil1 all other conditions at the same time and looks forward to receiving Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 43 - APPENDIX I ATTACHMENT assistance under the Initiative and achieving debt sustainability. In this context, the government is committed to a sound management of its internal and external debt and will continue to avoid any external borrowing on nonconcessional terms. 19. Exchange restrictions. During the period of the ESAF program, the government will not impose or intensify restrictions on payments and transfers for current international transactions; will not introduce multiple currency practices; will not conclude bilateral payments agreements that are inconsistent with Article VIII of the Fund’s Articles of Agreement; and will not impose or intensify import restrictions for balance of payments reasons. Furthermore, the government will not incur any new external payments arrears, except arrears on payments that are subject to debt rescheduling negotiations. Mozambique intends to accept the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4 of the Fund’s Articles of Agreement in July 1999. 20. Performance criteria and benchmarks. The quantitative performance criteria and benchmarks that will be used to evaluate the government’s progress in implementing the first- year financial program, as well as the test dates on which such evaluation will take place, are shown in Table 1 attached to this memorandum The tirst four represent key financial objectives of the program, the next two will help to maintain a sustainable external debt position, and the last one is intended to protect Mozambique’s external creditworthiness. The structural performance criteria and benchmarks are shown in the attached Table 2. These comprise specific actions that are important for the success of critical reforms in the various areas indicated. The government understands that its ability to request disbursement of the second loan under the three-year ESAF arrangement will be contingent upon the observance of the performance criteria set out in Tables 1 and 2, and the completion of the first review of the program, scheduled to take place by the end of January 2000. . Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 1. Quantitative Performance Criteria and Benchmarks Under the First-Year ESAF Program, April 1999-March 2000 (End of period) March Prel. 1999 2000 June September December March BtXChma& PerfollllZUl~ Indicative Indicative criteria Benchmarks Pelf0lIIIanCe Criteria Central government domestic primal? deficit (ceiling) I/ 21 Central govemment revenue (floor; benchmark only) 21 Stock of net domestic assets of the Bank of Mozambique (ceiling) 3/4/j/ Stock of net international resewes of the Bank of Mozambique (floor) 61 211 I.286 3,815 468 (In billions of meticais) 764 1,382 1,368 1,553 2,682 4,337 6,262 7,802 3_365 3,742 3,702 3,737 (In millions of U.S. dollars) 512 495 518 498 New nonconcessional borrowing contracted or guaranteed by the govemment or the Bank of Mozambique with mamri& of more than one year (ceiling) 21 Stock of short-tern1 external public debt outstanding (ceiling) 71 EFtemal payments arrears (ceiling) 2181 Memorandum item: 0 0 0 0 0 I2 12 12 12 12 0 0 0 0 0 Foreign program assistance (grants and loans) 21 101 192 217 271 302 l/ Defined as revenue minus noninterest current expenditure minus locally financed capital expenditme and locally financed net lending. 2/Cmnulative Tom the beginning of 1999. 31 Defined as reserve money minus net foreign assets of the Bank of Mozambique. The foreign currency component of reserve money and the net foreign assets are valued at program exchange rates; net foreign assets defined to exclude the effect of any stock adjustments in medium- and long-term liabilities. ~/TO be adjusted upward/dowmvard to the extent of any shortfall/excess of foreign program assistance relative to the amounts shown in the memorandum item. 51 To be adjusted downward to the extent that eligible bank reserves fall short of 6.8 percent of bank deposits. 61 To be adjusted downward/upward to the extent of any shortfalVexcess of foreign progmm assistance relative to the amounts shown ia the memorandum item. 7/ Loans of O-1 year’s maturity, excluding normal import-related credit. Non-U.S.-dollar debt converted to U.S. dollars at actual exchange rates. 8/ Continuous; excluding arrears arising from debt-service payments that become due pending the conclusion of debt-rescheduling agreements. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 45- APPENDIX I ATTACHMENT Table 2. Structural Performance Criteria and Benchmarks Under the First-Year ESAF Program. Anril 1999-March 2000 Actions Proposed Date of Implementation (End of period) Public administration - Prepare new civil service regulations that include performance standards and incentive mechanisms (paragraph 1.5) (*) Tax and customs administration - Complete computcrization of at least ten customs clearance points (paragraph 6) (*) - Complete an assessment of the remaining import surcharges (cement, steel plates and tubes, sugar) - Adopt new procedures governing customs warehousing and transit trade - Complete redeployment of 500 redundant customs personnel - Submit revised customs legislation to the National Assembly (basic customs act; customs code; and law on customs tribunals) (paragraph 6) (*) - Include in the budget proposal for 2000 the abolition of the tourism tax - Strengthen tax auditing capacity by recruiting ten additional tax audit officers and conducting two training courses - Examine options for the creation of a central revenue authority - Review tax and tariff system and adopt positiou towards rationalising exemptions regimes Financial sector - Adopt new chart of accounts for commercial banks (paragraph 14) (*) - Authorizc Bank of Mozambique to hold regular auctions of treasury bills and to determine the amounts on the basis of forecasts shared with the Ministry of Finance, as needed for monetary control purposes Public enterprise reform - Submit to the Council of Ministers a policy statement regarding the future of public enterprises and of companies with majority state ownership Statistics - Produce revised national accounts statistics through 1998 based on census results Dccembcr 1999 September 1999 September 1999 September 1999 December 1999 December 1999 December 1999 March 2000 March 2000 March 2000 December 1999 December 1999 March 2000 October 1999 Note: An asterisk (*) indicates a perfonnancc criterion; the paragraph rcfcrcnce is to the government’s memorandum ou economic and tinancial politics. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 46 - APPENDIX II Mozambique: Relations with the Fund (As of April 30, 1999) Membership Status: Joined 9/24/84; Article XIV General Resources Account: Quota Fund holdings of currency Reserve position in Fund SDR Million 113.6 113.6 0.01 % Quota 100.0 100.0 0.0 SDR Department Holdings SDR Million 0.04 % Allocation n.a. Outstanding purchases and loans: SDR Million % Quota Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility (ESAF) arrangements 139.91 123.2 Financial Arrangements -be ESAF ESAF SAF Approval date 612 1 I96 6/O I/90 6/0X/87 Expiration date X/24/99 12/31/95 6/07/90 Amount Approved (SDR million) 75.60 130.05 42.70 Amount Drawn (SDR Million) 63.00 115.35 42.70 Projected Obligations to the Fund (SDR millious; based on existing use of resources and present holdings of SDRs): Overdue Forlhcomjne 4/3011999 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 Principal Charges/interest Total 0.0 15.5 22.2 21.0 17.1 14.8 0.0 0.7 0.6 0.5 0.4 0.3 0.0 16.2 22.8 21.5 17.5 15.1 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 47 - APPENDIX II Exchange Arrangements The exchange rate for Mozambique’s currency, the metical (plwal: mcticais) is market determined. Commercial banks may buy and sell foreign exchange from, and sell to, individual customers on a freely negotiable basis. The Bank of Mozambique fixes the midpoint rate for its transactions daily so as to be within 2 percent of the weighted average of market rates of the previous day. As of end-April 1999, the central bank rate was Mt 12,509 per U.S. dollar. Mozambique has expressed the intention to accept the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4 of the Fund’s Articles of Agreement in the near future. In this regard, a detailed examination of the exchange system is being conducted in,collaboration with the Fund staff. Article IV Consultation Mozambique is on the standard 12-month cycle for Article IV consultations. The 1998 Article IV consultation, which was conducted together with Mozambique’s Article XIV consultation, was completed by the Executive Board on April 7, 1998 (EBY981.57; 3/3 l/98). The following decision was taken: 1. The Fund takes this decision in concluding the 1998 Article XIV consultation with the Republic of Mozambique, in light of the 1998 Article IV consultation with the Republic of Mozambique conducted under Decision 5392-(77/63), adopted April 29, 1977, as amended (Surveillance over Exchange Rate Policies). 2. The Republic of Mozambique maintains restrictions on payments and transfers for current international transactions described in EBS/98/57, in accordance with Article XIV, Section 2. The Fund encourages the Republic of Mozambique to apply these restrictions in a liberal manner and lo eliminate them as soon as its balance of payments position permits. Directors noted that the Republic of Mozambique’s overall economic performance had continued to improve in 1997, as evidenced by higher growth, falling inflation, an improvement of the external current account, and the stability of the nominal exchange rate. They commended the authorities for adhering to their macroeconomic program for 1997/98, as well as for their determined efforts to implement the wide- ranging structural refomrs set out in the policy framework paper. Directors noted that, despite the recent economic gains, Mozambique still faced major economic problems, notably widespread poverty, an inadequate social and economic infrastructure, and a heavy external debt burden. They stressed the need for firm adhercncc to the program through continued pmdcnt financial management and an acceleration of the remaining structural reforms, in order to consolidate the gains already achieved and to place the economy on a path of strong and sustainable growth. Resident Representative Mr. Marco Pition-Farah has been Resident Representative since the establishment of the post in Scptembcr 1996. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 48 - APPENDIX II Technical Assistance, 1993-98 Departments Timing Statistics Febmay 1995 February I996 July-August 1997 Ja”Ualy 1999 April-May 1999 Fiscal Affairs Februilry 1995 Nownber 1995 June I995 April 1996 July 1996 December I996 May I997 1996-99 1997-99 Max-ch 199X July 1998 Oct.-Dec. 1998 February 1999 Monetiuy and March 1996 Exchange Afzlirs Since September 199x Ja”-Feb. 1999 May 1999 June I999 IMF In&h& November 1994 Form Mission Mission Mission Regional semmr (Formgal) Mission Mlssio” MiSSiLl” MiSSi Mlssion Mission (with World Ba&) Mission Mission Long-tern1 co”sulta”t LO”,g-tell11 consulta”ts (2) Missim Mission Mission Mission Long-tern1 co”sultn”t LO”g-teIlll CO”SUlt”“t Missions (2) Mission Mission Missim Purpose Balance of payments f0llow-up (external aid flows) Monetv statistics Monetary statistics Monetary and financial stntislics Ehla”ce or pay”mts Customs administration. value-added tax (VAT) Customs administration. VAT Customs and t”.x administration VAT prepxations Tnritirefoml Customs ndministration. VAT Customs administration, VAT Imulementation Of customs reform P&““l Prcpaxation for the ituplementation of VAT VAT pf-epxitio”s VAT prepparations VAT preparations VAT preparations and Customs reform Ranking supervision Banking supervision Payments systenl a”d foreign exchange management Forei@> exchnnge manage”~e”t Payments system Course (two weeks) on tkilnciol pro@anuning and policies cotmterparts Bnnk of Mozambique, Ministry of Finance. and Planning, donors Bank of Mozambique Bank of Mozambique Ptiicipnnts from Bank of Mozambique, Ministry of Finance and Planning Bank of Mozambique biinisby of Finance Mkstry OfFinance Ministry of Finance Ministly of Finance Ministry of Finance Ministry of Finance Ministry ofFinance Ministry ofFinance Ministry of Finance Jvlinisy of Finonce Ministry of Finance Ministry ofFin”nce Ministry of Finance Bank of Mozambique Bank of Mozambique Bank of Mozambique Bmk of Mozambique Bank of Mozambique 22 Mozambican participants Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 49 - APPENDIX III Mozambique: Relations with the World Bank Group The World Bank has supported Mozambique’s reform efforts through 26 investment credits and 6 adjustment operations. Currently, the Bank’s active portfolio consists of 14 investment projects totaling about US$709 million, of which about US$384 million had yet to be disbursed as ofMarch 15, 1999. A third economic recovery credit was approved in February 1998, and its first and second tranches were released upon satisfactory Ldlillment of specific conditions in May 1997 and March 1998, respectively. The latest Bank adjustment operation, its sixth, is the Economic Management Reform Operation (EMRO). The EMRO was approved in December 1998 as a US$l50 million grant as part of the HIPC interim measures. The first tranche (US$75 million) was released in March 1999, and the second tranche is expected to be released in mid-1999 upon fultillment of specific conditions. The World Bank Country Assistance Strategy was discussed by the Board in December 1997. The broad elements of the strategy include (a) promotion of private sector-led growth; (b) capacity building and human resource development; and (c) the strengthening of development partnerships. The World Bank’s portfolio has been restructured, and new lending over the next three years will focus on agriculture, education, and infrastructure. To strengthen capacity for policy analysis, economic management, and project implementation in Mozambique, economic and sector work was devoted in 1991 to issues of public sector pay and employment, training, decentralization to provincial and district levels, and capacity building. A second public expenditure review in 1992 addressed the composition and phasing of the investment budget, and the balance between recurrent and investment expenditure. Issues concerning mobilization of counterpart funds were reviewed in 1991 and early 1992. In 1992, a financial sector study and education sector review were completed. In early 1993, a joint Bank/donor mission looked at issues related to import support funds. Economic work in 1993-94 focused on the government’s transition from an emergency situation to sustainable development. In 1994, a study on the impediments to industrial recovery and exports was carried out, and a country environmental strategy was produced. The World Bank, along with other donors, also assisted the government in the preparation of integrated investment programs in the roads and health sectors. In 1996, the Bank commenced a fiscal management review process with the government that has supported budgetary reform. In 1998, this effort focused on developing a medium-term fiscal framework. The Bank has assisted the government in developing sector-specific programs in education and agriculture. World Bank credits in support ofthe education sector program and of the agriculture sector program were approved by the Bank’s Board in February 1999. The Bank is also preparing a private sector development investment operation with the government. In addition, the Bank is assisting the government in its public sector reform program and is conducting a growth prospects study. The Bank has been providing technical assistance with respect to banking supervision, capacity building, the development of transit corridors, gas exploitation, and statistical issues. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicAPPENDIX III _ Lom and Grant Operations, 1985-99 Board “$fd;; Approval ’ Date Amount Cancellations Disbursed PeKe”t xsof Disbursed 4130199 as of 4i30199 (Millions of U.S. dollars) Adjustment operations First import rehabilitation Second Unport rehabilitation Second import rehabilitation (At? Facility) Thud import rehabilitation Economic recovery credit Second economic recovery credit Third economic recovery credit Economic Management Reform Operation I/ 6&i 45.0 8/87 70.0 8187 18.6 5189 90.0 6192 180.0 6194 200.0 2197 100.0 12198 150.0 Energy Energy ‘TA/rehabilitation Household energy Gas engineering 51x7 20.0 1.6 20. I 100.4 6189 22.0 2.2 21.3 96.9 6J94 30.0 0.0 20. I 67.0 Urban Urban rehabilitation XIX8 60.0 Local govt. refxmlengineering 6193 23.2 National water 2lQ8 36.0 Social sectors Education and manpower development Health and nulritio” Education 11 Capacity building: Human Rcs. Dev. Capacity building: public sector and legal kst. development Feed security Sl88 15.9 0. I 16.3 102.7 3189 27.0 0.0 30.2 III.9 I2100 53.7 0.0 53.3 99.3 I l/92 48.6 0.0 28.5 58.5 Health sector recovery General education sec. exp. pro. I l/Q2 15.5 2.9 I I.1 71.6 4lQ3 6.3 1.3 4.0 61.7 I l/95 98.7 0.0 16.4 16.6 2199 71.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Transport Transport rehab. (B&a Corridor) Roads and Coastal Shipping I Maputo cotidor revitalization Roads tid Coastal Shipping II industry and finance Industrial enterprise restructuring SmalVmediun scale ent. dev. I2189 so. I 0.0 44.4 88.7 I2189 32.0 3.4 32.0 100.1 Public sector management Economic/financial management TA Financial sector capacity building IO/89 21.0 0.6 22.9 109.0 404 9.0 0.0 5.0 55.4 Agriculture Agric. rehab./development Agric. serv. rehab./development Rural Rehabilitation Agriculturnl sec. PEP 9/QO 15.4 9.7 6.3 40.8 2192 35.0 12.3 14.5 41.4 3/!)3 20.0 0.0 15.3 76.3 2lQ9 30.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Total of all credits and grants I ,905.6 61.1 I ,437.6 75.4 0.3 55.6 123.5 103.9 100.9 101.4 104.6 104.2 94.3 50.0 7.2 53.7 5.0 13.1 0.0 2.2 89.5 56.6 6.0 9189 40.0 12.8 30.2 75.4 6192 74.3 0.0 58.9 79.3 l/93 9.3 0.0 5.9 62.9 41’34 188.0 0.0 107.9 57.4 Memorandum items: Disbursements inFY 1993 (July I, 1992.June 30, 1993) U$$l28.4 million Disbursements in FY 1994 (July I, 1993-June 30, 1994) US$lO7.0 million Disbursanents in FY 1995 (July I, l994-June 30, 1995) US$I97.0 million Disbursements in FY 1996 (July I, I995June 30, 1996) US$ IS I .2 million FY 19;7 (Fly 1, 1996-June :O, I9;7) lJ;$263.0 million FY 19 8 (. “IV I l997-June -0. I9 8) I $126.4 million II This is a grant Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 51 - APPENDIX~IV Mozambique: Statistical Issues Mozambican economic data are based on a small number of primary statistical sources. The reliability of these sources deteriorated after the economic liberalization of 1987, as statistical practices failed to fully adapt to the market reforms and economic agents’ responses to statistical queries deteriorated. Efforts to rectify these problems have intensified since 1993; however, significant results can be expected only over the medium to long term. The United Nations Development Program (UNDP) has had a program for statistical development for several years. This program has developed most of the nonfinancial statistics in Mozambique until now. In October 1994, a multisector STA mission provided technical assistance in five areas of macroeconomic statistics (money and banking, balance of payments, government finance, national accounts, and prices). Presently, a twinning arrangement with two European statistical institutes financed by the World Bank under the Statistics Strengthening Program (SSP) is contributing notably to capacity building at the National Statistics Institute (INB). The comprehensive institutional changes being implemented since the adoption of the new Statistics Law will pave the way for substantial improvements in production, national accounts, balance of payments, and social indicator statistics over the period of the ESAF arrangement. National accounts Mozambique ‘s official national accounts statistics are currently in transition, as two alternative series of accounts are compiled, one by INE, and the other by the National Directorate of Planning @NP). ME’s figures are based as much as possible on the 1993 Sy.sfem of Narional Accounrs and seem to reflect Mozambique’s economic structure better than DNP’s figures. As agreed with the authorities, the staff has been using INE?s data for program purposes and DNP’s growth indicators for producing short-term projections. DNP’s balance of payments and fiscal figures are used to obtain a further breakdown of the expenditure composition of GDP. In December 1998, INB rebased the national accounts for 1996-97 and revised them to incorporate the results of the 1996 household expenditure and income survey. The national accounts will be further revised to include the census results, and the historical series will be reconstructed back to 1991 by October 1999. Prices and labor market As of January 1995, a new consumer price index for Maputo, based on a broader consumption basket that uses a household survey conducted in 1991, was implemented. Compilation of indices for the cities of Beira and Nampula began in early 1996. A preliminary national index obtained by integrating the indices for Maputo, Beira, and Nampula is expected Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 52 - APPENDIX IV . to be prepared in 1999. The index will use consumption weights based on the results of the national household expenditure and income survey. There are very little labor market and employment data; this is another area that needs attention. Money and banking statistics During the last two years, improvements in the Bank of Mozambique’s accounting practices have contributed to better-quality accounting information and monetary statistics. In September 1997, a revised plan of accounts for commercial banks was introduced. This revised plan of accounts will provide better details so as to reduce the unusually high level of unclassified assets and liabilities of the banks and further improve the transparency of the monetary statistics. Also, the use of the Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunication (SWI,FT) service since mid-1997 has reduced discrepancies in the data on foreign exchange holdings between the Bank of Mozambique’s records and those of the foreign correspondent banks. It is expected that this service, when fully operational, will eliminate the practice of adjusting balance sheet data on foreign assets. However, the Bank of Mozambique still needs: (i) to eliminate large asymmetries in the interbank positions, particularly between commercial banks and the Bank of Mozambique, and (ii) to improve the timeliness of the money and banking statistics, Currently, the Bank of Mozambique publishes the monetary data on a regular basis in its quarterly statistical bulletin. A new chart of accounts for the commercial banks has been scheduled to be introduced by end-1999. It is expected that this new chart of accounts will include the correct sectorization of the domestic economy and classification of financial instruments for compiling comprehensive monetary and financial statistics. Data on foreign aid flows The multisector STA mission of October 1994 identified the absence of firm data on foreign aid flows as one of the crucial data gaps that weakened the balance of payments, fiscal, and national accounts. The difficulty lies in tracking disbursements made outside the domestic financial system, and it is tinther exacerbated by the weakness of customs records. Fiscal accounts A major weakness in the fiscal data is that the foreign-financed portion of project execution needs to be estimated on the basis of the execution of the domestically financed portion of capital expenditure, as well as of the planned proportion between domestic and foreign financing. Another significant weakness is the lack of reports on the uses of foreign aid by the spending government units. The monitoring of the generation and collection of counterpart funds is also weak. In 1997, a new classification of fiscal accounts was prepared and issued to government agencies, and from January 1998 onward expenditure execution is being reported by functional category at the source. This change will greatly facilitate the identification of standard government finance statistics categories. Also, data on the operations of the National Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 53 - APPENDIX IV Social Security Institute should be included, and data on local/regional governments excluded, from the central government figures. The ongoing fiscal management review is addressing most of these issues. External accounts The quality of the external accounts is affected by the weakness of customs data, the absence of firm foreign aid statistics, and the activities of a large informal sector operating in foreign exchange. In past years, both export and import figures have been provided by the Ministry of Industry, Commerce, and Tourism, based on issued licenses. However, as of 1997, exports and imports statistics in the offkial balance of payments are based on customs data, as their quality has improved in recent years. The quality of customs data is expected to tluther improve with the full implementation of the new PSI reconciliation system. However, the use of survey techniques is needed to obtain more reliable information on imports and exports of services. ,’ In April-May 1999, a STA mission provided technical assistance in the area of balance of payments. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicMozambique: Core Statistical Indicators As of end-May 1999 GDP/ GNP Intema- tional Reserves Reserve/ Ba.% Money Broad Money Exports/ Imports Dec. 98 current Account Balance Dec. 98 Consumer PliCC Iindex April 99 May 99 Interest Rates March 99 May 99 Central Bank Balance Sheet March 99 Exchange Rates Qril99 March 99 March 99 March 99 Dec. 98 April 99 1 Date of latest observation Date received April 99 May 99 Ma) 99 May 99 April 99 Q/V QN May 99 M May 99 M M M V V M M M M M M A 3 W D Frequency of data 11 Frequency of report- ing II Frequency of publication11 Source of data 21 V M M M M V Q -I- A A V M V M M M A A A A A V A V C I C C C C C C C Mode of reporting 31 Cotiden- tiality 41 C C C C C D C C C I/ D=Daily; W=weekly; M=monthly; Q=quarterly; V=collected during mission 2/ A=Direct reporting by central bank or relevant ministry. 3/ C=cable or fax; V=staff visit. 4/ C-unrestricted use; D=embargoed for a period of time. I . Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 55 - APPENDLX v Mozambique: Social Indicators Latest single year Same regiodiicome group Sub- saharan Low- I QW75 1980-85 1992-97 Ama income POPULATION Total population, mid-year (millions) Growlh rate (% annual average) Urban populalion (% of population) Total fertility rate (births per woman) POVERTY (% ofpiphfion) National headcount index Urban beadcount index Rural headcount index INCOME GNP per capita (USS) Consumer price index (I 995=100) Food price index (1995=lOO) INCOWCONSUMPTION DISlRlBUTTON Gini index Lowest quintile (% of income or consumption) Highest quintile (% of income or consumption) SOCIAL INDICATORS Public expendihtre Health (% of GDP) Education (% of GNP) Social security and welfare (% of GDP) Net primary school enmllment rate (% o/age group) Total Mfk Female Access to safe water $4 o/populolion) Total Urban Rural hllmtition rate (?? under I.2 month) Measles DPT Child malnutrition (% under 5 years) Life expectancy at birth (vWS) Total Male Female Mortality Infant (per thousand live births) Under 5 (per thousand live births) Adult (I 5-59) Male (per I.000 population) Female (per I,M)O population) Maternal (per 100,000 live baths) 10.5 13.5 16.6 612.4 2.035.6 2.2 2.3 2.1 2.2 1.7 X.6 19.4 36.4 32.3 28.4 6.5 6.5 5.3 5.5 4.0 69.4 62.0 71.3 250 180 510 350 I I53 II8 122 4.2 2.5 4.3 I.0 51 40 56 45 47 34 9 24 47 69 82 44 74 80 2 17 32 66 70 61 26 74 76 42 44 41 43 44 46 45 44 47 I35 201 400 354 1,100 51 59 49 58 52 Go I68 133 281 223 91 82 I47 II8 498 468 382 361 428 274 375 255 Source: 1999 World Development Indicators CD-ROM, World Bank Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public