MASTER FILES ROOM C-525 DOCUMENT OF INTERNATIONAL MONET.ARY FUND AND NOT FOR PUBLIC USE 045 1 EBS/95/133 CONFIDENTIAL August 10, 1995 To: Members of the Executive Board From: The Secretary Subject: Republic of Croatia - Staff Report for the 1995 Article IV Consultation, Second Program Review, and Financing Assurances Review Under the Stand-Bv Arrangement Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staff report for the 1995 Article IV consultation with the Republic of Croatia, the second program review, and financing assurances review under the stand-by arrangement, which will be brought to the agenda for discussion on a date to be announced. This report was completed before the breakout of conflict in Croatia in early August. A supplement containing a reassessment of the situation in Croatia and a report on the implications of recent developments for the program, together with a draft decision will be circulated before the Board meeting. Mr. Dorsey (ext. 34047) or Mr. Clifton (ext. 38796) is available to answer technical or factual questions relating to this paper prior to the Board discussion. Unless the Documents Preparation Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the European Commission (EC), following its consideration by the Executive Board. Att: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicCONFIDENTIAL INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND ', REPUBLIC OF CROATIA .: . Staff Report for the 1995 Article .IV Consultation, Second Program Review, and Financing Assurances Review Under the Stand-bv Arraneement Prepared by the European I and the Policy Development and Review Departments (In consultation with other departments) Approved by Massimo Russ0 and Joaquin P. Pujol August 7', 1995 '; -' - 1. Contents I. Introduction II. Background III. Policy discussions 1. Fiscal policy 2. Monetary and exchange rate policy 3. Incomes and labor market policies 4. Structural policies 5. External policies and outlook for 1995 IV. Medium-Term Outlook and Capacity to Repay the Fund V. Staff Appraisal Tables 1. IMF Position, June 1995 to March 1996 2. Schedule of Purchases Under the Proposed Stand-By Arrangement and Under the Systemic Transformation Facility, 1994-96 3. Quantitative Performance Criteria, 1994-95 4. Main Economic Indicators 5. Central Government Budgetary Operations 6. Monetary Survey 1993-95 7. Net Domestic Assets of the NBC, 1991-95 8. Balance of Payments, 1993-2000 9. Medium-Term Savings Investment Gap 10. Projected Payments to the Fund as of June 30, 1995 Pane 1 2 5 6 8 10 11 14 16 17 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicI. Fund Relation8 II. Relationa with the World bank III. St&tistic81 Annex Letter of Intent 1. Nominal Excbmge Slate 2. Rem1 gffective Exchange Rate 3. Prices, Wages, Unemployment, and Output 4. Broad Honey Velocity 5. Selected Balance of Payments Indicatora 30 33 34 4a 4b 4c 4d 6a Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicI. Introduction A staff team visited Zagreb during June 12-23 to conduct discussions for the Article IV Consultation, a financing assurances review and the second program review under the Stand-By Arrangement (SBA). u The mission met with the Prime Minister, the Deputy Prime Minister for Economic Affairs, the Minister of Finance, the Ministers in charge of external debt negotiations and issues regarding refugees and displaced persons, and the Governor of the National Bank of Croatia (NBC), as well as many other senior government officials and representatives of an employers' group and trade unions. In a letter to the Managing Director dated July 21, 1995 (attached) the authorities describe their policies for the rest of 1995 and request modifications to the performance criteria on net domestic assets for end-September and end-December 1995. Tables l-3 show the projected Fund position during the arrangement, the schedule of purchases, and performance criteria. Croatia became a member of the Fund, with effect from December 14, 1992, through succession to the membership of the former Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (SFRY). 2/ The Executive Board approved an 18-month SBA for SDR 65.4 million (25 percent of quota) and a first purchase under the Systemic Transformation Facility on October 14, 1994. The 1994 Article IV Consultation was also concluded by the Board on October 14 (EBM/94/91). At that time, Directors congratulated the authorities on their success in containing inflation, increasing reserves, and limiting the fiscal deficit. Nevertheless, Directors noted risks to the program from the security situation, the possible return of inflation due to overextension of credit to troubled enterprises or difficulties in sterilizing foreign exchange inflows. On April 10, 1995, the Executive Board concluded the first review of the program and approved a second purchase under the STF. At that time, Directors congratulated the authorities on the success of their stabilization, but expressed concern at the slow pace of privatization and enterprise governance reform and the sharp rise in real wages'in 1994. Croatia has made considerable progress in improving statistical systems and adapting them to the needs of a market economy in the areas of monetary, government finance, and balance of payments statistics (see Appendix III for additional details). Although further refinements could improve these systems, they produce data of reasonable quality on a timely basis which are published and reported to the Fund. However, obstacles still remain for the full reconciliation of the monetary and fiscal accounts and more work needs to be done in this area. National accounts statistics remain weak, and there are significant problems of coverage of the new private sector in I/ The team consisted of E. Clifton (head), A. Dayal-Gulati (EP), T. Dorsey, E. Meyermans (EP) (all EUl), C. Jarvis (PDR), and V. La Torre (assistant, EUl). World Bank staff members attended some of the meetings. u Croatia's relations with the Fund are discussed in detail in Appendix I, and with the World Bank in Appendix II. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 2 - labor, wage, production and sales statistics. The new private sector is estimated to be roughly half the size of the current and formerly state-owned enterprises that are captured by the existing systems. Thus this may be a source of a large and growing bias in the real sector statistics. II. Dackeround In October 1993 the authorities implemented a stabilization program which has been remarkably successful: inflation came down quickly and has remained very low for more than a year and a half. While there were many important aspects of the program (see below), its success has been largely due to the elimination of the domestic financing of the fiscal deficit, the implementation of an exchange rate anchor to boost confidence and the breaking of the pervasive backward-looking indexation which had characterized the economy. While there has not yet been much structural reform in the enterprise sector or privatization of large enterprises, given the system of market socialism that existed in the former Yugoslavia, the circumstances in this sector are more favorable than in many other economies in transition. The dissolution of the former SPRY and the ensuing conflict severely affected the economic situation in Croatia and, in consequence, real GDP declined by a cumulative 30 percent during 1991-93 (Table 4). With high inflation and inflationary expectations inherited from the former SPRY, extensive backward-looking wage indexation, wide-spread currency substitution and virtually no foreign exchange reserves, the initial economic situation in Croatia was precarious. Recognizing the risk of hyperinflation, the authorities began to take steps in 1992 to reduce the fiscal deficit and improve monetary control. On October 3, 1993, the authorities announced a major stabilization initiative. The NBC adopted a policy initially based on tight and publicly announced base money targets. After allowing an initial depreciation of some 20 percent, the NBC also announced that it would prevent the dinar/DM exchange rate from depreciating beyond announced intervention limits through end-1993. To increase confidence in the dinar, a new interbank foreign exchange market was introduced and individuals were given the right to buy unlimited foreign exchange from the banking system for current account transactions. The Government also imposed a tight incomes policy, eliminating formal wage and pension indexation and limiting the growth of wage bills in the public sector and state-owned enterprises. InitLally under the stabilization program, the authorities adopted an eclectic approach to balancing base money targets against concerns about movements in the exchange rate. However, as confidence in the stabilization program grew, it quickly became apparent that substantial remonetization was taking place. In response, the authorities allowed their targets for the growth,of base money to be exceeded, and from mid-November 1993 onward they began to focus mostly on the exchange rate as the nominal anchor of the Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 3 - program. Since November 1993 the nominal exchange rate has fluctuated in a narrow band against the deutsche mark although it has shown some appreciation, most recently in April 1995 (Chart 1). The real effective exchange rate has also been relatively stable since November 1993 (Chart 2). Prior to the stabilization program, most prices were implicitly indexed to the exchange rate against the deutsche mark, and at the time of the October 1993 dinar depreciation prices generally moved in line with the exchange rate change. However, the subsequent appreciation of the dinar led to reductions in prices only with a lag, thus a general decline in the price level persisted over several months. From December 1993 to December 1994, the retail price index declined by 3.0 percent and the producer price index declined by 5.4 percent (Chart 3). Once the lagged adjustment to the exchange rate appreciation ended, retail price inflation began to average some 0.2 percent per month. Over the first six months of 1995 the CPI rose by 1.4 percent while the PPI fell by another 0.6 percent. Costs of housing and utilities in part accounted for the higher retail price inflation. Broad money grew by 121 percent between November 1993 and May 1995 while the retail price level fell slightly. The decline in the income velocity of money (Chart 4) has apparently been due to a sharp increase in confidence in the domestic currency that resulted from the stabilization program and its continuing success. In addition the kuna is reportedly increasingly being used in some areas of Bosnia where ethnic Croats predominate. While broad money relative to GDP (24 percent during the first quarter of 1995) is still low relative to some neighboring countries, the rate of decline of velocity has slowed significantly this year suggesting that the remonetization process may be ending. Industrial production initially fell after the implementation of the stabilization program but much of the decline in industrial production was concentrated in capital goods production which the authorities attributed to the effects of the transformation process rather than the stabilization program. Subsequently industrial production began to rise and in the first quarter of 1995 was 5.3 percent above the level of one year earlier. More broadly, anecdotal evidence suggests that private sector activity is increasing although parts of the economy remain dominated by large enterprises which are still state owned, e.g., shipbuilding and petrochemicals. Domestic investment and foreign direct investment in the newly emerging private sector appear to be increasing but remain low in large part owing to the difficult security situation in the region. National accounts data are limited but it appears that real GDP began to rise after the implementation of the stabilization program and, for 1994 as a whole, increased by 0.8 percent. Although a breakdown of GDP by expenditure is not produced, other information clearly shows that rising domestic demand was behind the increase in GDP. The sharp rise in domestic demand over 1994 and early 1995 evidently did not lead to higher inflation because of substantial domestic excess capacity coming into production and a Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4- spillover of domestic demand into imports at a stable or appreciating nominal exchange rate. Wage data indicate that enterprises' wage bills (including benefits) rose by nearly 40 percent in real terms during 1994. IJ This growth was apparently driven by increases in private sector employment and wages in response to high demand for skilled labor. u Despite recent increases, real wages are still lower than their 1990 levels. It must be emphasized, however, that Croatian wage statistics have significant problems and are difficult to interpret; in part for this reason, the authorities have instituted a special monitoring system for the majority state-owned enterprises. For these enterprises, data indicate that wage growth has been in line with the established ceilings (see below for further details). The overall cash balance of the consolidated central government for 1994 is estimated at a surplus of 1.7 percent of GDP compared to a deficit of 0.8 percent in 1993 (Table 5). 3J The 1994 outcome was caused by a sharp increase in the revenues of the central budget due to increased efforts at tax enforcement, the introduction of excise taxes in mid-1994, and higher revenues from import duties, sales taxes and income and profit taxes. Expenditures in the central budget also rose sharply, particularly on defense and wages and salaries. During the first quarter of 1995, consistent with the program, the consolidated central government ran a surplus of 0.6 percent of GDP at an annual rate on both a cash and accrual basis (some domestic interest payments 'were not made as scheduled in the first quarter of 1995, but these were offset by cash expenditures to redeem promissory notes issued in lieu of interest payments for 1994; the arrears for the first quarter have now been regularized). Tax revenues were better than anticipated because of strong growth in the underlying tax base, especially retail sales and imports. Revenues from privatization, in contrast, were lower than expected as enterprise sales proceeded slowly. Expenditures on wages and salaries were significantly higher than originally budgeted during the first quarter because of wage increases conceded by the government, while capital expenditures were much lower than planned, largely because of new administrative procedures which spending agencies needed time to learn. I/ Wage statistics cover only part of the economy and changes in the annual wage statistics are believed to overstate the real decline which occurred in 1990-93 and to overstate the rise in 1994 in particular because of measurement problems caused by high inflation as well as incomplete and shifting coverage of the data. Hence, caution must be exercised in giving too much weight to the exact size of this increase. u This trend appears to have continued in early 1995 although changes to the reporting system limit the usefulness of the data for comparisons. 1/ Interest payments due in mid-1994 were rescheduled off-budget to the first quarter of 1995, reducing the overall surplus on an accrual basis to 1.5 percent. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public4.00 3.90 I - - _ 3.80 3.70 3.60 3.x I- CHART 1 Croatia: Nominal Exchange Rate l/ (Kuna per German mark) I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I NOV DEC JAN FEB MAR APR MAY JUN JUL AUG SEP OCT NOV DEC JAN FEB MAR APR MAY 1993 1994 1995 4.00 3.90 3.80 3.60 3.50 Source: National Bank of Croatia. 1/ Monthly averages. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public160 CHART 2 Croatia: Real Effective Exchange Rate January 199% 100 Increase indicates appreciation 160 150 - - REER based 150 on .*--.. .-’ --. _-.----. .- _c_..---___.- . I 9 140 REER based on consumer price deflator 1 130 JAN APR JUL OCT JAN APR JUL OCT JAN APR JUL OCT JAN APR 1992 1993 1994 1995 Source: National Bank of Croatia and staff calculations. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 4c - CHART 3 Croatia: Prices, Wages, Unemployment, and Output 50 40 30 20 LO 0 -10 390 280 260 240 220 200 180 180 140 Ulation mnt pa rnoalbj -Retail prina --Producer prices AJOJAJOJAJOJAJOJAJOJ 190 1991 lQQ2 1893 1994 19! egistmed unemployed 2/ /\ A J 0 tgsA, J 0 $ J 0 ;A J 0 :QQ\ J 0 90 Source: SIMAF. 50 IO 30 20 10 0 -10 300 280 ZOO 240 220 200 180 60 .40 1985 .“” Jhpcnditures and Income l/ -Expenditures --Rage bill plus benefits JAJOJAJO;~JOJAJO~~JOJ wQo 1991 1993 IQ! 120- I 110 - \ 190 - m- BQ- 70 - m- \ . . . Lm A iQA J 0 iQg: J 0 ;QA J 0 iQ; J 0 ;& J 0 J A 1995 I/ Aggregate household expenditures and rage bill plus benefits; in constant prices, 1990=100. Z/ In thousands Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicCHART 4 Croatia: Broad Money Velocity l/ -i FEB APR JUN AUG OCT DEC FEB APR JUN AUG OCT DEC FEB APR JUN AUG OCT DEC FEB APR JUN AUG OCT DEC 1992 1993 1994 1995 10 9 Source: National Bank of Croatia and staff ca!culations. l/ GDP data are actual through March 1995 and projections thereafter: Broad money data are actual through May 1995 and projections thereafter. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 5 - The current account surplus (0.7 percent of GDP) in 1994 was almost unchanged from the 1993 level, as a trade'deficit of 6.8 percent of GDP was more than offset by service receipts and transfers (Chart 5). In particular, net revenues from tourism were 64 percent higher in 1994 than in 1993 as foreign tourists returned to Istria and islands off the Dalmatian coast. During the first quarter of 1995, the current account deficit reached US$340 million compared with a surplus of US$38 million during the same period of 1994. l-/ This deficit was offset in large part by unrecorded inflows which are believed to be inflows of funds held abroad by Croatian residents as well as unrecorded current account transactions. The net international reserves (NIR) of the NBC increased by US$793 million in 1994 and by US$130 million in the first quarter of this year. III. Policv Discussions The authorities and the mission were of the view that the macroeconomic outlook for the rest of this year continues to be favorable and the policy stance for 1995 described in the authorities' letters to the Managing Director of August 26, 1994 and March 2, 1995 remains broadly appropriate. u While revised projections suggest that the current account position will be a deficit of 1 percent of GDP rather than balance as previously expected, this development was not viewed by the mission as calling for a tightening of policies at this time. While most of the lines of the balance of payments projections have changed, it is important to note that the increased imports are largely of capital and intermediate goods necessary for export production and reconstruction. The capital account projections suggest that the current account deficit can be largely financed by inflows from official creditors and non-debt creating transfers of funds by residents. In addition, the only market pressure on the exchange rate has been to appreciate and the NBC has continued to accumulate reserves. At end-June 1995, the NBC's gross reserves totaled USS1.8 billion. In the domestic economy, retail price inflation has been running at about programmed levels (0.2 percent per month). After registering strong growth in the second half of 1994, real GDP declined during the first quarter of this year, mostly for seasonal reasons. While recognizing the seasonal component of the first quarter outcome, the authorities were nonetheless concerned that the tightness of credit policy has been adversely impacting the recovery. Thus, the scope for allowing a greater expansion of bank credit to the healthy parts of the economy was a major subject for discussion during the mission as well as the prospects for accelerating structural reform. The mission agreed that the financial program for the JJ The 1994 first quarter result is viewed as abnormal as both imports and exports were unusually low; for example, the first quarter current account deficit in 1993 was US$291 million. 2J See EBS/94/179 (g/9/94) and EBS/95/36 (3/15/95). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 6 - rest of the year would be based on 5 percent real GDP growth which was at the lower end of the authorities' projections and appears to be feasible (12). I/ 1. Fiscal policy The Government is committed to a noninflationary fiscal policy with deficits no higher than can be externally financed largely by multilateral development banks. u The authorities and the mission agreed that this policy remains appropriate, and the fiscal discussions focused mainly on how it would be implemented. 1/' In part because of recent security developments, the Government has submitted a revised budget for 1995 to Parliament which provides for an increase in expenditures on defense and reconstruction of some 2% percent of GDP, while continuing to eschew domestic financing of the deficit (q3). 4/ The authorities expect higher-than-programmed tax revenues- -particularly from taxes on retail sales, imports, and incomes and profits-- to cover about two thirds of the increased expenditures with roughly another quarter coming from the sale of government-owned apartments and real estate. At the time of the mission, the authorities were considering cutting the cash wages of government employees to cover the remaining amount (about 0.4 percent of GDP) but, more recently, the staff has been informed that Parliament has substituted new taxes on tobacco and gambling. v The mission was of the view that the authorities' projection of privatization receipts (0.8 percent of GDP in 1995 compared to an outcome of 0.4 percent of GDP in 1994) was overly optimistic given the slow pace of privatization. Nevertheless, the overall projections appear consistent with the fiscal performance criteria assuming that the new taxes on tobacco and gambling yield the expected amounts and given that external financing will likely be somewhat higher than programmed (the related expenditures are generally already included in the budget). 1/ Paragraph references are to the authorities' July 21 letter which has additional information. u The flow of external savings to Croatia is projected to be about 1 percent of GDP in 1995 with about one half representing a transfer of real resources to the Government sector. w Based on information on foreign financing available during the first program review, the deficit target for 1995 had been set at 0.5 percent of GDP. However, it now appears that somewhat more foreign financing will be available. If higher-than-programmed external financing from official sources is available, the program has an adjuster to the performance criteria for a maximum increase in the deficit of 1.2 percent of GDP. q The current budget proposal actually targets a deficit of 0.1 percent of GDP but the staff believes that the program's target of 0.5 percent of GDP is a more realistic projection (see below). I/ Details of the authorities' plans are to be communicated to the staff before the Board meeting on the review. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 6a - CHART 5 Croatia: Selected Balance of Payments Indicators l/ 1500 - 1500 External Current Account (In millions of US dollars) sewices I 1000 - 1000 50G - 500 0. 0 -500 - --.. _ -500 I.._ -. .---.._.____ -1000 - .~~-~--~~---._.___._~~.~~.~ Trd>hhco - . ..___ -1ooG --..__ -.-.____ .--.____ - 1500 - 1991 1992 1993 1994 199s 1500 6500 6500- Foreign Trade (In milllone of U.S dollars) 6cloQ 6cloQ. - 6500 6000 ~5500 I5000 4500 4000 - 3500 ~3ooo 2000. Gross Reaervea (In millions of U.S dollare) 2ooo Source: National Bank of Croatia and staff estimates. I/ 1995: Projections Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 7 - In the program the Government committed itself to the enforcement of payments discipline including in regard to its own obligations (15). Nonetheless, some interest payments relatedto frozen foreign exchange deposits were not made by the Government in the first quarter of 1995 as scheduled, breaching the prohibition against government arrears at end- Harch. These arrears have now been cleared through cash payments and the issuance of promissory notes. New payments of both interest and amortization related to the deposits 'came due on July 1. To cover the interest payments the Government is issuing promissory notes paying a market-related rate of return including interest on the arrears. The Government's view is that the original payments schedule, developed at the time of monetary independence, was inappropriate and they intend to work out a new payments schedule for the counterpart to the frozen foreign exchange deposits, providing for a market-related rate of return. The mission stressed to the authorities the importance of providing other sectors of the economy with a good example of financial discipline and of setting the stage for marketing government securities. A structural benchmark for this review, the implementation of a single treasury account, which is extremely important from the point of view of expenditure control, has largely been completed (14). The final step is to occur before mid-September. While the mission was impressed by the considerable progress that had already been made, it expressed the view that a further integration of banking and general ledger information was needed and that the final consolidation of the various government sub-accounts into one single treasury account was essential for the Ministry of Finance to have complete control over expenditures. The mission also preliminarily discussed the authorities' fiscal plans for 1996 and the medium term. The preparation of the 1996 budget is at a very early stage and it is expected that it will be submitted to parliament late this year.- The medium-term fiscal objective of the Government is to limit the central government deficit to about ti percent of GDP per annum. The Government has decided to postpone the introduction of a VAT until 1997 in order to have more time to prepare. u The new VAT will be a broad based 22 percent rate with no surcharge. Capital expenditures and net lending are targeted at about 3.5 and 1 percent of GDP, respectively. A large part of these expenditures will be used to rehabilitate the banking sector. Expenditures for reconstruction and defense, as well as subsidies to the railroads which were severely damaged in the conflict, will to a large extent be determined by developments in the regional security situation. Comprehensive pension reform will take place under a new pension u The new VAT will replace the current sales tax of 20 percent--plus a 10 percent surcharge --on goods and a 10 percent sales tax on services. In 1994, revenues from sales taxes were about 57 percent of total tax revenues. The companion paper, Recent Economic DeveloDmentg, has additional information on the tax system. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-8 - law (expected to be enacted by late 1996) which will downsize expenditures under the current "Pay-As-You-Go" system. 2. Honetarv and exchanne rate policy Since late 1993 the authorities' program has been based on using the exchange rate as the main nominal anchar combined with a cautious approach to permitting an expansion of the net domestic assets of the banking system WA) (9). There has been a persistent tension between exchange rate policy and concerns about monetary growth as a reversal of currency substitution as well as transfers of capital from abroad have put upward pressure on both the exchange rate and the money supply. In particular, while the exchange rate appreciated by approximately 5 percent against the deutsche mark during 1994 (and by larger amounts against most other currencies), the NBC also purchased US$245 million more in international reserves than programmed pushing up the money supply. During the first quarter of 1995 the outcome was much the same as the kuna appreciated by about 1 percent against the deutsche mark and the NBC purchased US$73 million more in reserves than it expected was necessary to meet the end-March NIR performance criterion. u The greater-than-expected injections of base money caused by these foreign exchange purchases also contributed, via the money multiplier, to the NDA of the banking system ceilings for end-December 1994 and end-March 1995 being exceeded (only slightly in the latter case). 6iven a paucity of sterilization instruments, to limit the growth of money the NBC has relied 'heavily on changes in reserve requirements. 2/ In an effort to meet the end-June NDA performance criterion, reserve requirements were raised again in May 1995 and the NBC introduced, as a temporary measure, direct credit controls which were allowed to expire in July. u For the future, the authorities intend to continue to use the exchange rate as the nominal anchor of their program and expect that the introduction of marketable government securities will give them an alternative vehicle to sterilize foreign exchange inflows and better control the growth of the money supply. The development of plans for the u The NIR performance criterion for end-March was nonetheless breached because cash payments to Paris Club creditors were less than assumed in the program--which the NBC did not realized until too late--which triggered an upward adjustment to the floor on NIR accumulation (18). 2/ The NBC has attempted to use NBC bills as a sterilization instrument, but it has experienced difficulties in marketing substantial volumes of these bills even at very high interest rates. u Based on preliminary data received, it appears that the end-June NDA performance criterion was not observed in spite of the authorities' efforts. The growth of NDA nonetheless looks on track to meet the revised end-September target. Final data for end-June should be received by mid-August and a supplement to the Staff Report will be issued with additional information on the end-June performance criteria. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 9 - introduction of marketable government securities--which is a structural benchmark for this review--is underway and the plans are to be approved by the Government and the NBC by mid-September 1995 (17). u During the discussions the authorities expressed the view that somewhat higher monetary growth than was expected at the time of the first program review would need to occur over the rest of 1995 if the economic recovery was not to be stifled, and that relatively more of the increase in money than in the past should have as its counterpart an increase in NDA (IS). The authorities noted domestic lending rates--which were already very high in real terms --had moved up further in recent months, and anecdotal evidence suggested to the authorities that tight credit had adversely impacted the emerging private sector and real growth during the first quarter of this year. 2/ The mission agreed that available information tended to support the authorities' analysis about the tightness of credit and that sufficient credit needed to be available to the healthy parts of the enterprise sector to allow the economy.to move closer to its potential. It also appeared that some loosening of the monetary stance would be consistent with continued low inflation and the use of the exchange rate as a nominal anchor. The demand for money relative to GDP had increased by more than expected in the first half of the year and, while it was projected to increase only slightly during the remainder of the year, seasonal variations in real GDP growth- -which typically picks up sharply in the third quarter--suggested that a larger increase in broad money could be allowed. 2/ Thus the projected rate of growth of broad money during the second half of 1995 was raised from the 9 percent agreed at the time of the first review to 19 percent (Tables 6 and 7). Given balance of payments projections (see below) which suggest that the increase in the net foreign assets of the banking system will be close to zero over the second half of the year as more cash payments to Paris Club u The other structural benchmark for this review in this area, the repayment of outstanding balances on automatic credit facilities from the NBC, was completed in late 1994 (19). a/ Most interest rates in Croatia are market-determined and htghly positive in real terms with a wide spread between borrowing and lending rates due to high costs of intermediation reflecting large shares of non-performing assets and limited competition. Average credit interest rates rose from 15.4 percent in December 1994 to 22.6 percent in June 1995 in spite of continued low inflation. 1/ Since the time of the first review, the authorities, building on technical assistance provided by the Fund's Statistics Department, have improved significantly their capacity to make quarterly real GDP projections. Thus, it was possible to arrive at more closely calibrated projections for movements of GDP in the course of the year than had previously been the case. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 10 - creditors are made, the counterpart to the increasing money supply would be an increase in NDA. There exists, of course, the possibility that large foreign exchange inflows could occur during the second half of 1995 as happened during late 1994. However, as at that time, these inflows would likely be due to reverse currency substitution and further increases in the demand for kuna. Thus the inflation risk to the program would seem low. Given the program's restrictions on bank credit to the Government and selected problem enterprises, a reprogramming of NDA consistent with the revised broad money targets would allow an expansion of credit to the healthier parts of the enterprise sector of 23 percent from end-June to end-December, some 10 percentage points above the projected growth of nominal GDP over the same period. In the authorities' view such provision for credit was necessary because it could be expected that the new emerging private sector was growing much more rapidly than the state enterprise sector which has a heavy weight in GDP statistics. The mission noted that data on the distribution of credit between the new private sector and majority state-owned enterprises were not available, and stressed that if the new private sector was to get the credit it needed, the authorities would need to ensure, through the maintenance of a tight incomes policy and through further progress on enterprise restructuring, that credit to state-owned enterprises was kept under restraint. Furthermore, the mission cautioned the authorities that they would need to monitor the situation carefully and be prepared to tighten policies if there were a sudden shift of sentiment against the kuna (for example caused by changes in the security situation). 3. Incomes and labor market nolicies Incomes policy in Croatia directly covers the Government and enterprises which are still majority state owned. u This policy is implemented through the budget process for the Government and by instructions --backed up by penalties-- issued to the Boards of Directors of enterprises. 2/ The authorities explained to the mission that wage increases in the majority state-owned enterprises have been kept within the program's guidelines (110). The mission noted that although the wage control mechanism for the majority state-owned enterprises appeared to be operating satisfactorily, complexities in the data made it difficult to ensure that wage growth had been in line with allowed increases. Under the existing self-reporting system, enterprises report the maximum salary payable-- which requires many adjustments to the base--and the actual payments made. At present, verification is not automatic, although the data u Indirectly wages in the private sector are influenced through the Government's participation in nationwfde collective bargaining agreements. 2;/ The incomes policy permits a 2 percent increase in standard monthly gross nominal wage bills (including compensations) of majority state-owned enterprises from October 1994 until April 1995; a cumulative 4 percent until October 1995; and, 6 percent through December 1995. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 11 - are reviewed by the Government. The mission stressed the need for better data, and control, in this area. Regarding economy-wide wage developments, the mission expressed concern about the sharp growth in measured real wages because of its potential effects both on aggregate demand and enterprise profitability. u Further the mission stressed that wage statistics in Croatia suffer from serious shortcomings and urgent steps are needed to improve their coverage and reliability. The authorities agreed that real wage growth in the economy had been significant and indicated that increased demand for skilled labor by private enterprises and increases in employment in parts of the economy not covered by wage ceilings had largely been responsible for the wage growth. They were of the view that the economy was not overheating and that growth in private sector wages was a desirable development although the widening differences between public and private sector wages were causing some problems. A new Labor Law was passed by Parliament in May; it will go into effect from January 1, 1996. A key feature of the new law is that it establishes a legal framework under which employers can lay off workers. The law allows employers to set the terms and conditions of work while it also establishes freedom of association for labor and gives precedence to collective bargaining agreements. An Employment Act is expected to be passed by Parliament by the end of the year which will establish training programs to address the demand for skilled labor. Also under the new law, unemployment benefits will decline over time in order to create incentives for the unemployed to find new jobs. 4. Structural nolicies Croatia inherited a decentralized, two-tier banking system from the former Yugoslavia in which most commercial banks were owned by their major borrowers. For many of these banks, a large share of their assets consisted of poorly performing loans to related-party enterprises. Furthermore, a large part of the liabilities of banks consisted of household foreign exchange deposits for which the counterpart foreign exchange assets--held at the central bank of the former WRY--became unavailable at the time of the breakup of the WRY. In 1991, the authorities addressed the solvency implications of these banking system problems by two debt assumption operations. First, the Government recapitalized banks through the issuance of bonds to Croatian banks in exchange for non-performing bank claims on the enterprises. The Government also assumed the claims of commercial banks on the central bank of the former Yugoslavia corresponding to household foreign exchange deposits. &/ Data on profits are difficult to interpret because of inadequate accounting standards. Historical comparisons are distorted by the previous near hyperinflation. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12 - Both recapitalization operations increased the solvency of the banking system. However, because of the non-tradable nature of the government debt and the long maturities of both classes of debt, these operations effectively transformed the solvency problem into a liquidity problem. Furthermore, neither operation addressed the related problems of poor enterprise governance among the formerly socially-owned enterprises, poor corporate governance of the banks themselves, and undue borrower influence over banks. The authorities initially relied on privatization of enterprises and banks and new entry into both non-financial enterprise and banking sectors to address these governance problems. The reliance on privatization and new entry was successful to some extent. By mid-1994 over 84 percent of the formerly socially-owned enterprises (accounting for over half of the total book value) had been transformed to majority private ownership, several new private banks had been established and become significant competitors in many banking markets, and in 1995 one of the two largest banks announced that it had transformed itself into majority private ownership. There is also evidence of improvement in the quality of commercial bank portfolios over the past three years in addition to that attributable to the government's restructuring measures in 1991. Nevertheless, most banks remain highly illiquid and serious problems with the solvency of important banks persist. The pace of privatization had also slowed by 1994 and only very modest increases in the number or book value of majority privatized enterprises have since taken place. The factors behind this slowing of privatization include factors largely be:yond the control of the authorities such as insufficient domestic savings and difficulties in attracting foreign investors, particularly in light of the regional security situation. Other factors, more directly under the co,ntrol of the authorities, include the lack of enterprise restructuring, non- transparent privatization procedures, underdeveloped domestic capital markets, and problems with enterprise valuation. The authorities began implementing additional measures to address the monetary consequences of remaining problems of enterprise and bank governance in late 1993 and 1994. Refinancing facilities at the NBC and automatic lender of last resort facilities, which had allowed illiquid banks to continue normal operations, were eliminated. Performance criteria were established to limit the growth of bank credit to a group of 19 large, financially troubled enterprises. Also, the Government implemented a law that limited the extension of new credit to enterprises with ownership shares in the lending bank and the Bank Rehabilitation Agency (BRA) commenced operations. Taken together, these measures have prevented the bank and enterprise governance problems from undermining the macroeconomic stabilization. Par example, there has been a consistent and substantial overperformance on meeting the credit limits to the group of selected problem enterprises. Nonetheless the authorities recognize that these measures have not brought Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13 - about a final resolution of the problems with banks and enterprises. Over the near term, the authorities are planning additional measures: the BRA is to have its mandate broadened and is to be put in charge of restructuring/liquidating a group of large problem enterprises and a new bankruptcy law is expected to be approved by Parliament before end-October 1995 (it will receive its first reading by mid-September 1995) (112). The authorities have also begun an active program of bank rehabilitation developed in cooperation with the World-Bank in connection with a proposed Enterprise and Financial Sector Adjustment Loan (EFSAL) which will, in part, finance the operations of the BRA. L;/ The BRA has begun the restructuring process by intervening to take over one major regional bank with serious liquidity and solvency problems and another will be taken over in late 1995. The initial steps in taking over the largest of the problem banks, Privredna Banka, will be taken by mid-September 1995 (113). Unfortunately, the authorities are still in the early stages of bank restructuring and have not yet restructured any banks or agreed upon a strategy for doing so. Further elements in the rehabilitation strategy for these banks and a group of large enterprise among their debtors are being developed. In the meantime, the NBC is paying particular attention to these and other problem banks in order to ensure compliance with supervisory regulations until these banks can be taken over and rehabilitated by the BRA. The Government has recently proposed additional measures to accelerate the privatization of the remaining state-owned enterprises (Ill). u The Government has submitted a new privatization law to Parliament (expected to be enacted by mid-October) and it is developing plans to privatize parts of the public enterprises (e.g., the oil, electric, and telecommunications companies). The law will continue the use of the existing privatization methods but allow greater flexibility in their implementation. The privatization law and accompanying legislation on investment funds and securities will greatly improve the legal infrastructure for capital markets, encourage more efficient secondary markets for shares and provide for a limited voucher scheme which should result in the privatization of a further large share of the equity now owned by the state. However, this legislation will not by itself increase the transparency of privatization, increase flexibility in valuation, or bring about enterprise restructuring. The mission stressed that additional efforts are needed to remove these impediments to privatization. The mission generally supported the authorities' plans but expressed the view that structural reform was proceeding much too slowly. The mission took the position that until the problems in the banking and enterprise sectors were resolved there was still a danger that enterprises could obtain bank credit with which to pay out excessive wage payments thus undermining the stabilization program. While the privatization of banks and enterprises u The BRA also receives direct transfers from the budget. u The companion Recent Economic DeveloDmentS paper has further information. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14 - would be the long-term solution, the authorities needed to make sure that effective governance was exercised in the meantime. The mission noted that the new bankruptcy law, and its enforcement, was an extremely important step in that regard. The authorities were in basic agreement and emphasized their intention to secure passage of the bankruptcy law. On the pace of structural reform they also felt it needed to move faster, but noted that a lack of experienced Croatians, and security problems which at times kept foreign experts out of Zagreb, had slowed down the process. 5. &cterd oo&ies and outlook for 1995 The authorities and the mission developed a revised balance of payments projection for 1995 and the current account deficit is now expected to be US$175 million (1 percent of GDP), in contrast to the approximate balance projected at the time of the first review (Table 8). On the basis of unusually high first quarter figures, imports are now expected to grow 'by around 19 percent, with much of the growth occurring in imports of capital goods in part associated with reconstruction. Exports have been similarly strong, and on the basis of strong first quarter performance and contracts already concluded for exports of ships, an increase of around 15 percent in total exports is projected. Inflows from services are projected to be slightly lower than the projection at the time of the first review. The rocket attacks on Zagreb in early May resulted in some cancellations among tour groups, and while the Ministry of Tourism still expects revenue from tourism to be higher than last year,, the staff and the authorities agreed that, in view of continued uncertainties about the security situation, a more cautious projection was warranted. It is projected that net tourism revenues will now be US$831 million!, well below the US$1,020 million projected at the time of the first review, and slightly below last year's figure. While the most recent projections suggest a widening of the trade .and current account deficits, the authorities did not believe that the exchange rate had become significantly overvalued (Chart 2). Export growth is strong, international reserves are continuing to increase and there are no indications of downward pressure on the exchange rate; nevertheless, the mission was of the view that further significant appreciation of the rate could begin to affect competitiveness adversely. JJ The mission cautioned the authorities to keep the appropriateness of the level of the exchange rate under close review. The most notable recent development in the capital account has been a sharp increase in private capital inflows, which have made it possible for the authorities to continue to increase international reserves notwithstanding the adverse developments in the current account. It is now projected that there will be private capital inflows of around a/ The companion Recent Economic DeveloDments paper has additional information on the issue of competitiveness. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 15 - US$400 million this year, close to the 1994 level. Together with a modest increase in official disbursements from the IBRD, EBRD and some bilateral lenders (which based on developments so far this year should materialize), this should produce a strong capital account surplus, and anoverall balance of around US$92 million, which will allow the NIR targets to be met, and will result in the reserves of the NBC being about USS1.8 billion at the end of the year (about 2% months of imports of goods and non-financial services). The March 21 Paris Club rescheduling was a major step in the regularization of relations with official bilateral creditors. The authorities are now proceeding with bilateral negotiations under the agreement (114). Discussions with most creditors have already been held, and the process of reconciling debt figures, particularly difficult in the case of the debt of the former Yugoslavia, is largely complete. Negotiations with commercial bank creditors are less advanced, but the authorities and the Croatian commercial banks who were the original debtors recently held meetings with representatives of the commercial banks. The authorities also believe that the agreement reached between the banks and Slovenia in June could pave the way for a similar agreement with Croatia, so that the prospects for an agreement with the banks are better than at the time of the last review. In preparation for such an agreement, the Government instructed Croatian debtor banks to pay amounts corresponding to interest payments due on the commercial bank debt into a special account in the NBC. As of end-March 1995, US$16 million had been deposited into this account by Croatian commercial bank debtors which was insufficient to cover all the relevant payments. Reflecting the difficult financial position of some of the Croatian banks and enterprises concerned, the Government has committed itself to ensure that sums necessary to bring the account up to the required level (US$40 million) are deposited in the account by end-August, The staff noted that while the budget could absorb the cost of making these payments (about 0.1 percent of GDP), to improve financial discipline it would prefer that the original borrowers make the payments. The mission nonetheless recognized that some of these borrowers were destroyed in the conflict or are located in territories not under the control of the Government. Croatia accepted Article VIII status on May 29, 1995 (914). The only exchange restriction subject to approval under Article VIII still outstanding is that evidenced by arrears to official bilateral creditors and the elimination of these arrears will take place in the near future when the bilateral agreements with Paris Club creditors are signed. u y Further information is contained in the companion paper, Recent Economic DeveloDments. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 16 - The Government is considering a new tariff structure, and is planning to send a bill embodying this to Parliament in September. jJ Under the new structure, a 10 percent import surcharge would be abolished, as.would a 1 percent administrative surcharge, and tariff rates for capital and intermediate goods would be reduced to 3 percent. However, tariffs on consumer goods would be increased to 15-18 percent. Consideration is also being given to instituting special tariffs of up to 80 percent on some agricultural goods, as part of a process of replacing the remaining import quotas with tariffs. In general, the aim is to have lower nominal tariff rates, but fewer exemptions, so that effective rates, and revenue derived from taxes on trade, would be similar. Over the longer term, the Government is pursuing negotiations with the WI'0 and with the EU; ultimately the aim is to harmonize tariffs with the EU. IV. Nedium-Term Outlook & Cawitv to ReDav the Fund The medium-term outlook for Croatia has not changed significantly since the time of the first review. Croatia's prospects remain good, assuming that the security situation in the region allows a continuation of growth. The staff's new scenario shows a gradual improvement in the current account balance over the period to the year 2000, reflecting in particular a resumption of rapid growth in the tourism sector (Tables 8 and 9). Increases in foreign direct investment and in lending from multilateral institutions and supported by official export credit agencies are also projected. 2/ If these inflows materialize, there should be sizable capital account surpluses throughout the projection period and a further increase in reserves (to over three months of imports of goods and nonfinancial services) should be possible. It should be noted that the medium-term outlook above is essentially a status quo scenario that does not assume a quick resolution of the conflicts in Croatia and Bosnia. The resolution of the conflict in the region would likely result in a considerable increase in the demand for imports for reconstruction. At the same time, tourism and direct foreign investment would likely also increase sharply thus the net effect on the balance of payments is not clear. There are also uncertainties remaining over the claims of Croatia on the assets of the former Yugoslavia and the amount of commercial bank debt which was the responsibility of the former Yugoslavia that will become Croatia's responsibility following negotiations with external commercial bank creditors. All of these factors could result in lJ The current system of import duties is explained in the tax summary in the companion paper on Recent Economic DeveloDments. &' The is a great deal of uncertainty about the projections of foreign direct investment and private capital inflows (which are mostly resident's reflows of capital) given the lack of historical information about pre-independence capital flows. The assumed inflows are rather small compared to the size of the economy (e.g., direct investment in 1996 is only about 1 percent of GDP). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17 - increased financial needs in the years ahead. Notwithstanding this, Croatia's indebtedness to the Fund continues to be relatively low and, unless there is a serious deterioration in the security situation affecting Croatia directly, Croatia should have no difficulty in servicing its Fund obligations. V. Staff ADDlXiSd Croatia's stabilization and reform program, supported by a stand-by arrangement with the Fund and purchases under the Systemic Transformation Facility, has achieved impressive success. In particular, inflation has been reduced to industrial country levels and the economy is beginning to grow at a healthy rate. Gross international reserves have been built up to relatively comfortable levels and a rescheduling agreement has been reached with Paris Club creditors. All of these achievements have taken place in the context of an economy that has been damaged by war and is in the process of converting itself to being fully based on market principles. The staff commends the authorities for their success. For the rest of 1995 the authorities intend to maintain a cautious fiscal policy stance. In spite of pressure for increasing expenditures on reconstruction and other areas --which the authorities are partially meeting--the Government is maintaining its commitment to strictly limit the fiscal deficit and to finance it only through external borrowing. The staff agrees that this is the correct approach given the considerable uncertainties which confront Croatia. The Government unfortunately failed to service all of its domestic debt as scheduled during the first quarter of 1995 which reduced confidence'in the Government and has led potential lenders to demand higher interest rates. The Government is now planning to reschedule these obligations and has committed itself to strictly adhere to the new payments schedule. The staff believes that this is a positive step and should help to increase the Government's domestic creditworthiness which will allow the Government to proceed with its plans to auction debt instruments. On monetary policy, the authorities intend to ease the stance of credit policy somewhat as, in their view, inflation is largely under control and the problem now is how to maintain growth. The staff agrees that price performance in Croatia since November 1993 has been exceptional and that there are no signs that a significant upturn in the rate of inflation is in the offing. The staff is comfortable that some loosening of the monetary stance would be consistent with continued low inflation. Nonetheless, the authorities need to monitor the situation carefully to ensure that the space created for additional credit growth does not permit problem enterprises to use bank credit to pay out excessive wage increases. More generally, the staff believes that the authorities' monetary and exchange rate policies, particularly the use of the exchange rate as a nominal anchor, continue to be appropriate. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 18 - Over the past year the real wage bill in the enterprise sector has risen rapidly although wage increases in majority state-owned firms have reportedly been consistent with the program's guidelines. The authorities report that higher wages paid by private firms--particularly for skilled labor--and increases in employment in firms not subject to the wage ceilings have been behind this increase. There is no evidence to suggest that the majority state-owned enterprises are not observing the wage guidelines but it is difficult to reconcile this view with the rapid growth in the aggregate enterprise wage bill which has taken place. This seeming inconsistency underscores the need and urgency of improvements in wage and labor statistics. The staff urges the authorities to implement such improvements quickly so that they can accurately monitor the situation to ensure that rapid wage growth does not contribute to a resurgence of inflation. While Croatia has made progress in improving the national statistical database with substantial Fund assistance, many problems remain requiring sustained efforts by the authorities to implement needed improvements. These include the reconciliation of monetary and fiscal statistics, the improvement of national accounts statistics, and broadening the coverage of the new private sector in labor, production, and sales statistics. As noted above, there is an urgent need for improvements in wage statistics. The staff strongly urges the authorities to identify and correct the problems with statistics in these areas including by implementing recommendations of Fund technical assistance teams. In spite of the generally very positive economic developments over the past year and a half there are significant risks to the authorities' program. The reconstruction needs of the economy are very great. Parts of Croatia have suffered extensive destruction due to the armed conflict and the large number of refugees and displaced persons continues to put a strain on public and private resources. As the authorities recognize, the confidence of domestic and external economic agents is closely connected to the security situation in the region. Adverse developments in this area could reverse many of the achievements of the stabilization program. Likewise, the restructuring of large state-owned enterprises and banks is still at a very preliminary stage. Until this process is more advanced, and in the absence of the privatization of large enterprises, there is a substantial risk that a lack of financial discipline in the enterprise sector could undermine the adjustment program because of an overextension of credit to, or excessive wage payments by, majority state-owned enterprises. More rapid progress in this area is urgently needed. While ceilings on bank credit to problem enterprises have been effective in limiting bank credit to these enterprises, the staff urges the authorities to exercise close governance over all majority state-owned enterprises and to stand ready to adopt tougher measures should it prove necessary. The authorities also need to remain alert to the problems of moral hazard presented by those banks that know they are to be taken over and maintain strict supervisory oversight over these and other problem banks. The staff supports the Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 19 - authorities' intention to secure passage of a new bankruptcy law and to enforce it against enterprises not meeting their payments obligations. Ultimately, the privatization of the large state-owned enterprises is essential to gaining the full benefits of a market economy. In sum, the staff's view of the economic outlook for Croatia is basically unchanged from that expressed at the time of the first program review: the program is on track and the outlook is for a continuation of positive developments barring no worsening of the security situation. At the same time, more rapid progress in the areas of structural reform--especially in the enterprise and banking sectors--is needed as well as an acceleration of privatization. The staff supports the requested modification of the end-September and end-December performance criteria on net domestic assets as being consistent with the inflation goals of the program. Finally, on the basis of the agreement reached with Paris Club creditors in March, and the prospects for the conclusion of the bilateral agreements implementing that rescheduling, the staff supports the extension of the approval of the remaining exchange restriction arising from the existence of arrears to official bilateral creditors until end-December 1995 or the completion of the next quarterly financing assurance review whichever is earlier. It is proposed that the next Article IV consultation take place on the standard 12-month cycle. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 1. Croatia: IMF Position, June 1995 to March 1996 Actual Outstanding June 30.1995 3 Months to SeDt. 30.1995 Proposed 3 Months to Dec. 31.1995 3 Months to Mar. 31.19% /In millions of SDRs) Transactions under credit tranche policies, net Purchases Ordinary resource Repurchases Ordinary resources Enlarged Access resources . . . 26.2 11.5 13.1 . . . 26.2 13.1 13.1 . . . 26.2 13.1 13.1 0.0 1.6 0.0 I . . . . . . 0.0 0.0 0.0 r: . . . 0.0 1.6 0.0 I Total Fund credit outstanding (end of period) Ordinary resources Enlarged Access resources 150.1 176.3 187.8 200.9 143.9 170.0 183.1 196.2 6.2 6.2 4.7 4.7 /In percent of quota) l/ Total Fund credit outstanding (end of period) Ordinary resources Enlarged Access resources 57.4 67.4 71.8 76.8 55.0 65.0 70.0 75.0 2.4 2.4 1.8 1.8 Source: International Monetary Fund l/ Quota is SDR 261.6 million Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 21 - Table 2. Croatia: Schedule of Purchases Under the Stand-By Arrangement and Under the Systemic Transformation Facility, 1994-96 Date Amount of Purchase (In Percent of Quota) Conditions L/ October 1994 25.0 March 1995 25.0 September 1995 5.0 Board Approval (October 14, 1994) -- Observance of end-December 1994 performance criteria and completion of first review u 10.0 Observance of end-June 1995 performance criteria and completion of second review November 1995 -- 5.0 Observance of end-September 1995 performance criteria February 1996 -- 5.0 Observance of end-December 1995 performance criteria Total 50.0 25.0 I/ Reviews of financing assurances will be conducted during quarterly financing reviews. 2/ Performance criteria will be set for end-June, end-September; and end- December 1995. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 3, Croatia: Quautitative PafamanceCtitti 1994-95 Aaual IlKkdvc PafollUanCe Perfocmalux P&iminq Out-tutn ug EtZpt. out-turn criteria out-tnctt CritCCia out-turn PcrfamancdXteria End-Sep. Et&-DCC. Fad-Dec. EM-MY. Emi-Mar. End-Apr. Emi- June Eltd-SC@. Ed-Dec. 19% 1994 19% 1994 1995 1995 1995 1995 1995 1995 Limb on the Cumulativt Defick of -516 430 -606 so -512 650 -699 800 570 460 the Consolidated Central Government l/ 2/ Limis on the Cumulative Increases in the Net Credit of the Banking System to the Consolidated Central Government 3J -675 285 -810 84 -751 220 -972 20 -340 -570 541 373 677 432 713 Targets for Cumulative Increases in the Net Intexnational Reserve of the National Bank of Croatia 41 484 1275 2.911 8i 1,430 2,691 Limis on the Cumulative Increases in the Net Domestic Assets of the Banking system 3/ 78.5 879 51 859 61 8w 71 820 7t 2,571 9J 3,629 3,317 9t $225 lO/ 6,615 lO/ -4% 360 -980 345 -1,533 200 -1,720 -830 -670 -505 I t-J r-2 I Limks on the Cumulative Increases the Net Credii of the Banking System to Selmted Enterprises 3i Cumulative Ceiliqp on Contracting or Guaranteeixg New External Debt I II I-12yealx l-5 years (subceiling) 6 100 49 200 64 200 . . . 200 200 200 6 25 6 50 6 50 . . . so so 50 Cumulative Qiling on the Increase in the Stock of Shut-tam Govanment De& ll/ - - -- -- -- -- _^ -- -- ^^ -- Source: Data provided by the Croatian author&s. I/ Ceilinga iu millions of Croatian kuna relative to end-Deccmbet 1993. 2/ The measure ahown is the mob rcbn’dive measure of the fwaldefic&. 3/ Ceilings in millions of Croatian kuna relative to end-June 1994. 4/ Floors in millions of U.S. dollars relative to end- December, 19% S/ June 20,199S reaave data. 6/ AdjustcdflaorbaPsdoncld-MaydataforParisCiubpaymcnts. 7/Unadj#ed floors. 8/ HrK l,!VJ million was reclawif%ied from domestic liaWkics into net fceign liaWities. I-W 1,291 million of this amount was unanticipated in the original program. This unanticpted component is reflected in the monetary survq but not in the data for performance crkeria ealcuIatious. 9/ Amountsrcviscd to reflect brat arrears adjwtmcnt from d-December 19!X. lO/ Unadjusted ceiling. 111 Qilinga in miUionaofU.S.dolIamreiatietoend-June, 19% . Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 23 - Table 4. Croatia: Main Economic Indicators 1991 1992 1993 1994 Est. 1995 Rev. Prog. (Percentage growth, unless otherwise indicated) Real economy Real GDP -20.9 -9.7 -3.7 0.8 Unemployment rate (e.0.p.; percent) 13.2 13.2 12.7 13.0 Real bill plus benefits (period average) wage lf -25.3 -47.4 - 18.0 38.9 Consumer prices (Dec./Dee.) 249.5 939.2 1,149.2 -3.0 Consumer prices (period average) 122.6 663.6 1516.6 97.5 Public finance; consolidated central government budget Revenues Expenditures 2,’ Accrual Balance Cash balance 32.6 37.5 -is (Percent of estimated GDP) 32.0 31.9 43.9 35.8 32.7 424 -ii -is 1.5 1.7 5.0 . . . ii 2.1 47.6 48.1 -0.5 -0.5 Money and credit Broad money (e-0-p.) Credit to central government (e.o.p.) Credit to selected enterprises (e.o.p.) Other credit (e.o.p.) Deposit money bank interest rates average deposit rate (e.o.p.) average credit rate (e.o.p.) Balance of payments 4/ Exports f.o.b. Imports c.i.f. Trade balance Services and transfers balance of which: Tourism Remittances Current account balance Fxternal debt (e.o.p.) Official reserves (e.0.p.) (In SDR millions) Fund position end- June 1995 Quota 261.6 Holdings of currency 411.73 (157.4 percent of quota) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 434.5 27.4 5.0 5.3 3/ . . . 2332.9 59.0 15.4 18.7 3J 3292 -3,828 -536 -54 105 -2 2,978 -- 521.9 1,092.6 74.9 . . . . . . - 106.4 . . . . . . - 1.4 . . . . . . 44.8 (Millions of US $) 4,597 3,904 -4,461 -4,666 137 -763 -%!J 686 867 1,073 385 533 875 326 126 224 823 104 104 2,736 2,638 3,488 167 613 1,* Holdings of SDRs Forthcoming obligations from existing drawings 19!95,19!x 65.48 (148.1 percent of allocation) 5.3; 10.4 Exchange rate Exchange rate regime Croatian kuna per Us% (end- June 1995) Other managed floating 5.044 28.2 -659.1 -3.4 24.7 4,887 -6230 -1343 1,168 831 227 -175 3,627 1,797 Source: Croatian authorities: and staff estimates. l/ Wage statistics cover only part of the economy. 2/ 1994 expenditures include accrued interest on frozen foreign exchange deposits. 3/ Data are for May 1995. 4J 1991 data exclude other republics of the former Yugoslavia Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 24 - IJO 28.2 iii 2a4 7.6 L6 16.9 L6 11 0.2 3.3 IS -LS -0.0 -W -a7 900 mo -- 2x275 z IRS7 rJoz z 932 z 3.01011 3,m 948 -412 -412 -412 411 412 412 412 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -w -- -- -- -- 2a3 iti 26.8 E 19.2 ii 0.s se iti 23.7 21.4 as IE ii 2 3s -E -0J as as -- -- -- -- -- -0.5 Is -- -- -- -- -- z 796 ,I: 067 I63 s6 -- s isi 21Q 437 201, 3% 32s 2s 642 2% so I36 I27 -127 34 -I62 -w” 217 -- -221 30.6 iti zQ4 tE 26.7 ;: a3 -- E iz 16.6 22 16.4 I.0 E 3.2 I.5 a3 a7 I6 -a6 a2 -0.S a3 I.1 -- -1.1 ias 14Js3 IQ474 l6,Wl I.719 47: IS33 313 69 -- . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36.4 it: 2Q.6 t; 19.7 43 z -- 30.6‘ u”: 24.0 la3 21 Il.5 . I.1 1.0 ai 3.3 IS t: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 6. Croatia: Monetary Survey 1993-95 1993 Dec. 1994 Actual 1995 Aaual 1995 ProjeUions June *P. Dec. II Mar. June First Review Rev&d FirsI Review Revircd Sept.21 *pt. Dec. 2l Dec. Broad Money DomesticCurrency-Denominated Money Of which: 10.834 5.123 14,630 7.543 Currency Outside banks: Foreign Currency-Denominated Money Net Foreign Assets of the Banking System Net lntemational Reserves of the Niional Bank Other Net Foreign Assets of the Banking System Nd Domestic Assets of the Banking System Of which: 1,367 I.- 5,711 7.087 5,218 6.084 3,878 4,979 1.341 1,105 5,616 8,546 Net Credit to Government 587 779 Credit to S&&d Enterprises 7,247 8.128 Other Credit 14,047 15.725 Broad Money DometiicCurrency-Denominated Money Of whichz Currency Outside bati Foreign Currency-Denominated Money Net Domestic Assets of the Banking System Of which: Credt to Seleded Enterprises Other Credit DomesticCurrency-Denominated Money For& Currency-Denominated Money Nd Foreign Ass& of the Banking *tern NU International Rescrw of the Nstional Bank Other Net Foreign Assets of the Banking syltem Nd Domestic Assets of the Banking System Memorandum Items: Vebcity of Broad Money NBC Bills Frozen foreign exchange deposits (excluded from broad money) 44 29 132 46 . . . 11 17 11 15 21 9 10 . . 9 4 . . . 4 7.h 5.54 21 352 13,857 12,703 18,001 9,488 2.158 8.513 8,971 6.552 2,419 9,030 115 7,631 18,630 18,950 19.229 20,416 9,776 9,881 10,387 2,658 2.556 2.946 9,114 9,348 10,029 7.492 7,060 7.956 7,222 7,047 7,947 271 13 9 11,458 12.169 12,461 -6 53 172 7,148 6,594 6,582 20,346 20.353 20,707 (QttaacrlY PerotntaPe charu7es) 21,179 23,544 21,997 24,288 10,926 11,978 11,348 12.357 2.803 3.246 2.847 3.295 10.252 llJ66 10,648 11.931 9,392 8,481 9,520 7,836 7.750 8,257 1,863 7,609 1.642 225 1.657 226 11.786 15.063 12.476 16.453 184 439 -37 7,298 6,743 7,459 21.924 23,684 22,954 23 26 : 30 20 6 -s 2 -5 -6 18 5 1 6 3 1 5 23 -4 15 8 2 7 27 6 2 -6 -8 -0 9 0 2 11 6 (Charwe as a txrcent of braad money) 11 2 1 2 3 8 3 1 3 1 3 -8 -2 4 -1 8 4 -1 4 1 16 -11 -1 -0 7 9 13 4 1 -1 4.95 439 11,941 4.57 4.15 4.32 375 288 . . . 11,492 10,984 . . 4.28 . . . . . . (MiIlions of Crmtian kuna) - Sources: National Bank of Croatia and program projections. 1s 1s 10 1s 21 2 14 7 7 2 1 1 11 4.13 -7 -5 -12 -8 -17 11 -3 -3 -4 -2 -4 5 -2 4.19 . . . . . 2 2 -3 -3 0 6 4.06 . . . . . . I/ Reclassification of net foreign assets and liabilities at end-December 1994 resulted in a transfer of HrK 1,977 million in liabilities from net domestic assets to net foreign assets. 2/ These data did not reflect the reclassification of net foreign ass& and liabilities that took place at end-December 1994. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 7. Croatia: Net Domestic Assets of the National Bank of Croatia 1991-95 l/ Monetary Liabilities Currency outside banks Bank reserve assets Deposit money Quasi money Net Foreign Assets Foreign Assets Foreign Liabilities of which: IMF Credit Ne: Danestic Assets Net credit to Government Credit to Government Government Deposits Net claims on banks ClaitIIS on bank8 Refinancing Arrears Repurchase and lombard credit Other claims on bank8 NBC bills (liability to banks) Other items net 2/ Sources: National Bank of Croatia. 1991 Dec. 1992 Dec. 1993 Dec. Mar. 1994 1995 June Sep. Dec. Mar. May (prelim.) 34 18 16 -- -- -- -- - 151 -127 - 101 -94 -715 -625 34 16 16 -- 26 26 17 -- -- 9 -- -8 207 2,250 2,679 3,133 4,358 4,785 4,571 5,118 131 1,367 1,527 1,666 2,158 2,658 2,556 2,777 76 874 1,109 1,404 2,136 2,033 1,975 2332 -- 8 40 40 42 54 13 29 -- 1 3 23 22 40 27 30 133 3,892 4,269 4,978 6,549 7,192 7,000 133 4,044 4,3% 5,080 W4 7,908 7,672 -- -152 -127 -102 -95 -716 -672 74 -1,641 -1,590 -1,845 53 528 602 798 53 528 605 801 -- 0 3 3 108 249 33 -241 108 270 199 110 101 140 81 -- -- 83 53 80 -- -- -- -- 7 47 65 31 -- -21 -166 -352 -87 - 2,418 - 2,225 -2,402 -2,191 33? 340 3 -192 247 -- -- -- 247 -439 -2,336 -2,407 -511 250 761 -148 227 -- 5 222 . -37; - 1,749 - 2,429 -437 192 629 579 172 -- -- 171 1 407 -2,571 l/ Nominal magnitudes are in millions of Croatian kuna. 2/ Other items net is comoosed primarily of the capital of the National Bank of Croatia from late 1993 onward. . 7,412 8,593 - 1,182 I -625 % i - 2,293 . . . . . . i&i 223 . . . . . . * . . ii; . . . Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 27 - Table 8. Croatia: Balance of Payments, 1993-2000 (In millions of U.S. dollars) Actual PrORr&,tl, R.V.DrO.,. Projected 1993 1994 1995 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 Merchandise trade balance Exports (f.o.b.1 (Percent change) Import& (c.i.f.1 (Percent change) Services and Transfers Transportation Tourism Other eervicee Income (net interest) Government transfers Private transfers Current account balance Capital account Foreign direct invehtnent Official financing Disbursaents g Amortieation Bank net claim8 Other sectors net claim8 Errore and omission8 (net) Overall balance Gro6S reserves (- = inCrOa80) Arrears (+ = incream*) Exceptional finanaing of which IMF Peris Club rescheduling Rescheduling or deferral of paymenta to other creditors Memorandum items Current account as percent of GDP Gross reserves WS$ttt) 2/ Rererver in months of imports of &oods and non-financial services Gutstanding debt (US&a) y A/ Debt/GDP ratio a/ i/ Debt aervice/merchandiae exports GDP ma) (Portent change) -763 -969 3,904 4,260 -15.1 9.1 -4,666 -5,229 4.6 12.1 867 1.073 179 120 533 875 -80 -257 -141 -124 250 235 126 224 104 104 18 208 74 98 251 192 -369 -330 -193 -183 255 431 73 105 195 417 -446 -793 251 259 117 117 -- -- 0.9 0.7 613 1,406 1.2 2.1 2,630 3,488 24.2 21.6 15.9 13.0 11,111 14,159 12 26 -1,164 4,496 5.5 -5,660 8.2 1,185 139 1,020 -183 -121 150 180 21 39 100 248 -360 -150 200 -- 59 -276 -1,275 0.1 1,670 2.5 3,130 19.6 13.2 15,958 13 -1,343 -1,477 4,887 5,376 14.7 10.0 -6,230 -6,853 19.1 10.0 1,168 1,310 139 156 831 1,060 -108 -204 -91 -100 250 200 227 198 -175 -168 267 295 .oo 200 303 500 -386 -405 -150 . . . 400 . . . 92 127 -314 -127 -1,264 -- 1,407 151 860 476 -1.0 -0.9 1,797 1,924 2.4 2.4 3,627 3,622 20.0 18.6 12.3 12.0 17,753 19,438 25 9 -1,610 -1.739 -1,878 -2,028 5.859 6,328 6,034 7,381 9.0 8.0 8.0 8.0 -7,469 -8,067 -0.712 -9,409 9.0 8.0 8.0 8.0 1,511 170 1,352 -214 -97 150 150 -99 450 1,671 183 1,607 -229 -91 100 100 -68 402 375 500 -473 . . . . 1,902 2,119 198 214 1,833 2,033 -245 -264 -04 -63 100 100 100 100 24 91 409 439 300 550 -392 . . . . . . 450 450 450 450 -491 -461 . . . . . . . . . . . . -- -- -- -- 359 -359 -- 334 -334 -- 433 -433 -- 530 -530 -- -0.5 -0.3 0.1 0.3 2,283 2,617 3,050 3,580 2.6 2.0 3.0 3.3 3,680 3,707 3,665 3,654 17.5 16.4 15.2 14.0 10.8 11.3 10.8 9.6 20,920 22,515 24,232 26,080 8 8 8 8 Sources : Croatian authorities and rtaff estimatea. A/ Including net short term. From 1996, projections of disbursements include estimates for borrowing by other sectors of the economy. 2/ The projected change in the stock of the reserves of the BBC in 1995 ia higher than the projected purchases of foreign exchange, by USS77 million, reflectin& a chan&e in the valuation of the end-1994 stock of reserves, due mainly to the appreciation of the On againat the U.S. dollar. a/ Includes Croatia's share of the non-allocated debt of the WRY, owed to Paris Club creditors. Does not include amounts subject to dispute between Croatian cmercial bank debtors and external comercial bank creditors. A/ To the extent that disburrementr from 1996 onwards reflect borrowing by other sectors of the economy, public and publicly guaranteed debt will be lower than shown. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-- 28 - Table 9. Croatia: Medium -Term Savings Investment Gap Projections ____ 1994 -1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 Central government budget (incl Road Fund) Savings (current balance) I/ 3,067.2 Investment plus lending and repayment 2.526.1 Savings-investment gap 541.1 Extrabudgetary funds 21 698.9 External savings -628.2 Non-government sector Savings contribution 3/ -611.9 Public debt 41 35,538.8 Domestic 18,769.S External 16,7692 (Inzent of Cim Central government budget (incl Road Fund) Savings (current balance) I/ Investment plus lending and repayment Savings-investment gap Extrabudgetary funds 2/ External savings Non-government sector Savings contribution 3/ Public debt 41 Domestic External Memorandum items: 3.6 3.0 0.6 0.8 -0.7 -0.7 45.0 24.7 20.3 5.5 4.1 4.0 3.8 3.8 3.8 6.0 4.5 4.5 4.5 4.5 4.5 -0.5 -0.4 -0.5 -0.7 -0.7 -0.7 -- -- -- -- 1.0 0.9 0.5 0.3 -0.1 -0.3 -0.5 -0.4 39.3 36.3 20.5 18.5 18.8 17.8 0.0 0.4 0.8 1.0 33.6 31.2 29.2 27.3 16.9 15.5 14.4 13.4 16.7 15.8 14.8 13.9 Nominal GDP 84,046.O 90.142.0 97,01x3 U&412.7 112374.2 120942.8 130,164.6 Real GDP growth 0.8 5.0 5.0 5.0 5.0 5.0 5.0 GDP deflator 5/ 97.5 2.1 2.5 2.5 2.5 2.5 2.5 (Inflions of Croatian Kuna) 4,9%.8 3948.5 4,166.l 4,315.2 4,595.g 4,946.3 5,4cs3.9 4365.7 4,6961.6 5,0X8 5442.4 $857.4 --4121 -417.2 -5325 -741.7 -846.6 -911.2 -- -- 888.6 8385 494.1 339.4 -119.8 - 454.2 -476.5 -421.3 38.4 4023 966.4 1365.3 35,334.3 35.134.9 35,050.8 35,175.9 35Jos.9 35,700s 18,152.9 17,765.g 17468.7 173342 17394.9 17pl61.7 17,181.3 17.369.0 17,582.o 17,841.6 18,010.9 18,238.7 -- - -- -- -- - Sources: Data provided by the Ministry of Finance; the National Rank of Croatia; and staff estimates. I/ Including privatization proceeds. 2/ From 1995 onward, the assumption is made that the deficit of the water company is covered by transfers from the central budget. Hence, the savings- investment gap of the (uncousoWated) Central Government is equal to the overall deficit of the Consolidated Central Government. 3/ A positive sign indicates a contribution from the private sector. 4/ Debt figures in million Kuna are end-of-period numbers whereas those expressed in percent of GDP are averaged. For domestic debt it is assumed that from 1995 onward, 5 percent of the outstanding frozen foreign exchange deposits are swapped against equity. Debt excludes the nonallocated debt of the former SFRY and includes debt of public enterprises guaranteed by the government 51 Year on year average. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTab19 10. Croatia: Projected Payments to the Fund as at June 30, 1995 (In million8 of SDRs) Overdue 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 beyond Total Obli&ions from l xistirq drawings 1. Principal a. Repurchases -- 1.6 3.1 1.6 6.5 22.9 21.8 21.8 21.8 21.8 21.8 5.5 150.1 b. ESAF/SAF repayments c. Trust Fund obligations -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -s -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- qc -- 2. Charges and interest A/ -- 3.7 7.3 7.1 6.9 6.4 5.3 4.2 3.2 2.1 1.0 0.1 47.4 Total obligationa 2/ -- 5.2 10.4 0.7 13.5 29.3 27.1 26.0 25.0 23.9 22.0 5.6 197.5 (percent of quota) -- 2.0 4.0 3.3 5.2 11.2 10.4 10.0 9.5 9.1 0.7 2.1 75.5 Obligations fram prospective drawinljs 1. Principal a. Repurchaser b. ESAFfSAF repaywnts c. Trust Fund obli&ations -- -- -- -- 3.3 24.5 22.9 1.6 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- se 52.3 me -- -- -- 2. Chugas and intorent u -- 0.1 2.4 2.6 2.6 2.1 0.8 0.1 -- Total obli&ation& z/ -- 0.2 2.4 2.6 5.8 26.6 23.7 1.7 -- (porcmt of quota) -- 0.0 0.9 1.0 2.2 10.2 9.1 0.6 -- -- 10.6 -- -- -- 63.0 -- -- -- 24.1 Cmlativo (oxiatiu and prospoctiv*) 1. Principal a. Rqurchaso8 b. FSAF/SAF rmpaymont8 c. Trust Fund obli&ations -- 1.6 3.1 1.6 9.0 47.4 44.7 23.4 21.8 21.8 21.8 5.5 202.4 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -a we -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 2. Char&m and intorost u -- 3.0 9.7 9.7 9.5 6.5 6.1 4.3 3.2 2.1 1.0 0.1 58.0 Total obligations u -- 5.4 12.8 11.3 19.3 55.9 SO.8 27.7 25.0 23.9 22.8 5.6 260.5 (prcont of quota) -- 2.1 4.9 4.3 7.4 21.4 19.4 10.6 9.5 9.1 a.7 2.1 99.6 I s: I Source: ItW, Troasuror's DeparMnt. &/ Projoctiona l a based on currant rates of charge, includin& burden-sharing chargas were applicable. for purchases in the GM and on currant interest ratas for SAP. ESAF, and Trust Fund. The current SDR intorest rate is assrwd for net use of SDRs. 2/ Overdue obligations (if applicable) willba settled in full at cLoao of buainmas July 1, 1995. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 30 - APPEND= Croatia: Fund Relations (As of June 30, 1995) I. MembershiD Status.: Croatia succeeded on December 14, 1992, to the membership of the former Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (SFRY); the SFRY was an original member of the Fund. II. III" IV. V. General Resources Account: SDR Million Quota 261.60 Fund holdings of currency 411.73 SDR DeDartment: SDR Million Net cumulative allocation 44.21 Holdings 65.48 Outstanding Purchases and Loam: SDR Million Stand-by arrangements Systemic Transformation 19.32 130.80 Financial Arrangements: Expira- Approval tion Amount Amount Approved Drawn (SDR Million) jSDR Million) 65.40 13.08 TyDe Date wi Stand-by 10/14./94 4/13/96 Ouota X 100.0 157.4 % Allocation 100.0 148.1 Ouota % 7 . 41 50.0 VI. Projected Oblieations to Funci (SDR Million; based on existing use of resources and present holdings of SDRs): Overdue *- Forthcomine 6/30/95 i- 'L995 1996 1997_ 1998 1999 Principal -- 1.6 3.1 1.6 6.5 22.9 Charges/Interest -- 3.7 7.3 7.1 6.9 6.4 .- -- Total -- 5.3 10.4 8.7 13.4 29.3 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 31 - APPENDIX I VII. Exchange Rate Arrangements In December 1991, Croatia left the Yugoslav dinar area and adopted the Croatian dinar (HrD) as sole legal tender. The Croatian dinar was .replaced by the Croatian kuna on May 30, 1994. The authorities exchange rate policy regarding the Croatian kuna is classified as "other managed floating.? .The National Bank of Croatia transacts only in DM and U.S. dollars. VIII. Article IV-Consultation : The last consultation with Croatia was concluded at EBM/94/91 on October 14, 1994 (EBS/94/190, g/21/94; and Sup.1, 10/12/94; EBS/94/179, g/9/94; and SM/94/251, g/29/94). IX. fl Peoartmen& = J2!adms FAD November 1992 Tax Policy and Administration May 1993 VAT and Tax Administration November 1993 Public Expenditure Management March 1994 Treasury Establishment August.1994 Budget Preparation Mission November 1994 Follow up Mission on Treasury Establishment March 1995 Treasury Management Seminar Planned: August 1995 Treasury implementation October-November 1995 Treasury implementation STA December 1992 Multi-topic mission October 1993 Monetary Statistics November 1993 Government Finance Statistics April 1994 Money and Banking Statistics July 1994 National Accounts November 1994 Balance of Payments January 1995 Money and Banking Statistics (together with EUI mission) Planned: Third quarter FY 1996 BOP mission Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 32 - APPENDIX I INS December 1992 Bank,Supervision October 1993 Monetary Instruments; Exchange Market January 1994 Monetary Operations and Banking Supervision; Exchange Market May 1994 Payments System, Monetary Operations, Foreign Exchange, Banking Supervision, and Accounting October 1994 Monetary Operations Review December 1994 Payments system December 1994 TA Country-Specific Mission January 1995 Banking Supervision, Organization and Management, Foreign Reserve Hanagement - - MAE recruited a senior advisor to the Governor of the NBC, who will visit Croatia on a regular basis in 1994 and 1995 February-May 1995 Payments System Monetary operations, Banking Supervision, Foreign Exchange Management March 1993 Course on Macroeconomics and Financial Policies Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 33 - APPENDIX II Croatia: Relations with the World Bank Croatia succeeded to the membership of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (SFRY) in the World Bank. Croatia is current on its debt service payments in accordance with an agreement on debt apportionment reached with the Bank whereby Croatia assumed debt service responsibility for Bank loans benefitting borrowers on its territory. There are currently two Bank loans under disbursement in Croatia: the Istria Water Supply and Sewerage Project, approved when Croatia was still part of the SFRY, and the Emergency Reconstruction Project, approved on June 21, 1994. A Health Project (US$ 40 million) and the Highway Sector Project(US$ 80 million) were approved by the board on February 15, 1995 and April.20, 1995, respectively. Other projects are under consideration. First, an Enterprise and Financial Sector Adjustment Loan (EFSAL) is expected to be presented to the board within one and a half month of fulfillment of the preconditions for Board presentation, which include enactment of a law embodying the new privatization strategy, and the effective takeover of the key problem banks by the State as a prerequisite to their privatization. This loan could be complemented by a Capital Markets Development Project and an Investment Recovery project, both projects currently under preparation. In agrfculture, a Farmer Support Service Project, a Coastal Forestry Reconstruction and Protection Project, and a Rural Finance Pilot Project are under consideration. An Agriculture Adjustment Loan (ASAL) could be prepared if there is enough progress on privatization and other reforms planned for the sector. Next, a Public Sector Adjustment Loan (PSAL) with an emphasis on pension reform, will also aim at supporting the medium-term budget programming system and the establishment of the VAT. Other operations could include a Railways Project to support restructuring of the Croatian Railways and a reduction in railways subsidies, a Power and Heat Project to increase efficiency and enhance capacity, and a Water Supply and Sewerage project to increase service levels and efficiency, and protect coastal waters through improved waste water management. The IFC has no outstanding commitments in Croatia. As of mid-1995, two promotional mission have visited Croatia and have identified some prospective investments, including projects in paper manufacture and natural gas production. In addition, discussions are advanced concerning IFC's participation in a joint-venture commercial bank being established with Italian and Croatian partners. In the longer term, IFC expects to play an active role in the development of the tourism sector. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 34 - APPENDIX III Croatia: Statistical Annex The economic database in Croatia is of mixed quality. Data on prices, monetary.aggregates, and the balance of payments are in relatively good shape. Fiscal data have measurement problems related to coverage but they are rapidly improving. There are substantial problems with real sector data and the statistical infrastructure underpinning the national accounts data is weak. The Croatian authorities produce several publications on economic data at frequencies ranging from monthly to quarterly. The authorities are cooperative in providing all available data to the Fund on a timely basis. The presentation for Croatia in the Government Finance Statistics Yearbook was introduced in the 1994 issue. The introduction of the IFS page for Croatia is scheduled for the September issue. 1. National accounts N'ational accounts &ta systems are still in the process of development. The only regularly published series is a quarterly index of real gross domestic product measured from production data that is collected by the Central Bureau of Statistics. These estimates are available approximately six weeks after the end of each quarter. Estimates of components of GDP and nominal GDP estimates are available only on an ad hoc basis from other institutions of government, notably the State Institute for Macroeconomic Analysis and Forecasting. The Central Bureau of Statistics has launched a program to improve the national accounts on the basis of recommendations from the Fund and other external sources. More complete estimates of GDP by industry for 1991-94 in current and constant prices are scheduled for completion during the latter part of 1995. The statistical infrastructure for a regular quarterly reporting of current and constant price quarterly GDP estimates is being put into place. The Central Bureau of Statistics is also working on the development of surveys to update the coverage of its economic price and quantity indices to cover the emerging new private sector and capture changes in the composition of output in the formerly socially-owned sector of the economy. These changes will greatly improve the quality of national accounts data and a wide range of other real sector statistics (e.g, wages and industrial production). Nevertheless, this work is not far along and much more needs to be done in this regard. 2. Prices Croatia's Central Bureau of Statistics produces monthly indices of retail and producer prices. Each index is based on several hundred products observed in multiple locations across the country. The data are collected on or near the 20th of each month with the final index reported on or before the last working day of the month. In addition to standard consumer and producer price indices, cost of living indices (with weights calculated on the basis of a consumption basket for low-income, non-agricultural households) and retail price indices, which exclude seasonally sensitive Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 35 - APPENDIX III items, are also produced each month. Estimates of GDP deflators are produced on an ad hoc basis by the State Institute for Macroeconomic Analysis and Forecasting. 3. Waves Croatia produces a wide range of wage data including series on average cash wages, gross and net wage bills, and total household income including non-cash compensation. These data are produced monthly and made available in publications. However, all of the wage data suffer from serious problems of coverage (analogous to those for national accounts) as well as problems of comparability over time. Substantial progress in addressing these deficiencies is needed before these wage data can serve as a reliable measure of wages and income. 4. External trade Exports and imports cif. are tallied by the Central Bureau of Statistics from customs declarations provided by the customs office of the Republic of Croatia. Customs data are valued in U.S. dollars by converting foreign currency declarations using daily market exchange rates. Beginning in 1992, trade statistics include foreign trade flows to and from the various countries in the former Yugoslavia. 5. Fiscal data A great deal of reliable statistical material on government finances is produced on a monthly basis with lags ranging from three to six weeks. Although most of this data is not published, it is made available to the Fund as part of monthly performance criteria reporting. Revenue data are quite good and are potentially available on a next day basis for most major revenue categories for both the budget and extrabudgetary funds. The expenditure data are available with extensive disaggregation according to the Government Finance Statistics methodology. The major deficiency in the data relates to the coverage of expenditure transactions within the budget. Current data on budgetary expenditures report transfers to spending agencies from the Ministry of Finance rather than actual expenditures of the entities. Because all expenditures of budgetary agencies pass through the Ministry of Finance, this deficiency affects data on the timing of expenditures more than the amount of expenditures. Notes to the data published in the Government Finance Statistics Yearbook identify this deviation from the GFS methodology. Fiscal statistics will benefit from the establishment of a treasury ledger system. A key component of the treasury system that will allow tracking and control of the domestic currency demand deposits balances of spending agencies should be in place by mid-September 1995. Subsequent stages of implementation will allow tracking and control of other types of deposits of spending agencies and allow greater reconciliation of the government finance and banking system credit to government statistics. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 36 - 6. Monetarv data APPENDIX III Monthly data on the monetary survey 'and the balance sheets of the National Bank and the deposit money banks are provided monthly with an approximate six week lag. Key data such as currency in circulation, reserve deposits and international reserves of the central bank balance sheet are available on request with a one day lag. The implementation of a new plan of accounts for commercial banks and savings institutions has resulted in a sharp improvement over the data previously available and greater consistency of the statistical system with the institutions of a market economy. More work is needed on reconciliation with government finance statistics, although further progress on the implementation of the treasury ledger system needs to go forward before reconciliation can proceed much further. 7 Balance of navments data Balance of payments data are compiled on an annual basis and published by the National Bank of Croatia making use of information from commercial banks, the Central Bureau of Statistics., and the Ministry of Finance among other entlties. The data are generally available with a lag of approximately two to three months. Certain components are available with much shorter lags including international reserves (one day) and trade data (four to six weeks). International reserves are available as frequently as every day upon request. Data for 1994 have been reported recently for publication in the forthcoming country page for Croatia in IFS. Estimation of a number of components of the balance of payments are complicated by the very large share of household and other small cash transactions. Very substantial portions of trade, tourism, private transfers, direct investment, and worker remittances fall into this category. These transactions cannot be observed directly and must be inferred from sources such as foreign exchange sales to banks. The data on these components would benefit from regular household and other surveys to better inform the current estimates, External debt data are available with a two month lag, but suffer from deficiencies in quality not completely within the control of the compilers. Most Croatian external debt is debt contracted before the dissolution of the former Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. The Croatian share of this debt is still under negotiation for important classes of creditors (e.g., commercial banks). The debt data have improved as negotiations with official creditors have progressed and will likely improve further as a result of bilateral agreements reached in connection with the Paris Club rescheduling. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public. . Croatia: Core Statistical Indicators as of June 30, 1995 Central Bank Reserve/ Exchange International Balance Base Rates Reserves Sheet money Date of Latest Observation 5131 I95 617195 Date Received Monthly I I Monthly Frequency of Data Monthly Frequency of Reporting Publica- tions Source of Update Mail Direct Reporting Express Mail Direct Direct Direct Public- Reporting Report- Report- ations ing ing Express Express Express Mail Mail Mail Mail ~ Mode of Reporting Published Published Published Publish- Confidentiality Frequency of Publication Monthly I ed Broad Interest Money Rates Price Index June 95 06/20/ 617195 95 6/30/95 Monthly Monthly Monthly Monthly Monthly Monthly Direct Reporting Electronic Mail Consumer Current Overall Exports/ Account Government Imports Balance Balance GDP/GNP Monthly Monthly Monthly Quarterly Public- Publica- Direct Publica- ations tions Reporting tions Mail Mail Express Mail Mail Published Publish- 1 Published! Published I PuMished Monthly Monthly Monthly Monthly Quarterly Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 38 - ATTACHMENT . July 21, 1995 Dear Mr. Camdessus: 1. In our letters to you dated August 26, 1994 and March 2, 1995, the Government of the Republic of Croatia and the National Bank of Croatia (NBC) committed themselves to the execution of a strong economic program aimed at stabilization and reform. The Government and the NBC continue to be committed to the implementation of this program and, in accordance with the provisions of the stand-by arrangement from the Fund, we recently held discussions with Fund staff for the second program review, financing assurances review, and the 1995 Article IV Consultation. We believe that our program has achieved considerable success on the stabilization front and thus we are planning only some minor modifications at this time in our policies for the rest of 1995. In the area of structural reform, in contrast, we believe that more needs to be done and we intend to redouble our efforts. 2. Our stabilization program continues to be effective at keeping inflation down and we are pleased to inform you that the economy appears to be growing at a good rate. Inflation--which had been running at annual rates of more than 1,000 percent through October 1993--is at or below industrial country levels. Retail prices fell 3 percent in 1994 and increased by only 1.4 percent in the first six months of 1995. Producer prices fell by 5.4 percent in 1994 and declined by a further 0.6 percent in the first six months of 1995. It is estimated that real GDP growth accelerated in the second half of 1994 and we project that real growth for 1995 will be some 5-7 percent although it now appears that tourism activity will not rise by as much this year as was earlier hoped. Industrial production during the first quarter of 1995 was 5.3 percent above the level of one year earlier. While this picture is generally favorable, we are of course disappointed that the higher growth has not yet been translated into a significant decline in unemployment. 3. Thus far in 1995 the fiscal accounts have performed better than expected: for the first quarter the central government had a small cash surplus rather than a deficit as was projected. This result was due to stronger-than-projected economic growth and better tax compliance by private enterprises and was especially welcome given that tax collections are usually low early in the year. However, in part because of recent security developments, it has been necessary to prepare a revised budget for 1995 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 39 - ATTACHMENT which will provide for an increase in expenditures on reconstruction and defence of some HrK 2 billion. While revenues --particularly from taxes on incomes and profits-- are expected to be higher than programmed, in order to ensure that the programmed fiscal deficit target is achieved the Government is accelerating the sale of apartments and real estate and taking the difficult step of cutting average cash wages of government employees in nominal terms. Details on the size and form of this wage cut will be communicated to Fund staff before mid-September 1995. We stand ready to take other measures, as necessary, to ensure that the program's fiscal targets are met. 4. We are working on the fiscal budget for 1996 and will consult closely with Fund staff as plans are developed. For the budget process a macroeconomic forecasting unit in the Ministry of Finance has been established which is developing a multi-year system of budget planning. In order to guarantee that expenditures are under control, a temporary single treasury account system has been instituted and a more comprehensive system, consistent with advice from Fund technical assistance teams and an international consulting firm, is being prepared and will come into operation by mid;September 1995. 5. The Government is committed to the enforcement of payments discipline and believes that it is extremely important that it set a good example in this regard. Nonetheless, some interest payments related to frozen foreign exchange deposits were not made by the Government in the first quarter of 1995 as scheduled. At the time of independence the Government of the Republic .of Croatia assumed the responsibility for providing the resources to cover these very substantial deposits even though the foreign exchange backing for them was kept by the central bank of the former Yugoslavia. At the time the Government assumed the responsibility for these deposits we were relatively optimistic about the schedule under which these deposits could be serviced. It is clear that a more gradual amortization schedule will be necessary and by end-August 1995 a new payments schedule for the counterpart to these deposits, providing for a market-related rate of return, will be determined by the Government and provided to Fund staff. This new payments schedule will be strictly adhered to by the Government. In the meantime, to cover the interest payments due on July 1 on the counterpart to the frozen foreign exchange deposits, promissory notes are being issued paying a market-related rate of return. The arrears on the Government's obligation on the counterpart to the deposits that existed at end-March 1995 have now been cleared through cash payments and the issuance of promissory notes. 6. As described in our previous letters to you, the exchange rate with respect to the deutsche mark has been the main source of financial discipline in our program combined with a cautious approach to the expansion of domestic credit. For the coming period, it is the view of the Government and the NBC that this policy remains appropriate. This approach in general has worked well, as evidenced by our success in containing inflation and increasing growth. There has, however, been a persistent tension between Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 40 - ATTACHMENT the main elements of this policy. While ,the exchange rate appreciated by approximately 5 percent against the mark during 1994 (and by larger amounts against most other currencies), the NBC also purchased more in international reserves during 1994 than programmed as tourism inflows in particular were much stronger than expected. This contributed to an increase in base money that was an important factor in the greater-than-expected increase in the net domestic assets of the banking system during late 1994. 7. Foreign exchange purchases by the NBC have accounted for all of the base money injections since late 1993, and the lack of significant, marketable financial assets denominated in domestic currency severely constrains the NBC's ability to sterilize these purchases. To address this problem plans to convert most of the value of bank claims on government into tradeable securities and pave the way for the sale of new government obligations through the auction of marketable securities will be approved by the Government and the NBC and communicated to Fund staff by mid-September 1995. 8. The accumulation of net international reserves by the NBC through end-March 1995 was significantly higher than the set target; nonetheless, the performance criterion for that date was not observed because, as payments to Paris Club creditors were unexpectedly below their programmed level, an adjuster to the performance criterion floor was triggered and the accumulation of net international reserves fell below the adjusted target. An agreement with Paris Club creditors was reached on March 21, 1995. Following this, the uncertainty surrounding the extent and timing of payments to these creditors was reduced, and the extent of foreign exchange purchases which the NBC would need to make to meet the performance criterion became correspondingly clearer. The NBC has adjusted its program of reserve accumulation to ensure that the end-June performance criterion would be met. 9. The NBC and the Government are firmly committed to a monetary policy that controls inflation. Nonetheless the performance criterion on the growth of the net domestic assets of the banking system (NDA) for end-March 1995 was slightly exceeded. In May of this year to reduce the growth of NDA reserve requirements on deposits were increased and direct credit controls were imposed, and we believe the growth of NDA is on track and the end-June performance criterion should be met. The introduction of direct credit controls, while necessary,, was not a step that we would have preferred to take and they have now been removed. We remain conscious that there is considerable uncertainty about the lags in the relationship between the growth of money and price changes and an inflation risk to our program persists. Nonetheless recent developments suggest that the demand for money is still continuing to increase with lower inflationary expectations and the demand for domestic credit coming from healthy enterprises is growing. It is our view that the inflation targets of the program would not be endangered by permitting growth in money (and its counterpart, domestic credit) in the second half of 1995 to be somewhat higher than specified at the time of the first program review. In this context, we request a modification of the performance criteria on NDA described in Attachment IV Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 41 - ATTACHMENT to our letter of March 2, 1995, for end-September'and end-December 1995 to a cumulative growth of HrK 5,225 million and HrK 6,615 million, respectively. Finally, we would like to inform you that a monetary structural benchmark for this review, repayment of outstanding balances under automatic credit facilities was observed at end 1994. 10. The implementatLon of a tight incomes policy is an important nomlnal anchor of our stabilization program and the Government is committed to the full implementation of the incomes policy described in our previous letters to you. For majority state-owned enterprises, wage growth has been in line with the established limits. We believe that the wage control mechanism in place for these entities is operating satisfactorily but we are mindful of the need for continued vigilance. Wages in the private sector have grown quite rapidly recently, in part as private firms have sought to attract skilled labor. Direct controls on credit to selected enterprises and penalties on inter-enterprise arrears are in place to help ensure that problem enterprises are not giving wage increases which outstrip productivity gains. For government employees, as noted above, a nominal wage cut is being implemented which will provide a strong example of wage restraint for enterprises. The Government is conscious of the need to ensure that wage growth does not lead to an overheating of the domestic economy and stands ready, as necessary, to institute a compulsory savings scheme for high wage earners. 11. A crucial area of our reform program is the enactment of measures to address the structural weaknesses in the banking and enterprise sectors that underpinned the previous high inflation. In this regard we are discussing an Enterprise and Financial Sector Adjustment Loan with the World Bank which will support reforms in these areas. Following discussions with the World Bank, a new privatization law was submitted to Parliament in June and has received its first reading. Approval is expected by end-October 1995. This law, in conjunction with the newly created Ministry of Privatization, will accelerate the privatization process through improvements to existing procedures, the extension of the program to additional public enterprises, and the introduction of a mass privatization scheme. Plans for breaking up large conglomerates into units that can be more easily privatized, and the mapping of the sales of individual enterprises by privatization method will be prepared-- in consultation with the World Bank--soon after the new law is approved by Parliament. 12. The Government is taking a number of other measures to improve enterprise financial discipline and to accelerate enterprise restructuring. In early 1995, decree laws were issued to restrict the ability of banks to lend to enterprises which have ownership shares in them and to reduce inter- enterprise arrears. In the near future, the Bank Rehabilitation Agency (BRA) will be put in charge of restructuring/liquidating a group of large problem enterprises for whom the BRA will be the only source of financing. This restructuring/liquidation process is to be completed over the next two years. Before end-July 1995, a new bankruptcy law will be submitted to Parliament, and will receive its first reading by mid-September 1995. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 842 - ATTACHMENT Approval by Parliament is expected by end-October 1995. A new labor law, which provides greater authority to employers to downsize and restructure the labor force, was adopted by Parliament in May 1995 and will enter into force on January 1, 1996. 13. More directly in the banking sector, the process of the auditing of problem commercial banks is underway although it was delayed by the rocket attacks against Zagreb in early May. The audits are to be completed by end-July and the BRA is to take over Split&a Banka and Slavonska Banka during the course of 1995. The Government is currently discussing the takeover and rehabilitation of another major bank, Privredna Banka, with the World Bank and the initial steps in this process will be taken by mid-September 1995. These steps will consist of the request to the NBC for rehabilitation by Privredna Banka, the recommendation of the NBC and the decision of the Government that rehabilitation is needed. After these steps, the BRA will be in control of major decisions 'of Privredna Banka, including continuation of, or dismissal of, the bank's management. While these steps are taken the NBC will closely supervise these banks. For this year, Hrk 350 million is budgeted to cover the cost of bank rehabilitation. Reforms to prudential regulations in the banking sector are also being prepared with the help of technical assistance from the Fund and World Bank and bilateral donors to improve regulatory supervision. 14. Agreement with our Paris Club creditors on a rescheduling of our debt to official bilateral creditors has been reached and we expect to conclude the bilateral agreements implementing the rescheduling in the near future. Given that the only exchange restriction subject to approval under Article VIII still outstanding is that evidenced by arrears to official bilateral creditors and that the elimination of these arrears will take place in the near future when the bilateral agreements with Paris Club creditors are signed, the Government accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4 of the -Articles of Agreement on May 29, 1995. On external commercial bank debt, in April we met with representatives of our external commercial creditors and further meetings are expected soon. In the meantime we are depositing into an account at the NBC amounts corresponding to interest payments falling due on ceommercial debt that the Government has accepted as the responsibility of Croatia. As of end-March 1995, US$16 mil- lion had been deposited into this account by Croatian commercial bank debtors. As this amount was insufficient to cover all the relevant payments, the Government will either secure further payments from the relevant banks or will itself deposit funds sufficient to bring the balance in this account up to US$40 million by end-August, 1995. 15. The Government and the National Bank recognize the necessity of strengthening the collection and dissemination of economic statistics in order to improve the implementation of economic policy. While some obstacles still remain for the full reconciliation of monetary and fiscal accounts, we expect that work in this area should be concluded in the near future as the treasury ledger system is put into place in line with recommendations received from Fund staff. In addition we intend.to improve Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 43 - ATTACHMENT the collection of government debt statistics. National accounts statistics remain weak, and there are significant problems of coverage of the new private sector in labor, wage, production and sales statistics. The Government is beginning to prepare plans to identify and correct these gaps in reporting, including by implementing recommendations of Fund technical assistance missions. We will keep you informed of progress in this area. 16. The Government and the NBC believe that the policies set forth in this letter, and the letters of August 26, 1994 and March 2, 1995 are appropriate to meet the objectives of our economic program. However, the Government and the National Bank are prepared to take any further measures that may become necessary for this purpose and will consult with the Fund on the adoption of any such policies in accordance with Fund policies on such consultations. Sincerely, /S/ BoZo Prka Minister of Finance Ministry of Finance /S/ Pero Jurkovic Governor of the National Bank of Croatia Mr. Michel Camdessus Managing Director International Monetary Fund Washington, D.C. 20431 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public