DOCUMENT OF INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND NOT FOR PUBLIC USE EBS/95/66 CONFIDENTIAL April 18, 1995 To: Members of the Executive Board From: The Secretary Subject: Republic of Mozambique - Staff Report for the 1995 Article IV Consultation and Request for Extension of Commitment Period of the Additional Arrangement Under the Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facilitv Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staff report for the 1995 Article IV consultation with the Republic of Mozambique and its request for an extension of the commitment period of the additional arrangement under the enhanced structural adjustment facility, which is tentatively scheduled for discussion on Wednesday, May 10, 1995. Draft decisions appear on page 22. Mr. Leite (ext. 38563) or Mr. Oliviera (ext. 37012) is available to answer technical or factual questions relating to this paper prior to the Board discussion. Unless the Documents Preparation Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the African Development Bank (AfDB), the European Commission (EC), and the GATT Secretariat, following its consideration by the Executive Board. Att: (1) Other Distribution: Departments Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicCONFIDENTIAL INTERNATIONAL MCNETARY FUND REPUBLIC OF MOZAMBIQUE Staff Report for the 1995 Article IV Consultation and Request for Extension of Commitment Period of the Additional Arrangement Under the Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility Prepared by the African Department (In consultation with the Policy Development and Review, Fiscal, Legal, Monetary and Exchange Affairs, Statistics, and Treasurer's Departments) Approved by Evangelos A. Calamitsis and Susan M. Schadler April 14, 1995 Table of Contents I. Introduction II. Background and Performance Under the Program 1. Background 2 2. Performance in 1994 3 3. Social issues 6 III. Medium-Term Outlook 1. Overall objectives for 1995-2000 2. Social aspects 3. External payments prospects ;: Balance of payments and external debt outlook Capacity to meet financial obligations to the Fund IV. Policy Discussions and Program Extension for 1995 1. Overview 11 2. Structural policies 12 3. Fiscal policy 13 4. Monetary policy 16 5. External sector policies 17 6. Benchmarks 18 7. Statistical issues 18 8. Program risks 19 Page 1 2 7 7 8 8 8 11 11 V. Staff Appraisal 19 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable of Contents Page Appendix I. Transmittal letter Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies Attachment: Matrix of Economic and Financial Policies for 1995 Appendix II. Relations with the Fund Appendix III. Relations with the World Bank Appendix IV. Statistical Issues Appendix V. Statistical Tables 1. Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 1991-95 2. Government Finance, 1991-95 3. Monetary Survey, 1990-95 4. Balance of Payments, 1991-95 5. Macroeconomic Indicators, 1994-2000 6. Balance of Payments, 1993-2005 7. External Debt Service, 1993-2004 8. Balance of Payments Scenarios, 1994-2005 9. Indicators of Financial Obligations to the Fund, 10. 1994-2005 Projected Payments to the Fund as of January 1, 1995 Chart 1. Exchange Rate Developments, 1989-94 23 25 38 50 53 55 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 6a Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicI. Introduction The 1995 Article IV consultation discussions with Mozambique were held in Maputo during September 8-23, 1994 and February l-19, 1995. L/ In a letter to the Managing Director dated March 31, 1995, the Mozambican authorities have requested an extension of the commitment period of the additional arrangement under the enhanced structural adjustment facility (ESAF) to December 31, 1995. The accompanying memorandum of economic and financial policies (MEFP) and the matrix of economic and financial measures (Appendix I) describe recent developments, policy responses, and the 1995 program. On June 15, 1994 the Executive Board approved an additional annual arrangement under the ESAF for Mozambique, in support of a one-year economic and financial program. The additional annual arrangement, in an amount equivalent to SDR 29.4 million (35 percent of quota), was to be made available in two equal semi-annual disbursements. The first disbursement was made on June 30, 1994. The second disbursement was not made, since the quantitative performance criteria for September 1994 were not observed, and the midterm review under the arrangement could not be completed. The divergences from the 1994 program targets reflected, as discussed more fully below, the pressures and special expenditures related to consolidating peace and holding elections in October. Measures taken toward the end of the year brought the performance closer to the targets. The proposed extension of the commitment period would provide time for the new Government to implement its economic and financial measures and bring the program back on track for the remainder of 1995. The Fund would make available the remaining disbursement under the arrangement after the completion of the midterm review. In the last Article IV consultation, Directors expressed concern about the effects of the drought on the macroeconomic performance in 1992. They welcomed the measures taken during the second quarter of 1993 that aimed at correcting slippages in program implementation. Directors recognized that policies during 1993-94 would be greatly influenced by social and political developments, and they counseled the authorities to closely monitor the u The Mozambican representatives included Dr. Eneas de ConceicZo Comiche, the former Minister of Finance and present Economic and Social Affairs Counsellor to the President; Mr. Tomaz August0 SalomHo, the present Minister of Planning and Finance; Mr. Oldemiro Baloi, Minister of Industry, Commerce, and Tourism; Mr. Adrian0 Afonso Maleiane, Governor of the Bank of Mozambique; Mrs. Luisa Diogo, Vice-Minister of Planning and Finance; Mrs. Virginia Videira, National Director of Planning and head of the Oversight Committee; and other senior officials of ministries and institutions concerned with economic and financial matters. The staff representatives were Mr. Leite (head), Mr. Oliveira, Mr. Niebling, Mr. Santos, Mrs. Udovicki (all AFR), Mr. Cortes (PDR), Mr. Mendonca (PDR), and Ms. Lefever (assistant-AFR). Ms. Patel, Advisor to the Executive Director for Mozambique, participated in the discussions. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 2 - fiscal situation. Directors were especially concerned about Mozambique's fragile external medium-term outlook, and urged the authorities to intensify efforts to promote export growth. They hoped that the improving security situation would facilitate progress toward long-term external viability. During the discussions on the request for an additional year of the ESAF arrangement, Directors stressed the need to make rapid progress in resolving key structural issues such as the elimination of extreme poverty, conclusion of military demobilization, resettlement of refugees and dislocated population, reconstruction of infrastructure, low administrative capacity, and the heavy debt burden. Directors urged the authorities to boost foreign investor confidence and encourage exports. They welcomed progress on price liberalization and privatization of state-owned enterprises. Directors encouraged the Fund to provide technical assistance to Mozambique, particularly in the areas of statistics, tax reform, and monetary control. II. Background and Performance Under the Program 1. Background Sixteen years of internal strife in Mozambique came to an end in October 1992 with the signing of peace accords between the FRELIMO Government and the opposition RENAMO. Since then, some 80,000 troops have been demobilized, a national army now numbering about 12,000 has been formed, internationally supervised elections have.been held, resettlement of refugees and displaced persons has been almost completed, and demining and reconstruction are under way. Despite the civil conflict and irregular rainfall, Mozambique has made considerable progress in stemming economic decline, implementing structural reforms, and liberalizing its economy. Since 1987, the Fund has assisted Mozambique in its adjustment efforts, first with a SAF arrangement (1987- 90), and then an ESAF arrangement (1990-93). followed by the additional annual arrangement under the ESAF (1994). Progress in structural reform has included liberalization of almost all prices, elimination of multiple exchange practices, and the enactment of a new and more liberal investment law. Important reforms not yet completed include the restructuring and privatization of public enterprises, as well as financial sector reform. In spite of this progress, Mozambique remains one of the poorest countries in the world, heavily dependent on foreign aid, and still far from its objective of achieving high-quality growth in a stable macroeconomic environment. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 3 - 2. Performance in 1994 I/ Mozambique's economic growth remained strong (5.4 percent) and broad- based in 1994 (Table 1). Production grew in every major sector except industry. Construction activity expanded at a real rate of 7.5 percent, as a result of the reconstruction of road and rail links throughout the country and private home construction, while transport and communications grew by 5.7 percent. Agricultural production increased by 5.0 percent, following the 21.3 percent recovery of 1993. For the fifth year in a row, however, industrial production declined (by 3.3 percent in 1994), because of the ongoing restructuring of the state sector and increases in illegal imports of consumer goods. The inflation rate, as measured by the Maputo consumer price index, reached 70 percent (December-December), well in exc'ess of the targeted 30 percent. While broad money grew substantially in 1994 (by 49 percent), the price increase cannot be explained by domestic monetary expansion alone. Possible explanations are distortions in the price index owing to its limited regional coverage, and a reported sharp rise in the circulation of foreign currency (mainly U.S. dollars) due to the large international presence (including UN troops). The Government's overall budget deficit before grants widened to almost 30 percent of GDP (as against a target of 25 percent) in 1994, an increase of 7 percentage points in relation to 1993. This deterioration resulted from both a shortfall in revenue and an excess in expenditure, in relation to both the program and the 1993 outturn (Table 2). The revenue shortfall in 1994 (1.6 percentage points of GDP) was due primarily to a decrease in revenue from customs duties, the turnover tax, and the consumption tax on beer and imported goods. Poor customs administration, ad hoc tax exemptions, and a decline in industrial activity (particularly beer production) were the main causes. Total expenditure exceeded the target by 2.7 percentage points of GDP on account of higher-than-expected capital expenditure financed by external grants and loans. Special programs related to demobilization, elections, and democratization were largely responsible for a rise in current outlays relative to GDP (to 23 percent), but current expenditure remained within the program target. In particular, interest payments were curtailed because of delays in concluding rescheduling agreements with non-Paris Club creditors. Domestic financing of the budget was affected in 1994 by a shift in foreign aid disbursements which favored activities that do not generate lJ The analysis of the 1994 performance is partly based on preliminary data, particularly with respect to monetary statistics. Mozambique's economic and financial statistics remain in need of improvement. For details, see Appendix IV. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4 - counterpart funds for the budget. I/ As a result, the Government was able to reduce its net bank credit by only Mt 76 billion, instead of Mt 151 bil- lion as envisaged in the program. However, the domestic financing outturn was much closer to target than this outcome would suggest, as some Mt 48 billion in revenues collected at year-end were not deposited with the banking system before the new year. Monetary and credit developments turned out to be considerably more expansionary in 1994 than sought under the program, even though remedial measures adopted after the October elections were partly successful in containing the divergence (Table 3). The end-September quantitative performance criteria were missed by considerable margins; net foreign assets declined instead of increasing, net government repayments to the banking system fell short of target, and a resurgent growth of net unclassified assets ("other items, net") more than offset a shortfall in credit to the economy, so that the expansion of net domestic assets exceeded the intended ceiling. For 1994 as a whole, however, the increase in net foreign assets actually exceeded target, amounting to the equivalent of some US$54 million rather than the US$35 million sought, owing largely to year-end aid disbursements and unusually large expatriate miners' remittances. Net domestic assets and net government repayments were also brought closer to target. Identified credit to the economy in fact remained well within the envisaged range, and net unclassified assets were reduced slightly. This reduction resulted in large part, however, from the writing off of some assets of the Commercial Bank of Mozambique against counterpart deposits ("government lending funds"), so that the latter did not have the contractionary effect anticipated. Broad money still increased by 49 percent, rather than the 40 percent envisaged. Some of the measures to tighten financial policies were begun by mid- year, but their effect was felt only later, and others were taken as late as December. Weekly monetary policy committee meetings were initiated at the Bank of Mozambique (BM) in June, a system of ceilings on each bank's net domestic assets was introduced in July to rein in unclassified accounts, the timeliness of communications with foreign correspondent banks was greatly improved to reduce accounting discrepancies, and regular and special 'bank inspections were instituted. The new credit ceilings, reinforced by tighter application of reserve requirements, began to have their effect in th'e final quarter. At the same time, the BM withdrew the overdrafts previously extended interest-free to commercial banks and made new overdrafts subject first to a 40 percent interest rate and then to the rediscount rate. The latter had been raised from 43 percent to 55 percent in June, in response to quarterly price developments, and was increased further to 70 percent in late November. Bank lending and deposit rates have been fully freed since June 1994. L/ Most of the counterpart funds are generated through food aid and import-support financing. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 5 - Except for the timely compilation of monetary statistics, all structural performance criteria for September 1994 were observed. However, the pace of structural reform implementation could have been faster. The rehabilitation of the Banco Comercial de Mocambique (BCM) and the Banco Popular de Desenvolvimento (BPD), two large state-owned commercial banks, is taking much longer than expected. External audits undertaken for the first time in 1994 detected the need for further improvements in their accounting procedures; the hiring of a management support team for the BCM through a "twinning" arrangement with a foreign bank, scheduled for mid-1994, will only take place in 1995; and the process of identifying all the nonperforming assets of the BPD is still to be completed. Efforts to increase exports had only modest results, and the export drawback system, while approved, is not yet fully operational. Also, no decision has been taken concerning the strategy on land tenure, which is quickly becoming a concern as returning refugees and dislocated persons place additional pressure on available land. The privatization program continued to forge ahead despite some hesitancy by foreign investors because of the elections. A total of 131 enterprises (of which 13 were large firms) were privatized in 1994, bringing the cumulative total since the beginning of the program to 379. In addition, tenders for 15 large enterprises were completed in 1994. However, there was no progress regarding the simplification of the procedures for setting up new businesses. A set of prudential regulations on capital adequacy, loan provisions, interest accruals on nonperforming loans, and foreign exchange exposure was introduced, and check clearing operations were significantly improved in Maputo, Beira, and Nampula. While the conditioned price system was completely eliminated, there are still administered prices for bread, wheat flour, rents, petroleum products, public services (electricity, water, communications, transportation), hotel accommodation, newspapers, and medical services. The exchange rate policy was liberalized in mid-1994, and since then the market rate has been freely determined. The real effective exchange rate has been appreciating since December 1993, resulting in a 19 percent cumulative appreciation through December 1994 (see Chart 1). The spread between the parallel market rate and the secondary market rate reached about 17 percent in March 1994, but fell to 8 percent in December. The balance of payments improved considerably in 1994, compared with both 1993 and the program (Table 4). The external current account deficit after grants amounted to US$305 million, or 77 percent of exports of goods and services, a level somewhat lower than in 1993 and considerably below the 1994 program projection. Exports increased by 13 percent in U.S. dollar terms, or less than projected, owing partly to a sharp reduction in exports of cashew nuts because of the effects of a cyclone, continuing problems in the cashew processing industry, and a ban on exports of unprocessed nuts in mid-1994. Some other traditional exports rebounded (notably sugar, cotton, and re-exports of petroleum products), but industrial and nontraditional exports were not helped by the real effective appreciation of the metical. Imports increased by about 7 percent; however, excluding special program Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 6 - imports, this represented a 3 percent decline from the 1993 level. The co8ntraction was triggered by a 21 percent drop in official transfers for purposes other than special programs. Accrued interest was significantly lower than projected, owing to delays in concluding rescheduling agreements with non-Paris Club creditors. u Foreign borrowing, mostly from multilateral creditors, increased significantly, although less than programmed. Gross foreign assets of the banking system rose to 5.5 months of estimated 1995 imports; however, gross international reserves were equivalent to only 2.7 months of imports. Mozambique has concluded bilateral agreements under the 1993 Paris Club agreement with all creditors but Japan; the authorities expect that the agreement with Japan will be signed soon. The authorities are pursuing negotiations with non-Paris Club creditors to obtain agreements on terms at least comparable to those granted by the Paris Club: 2/ A Mozambican team visited Russia in September 1994, but no agreement was concluded; further rounds of discussion are planned. The 1994 debt service after relief remained near 24 percent of exports of goods and services. In the short run, the Mozambican authorities do not expect the Uruguay Round to have a significant impact on the economy. In the long run, they envisage a positive impact on their economy on account of easier access to foreign markets. 3. Social issues Social concerns continued to receive priority attention in public policy in 1994. The World Bank chaired donor working groups on agriculture, education, and health, which met to monitor needs in those sectors. Assisted by the United Nations Office of Humanitarian Assistance Coordination (UNOHAC), the authorities coordinated a major effort for relief and reintegration of demobilized soldiers, displaced persons, and returnees. As part of the poverty alleviation program, supported by the work of nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), provision of agricultural implements and seeds helped promote local food production. In addition, the Office for Vulnerable Population Initiatives (GAPVU) provided income transfers amounting to 0.6 percent of GDP to about 72,000 households in 13 urban districts, under strict entitlement criteria geared mostly to protect the destitute. Yl/ This assumes that no moratorium interest is accruing on arrears and scheduled debt service to non-Paris Club creditors. Non-Paris Club debt is assumed to be rescheduled on terms comparable to those granted by Paris Club creditors. u The debt service projected for 19!)5 and beyond assumes that such agreements will be concluded soon. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 6.3 - MIL\~llII~tiE EXCHANGE RATE DEVELOPMENTS 1989-94 8900/~~~~E EXCHANGE RATES, 1989-94 (In meticais per U.S. dollar) 6000 I 4000 i 2000 1000 01 11 11 ’ 11 “‘I 2 L ” 11 “1 III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I I1 III IV I II III 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 JO 100 EFFECTIVE EXCHANGE RATES, 1989-94 (Depreciation -; 1980=100) 70 GO 50 IL III IV I 11 III I’J I I! III I’: I if III I‘i ! II III IV I II III ii’ !989 I ‘3 !I 0 1 y-1, ) I I 1 Li9c’ 1993 1984 Sources: Information Notice System; and the Bank ot Mozambique. 3 6 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicIII. Medium-Term Outlook 1. Overall obiectives for 1995-2000 The new Government's medium-term economic objectives remain those spelled out in the PFP (EBD/94/81) which accompanied the.request for an additional annual ESAF arrangement (EBS/94/101). These objectives are to provide the basis for economic growth, achieve progress toward external viability, and overcome the conditions of pervasive poverty. The Government's strategy emphasizes agriculture, education, health, and exports as the underpinnings for sustainable economic growth. The main macroeconomic targets for the medium term are (a) an average annual GDP growth rate of 6 percent; (b) a steady reduction of inflation; (c) a continuation of net repayments by the Government,to the banking system; and (d) a reduction in the external current account deficit (after grants) relative to GDP, based mainly on strong export growth. The authorities are confident that a lasting peace will lay the basis for a strong recovery of agriculture in the medium term. Agricultural growth should benefit from efforts being undertaken to clarify land tenure rights. These include the elaboration of a national land policy, fostering debate on the institutional aspects of land law, and taking immediate steps to update the land registers (see matrix of economic and financial policies for 1995). The resumption of electricity exports from Cahora Bassa and the startup of natural gas exports in 1997-98 will also boost export earnings, although they will be partially offset by related debt service. The agenda for structural reform over the medium term encompasses public sector administration reform (including administrative decentralization and civil service reform), tax administration and customs reforms (including a revamping of customs procedures and the introduction of a simplified value-added tax), completion of public enterprise and financial sector reforms, an in-depth review of the investment program, and the promotion of private sector development and exports. Mozambique's investment expenditure is high as a proportion of GDP (60 percent in 1994), reflecting the substantial contribution of foreign aid to capital expenditure (Table 5). lJ Over the medium term, gross national savings are expected to decline only marginally, from 36 percent of GDP in 1996 to 35 percent by 2000. However, foreign savings are projected to decline by 13 percentage points of GDP, and this decline will force a reduction of the share of investment in GDP to about 44 percent in 2000, affecting both public and private investment. Nevertheless, private investment is expected to show a temporary increase in 1996-97 (and remain lJ Another reason for the high level of investment expenditure as a share of GDP is the fact that many recurrent expenditures linked to foreign- financed projects are misclassified as investment. An effort to resolve this problem is expected to bear fruit during the next few years. However, the medium-term projections assume that the existing level of expenditure misclassification will remain unchanged. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 8 - high in 1998), owing to the implementation of large electricity and natural gas projects. While a substantial improvement is expected in the financial position of the Government, the overall budget deficit before grants by 2000 is likely to remain high at about 10 percent of GDP. Thus, even in the medium term, Mozambique will still need significant amounts of external grants and other financing if the Government is to avoid borrowing from the banking system to cover the budget deficit. Continued fiscal adjustment over the medium term will be essential. 2. Social asnects The strategy to augment human capital is directed principally toward primary education and basic health services. 1/ A five-year integrated health sector program, now under preparation, aims at improving the quality of health services and increasing basic health care. The program will concentrate on rehabilitating the existing network of health centers and rural hospitals, building new facilities where required, and providing training for health personnel. Similarly, an integrated education sector plan is being prepared, with a focus on augmenting primary enrollment and improving literacy. This will require a substantial increase in the number of primary school teachers over the medium term. To enhance the effectiveness of Mozambique's poverty alleviation program, the authorities intend to rationalize the cash transfer program to vulnerable population groups (GAPW), and to replace the wartime emergency rural food aid distribution scheme by a natural disaster safety net for the vulnerable rural population. The new Government has reaffirmed the priority it attaches to poverty alleviation, to be achieved through agricultural development. Box 1 presents the key elements of the Government's poverty alleviation strategy. 3. External navments prospects a. Balance of oavments and external debt outlook In the balance of payments baseline scenario (Table 6) it is assumed that over the next decade underlying import growth will be roughly in line with that of world prices and of real GDP in Mozambique, but with a drop in imports in 1995 as special programs cease, and a bulge in 1997-98 owing to imports of capital goods for the Pande natural gas project. Exports are expected to grow rapidly, as traditional exports recover and new export sectors open. Much of the increase would come from electricity and natural gas exports; together, they would account for about 40 percent of all l/ As a proportion of current expenditure, the budgetary allocation for education and health has increased from 14 percent in 1994 to 23 percent in 1995. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 9 - Box 1. Mozambique: Poverty Alleviation Strategy b Improve rural living standards through agricultural growth Agric~ltund growth through liberal&d food and export markets, investment in NRd infIIIStNCbJI& particularly feeder roads, sanitation and safe water projects, and provision of extension services and seeds for the end poor are expected to increase the availability of marketed surplusee, and lower the cost of food. A review of agricultural sector expenditures ie to be completed in 1995 as a step toward creating a se&oral development program, Improvements in the marketing system through competition should help farmers obtain fair market pricea. Land tenum system to be reviewed to ensure access to land by the end poor. b Invest in human capital through increased coverage and quality of social services, particularly in the rural sector Current expenditures in health and education are programmed to grow in real terms by 43 percent in 1995. An integrated health sector program coordinates donor financing and government resources with the objective of improving the quality of health services and increasing basic health care. An integrated education sector plan is also being prepared that will focus on augmenting primary enrolhnent and improving -literacy. b Protect the most vulnerable with a social safety net Several urban safety net progtama exist, including the School Lunch Program, Social Fund for Medicine, and Infant Food Supplement Program, and the GAPVU cash transfer scheme. GAPVU covered about 72,OCKl households in 13 Moxambican urban districts in 1994. The provision of safety net programs in the Ed areas, in the form of a end disaster safety net and a end nutrition safety net, is also under consideration. b Improve the national capacity for poverty analysis The Government has created a Poverty Alleviation Unit in the Department of Planning, Ministry of Plan and Finance, aimed at establishing a poverty data base, integrating poverty issues into the national planning process, strengthening analytical capacity, and enhancing national awareness of poverty and food security. The World Bank’s Food Security and Capacity Building Project (USS6.3 million) supports these objectives. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 10 - exports by early in the next century. lJ In spite of this optimistic scenario, the ratio of exports to imports would remain low and the trade deficit would not decline in the medium term. However, services earnings should improve markedly as a result of the ongoing rehabilitation of ports and land transport infrastructure. The current account deficit (before grants) would still remain large under these assumptions;but relative to exports of goods and services it would decline from 220 percent in 1994 to 46 percent in 2005. Throughout the medium term, Mozambique will continue to be heavily dependent on concessional foreign assistance, including debt relief. In the baseline scenario, grants decline gradually in real terms. A voluntary cap on official foreign borrowing (contracted or guaranteed) at US$225 million a year is assumed for 1996-98. 2J The implied drop of US$30 million in relation to 1995 could be helpful in containing aid dependence and limiting indebtedness. Nevertheless, total borrowing would increase in 1997-98, because of private borrowing to' partially finance the natural gas project. Foreign direct investment, although initially low, is expected to rise in 1997-98, owing to the gas project, and resume steady growth thereafter. The remaining financing gaps could be filled through additional flow rescheduling from bilateral creditors on Naples terms, including the topping up of the debt rescheduling concessions already given under Toronto and London terms. In spite of a concessional debt rescheduling on Naples terms and the pursuit of a strategy to limit the accumulation of new debt, the debt service burden would remain high in the medium term. In proportion to exports of goods and services, debt service after relief would drop initially from 35 percent in 1995 to 23 percent in 1996, but it would increase in 1997-98, owing to private sector debt obligations, namely the resumption of debt service on old loans for the Cahora Bassa hydroelectric project and the beginning of debt service on commercial loans for the gas project (Table 7). By 2005, the debt service ratio after possible debt relief would still be about 26 percent. Two additional scenarios have been prepared to illustrate alternative debt relief and aid hypotheses (Table 8). In Scenario II, a stock of debt relief operation is assumed equivalent to a 67 percent reduction of pre- cutoff-date debt other than official development assistance. 2/ Residual financing gaps would result, and it is assumed that the authorities would rely on additional adjustment measures to eliminate them. By 2005 the debt service ratio would still be slightly higher than in the baseline scenario (about 27 percent), but ongoing debt reschedulings would have been obviated. lJ Electricity export receipts are included in the trade account. Most of these earnings are expected to be dedicated to servicing loans contracted for the construction of the Cahora Bassa dam. 2J Both from existing commitments and new commitments. Most official foreign borrowing is expected to be provided by multilateral creditors. 3J Includes all debt owed to non-Paris Club official creditors and assumes the topping up of the debt rescheduling concessions already given under Toronto and London terms. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 11 - In Scenario III, grants are assumed to stay constant at the nominal 1995 level. The resulting residual financing gaps, if financed by foreign borrowing, would imply a steady rise in foreign borrowing over the medium term. In summary, Mozambique's external position remains extremely vulnerable, and the early achievement of external viability is likely to require additional amounts of debt forgiveness and/or highly concessional financing beyond that illustrated above. b. Caoacitv to meet financial obligations to the Fund On the basis of SAF and ESAF disbursements to date and a further ESAF disbursement in late 1995, Mozambique's debt service to the Fund would increase from USS11.4 million in 1994 to a peak of USS34.1 million in 1999, and decline quickly after 2001 (Table 9). Relative to exports of goods and services, it would reach a peak in 1997, at 5.1 percent, and would fall to 2 percent by 2002. The last repayment would take place in 2005 (Table 10). In relation to nonreschedulable debt service (mainly to multilateral creditors), which accounts for almost one fifth of the total,.annual obligations to the Fund would peak in 1996, at 21.4 percent, and would average about 16 percent in 1996-2000. Given Mozambique's substantial reliance on foreign aid, any shortfalls on that account would increase the Fund's risk of not being repaid on time. IV. Policy Discussions and Program Extension for 1995 1. Overview The extension of the commitment period of the additional ESAF arrangement for 1995 is being proposed in the context of major political and economic changes resulting from democratization and the consolidation of peace in Mozambique. The new Government intends to make a serious effort to recover the ground lost by the slippages in policy implementation in 1994. In this context, the key macroeconomic objectives for 1995 are, for the most part, those that were used in the PFP for 1994-96 (EBD/94/81). The end-of-period inflation rate for 1995 will be the same (24 percent) and the accumulation of net foreign assets is programmed to be larger. Although the overall budget deficit before grants for 1995 would be larger than previously projected (21.3 percent instead of 17 percent of GDP), the domestic bank financing would be smaller (-3.0 percent instead of -1.8 per- cent of GDP). The rate of economic growth, however, will be smaller (4 percent, as opposed to 6 percent), because of a sharper reduction in government services and a less buoyant agricultural sector (as a result of irregular rainfall). The authorities explained that the program entails (a) a major reduction in the overall government deficit before grants; (b) a tight monetary policy; (c) a market-determined exchange rate, coupled with a strengthening of the net foreign assets position; and (d) a closer monitoring of foreign aid flows and uses and of counterpart fund generation. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12 - The Government has already implemented a number of measures in the context of the 1995 program. These prior actions have included increases in prices of petroleum products and in rentals of state-owned properties; hiring of experts to help the Treasury monitor counterpart fund generation; abrogation of Decree No. 2O/S8, which permitted ad hoc tariff exemptions; strict enforcement of bank regulations; linkage of interest rates on all BM credit to the rediscount rate; and approval and dissemination of the 1995 budget. In addition, the Government announced a number of measures to consolidate democracy, promote national reconciliation, guarantee civil rights and press freedom, strengthen Parliament and the judicial system, and prevent corruption. 2. Structural nolicies For 1995, the agenda of structural reforms will concentrate on completing the initiatives that are under way. The privatization program for 1995 encompasses the sale of most housing units to residents, steps to clarify land tenure rights, the completion of public tenders for at least 40 state enterprises (including 10 large enterprises), and the sale to the public of all BM shares in enterprises. The situation of LAM, the state- owned airline, will be reviewed, as the company had a large loss in 1994. Financial reforms will be accelerated in 1995. The Government has announced plans for the privatization of the BCM in 1995 and of the BPD in 1996. Preparatory steps in this direction include the implementation of: a "twinning" arrangement between the BCM and a foreign bank with a view ta1 increasing the efficiency of the BCM and preparing it for.privatization, and the transformation of BPD into a joint stock company. Efforts are being made to ensure unqualified auditor reports for all state-owned banks in 1995. Bank supervision is to be enhanced, and a central risk bureau is being established to alert banks to questionable or overextended borrowers. The new clearing procedures successfully introduced in Maputo, Beira, and Nampula in 1994 are to be extended to all provincial capitals. Exports will be promoted mainly by the expansion of the activities of the Instituto de Promocao hs Exportacoes in support of exporters, the decentralization of the authority to issue export licenses, the implementation of an operational drawback mechanism for imported inputs, the setting up of export financing facilities, and the lifting of the ban on exports of unprocessed cashew nuts. Other measures that should help exports in the medium term are the completion of agreements for the assessment and exploitation of the Pande gas reserve, and rapid progress in the construction work on the transmission lines from Cahora Bassa to South Africa and Zimbabwe. The Government recognizes the need for reforms aimed at modernizing public administration, and making it more transparent, accountable, and efficient. The precise scope of these reforms is still under discussion, but should include the decompression of the structure of civil service salaries; the introduction of career streams with productivity incentives, merit promotions, and performance bonuses; the decentralization of public Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13 - administration; and the elimination of any noncore activities and duplications. Preparatory work for the public administration reforms will start in 1995, together with measures to begin the implementation of the new municipalities law, which already envisages some decentralization of public administration. lJ Measures in 1995 to make public administration more accountable and transparent include the publication of the budget proposals, the provision of timely information on budget execution, and the enactment of a code of ethics for public officials. 3. Fiscal policy The Government's overall budget deficit before grants is programmed to decline by about 8.3 percentage points of GDP (to 21.3 percent of GDP) in 1995 as a result of both revenue increases and expenditure cuts (Box 2). Total expenditure will be reduced by 4.8 percentage points of GDP, with most of the cuts falling on current expenditure (3.2 percent of GDP). The reduction in current expenditure will be mainly achieved by phasing out the special programs, and by cutting military outlays. The total budgetary allocation for defense and security has been reduced by an estimated 43 percent in real terms in 1995. 2/ However, the authorities explained that increases would be necessary in expenditures on normalization of the democratic process (operation of Parliament and political parties, as well as improvements in the judiciary system), interest, pensions, and social services (health and education). Also, the wage bill will rise owing to the hiring of additional teachers and health personnel. 3J Total revenue is expected to increase by 3.4 percentage points of GDP to 21 percent of GDP. A major effort will be undertaken to improve customs administration based on the recommendations of recent FAD and World Bank missions. For 1995, this effort is aimed at returning the effective tariff to its pre-1994 level; however, the measures described in paragraph llb of the MEFP are designed to make an even larger contribution to revenues in the medium term. The most important of these measures is the elimination of the ad hoc tariff exemptions, which were used extensively in 1994. To ensure early results while long-lasting reforms are carried out, the Government will sign, before mid-1995, a new contract with a preshipment inspection firm that incorporates proper reconciliation procedures and a low inspection threshold level; this contract is seen as a first step toward using a lJ Preparatory work on the public administration reforms will include the definition of their scope and objectives and a preliminary diagnostic study of the present situation. u This figure nets out two opposite effects in the 1995 budget: (a) a greater reduction in military expenditure (Ministry of Defense), as a consequence of the demobilization, and (b) an expansion in security outlays (Ministry of Interior), as a result of the re-establishment of law and order (justice, police). Z3/ However, the authorities have announced the discontinuation of the salary bonus program from December 1994 onward. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14- Box 2. Mozambique: Summary of the 1995 Fiscal Measures (Change from urevious year; in vercentage points of GDP) Overall budget defcit before grants -8.3 Expenditure cuts -4.8 Current expenditure cuts -3.2 -6.9 b Special programs -5.5 b Military outlays -1.1 b Price and enterprise subsidies -0.1 b Other current -0.2 Increases 3.7 . Health and education 1.2 b Interest 1.1 . Pensions . Police 8.4 b Other current 0:3 Capital expenditure -1.6 b 1995 budget year -3.5 b Complementary period (net) 1.9 Revenue increases 3.4 Taxes on international trade 11 1.8 b Elimination of ad hoc exemptions . Improvements of customs procedures 8:; Other taxes and revenues 1.7 b Consumption tax on beer 0.6 . Taxes on petroleum products b Other taxes and revenues 8::: 11 The underlying assumption is that the ongoing improvements in customs procedures and elimination of ad hoc exemptions will bring the effective tariff to pre-1994 levels. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 15 - preshipment inspection firm to help the Government on customs management issues and the implementation of customs reforms. I/ Other tax measures, not directly related to international trade, will also be undertaken, and are expected to yield 1.7 percentage points of GDP. They are described in paragraphs lla and llc of the MEFP: The most important of these measures are an increase in consumption taxes on beer--as domestic production is expected to return to normal levels and taxes on imported beer will be raised to the same levels of domestic beer taxes--and the reintroduction of some taxes on petroleum products. As a result of these fiscal adjustments, a surplus (of 1.4 percent of GDP) is projected in the current account, allowing the Government for the first time to contribute to the national savings. The staff pointed out that the proposed adjustment strategy relies to an important extent on the successful implementation of the customs measures, without which revenues would remain depressed. The authorities emphasized that, in their view, the revenues from the proposed measures were conservatively estimated; they reiterated that they would be giving the highest priority to the timely implementation of these measures. They explained that the customs measures were also critical to the success of the value-added tax, which they plan to introduce in mid-1997, in accordance with a timetable and work program recently prepared by an FAD mission. The staff indicated that the authorities should be prepared to take alternative revenue measures, if it becomes clear that the revenue effects of the customs reforms are falling short of target; the staff suggested that a possible source of additional revenue would be a further increase in taxes on diesel, as diesel prices are still below those in South Africa and Malawi (although similar to those in Zimbabwe). The Government will reassess the National Reconstruction Program and the Three-Year Public Investment Program, with a view to setting priorities for the existing projects and defining the domestic resources available for each project. Investment outlays will be limited to a maximum of 22.8 percent of GDP (1.6 percentage points of GDP below the investment expenditure in 1994), which is a level more in line with the absorptive capacity of the country. Coordination with donors will be strengthened through a more active use of joint working groups on investment and on key sectoral programs such as agriculture, education, and health. One of the purposes of these working groups is to ensure that project outlays remain within the limits set by the budget and to avoid duplication of efforts. The staff encouraged the authorities to continue their efforts to improve the data base on flows and uses of foreign aid. L/ This measure would help the Government address customs administration issues until such time as the customs reforms have been completed, and the customs is in a position to resume full valuation and classification responsibilities. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 16 - Foreign grants to the budget are expected to decline by almost 4 percent of GDP. This will increase the urgency of ensuring counterpart fund generation. With assistance from the European Union, the Government has decided to hire three experts to help monitor counterpart fund generation and to ensure that reporting procedures are satisfactory to donors. In 1995 net government repayments to the banking system are expected to reach Mt 391 billion, or 3 percent of GDP (as opposed to Mt 76 billion in 1994). 4. Monetary policy Recognizing the dangers of resurgent inflation, the Mozambican authorities have adopted a tight monetary policy stance for 1995, continuing and reinforcing the measures taken in the latter part of 1994. An increase in nelt foreign assets equivalent to US$40 million has been targeted. The broad money supply is slated to expand by 26.5 percent, slightly more than expected end-of-year inflation. The key to making this tight monetary policy successful without stifling economic recovery is the contraction in outstanding net bank credit to Government equivalent to 3 percent of GDP, or more than 12 percent of the opening broad money stock. An equally large contractionary effect is projected, moreover, from the buildup of counterpart deposits. I/ As a result, it will be possible to increase credit: to the economy significantly without generating excessive inflationary pressures. The overall credit: ceiling under the program continues to be set in terms of net domestic assets, which is targeted to increase by Mt 472 billion, or 24 percent above the end-1994 level. Write- offs of nonperforming assets of the state-owned commercial banks in the context of their rehabilitation will cause a sharp decline of other items net. 2/ Monetary and financial sector measures in support of these objectives are directed mainly at further improving the performance of the banking system, fostering interbank markets, and making commercial banks more interest-sensitive. The system of bank-by-bank ceilings on net domestic assets; will be maintained, helping to pressure banks to reduce regularization and interbranch accounts, which have been a source of implicit credit expansion. Any bank overdrafts with the BM, and shortfalls against required reserves, are to be charged at the rediscount rate, plus a penalty as needed. While the staff is encouraged by the increase in monetary control as a result of the imposition of sanctions on commercial banks that have failed to observe their individual net domestic assets ceilings--or minimum reserve requirements--management problems in a few large banks could result in a loss of monetary control irrespective of the 1/ Most of these counterpart deposits are generated by World Bank import support loans that may be used only for a few specific purposes and are otherwise blocked, so as to allow a strong extension of credit to the economy. 2/ Most of these nonperforming assets have been identified in previous years and segregated in a special account under other items net. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17 - best efforts of the authorities. In the short run, this risk could be reduced by careful monitoring of these banks; in the medium term, the expected privatization of the BCM and BPD should help ensure closer compliance with monetary policy requirements. It will be necessary to transfer some resources from the central bank to the commercial banks to permit the targeted expansion of credit to the economy. Accordingly, reserve requirements should be kept under review during the year, and may need to be reduced. Some BM refinancing will also be provided, but contrary to the past the interest rate should be tied to the rediscount rate. As soon as competitive conditions permit, the BM intends to move toward the use of indirect instruments of monetary control. As a first step, the monetary policy committee has begun monitoring base money and other key central bank variables on a weekly basis. Another step will be the conduct of a pilot treasury bill placement by June 1995. Although last year's target for the timeliness of comprehensive monetary statistics proved overambitious, the BM is confident that, henceforth, it can generally produce them within six weeks and close its own books within a month. 5. External sector policies The Government will maintain the existing freely floating and market- determined exchange rate arrangement. Intervention operations by the central bank will be guided by its net foreign assets targets. The central bank is taking steps to improve the efficiency and depth of the foreign exchange market, thereby reducing the incentives for parallel market operations. u The program for 1995 incorporates a target for the accumulation of net foreign assets of the banking system of US$40 million. Exports are projected to increase by around 14 percent, as they did in 1994. Imports are expected to drop sharply, by about US$150 million, mainly on account of the termination of the special programs, but also because of the tight fiscal and monetary policies, and the effect of the elimination of a large number of import duty exemptions. The projected worsening of the deficit in the services account is due primarily to the expected increase in interest charges resulting from the conclusion of rescheduling agreements with non- Paris Club creditors. Private transfers are projected to decline as a consequence of a tighter enforcement of immigration laws in South Africa. The current account deficit before grants is projected at about US$740 million, a US$130 million drop from 1994. However, as a major decline in grants is expected, the current account deficit after grants should not change significantly. The capital account would register a small surplus, I/ These steps include the licensing of additional foreign exchange dealers throughout the country, liberalizing foreign exchange regulations, introducing a streamlined foreign exchange law, and implementing foreign exchange exposure regulations. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 18 - of about US$25 million, as a result of a decline in scheduled amortization and an expected pickup in foreign direct investment, Thanks to the improvement in the capital account, the overall balance of payments deficit is projected to decline to US$284 million. The Consultative Group meeting for Mozambique that took place in Paris during March 13-15, 1995 was successful in providing for most financing requirements of the 1995 balance of payments. Pledges made by donors amounted to US$780 million (including food aid but excluding debt relief). Of this amount, 29 percent was for import support and 16 percent for food aid. Debt relief is assured until midyear. To cover the remaining financial gap (US$163 million), the Government intends to request an extension of the 1993 Paris Club arrangement until year-end. In March 1995, the BM liberalized the ceilings. for foreign exchange payments related to travel, education, and health. The authorization for such payments has also been facilitated by delegating licensing to commercial banks (up to a US$5,000 limit). The BM has also authorized exporters to retain 35 percent of export proceeds in foreign exchange accounts. The authorities indicated their intention to continue making progress toward the acceptance of Article VIII obligations. i/ 6. Benchmarks The proposed quantitative and structural indicators of the program under the remaining period of the additional annual ESAF arrangement, as extended, are described in the MEFP (Appendix I, Attachment 2, Tables 1 and 2). u The authorities will also closely monitor external debt service payments to avoid any inadvertent accumulation of arrears. A mission is expected to visit Maputo in August to review the economic and financial developments during the first half of the year. Compliance with the June 1995 benchmarks are a condition for completion of the midterm review. The second loan disbursement under the additional arrangement under the ESAF will be released upon conclusion of the midterm review. 7. Statistical issues The staff emphasized the need for urgent improvements in Mozambique's economic and social statistics, including the national accounts, price, trade, monetary, and fiscal statistics. The authorities stated that a draft Yl/ Mozambique has no Article VIII restriction. Restrictions under Article XIV comprise limits of US$5,000 per transaction on sales of foreign exchange for current invisibles not related to trade (including but not limited to travel, education, health), limits on profits/dividends remittances subject to regulations for each project, and restrictive features of a bilateral payments agreement with a Fund member. 2/ Because of the preliminary nature of the monetary data for end-1994, the cumulative changes in the quantitative benchmarks are calculated in relation to end-1993 stocks. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 19 - Statistics Law will be submitted to Parliament, in time to begin implementing a System of National Statistics during 1995. Also, substantial progress will be made in the compilation of national accounts data based on the SNA methodology, and in the preparations for a consumer price index for Beira and Nampula. Customs reforms, including the introduction of the UNCTAD's ASYCUDA software, will be implemented, aiming, inter alia, at timely and comprehensive export and import data compilation by end-1995. Moreover, improvements in bank reporting and BM compilation of monetary statistics will be carried out in 1995. A special effort will be made to compile adequate fiscal statistics providing firm data on recurrent and capital expenditure execution financed by both domestic and foreign sources. For the latter, a data base on foreign aid inflows and uses will be set UP.'1/ 8. Program risks While peace has opened up new opportunities for Mozambique, a difficult process of national reconciliation is still taking place. Expectations have risen, and the Government will be under pressure to deliver many of its electoral promises. In this situation, a major deterioration in the political environment could adversely affect the Government's ability to carry out its program as originally planned. Rainfall has been irregular, and even though Mozambique's crop does not seem to have suffered excessively, prices for some agricultural products are likely to increase. If the crop proves to be much smaller than expected, government emergency expenditure may be needed to support the most vulnerable population groups, and the repayment of government debt to the banking system may be less than programmed. Similarly, either unexpected aid disbursement shortfalls or aid composition shifts may adversely affect program implementation, since the country's capacity to respond rapidly to this type of events is limited. Although the flows of foreign aid were conservatively estimated in the program, the 1994 experience suggests that the authorities will need to maintain close coordination with donors, and take additional fiscal adjustment measures, if needed. Expected increases in exports of electricity and gas, as well as in transportation services, emphasize the close interdependence of Mozambique with other countries in the region. Thus, political and macroeconomic developments in these countries, particularly in South Africa, could have an important effect on Mozambique's export performance. V. Staff Appraisal Mozambique's economic performance in 1994 was weak in a number of areas. In particular, little progress was made toward reducing aid dependence, the inflation rate remained high, structural reforms lingered, L/ With STA assistance and support of the World Bank and other donors. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 20 - and needed policy adjustments were hampered by information lags. At the same time, the completion of the demobilization process, the conduct of internationally'supervised elections, and the resettlement of millions of refugees and displaced persons are significant achievements that will help normalize economic activity and attract foreign investment. With peace, the newly elected Government has an historical opportunity to accelerate the adjustment effort, which, combined with timely structural reforms and generous debt relief, could bring about a sustainable rise in the living standards of the Mozambican people. The new Government is making good strides in accelerating the adjustment pace. The measures taken late in 1994, particularly the tightening of monetary policy, show promise. Two months into 1995, base money was still below its end-1994 level, which should help to bring the inflation rate down quickly. Moreover, fiscal policy, as embodied in the 1995 government budget, is aiming at a sharp reduction in the budget deficit before grants, which is an appropriate step toward reducing inflationary pressures and aid dependence. The new budget includes a number of measures to increase revenue and cut expenditure, and shows a welcome shift of expenditure from military outlays to education and health. The Government's strategy for poverty alleviation--based on economic growth, not on income redistribution--is appropriate to Mozambique's circumstances. In addition, the new Government will be reassessing the investment program to enhance its focus, efficiency, and affordability. Close monitoring of foreign aid flows and uses, as well as of counterpart funds generation--areas where there have been weaknesses in the past- -will be pursued urgently with foreign assistance. Early implementation, careful monitoring, and timely remedial actions, as necessary, will be critical to the success of the Government's strategy. The prior actions taken in early 1995 were a good initial step. However, to maintain the momentum of the adjustment effort, they must be followed by rapid improvements in critical areas, particularly financial sector and customs performance. The expected privatization of the state-owned banks and the authorities' intention to sign a contract with a preshipment inspection firm to assist the Government in improving customs procedures are positive developments. There are clearly risks of slippage both in ensuring monetary control when important commercial banks are still in the process of rehabilitation, and in attaining the expected increases in customs revenue. Therefore, the authorities should be ready to take additional measures, if necessary. Continued progress toward promoting exports, private sector development, and foreign investment will also be important to increase exports and improve the medium-term prospects of the economy. The staff believes that public administration reforms-- including decentralization and civil service reform- -and improvements in budgetary transparency and accountability are areas deserving emphasis during 1995-96. The staff commends Mozambique for the recent steps taken to liberalize exchange restrictions and welcomes the authorities' intention to continue making progress toward the acceptance of the Article VIII obligations. The Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 21 - Government has announced a major effort to improve Mozambique's economic and social statistics; technical assistance and financial support for field surveys in these areas will be a high priority. Despite the emerging prospects for improved foreign exchange receipts on account of exports of electricity and natural gas, Mozambique's balance of payments position is expected to remain fragile over the medium term. Given the freely floating exchange rate arrangement in place, the authorities will need to be watchful to avoid financial policies that may result in a further real effective appreciation of the metical. Another concern is the heavy debt burden. Although future rescheduling under Naples terms would help reduce this burden, additional debt forgiveness and/or concessional financing would greatly facilitate the achievement of external viability by Mozambique. The staff is encouraged by the steps taken by the new Government so far. The 1995 plan of action represents a serious effort to return the program back to the original adjustment path. Given that the fiscal and monetary policies have been tightened, and structural reforms are being accelerated, the staff recommends approval of the requested extension of the commitment period of the present additional annual ESAF arrangement to December 1995. It is proposed that the next Article IV consultation with Mozambique be held on the standard 12-month cycle. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 22 - VI. Proposed Decisions The following decisions are proposed for adoption by the Executive Board: A. Republic of Mozambioue - 1995 Consultation 1. The Fund takes this decision in concluding the 1995 Article XIV consultation with the Republic of Mozambique, in the light of the 1994 Article IV consultation with the Republic of Mozambique conducted under Decision No. 5392-(77/63), adopted April 29, 1977, as amended (Surveillance over Exchange Rate Policies). 2. The Republic of Mozambique maintains restrictions,on payments and transfers for current international transactions described in EBS/95/66, in accordance with Article XIV, Section 2. The Fund encourages the Republic of Mozambique to apply these restrictions in a liberal manner and to eliminate them as soon as its balance of payments po.sition permits. B. Republic of Mozambique - Extension of the Commitment Period Under the Additional Annual ESAF Arrangement The commitment period of the additional annual arrangement for Mozambique under the enhanced structural adjustment facility (EBS/94/101, Supplement 1) is extended to December 31, :L995. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 23 - APPENDIX I Maputo, March 31, 1995 Dear Mr. Camdessus: 1. The attached Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies of the Government of Mozambique sets out the objectives and policies of the economic and financial program for 1995 that are intended to provide the basis for completion of the midterm review under the additional annual ESAF arrangement for Mozambique. These policies are aimed at bringing the economic and financial performance of Mozambique in line with the objectives and policies described in the 1994 Policy Framework Paper (PFP). A matrix of economic and financial policies for 1995 is also attached (Appendix I) and serves to update the Policy Framework Paper. The Government understands that the completion of the review under the ESAF arrangement is contingent upon the observance of the financial indicators for end-June 1995 in Tables 1 and 2 of the attached Memorandum. 2. In support of the objectives and policies described in the attached Memorandum, the Government would like to request an extension of the commitment period of the additional annual arrangement under the ESAF to December 31, 1995. 3. The Government of Mozambique will provide the Fund with such information as the Fund requests in connection with Mozambique's progress in implementing these economic and financial policies and achieving the objectives of the program described in the Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies. 4. The Government believes that the policies and measures set forth in the attached Memorandum are adequate to achieve the objectives of the program, but will take any further measures that may become appropriate for this purpose. During the period of the additional annual arrangement, Mozambique will consult with the Managing Director on the adoption of any measures that may be appropriate, at the initiative of the Government or whenever the Managing Director requests such a consultation. Moreover, after the period of the additional annual arrangement and while Mozambique has outstanding financial obligations to the Fund arising from loans under that arrangement, Mozambique will consult with the Fund from time to time, at the initiative of the Government or whenever the Managing Director requests consultation, on Mozambique's economic and financial policies. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 24 - &?PENDIX I 5. In view of the close cooperation that has existed between Mozambique and the Fund for many years, we trust that we may rely on the continued support of the Fund in the period ahead. Sincerely yours, /S/ Tomaz August0 SalomZo Minister of Planning and Finance Ministry of Planning and Finance Attachment: Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies /S/ Adrian0 A. Maleiane Governor Bank of Mozambique Mr. Michel Camdessus Managing Director International Monetary Fund 700 19th Street, N.W. Washington, D.C. 20431 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 25 - APPENDIX I MOZAMBIQUE Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies 1. This memorandum describes the policies and objectives of the Government's economic and financial program that are intended to provide the basis for completion of the midterm review under the additional annual ESAF arrangement for Mozambique. 2. The Government formed in December 1994 is determined to reinforce the adjustment process and complete key structural reforms to allow the Mozambican economy to attain sustainable growth, sharply reduce the inflation rate, and improve its balance of payments. These objectives should help curtail, over the medium term, Mozambique's dependence on foreign aid. 3. The main components of the Government's economic strategy for 1995 are: (i) a major reduction in the overall government deficit before grants; (ii) a tight monetary policy stance backed by penalties on financial institutions that are found to be in noncompliance with sector regulations; (iii) an exchange rate policy addressed primarily to meeting the net foreign assets targets; and (iv) a tighter monitoring of foreign aid flows and uses, and counterpart funds generation. 4. While the Government is fully committed to an ambitious adjustment effort aimed at eliminating internal and external imbalances in the Mozambican economy, foreign assistance and debt rescheduling will remain critical to Mozambique's efforts to accelerate the reconstruction of the Mozambican economy after a long and destructive war. Performance in 1994 5. 1994 was a pivotal year for Mozambique. It saw the successful conclusion of the General Peace Agreement that resulted in the following achievements: 0 A new army consisting of former opposition and government soldiers was formed, following the demobilization of some 80,000 soldiers. 0 Mozambique's first multi-party elections were held successfully. Some 85-90 percent of the electorate voted despite the country's having been at war just two years earlier. All Mozambican parties and the international community acknowledged that the elections were held in a democratic manner. 0 Democratic institutions were established with the convening of the Parliament and the formation of a Government by the newly elected President of the Republic. These are substantial achievements, but they were attained at a high cost that severely taxed the human and financial implementation capacity of the Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 26 - APPEND:u State. It forced the Government to incur unexpected expenses related to demobilization and democratization that were not fully financed by external aid as initially envisaged. 6. The overall result was increased macroeconomic imbalances in 1994. Growth remained strong (5.4 percent), but the inflation rate reached 70 percent, against a 30 percent target. The quantitative performance criteria established in the ESAF-supported program were exceeded by wide margins in September 1994. While broad money increased by 49 percent, that is, by significantly less than the rate of inflation, the informal circulation of dollars increased sharply owing to the implementation of special programs and presence of the large contingent of UN troops. Measures introduced in the last quarter of 1994 (described below) brought about a considerable turnaround later in the year. By December 1994, the net foreign asset target was met and the deviations .from the targets for net credit to government and net domestic assets were substantially reduced. Additional measures included in the 1995 program are expected to further improve economic and financial performance in 1995. All structural performance criteria and key structural benchmarks have been observed, except for the timely compilation of monetary statistics. 7. The balance of payments improved in 1994. The current account deficit (after grants) narrowed to US$305 million, an improvement both in relation to 1993 and in relation to program projection. However, it still remained very high as a percent of exports of goods and services (77 percent). The exchange rate policy was liberalized in 1994, and the market rate is freely determined. While the real exchange rate appreciated considerably, the spread between the parallel and the official rate narrowed to 5 percent by end-1'394. Mozambique concluded bilateral agreements under the 1993 Paris Club agreement with all creditors but Japan. In September 1994, Paris Club creditors agreed to extend the 1993 agreement through June 1995. Policies implemented in the second half of 1994 8. In 1994, the Government experienced a major shortfall in customs revenues (2 percentage points of GDP) in relation to the program. Moreover, expenditures exceeded program targets, raising the overall budget deficit before grants by about 5 percentage points of GDP above the program target, mainly as a result of externally financed investment expenditures. Also, unexpected shifts in foreign aid from uses that generate counterpart funds to other uses meant that by December 1994, the Government had been able to repay only Mt. 76 billion of its net debt to the banking system, instead of Mt. 151 billion as planned. This result was achieved in part by collecting substantial amounts of counterpart funds associated with grants and loans from previous periods. 9 . Another problem faced during 1994 was the continuing difficulty in controlling other assets net (OAN) of the banking system, which the program envisaged would be reduced substantially. With the aim of doing so, the Bank of Mozambique (BM) introduced a new system of bank-by-bank credit ceilings geared toward capturing increases in OAN within the ceiling; it Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 27 - APPENDIX I improved the clearing system procedures with the assistance of the Fund; and it streamlined its foreign exchange operations to avoid foreign exchange losses and delays in completing transactions. These measures were a step in the right direction, but they were not sufficient to attain the reduction of OAN called for in the program. The new system of credit ceilings was introduced only in midyear, with'september 1994 as the first control point. The BM had to take a firm stance vis-a-vis banks that had failed to meet their September 1994 credit ceilings to gain a better control of OAN. Tighter enforcement of credit ceilings and other regulations was implemented late in 1994; however, it did not reverse completely the earlier expansion. The expansion in OAN was, in part, reduced by the rehabilitation of the BCM, which resulted in the writing off of large items under OAN. L/ The BM will continue to monitor commercial bank behavior closely and enforce penalties, if necessary. Strategy for 1995 10. Program objectives. The key objectives of the 1995 program are to attain a significant reduction in the inflation rate, as well as a continuing recovery in productive activity, while strengthening external viability in the medium term. The 1995 targets for inflation and growth are 24 percent and 4 percent, respectively. 2/ The structural reforms that have been part of Mozambique's efforts in recent years will be accelerated. In particular, the Government will focus on privatization and financial sector reforms, export promotion, public administration reform (including decentralization and civil service reform), and fostering an environment of greater transparency and accountability in public matters. The judicial system will be strengthened and civil liberties guaranteed. 11. Fiscal issues. Fiscal policy in 1995 aims at a large reduction in the overall budget deficit (before grants) in terms of GDP, and a substantial increase in government payments to the banking system. a. Fiscal measures. Revenues will be raised by 3.4 percentage points of GDP, with this increase divided equally between increases in taxes on international trade and other taxes. The taxes on international trade will be raised primarily by returning the effective tariff level to its pre-1994 levels through improvements in customs administration (see paragraph llb below) and the elimination of ad hoc tariff exemptions. Measures accounting for the increase in other tax revenues include: (i) intensifying enforcement efforts on corporate income tax and accelerating payment by large taxpayers; (ii) raising the consumption tax on imported beer to the rate applying on domestic beer; (iii) rationalizing the stamp tax to improve its coverage; (iv) increasing taxes on petroleum products; (v) updating I/ This write-off was made through an injection of government resources drawn from the government lending fund accounts. This drawdown explains most of the reduction in these otherwise "blocked accounts." 2/ The slowdown in economic growth from 5.4 percent in 1994 reflects an expected deceleration of the growth rate of the government sector. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 28 - APPENDIX I specific tax values and income brackets; (vi) increasing moratorium fees and interest rates and keeping them updated; and (vii) eliminating unjustified tax concessions; l.J An FAD mission that visited Maputo in February 1995 helped prepare a proposed timetable for the implementation of a value-added tax. The Government intends to implement this timetable as agreed. A working group has already been set up in the Ministry of Planning and Finance to implement the value-added tax and related proposals. 2/ b. Customs. The Government has undertaken a close review of customs procedures aimed at increasing customs revenues, curtailing smuggling and evasion, and facilitating trade. A number of recommendations to improve customs procedures were provided in a World Bank study on Private Sector Development and Export Promotion. In response to these recommendations, the Government will implement on an urgent basis, and no later than mid-1995, the following measures: (i) an increase in the number of customs posts and upgrading of the existing posts; (ii) stricter controls on exemptions and goods in transit; J/ (iv) implementation of a revised regime of customs warehouse utilization; (v) conclusion of an adequate new contract with a preshipment inspection firm that incorporates proper reconciliation procedures and a low inspection threshold level; and (vi) adoption of the ASYCUDA computerized customs system. A work program to improve customs administration was drawn by the February FAD mission. Further measures will be taken as needed to ensure a satisfactory performance of the Customs in 1995 and subsequent years. C. Other revenue measures. The Government will substantially increase rents on state properties (both housing and commercial properties) be,fore end-April 1995. d. Current expenditures. Current expenditures will be reduced by 3.2 percentage points of GDP from the 1994 outturn. This reduction will be achieved, for the most part, by eliminating special programs (5.5 percentage points of GDP), and cutting military outlays (1.5 percentage points of GDP). Reductions in subsidies and the recent restructuring of ministries and public functions will also contribute to lower current expenditures. However, these cuts will be partially offset by increased allocations to health and education (by 1.2 percentage points of GDP). Other areas that will receive higher real budgetary allocations than in the past are the Parliament and the police. Interest payments and pensions as a proportion of GDP will also be higher than in 1994. I/ Most of the increase in taxes other than on international trade will come from consumption taxes on beer (0.6 percent of GDP) and taxes on petroleum products (0.4 percent). With most breweries now in private hands, domestic beer production is expected to return at least to its 1993 level. 2/ This tax is slated for introduction in mid-1997. J/ In particular, Decree 20\88, which, inter alia, allows the Ministry of Finance to grant ad hoc exemptions will be abrogated. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 29 - APPENDIX I e. Investment expenditures. Capital outlays will also have to be scaled down by 1.6 percent of GDP. To this end, the Government will reassess the existing investment program with a view to setting priorities for existing projects and defining the domestic resources available for each project. Present and future recurrent expenditures associated with each project will be clearly identified in a review of existing projects. Both these recurrent costs and the type of foreign financing (grants or loans) available will be used in setting priorities. f. Counterpart funds generated by external assistance play an important role in the financing of the budget deficit, and the Government will accordingly continue its efforts to maximize their generation. Three experts will be hired before end-April 1995 to assist the Treasury in this task. The Government will deny requests for postponement of deadlines on the payment of counterpart funds by enterprises using bank guarantees (cartas de zarantia). Agreement with donors will continue to be sought to harmonize the valuation of food aid, and to ensure the proper recording of all counterpart funds. The Government encourages donors to remain committed to import-support funding and other programs that generate freely usable counterpart funds. g* Given the observed difficulties in ensuring that foreign aid pledges are disbursed according to the original plans, the Government undertakes to take offsetting fiscal measures to compensate for aid disbursement shortfalls on a timely basis. To be able to fulfil1 this commitment, the Government will assign the highest priority to the monitoring of foreign aid disbursements and uses. In this context, the Government will continue its efforts to improve its data base on foreign aid inflows and uses. Priority will also be given to monitoring and documenting the execution of foreign-financed projects, as well as identifying their recurrent, technical assistance, and investment components. 12. Monetary policy. The 1995 program envisages a tight monetary policy backed by close monitoring of financial sector trends and strict enforcement of financial sector regulations. It aims at holding the rate of broad money expansion to 26.5 percent, well below nominal GDP growth. A substantial government repayment to the banking system will permit an extension of credit to the economy sufficient to sustain growth. The following measures will be taken in 1995: a. Interest rates. All commercial bank interest rates have been freely determined by commercial banks since June 1994. The BM will continue to maintain its rediscount rate positive in real terms. b. Refinancing facilities. The use of refinancing facilities at the BM will be severely curtailed. Overdrafts are, in principle, no longer permitted and any that in fact occur will be charged at least the rediscount Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 30 - APPENDIX I rate, as will shortfalls against required reserves. 1/ Any new refinancing will carry an interest rate linked to the rediscount rate whenever the loan is denominated in domestic currency. C. Compliance with regulations. The BM will closely monitor commercial banks' compliance with its credit limits, minimum reserve requirements, and prudential regulations. Whenever relevant, financial penalties will be assessed, carrying rates in excess of the rediscount rate. The purpose of this close monitoring and assessment of penalties is not solely to ensure the good health of the financial system, but also to provide strong incentives for deposit mobilization and interbank transactions. d. Rediscount operations. As soon as the Treasury begins its placement of treasury bills, the BM will indicate the operations it is prepared to engage in with the commercial banks using these securities. Under consideration are rediscount, repurchase,and reverse repurchase transactions. Details of these modalities will be provided to commercial banks at the time the first pilot auction is announced. e. Monetary Policy Technical Council. The BM established in June 1994 a Monetary Policy Technical Council in charge of monitoring and taking timely actions to ensure that the BM's monetary policy is line with the stabilization objectives of the Government. In 1995, the Council will give particular attention to the quantitative performance criteria contained in the program, but will also use base money as a short-term indicator of monetary trends. 13. External sector. The 1995 program envisages an increase in net foreign assets of the banking system by US40 million. The current account after grants is projected to remain essentially unchanged, notwithstanding a decline in grants, while net foreign disbursements are expected to improve. The Consultative Group meeting for Mozambique that took place in Paris during March 13-15, 1995 was successful in providing for most of the financing requirements of the 1995 balance of payments. Pledges made by donors amounted to US$780 million (including food aid and excluding debt relief). Of this amount, 29 percent was for import support and 16 percent for food aid. Debt relief is assured until midyear. To cover the remaining financial gap (US$163 million), the Government intends to request an extension of the 1993 Paris Club arrangement until year-end. 14. :Exports. Mozambique's exports are still well below the levels attained in th'e past and are only one eighth the level of imports. Mozambique has a large and relatively untapped natural resource base, particularly as concerns agro-industry and energy, which can be transformed into significant I/ The higher interest rates applying to overdraft facilities at the BM 'have put strong pressure on banks to regularize their situation. By end- 1994, the use of overdrafts had been substantially curtailed. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 31 - APPENDIX I earnings. Over the medium term, the resulting rise in the country's output and exports would substantially improve the balance of payments and reduce the country's dependence on external aid. Accordingly, the Government gives high priority to creating an economic environment that fosters exports. There are ongoing discussions on the exploitation of natural gas deposits in Pande, with a view to beginning construction of a gas pipeline to South Africa by 1996. Construction work on transmission lines from the Cahora- Bassa hydroelectric plant to South Africa and Zimbabwe is expected to be started in mid-1995, and electricity exports should begin in 1997. Improvements in roads and port infrastructure in the context of the World Bank Roads and Coastal Shipping Projects are expected to improve the foreign earnings of Mozambique's transportation corridors to neighboring countries. Exports of crops such as cashew nuts, cotton, sugar, tea, and sisal will benefit from the opening up of the country and the restructuring and privatization of state-owned agricultural and agro-industrial enterprises. Efforts will be made to redirect illegal exports of gold and precious stones through normal commercial channels by increasing border controls and allowing exporters to retain a larger proportion of the proceeds in foreign currency. 15. Export promotion. The Government will further streamline the licensing of exports, ensuring that their use for statistical purposes does not entail an unnecessary burden on exporters. During 1995, the BM will authorize commercial banks to set up export financing facilities in foreign exchange with interest rates compatible with those prevailing in international markets. Also, the Government will remove the restriction on exports of unprocessed cashew nuts. 16. Current invisibles. During 1995, the BM will liberalize ceilings for foreign exchange payments related to travel, education, and health. It will expedite authorization for such payments by delegating licensing to commercial banks (up to reasonable maximum limits). These measures will be a significant step in moving toward acceptance of the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4 of the IMF Articles of Agreement. 17. External debt. Despite the heavy burden that debt service payments pose to the country, it is the Government's intention to maintain Mozambique current on its official commitments to Paris Club countries and other bilateral creditors with whom it has concluded rescheduling arrangements. In order to achieve this objective, the BM is closely monitoring debt service payments to avoid any inadvertent accumulation of arrears. The Government will review carefully additional foreign loans, even those on concessional terms, to ensure that the increased foreign indebtedness is compatible with Mozambique's capacity to pay in the medium term. The Government will continue to pursue negotiations with non-Paris Club creditors to reach rescheduling agreements at least comparable to Paris Club agreements. 18. Exchange rate. The existing exchange rate arrangement, with freely floating and market-determined exchange rates, is working well, and will be maintained in 1995. During 1995, BM's operations in the foreign exchange Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 32 - k,PPENDIX I market will be guided by its monetary policy objectives and net foreign asset targets. The BM expects that the introduction of prudential limits on foreign exchange exposure late in 1994 will foster the development of a more active interbank foreign exchange market. A decree regulating the operation of exchange houses has been recently published. The BM will continue to authorize new foreign exchange agents so as to cover adequately the whole national territory, improve the efficiency and depth of the foreign exchange market, and thereby reduce incentives for parallel market operations. 19. Enterprise sector reforms. The Government will speed up its privatization program. A privatization program for 1995 will be prepared early in 1995 and will include the completion of public tenders for at least five large enterprises by end-June 1995 and of five additional large enterprises by end-1995. The BM will also take steps during 1995 to liquidate its holdings of shares in enterprises. The Government will review the legal requirements to set up new businesses with a view to streamlining them before end-1995. 20. Financial sector reforms. The rehabilitation of the Banco Comercial de Mocambique (BCM) and the Banco Popular de Desenvolvimento (BPD) is close to completion. Business strategy plans for these two banks have been drawn and are being used to refocus their activities. A number of problems have been noted and efforts will be undertaken in 1995 to resolve them. In particular, the firm stance of the BM in the latter part of 1994 and the new credit ceilings have highlighted the need to take steps to (a) improve liquidity management; (b) expedite transactions among branches and with the head office; (c) minimize the recourse to regularization accounts; (d) obtain accounting data on a timely basis; and (e) regularly reconcile information from the BM and correspondent banks with the commercial bank accounts. 21. In 1994, the first external audits were conducted in the BCM and1 the BPD. These audits will be used to assess the progress of these banks in subsequent years. The BM expects that the external auditors will be able to express an opinion on the financial status of these banks and their accounts when conducting the external audit of the 1994 accounts. In the conduct of its supervisory role, the BM will be closely monitoring these audits and the actions taken by these banks to meet the recommendations of the auditors. 22. The Government has reached the conclusion that the privatization process, which is obtaining positive results in other sectors, should also be used in the financial sector. For that reason, steps will be taken in 1995 to continue restructuring the state-owned banks. 23. Public administration reform. The Government will announce before mid- M,arch 1995 the main objectives and priorities of a program of reforms in public sector administration to be implemented during the period 1995,-97. Its objectives will include (i) decompression of the structure of civil service salaries (ii) introduction of career streams with productivity incentives, merit promotions, and performance bonuses; Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 33 - APPENDIX I (iii) decentralization of public administration; and (iv) elimination of non-core activities and duplications. 24. Agriculture. Key concerns include reorganizing the state-owned agricultural and agro-industrial enterprises, providing seeds and for smallholder farmers, and implementing a land tenure system that strikes the right balance between small, medium, and large-scale farmers, while providing incentives for soil conservation, increased yields, and capital improvements. The Government is also determined to encourage a crop marketing system that results in fair market prices being offered to farmers. The Government will concentrate on providing an environment that fosters competition among private traders, in particular, by providing and restoring feeder roads, and ensuring that adequate private and public storage facilities are available. 25. Poverty alleviation. Mozambique is one of the poorest countries in the world. Poverty alleviation and social sector expenditures are thus critical to attaining high-quality growth. Development of the agricultural sector through market incentives will be the cornerstone of government policies to reduce poverty. In urban areas, the Government will undertake an evaluation of the Office of Vulnerable Population Assistance (GAPVU) and take steps to improve the targeting of its income transfer programs. 26. Education and health. The Government is well aware that good education and health services are key to enhancing the productivity of the labor force. In education, the Government will emphasize the rehabilitation of facilities, and expansion in primary and secondary enrollment, through hiring and training of teachers. In health, government priorities will focus on increased primary care, mother/child needs, and training of mid- level health professionals. 27. Governance issues. The Government recognizes the need for greater transparency and accountability in public affairs. Regarding the budget for 1995, the Government will publish and disseminate the draft budget proposal before mid-March 1995 and the approved budget for 1995, including sufficient detail to permit meaningful interpretation and monitoring. It will disclose budget execution information on a quarterly basis with less than 45 days' delay. The Government is in the process of drafting a code of ethics for public officials, including conflict of interest provisions; this code of ethics will be submitted for parliamentary approval before end-June 1995. Additional resources will provided to the judicial system and to the police to ensure the observance of law and order and to protect civil liberties. 28. Environment. Poverty and the war have accelerated environmental degradation in Mozambique in the past decade. Of particular concern are deforestation, mangrove destruction, soil degradation, and lack of access to clean water and sanitation for wide segments of the population. In 1994, Mozambique adopted a National Environmental Management Plan, which provides a comprehensive set of sectoral programs for the medium- and long-term aimed at ensuring the environmental sustainability of the country's development. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- :34 - APPENDIX I The Government is planning to further operationalize this plan through the adoption of an environmental law, and the incorporation of environmental objectives and constraints in the existing economic planning process. In particular, starting in 1995, environmental impact evaluations will be required prior to the approval of investment projects, and ongoing projects will be subjected to environmental review as appears necessary. 29. Statistical issues. Mozambican statistics are still weak. The Government is fully aware of the importance of adequate statistics for policymaking and intends to make substantial progress in this area. It intends to send a draft statistics law to the Parliament in time to begin implementing a System of National Statistics (as described in the law) during 1995. Key priorities in the statistical area include improvements in national accounts, price, trade, and fiscal statistics, as well as the setting up of a data base on foreign aid inflows and. uses. Customs reforms such as the introduction of the ASYCUDA are expected to lead to the compilation of timely and comprehensive export and import data by end-1995. Improvements in bank reporting and BM compilation of monetary statistics, in response to the recommendations of last October's STA mission, will be implemented in 1995. The Government would like to call on the international community to lend its support to the conduct of field surveys in critical areas. Benchmarks 30. To monitor and verify the progress in implementing the 1995 program, a number of key financial and structural benchmarks have been established. The Government understands that the completion of the review under the additional annual ESAF arrangement is contingent upon the observance of the financial monitoring indicators for June 1995 in Table 1 and the key structural benchmarks listed in Table 2. A summary of the Government's 1995 program in matrix format is provided in Appendix I. 31. During the program period, the Government does not intend to (i) introduce new or modify existing multiple currency practices; (ii) impose new or intensify existing restrictions on payments and transfers for current international transactions, or for balance of payments purposes, introduce new or intensify existing restrictions on imports; or (iii) conclude any new bilateral payments agreements having restrictive or discriminatory features with member countries of the Fund. The Government will not accumulate external payments arrears, apart from those arising from debt service payments pending the conclusion of debt rescheduling and reduction arrangements. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 35 - Table 1. Mozambique: Quantitative Benchmarks for 1995 (Cumulative channes to end of neriod) APPENDIX I Since end-1993 1994 1995 September December March June Sept. Dec. Program Est. Program Est. Benchmarks L/ (In billions of meticaiq) Net domestic assets of the banking system 2/ Net bank credit to the Government g/ 538 740 -59 -21 586 718 929 1.055 1,345 1,191 -151 -76 -73 -134 -276 -467 (In millions of U.S. dollars) Net foreign assets of the banking system a.5 -6 35 54 64 79 60 94 External borrowing on nonconcessional terms 3/ Loans of l-5 years -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- Loans of 5-12 years 7.0 7.0 7.0 7.0 7.0 7.0 7.0 7.0 Increase in public and publicly guaranteed short-term debt i/ -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- &/ Indicative targets. z/ After valuation adjustment. a/ Contracted or guaranteed by the Government or the Bank of Mozambique, excluding rescheduling agreements. 4/ Loans of 0-1 year's maturity, excluding normal import-related credit. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 36 - APPENDIXI Table 2. Mozambique: Structural Policy Measures Under the Additional Annual ESAF Arrangement Policy Measures Timing of Measures Prior .Actions Make public the approved budget for 1995 with sufficient detail to permit meaningful analysis and monitoring Implement a significant increase in rentals of state-owned properties Contract the services of experts to help Treasury monitor counterpart fund generation Adjust prices of petroleum products and energy tariffs at quarterly intervals to cover domestic and import costs and maintain real revenues to the budget Charge penalties of at least the rediscount rate on reserve shortfalls and any overdrafts; continue to reduce bank quarterly NDA ceilings by any previous-quarter excesses Link the interest rate on all credits from BM to commercial banks to the rediscount rate Abrogate Decree 20/88 on, inter alia, tariff exemptions Benchmarks to Conclude Review Sign a new preshipment inspection arrangement that takes into account World Bank recommendations Adjust controlled prices regularly to reflect changes in costs Complete public tenders for five large enterprises Implement System of National Statistics as described in proposed Statistics Law. The Statistics Law is to be submitted to Parliament before June 1995. Before end-April 1995 Before end-April 1995 Before end-April 1995 Before end-April 1995; quarterly thereafter From end-February 1995 onwards From end-March 1995 onwards Before end-April 1995 Before end-June 1995 First adjustment of 1995 to take place by end-April 1995 and quarterly thereafter Before end-June 1995 1995 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 37 - APPENDIX I Policy Measures Timing of measures Make substantial progress in the compilation of national accounts data based on the SNA methodology Adjust the rediscount rate of the BM to positive real levels at quarterly intervals Produce monthly central bank balance sheet and analytical summary thereof within thirty days Produce monthly monetary survey and supporting data within 45 days usually and no more than 60 days June 1995 Ongoing Throughout Throughout Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 38 - APPENDIX I Mozambique: Matrix of Economic and Financial Measures for 1995 Objective Action Timing of measures I. Fiscal Policy Avoid excessive Reduce budget deficit 1995 dependence on foreign before grants by 8 aid and reduce percentage points of inflationary pressures GDP Increase transparency Make public the draft Before mid-March 1995 and accountability budget proposal submitted to Parliament Make public t:he Before end-April 1995 approved budget for 1995 with sufficient detail to permit meaningful analysis and monitoring Make public budget execution quarterly 45 days after the end of each quarter. Increase tax revenues Establish a working Before mid-March 1995 group in the Ministry of Finance to implement a value-added tax Announce a timetable Before mid-March 19!)5 for implementation of a value-added tax prepared in collaboration with the February 1995 FAD mission Carry out a revision of Before end-April 1995 specific taxes and levies to take into account 1994 inflation; revise them to take Before end-Dec. 1995 account of the 1995 inflation Announce the t:ax Before mid-March 1995 measures necessary to support the financial program Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 39 - APPENDIX I Mozambique: Matrix of Economic and Financial Measures for 1995' (continued) Objective Action Timing of measures Increase tax revenues Announce the tax Before mid-March 1995 (cont.) administration measures to be taken in 1995 Implement a significant Before end-April 1995 increase in rentals of state-owned properties Publish clear criteria Before end-June 1995 for tax concessions; eliminate tax By end-Sept. 1995 concessions that do not meet this criteria Increase in customs revenues Sign a new preshipment Before end-June 1995 inspection arrangement that takes into account World Bank recommendations Announce measures to Before mid-April 1995 improve customs administration Computerize customs Before end of 1995 with ASYCUDA software or similar Tighten controls on Before end-April 1995 exemptions and goods in transit Publish clear criteria Before end-April 1995 for granting tariff exemption; eliminate exemptions that do not Before end-June 1995 meet this criteria Reduce expenditures to Identify expenditure In the context of the sustainable levels cuts from 1995 budget administrative reorganization Reduce ltspecial In the context of the programll expenditures 1995 budget by 5 percentage points of GDP Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 40 - UNDIX I . Mozambique: Matrix of Economic and Financial Measures for 1995 (continued) Objective Action Timing of measures Reduce expenditures to Set priorities for the sustainable levels investment program and (cont.) provide adequate domestic contribution depending on the priority level~of each project '. In the context of the 1995 budget Downsize the investment program through cuts in low-priority projects and those that would result in an unsustainable stream of future recurrent expenditures; size of investment program to be consistent with the availability of domestic counterpart resources and need to avoid excessive debt burden. 1995-97 Announce wage policy Before end-February for 1995 1995 Clarify the discontinuation of the salary bonus program after December 1994 Before mid-March 1995 Rationalize public Carry out a public sector administration sector administration reform During 1995-97 Rationalize public Announce the main sector administration objectives of the proposed public sector reform. Objectives to include: salary decompression; introduction of productivity incentives and performance bonus; elimination of non-core public sector activities Before mid-March 1995 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 41 - APPENDIX I Mozambique: Matrix of Economic and Financial Measures for 1995 (continued) Objective Action Timing of measures Improve the management of public funds Monitor foreign aid flows and uses Governance issues II. Price Policy Remove price distortions and subsidies Implement the recently approved local authority law Decentralize public administration Review existing treasury operations and procedures Contract the services of experts to help Treasury monitor counterpart fund generation Conduct at least one pilot auction of treasury bills Continue efforts to improve data base on flows and uses of foreign aid Submit to the National Assembly a code of ethics for public officials, including conflict of interest provisions Provide additional resources for the judicial system Adjust controlled prices regularly to reflect changes in costs (minimum prices to be adjusted once a year prior to crop season) Before end-1995 During 1995-1997 During 1995-96 Before end-April 1995 Before end-June 1995 Ongoing Before end-June 1995 1995 First adjustment of 1995 to take place by end-April 1995 and quarterly thereafter Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 42 - APPENDIX I Mozambique: Matrix of Economic and Financial Measures for 1995 (continued) Objective Action Timing of measures Adjust prices of Before end-April 1995 petroleum products and energy tariffs at quarterly intervals to cover domestic and import costs and maintain real revenues to the budget III. External Sector and Trade Policy Exchange rate management Focus efforts on Ongoing attaining net foreign asset targets Ensure optimal use of Ongoing available import- support resources Enforcement of foreign Before end-1995 exchange exposure regulations Export promotion Eliminate quantitative Before end-April 1995 controls on exports of unprocessed cashew nuts Authorize commercial By March 1995 banks to set up an export financing facility in foreign exchange at rates compatible with international markets Complete agreement for 1995 the assessment of Pande gas reserves Begin construction work By mid-1995 on transmission lines to South Africa and Zimbabwe Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 43 - APPENDIX I Mozambique: Matrix of Economic and Financial Measures for 1995 (continued) Objective Aid commitments and reporting Action Timing of measures Encourage donors to Ongoing untie their aid and harmonize procurement procedures Encourage donors to identify their contributions to recurrent and investment outlays Ongoing Ensure that all aid 1995-97 projects considered to . be high priority are reflected in the budget and are carried out as budgeted External debt Encourage donors to Immediately increase the share of projects financed by grants Strictly limit official Ongoing contracting or guaranteeing of l-12 years' debt on non- concessional terms, with a subceiling on l- 5 years' maturities Zero increase in short- Ongoing term public and publicly guaranteed debt IV. Enterprise Reform Promote efficiency of Prepare a privatization End-June 1995 enterprise sector program for 1995 Complete public tenders Before end-June 1995 for 5 large enterprises Complete public tenders Before end-1995 for 5 additional large enterprises Promote efficiency of Reduce enterprise Ongoing enterprise sector subsidies as a percent of GDP Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 44 - APPENDIX I . Mozambique: Matrix of Economic and Financial Measures for 1995 (continued) Objective Action Timing of measures Eliminate Bank Iof Mozambique's ownership of enterprises Streamline lega'l requirements to start up a new business Complete privatization of medium-size and small enterprises V. Financial Sector Policy Monetary and credit policy Observe quarterly benchmarks on net domestic assets,. net bank credit to Government, and net foreign assets of the banking system Charge penalties of at least the rediscount rate on reserve shortfalls and any overdrafts; continue to reduce bank quarterly NDA ceilings by any previous-quarter excesses Produce monthly central bank balance sheet and analytical summary thereof within thirty days of month end Produce monthly monetary survey and supporting data within 45 days usually and no more than 60 days Financial sector reform Continue licensing of new banks and other financial institutions Before end-1995 Ongoing 1995-97 During 1995 By February 1995 Throughout Throughout Ongoing Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 45 - APPENDIX I Mozambique: Matrix of Economic and Financial Measures for 1995 (continued) Objective Action Timing of measures Interest rates Implement a "twinning Before end-June 1995 arrangement" for the BCM. Transform BPD into a By end-February 1995 joint stock company (sociedade anonima de resoonsabilidade limitada) Introduce mechanisms to By September 1995 reduce interbranch (vis-a-vis December float in the BCM and 1994) the BPD. Interbranch float to be reduced in half (in real terms) Expansion of the new Before end-June 1995 clearing procedures to all provincial capitals Establish a Credit Risk 1995 Office (central de riscos) Maintenance of a positive real BM rediscount rate as measured at the end of each quarter by the rise of the latest Ongoing actual quarter's average of the monthly CPI for Maputo (1989=100) against the year earlier average. Link the interest rate From end-February 1995 on all credits from BM onward to commercial banks to the rediscount rate Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 46 - APPENDIX I Mozambique: Matrix of Economic and Financial Measures for 1995 (continued) Objective Action Timing of measures Rates on new refinancing will be linked to the rediscount rat:e VI. Agriculture Pricing Review effectiveness of minimum prices applied to selected crops Marketing Assess financial and operational performance of the Institute of Cereals Assess the availability of private and public storage facilities for key crops Increase expenditures to rehabilitate feeder roads Land rights/tenure Announce steps and timetable for the preparation of a National Land Policy Announce procedures under which institutional aspects of land law and administration will be reviewed Take immediate steps and provide a timetable for updating land registers Starting July 1, 1995 1995 1995 1995 1995-97 By end-1995 By end-1995 Before end-June 1995 Public expenditure Complete a review 'of 1995 agricultural sector expenditures Integrate donor- 1995-97 financed projects into one program, starting with extension services Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 47 - APPENDIX I Mozambique: Matrix of Economic and Financial Measures for 1995 (continued) Objective Action Timing of Measures VII. Social Policy Poverty alleviation. Expand labor-intensive public works program with emphasis on feeder-road reconstruction Assess existing schemes for income transfers to targeted population Make available extension services and seeds for the rural poor Resettle displaced persons and provide them with tools and seeds Health Education Re-establish district based provision of basic health care services Provide adequate levels of recurrent outlays (drugs, medical personnel, etc.) Raise the cost recovery rate on medicines and medical supplies to 15 percent Increase the share of expenditures in GDP Increase primary school enrollment, in part through the rehabilitation of rural schools Improve training of elementary school teachers Population Formulate comprehensive population plan Ongoing By June 1995 1995-97 Ongoing 1995-97 By end-1995 1995-97 1995- 97 1995-97 1995 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 48 - APPENDIX I Mozambique: Matrix of Economic and Financial Measures for 1995 (continued) Objection Action Timing of measures Environment Minimize deforestation Ongoing in peri-urban areas . . by providing incentives for family sector tree planting and introducing policies to favor commercial fuel substitution for wood fuel Implement the national 1995-97 environmental management plan (NEMP) Recuperate and expand Ongoing provision of sanitation and water supply systems in Mozambique's major cities IX. Statistical Issues Statistical base Give high priority to 1995-97 compilation of adequate statistics; encourage donor support for statistical activities Implement System of 1995 National Statistics as described in proposed Statistics Law Make substantial 1995 progress in the compilation of national accounts data based on the SNA methodology Implement a consumer 1996 price index for Beira and Nampula Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 49 - APPENDIX I Mozambique: Matrix of Economic and Financial Measures for 1995 (concluded) Objective Action Timing of measures Reinforce efforts to 1995 compile adequate fiscal statistics providing firm data on recurrent and capital expendi- tures execution financed by both foreign and domestic resources Statistical base Decide on revisions to By end-April 1995 bank reporting and monetary statistics compilation proposed by STA mission of October 1994; Introduce revised By end-September 1995 methodology overlapping old through end-1995 Produce timely and By end-1995 reliable import and export data from customs sources Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 50 - APPENDIX II I. MOZAMBIOUE - Relations with the Fund (As of March 31, 1995) Membership Status: Joined g/24/84; Article XIV II. III. IV. V. General Resources Account: SDR Million Quota 84.00 Fund holdings of currency 84.00 Reserve position in Fund 0.01 SDR DeDartment; SDR Million Holdings 0.03 Outstanding Purchases and Loans: SDR Million SAF arrangements 29.07 ESAF arrangements 115.35 Financial Arrangements: Amount Approval Expiration approved VI. VII. Quota % 100.0 100.0 -_ % Allocation . . . Quota % 34.6 137.3 Amount drawn TvDe date date- (SDR Million) (SDR Million) ESAF 6/01/90 6/14/95 130.05 115.35 SAF 6/08/87 6/07/90 42.70 42.70 Projected Obligations to Fund (SDR millions; based on existing use of resources and present holdings of SDRs): Overdue Forthcoming 01/31/95 11)95 1996 1997 1998 1999 Principal _- 9 . 5 11.9 18.3 21.4 22.8 Charges/interest -- 0.7 0.7 0.6 0.5 0.4 Total -- 10.2 12.6 18.9 21.9 23.2 Exchange Rate Arrangement: The exchange rate for Mozambique's currency, the metical (plural: meticais) is market-determined. Commercial banks may buy and sell foreign exchange from/to individual customers on a freely negotiable basis. Since reunification of the system on June 1, 1993, the Bank of Mozambique (BM) fixes the midpoint rate in its transactions daily so as to be within 2 percent of the weighted average of secondary market rates the previous day. As of March 31, 1995, the BM rate was Mt. 7,443.OO per U.S. dollar and the secondary market rate was Mt 7,581.OO. Mozambique has exchange restrictions under Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 51 - MOZAMBIQUE - Relations with the Fund (As of March 31, 1995) APPENDIX II (continued) Article XIV. These restrictions are listed in footnote 1 of p. 26. VIII. Consultation with the Fund: Mozambique is on the standard 12- month cycle for Article IV consultation. The previous Article IV consultation discussions were held in Maputo during April 15- May 8, 1993 and the consultation was completed by the Executive Board on August 4, 1993 (EBS/93/111, Corr. 1, 2, and 3, and SM/93/161). Although a staff mission visited Maputo in September 1994, the discussions for the Article IV consultation (as well as the midterm review under the ESAF) were deferred to early 1995, in view of the impending elections in October'1994, to permit the staff to exchange views with the new Government. A delay notice in concluding the 1994 Article IV consultation, attaching the staff report for the 1994 Article XIV stand-alone consultation, was issued to the Executive Board on December 21, 1994 (SM/94/302). The following decision was taken: 1. The Fund takes this decision in concluding the 1994 Article XIV consultation with Mozambique. 2. The Republic of Mozambique maintains the restrictions on payments and transfers for current international transactions described in SM/94/302, in accordance with the transitional arrangements of Article XIV, Section 2. The Fund encourages the Republic of Mozambique to reduce its reliance on these restrictions and to eliminate them as soon as its balance of payments position permits. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 52 - APPENDIX II , IX. MOZAMBIQUE - Relations with the Fund (concluded) (As of March 31, 1995) Technical Assistance. 1993-95: Timing April 1993 April 1993 July 1993 Departments Form Purpose Counterparts Statistics Mission Balance of payments Bank of statistics Mozambique Fiscal Affairs Mission Review of tax issues Finance Monetary and Mission Payments system and BM Exchange Affairs foreign exchange management March-April 1994 Monetary and Consultant Interbank payments BM. Nov.-Dec. 1994, and Exchange Affairs Visits system comercial Second Quarter 1995 banks (planned) October 1994 Statistics Mission Multisector statistics BM, Finance, review (money and banking, balance of payments, government finance, returned accounts, prices) November 1994 IMF Institute Mission Course (2 weeks) on 22 Mozambican financial programning participants, and policies 3 from Guinea-Bissau and 1 from Sao Tome and Principe February 1995 Fiscal Affairs Mission Customs administration, Finance introduction of VAT February 1995 Statistics Mission Balance of payments BM, Finance follow-up (external aid and Planning, flows) Donors X. Resident Representative: None. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 53 - APPENDIX III MOZAMBIQUE - Relations with the World Bank World Bank assistance to Mozambique is focused on economic rehabilita- tion in the context of the Government's comprehensive reform program. The Bank's Executive Board has approved five IDA structural adjustment credits since 1985, as well as twenty-two IDA project and sector credits (see attached table). A Second Economic Recovery Credit (SERC) was approved in June 1994 and focusses on financial sector reform and the public enterprise sector. The first tranche (of US$80 million) was released in July 1994, and second and third tranches (US$60 million each) will be released about July and December 1995, respectively, upon satisfactory fulfillment of specific conditions. Virtually all IDA credits to Mozambique have been accompanied by substantial cofinancing and/or parallel financing from other sources. A commercial bank debt buy-back financed by grants from IDA and bilateral donors was effected in December 1991. To strengthen capacity for policy analysis, economic management, and project implementation in Mozambique, economic and sector work was devoted in 1991 to issues of public sector pay and employment, training, decentralization to provincial and district levels, and capacity building. A second Public Expenditure Review in 1991 addressed the composition and phasing of the investment budget, the balance between recurrent and investment expenditure, and the impact on poverty reduction. Issues concerning counterpart funds mobilization were reviewed in 1991 and early 1992. In 1992 a financial sector study and education sector review were completed. In early 1993, a joint Bank/donors' mission looked at issues related to import-support funds. Economic work in 1993-94 focused on the Government's transition from emergency to sustainable development. In 1994, an export growth/private sector development study was carried out, a country environmental strategy was produced, and an agricultural sector review was initiated. In collaboration with donors and government, a review of poverty issues and public expenditures for the social sectors is under preparation. In 1995, economic work will focus on public sector issues including a public sector reform study. The Bank has been providing technical assistance in the areas of capacity building and statistical issues in the Bank of Mozambique. An eighth Consultative Group meeting was held in Paris in March 13-15, 1995. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 54 - APPENDIX III MOZAMBIQUE - Relations with the World Bank (concluded) IDA Lending Operations: F'Y 1985-95 Sector Board Credit Percent Approval Amount Disbursed Date (US$ mil) by 02/95 Adjustment Operations First Import Rehabilitation Second Import Rehabilitation Second Import Rehabilitation (Afr. Facility) Third Import Rehabilitation Economic Recovery Credit Second Economic Recovery Credit Energy Energy T.A./Rehabilitation Urban Household Energy Gas Engineering u Urban Urban Rehabilitation Local Govt. Reform/Engineering Social Sectors Education and Manpower Development Health and Nutrition Education II Capacity Building: Human Res. Dev. Capacity Building: Public Sector and Legal Inst. Development Food Security Transport Transport Rehab. (Beira Corridor) Roads and Coastal Shipping I Maputo Corridor Revitalization Roads and Coastal Shipping II Industry and Finance Industrial Enterprise Restructuring Small/Medium Scale Ent. Dev. Public Sector Management Economic/Financial Management TA Financial Sector Capacity Building Agriculture Agric. Rehab./Development Agric. Serv. Rehab./Development Rural Rehabilitation 06/85 45.0 100.0 08/87 70.0 100.0 08/87 18.6 100.0 05/89 90.0 100.0 06/92 180.0 88.0 06/94 200.0 31.5 05/87 20.0 100.0 06/89 22.0 45.0 06/94 30.0 5.0 08/88 60.0 81.5 06/93 23.2 9.9 05/88 15.9 87.4 03/89 27.0 53.0 12/90 53.7 17.1 11/92 48.6 3.7 11/92 15.5 6.5 04/93 6.3 9.5 09/89 40.0 59.5 06/92 74.3 23.3 01/93 9.3 5.9 04/94 188.0 9.5 12/89 50.1 18.8 12/89 32.0 53.1 lo/'89 21.0 64.3 04/94 9.0 10.1 09/90 15.4 33.8 01/92 35.0 11.1 03/93 20.0 3.5 Disbursements in M 1993 (JuYLy 1, 1992-June 30, 1993): USS128.4 million. Disbursennents in FY 1994 (July 1, 1993-June 30, 1994): US$107.0 million. I/ Credit not yet effective. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 55 - APPENDIX IV MOZAMBIOUE - Statistical Issues Mozambican economic data consist of estimates based mainly on a small number of primary statistical sources. The quality of most of the primary sources has steadily deteriorated since the economic liberalization of 1987 as statistical practices failed to fully adapt to the structural changes and economic agents' response to statistical queries became increasingly unreliable. Although improvements have been observed recently in some areas, Mozambican statistics are still weak, and a systematic effort is needed to ensure urgent and sustainable improvements. A new National Statistics Law is due for implementation in 1995. Data on real sector (production, employment, earnings, external trade, and prices) and balance of payments have been reporte'd to the STA on an irregular basis, and the GFS has not been completed yet. In the March 1995 IFS, money and banking statistics from Mozambique were published through December 1991. 1. National accounts and orices Approximately two thirds of the gross domestic product is estimated from data on gross output collected by sectoral ministries and assumptions made on technical coefficients of intermediate consumption. Production of subsistence agriculture and of most services are estimated on the basis of scant information and assumptions. Mozambique's GDP is believed to be substantially underestimated, but is expected to improve as Government administrative control is consolidated throughout the country. Moreover, the data available on the expenditure components of GDP and on factor incomes does not allow for reasonable verification of estimates obtained from the production side. There is also no information on agricultural producer and wholesale prices. The only systematically collected information on the general price level in Mozambique is the CPI for the city of Maputo. As of January 1995, a new CPI, based on a broader consumption basket that uses a household survey conducted in 1991, was implemented. Currently, work is in progress on surveys of agricultural and urban households as well as agricultural enterprises, with results scheduled for release throughout 1995 and early in 1996. Also, before the end of 1995 consumer price indices for the provincial capitals of Beira and Nampula will be implemented and estimates of national accounts based as much as possible on the international SNA methodology will be published for the years 1991 and 1992. 2. Monev and bankine; statistics Significant improvements have been achieved in the collection and compilation of money and banking statistics, Recently, the Bank of Mozambique has begun publishing on a regular basis the resulting monetary data in its quarterly statistical bulletin. Data based largely on this Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 56 - APPENDIXa methodology, with some modifications, have been published in the Mozambique page of IFS, but only through 1991. Several factors still. hinder the compilation of sound monetary statistics: (a) the methodology does not employ the full degree of detail availalble from most banks' balance sheets (to the fifth digit classification rather than the third), (b) the coverage of the accounting data in both th.e BM and the BCM is not complete, so that a number of adjustments have to be introduced from outside their balance sheets in compiling the statistics (notably for valuation adjustment, and also to a now-lesser extent for correspondent banks' accounts); (c) there is substantial lack of symmetry in the interbank positions shown in the accounts of the BM and the consolidated commercial banks, as well as among commercial banks; (d) information on valuation adjustment is not reported by all commercial banks; and (e) banks have a tendency to allocate ambiguous accounts, as well as newly introduced ones, to unclassified assets or liabilities. 3. Fiscal accounts Fiscal data suffer from the absence of records on important components of the budget, from aggregation and classification methods that do not always allow for the identification of standard GFS categories, and from delayed compilation of budget execution data. The most important unknown in the budget is the execution of projects financed by foreign loans and grants, as it is difficult to determine the portion of these outlays that corresponds to capital expenditure. Instead, these expenditures are estimated on the basis of the execution of the domestically financed portion of capital expenditure, and the planned proportion between domestic and foreign financing. Fiscal statistics include capital expenditure by some autonomous funds (but not all), and local government outlays. However, the National Social Security Institute operations are not included. Currently, a data base on donor disbursements for investment is being enhanced to permit better estimates of budget execution. Also, the Treasury has recently installed a unit to improve monitoring of counterpart funds generation and collection. A more systematic follow-up on the resource transfers between the local budgetary units of the Treasury (including provinces) and the banking system could explicitly identify the float of these resources and improve consistency with the monetary statistics. 4. External sector In the face of the large special programs related to the peace process and elections, the quality of balance of payments statistics (particularly import data) may have worsened, because of deficiencies in the current system of data compilation. Balance of payments data are particularly affected by institutional weaknesses, Thus, improvements in customs data and the use of survey techniques are urgently ileeded in order to obtain more reliable information on imports and exports of goods and services. Concerning foreign financing statistics, a great improvement could be obtained by cross-checking information with donor sources and by developing the data base on foreign aid disbursements. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 57 - APPENDIX V Table 1. Mozambique: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 1991-95 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 Sept. 1/ Dec. Prog. Prog . Act. Prog. 21 Est. Production and prices GDP real growth GDP deflator Consumer prices (annual average) Consumer prices (end of period) Foreign trade (in U.S. dollar terms) Exports, f.o.b, Imports, c.i.f. Terms of trade Exchange rata (depreciation -) Annual average (US$/Mt.I Nominal effective (end-of-period) Real effective (end-of-period) Government budget (cash basis) Total revenue Total expenditure Currant expenditure Money and credit (end of period) 5/ Net domestic assets Domestic credit Government (not) Credit to the economy Money and quasi-money GY2) Interest rate (on 6- to la-month deposits; end of period) National accounts Gross domestic saving Gross investment Government budget (cash basis) Total revenue External grants Total expenditure Overall balance Before grants After grants Domestic bank financing Balance of payments CUSS millions) Current balance (after grants) Overall balance Current balance (before grants) 6/ Current balance (after grants) &/ -237 -239 -321 -458 -407 -436 -202.2 -204.1 -221.9 -64.8 -66.1 -06.4 Gross foreign assets z/ 3.7 3.9 External debt (USS millions) Debt service ratio Before debt relief a/ After debt relief h/ fi/ 5,126 4,999 134.2 16.2 4.6 5.083 144.5 21.2 134.7 29.8 ...... -351 -305 -310 Ly ...... -358 -323 -204 3/ ...... -240.2 -220.0 -106.7 3/ ...... -86.2 -77.2 -77.9 y ...... 5.1 5.5 6.2 ...... 5,576 5,404 5,610 ...... 121.7 119.2 116.2 ...... 24.4 23.8 34.7 Memorandum items: GDP (Mt billions) 2,056 3,126 5.463 . . . Official exchange rate (average, Mt. ./USS) 1,435 2,433 3,721 . . 5.G 8,554 . . . 4.9 -0.8 46.2 53.2 33.2 45.1 35.2 54.5 20.4 -14.2 2.4 -4.9 12.3 -10.3 -35.3 -39.9 -25.4 50.1 38.3 33.6 20.7 32.6 -3.3 36.0 30.1 34.0 -41.0 -27.0 6.4 47.8 56.7 65.5 37.0 38.1 4.2 33.9 52.8 43.0 21.8 21.1 19.3 20.9 44.9 46.3 -24.9 -26.3 -5.6 -5.4 -0.8 1.0 . . . . . . (Annual percentage changes, unless otherwise soecified) 19.3 . . . 46.5 . . . 42.4 . . . 43.6 24.4 -5.3 . . . 11.7 . . . 6.4 . . . -34.6 . . . -39.8 . . . -18.1 ,.. 65.4 0.9 55.4 A/ 21.6 54.1 y 31.5 69.6 26.7 24.5 50.2 7.0 -2.9 17.5 53.1 63.0 29.2 43.0 . . . . . . . . . . . . 44.9 . . . . . . . . . -35.2 -18.5 16.6 -4.4 11.3 24.2 36.7 36.3 -1.0 37.3 35.1 55.0 5.8 5.4 48.0 50.8 50.0 63.2 30.0 70.1 24.4 13.4 19.8 6.7 5.9 -1.3 . . . -37.1 . . . -20.3 . . . 19.1 50.6 39.6 65.2 A/ 77.7 79.7 if 69.4 29.5 35.6 61.2 31.8 -7.6 -3.8 60.0 35.6 40.0 49.3 . . . 69.7 (In percent of GDP) 7.2 59.7 1:: 1:: ::: 4.7 60.2 12.3 55.3 20.0 12.9 12.2 19.2 17.6 17.1 16.1 14.8 20.8 21.4 21.0 17.7 21 41.5 i/ 32.0 30.0 44.5 A/ 47.2 4/ 42.4 a/ 4.3 44.1 44.3 24.0 13.7 -14.7 y -1.2 . . . . . . . . 80.0 35.1 3/ 29.3 31 15.0 36.1 -12.4 48.5 26.5 -22.2 i/ -19.9 -17.8 -25.3 A/ -29.6 A/ -21.3 a/ -5.1 A/ -3.0 -3.0 -4.5 A/ -a.2 A/ -3.7 31 1.4 y -0.7 -0.4 -1.8 G/ -0.9 y -3.0 (In units specified) 0,603 13,053 5.910 Sources : Data provided by the Mozambican authorities; and staff estimates, I/ In relation to December 1994. i/ As per EBS/94/101. 3/ These trends are explained by the termination of the special programs. $/ Includes expenditures related to demobilization and elections, which account for 25 percent of total expenditure in 1994. >/ With respect to beginning-period money and quasi-money. 6/ As percent of exports of goods and services. I/ As months of following year's imports, c.i.f. g/ Actual payments. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 58 ‘- APPENDIX V Table 2. Mozambique: Government Finance, 1991-95 1991 1992 1993 _- 1994 1995 September December (Pro,,) December (Estimatcr) - Total Under- Spefial Under- Special Proa. Est. lvina racton Total lvinn facton Total PKIR. (In billions of met&ii) Total revenue Tax revenue Of which: taxes on imports Nontax -UC Total expmditurr and net lending Currmt expenditure Of which: dcfense and security Salaria and wages Goods and services Interat cn public debt Current defiiit (-) Enluding interest Investment expenditure Lending minur repayments Overall defKit before grants Grants received Overall defrit after grants External hxrowing (net) Dishnsements Amortization paid Domestic fmancing (net) Oftiich: bank financing (net) Memorandum items: GDP 2.056 3,126 5,463 8.554 8.554 8,554 8.554 8,554 Total revenue 21.8 21.1 20.0 12.9 12.2 19.2 -- 19.2 Tax revenue 18.5 18.4 18.2 -- 11.0 17.7 -- 17.7 Nomax revenue 3.3 2.8 1.8 -- 1.2 1.6 -- 1.6 Total expcnditurc 44.9 46.3 41.5 32.8 30.0 38.1 6.5 44.5 Current expenditure 22.3 24.2 21.4 18.8 17.0 18.1 6.5 24.5 Investment expenditure 22.6 22.0 20.1 14.0 13.0 20.0 -- 20.0 Lending minus rcpayme:~ts Current defrit Ovwall deficit before grants Grants received 1.8 -- -0.5 -24.9 -5.9 -19.9 -5.3 0.5 -253 -23.9 19.3 Overall deficit after grants -5.6 Domestie fmancing (net) -0.7 Of tiich: bank fmancing (net) (-0.8) 1.2 0.7 -3.1 -1.4 -263 -222 20.9 17.1 -5.4 -5.1 2.2 1.4 (1.0) (1.4) 16.1 -3.8 -0.8 (-0.7) -4.7 1.2 -6.5 -178 -188 -6.5 14.8 15.9 4.9 -3.0 -3.0 -1.5 -0.7 -3.5 1.5 (-0.4) (-3.3) Cl.9 20.8 17.2 -4.5 -6.7 -1.9 -2.4 (-1.8) (-2.4) 447 380 (1;) 958 458 I::!; I:; -10 36 46.5 36 -511 397 -114 128 140 12 -14 (-17) 661 574 ‘1;;’ 1.483 757 (259) (143) ;::32; -97 17 688 37 -822 6S2 -170 100 159 58 (ii, 1,093 (E) 98 2.36 1,167 I:::; $i; -74 124 1.097 40 -1,212 932 -280 204 285 81 (:9”) lJa3 1,045 (11, (y%i) -- 2.8U3 2,566 1.6M 1,450 (575) (202) Iii:; (476) (514) (167) (104) -502 -405 -335 -302 1.198 1,116 -- -- -1,700 -1,521 i,3n 1,266 -323 -255 393 315 521 418 128 104 -70 (-59) (2) 1,646 -- 1.512 P$’ (11, -- 3.2% 552 1,546 552 :::a; (24% (330) :;0;; (222) (--I 100 -552 322 -552 1.710 -- -1,610 -552 1,357 421 -253 -131 551 . . . 720 . 169 . -297 131 (-282) (131) (In percent of GDP) 1.616 1,512 (523) 133 3,808 2,098 $2; (633) (222) -452 -230 1.710 -- -2.162 1.7’77 -38.5 551 720 169 -166 (-151) 1.526 1,397 (343) 129 3.599 1,481 ;:z$ I::;; 45 195 2.119 -- -2,074 1,492 -582 788 935 147 -206 (-2081 ‘3,683 17.6 16.1 1.5 41.5 17.1 24.4 -- -. ._- 1.526 (-1, li$ -- 497 4.0% 497 1,978 (254) C-62) :243; (296) wJ2) C--J (151) -497 -452 -497 -302 -- '2.119 -497 - 2.571 -2,787 365. 1,857 2,308 -132 .-713 -478 . . 788 878 935 1,161 147 284 132 -7s -399 (132) 1-76) (-391) 8.683 8,&3 13,Os3 17.6 21.0 . 16.1 19.6 1.5 1.4 5.7 41.2 42.4 5.7 22.8 19.6 . 24.4 22.8 -5.7 -5.2 -5.7 -29.6 4.2 21.4 -1.5 -8.2 1.5 -0.9 (1.5) (-0.9) ---- -- 2.746 2,559 (749) 187 5,532 2.558 ;;:i; g; 187 560 2,974 -- -- 1.4 -213 17.7 -3.1 -3.1 (-3.0) SOWCCS: Data provided by the Mozambican aurhorities; and staff estimates. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-- 59 - Table 3. Mozambique: MonetarySurvey, 1990-95 APPENDIX V 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 Prog. Est. Prog. I. Stocks (end of period): (In billions of meticab) Net foreign assets % gJ 454 709 1,093 1,152 2,258 Foreign assets 274 513 1,055 1,968 2,783 2,817 5,027 Foreign liabilities -178 -286 -602 -1259 -1,690 -1,665 -2,769 Net domestic assets 427 501 31 470 482 1,310 !,806 Domestic credit Credit to Government, net Credit to the economy 653 905 1,134 2,314 1,721 -5 6 39 -150 -93 658 898 1,095 2,465 1,814 t,200 2,718 -627 3,345 Government lending funds -1.51 -211 -491 -934 -1.597 -984 Medium- and long-term foreign liabilities -1,018 -2,012 -2,647 -5,386 -6,626 -6,436 Exchange valuation gains(-)/losses 1,051 1,084 1,947 4,991 6.470 6,226 Other items, net (assets -) 44 968 %3 1,504 1,246 1,478 Money and quasi-money (M2) Money Currency in circulation Demand and savings deposits Quasi-money 523 709 4% 660 1,129 1,024 139 173 258 357 481 766 27 49 105 2.019 2.899 1,796 . . . 469 . 1,326 . . . 223 . . . El ‘756 2,115 285 - 1,772 -10,392 10,416 12% 4.458 . . . . . . . . . . . . II. Flows [during year): l/ Net foreign assets 13 49 j2J m? 111 171 3 -17 108 188 Net domestic ass&s 22 Domestic credit Credit to Government, net Credit to the economy 270 276 1,218 30 79 -151 240 197 1.369 278 m 642 -76 719 Government lending funds -29 -30 -227 -117 -513 53 Medium- and long-term foreign liabilities 65 -9.56 225 84 94 49 Other items, net (assets -) -25 924 -6 542 -213 -26 363 472 1,140 -391 1,531 -420 -- -248 Money and quasi- money (M2) Money Quasi-money 136 158 374 711 796 9% 836 12.5 136 318 594 -- 934 . . . 11 22 57 117 -- 62 III. Rates of change l/ (In percent per year) Net domestic assets 38.2 25.3 Domestic credit 27.3 34.1 Credit to the economy 29.8 40.0 Money and quasi-money(M2) 36.5 30.1 IV. Flows relative to M2 1/ 54.4 116.3 44.8 41.3 30.5 107.1 36.5 22.0 124.9 52.8 63.0 40.0 (In percent of opening. M2 stock) 54.8 23.6 56.6 66.3 65.6 84.4 49.3 26.5 Net foreign assets 3.5 9.4 Net domestic assets 33.0 20.7 Domestic credit 30.0 32.6 Credit to Government, net 0.8 -3.3 Credit to the economy 2Y.O 36.0 15.8 -6.6 10.5 37.0 69.6 29.5 38.1 24.5 61.2 4.2 7.0 -7.6 33.9 17.5 68.8 13.8 II.5 35.6 15.0 31.8 36. I -3.8 - 12.4 35.6 48.5 Sources: Data provided by the Bank of Mozambique; and staff estimates. 1/ After valuation adjustment. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 60 - Table 4. Mozambique: Balance of Payments, 1991-95 (hnillions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise specified) APPENDIX V --- 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 Prog. Est. Prog. Trade balance Exports f.o.b.) ImKZ&$f’!pecial programs I/ Services (net) -736.5 -715.7 162.3 139.3 -898.8 -855.0 (--I (---I - 109.6 -132.8 -822.9 -979.8 131.8 164.0 -954.7 -1,143.g (-33.5) (-125.8) - 126.7 - 157.2 -869.0 -698.7 149.5 170.0 -1,018.5 -868.7 (-125.4) (-7.4) -138.5 - 164.4 Receipts 202.8 2.22.6 239.8 Transportation 60.2 169.5 78.2 Compensation of employees 55.6 58.0 59.6 Other service receipts 87.0 ‘95.1 102.0 242.6 E 107:4 245.91 228.0 67.1 73.0 54.8 55.0 124.01 100.0 E enditures ? nterest 2/ Transportation Compensation of employees Investment services Other service expenditure -312.4 -355.4 -366.5 -399.8 -384.4. -392.4 - 135.9 -171.2 - 170.1 -166.1 - 143.5 - 174.1 -50.2 -48.5 -51.3 -55.9 -48.2 -50.3 -29.6 -26.6 -21.3 -27.6 -19.4 -20.0 -44.5 -43.0 -47.0 -61.1 -85.0’ -80.0 -52.2 - 66.2 -76.8 -89.1 -88.3 -68.0 Private transfers 107.6 110.0 125.0 127.5 137.5 120.0 Current account, excluding grants Unrequited official transfers 3/ Of which: special programs I/ Current account, including grants -- 738.4 -738.5 -824.6 - 1,009.5 -870.0 -743.1 501.7 499.4 (--I (---I -236.7 -239.1 503.3 658.8 (33.5) (125.8) -321.3 -350.7 564.6~ 433.0 (189.1) (7.4) -305.4. -310.1 C?~Zi~ZctZ%wing Amortization Direct investment (net) Short-term capital and errors and omissions (net) Overall balance -187.5 -155.1 -107.0 -1.4 -22.1 25.7 144.1 169.8 185.5 276.4 260.3 255.2 -354.1 -350.2 -324.5 -318.8 -317.4. -274.5 22.5 25.3 32.0 35.0 35.0 45.0 -33.7 -12.4 -7.8 4.3, -- -457.9 -406.7 -436.1 -358.1 -323.2. -284.4 Fil ~~t%~eign assets Assets (increase -) $/ Liabilities ’ ~ Financing ga Debt rehe P 384.9 6/ 384.9 Remaining gap I/ -- Memorandum items : CurrentaccounlhTficit/surplus s/ Before grants After grants Gross foreign assets of the banking system (in months of next Debt service ratio 8 ear’s imports) 7 Before debt reli;f After debt relief Actual payments 457.9 - 12.7 -15.9 3.2 ‘p+’ 406.7 436.1 -39.8 46.2 -106.3 13.0 66.5 33.2 -w -G? 358.1 323.2 -35.0 -54.1 -45.1 -55.6 10.1 1.5 r_l;.;, “;:;.I 284.4 -40.0 -47.6 7.6 $:i’ 668.7 988.0 395.6 387.1 668.7 988.0 395.6 387.1 -- -- -- --. 326.8 163.4 163.4 202.2 204.1 221.9 248.2 220.0 186.7 64.8 66.1 86.4 86.2 77.2. 77.9 279.9 384.8 372.1 416.9 427.6 475.2 3.7 4.6 3.9 5.1 5.5 6.2 134.2 144.5 134.7 121.7 83.7 88.3 31.9 24.4 16.2 21.2 29.8 24.4 116.2 34.7 34.7 Sources: Bank of Mozambique; and staffestimates. A/ Includes demobilization and reintegration of demobilized soldiers, elections, resettlement, and land mine removal. 2/ It does nclt include interest accrued on loans to the Cahora Bassa 1Iydropower Project. 3/ Does not include technical assistance. y 5-/ Includes the special account held in the Bank of France. Reduction of arrears in 1993 includes US$18.9 million in rescheduling agreements with other official creditors. pa i: ments to the Paris Club in early 1993 and assumescompletion of Arre‘ars to arls Clubcreditors (lJS$12.2 million) accumulated in late 1993 were cleared in early 1994. Arrears lo multilateral creditors (USrS2.4 million) accumulated in late 1994 were clared in early 1995. $! Debt relief prior to 19Y3 includes only concluded agreements; in lYY3debt relief includes Us%189 million in current obhgations rescheduled under the 1993 ParIs Club agreement, a USS23 million discount obtained in current obligations with Brazil, and assumes the corn amounting to US$56 letion of rescheduling agreements with other official creditors totaling US$7.53 million (arrears P “J’ mllhon ; m 1994 includes US$210 million in current obligations rescheduled under the 1993 Paris Club agreement, a US.S.22 million iscount obtained in current obligations with Brazil and assumes USS155 million of current maturities to be rescheduled with other bilateral creditors; in 1995 includes half of US$170 rnillion in current obligations rescheduled under the 1993 Paris Club agreement, assumes half of U423 million (55 percent) discount obtained in current obligations to Brazil and half of US$134 million of current maturities to be rescheduled with other bilateral creditors. 21 The financing gap for 1995 would be fiiled with additional concessional agreements under London terms for the second half of 1995. g/ In percent of exports of goods and services; in 1993, the ratios exclude the effects of the debt cancelation granted by the Netherlands. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 61 - Table 5. Mozambique: Macroeconomic Indicators, 1994-2000 (In percent of GDP) APPENDIX V 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2om Ed. Projections Gross domesticsavings (GDS) lJ 4.7 12.3 12.5 14.3 17.2 19.1 19.9 Public sector 21 -3.5 4.2 3.7 4.3 4.8 5.5 6.0 Priate sector 21 8.2 8.1 8.8 10.0 12.3 13.6 13.9 Net factor income from abroad and net unrequited transfers Net factor income g Public sector Private sector Net unrequited transfen Public sector Private sector 34.7 22.3 23.0 20.8 16.4 14.1 13.8 - 13.2 - 14.7 - 15.5 -145 -15.2 - 14.3 - 12.5 -9.8 -11.6 -12.6 -11.9 -13.0 -11.0 -9.4 -3.4 -3.0 -2.9 -2.6 -2.2 -3.3 -3.0 47.9 37.0 38.6 35.4 31.6 28.4 26.3 38.5 29.0 30.1 27.6 24.6 22.1 20.3 9.4 8.0 8.4 7.8 7.0 6.4 5.9 Gross national savings (GNS) 9 39.4 34.6 35.5 35.1 33.5 33.2 33.7 Public sector 25.2 21.5 21.2 19.9 16.4 16.6 16.9 Primte sector 14.2 13.1 14.3 15.2 17.1 16.6 16.8 Foreign savings q 20.8 20.7 21.7 26.4 21.5 Gross savings 60.2 55.3 57.2 61.6 5.5 1 Gross investment Public sector Primte sector Of which: electricity and gas projects Memorandum items: 60.2 55.3 57.2 24.4 22.8 21.9 35.8 32.5 35.2 (-1 (2.0) (4.1) 55.1 18.1 36.9 (8.6) 10.1 8.9 43.3 42.6 43.3 42.6 16.3 15.0 26.9 27.5 . . . . . . Total revenue 17.6 21.0 21.0 61.6 20.4 41.2 (9.8) 21.0 21.0 Current expenditure 22.8 19.6 19.4 19.3 19.3 Investment expenditure 24.4 22.8 21.9 20.4 18.1 Total expenditure 47.2 42.4 41.3 39.7 37.4 21.0 18.7 16.3 35.0 Overall deficit before grants -29.6 -21.3 -20.3 - 18.7 - 16.4 External grants received 21.4 17.7 16.2 13.8 11.7 Overall deficit after grants -8.2 -3.7 -4.1 -4.9 -4.7 Domestic financing -0.9 -3.1 -2.3 -0.7 0.4 Of which: bank financing (-0.9) (-3.0) (-2.2) (-0.6) (0.4) - 14.0 10.1 -4.0 (0d.Z) 21.1 18.5 IS.0 33.6 - 12.5 8.9 -3.6 ,::“,, Source: Staff eslimates. L/ GDS = GDP less total consumption. 21 Current budgetary revenue - current budgetaryexpenditure net of foreign factor income payments. 31 Residual. 4/ External interest payments on a commitment basis. ?$ GNS = GDS plus net factor income from abroad plus net unrequited transfers. 6/ External current account deficit. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 6. Mozambique: Ba!ance of Payments, 1994-2005 (In millions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise specified) 199s 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 200s Projections Trade balance -869.0 -698.7 -731.1 -873.8 -836.4 Exports (f.o.b.) 149.5 170.0 194.6 258.1 369.9 Imports (c.i.f.) -1,018.S --868.7 -925.6 - 1,131.9 -1,206.3 -918.7 748.9 -1,667.6 Services (net) -138.5 -164.4 -151.6 - 136.2 -156.6 -673.4 -729.4 -764.2 -805.3 -864.8 466.4 500.6 563.0 626.9 680.6 -1,139.g -1,229.9 -1,327.2 -1,432.2 -1,545.4 -144.8 -96.7 -49.7 -14.0 28.5 80.1 -960.4 839.0 -1,799,s 116.3 Receipts 245.9 228.0 255.4 286.8 320.5 359.4 404.3 447.2 495.4 546.0 602.8 653.9 Expenditures -384.4 -392.4 -407.0 -422.9 -477.1 -504.2 -501.0 -496.9 -509.4 -517.5 -522.7 -537.5 Of which: interest // -143.5 -174.1 -184.9 -195.2 -242.6 -232.7 -221.8 -209.7 -213.9 -213.4 -209.9 -207.9 Private transfers 137.5 120.0 123.6 127.3 131.1 135.1 139.1 143.3 147.6 152.0 156.6 Current account, excluding grants -870.0 -743.1 -759.1 -882.6 -861.9 -683.1 -687.0 -670.6 -671.7 -684.3 -682.1 161.3 -682.8 Unrequited official transfersz/ 564.6 433.0 441.7 450.5 459.5 468.7 478.1 487.6 497.4 507.3 517.5 527.8 Current account, including grants -305.4 -310.1 -317.4 -432.1 -402.3 .-214.4 -208.9 -183.0 -174.3 -176.9 -164.6 -155.0 Capital account -22.1 25.7 58.1 196.9 143.9 21.0 -49.5 -51.7 -67.0 -65.2 -62.8 Foreign borrowing 260.3 255.2 225.0 330.0 330.0 236.3 264.6 259.3 254.1 249.0 241.6 Amortization -317.4 -274.5 -217.3 -234.6 -294.3 -286.1 -393.4 -399.8 -420.6 -425.6 -429.2 Direct investment (net) 35.0 45.0 50.4 101.4 108.2 70.8 79.3 88.8 99.5 111.4 124.8 -39.8 234.3 -413.9 I 139.8 Is Short term and errors and omissions (net) 4.3 -323.2 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- Overall balance -284.4 -25Y.3 -235.3 -258.4 -193.4 -258.4 -234.7 -241.3 -242.1 -227.4 -194.8 Financing Net foreign assets Assets (increase -) Liabilities 323.2 -54.1 -55.6 1.5 ofwhich: Use of IMFcredit (net) 10.5 Net change in arrears (increase +) -9.8 284.4 259.3 235.3 258.4 193.4 258.4 234.7 241.3 242.1 -40.0 -58.2 -50.7 -67.8 -69.0 -81.1 -85.7 -78.6 -74.2 -47.6 -40.9 -24.1 -36.6 -35.6 -48.6 -52.5 -56.6 -61.1 7.6 -17.3 -26.7 -31.2 -33.4 -32.5 -33.2 -22.0 -13.1 7.6 -17.3 -26.7 -31.2 -33.4 -32.5 -33.2 -22.0 -13.1 -2.4 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 227.4 194.8 -57.4 -41.9 -50.9 -37.6 -6.5 -4.3 -6.5 -4.3 -- -- Financing gap 387.1 326.8 Debt relief 387.1 163.4 Remaining gap 3/ -- 163.4 317.5 286.0 326.2 262.4 339.5 320.3 319.9 316.3 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 317.5 286.0 326.2 262.4 339.5 320.3 319.9 316.3 284.8 236.7 -- -- 284.8 236.7 Memorandum items : Current account deficit/surplus 41 Before grants After grants Gross foreign assets of the banking system (in months of next year’s imports) Debt service ratio 41 Before debt relief After debt relief 220.0 77.2 427.6 5.5 186.7 168.7 162.0 124.8 82.7 75.9 66.4 59.8 55.8 50.5 45.7 77.9 70.6 79.3 58.3 26.0 23.1 18.1 15.5 14.4 12.2 10.4 475.2 516.1 540.1 576.7 612.3 660.9 713.4 770.0 831.1 882.1 919.7 6.2 5.5 5.4 6.1 6.0 6.0 6.0 6.0 6.0 5.9 5.7 119.2 116.2 93.2 83.8 82.3 66.9 71.6 63.6 58.5 53.2 47.8 41.9 24.4 34.7 22.7 31.3 35.0 35.1 34.1 31.9 30.0 27.4 26.7 26.1 - Sources: Bank of Mozambique; and Fund staff estimates. l/ It does not include interest accrued on loans to the Cahora Bassa Hydropower Project. 2/ c does not include technical assistance. 3/ Financing gaps from 1996 onwards could be filled through continuous rescheduling agreements under Naples terms, including topping up the concessionality of the debt service on debt previously rescheduled under Toronto and London terms. 4/ Jn percent of exports of goods and services. . Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public. Table 7. Mozambique: External Debt Service, 1994-2005 (In millions of U.S. dollars) 1994 Est. 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 ProJecttons 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 Total debt set-vice 471.3 Principal 327.9 Interest 143.5 Scheduled debt service I/ 471.3 Principal Multtlateral Of which: IMF repayments 2/ Bilateral Paris Club Post-cutoff date Pre-cutoff date Of which: PRD on Toronto terms Of which: PRD on London terms Other official Commercial 327.9 24.2 5 10.5) 03.7 144.0 11.4 132.6 ,‘$I -- Interest Multilateral Of which: IMF charges 2/ Bilateral Paris Club Post-cutoff Pre-cutoff Of which: PRD on Toronto terms Of which: PRD on London terms Other official Commercial 143.5 13.6 1 2 1 93.2 11.2 82.0 (37.2 $2:: 1 -- New debt service Principal On possible new debt relief On new borrowing 3/ Of which: commercial 4/ Interest On possible new debt relief On new borrowing 3/ Of which: commercial 41 . . . . . . . . . (-1 . . . . . . . (-1 . . . . . . . . . . 1.. . . . Memorandum items : Possible new debt relief Paris Club Other Debt service on possible new debt relief Paris Club Other / 462.3 Et 426.5 287.5 31.8 I:?? 110:1 1oG 419.4 234.6 184.9 368.0 233.3 456.5 261.3 195.2 356.1 223.9 48.7 1’;;;’ 69:0 14.3 54.7 568.1 325.5 242.6 407.3 252.0 57.0 g;’ 75:8 16.1 59.7 (-- 1% 3 -- ::z 23217 350.6 228.1 61.7 1’;;:’ 89:6 17.6 72.0 647.6 425.8 221.8 435.1 69.3 10.2 59.1 21.4 165.4 (107.5 ‘g.Z -- 642.7 433.0 209.7 412.5 334.8 66.2 k 3;;’ 184:4 24.0 160.4 656.5 442.6 213.9 409.0 S% 213.4 382.7 328.4 259.2 180.1 22.5 157.6 -- 139.1 15.2 -- -- -- -- 321.9 53.5 i68.4 13.1) 179.4 20.5 158.9 (100.5 (A;:: -- 134.i 21.4 1 i:.:’ 8:1(: 78.9 60.8 18.0 62-9 3&i 6.3 78.0 71.3 19.1 4 If’ 41:9 3.6 38.3 -- -- -- 35.8 51.4 100.3 160.8 201.6 212.6 238.1 247.5 269.5 8:: (1:) 35.0 33.0 2.0 (--I ::: -- (--) 37.4 1.4 36.0 (36.0) 73.5 91.4 7;:: 8;:: (72.0) (89.5) 92.0 2.5 89.5 (89.5) 98.2 8::: (89.5) ‘Yi:: 89:s (89.5) 116.8 18.8 98.0 (89.5) 50.2 62.9 87.3 110.3 120.6 42.8 50.0 57.3 64.3 71.7 7.4 12.9 30.0 46.0 48.9 (--I (--I (10.5) (21.0) (19.3) 1;;; s2:o (17.5) 142.6 152.7 87.5 94.7 55.1 57.9 (15.8) (14.0) 326.8 170.1 156.7 33.8 3::: 317.5 138.0 179.5 44.1 8.6 35.4 286.0 132.7 ‘:::: 11.9 39.5 326.2 138.9 187.3 :2 43:s 262.4 144.7 ‘ii:: 19.0 47.1 339.5 222.0 117.5 74.2 ii:: 320.3 199.0 121.3 Fir: 53.7 %:9’ 124.0 102.9 44.8 58.1 316.3 192.5 123.8 113.6 50.7 62.9 645.5 626.1 435.6 418.2 209.9 207.9 280.5 47.7 2 2 5 ‘:t:i 159.7 ‘$! 54:s I -- “4”E 1W 160.9 17.3 143.6 ‘g; IS:0 ! -- 47.9 17.1 (iii2 28.9 2.7 26.2 ‘gi 1.9 I -- 317.1 ‘ET 132:O (107.5) 162.0 101.6 (E) 366.9 ‘% 168:s (125.5) 284.8 170.3 ‘2~ f (10:s) z% 74:1 ‘2-i 73:s Sources: Bank of Mozambique; and staff estimates. I/ Debt service on stock of debt outstanding as of December 31, 1994. It does not include interest accrued on loans to the Cahora Bassa Hydropower Project. 21 Includes debt service on pros ective Fund disbursement of SDR 14.7 million in 1995. 3/ Disbursed after December 3 , 1994. 4 4/ Debt service not contracted or guaranteed by the Government or the Rank of Mozambique. tt includes also debt service of loans to a prospective natural gas project. It includes amottization of loans to the Cahora Bassa Hydropower Project; 5/ It includes debt service on arrears and schedule debt service assumed to have been rescheduled in 1993-94, for program proposes. It also assumes comparable terms with the Paris Club debt reduction option. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 8. Mozambique: Balance of Payments Scenarios, 1994-2005 (In millions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise specified) 1994 Est. 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 Projections 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 Debt service Debt service ratio l/ Current account, after grants Overall balance Financing gap, before debt relief Debt service Debt service ratio I/ Current account, after grants Overall balance Financing gap, before debt relief Financing gap, after debt relief Debt service Debt service ratiol/ Current account after grants Overall balance Financing gap, before debt relief Financing gap, after debt relief 471.3 462.3 419.4 456.5 568.1 552.2 647.6 642.7 656.5 652.2 645.5 626.1 119.2 116.2 93.2 83.8 82.3 66.9 71.6 63.6 58.5 53.2 47.8 41.9 -305.4 -310.1 -317.4 -432.1 -402.3 -214.4 -208.9 - 183.0 -174.3 - 176.9 - 164.6 -155.0 -323.2 -284.4 -259.3 -235.3 -258.4 - 193.4 - 258.4 -234.7 -241.3 -242.1 -227.4 - 194.8 387.1 326.8 317.5 286.0 326.2 262.4 339.5 320.3 319.9 316.3 284.8 236.7 , 471.3 462.3 119.2 116.2 -305.4 -310.1 - 323.2 - 284.4 387.1 326.8 471.3 462.3 119.2 116.2 -305.4 -310.1 -323.2 - 284.4 387.1 326.8 -- -- Scenario II (67 percent stock operation) 2/ 163.1 222.5 285.4 326.0 337.6 342.9 350.0 343.1 374.4 36.3 4U.8 41.3 39.5 37.3 33.9 31.2 28.0 27.7 -248.8 -360.5 -300.0 - 136.5 - 143.4 - 130.9 -118.7 - 122.8 - 114.9 -3.0 -1.3 24.3 32.8 51.7 65.1 65.3 67.0 43.8 61.1 52.1 43.5 36.2 29.4 20.6 13.4 7.2 13.6 61.1 52.1 43.5 36.2 29.4 20.6 13.4 7.2 13.6 I 409.6 27.4 - 107.1 21.7 20.2 20.2 Scenario III (lower growth of official transfers) z/ 419.5 456.8 568.9 553.6 649.8 645.9 660.9 658.0 653.2 636.4 93.2 83.8 82.4 67.0 71.8 63.9 58.9 53.6 48.3 42.6 -326.2 -450.0 -429.6 -251.5 -256.2 -240.8 -243.1 -257.0 -256.5 -259.0 -268.0 -253.1 -285.7 -230.5 -305.7 -292.5 -310.0 -322.2 -319.5 -300.0 326.2 303.8 353.5 299.5 386.8 378.2 388.7 396.4 376.9 341.9 8.8 17.8 27.3 37.1 47.3 57.8 68.8 80.1 92.1 105.1 Baseline Scenario Sources: Bank of Mozambique; and Fund staff estimates and projections. I/ As a percentage of exports of goods and services. h0 and London terms. Assumes similar options to the 1993 Paris Club rescheduling 3; Assumes a decline in the rate of growth of official transfers of 2 percentage points a year from 1996 onward. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public. m Table 9. Mozambique: Indicators of Financial ObligaConr CO the Fund, 1994-2005 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 Est. Projectiorrs Debt service to the Fund In millions of U.S. dollars In percent of exports of goods and services In percent of total debt service Before debt relief After debt relief In percent of nonreschedulable debt service J/ In percent of gross foreign assets 11.4 14.8 18.4 2.9 3.7 4.1 2.4 3.2 4.4 11.8 10.8 18.0 16.4 12.7 21.4 2.7 3.1 3.6 Debt service lo the Fund In percent of total debt service Before debt relief After debt relief Debt service lo the Fund In percent of total debt service Before debt relief After debt relief Memorandum items : Fund credit outstanding In millions of U.S. dollars In percent of quota In percent of exports of goods and services Gross Fund financing In millions of U.S. dollars In percent of Mozambique’s financing needs z/ USYSDR exchange rate 2.4 3.2 11.3 11.8 10.8 11.3 2.4 3.2 4.4 11.8 10.8 18.0 207.4 172.9 52.5 21.0 1.7 1.4 219.1 201.9 179.2 165.0 55.0 44.9 21.4 -- 2.0 -- 1.5 1.5 27.6 5.1 6.1 16.2 18.1 5.1 32.1 34.1 33.0 33.5 4.6 4.1 3.6 3.3 5.6 6.2 5.1 5.2 13.3 11.8 10.7 10.4 14.4 12.7 11.6 11.2 5.6 5.6 5.0 4.7 Scenario II (67 percent stock oDeration) 22.2 13.2 2.0 I.1 3.4 2.0 6.6 3.9 7.1 4.2 2.9 1.6 6.5 4.3 0.5 0.3 1.0 0.7 1.8 1.1 1.9 1.1 0.7 0.5 12.4 12.4 11.2 10.5 9.8 9.8 11.2 10.5 9.8 9.8 Scenario III flower rrowrh of official transfers) 6.3 3.8 1.7 6.3 3.8 1.7 1.1 ’ 1.1 E I 6.1 5.6 6.2 5.1 5.2 3.4 2.0 1.0 0.7 16.2 13.2 11.7 10.6 10.3 6.5 3.9 1.8 1.1 175.4 144.1 111.5 79.1 45.9 23.9 10.8 143.2 117.8 90.6 64.2 37.3 19.4 8.8 32.2 21.0 13.5 8.7 4.5 2.1 0.9 4.3 -- 3.5 -- -- 0.3 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5 -- -- 1.5 -- -- 1.5 Baseline Scenario Sources: Bank of Mozambique; and staff estimates. 1/ Nonreschedulable debt service is defined as including debt lo mullilateral organizations, uninsured suppliers, commercial banks (excluding arrears), all post-cutoff debt and debt rescheduled on concessional terms. From 1996 onward it does not include debt service rescheduled under Toronto and London terms. 21 Gross financing needs arc defined as the sum of the current account deficit before grants, amortization of medium- and long-term debt, repayment 10 the Fund, targeted grants, amortizarlon of medium- and long-term debt, repayment reduction in payment arrears, and targeted accumulation of reserves. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 10. Mozambique: Projected Payments to the Fund as of January 1, 1995 ----. (in miliions 01 JuEj Overdue 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 - -~~~ A. Obligations from existing drawings 1.’ Principal a. Repurchases b. ESAFISAF repayments c. TF obligations 9.5 -- 11.9 -- -- 18.3 -- 2. Charges and interest I/ 0.7 0.7 0.6 3. Total obligations (percent of quota) -- 10.2 12.1 12.6 18.9 21.9 23.2 22.4 19.9 12.2 6.0 1.5 14.9 22.5 26.0 27.6 26.7 23.7 14.5 7.2 1.8 B. Obligations from prospective drawings 2/ 1. Principai a. Repurchases b. ESAFISAF repayments c. TF obligations -- -- 2. Charges and interest 1/ 0.1 0.1 3. Total obligations (percent of quota) -- -- 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 C. Cummulative (existing and prospective) 2/ 1. Principal a. Repurchases b. ESAF/SAF repayments c. TF obligations -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 9.5 11.9 18.3 21.4 22.8 -- -- -- -- -- -- 2. Charges and interest 1/ 3. Total obligations (percent of quota) -- 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.6 0.4 0.3 0.2 0.1 0.1 -- -- -- 10.2 12.6 19.0 22.0 23.3 22.5 22.9 15.1 9.0 4.4 2.9 -- 12.1 15.0 22.6 26.1 27.7 26.8 27.2 18.0 10.7 5.3 3.5 Source: Treasurer’s Department. -- 12.1 -- -- 22.8 ,21.4 -- 22.2 -- 19.7 -- 6.0 -- 1.5 0.5 0.4 0.3 0.2 0.1 -- -- 2.9 -- 2.9 2.9 2.9 2.9 z -- , 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 -- 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 3.0 3.0 3.0 3.0 2.9 3.6 3.6 3.5 3.5 3.5 -- 22.2 -- -- -- -- -- 22.7 15.0 8.9 4.4 2.9 -- -- -- -- -- I/ Projections are hased on current rates of charge. including burden-sharing chargeswhere applrcahle, lor purchases tn the GRA. and on current interest rates for SM. ESAF, and Trust Fund. The current SDR interest rate is assumed for net use of SDRs. 2/ Based on an ESAF loan disbursement of SDR 14.7 million in October 1995. . . Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public