DOCUMENT OF INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND NOT FOR PUBLIC USE FOR’. El AGENDA EBS/95/94 CONFIDENTIAL June 2, 1995 To: Members of the Executive Board From: The Secretary Subject: Republic of Moldova - Staff Report for the 1995 Article IV Consultation and First Review Under the Stand-Bv Arrangement Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staff report for the 1995 Article IV consultation with the Republic of Moldova and the first review under the stand-by arrangement, which is tentatively scheduled for discussion on Wednesday, June 21, 1995. A draft decision appears on pages 19 and 20. Mr. Berengaut (ext. 38773) or Mr. Haley (ext. 34134) is available to answer technical or factual questions relating to this paper prior to the Board discussion. Unless the Documents Preparation Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified-;' the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD), the European Commission (EC), and the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), following' its consideration by the Executive Board. Att: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicCONFIDENTIAL INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND REPUBLIC OF MOLDOVA Staff Reoort for the 1995 Article IV Consultation and First Review Under the Stand-By Arrangement Prepared by the European II and Policy Development and Review Departments (In consultation with other Departments) Approved by John Odling-Smee and Mark Allen June 1, 1995 I. Introduction II. III. IV. Policies for the Period Ahead Recent Developments 2 Contents Performance and Developments under the 1995 Program 1. Performance under the program 2. Monetary policy 3. Fiscal policy 4. External sector ba: Balance of payments Exchange and trade regime 5. Structural reforms 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. Introduction Monetary policy Fiscal policy Balance of payments and exchange system ba: Balance of payments External debt C. Exchange rate policy d. Trade policy Medium-term balance of payments outlook Capacity to repay Structural measures Medium-term policy framework Page 1 7 7 7 8 10 10 10 10 11 11 12 12 14 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicV. Staff Appraisal 14 Tables 1. Performance Under the Program, December 1994 - March 1995 21 2. Macroeconomic Framework, Summary.Indicators, 1992-95 2:2 3. Monetary Survey and Projections, 1993-95 2:3 4. General Government Budget Outcomes, 1992-95 24 5. Balance of Payments, 1993-95 25 6. Illustrative Medium-Term Scenario, 1993-2004 26 7. Indicators of Capacity to Repay the Fund 2 7 Charts 1. Inflation, Production and Fiscal Indicators 2. Selected Financial Indicators 3. Foreign Currency Market, USD 4. Privatization of Medium- and Large-Scale Auctions 2a 2b 661 Number of Enterprises Auctioned 6b Annexes 1. Data Reporting and Quality 28 - ii - Contents Page ADDendices I. Fund Relations II. Relations with IBRD Attachments 32 36 I. II. Transmittal Letter 37 Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies 38 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicI. Introduction A staff team J.J visited Chisinau April 18-May 2, 1995 to conduct discussions for the 1995 Article IV Consultation and the first review unde? the 12-month stand-by arrangement that was approved on March 22, 1995 in ;::I amount equivalent to SDR 58.5 million (65 percent of quota). Members of the mission met with the Deputy Prime Minister (Mr. Gutu), the President of the National Bank of Moldova (Mr. Talmaci), the Minister of Finance (Mr. Chifan), the Minister of Labor (Mr. Nidelcu), and other senior officials of the Government and the National Bank of Moldova (NBM). The Managing Director, accompanied by Mr. Wijnholds, the Executive Director for Moldova, visited Chisinau May 6-7, 1995. He met with President Snegur, Prime Minister Sangheli, Speaker of Parliament Luschinski (together with Chairmen of key Parliamentary commissions), the President of the NBM and the Minister of Finance. The Managing Director also addressed Parliament and participated in a press conference. The first purchase under the stand-by arrangement (SBA), in an amount equivalent to SDR 6.3 million, was made on Board approval. The second purchase, in an amount equivalent to SDR 13.05 million, is contingent, inter alia, on the observance of end-March 1995 quantitative performance criteria and the completion of the first review. As of end-April 1995, Moldova's use of Fund credit was equivalent to 143.1 percent of quota. The authorities' policy intentions for 1995 were set out in their letter to the Managing Director of February 27, 1995 and in the Memorandum of Economic Policies that was attached to it (EBS/95/26). Additional policy measures are set out in a Memorandum of Economic Policies attached to the letter from the Prime Minister and the Chairman of the National Bank of Moldova dated May 30, 1995 (Attachments I and II). When the Executive Directors considered Moldova's request for the stand-by arrangement, they noted the ambitious inflation target and stressed the importance of consolidating the progress made towards financial stabilization. They urged the NBM to strengthen its supervisory capacity and deal in a comprehensive way with undercapitalized banks. Directors emphasized the need for improvements in tax administration, the importance of maintaining a unified tax system and the need for strict expenditure prioritization. They also stressed the importance of accelerating structural reforms on as broad a front as possible so as to buttress the gains that had already been made in terms of financial stabilization. l/ The team comprised Messrs. Berengaut (head), Haley, Shabsigh (all EUR II), Mr. Leckow (LEG), Charap (PDR), Krelove (FAD), Mr. Kenjeev (interpreter, BLS), and Mrs. Alvarado (administrative assistant, RES). The team was assisted by Mr. Nielsen, the resident representative in Moldova. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 2 - The 1994 Article IV consultation was completed by the Executive Board on June 3, 1994. Moldova avails itself of the transitional arrangements of Article XIV, Section 2, of the Fund's Articles. II. Recent Developments 1/ Inflation was contained through the first quarter (Chart 1). The monthly inflation rate was 0.7 percent in March, down from 2.9 percent and 2.3 percent in January and February, respectively, and below the 1 percent monthly rate targeted in the program for the first half of 1995. Further progress towards financial stabilization was made in April, when the rate of inflation fell to 0.6 percent. The Moldovan leu remained broadly stable in foreign exchange markets during the first quarter. The Moldovan currency traded within a range of between Mdl 4.27 - US$l and Mdl 4.52 = US$l. Foreign exchange intervention by the NBM has been limited to smoothing movements of the exchange rate. Despite the small nominal depreciation that has occurred, the leu has continued to appreciate in real terms (Chart 2). Nominal interest rates have continued to decline. In the auction held April 28, 1995, the discount rate on NBM-auctioned credits fell to 2.67 percent (at a monthly rate), roughly 80 basis points below the level in end-1994. The interest rate on commercial bank lending has also fallen somewhat, but the spreads between lending and deposit rates remain high (Chart 2). This may reflect, in part, the overhang of non-performing loans on the balance sheets of most commercial banks. As of end-March 1995, inter-enterprise arrears amounted to Mdl 1,639 million compared with Mdl 1,598 million as of end-1994. Although the underlying economic situation remains difficult, there are signs of improvement in the outlook. Industrial production, especially in the agricultural processing sector, remains depressed. Overall, however, the level of industrial production has been broadly stable since end-1994. Agricultural production is expected to rebound from the drought-affected level recorded in 1994, provided favorable growing conditions continue. Initial indications are that the winter wheat crop will be good. Higher yields in the agricultural sector and the stabilization of industrial output should provide the foundation for a modest recovery in real output in the remainder of 1995. The labor market continues to be characterized by a very low level of official unemployment on the order of 2 percent of the labor force. The data for end-1994 indicate, however, that large numbers of employees were on long-term unpaid leave (about 17 percent of the labor force). Substantial wage arrears exist in virtually all sectors of the economy with the L/ Developments through end-1994 were described in EBS/95/26. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 2a - (‘11;ll~l. I blCl.lN:i’ \ Inflation, Production and Fiscal Indicators Monthly Inflation 35 ,--, 35 I I\ Actual I - 20 - 15 - 10 O- -5 I I I I I 1 I I I 1 I I , I I I I I -5 ONDJFMAYJJASONDJFMA 1993 1994 1995 650 Revenues (In millions of Mdl) r 600 - 550 - Actual 1501 IL!3 I II III IV 1994 Id95 650 650, Expenditure including Net Lending (In millions of 600 600 - 550 500 450 400 350 300 250 200 150 550 - 500 - 450 - 400 - 350 - 300 - 250 - 200 I 1501 IL\3 II III IV 1994 1495 Industrial Production (1990 = 100) 3/ 120Y-- 1993 1994 1995 550 500 450 100 550 100 !50 LOO 150 600 l/ EBS/94/177. 2,’ EBS/95/26. 3/ Excluding production of private joint ventures ana enterprises in the town of Bendery. beginning January 1994. 4/ E&/94/111; for 199404. EBS/94/225; for 199501, see Table 4. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 2b - ~‘11:11.1 .: MOl.l)f)V/\ Selected Financial Indicators 800 CPI and Monetary Aggrrgates (Quarterly Average of 12-month x changes) '.., CPI '.., '.., 600 500 400 300 200 100 cl ‘.., ‘:, ” - 500 ':, 'J, '.., ‘., - 400 '... '.., '.., 1 300 L L I lo I II III IV 1994 Id95 800 AC I 1 700 i 600 Gross International Reserves of the NBM -(In millions of US$) Actual I Proflam 3, 401 I "'I I"" " ! " "I 0,ig3D J F M A M fg9J4 A S 0 N D J ;gg! A Exchange Rate Developments US$/MDl 200 0.35 180 (Increase in index indicates appreciation) ,... ;,....... .-“. 2.4 ,./ 0.33 160 140 120 100 Nominal Exchange Rate (Right scale) 80 60 0.31 0.29 0.21 0.25 0.23 0.21 I.19 I.17 1.15 1.13 Interest Rates at Monthly Rates Commercial banks’ lending rate 1/ 3C 2( l( 0 -10 -20 V Real NBM auction rate 2/ 40 20 -10 l/ Average Interest rate on S-month credit sxtendcd hy the four largest banks. 2/ Adjusted by the current monthly inflotion. 3/ EBS/93/177 In 1994 and EBS/95/26 I? 199501. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 3 - exception of the budgetary sphere, where the Republican Government implemented several measures to clear arrears in early April 1995. III. Performance and DeveloDments Under the 1995 Pronram 1. Performance under the proeram All the performance criteria applicable to end-March 1995 were met with significant margins (Table 1). While the margins on the ceiling on net domestic assets of the NBM and the net and gross international reserves of the NBM reflect a tighter-than-programmed policy stance, the margin on the target for general government borrowing from the banking system stems, in part, from larger-than-expected foreign financing and from the accumulation of expenditure arrears that were settled in early April 1995. 2. Monetary oolicv In the first quarter of 1995, the NBM pursued a tighter-than-programmed credit policy in response to higher-than-expected inflationary pressures in the last quarter of 1994 and early 1995 (Tables 2 and 3). NBM lending to commercial banks grew less than programmed, and lending to the general government was also significantly less than programmed, aided by a surge in tax revenues in March 1995. As a result of the restrictive credit policy, reserve money contracted in the first quarter by 8 percent compared with a programmed decrease of 1 percent. The decline in reserve money is attributable to a decline in bank reserves, as commercial bank correspondent account deposits with the NBM fell by 44 percent. This was partly offset by a significant increase in currency in circulation, which rose by 6.3 percent, as a result of the continuing expansion of the informal private sector and increased demand for leu notes in Transnistria. Broad money grew by 1.2 percent in the first quarter of 1995, slightly below the program target. Foreign currency deposits, which grew by 24 percent, (at market exchange rates), offset a 10 percent decline in lei deposits. The portfolio shift towards dollar deposits reflects mainly the restoration of foreign exchange holdings to the average level in the second half of 1994, which itself was part of a diversification of assets that began with the liberalization of foreign exchange controls in 1993. Although commercial bank monthly lending rates have decreased on average by 3 percentage points since December 1994, they remain high at about 8 to 10 percent. This is, as noted above, attributed to a systemic problem of non-performing loans in the banking system. The NBM has responded to this situation by strengthening the banking supervision department both in terms of staffing and training programs. At the same time, new loan quality classification guidelines have been implemented and banks are now required to publish a monthly statement of their capital Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 4 - balance. Agreements with undercapitalized banks have been concluded under which these banks are subject to restrictions on their acceptance of deposits, loan activities and payments of wages and dividends. Legislation revising the taxation of financial institutions has also been submitted to Parliament which provides, inter alia, for more favorable tax treatment of loan-loss provisioning. The Government is preparing two additional laws (both of which have benefited from considerable technical assistance by MAE and LEG): the law on the central bank, which sets out the responsibilities of the NBM and the criteria which should guide the conduct of monetary policy, and the law on financial institutions, which provides the framework for the NBM supervisioln of commercial banks. 3. Fiscal nolicv The first quarter consolidated budget outcome (incorporating the Social Fund balance) was broadly consistent with the annual program (Table 4). Tax revenues were as programmed, aided by extraordinary efforts to collect 1994 tax arrears, in particular of enterprise income tax, VAT and excise taxes, as well as road fees. Because under a decision of Parliament revenues resulting from arrears collection were allocated to the liquidation of 1994 expenditure arrears, the budget outcome for the quarter was only achieved by the sequestration of current expenditure on a priority basis. Strict expenditure control, aided by restraint in granting new loans and guarantees, and a cashflow surplus in the Social Fund in conjunction with better-than-expected foreign budgetary financing, which reflected the rescheduling of some principal repayments to Russia, contained the domestic bank borrowing requirement within the program target. Significant weaknesses remain in tax collection, although improvements in tax administration are being made through the training of personnel, computerization, and the rationalization of its operations. In addition, a number of legislative initiatives are underway to provide the basis for a modern tax administration, including legislative amendments in four areas: (i) a requirement for the filing of returns; (ii) a requirement for taxpayers and third parties to provide relevant information when requested; (iii) authorization for the tax authorities to assess penalties (subject tat appeal to the courts); and (iv) imposition of criminal sanctions for tax evasion. Government expenditures remained subject to severe expenditure control in the quarter, with priority given to the clearance of wage and pension arrears and essential expenditures. Despite these measures, expenditure arrears continued to accumulate. Wage arrears of the Republican Government stood at Mdl 10 million at the end of March (equivalent to about 0.5 percent of quarterly GDP), most of which were accumulated in the month (arrears for February and earlier months having been settled earlier), while local government wage arrears totalled Mdl 17 million (equivalent to about 0.8 percent of quarterly GDP). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 5 - Progress was made in other budgetary areas. Lending operations made a net contribution to the budget in the first quarter, as no new loans were extended, repayments on previous loans and defaulted guarantees were made, and as there were no defaults on government guaranteed loans to enterprises. The Social Fund, incorporating pension and social safety .net expenditures, recorded a cash flow surplus of about Mdl 10 million in the quarter. Payment arrears increased by Mdl 25 million, however, which is attributable in part to administrative delays in the transfer of funds from surplus to deficit districts of the country. To protect the standards of living of those most in need, some pensions were increased in the first quarter of 1995, the first increases since June 1994. To spread more evenly the social costs of restructuring, the Government has decided to provide, through the Social Fund, severance payments for laid-off employees of bankrupt companies in cases where the enterprises do not themselves possess, sufficient funds to pay. In addition, steps have been taken to unify payroll tax rates across sectors, to flatten the pension benefit structure, and to limit pensions for those still working, consistent with the recommendations of a FAD technical assistance mission. In March 1995, the Government introduced treasury bill auctions. Although the amount raised in three initial auctions through end-March 1995 was small (some Mdl 4 million), and the interest rates high (about 7 percent on a monthly basis, equivalent to 6 percent in real terms), the prospects appear good for substantial expansion of nonbank domestic borrowing, as evident from the recent interest of foreign investors, and efforts are being made to provide information on the auctions to the public, to the banks (to act as agents) and other financial institutions. 4. External sector a. Balance of pavments The balance of payments remains under severe pressure, primarily as a result of higher prices for imported energy (Table 5). Based on preliminary data, the current account deficit for 1994 was US$183 million; in the first quarter of 1995, the current account deficit was narrower than projected, at US$53 million, owing primarily to lower-than-anticipated imports and strong growth in exports to non-FSU markets. b. Exchanne and trade regime Since the introduction of the Moldovan leu on November 29, 1993, the exchange rate, managed under a unified and floating system, has remained Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 6 - relatively stable (Chart 3). l/ The real exchange rate appreciated by 82 percent vis-a-vis the U.S. dollar over 1994; in the first quarter of 1995, it appreciated by a further 2.4 percent. On April 1, 1995 Moldova lowered its maximum tariff to 30 percent, with the exception of tariffs on a small number of luxury goods. 2J The Gover,nment has continued its efforts toward accession to the GATT/WTO and has taken the first steps to join the IFC. 5. Structural reforms Although several important measures were initiated in the first quartcer of 1995 program, structural reforms have not matched the gains made with respect to financial stabilization. The Government began liquidation actions against several state enterprises as a prior action for approval of the arrangement. Proceedings were taken against five of the seven state enterprises that had been identified under the program; three were liquidated, with their assets sold in public auction, while two found sufficient resources to clear their outstanding liabilities. Liquidation proceedings against the two remaining firms were deferred while negotiations concerning the possible restructuring of the enterprises were conducted. The pace of the privatization process slowed in the first quarter of 1995 (Chart 4). Several factors account for this development, including the adoption of a "wait and see" attitude on the part of enterprise managers and the branch ministries in anticipation of the adoption by Parliament of the 1995/96 Privatization Program. Firms scheduled for voucher privatization hoped to convert to cash auction (and lobbied the Government for a change in their status). As a result, there was a marked decline in the number of enterprises sold in the first quarter of the year. As of end- March 1995, 334 small-scale enterprises had been sold; an additional 61 firms were sold in April. Almost 500 medium- and large-scale enterprises were sold over the same period. The total number of enterprises sold-- roughly 800 firms in all- -represents about two-thirds of the total number identified in the 1993/94 Privatization Program (adjusted to exclude enterprises located in Transnistria and firms that had merged with other enterprises). The remaining unsold enterprises that had been identified in the 1993/94 Program (about 400 in total) have been incorporated in the 1995/96 Privatization Program, which was approved by Parliament on March 15, 1995. There were a number of developments with respect to Moldova's legal framework. Considerable progress was made in the revision of the bankruptcy 1/ The leu was not introduced in the Transnistria region, where a separate, local currency circulates. As of April 1995, the Transnistrian currency had effectively depreciated by more than a factor of 200 against the Moldovan currency since the two were separated in the fall of 1993. 2/ The exceptions apply primarily to wine products and consumer electronics. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 6a - ii 0 .- - - .- E ,’ ,’ I I I I I c-4 0 , 7 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public140 120 100 80 60 40 - 6b - Chart 4 -- Privatization of Mcdillrn- ;la~d I.argf:-Sc;jle En krprises Number of En t wpri33 Allctioncd 1/ (Fly ailctinn start.inc r!n dalf= lndicatrd) Jun 20 Jul 27 Aug 30 sept 30 act 30 Nov 30 1994DeC 2g .Jon 31,g95 Feb 25 Apr 11 Total Enterprises Offwcd for r2~~ct.ro~~ anti Enterprises F’rivatized 14c Q Enterprises anctioned I Enterprises privatized 2/ 120 N 100 - 80 - 60 - 40 - 20 - 0- dsssdh 1 - Jur 28 Jul 27 4ug so sept 30 net so wnv 70 Dee 79 Jar, 31 Feh 25 Apr 11 1994 1995 140 120 100 80 60 40 20 0 140 120 100 80 60 40 20 0 l/ Excluding unsold entorpriscs previously offered for ouctio? 2/ The outcome of April auction is not yet available. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 7 - legislation with technical assistance from the staff, and new legislation is expected to be submitted to Parliament by end-May. Revisions to key elements of the civil law, with the intention of providing a firmer basis for contracts and commercial relations, were also initiated. On the other hand, revisions to the law on property were passed in early February which make it more difficult for individuals to leave collective farms in order to operate independently. IV. Policies for the Period Ahead 1. Introduction The basic policy framework of the Government and the National Bank of Moldova remains as set out in their Memorandum of Economic Policies which is supported by the stand-by arrangement approved on March 22, 1995 (EBS/95/26, Attachment II). Policy implementation and priorities continue to be guided by the main policy objectives of the economic program: the achievement of essential price stability, and broadly-based systemic change. The authorities are satisfied with the outcome of their stabilization policies so far, especially the generally favorable financial indicators. Nevertheless, after several years of sharply contracting output and falling standards of living, they are preoccupied with the prospects for economic recovery. Accordingly, the main theme of the discussions was the need to establish a set of sufficient conditions for a revival of growth and the consolidation of financial stabilization. The authorities agreed that these conditions include a strengthening of structural reforms with a view mainly to effect behavioral changes in the state enterprise sector as well as the adoption of a proactive approach to various challenges to financial stabilization. 2. Monetarv policv The NBM remains committed to a monetary policy framework that is consistent with the objective of limiting inflation to 10 percent by year-end. NBM officials intend to maintain their policy stance and see no immediate need to utilize the margins under the SBA ceilings. They expect that the continuation of tight credit policies will lead to a further decline in inflation and bring about additional interest rate reductions. Although commercial bank lending rates have declined, the problem of high spreads between lending and deposit rates remains. The NBM is taking action on several fronts to deal with this problem. The NBM will finalize, by end-May, new guidelines on capital adequacy and non-performing loans and prepare a rating system for commercial banks to be implemented in July. A bank resolution and rating unit will also be established within the banking supervision department. Action plans for banks which fail to meet the terms of the recapitalization agreements will be prepared by end-June 1995. These plans would provide, inter alia, for the de-licensing of problem banks, the Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 8 - imposition of further restrictions on lending activities, the revocation of access to NBM credit auctions, and the removal of bank managers. Following the promulgation of the new ILaws on central bank and on financial institutions (which is expected in June 1995), the NBM plans to accelerate its efforts to address the problems of the financial system in a medium-term framework. Steps in this regard would include: the enforcement of internationally-recognized bank accounting standards; the introduction of improved reporting requirements and inspection procedures; and the development of plans to strengthen the banks' capital base. The NBM is continuing its preparations for the initiation of indirect monetary control in the second half of 1995.. The commencement of the government securities auctions in March 1995 and the expected opening of a Lombard facility by the NBM in the near future are seen as important steps in this direction. In recent months, a range of various nonbank financial institutions have begun to operate in Moldova. The Government and the NBM have expressed concern that these institutions, which currently operate in a supervisory vacuum, could lead to investors' losses as a result of imprudent behavior on the part of their managers. The Securities Commission is therefore expected to strengthen its supervisory activity in this area. 3. Fiscal policy The Government continues to view the key fiscal objectives of the 1995 program of limiting the budget deficit to 3.5 percent of GDP and the domestic bank borrowing requirement to some 1.5 percent of GDP as necessary to underpin the financial stabilization. The implementation of the program in the first quarter of 1995 was broadly successful though some problems have arisen as described below. While borrowing from the banking system was contained within the program target, expenditure arrears accumulated, which were broadly equivalent to the margin under the ceiling (about Mdl 40 million or 0.5 percent of GDP). The Government attributed this development to the difficulties of monitoring the position of extrabudgetary funds vis-a-vis the banking system and the lumpiness of tax revenue. Expenditure arrears were cleared in early April 1995, and the Government is now taking steps to improve its monitoring capability, including efforts to computerize key Treasury functions. The Government identified several factors that threaten fiscal performance over the remainder of the year (Paragraph 8 of the Memorandum of Economic Policies). These include, in particular, conditional postponement of payment of tax arrears for selected manufacturing industries, and a general postponement of taxes on imports of inputs into agricultural production; (ii) the dependence of the revenue performance in the second half on significant land tax collections; (iii) the accumulation of Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 9 - significant pension and other benefits arrears by the Social Fund; (iv) delays in the receipt of privatization revenue; (v) a delay in the implementation of improvements in tax administration procedures and the granting of sufficient enforcement powers to the state tax inspectorate; u and (vi) an increase in the level of public service wages at the lower levels of the pay scale in the first quarter of the year, and delays in concomitant employment reductions. Under these circumstances, the Government decided to implement the following measures to ensure the integrity of the fiscal program: (i) postponed tax liabilities will be settled in full by end-October 1995, and new tax postponements or industrial incentives will be strictly restrained; (ii) the Government will offset any revenue shortfall arising from the existing postponements, or from other causes, by increasing the base in excise taxes; (iii) the Government will review preparations for the effective collection of land tax revenue, and implement appropriate remedial measures; (iv) the operation and financing of the Social Fund will be reviewed to identify means to accelerate the payment of contributions from enterprises and targeted transfers from the local governments; (v) the process of cash privatization will be accelerated with a view to mobilizing at least Mdl 30 million by end-June 1995; and any tied expenditures, such as the indexation of deposits, will be deferred until the corresponding revenue is realized; (vi) the Government will ensure that by end-May 1995 the State Tax Inspectorate has sufficient legal powers to seize assets of tax delinquents; and (vii) salary adjustments will be allowed only in those administrative units that have reduced their work force beyond the targets envisaged in the 1995 Budget Law. The Government is also accelerating the implementation of a number of additional fiscal structural measures including: the reduction of the personal use exemption for imports to the equivalent of US$200 per person and a review of public sector employment with the view to developing an effective program of work force adjustment. The preparatory work on a new law on the budget system and budgetary process, and a law on internal debt is progressing; it is expected that this legislation will be submitted to Parliament by September 1995. With regard to tax policy, the Government has continued its efforts to implement basic tax reform, including expanding the base of the income taxes to capture a greater proportion of income generated in the private sector, non-wage incomes, and non-wage benefits and payments in kind. u On page 8 (footnote 2) of EBS/95/26, it was incorrectly stated that, "As a prior action, effective March 1995, the Tax Inspectorate will be empowered to seize assets of delinquent taxpayers." This measure did not constitute a prior action and was not described as such in the listing of prior measures in the staff report (page 14) or in the Policy Memorandum (page 48). In the event, it was not implemented prior to the approval of the stand-by arrangement. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 10 - 4. Balance of payments and exchanpe svstem a. Balance of pavments The external position of Moldova will remain under s.evere pressure in 1995 primarily because of the continued impact of the terms-of-trade shock caused by the increase in imported energy prices to world market levels. In this context, the strategy adopted by the authorities calls for structural reforms that will enhance economic efficiency, decrease the demand for imported energy, and attract foreign direct investment. The authorities see the recent sharp expansion of exports to nontraditional markets as an indicator of the effectiveness of this approach. b. External debt The Government has taken further measures to ensure that foreign borrowing and the issuance of external loan guarantees will take place in a manner commensurate with its external repayment capacity. Accordingly, the Government has strictly limited the guaranteeing of debt contracted by the enterprise sphere. To ensure timely payments to external creditors, the Ministry of Finance has authorized the NBM to make repayments on behalf of the Government. C. Exchange rate oolicv The authorities have indicated that they view the present level of the exchange rate to be broadly appropriate. The NBM intervention policy, designed for smoothing operations, eschews targeting a particular level of the exchange rate. The pegging of the exchange rate is one of the policy options that the authorities keep under consideration. For the time being, however, the balance of their opinion is that, given the still inadequate level of international reserves and the possibility of potentially serious supply-side shocks stemming from the weight of agriculture in the economy, it would be premature to peg the rate. The number of fixing sessions on the interbank market was increased from three times a week to daily fixing sessions in February 1995. The National Bank of Moldova and the Government are in the process of reviewing the exchange system, with assistance from Fund staff, with a view to accepting the obligations of Article VIII, Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 11 - Sections 2, 3, and 4 of the Fund's Articles of Agreement by end- June 1995. u d. Trade policy In accordance with the terms of a structural adjustment loan from the World Bank, the Government has agreed to reduce the maximum tariff rate, with few exceptions, to no more than 20 percent by December 1, 1995. Under the 20 percent maximum, there will be five tariff bands. The last remaining quantitative restriction-- the export quota on grain and grain products--will be removed in the second half of 1995, and no later than end-November. 5. Medium-term balance of oavments outlook The staff has updated the projection of the medium-term balance of payments scenario that was prepared at the time of negotiation of the 1995 SBA (Table 6). u While the external position is expected to remain difficult, with continued financing gaps, steady progress is foreseen toward external viability as structural reform progresses. Large and continuing financing requirements are projected and are expected to contribute to a sharp build-up in external debt. Debt-service payments are projected to peak in 2001 at about 16 percent of total exports, and then decline to about 14 percent of exports by 2004. I/ The Moldovan authorities maintain the following exchange measures under the transitional arrangements of Article XIV, Section 2: 1) an exchange restriction arising from the limitation on the right of resident legal entities to make advance import payments to countries outside of the former Soviet Union; 2) exchange restrictions arising from limitations on the right of resident individuals to make payments for a variety of current international transactions to countries outside of the former Soviet Union; and 3) exchange restrictions arising from the National Bank's system of correspondent accounts with FSU central banks other than the Central Bank of Russia. 2/ Data weakness have affected the staff's ability to analyze accurately external developments, particularly with the FSU countries, Moldova's main trading partners (the administration of customs, for instance, has to rely on the cooperation of the Transnistrian authorities to monitor these flows). The staff projections, therefore, remain subject to considerable uncertainties, and this updated scenario should be considered only as illustrative of possible external developments (see Annex I on Data Reporting and Quality). In particular, owing to a revision of the 1994 base figures, the rate of growth of exports for 1996 to 1998 was revised downward by one to two percentage points and a similar downward adjustment was made in the projected rate of growth of imports. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12 - 6. Capacitv to repay The medium-term scenario suggests that Moldova's need for exceptional financing will decline rapidly after 1999. Assuming all purchases under the current SBA are made, Moldova's outstanding credit from the Fund would rise to 195 percent of quota by 1996 (Table 7). As a percentage of total external debt (including use of Fund resources), outstanding use of Fund credit amounted to 32 percent at end-1994, and is projected to reach 33 percent by end-1995. Through 2002, debt service to the Fund will remain relatively low in relation to total exports (less than 10 percent), but will reach about 41 percent of gross official reserves in 1999. Moldova's continued reliance on exceptional financing over the next few years implies the possibility of further use of Fund resources, possibly in the context of an extended arrangement, which would worsen the indicators of capacity to repay the Fund. In turn, this underscores the importance of adhering to the reserve accumulation targets of the program, encouraging nondebt-creating inflows, and closely monitoring external indebtedness so as to safeguard Moldova's capacity to repay the Fund. The Fund faces substantial risks if the program goes off track, particularly with respect to the ambitious real rate of growth in exports (of about 7 percent per annum); for example, a fall in the export growth rate of 1 percentage point below the rate projected between 1996 and 2001 would result in an uncovered financing gap of almost US$200 million over the period. I-J 7. Structural measures The authorities reiterated their commitment to effect a transition to a market economy, which is seen as the only feasible basis to secure a sustainable growth of output and improved standards of living. The authorities acknowledged that, in the early part of 1995, they had encountered delays in the implementation of some of the necessary structural changes. Stressing that the delays were temporary, they attributed them to several factors, including the intrinsic difficulties of the transition process in which a limited number of officials must oversee measures in several different areas, the need to secure broad-based support in Parliament for the promulgation of the necessary legal measures and the need to coordinate and assimilate technical assistance from several multilateral and bilateral sources. The Moldovan authorities recognized that delays in implementing structural measures were likely to be costly in terms of stalling the revival of growth and saw the acceleration of reforms as one of their most urgent policy priorities (paragraphs 14-20 of the Memorandum of Economic Policies). lJ Similarly, lack of market access or continued economic difficulties among Moldova's major trading partners might limit the growth of exports. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13 - These efforts have as their broad objective strengthened hard budget constraints, especially in the state enterprise sector. The Government has already allowed a voluntary out-of-court debt reconciliation and restructuring process. In addition to policies described above (e.g., collecting tax arrears, encouraging banks to improve their capital position through more aggressive collection of overdue loans), the Government sees bankruptcy as necessary to improve payments discipline. Effective enforcement of financial discipline on the enterprise sector requires a sound legal basis for bankruptcy. The program provides for new legislation to be presented to Parliament by end-June. A vital role in protecting creditors in bankruptcy proceedings will have to be played by the courts; if the existing arbitration tribunals do not function effectively in this role, the Government is prepared to move expeditiously to set up specialized commercial courts. The Government has enhanced the credibility of the bankruptcy threat by identifying for liquidation a further 15 insolvent state enterprises. The Government sees privatization of state enterprises as a key instrument to foster structural reforms. Several measures to accelerate the privatization process are identified in the program. These include the sale by end-May of the residual tranche of enterprises initially identified in the 1993/94 Program. Under the 1995/96 Privatization Program, voucher privatization is scheduled to be completed by mid-September. This implies that almost 800 firms (or about 200 per month) are to be auctioned in the May to September period. The remaining 600 enterprises identified in the 1995/96 Program are to be sold by cash auctions. The majority of these enterprises are to be sold by year-end. For enterprises that are to remain under government ownership, boards of directors will be appointed to monitor and, if necessary, remove management in accordance with the public enterprise law of June 1994. Managers are to be directed to pursue full cost recovery, while the Government will refrain from directing enterprises to engage in transactions at non-market prices. The Government and the NBM have decided to accelerate preparations for the conversion of interenterprise arrears into tradeable claims on debtor enterprises. This process will be coordinated with the operations of the securities exchange. In early 1995, the Government introduced restrictions on land titles which impede the ability of collective farm workers to operate independently. In justifying these restrictions, the Government stressed the need to avoid short-term dislocations or the creation of farms of inefficient size. However, the Government also recognized that the effects of these restrictions are to shield the agricultural sector from market forces, retard its adjustment and reduce the level of investment including investment from foreign sources. Moreover, these restrictions have adversely affected the ability of commercial banks to provide credit to the agricultural sector owing to the lack of adequate collateral. Accordingly, the Government has decided to review these restrictions with a view to their elimination as soon as possible. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14 - 8. Medium-term policy framework The Government and the National Bank of Moldova have stated that they will be guided over the medium term by two broad objectives: securing financial stabilization on a permanent basis and completing the task of establishing and making effective all of the basic institutions of a market economy. They recognize that the transition process entails complex interactions among the various policy areas and that the quality of policy implementation would be improved if policies were cast in a medium-term framework. This would allow for greater attention to issues such as prioritization and sequencing. Such a framework would also be useful for the coordination of technical assistance from bilateral and multilateral sources. The authorities believe that an arrangement under the extended Fund facility would be useful for the development and implementation of such a policy framework. The authorities have started to prepare the necessary framework. A listing of the various policy areas has been compiled and officials are being assigned to prepare position papers on these issues. It is expected that the framework will be discussed with the staffs of the Fund and of other multilateral institutions in the second half of 1995. V. Staff Appraisal Since late 1993, Moldova has implemented a financial stabilization program in support of its newly introduced national currency, which was seen as a fundamental attribute of independent nationhood. Six consecutive quarters of tight financial polices have reduced inflationary pressures to a point at which the ambitious target for end-1995 of matching the inflation performance of OECD countries appears broadly within reach. All interest rates have declined, the exchange rate has remained broadly stable, and Moldova's external position has strengthened substantially. The Moldovan authorities are to be commended for their determination and resolve in implementing adjustment policies, especially in an environment of natural disasters and external financing constraints. In the area of financial policies, the NBM has amply demonstrated its willingness and ability to pursue prudent credit and exchange rate policies. While monetary policy is formally determined by Parliament, in practice the NBM has been able to act with considerable autonomy. The proposed law on the central bank establishes the NBM's independence and identifies the criteria that should guide it in the implementation of monetary policy; the staff urges the Government to press for its speedy promulgation. Despite its impressive record in terms of financial stabilization, the NBM faces several important challenges. The first is defining and implementing a medium-term strategy for dealing with non-performing assets in the banking sector. The first step in this direction would be to ensure that the NBM has the legal powers necessary to deal with the problem banks, Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 15 - including the ability to restrict the types of deposit-taking and lending-operations in which these banks engage, change bank managements and force bank reorganizations. Accordingly, the staff advised the Government to submit to Parliament the law on financial institutions as a matter of urgency. The second priority would be to determine with .some clarity the dimensions of the bad-loan problem and its distribution within the various banks. In this context, the adoption by banks of generally recognized accounting standards is of utmost importance. With these elements in place, it should be possible for the authorities to deal with the problem in a comprehensive manner. The staff welcomes the close involvement of technical assistance experts from MAE, the World Bank and other donors in this process. Another challenge comes from the emergence of new nonbank financial institutions. While the process of financial deepening is to be welcomed, it is clear that at least some of these institutions promise investors returns so grossly out of line with feasible returns that the possibility of failures and large financial losses for the population must be considered. In view of this potential threat, the Government, together with the Securities Commission, should intensify their supervisory activities in this area. The implementation of tight budgetary policies that restrain general government borrowing from the banking system has been critical in allowing the NBM to pursue restrictive credit policies. From the outset of the program, it was recognized that the target of reducing the deficit for the general government to 3.5 percent of GDP while limiting the domestic bank borrowing requirement to some 1.5 percent of GDP was ambitious and that to achieve it would require strict discipline in the collection of taxes and in controlling expenditure on the part of the Government. The record of the first quarter- -the attainment of the bank borrowing target at the price of incurring arrears--bears out this assessment. Looking to the future, the Government has identified a number of areas in which policies need to be strengthened in light of pressures that became evident during the first quarter. The staff welcomes this forward-looking approach, but warns that, even with strengthened policies, constant vigilance will be required to meet the targets for the remainder of the year. In the area of tax policy, the Government has been under pressure to engage in selective reductions of the tax burden in order to stimulate industrial output and assist the agricultural sector to overcome the after- effects of the 1994 drought. The staff urges the authorities to resist these pressures since they threaten the integrity of the budget and would not, in any case, be effective in stimulating aggregate output. A further strengthening of tax administration will be essential for the achievement of the fiscal targets. Specific areas in which action is required includes expanding the powers of the State Tax Inspectorate to attack assets of tax delinquents, improving tax collection capability with Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 16 - respect to the Customs, and reviewing the preparations for the collection of the land tax. The staff recognizes the extraordinary efforts put in place by the Government to control expenditures, including the containment of budgetary lending. Further advances in the implementation of a full-fledged Treasury should assist the Government in tracking its financial position and reduce its reliance on sequestration. In the area of external policies, Moldova's exchange rate system has served well the needs of transition. The NBM's external position has been strengthened, the foreign exchange market has operated smoothly, and real exchange appreciation, which was appropriate in the early stages of stabilization, has moderated substantially. The level of dollar wages continues to be substantially lower in Moldova than in its major trading competitors and exports to nontraditional markets are expanding. For the period ahead, the NBM intends to keep under close review, on the one hand, the level of the real exchange rate and its implications for external competitiveness and, on the other hand, the level of monetary aggregates in the light of the nature of foreign exchange inflows that might be taking place. The staff endorses this approach. The staff also shares the authorities' view that, while the possibility of pegging the rate should be kept under review, there was no urgency for immediate action in this regard. In the trade policy area, the staff welcomes the authorities' recent actions and plans or further reform, and will encourage them to replace high tariffs on luxury goods with non-discriminatory excises. At this stage of the stabilization process, judicious reliance on foreign savings is appropriate, provided sufficient care is exercised to ensure that it is used productively. In this context, the staff is concerned about pressures on the Government to extend guarantees to external borrowing by domestic enterprises. Accordingly the staff welcomes the intention of the Government to begin, from end-1995, provisioning for these contingent liabilities. Equally important is the Government's commitment not to assume the outstanding foreign obligations of enterprises nor guarantee their current import payments. The staff welcomes Moldova's intention to accept by end-June 1995 the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4 of the Fund's Articles of Agreement. The acceptance of Article VIII status should send a strong positive signal for foreign investors. The Moldovan authorities are preoccupied with the sharp contraction of output that had taken place since independence and the prospects for its reversal. In this context the staff would emphasize that the successful implementation of financial stabilization has created one of the prerequisites for sustainable growth. Another prerequisite that remains to be put in place is broadly-based structural reforms. Evidence of hard budget constraints--cost minimization, an emphasis on developing new markets and new products, declining inter-enterprise arrears, and eschewal of Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17 - government handouts--is not yet widespread in Moldova, especially in the state enterprise sector. The staff would stress in the strongest possible terms that, without these behavioral changes, no lasting foundation for improvements in the well-being of the population will be possible. In addition to pursuing the privatization program, the Government has assigned the highest priority to the creation of a legislative framework that is appropriate to a market economy. Two areas that need urgent attention are revisions to the laws on bankruptcy and collateral and the clarification of property rights, especially with regard to land. A credible and effective threat of bankruptcy is essential for the enforcement of payments discipline. The proposed revisions to the law on bankruptcy, which are to be submitted to Parliament by end-June 1995, should make the process more workable. In the meantime, the process of liquidating insolvent state enterprises which the Government had started in the first quarter of 1995 should continue. The law on land ownership adopted in 1991 imposed a ten-year moratorium on sales of land, with subsequent amendments that restrict the ability of members of collective farms to secede and farm independently. The staff urges the Government to recognize the need for clear titles to land and to revoke the restrictions on the sale of land without delay. The medium-term scenario presented by the staff shows that Moldova's external position will remain difficult. While some progress towards external viability has already been achieved, the scale of the problems faced by Moldova is such that external adjustment will, of necessity, be spread out over a considerable period of time. This underscores the need for the provision of adequate foreign financing on terms that are commensurate with the country's ability to service its external obligations. Substantial risks continue to impinge on the medium-term prospects of Moldova; the capacity to repay the Fund will depend most directly on a sustained implementation of adjustment policies. Moldova is at an important point on the path to a stable and dynamic market economy. Further delays in implementing structural reforms will impede the onset of growth and jeopardize the important achievement of financial stabilization. The task of accelerating structural reforms must be carried out with the same determination that the Moldovan authorities have shown in pursuing tight financial policies. The authorities have signaled their intention to request support under the extended Fund facility for the implementation of a medium term policy framework that is under preparation. Work on the framework is progressing with the assistance of the staffs of the Fund and the Bank, and it is expected that discussions on the framework could begin in the second half of 1995, provided the 1995 financial program remains on track and structural reforms advance. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 18 - The authorities have continued to implement, with Fund technical assistance, major improvements in the quality of economic statistics especially in the monetary, and fiscal areas. In the external area, the monitoring trade transactions have been affected by the conflict with Transnistria. Significant gaps also remain, in the area.of national income accounts and sectoral and labor market statistics, for which Moldova will need to continue to receive technical assistance. The authorities' track record in the provision of information to the staff (including data on international reserves and foreign exchange intervention) during and between missions and of access to officials has been exemplary. Based on the strong record of policy implementation and the additionaIL policy commitments, the staff recommends that the Fund complete the first review of the program supported by the stand-by arrangement. It is recommended that the next Article IV consultation with Moldova be held on a standard 12-month cycle. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 19 - VI. ProDosed Decisions The following draft decisions are proposed for adoption by the Executive Board: A. 1995 Consultation 1. The Fund takes this decision in concluding the 1995 Article XIV consultation with the Republic of Moldova, in the light of the 1995 Article IV consultation with the Republic of Moldova conducted under Decision No. 5392-(77/63), adopted April 29, 1977, as amended (Surveillance over Exchange Rate Policies). 2. The Republic of Moldova maintains restrictions on payments and transfers for current international transactions, as described in SM/95/ , under Article XIV, Section 2. The Fund encourages the Republic of Moldova to remove these restrictions. B. Review Under Stand-By Arrangement 1. The Republic of Moldova has consulted with the Fund in accordance with paragraph 3 (c) of the stand-by arrangement for the Republic of Moldova (EBS/95/26, Supplement 2) and paragraph 32 of the memorandum of economic policies attached to the letter dated February 27, 1995 from the Prime Minister and the Governor of the National Bank of Moldova. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 20 - 2. The letter dated May 30, 1995 from the Prime Minister znd the Governor of the National Bank of Moldova, together with its annr:r:ed memorandum of economic policies, shall be attached to the stand-by arrangement for the Republic of Moldova, and the letter dated February 27, 1995, together with its annexed memorandum, shall be read as supplemented and modified by the letter of May 30, 1995 and its annexed memorandum. 3. The Fund decides that the first review contemplated in paragraph 3 (c) of the stand-by arrangement for the Republic of Moldova has been completed. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 21 - Table 1. Moldova: Performance Under the Program, December 1994 - March 1995 I/ 1994 December March Prog. Prog. Ba= 21 1995 March Actual Dev. I. NBM net domestic assets 3/ II. Banking system net claims on general government 31 $1 III. Reserve money 3 IV. Broad money 3 V. NIR (convertible) 3/ VI. Gross reserves 51 VII. Limits for contracting and guaranteeing of external debt from January 1,1995: 3j 4/ 1 - 12 year maturity 1 - 5 year maturity VIII. Limits on guaranteeing of external debt from January 1,199S: 3J 21 1 - 12 year maturity 1 - 5 year maturity Memorandum item: Government guaranteed enterprise domestic debt (in millions of Mdl) (In millions of Mdl) 459.38 642.38 528.87 -113.51 302.66 342.66 329.33 -33.33 551.94 547.94 507.&l -40.14 753.20 766.u) 762.09 -4.11 (In millions of U.S. dollars) 15.25 -21.60 -7.08 14.52 178.86 165.00 180.25 15.25 . . . 200 6 - 194 -- . . . 70 -70 . . . 100 6 -94 -- . . . 50 -50 . . . . . . 8.55 . . . Sources: NBM; and staff estimates. I/ Performance criteria at constant exchange rates; unless otherwise indicated. U As set out in EBWW6. 3/ Performance criteria. 4/ Ceiling on government borrowing is adjusted downward by 20 percent of government guaranteed domestic enterprise debt. 5/ Indicative targets. 6/ In addition, the Government and the NBM will not contract or guarantee external debt in maturities of less than one year, with the exception of normal import-related credits. 7/ These limits apply within the ceiling established under item VII above. The limits on the issuance of the guarantees shall not apply to any loan guarantees granted with respect to projects financed by multilateral organizations. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 2. Moldova: Macroeconomic Framework, Summary Indicators, 1992-1995 1992 1993 1994 1992 ----- year year 01 02 03 04 year 01 Ql 02 Q3 04 year Pr0g. Prel. RW. RCV. Rev. Rev. Pw. Prog. Prog. Prog. aId tiemonraphic indicaton I/ Area (sq. km) Population (thousands) Populatioo density (inhabitanu persq. km) Life expectancy at birth (1990) . Total population Males Females lnfanr mortalityrate (per 1,000 births) Hospital beds (per 1,000 inhabitants, 1990) Physicians (per 1,000 inhabitants, 1990) Macroeconomic obiectives __-~ Gross Domestic Product Real growth rate (in percent of same period of the previous year) Nominal GDP (in millions of Mdl) lnflatioio (CPI. in percent) _U Auengc period End period Gross official reserves (lo millions of U.S. dollars) (In weeks of imports) Government budget balance (In percent of GDP) Broad money (percentage change) _U Reserve money (percentage change) y Net domestic awts Banking system 21 National Bank of Moldova i/ Banking system net claims on government 3/ Curren~r account balance (In millions of U.S. dollars) Exterrnl factors -1- Terms of trade Energy price index (1992-100) Oil products pricer (U.S. dollan per ton) Memorandum item% ---~ Average wage (Mdl per month) Nominal Real (Jan. 1992=100) Minimum wage (end period, Mdl per month) Exchange rate (simple ave. period, Mdl/U.S.doilar) . . . . . . 33,800 4,353 129 68.6 65 72 18.4 13.1 4 . . . . . . . . . . . . 33.800 . . . . 4,353 . . . . . . . . . 129 . . . . . . 67.8 . . . . . . . . 64.3 . . . . 71.1 . . . . . . . . 21.5 . . . . 13.1 . . . . . . . 4 -29.1 -6.7 . 215 2,788 1,118 . . . . 1,250 2,205 1.276.0 788.5 82.9 23.4 5.7 2,198.O 837.0 67.9 10.7 4.7 2.5 76.6 67.1 104.2 117.6 0.1 6.3 . . . . . -23.4 -6.8 . 356.0 320.3 -7.2 549.0 392.7 10.2 394.0 262.1 6.3 653.8 407.3 33.9 285~5 69.3 9.1 -, 39 -20 loo 84 3 102 1.7 0.19 - 182 -55 . . . . . . -8.1 113.8 -6.5 16.3 115.7 29.3 29.3 23.6 127.0 31.5 21.5 - 3.9 70.9 15.3 33.0 -5.4 88.0 6.4 16.5 -7.4 34.0 1s -59 -85 -184 -25 169 136 . . . . . . . . . . . . -32 .., . 488 . . . . . . . . . 114 29 97 10.0 1.43 75 a2 13.5 3.82 91 116 133 104 80 % 102 90 18.0 18.0 18.0 18.0 4.06 4.12 4.25 4.06 . .,, - . 22.2 3,223 7,796 9.4 329.6 11.0 116.0 178.8 178.8 13.3 ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... ...... 5.0 a.2 3.0 6.4 165.0 183.0 ...... ...... 1.8 1.2 -0.7 -8.1 31.6 22.4 33.1 12.1 8.0 2.8 -66 -53 ...... ...... ...... 148 122 107 86 18.0 18.0 4.39 4.38 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .I. . .., .., . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1.5 . . . . 8,655 3.0 2.0 1.5 25.4 3.0 1.5 1.5 9.4 165.0 15s.o . . . t.. 170.0 . 170.0 10.8 . . . . . . 2.6 2.2 2.6 1.4 . -3.5 4.0 11.0 8.1 11.6 15.3 21.1 6.5 76.1 19.9 27.1 11.6 92.5 4.6 3.2 1.9 17.9 -42 -18 -69 - 182 . . . . . . . . . . . . 14 318 142 128 131 132 128 88 68 87 87 18.0 18.0 18.0 18.0 4.47 4.56 4.65 4.52 Sourcer.: Moldovan authorities; and staff estimates 1: So&l indicators are inclusive ofTransnistria. Mxrocconomic indicatorsexclude Transnistria. L/ Relative to preceding period. J/ Chwge in percent of initial stock of bra ,d money. Data for 19% are at the program accounting exchange rate. 4, Chwge in percent of initial stock of reserve money. Data for 1995 are at the program acwunting exchange rate. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 23 - Table 3. Moldova: Monetary Suwcyand Projections. 1993-95. L/ (In millions of Mdl) 1993 CM 01 a2 1994 03 04 04 PrOg. 01 P% 01 PXl. 1995 02 Prog. Net foreign assets -8.24 -51.42 -2253 -30.17 61.Y 89.98 -97.16 -21.08 -19210 -337.04 -35698 NFA (convertible) -32.05 -64.77 -35.76 -44.13 47.78 76.23 - 107.84 -35.41 -20278 -347.72 -367.66 Gross mserves 229.92 201.l6 312.48 35286 53634 89430 825.00 90124 825.00 775.00 850.00 Foreign liabilities -261.97 -265.92 -34824 -397.00 -488.56 -818.07 -93284 -93666 -1,027.78 -l,l22.72 -1.217.66 NFA (non-convertibk) 23.81 13.35 13.23 13.96 13.75 13.7s 10.68 14.34 10.68 10.68 10.68 NFA (rubles) 13.11 13.25 13.22 13.21 13.54 13.54 9.68 13.71 9.68 9.68 9.68 NFA (other non -convertible) 10.70 0.10 0.01 0.75 0.21 0.21 l.OCl 0.57 1.00 1.00 1.00 Net domestic assets 25053 318.45 367.93 476.76 490.73 46229 64534 52887 754.40 906.99 973.10 Net claims on general government 2i 146.00 176.43 176.75 29253 24654 319.48 379.48 357.73 414.48 439.48 454.48 Credit to banks 98.68 154.48 200.49 179.19 274.67 274.67 33086 292.68 404.92 52251 568.66 Other items (net) 5.84 - 12.46 -9.31 5.04 -30.48 - 131.86 -65.00 - 121.54 -65.00 -55.00 -so.oo Reserve money 24229 267.03 34S.40 44659 55227 55227 548.18 SO780 56230 56995 616.16 currency in circulation 119.45 128.19 17552 272.43 34555 3455s 356.93 36752 36233 368.07 38835 Required reserves 43.16 41.69 35.41 49.53 SO.18 SO.18 51.14 44.4s 53.28 54.94 56.64 Cash in vaults and net corrcspondcnt dep. 77.15 94.91 13186 11858 15126 15-126 135.11 94x3 141.69 141.95 166.11 Special deposits 2S4 2.25 2.61 6.06 5.28 5.28 5.00 1.69 5.00 5.00 5.00 Net foreign assets 38.80 0.83 198.67 58.30 15253 215.76 -8.57 104.19 -105.89 -254.95 -274.64 NFA (conwrtible) 12.70 - 19.79 178.43 21.85 10727 17050 -18.86 82.70 -11618 -265.24 -284.92 Gross reserves 274.67 246.14 526.67 41885 59582 98857 916.85 1,019.36 91685 865.10 942.72 Foreign liabilities -261.97 -265.92 -348.24 -397.00 -488.56 -818.07 -935.71 -93666 -1.CQ3.02 -1.l30.33 -1.227.65 NFA (non-convertible) 26.10 20.62 20.25 36.45 45.27 45.27 10.29 21.49 10.29 10.29 10.29 NFA (rubles) 13.11 13.25 13.22 13.21 13.54 13.54 9.29 13.77 9.29 9.29 9.29 NFA (other non-convertible) 12.99 7.37 7.03 23.23 31.72 31.72 1.00 7.72 1.00 1.04 1.00 Net domestic assets 310.44 32323 494.14 589.15 600.67 537.44 Net claims on general gownmcnt 21 31 116.72 14833 169.05 275.63 235.47 308.40 Credit to economy 33435 37582 471.75 57221 668.69 668.69 Claims on mtcrprisa 24328 29215 375.70 432.94 493.91 493.91 Claims on private sector 91.06 83.67 96.05 13927 174.79 174.79 Other items (net) - 140.62 -200.91 -14666 -258.69 -303.49 -439.66 77521 368.40 72681 -320.00 657.90 89227 1.058.58 lJ10.77 32933 403.40 428.40 443.40 747.12 80887 950.18 98736 53626 ._. 210.86 -418.55 -320.00 -320.00 -320.00 Broad money 34924 324.06 69281 647.4s 75320 75320 766.64 762.09 78638 803.64 83613 Currency in circulation 119.45 128.19 17552 272.43 3455s 3455s 356.93 36752 36233 368.07 38835 Total deposits 22980 19581 51729 375.02 407.65 407.65 409.70 39456 424.05 43556 441.71 Demand and time deposits 17659 152.10 23421 29951 33034 33034 33239 29857 34635 357.08 36851 Foreign currency deposits $/ 53.21 43.77 283.08 75.51 77.31 77.31 77.31 95.99 77.70 78.48 79.26 Memorandum items: Exhange rate (Mdl per one dollar) Accounting exchange rate Actual eshange rate 3.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 3.00 5.00 3.64 3.98 4.05 4.20 4.27 4.27 5.00 5.00 5.00 5.00 5.00 4.43 . . National Bank of Moldova Banking system Sources: NBM; and staff stimata. _Y Data are at program accounting cxhange rates and cxchdc Transnistria banks. y Net claims on other Government adjusted toestablish a base for the 1995 program to reflect reclassification at end March 1995 of a liability incurred as a result of the CCFF purchase in 1993 from a medium- and long-term liability of the NBM to Government liability in the amount of Md172.94 million. 31 Banking syvtcm net claims on the general government were d&cd inclwivc of SSF. $/ At current exzhange rate. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 24 - Table 4. Moldova: General Government Budget Outcamcs. 1992-1995. i/ 1992 ACllh3l 1993 ACtUZ3l 1995 1995 1994 1995 01 01 AClW3l Program Pr0glXl Prel. Act. RWeoUCs 43 364 Tax Revenues 40 326 Profit Tax 10 97 VAT 14 95 Excise 10 63 Personal Tax 4 35 Foreign Trade 1 19 Land Tax -- 14 Real Estate -- -- Othertaxes -- 3 Non-Tax Revenues _U 4 38 Ofwbich: Road Fees -- 10 Privatizatioo . . 1.353 980 351 282 151 130 30 15 6 15 373 61 1,667 331 342 1.330 271 293 385 90 97 355 85 88 120 25 50 150 35 40 so 15 8 218 10 3 22 4 2 30 7 4 337 60 49 39 8 18 110 15 -- Expenditures & Net Lending 94 553 1,984 1968 421 495 Expenditures 55 543 1,874 1968 421 503 National Economy Environment Social Sphere Education ClJh-C Hcaltb Care Physical Culture Social Assistance Subsidies &Cash Camp. Food Subsidies Non-Food Subsidies Cash Compensation Emergency Aid Law & Police Interest Domesrw Foreign Caoital Exwnditures Other Ex&nditure J/ Maintenance of Roads Index&ion of deposits Earab. balance Social Fund deficit 4/ Net Lending Of which: loan defaults Grain procurement 3 -- 35 14 2 7 2 2 10 7 3 -- -- 5 1 7 2 -- . 39 -- -- 27 2 306 127 10 80 1 8 80 50 13 18 135 8 969 422 31 MO 2 29 184 67 47 69 40 105 164 120 44 120 300 51 -- -6 -14 111 49 40 104 8 974 437 30 315 2 32 157 -- 58 23 18 5 49 68 10 -- -- 57 100 -- 133 204 112 92 147 254 53 70 25 2 235 -- 20 3 226 106 7 67 -- 8 38 -- 8 30 42 20 42 30 12 17 133 8 10 19 -- -- 21 -- -- 32 42 30 12 30 60 12 -- -- -- -- 2 -10 -9 -- -- -- Balance -50 -189 -630 --MO -90 -153 Financing Net Domestic Net Banking System Non-Bank Arrears Net Foreign Drawings z/ Amortizatioo SO 50 50 -- -- -- -- 189 136 110 -- 26 53 54 1 6M 227 107 9 110 403 403 90 60 56 4 -- 300 200 135 70 -5 100 371 271 -- 30 52 22 153 64 21 4 39 89 a9 -- Revenue 20.1 17.1 17.4 19.3 Tax revenue 18.4 15.3 12.6 15.4 Expenditure and net lending 43.6 25.9 25.5 22.1 Expenditure 25.4 25.5 24.0 22.1 BalWlW -23.4 -8.9 -8.1 -3.5 Memorandum Items: -~- GDP Tax arrears Unbudgeted net lending $/ Enlarged delicit 215 Enlarged deficit (in percent of GDP) mnillioos of Mdl) (Ir! percent of GDP) (lr~ millions of Mdl) 2131 7796 8655 11 252 43 375 -232 - 1005 . - 10.9 - 12.9 - - Source: Data provided by authonties, and staff estimates and projections. i/ Comprising the republican g~wemment. local governments. extrabudgetary funds and Social Fund net balances (for 1995). z/ Includes profit remittancea from the NBM. J/ Includes military and other unalloatcd expenditures: the level for Cl1 1995 reflects predominantly the preliminary nature of the figures. 41 Revenue and expenditure recorded on a cash basis. I/ Includes grants. 61 Overdue domestic counterparr of foreign commodity loans and granw Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 25 - Table 5. Mddovx Bdancc of Payments, 1993-95 (la milions of US. dollars) 1993 1994 ______ Ycpr YSar Eat. P=l. 01 PW. 01 P-1. 1995 02 03 Q-4 Y.Xr Pmj. Pmj. Proj. Proj. Glnwll #co”D( bdaoa Non-FBU FSU Trade bds~sc -180 -128 -49 -36 -22 1 -46 -103 Non-FSU -3s -31 -21 23 5 28 19 75 FSU -144 -98 -28 -59 -n -28 -6.5 -178 T-lupoltrY 4.51 617 171 154 157 159 161 631 Non-FSU 3’ 174 208 43 75 76 77 78 304 f?W 277 408 128 80 81 82 I33 326 T&al imports y -631 Non-FSU -210 FSU -421 Ofubicb: Energy -242 BdsDcedsavlca 3 Nm-FSU Ofwbicb: Iotcrcst (W) KUY Of hich: Enugytrelrspmimtioo latemt (0.3) TtXUfCO Capital tiomt Non-FSU (xt) SJ Ofticb: Direct invcstmcot (net) Commcmial banks jnd) Medium- and lcng-term loans sb‘xt-h-m Icam (net) g Fsu IJ Ofu3ricb: Dirbursemcots Amob.atioo &j Comwnid Barks (na) IDtnratapriv .- (act) 9 On-Al balance FinalriM Fund titkcing Gmr oIlkid rcylw Other assets W NBM correspoodca sccourh Utiliioa (net) 1y Rcscbcduling 12/ Finawing gap (including traarfm) Memorandum item: Gmrr of&id rcscms l3J -182 -163 -68 -53 -42 -16 -69 -8 -45 -27 17 -2 22 8 -174 - 139 -42 -70 -39 -39 -76 -220 -190 -179 -IS8 -64 -52 -m -48 -156 -138 -1lM -110 -84 -81 -SO -50 -24 5 -2 -29 -25 . . . -17 -22 -21 -6 -10 -10 -1 -5 -5 -12 -12 -12 -9 -5 -5 -2 -2 -2 22 -- 2 3 117 62 14 -11 51 28 8 -- 69 -- -8 55 10 -- -1 51 34 -31 31 87 -74 -- 19 -- -- I7 -745 -239 -506 -284 -7) -36 -4 -41 -35 -5 22 300 171 23 -5 163 -- -- 129 12 -- 12 -88 28 -28 71 -102 -1 4 -- -22 -8 -1 -14 -10 -2 2 30 33 8 -- 21 -1 5 -3 -: -- . -- -38 3.3 24 14 1 -- __ -- 165 1 -18 6 -11 8 8 -- -- 20 -- -- 22 -- -5 -- 27 -u -27 27 23 -4 1 -- 5 -- 183 45 -1 -46 -5 -- -4 -- . . . -- -41 41 20 18 -- -- 2 -- 16.5 42 -37 -24 -7 -- -7 -- . -- 179 -- -36 36 20 10 -- -- 5 -- 155 -207 -59 -148 -88 -25 -14 -9 -12 1; 3 58 6s 8 -- 55 -1 4 -7 -- -7 -- ._ -- -11 11 20 -15 -- -- 5 -- 170 -181 -2r.i -734 -229 -504 -269 -06 -39 -20 -47 -2a -7 8 92 88 32 -- 162 -39 -66 4 -- -22 -- . . . -24 -114 114 86 9 1 -- 18 -- 170 Sources: Data providcd~bythe Mddovao autboriticr; staff estimated; sod projcctionr. lo Trend gror*b in exports and impolu dtb 1994 and a11995 as base. Non-trend impottr reflect spwifr tinan&& y For 1994, includes suboal*id once-dfexpmts. 2/ Includes CIF-FOB adjustments and ralassif~tim denergytranapon~ic. y An interest payment due to Russia in 04 1993 WOI delayed to 01 1994. An interest payment due to Russia in Q3 1994 was delayed to (14 1994. Mddovaaclaina against otbcr FSU statcs~rc noopafmning. 5~ Includucommodityloans. g Includes repayment d intermtetprire an-an. 1/ A kcboical credit” from Rluaia YIB( transformed in to a government loan valued at USS71.3401 (USBB.9m inchding Transnistria). An additional loan was contracted for Rrub 5Ob. of tiicb Rrub 1Sb was for Tranmirtria. g &lore rescheduling of principal payments to Russia. 9~ As of end 011995, the outstanding stat of a-, primarily for cnqy imponr. was estimated to be about USSl7Om includiig valuation adjustments. lJ/ Includugcwemmcnt foreigncurrency bddiqt. lJ/ Non-iauest-aeruingcroar-clsbr among FSUcatml banks. l2J Priwpal repymcmson tbc tranrfonned Zahoial credit’fmm Russia in tbs amouti d US357 million in 01 and 02 and in the amount of US.535 millha in 03 and Q4 M assumed to be rucbedulcd to 1999. The principal repaymmt w a loan from the Russian Federation in the amount of USE1.12milEw duein 199Swas movedtoQ21995 and is presented iatbe rescbedulingoo a ncl basis. 12/ Oftiiial rcscwes in convenibk currencies at current excbaogc rates. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 26 - Table 6. Moldova: lllurtrative Medum-Term Scenario, 1993-2004 (In millions of U.S. dollars) 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 Ed. Prel. Proj. Proj. Ptoj. Proj. Proj. Proj. P&j. Proj. Proj. Proj. Current amunt balance -182 -183 Trade balance -180 -128 EXpOrtr 451 617 Imports -631 -745 Of which: Energy M -242 -304 Bala”ce of retice: -24 -77 Of which: Interest (“et) 5/ -2 -9 Tra”SfCrS 22 22 Capital account FDI (net) Commercial banks (net) b-&diW”- a”‘, \Ol,8-teTT0 b”, Disbursements Amortisation 3 Other capital (net) 4-/ 151 14 -18 80 -- 75 -31 31 a7 -74 -- 212 68 108 128 23 32 3.3 45 -11 -- -- -- 175 162 99 -- -63 -28 25 -63 -- Overall balance Financing Fund financing I/ Gross official rcscnes Other assets NBM correrpcmdent accounts Utilization (net) 6J Rescheduling 2/ 19 -- 28 -28 71 -102 -1 4 -- Financing gap s/ -- -- Memorandum items: Gross official reset-w in months of imports Current AccounVGDP Stock of Debt Rate of GDP growth v Debt/GDP w Debtservice gl (As percent of exports) n 179 1 3 -16 -10 168 343 -9 -22 23 26 Percentage change in Trend export volumes FSIJ Non-PSU Trend import volumer Fsu u/ Non-F!W II/ Energy Terms of trade -- . . . . . . . . . . . -2s 2 . . . . . . . . . -32 -181 -179 -174 -103 -58 -2s 631 708 787 -734 -765 -812 -269 -272 -206 -86 -122 -149 -27 -51 -68 8 -- -- 113 162 1% -30 -32 -40 -- -- -- -114 114 86 9 1 -- 18 -- 170 3 -9 528 2 41 13 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14 -71 -45 26 82 67 3a 39 42 -- 12 -12 -- -36 -a7 -107 -67 -38 -39 -21 -69 -87 -4s -13 -11 -14 -18 -20 -22 -2s -28 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 71 81 61 25 -- -- -- 182 1% 214 234 2% 281 309 340 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 -a -7 -6 -6 -s -4 -3 -3 739 9% 1314 1604 1826 1961 2051 2112 2 4 5 5 5 5 5 5 47 52 56 57 56 53 49 4s 14 17 23 23 20 6 5 7 6 6 6 6 6 2 2 2 -- -170 -164 -ls.s -151 -144 -13s -130 9 46 81 116 149 210 237 682 99s 1119 1252 1387 lS36 1709 -873 -949 -1037 -1136 -1238 -1326 -1472 -305 -323 -343 -366 -386 -412 -437 -179 -209 -239 -261 -293 -34s -87 -103 -113 -120 -124 -126 -- _- -- -- -_ -- 1% 246 66 90 -- _- 225 189 183 103 108 113 -- -- -- 177 119 -- 160 -58 -- 163 172 164 -82 -103 -106 -- -- -- -42 -11 -31 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 5 7 7 7 5 6 6 6 3 3 -- -- 6 7 3 -- 17 17 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 3 3 -- -- 16 7 7 7 7 7 7 3 -- -36-l -147 -- 164 12s -- 138 -99 -- 34 -34 -- -34 -- -- -- -- 374 3 -2 2144 5 40 14 7 7 7 7 3 -- Sources: Data provided by the Moldovan authoritic:; staff estimates; and projections. 1/ lncluder energy imports from both PSU and non-FSU. z/ lncluier interest on firtancing gap. 1/ Before rescheduling of principal repayments in Russia in 1995. Includes amortisation of financing gap. $/ lncludcr interenterprise arrears and errors and ombriorn for 1993 and 1994. s/ In 1993 includes 1S percent of quota under the CCFF, SO percent of quota under the SIP. and 4.S percent under the SBA. In 1994 includes 41.4 percent of quota under the SBA and 13.5 percent of quota under the CCFF. I” 1995 includes 11 percent of quota under the SBA (1994) and SO.5 percent of quota under the SBA (1995). In 1996 includes 14.5 percent of quota under the SBA (1995). 4/ Includer change in liabilities due to debt conversion. T Principal repayments on the tramformed “technical credit” from Russia in the amount of USS3.57 million in 01 and 02 and in the amount of USSS.3S million in 03 and Q4 are assumed to be rescheduled to 1999. B/ l”cluder transfers. 91 Growth in nominal GDPvalued in US dollars is assumed to greater than the rate of real GDP growth. lJ Includes Fund charges and repurchases. w Excluding energy imports. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 7. Moldova: Indicators of Capacity to Repay the Fund 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 Outstanding use of Fund Credit 63 112.45 167.9 175.89 161.33 114.16 54.875 24.131 15 IMF CIbligations Repurchases Charges Outstanding use of Fund Credit Merchandise Exports 19 26 41 36 30 19 8 3 2 o/w: convert area 50 77 85 75 61 38 16 6 4 External Debt I/ 34 32 33 26 19 11 5 2 1 Gross Official Reserves 115 90 153 141 120 78 34 14 8 Debt Service Obligations to IMF Merchandise Exports -- 1 2 3 5 9 10 4 1 o/w: convert area 1 2 4 7 9 19 19 9 2 External Debt I/ 0 1 1 2 3 6 6 3 1 Gross Official Reserves 1 3 7 12 18 38 41 19 5 -- 0.73 -- -- 5.06 14.56 47.17 59.28 30.74 9.13 3.50 7.61 10.25 10.05 8.65 5.55 2.51 1.23 (In percent) (In millions of SDRs) 7.5 7.50 0.77 1 2 1 4 1 2 1 4 -- 7.50 0.33 -- -- -- -- 1 2 1 3 Sources: Data provided by the Moldovan authorities and staff estimates and projections. / Includes use of Fund resources in external debt. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 28 - Data Reporting and Quality L/ Although the statistical system in Moldova is extensive, it does not provide all the data required for the analysis and monitoring of economic developments and for the formulation of macroeconomic policy in a market economy. Nonetheless, there has been significant progress in this area during the past two years. The staff has received excellent cooperation from the Moldovan authorities in terms of reporting and access to data. Efforts are made at all levels to ensure that the staff is given access to background information that is needed to complete its work. The success that has been made towards financial stabilization can be attributed, in part, to the professional attitude of the Moldovan authorities and the good track record of cooperation between them and the staff. Monetary and Bank renortinp statistics Data on monetary and exchange rate developments are provided to the staff on a timely and comprehensive basis. The NBM provides a summary of developments in the foreign exchange market on a weekly basis outlining the daily volumes bought and sold and its own intervention--including its international reserve position. A summary of the outcome of NBM credit auctions (amounts on offer, number of banks participating the spread in bids, etc.) is also provided. Detailed information on the structure of deposit and lending rates at the commercial banks are available on a monthly basis. Bank reporting systems in Moldova are based almost exclusively upon the Gosbank plan of accounts, However, a "market economy" style balance sheet can already be produced by using an IMF Statistics Department spreadsheet that maps from the Gosbank Plan of Account to a presentation that is used by the IMF. This system permits the timely preparation of central bank and banking system statements of accounts and has greatly facilitated progralm monitoring. The staff considers the current system highly effective in this regard (the balance sheet of the central bank is available on a weekly basis within two or three working days; the full banking system is prepared on a monthly basis with a two-week delay, although the NBM intends to move to a partial weekly survey of the commercial banks to provide weekly data on key indicators, such 'as broad money). At the same time, efforts should be made to intr0duce.a new chart of accounts more in keeping with the data requirements for central banking in a market economy (see below). As regards the reporting of commercial banks, the staff has advised the NBM to study its information needs in the new environment and develop a unified reporting system to guide banks in the design of their new 1/ Incorporates the findings of a STA multitopic mission of November 1994. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicANNEX I accounting systems. Future reports should provide for a "market economy" presentation of bank balance sheets and income and expenditure statements together with supporting information for prudential regulations, such as loan concentration and loan to shareholders, and monetary analysis, such as loan and deposit maturities and interest rates. The full introduction of such a system would probably have to await new chart of account for the banks, which is anticipated by end-January 1997. Government finance statistics The Ministry of Finance (MOF) does not prepare statistical data for macroeconomic analysis. Users of MOF data rely on budget reports, which are prepared for administrative purposes and do not meet the requirements for fiscal analysis in a consistent macroeconomic framework. The MOF has streamlined and tightened the management of government revenue and expenditure through its recently introduced Treasury function. The full implementation of the Treasury expenditure management system will take some time, however, and the staff has recommended that the authorities take this opportunity to review the technical assistance advice provided by the Fund's Statistics Department (STA) regarding changes to the expenditure classification system to meet needs for fiscal data prepared according to the Fund's A Manual on Government Finance Statistics (GFS). The staff has also recommended that the authorities establish a statistical/macroeconomic unit within the MOF. A FAD technical assistance mission in this area is tentatively scheduled for June 1995. Balance of navments statistics The compilation of the Moldovan balance of payments (BOP) is steadily evolving. The present estimates are based on a still incomplete and hybrid system, which is subject to under-recording. The NBM prepares monthly estimates of the balance of payments; the staff is given full and complete access to these figures. These estimates represent a timely and important source of information for the staff. The ability of the staff to analyze external developments is affected adversely, however, by data weakness which may reflect, in part, circumstances unique to Moldova, particularly the reliance on the Transnistrian authorities for the monitoring and administration of customs. In 1994 the National Bank of Moldova (NBM) took a major step forward by implementing a bank reporting system (BRS). The staff has recommended that the coverage of the BRS be expanded to include the NBM itself, and reporting on the foreign bank accounts of Moldovan enterprises. In order to assess the quality and comprehensiveness of BRS data, the NBM needs to have access to the primary source documents. Presently, the Law on Commercial Secrets prohibits access, and some remedial action in this regard is required. The recent extension of the customs declaration system to include trade with.countries of the former Soviet Union (FSU) represents a significant Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- :30 - ANNFX I step to improve trade data. However, the trade data still show evidence of under-recording; the staff has therefore recommended that the Department of Customs Control (Customs) give high priority to setting up an effective customs declaration control mechanism. IJ Very little information is available on services and private capital flows. For the measurement of the latter, a special BOP addendum was introduced to the MOF's collection form on balance sheet information of enterprises. However, the design of the addendum was poor, the accompanying instructions were unclear and incomplete, and the data collected were inconclusive. The staff has recommended that either the form should be revised, or the NBM should conduct the survey itself, possibly in cooperation with the State Department of Statistics (SDS). National accounts statistics There has been significant progress implementing the guidelines of the 1993 System of National Accounts (SNA). GDP estimates are based on the material product data reporting system, which is extensive, but does not generally meet the requirements of national accounts. Most importantly, the activities of the burgeoning- -though still-nascent--private sector are not fully accounted in the national accounts. There is anecdotal evidence thiat the private sector activity not presently incorporated in the official estimates represents an important and growing share of overall economic activity in Moldova. The staff has recommended that surveys of private sector activity be undertaken to estimate their contribution to the Moldovan economy. Over time:, improvements in national accounts statistics will require substantial changes in the flow of statistical information and its management by the SDS. Accordingly, the staff has suggested that future work in this area focus on the design of report forms for various institutional agents in the economy, on development of bridge tables linking report form information to national accounts classification, and on development of sample frames for surveys. An effort is being made by the SDS to prepare quarterly estimates of GDP on a timely basis. As a preliminary measures, however, estimates of historical GDP extending back for several years are being completed. These figures are available (on a annual basis) through 1994. Beginning with the first quarter of 1995, preliminary (or "flash") estimates of quarterly GDP, based on NMP the concept, will be ready within 30 days of the quarter encl. This figure is subject to (possibly substantial) revision within 3 months of the end of quarter. The third stage of the process is the release of a "final" revision within 6 months of the end of quarter. l/ It should be noted that the Customs Department has to rely on the cooperation of the Transnistrian authorities in the exercise of its functions. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 31 - ANNEX I The considerable progress that has been made in the area of real sector statistics can be attributed largely to the technical assistance program that the international community has provided to the SDS. At the same time, there are indications of "assistance fatigue" related to the plethora of (sometimes conflicting) advice received from the different sources with whom it has dealt concerning the preparation of national accounts. The SDS is the recipient of technical assistance from the Fund, the OECD, as well as bilateral assistance. Short-term visits from these various sources add to the heavy burden on the staff of the national accounts division, which has been asked to revise re-estimate figures that had been compiled on the basis of technical advice received from other sources. A resolution of this situation may be forthcoming. The UNDP is coordinating a year-long program of technical assistance--including the placement of a resident technical advisor. A key element of the program will be the provision of funds for the computerization of the SDS. With the assistance of the resident advisor on SNA, this should greatly facilitate the implementation of the staff's recommendations and result in improved GDP estimates. Price statistics Following the April 1994 IMF mission, the SDS undertook a major revision of the current official consumer price index (CPI). The chief problem was that the CPI figures were biased by the so-called Sauerbeck index problem and by contamination by price data from the Transnistria region (which was undergoing hyperinflation through the relevant period). These problems have been eliminated with the revision of the CPI index monthly inflation based on the CPI is available with two weeks (generally shorter) of the month end. With increased privatization, however, this index is expected to become less reliable as the current price collection forms do not accommodate the inclusion of emerging private outlets and new varieties of goods. Work has been initiated on a new and improved CPI, which uses a new price collection system that corrects this shortcoming. This work is being carried forward by the SDS and has progressed very well, with monthly data having been collected from 11 districts since July 1994. Additional efforts are required to improve still further on price collection procedures, and introduce other minor modifications to the price collection program. The staff has recommended that, after the introduction of the new CPI, the SDS should revise the existing producer price index to bring it into conformity with international standards. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 32 - APPENDIX I Moldova: Fund Relations (As of March 31, 1995) I. Membership Status: Joined 8/12/92; Article XIV II. General Resources Account: SDR Million Quota 90.00 Fund holdings of currency 218.75 Reserve position in Fund 0.01 III. SDR Department: Holdings SDR Million 13.20 IV. Outstanding Purchases and Loans: SDR Million Stand-by arrangements 58.05 CCFF 25.70 Systemic transformation facility 45.00 V. Financial Arrangements: Expira- Amount Approval tion Approved Quota % 100.0 243.1 -- % Allocation _- Quota % 64.5 28.6 50.0 Amount Drawn Tvue Date Date (SDR Million) (SDR Million) Stand-by 3/22/95 3/21,'96 58.50 6.30 Stand-by 12/19/93 3/16,'95 51.75 51.75 VI. Proiected Obligations to Fund (SDR Million; based on existing use ofi resources and present holdings of SDRs): Overdue Forthcominp 01/31/95 1995 1996 1998 14s 1997 Principal -- - _. 5.1 14.6 42.3 34..8 Charges/interest -- 5.7 7.7 7.2 5.9 3 . 5 -- -- Total -- 5.7 12.8 21.8 48.2 38.3 VII. Exchange Rate Arrangement: Prior to the introduction of the Moldovan leu on November 29, 1993, the the Russian ruble (supplemented by NBM-issued ruble denominated coupons) was the legal tender in Moldova. The Government introduced the leu at a conversion rate of one leu equal to 1,000 Mrub. At the time of the conversion, one U.S. dollar equalled 3.85 lei. The leu has depreciated somewhat against the dollar since its introduction and traded at 4.53 lei-US$l on May 12, 1995. Foreign exchange is traded on the Chisinau Interbank Foreign Currency Exchange (CIFCE), which started operations at the beginning of 1993. An Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 33 - active foreign exchange cash market also exists within auti-,crrii;sd banks and bureaux of foreign exchange. Effective November 16, 1993, the U.S. doliar exchange rate established in the CIFCE is the official exchange rate quoted by the NBM. The exchange rates for other hard currencies are determined by means of the U.S. dollar cross rates quoted in London, New York and >loscow. The CIFCE commenced daily auctions in early February 1995. Foreign exchange regulations were approved by a decision Jf the Administrative Council of the NBM on January 12, 1993 establish a liberal exchange system in Moldova in which most payments and transfers for current international transactions are, in practice, freely permitted. The NBM also has the authority to enact regulations governing capital transfers. VIII. Article IV Consultation: The last Article IV consultation was concluded on June 3, 1994, (EBS/94/111, May 25, 1994) and SM/94/130, May 27, 1994). IX. Use of Fund Resources: On February 4, 1993, Moldova purchased Fund resources totaling SDR 13.5 million, equivalent to 15 percent of quota under the Compensatory and Contingency Financing Facilities (EBS/93/8, January 15, 1993). This was followed by a first drawing under the Systemic Transformation Facility of SDR 22.5 million, equivalent to 25 percent of quota, which was approved by the Board on September 16, 1993 (EBS/93/149). On December 17, 1993, the Board approved a purchase of Fund resources under a stand-by arrangement in the amount of SDR 51.75 million and the drawing of the second tranche of the STF totalling SDR 22.5 million. On December 19, 1994, Moldova made a second purchase under the CCFF totaling SDR 12.2 million, equivalent to 13.5 percent of quota, in conjunction with the second review of the stand-by arrangement which expired at end-March 1995. The Board approved a successor stand-by arrangement for Moldova in an amount totalling SDR 58.05 million (equivalent to 65 percent of quota) on March 22, 1995. The first tranche equivalent to SDR 6.3 million was drawn on approval of the program. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public_~~ - 34 - APPENDIX i X. Technical Assistance: The following table summarizes the technical assistance provided by the Fund to Moldova since January 1994. Fund Technical Assistance in Moldova Subiect/ Dept. Identified Need Action Timing Counternart FAD STA MAE STA FAD MAE MAE MAE MAE MAE STA MAE FAD MAE MAE STA MAE MAE MAE MAE MAE MAE MAE Treasury Balance of Payments Central Bank Accounting Consumer and Producer Prices Tax Administration Banking Supervision Payments and Settlement Foreign Exchange Central Bank Modernization Accounting Money and Banking Statistics Research and Policy Treasury and Tax Administration Banking Supervision Foreign Exchange Multi-sector Central Bank Modernization Central Bank Accounting Monetary Operation Payments and Settlements Bank Supervision Information Technology Accounting Mission Mission Expert Visit Mission Mission Mission Expert Visit Expert Visit Mission Expert Visit Mission Expert Visit Expert Visit Expert Visit Expert Visit Mission Mission Expert January February March April April April/May April May May June July September October October October/ November November November November Visits (2) Expert November Visit Expert December Visit Expert December Visit Expert December Visit Expert December Visit MOF NBM NBM SDS MOF NBM NBM NBM NBM NBM NBM NBM MOF NBM SDS NBM NBM NBM NBM NBM NBM NBM Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicAPPENDIX I - 35 - Fund Technical Assistance in Moldova (concluded). Subiect/ Dent. Identified Need Action Timinp Counterpart MAE MAE MAE MAE MAE MAE MAE MAE Accounting Monetary Operation Research and Policy Monetary Operations Accounting Foreign Exchange Payments and Settlements Banking Supervision Expert Visit Expert Visit Expert Visit Expert Visit Expert Visit Expert Visit Expert Visit Expert Visit February February March April April April April May NBM NBM NBM NBM NBM NBM NBM NBM XI. Resident ReDresentative: Mr. Lynge Nielsen has been the Fund's Resident Representative in Moldova since August 13, 1994. XII. Resident Advisor: Mr. Herskovitz has been resident advisor on central banking issues since July 2, 1993. Mr. and Mrs. Faulk have taken up posts for one year as resident banking supervision advisors. XIII. Short-term Assistance: Mr. Bruneau of the Banque de France will make multiple visits to Moldova to advise the NBM on foreign exchange issues. The first visit was undertaken in September 1993. This was followed by a visit in November that was held in conjunction with the technical assistance mission from MAE. Ms. Rhee will make multiple visits to advise on information technology. Ms. Kremer from the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco will make multiple visits to advise on on-site examinations. Mr. Parks of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand will make multiple visits to advise on the implementation of the new chart of accounts for the NBM. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 36 - APPENDIX IL Moldova: Relations with IBRD The Republic of Moldova joined the IBRD on August 12, 1992. The first loan made by the Bank was an Emergency Drought Recovery Loan for US$26 million, which was approved by the Board on March 11, 1993. The loan was used to finance the purchase of key agricultural inputs for the 1993 agricultural season. A Rehabilitation Loan for an amount of US$60 million was approved on October 21, 1993. The Loan financed essential imports in support of the structural reform program, and provided noninflationary financing of the budget deficit. A Structural Adjustment Loan (SAL) tota:Lling US$60 million was approved on December 8, 1994. The first tranche of US$30 million is fully disbursed. The SAL supports a broadening of structural reforms with particular attention to the acceleration of privatization; hardening the budget constraints on enterprises; creating a competitive environment (including through demonopolization of agricultural input supply and output marketing); and better targeting of benefits to need in the social safety net, within fiscal constraints. Cofinancing or parallel financing for quick-disbursing balance of payments assistance is being sought in conjunction with the loan, and financing for technical assistance to support a number of measures in the Government's reform program has been obtained or is being sought from various donors. A pre-export guarantee facility for the amount of US$30 million was approved on March 9, 1995. The aim is to stimulate viable production for export and build bridges with foreign financiers, traders, and ultimately investors, by mitigating the risk of changes in the policy environment. In addition, loans in the energy and agricultural sectors are nearing completion, as is a loan to support the restructuring of the financial and enterprise sectors. Moldova: Relations with EBRD An revised EBRD strategy paper for Moldova was issued in April 1994. The Bank is focusing its activities in the agriculture and agri-business sectors, small business development, the improvement of energy efficiency, and the telecommunications sector. A project in the Moldovan wine sector, the Wine Export Promotion Project, is valued at about ECU 42.2 million. Disbursements under the wine sector project are scheduled to begin in the second half of 1994. A number of other projects in the financial, shoe manufacturing and textiles sectors are also under consideration. Technical assistance in the amount of approximately ECU 0.8 million is also being provided by the EBRD to the wine, power and transport sectors. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 37 - ATTACHYEKT I May 30, 1995 Dear Mr. Camdessus: Moldova's program of economic reforms, which is aimed at securing financial stabilization and a market economy, is continuing. Important progress has been achieved in terms of financial stabilization, and we are grateful for the support our program has received from the IMF through purchases of Fund resources under the Compensatory and Contingency Financing Facility, the Systemic Transformation Facility and stand-by arrangements. Our policy intentions for 1995 have been set out in the Memorandum of Economic Policies dated February 27, 1995 that was attached to our letter to you of the same date. The program outlined therein aims at reducing annual inflation to under 10 percent, enhancing financial discipline in the state enterprise sector, and accelerating structural reforms. The major elements of the program are being implemented as scheduled. We have, nonetheless, identified several policy areas in which our policies would need to be strengthened with a view to ensuring that the ambitious objectives of the program are attained. We have already begun to implement the required measures which are set out in the attached Memorandum of Economic Policies. On the basis of our track record of cooperation with the Fund and the additional policy commitments set out in the attachment, we hereby request the completion of the first review of the program under the stand-by arrangement that was approved by the Executive Board on March 22, 1995. /s/ Andrei Sangheli Prime Minister of Moldova Attachment /s/ Leonid Talmaci Governor National Bank of Moldova Mr. Michel Camdessus Managing Director International Monetary Fund Washington, D.C. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 38 - ATTACHMENT II May 30, 1995 REPUBLIC OF MOLDOVA Memorandum of Economic Policies I. Introduction 1. [Overall objectives]. The general policy intentions of the Government and the National Bank of Moldova for 1995 have been set out in the Memorandum of Economic Policies of February 27, 1995. The economic program outlined therein, whose objectives are to achieve essential price stability and accelerate the process of structural reforms, is being implemented as scheduled. While the general economic policy environment remains quite difficult, we are broadly satisfied with the results of the program so far and intend to persevere with its full implementation. To ensure this outcome, we have identified several areas (described below) in which implementation efforts will be reinforced and additional measures taken. 2. [Aggregate output]. Although complete data are not yet available, we have observed signs that the sharp decline in economic activity has bottomed out. With the exception of the agricultural processing sector, which continues to be affected by the serious drought in 1994, we expect the level of industrial production to stabilize in the second half of the year. Private sector activity, often with the involvement of foreign investment, is expanding. With the expected return of agricultural production to its long-term trend level, it is projected that aggregate output will recover, albeit at a modest rate. For the medium term, the Government sees the structural reforms as the only basis for sustainable growth. 3. [Price objectives]. We view the price stability objective as ambitious yet necessary. The monthly indicators of inflation in the first quarter have converged toward the targeted inflation path. The Government and the National Bank of Moldova will keep the level of inflation under close review and will take additional measures as required to keep on the targeted path. II. Monetarv 4. [Monetary program]. The NBM continues to implement the agreed credit program; all quantitative performance criteria and indicative targets for end-March 1995 were met. 5. [Interest rates]. Continuing financial stabilization has resulted in declining nominal interest rates; the structure of interest rates remains positive in real terms. Nonetheless, the high level of commercial bank lending rates continues to cause concern owing to its potential adverse effect on growth. The NBM attributes high lending rates primarily to the problem on nonperforming loans, which in turn reflects lack of financial Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 39 - ATTACHMENT II discipline and past credit decisions which were based on non-economic factors. 6. [Financial system]. The commercial banking system is impaired by an overhang of nonperforming loans; the NBM has taken measures on a number of fronts to address the problem. New loan quality classification guidelines have been implemented. Agreements with undercapitalized banks have been concluded under which the banks are subject to restrictions regarding the acceptance of deposits, the payment of wages and certain administrative costs. The Banking Supervision Department of the NBM has been strengthened significantly. A law reforming the taxation of financial institutions that provides, inter alia, for loan-loss provisioning from pretax profits has been submitted to the Parliament. The NBM's efforts are showing some positive effects. However, the NBM will need to accelerate its efforts at reforming the banking system in a medium-term framework, once the required legislative framework is in place. In particular, the new laws on the National Bank and on financial institutions will be promulgated in May 1995. In the meantime, the NBM will stand ready to take measures, including de- licensing, against banks that do not meet the terms of recapitalization agreements. The NBM will also work with the Government and the Securities Commission to develop an effective regulatory regime for nonbank financial institutions. III. Budvetarv Policies 7. [First quarter budget outcome]. The first quarter budget outcome was consistent with the program. Tax revenue performance was aided by the collection of tax arrears, in particular of enterprise income tax, VAT and excise taxes, as well as road fees. However, the payment of 1994 expenditure arrears, and the assumption by Government of loans extended to enterprises on account of the natural calamities, resulted in severe pressure on other current expenditures, which was accompanied by sequestration of expenditures on a strict priority basis. This expenditure control, aided by restraint in granting new loans and guarantees, was effective in bringing the consolidated deficit to its targeted level. The domestic bank borrowing requirement stayed within the ceiling on account of adequate foreign financing in the quarter, and including rescheduling of some amortization payments. Treasury bill auctions have been initiated, though amounts sold have so far been limited. a. [Prospects ahead]. Despite the adequate outcome in the first quarter, several factors threaten the program, including: . the potential loss of approximately Mdl 200 million in tax revenue as a result of the conditional postponement of payment of tax arrears for selected manufacturing industries, and a general postponement of taxes on imports of inputs into agricultural production; . the extraordinary nature of tax collection efforts in the first quarter of 1995 and the need to strengthen revenue collection on a sustainable basis; Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 4-o - ATTACHMENTX dependence of the revenue performance in the second half on significant land tax collections; the accumulation of significant pension and other benefits arrears by the Social Fund as a consequence of difficulties in revenue collection, arising from a large proportion of barter and cash operations in the economy, and from weaknesses in the new system of collecting from local governments their contribution to finance cash compensation; lags in privatization revenue in the presence of strong pressures to undertake the expenditures to which the revenue is tied, including for the indexation of bank accounts for certain segments of the population; delays in the implementation of improvements in tax administration procedures and granting of sufficient enforcement powers to the state tax inspectorate; delays in employment reductions to match the budgetary cost of the announced increase in budgetary sphere wages. To ensure the integrity of the fiscal program, the following measures will be implemented: . . l l l the Government will insist that postponed tax liabilities be settled in full by end-October 1995 and, in accordance with Article V of the 1995 Budget Law, will refrain from granting new tax postponements or industrial incentives that would adversely impact on the budget; the Government will offset any revenue shortfall arising from the existing postponements, or from other causes, by expanding the base for excise taxes, to take effect in the second half of the year; the Government will strengthen its preparatory work for the collection of the land tax revenue; the Government will review the operations and financing of the Social Fund with a view to identifying means to accelerate the payment of contributions from enterprises, and payments for targeted transfers from the local governments; the Special Social Insurance Fund will be placed under the administration of the Government with the 1996 budget. the Customs Department will be integrated with the Ministry of Finance by end-1995; the Government will accelerate the process of cash privatization with a view to mobilizing at least Mdl 30 million by end-June 1995 and will defer any tied expenditures until the corresponding revenue is realized; the Government will ensure that by end-May 1995, the State Tax Inspectorate has sufficient legal powers to seize assets of tax delinquents; the Government will allow salary adjustments only in those administrative units that have reduced their work force beyond the targets envisaged in the 1995 Budget Law; and the Government will establish, from the fourth quarter onward, indicative monthly targets for government borrowing from the banking system. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 41 - ATTACHYFNT II -Ij-_ 9. [Fiscal structural measures]. The implementation of a number of additional fiscal structural measures is being accelerated by the Government, including: the reduction of the personal use exemption for imports to the equivalent of $200 per person and the review of public sector employment with the view to developing an effective program of work force adjustment. The preparatory work on a new budget process law and a law on internal debt is progressing; it is expected that these bills will be submitted to Parliament by end-September 1995. The Governmellt has continued its efforts to implement basic tax reform, including expandins the base of the income taxes to capture a greater proportion of income generated in the private sector, nonwage incomes, and nonwage benefits and payments in kind, and enhancing the independent revenue-raising capacity of local governments. Furthermore, the Government has expanded its program of allowing private sector provision of transportation services. IV. External Policies 10. [External debt and Government guarantees]. As the stock of debt is increasing, careful control of the external debt position is required. Accordingly, the Government of Moldova will not utilize tied credits with disadvantageous repayment terms and will limit recourse to commercial borrowing. The Government believes that contingent liabilities arising from the granting of guarantees of loans entered into by enterprises, in both domestic and foreign capital markets, should be accounted for explicitly. The system of provisioning for domestic guarantees has served Moldova well, and from end-1995 it will be broadened to include government guarantees for external debt contracted by the enterprise sphere. Accordingly, 20 percent of the lei value for the first $50 million in guarantees extended, and 100 percent of the value of the guarantees in excess of this amount, excluding borrowing from multilateral organizations, will be subject to provisioning. The Government of Moldova is now and will remain current on its principal and interest payments on all foreign loans. To ensure timely payments, the Ministry of Finance has introduced a system of pre-authorizing the NBM to effect all its external debt service payments by automatically debiting the Government's account with the NBM. The Government and the National Bank also reaffirm their intention not to contract or guarantee external debt with maturities of less than one year, with the exception of normal import-related credits. The Government of Moldova will not assume the outstanding foreign obligations of enterprises nor guarantee their current import payments. 11. [Exchange laws and regulations]. The National Bank of Moldova and the Government of Moldova are in the process of completing a review of Moldova's exchange system with assistance from Fund staff with a view to accepting no later than end-June 1995 the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4 of the Fund's Articles of Agreement. Action will need to be taken in order to eliminate exchange measures subject to Fund jurisdiction arising from: the frequency of setting the official exchange rate; limitations of advance payments to non-FSU countries; restrictions on payments for current Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public42 - ATTACHMENT 12 international transactions by resident individuals; and the National Bank's system of correspondent accounts with some FSU central banks. 12. [Trade regimej. The maximum tariff (with few exceptions) was reduced to 30 percent on April 1, 1995. The Government reaffirms its intention to reduce the maximum rate to no more than 20 percent by December 1, 1995. The Government will abolish the export quota on grain and grain products in the second half of 1995, but, in any event, not later than December 1, 1995. The Government continues its efforts toward accession to the GATT/WTO. 13. [Foreign direct investment]. The Government of Moldova recognizes that inflows of non-debt-creating capital are crucial for the attainment of external viability over the medium term. The Government is in the process of reviewing barriers to foreign investment, to be completed by the end of June 1995, with special emphasis on identifying obstacles in the legislative and regulatory environment. The Government recognizes that the granting of tax exemptions to foreign investors entails significant fiscal costs, and distorts the business environment for domestic enterprises. In this connection, the Government will not extend or increase tax preferences for foreign investors beyond those set out in the Law on Foreign Investments, Number 999-X11, of April 1, 1992, as amended in 1994. To encourage exports and export processing, exports to non-CIS markets have been zero-rated for VAT for all exporters; the Government will investigate the feasibility of methods of relieving exports of the burden of import taxes on inputs. V. Structural Keforms 14. [Structural support for financial stabilization]. The Government recognizes that the progress made toward financial stabilization can be secured on a sustainable basis only if all economic agents--commercial banks, enterprises, individuals, and the Government--enforce financial discipline. This objective is contingent, however, on a broad program of structural reforms that would foster the development of market forces. The slow pace of structural reforms thus far has resulted in an imbalance in the reform program which has fostered the continued misallocation of resources, impeded the adjustment to the terms-of-trade shock and delayed the recovery process. The Government acknowledges that the current situation is unsustainable and, therefore, reaffirms its commitment to implement the range of measures identified in the program. 15. [Legislative framework for a market economy]. A legal framework that is both transparent and stable is a prerequisite for a market economy. Some progress has been made in this area, but much more remains to be done. Of particular concern to the Government are problems that have been identified with regard to the laws on bankruptcy and the law on collateral as it applies to the agricultural sector. The Government is reviewing th,is legislation with the aim of addressing any shortcomings. A revised law on bankruptcy will be suhmitted to Parliament in June 1995. To assure the sufficient allocation of credit to the agricultural sector, the Government Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 43 - ATTACHMENT II will review the law on property to give individuals unrestricted title to land and permit its transfer including through collateralization. 16. [Enterprise governance]. The Government recognizes the importance of reduci:\g its direct role in the economy and enhancing the role of market- determined prices in allocating resources. Enterprises should be guided by price and cost considerations. This underscores the importance of privatization (see below). For enterprises that are to remain under government ownership, in accordance with the public enterprises law of June 1994, the Government will appoint boards of directors with fiduciary responsibilities and legal obligations to monitor and remove management if necessary. Managers will be directed to pursue full cost recovery. To minimize direct Government intervention in the economy, transfers at nonmarket terms will not be granted. 17. [Insolvent enterprises]. An effective bankruptcy mechanism is essential to the efficient functioning of a market economy, As progress has been slow in initiating bankruptcies, there is an urgent need to give an unequivocal signal of the Government's commitment to the hardening of financial constraints on the state enterprise sector. The Government, therefore, has started on its own account to liquidate insolvent state enterprises. In parallel, commercial banks have initiated liquidation proceedings against some state enterprises, The Government is in the process of identifying a further 15 firms for liquidation; proceedings against these enterprises will be completed by end-June 1995. 18. [Interenterprise arrears]. The Government and the NBM have completed all of the preparatory work for converting interenterprise arrears into tradeable claims on debtor enterprises. It is expected that transactions in these claims will begin shortly following the scheduled opening of the securities exchange. 19. [Direct controls]. Margin controls on most goods at the wholesale and retail level were eliminated by Parliament effective January 1, 1995, with few exceptions. The Government will propose that all remaining margin controls be eliminated in the context of the review of the budget in the second half of 1995. 20. [Privatization]. The Government regards the privatization of state firms as a critical element of its structural reform strategy. However, delays have been encountered in the sale of the residual tranche of enterprises that were to have been sold under the 1993/94 Privatization Program. The process of privatizing these enterprises will be completed by end-May 1995. Voucher privatization will be completed by end-September 1995. A majority of enterprises included in the 1995/96 Privatization Program will be sold by end-December 1995. 21. [Medium-term policy framework]. The Government and the National Bank of Moldova have begun the preparatory work for the development of a medium- term policy framework which would serve as a basis for seeking support under the extended Fund facility. The work will be guided by two broad medium- Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Publict:erm objectives : securing financial stabilization on a permanent b,asis anti completing the task of establishing and making effective in Moldova all the basic institutions of a market economy. We would hope that negotiations on a medilrm-term program could take place later in 1995. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public