DOCUMENT OF INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND NOT FOR PUBLIC USE MASTER FILES ROOM HQ C-525 0451 EBS/99/15 CONFlDENTIAL February 11, 1999 To: Members of the Executive Board From: Subject: The Acting Secretary Argentina-Staff Report for thi? 1999 Article IV Consultation and Second Review Under the Extended Arrangement Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staff paper for the 1999 Article IV consultation with Argentina and the second review under the Extended Arrangement, which will be brought to the agenda for discussion on a date to be announced. A draft decision appears on pages 24-26. Mrs. Ter-Minassian (ext. 38844) or Mr. Reichmann (ext. 38610) is available to answer technical or factual questions relating to this paper prior to the Board discussion. Unless the Documents Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the WTO Secretariat on Monday, February 22, 1999; and to the European Commission, the European Investment Bank, and the Inter-American Development Bank, following its consideration by the Executive Board. Att: (1) Other Distribution: Departments Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicCONFIDENTIAL. INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND ARGENTINA Staff Report for the 1999 Article IV Consultation and Second Review Under the Extended Arrangement Prepared by Western Hemisphere and Policy Development and Review Departments Approved by David Goldsbrough and Jesus Seade February 11, 1999 Contents I. Introduction II. Recent Developments III. Report on Discussions A. Overview ................................. B. Fiscal Policies .............................. C. Credit and Banking Policy ..................... D. External Policies ............................ E. Structural Reforms .......................... IV. Staff Appraisal :. Tables 1. Quantitative Performance Criteria for 1999 2. Selected Economic Indicators 3. Consolidated Public Sector Operations, 1995-1999 4. Summary ofFederal Government Operations, 1995-1999 5. Summary Operations of the Financial System 6. Balance of Payments 7. Requirements and Sources of Foreign Exchange 8. Medium-Term Scenario 9. Availability of Purchases in 1999 10 13 16 17 19 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 Page .3 .4 10 21 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2- Contents Page Figures 1. Selected Economic Indicators 6 2. Selected Financial Indicators 8 3. Exchange Rate Developments 18 Text Boxes 1. Options Regarding Full Dollarization of Argentina 11 2. Structural Benchmarks for the Third Review 20 Annexes I. LetterofIntent.................................................... 36 II. Stress Analysis of the Banking System Under a Macroeconomic Shock 37 Ill. Status of Structural Reforms under the Extended Arrangement 40 Appendices 1. FundRelations .,.....,..,..,............._...........,.._........, 48 II. Statistical Information 50 III. Relations with the World Bank 53 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3- 1. INTR~DU~~I~N I. A staff mission’ visited Buenos Aires during November 30-December 15, 1998 to conduct Article IV consultation discussions and the second review under the extended arrangement, which was approved on February 4, 1998 in the amount of SDR 2,080 million (135 percent of quota). The authorities are treating the arrangement as precautionary. At end- December 1998, Argentina’s outstanding use of Fund credit was SDR 3.9 billion (251 percent of quota). During the first review of the arrangement in September 23, 1998, Directors commended the authorities for the performance under the program to date, especially in the fiscal area, but, urged the authorities to take further steps in regard to labor market reform, noting that the reform recently approved by congress fell short of what would be necessary to enhance labor market flexibility and reduce labor costs adequately. Directors also expressed concern over the possible adverse impact of the aftermath of the Russia debt crisis on Argentina’s access to external financing, and urged the authorities to maintain a firm macroeconomic policy stance, with a view to promoting a rapid improvement in market confidence. 2. Presidential and provincial governors’ elections are scheduled for October 1999. The coalition of two major opposition parties (the centrist Radical Party and the center-left FREPASO party) selected in November 1998 the mayor of Buenos Aires (Mr. Fernando de la Rua) as its presidential candidate. The ruling Justicialist party of President Menem (who is barred by the Constitution from running for a third term) will choose its candidate in April 1999. 3. Argentina has subscribed to the SDDS and, in general, the timeliness and accuracy of basic data for surveillance are adequate (the lag on external trade statistics, however, should be shortened). Progress was made during 1998 to revise the balance of payments statistics and those on the external indebtedness of the private sector. Work is underway to set up a system to monitor the quarterly fiscal position of the provinces. The authorities also are finalizing work on new national accounts in constant as well as current prices (see Appendix II). 4. The discussions for the Article IV Consultation and Review of the program supported by the Extended Arrangement were conducted before the devaluation of the Brazilian real. The staff agrees with the authorities’ view that the most appropriate response to this event is to reaffirm and, where possible, reinforce the strong commitment to the policy framework ‘The mission consisted of Mrs. Ter-Minassian (head), Messrs. Reichmann, Catao, Franks (all WHD), Cuevas (FAD), and Velloso (PDR), and was assisted by Mr. Figuerola, the IMF resident representative in Buenos Aires. Mr. Zoccali, Alternate Executive Director for Argentina, participated in the discussions. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4- that has served Argentina well in recent years. The core elements of this framework include the automatic adjustment mechanisms embedded in the currency board regime; conservative fiscal and external debt policies set in a transparent medium-term framework; a regulatory regime that promotes a resilient banking sector; and continuing structural reforms designed to improve the flexibility and efficiency of the economy. While the recent events in Brazil will certainly have a significant impact on Argentina’s economy, the size of these effects cannot be judged accurately at this early stage, and much will depend on how quickly the situation in Brazil is stabilized. An updated assessment of the impact on Argentina of developments in Brazil will be circulated by the staff prior to the Board meeting. In the meantime, the authorities have reaffirmed their commitment to the proposed fiscal and monetary targets for end-March, agreed to an additional review of the program to be concluded by end-May and to advancing to that date some of the structural benchmarks originally proposed for end-August. The subsequent review was rescheduled from August to November to avoid an undue bunching. The authorities’ letter specifying this change in the schedule of reviews is included in Annex I. The authorities intend to continue treating the arrangement as precautionary. Should they need to draw on it, completion of this review would provide access to cumulative resources through end-1998, with first access to the amounts scheduled for 1999 subject to end-March performance criteria and completion of the new (third) review in May. II. RECENTDEVELOPMENTS 5. The unsettled conditions in international capital markets in 1998 brought to a halt the rapid economic growth that Argentina had experienced after the steep recession in 1995. The hardening of external financial conditions, especially after the Russian debt crisis in August 1998, together with the weakening of demand in major trading partners, notably Brazil, and the decline in oil and other commodity prices (which account for over a third of the country’s exports) resulted in both a marked deceleration in the pace of economic activity and a deterioration in the current account of the balance of payments. The performance criteria under the program were observed at all testing dates through September 1998; however, preliminary information indicates a minor excess over the federal government deficit ceiling for end-1998 (Table 1). 6 After strong growth in 1997, the momentum of economic activity carried forward well into 1998, with little impact from the Asia crisis, but growth slowed sharply in the second half of the year. Real GDP growth for the year is estimated at around 4% percent, decelerating from about 7% percent in the first half of 1998 to under 1 percent in the fourth quarter (Table 2). The rapid expansion of output in 1997 and early 1998 was led by investment and was associated with a sharp increase in imports of goods and services, but both investment and imports slowed sharply later in the year. The unemployment rate, which had peaked in 1995 at 17% percent, continued to decline, to under 12% percent in October 1998. Reflecting the still signiticant slack in the labor market and related wage Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-5- moderation, as well as the decline in import prices, inflation remained low, with consumer prices rising by only 0.8 percent in 1998, while wholesale prices fell by over 6 percent (Figure 1). 7. The fiscal position improved markedly over the past two years, reflecting the strength of economic activity, as well as tight control over expenditures. The consolidated public sector deficit fell to an estimated 1.8 percent of GDP in 1998,* from 2.2 percent in 1997, largely as a result of the strengthening of the finances of the federal government (Tables 3 and 4). The primary balance of the latter improved by close to 1% percentage points of GDP over the period 199698. The weakness of activity in the second half of 1998, along with a larger than expected shift of contributors from the public to the private pension system,) contributed to a shortfall (equivalent to 0.4 percent of GDP) in federal government revenues, compared with program targets.4 The tax shortfall was concentrated in VAT collections, reflecting increased use of the accumulated VAT credits (due to excess withholding at source) to liquidate current liabilities, the deceleration of imports, as well as an increase in tax arrears associated with the economic slowdown.5 The revenue shortfall was largely compensated by the associated reduction in transfers to provinces and by cuts in discretionary expenditures-notwithstanding increased outlays on account of floods. The program target for the federal government deficit was slightly exceeded (by 0.1 percent of GDP), but the deficit, at 1 .l of GDP, remained modest. 8. Preliminary estimates suggest some overrun in the provincial government deficit in 1998, which may have reached 0.5 percent of GDP, compared with the indicative target of 0.2 percent of GDP. Notwithstanding the shortfall in shared revenue, most provinces continued making progress in fiscal adjustment. However, a few provinces that were in a relatively stronger financial position-particularly, Buenos Aires, which accounts for some 30 percent of total provincial spending-increased spending above program expectations. *Given the slowing of growth, the drop in the consolidated public sector deficit during 1998 implied a negative fiscal impulse of about 0.6 percent of GDP. ‘See “Recent developments in the social security system” in the accompanying background paper. 4Revenues were also affected by a court-mandated delay in the leasing of airwaves, which had been expected to add close to 0.1 percent of GDP to nontax revenues. This shortfall was offset by an increase in other nontax revenues (e.g., profits from the Mortgage Bank and realized interest on Brady bonds). ‘The remaining stock of excess VAT withholding is estimated at over Arg$2 billion. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-6- Figure 1. Argentina Selected Economic Indicators 10 i i“ lnflatian 1 \ ; i>%, pmcnt Ehnnp O.cr pre”iouS I2 monul4 . ..., Merchandise Exports and hwrts ,ln milllo” 0, U.S. aoil W Monthly Trade Selallee (I” Of us. d.llarl) -10 ‘8 I1 1 I-‘, ” ” /I “I -I- ‘0”) ‘8 -lw ,~~,~“~*““~“““~‘“~“:~,~~‘““‘~“~~.”’””” lSll sources: Argentine authonfies; end hmd sta,f os,intates Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-7- 9. The public debt as a share of GDP remains around 37 percent, while its average maturity increased from seven to nearly ten years; only the equivalent of 1 percent of GDP has a maturity of less than one year. In recent years, the authorities have pursued a policy of preborrowing, whereby they have sought to build a cushion equivalent to about three months of actual financing needs. During the recent bouts of turmoil in international capital markets, this policy allowed Argentina to suspend temporarily new debt issues without disrupting its debt service obligations, and gave the authorities valuable time to rearrange their financing plans. Financing from capital markets dried up in the wake of the Russia debt crisis in August 1998, but already by late October Argentina had reestablished market access, being among the first emerging market countries to do so. Spreads on Argentina’s debt peaked at 1250 basis points in August, but by year end were down to around 600 basis points, some 200 points higher than in the earlier part of the year. In the last months of 1998, the government placed bonds and notes in the international market for a total of US$2.5 billion, in the 7 to 20 years maturity range, at interest rates of 11 to 12 percent. In the domestic market, the government raised more than US%600 million in four- year bonds, in addition to rolling over short-term treasury bills. About half of these resources were kept in reserve to be used in 1999. In addition special structural adjustment loans were obtained from the World Bank and the IDB for a total of US$4.5 billion (some US$2 billion of which were disbursed in late 1998 with the remainder due in early 1999). As a result, the public sector started 1999 already having obtained or arranged resources sufficient to cover its financing needs for the first half of the year. 10. Private sector deposits in the banking system continued to grow in the aftermath of the Russian debt crisis albeit at a much reduced rate reflecting also the slowdown in economic activity. After growing by nearly 23 percent in the first half of 1998 (compared with the same period of 1997), deposits broadly stabilized in the second half of the year for an increase of almost 15 percent in the year as a whole. There was also a moderate shift-some 3 percent of the total-from peso to dollar deposits. The rate of growth of credit to the private sector, slowed from nearly 16 percent year-on-year in mid-1998 to 11 percent by year-end (Table 5). 11. Domestic interest rates rose substantially in the aftermath of the Russian debt crisis, with the interbank call rate rising to over 8 percent in August 1998, from 6 percent in June, and the prime rate more than doubling (to about 17 percent) over the same period. Interest rates declined gradually in subsequent months, albeit to levels still above those prevailing before the crisis before being boosted again in January 1999 by the Brazilian crisis (Figure 2). 12. The banking system as a whole has weathered the turmoil in international markets well, although there has been some flight to quality, with attendant pressures on a few, relatively small weaker banks. Two of these banks, which had long-standing Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-8- Figure 2. Argentina Selected Financial Indicators ~o”““‘~“““‘“““““~““‘u”““~“‘- ~mlllllrmlYEIXIDP~~~~RXIWDL1E~IIINIIYCDClmcnsur~ruca, ~‘sm I”, 33 Prime Rates i (I” pm.“,) Spread sw,ver Brady Bond Rates (ItI basic percent points) km 1100 am *OM tm 1100 4m 4 - \ Soure~s: Argentine au*hLvitiDs; JP. Morgan: and FU”d datf t-stinwtes. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-9- solvency problems, failed, and were taken over by stronger institutions, with the private deposit guarantee fund (SEDESA) covering a residual payout to depositors. In addition, the BCRA stepped up its temporary liquidity assistance through repos to other banks during October and the first half of November 1998. This support was unwound in the latter part of the year, so that the NDA ceiling for end-December was observed with some margin. 13. The external current account deficit widened from 3% percent of GDP in 1997 to an estimated 4’% percent in 1998, mainly reflecting an unanticipated deterioration in the terms of trade and a worsening of the factor services account. Real merchandise exports rose by an estimated 9 percent in 1998, while the growth of real imports slowed sharply to about 10 percent (Table 6). Imports actually declined in real terms during the last few months of the year, reflecting the downturn m economic activity, especially investment. The higher deficit in the factor services account partly reflected improved information on private sector foreign assets and liabilities and on interest paid and received abroad.6 Net interest payments abroad increased by nearly US$SOO million in 1998, mainly in reflection of higher interest rates and the increase in public and private external debt, while profit remittances rose by nearly US$500 million, as a result of both the rising stock of FDI and the relatively strong growth of profits, in the first half of the year. 14. Despite the fallout from the Russian crisis, net capital inflows rose during 1998, to about USS19 billion, allowing an increase of nearly USS3% billion in gross international reserves of the BCRA. Foreign direct investment remained buoyant (at US$4 billion). External borrowing by the public sector outpaced substantially private borrowing, especially in the latter part of the year, when Argentine enterprises faced significant constraints on access to external markets. External debt of the private sector (including revised estimates of debt of the nonfinancial private sector) is estimated to have reached US$42.7 billion (12.6 percent of GDP) by end-1998, which compares with a public external debt of some US.%83 billion (24.4 percent of GDP). 15. The authorities continued to make progress in implementing their structural reform agenda. Annex III to the report presents an updated overview of the status of the structural reforms included in the program. These included additional steps to strengthen tax administration, budgetary procedures, social security and other social programs, and governance; to carry out further deregulation, privatization, and leasing of public assets; to improve the legislative and regulatory framework for the financial sector and the functioning of the payments system; and to modemize the judicial system. 16. As indicated in the staff report for the first review, the labor market reform legislation approved by congress in August 1998 allows a significant reduction in dismissal 6The methodological improvements in the balance of payments data explain the equivalent of 0.1 percentage points of GDP of the current account deterioration in 1998. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-lO- costs for new employees, thereby facilitating the creation of new jobs. In other respects, however, especially as regards collective bargaining, the new law may reduce, rather than increase, labor market flexibility. The law also eliminated most forms of temporary labor contracts, which were exempted from contributions to so+ security but had been one of the main avenues for employment creation in recent years. 17. An important achievement in structural reform was the promulgation, in December 1998, of the tax reform. Key provisions include a significant expansion of the bases of the income and value-added taxes, a minimum corporate income tax based on gross assets, and limits to the deductibility of interest costs under the income tax. The additional revenue from these changes--estimated at 0.6 percent of GDP-will be used to finance a phased reduction of social security contributions in the course of 1999, which will lower private sector employers’ effective contributions on average from 10.5 percent of the gross wage to 4.4 percent, with consequent positive effects on employment and competitiveness.7 III. REPORT ON DISCUSSIONS A. Overview 18. The discussions were held against a background in which satisfaction with a by- and- large encouraging performance of the economy in 1998 was giving way to ,~ heightened concerns arising from the tightening of international capital markets conditions and the uncertain situation in Brazil. The authorities emphasized that the resilience exhibited by Argentina’s convertibility regime in the face of the renewed turmoil in capital markets owed much to the firmness with which it had weathered the Mexican crisis in 1995, the subsequent strengthening of the domestic banking system, and the prudent fiscal and external debt policies that had been followed. Indeed, the authorities felt that having come this far, and given the commitment of the society at large to the currency board, the way forward pointed to a deepening of this commitment in the context of a wider regional arrangement tending toward a common currency area. Such a fundamental shift would be a project for the medium-term, which needed to be approached deliberately. The authorities reported that preliminary studies on this topic and discussions with likely partners had i/ already been started. Box 1 describes some of the options being considered by the authorities. 19. For the immediate future, however, there were significant risks: economic activity was in a clear downturn, the external current account deficit had widened, financing conditions remained precarious and room for significant new policy initiatives in 1999 was likely to be constrained by the electoral timetable. In these circumstances, the authorities and the staff agreed that the prevailing uncertainties underscored the need to maintain ‘See “Changes in the tax system” in the accompanying background paper. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-ll- a firm and consistent macroeconomic policy stance, keeping to the envisaged medium- term fiscal adjustment path and ensuring the continued strength of the banking system. Box 1. Options Regarding Full Dollarization of Argentina Argentina has strengthened considerably its fmancial policies and economic performance since 1990, in the context of the adoption of a currency board arrangement in April 1991. Yet, the economy has remained vulnerable to sudden shifts in the international macroeconomic environment, and the authorities continue to search for ways to help reduce the interest rate premium (and variability) on Argentine capital market instruments, reiative to comparable U.S. Treasury instruments. Domestic inflation has remained below that of the United States for some time, the banking system has been much strengthened and made more resilient to shocks, and strong credibility has been established in the exchange rate peg vis-a-vis the U.S. dollar. In this context, when spreads on Argentine instruments once again increased following the external shock from Brazil, the authorities initiated new studies into strengthening further their commitment to convertibility, ineWing perhaps a full dnllarization of the economy. An immediate benefit from shiftiig to full dollarization in Argentina, i.e. replacing the peso with the U.S. dollar as the legal tender and unit of account, presumably would be to eliminate the currency risk premium on Argentine debt instruments. Additional benefits, i.e., further reductions in the interest rate premium, may be derived from the commitment that would be signaled by such a move of the authorities’ intent to stick to cautious and stable macroeconomic policies. The BCRA is studying three options for fall dollarization: (I) Unilateral dollarization involving the repurchase of all peso currency outstanding with U.S. dollar reserves and a redenomination of all peso assets and liabilities into equivalent U.S. dollar denominated assets and liabilities. Since the domestic currency would disappear, the risk of a devaluation also would disappear. However, Argentina would lose seignorage of some US$750 million a year r&live to the present currency board arrangement. (2) Seeking an American Monetary Union (AMU) similar to the European Monetary Union, with a unified Central Bank and coordination of economic policies. In the monetary union, Argentina would retain a voice in policy making, share in seignorage and have access to a rediscount window. This option, perhaps the most far-reaching one, would involve complicated multilateral negotiations and the need to create a new multilateral central bank system. (3) A third option would be to negotiate a Treaty of Monetary Association with the United States, involving the gradual replacement of the peso with the U.S. dollar while negotiating with the U.S. government certain rights (e.g., access to a discount facility) and compensations (for seignorage). Relative to 6ption (2), this alternative would likely require less time to implement, and could, in principle, be expanded al a later stage to include more countries in the region. Continued progress on the structural reform agenda would also be required, both to alleviate the adverse consequences of the adjustment on employment and to bolster confidence in the prospects for sustainable growth in the short to medium term. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12- 20. The program for 1999 described in the authorities’ Policy Memorandum (EBS/99/4, I/13/99) is based on a macroeconomic scenario developed before the full extent of the crisis in Brazil was known. In this scenario, Brazil was assumed to suffer a moderate recession which, together with a reduced harvest, would cut Argentine export volume growth from over 8 percent in 1998 to some 2 percent in 1999 (Tables 7 and S).~ Continued difficult market conditions would limit private capital inflows in 1999 to their 1998 levels, but support from the World Bank and IDB-plus privatization receipts-would reduce public sector recourse to financial markets by about one fifth, or some US$2 billion. Interest rate spreads would remain moderately high (around 600 basis points). Higher interest rates and reduced demand for Argentine exports would cut real GDP growth in 1999 to 2% percent, with economic activity remaining sluggish in the first half of the year before picking up in the second half. Unemployment would likely rise slightly. In this scenario, the current account deficit would widen from an estimated 4% percent of GDP in 1998 to 4% percent of GDP in 1999, as lower export growth would be only partially offset by weakened import demand due to lower income growth and a decline in automobile imports under the reciprocal arrangement with Brazil, while net factor payments would increase further. 21. Beyond 1999, this baseline scenario foresaw a return to stronger economic performance, with growth stabilizing at about 4% percent per year in 2001 and beyond, as more normal conditions returned to world financial markets. Deposits would continue to increase in line with the monetization of the economy and interest rate spreads would gradually decline in 2000 and 2001, permitting a sustained expansion of private sector investment. The scenario assumed that the public sector will gradually move to surplus in the medium-term. This ongoing fiscal consolidation would boost public sector savings and reduce government financing requirements. Export volumes would return to the strong growth experienced through 1998, with prices also recovering from their current depressed levels. Together, export growth and fiscal consolidation, along with declining interest rate premiums would generate a gradual reduction in the current account deficit to about 3% percent of GDP in 2005. After the increase in 1999, unemployment would resume its descent in 2000.R Given the international environment, this baseline scenario was regarded as being subject to more than the usual degree of uncertainty, and the staff reached understandings with the authorities to discuss again the program by April. This undertaking has now been converted into a review of the program with the Board. 22. The devaluation in Brazil in January 1999 and associated events will confront Argentina with a more adverse external environment than assumed in the program. *The authorities have a somewhat more optimistic view of the medium-term than that embodied in the staffs baseline scenario. They view the sustainable medium-term growth rate at above 5 percent per year, financed by sharper growth in private sector savings rates as well as higher external financing. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13- Nevertheless, the absence of an immediate attack on the peso and the calm maintained in Argentine markets have provided the authorities with a breathing space in which to consider their response. The authorities are confident of their ability to meet the fiscal targets of the program for the first quarter and, as noted, have secured financing through the first semester of 1999. They view the early differentiation of Argentine assets in the markets as a promising sign that, if maintained and consolidated, should help the economy adjust relatively smoothly to the developments in Brazil. In any event, the core of the authorities’ macroeconomic strategy-the commitment to the convertibility regime and low fiscal deficits-will not change. In these circumstances, they prefer to avoid a hasty response and allow time better to assess the consequences of the evolving situation. 23. While the adverse effects on financing conditions from the Brazilian devaluation have so far been more muted than the contagion from the Mexican, Asian, and Russian crisis, spillover effects may still be stronger than in the earlier cases because of the stronger tics between the Argentinean and Brazilian economies. However, the ultimate effects of the devaluation in Brazil on the bilateral trade balance are not easy to quantify, as they will depend on the degree of pass-through to prices of the nominal depreciation of the real, on particular sectoral circumstances (e.g., the automotive sector), on trade diversion and substitution effects on both the export and import side, and on the possible implementation of measures partially to insulate intra-Mercosur trade from the exchange rate developments in Brazil. In the meantime, and to alleviate the immediate impact on the business sector, the authorities announced a reduction from 14 percent to 6 percent of the duty on imports of capital goods from outside Mercosur’ and that the first stage of the reduction in social security contributions would be advanced to February for primary producers and industrial firms. The staff intends to circulate prior to the Board meeting a supplement including an updated assessment of the impact on Argentina of the recent events in Brazil. B. Fiscal Policies 24. The uncertain external environment and the size of the external current imbalance underscored the importance of maintaining fiscal restraint, especially as a means to convey a signal of continued discipline to the markets and bolster confidence. Accordingly, the authorities agreed to keep the fiscal target for 1999 close to the original indicative program target, despite a weaker than anticipated outlook for economic activity. The program would raise the primary surplus in the federal government by 0.5 percent of GDP to 1.3 percent in 1999, allowing a reduction of the deficit from 1.1 percent of GDP in 1998 to 0.8 percent in 1999. The program also includes indicative targets for the deficit of the provincial governments, which is expected to narrow marginally to 0.4 percent of GDP in 1999. For the public sector as a whole, the adjustment in the program would amount to “This reduction is an option contemplated under existing Mercosur provisions. The reduction will not significantly change Argentina’s average import tariff of around 14 percent. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-14. 0.5 percent of GDP, which, in the light of the decline in economic activity, would imply a sizable negative fiscal impulse. These fiscal targets and the need for any additional fiscal measures will be reviewed in April, in light of a revised assessment of both growth prospects for and financing availability in 1999. 25. The authorities acknowledged the difficulties encountered thus far in improving the revenue performance, but noted that factors beyond their control-such as the larger than anticipated decline in the number of contributors to the public pension system-had affected revenues adversely in 1998. They indicated that substantial progress was made in strengthening tax administration as called for in the program for 1998 and further measures in this area are planned for 1999 (paragraph lo)“, including in particular measures to accelerate the resolution of tax disputes, streamline judicial procedures, and strengthen the enforcement authority of the tax administration. The cumulative effect of the tax administration measures was expected to be felt in a strengthening of the revenue performance in 1999, which would also benefit from the favorable ruling the government obtained in regard to the leasing of frequencies, and from reduction in tax arrears, following strengthened collection efforts. 26. The main boost to revenues in 1999 would come from the entry into effect of the tax reform approved in the last days of 1998. The reform was designed to be revenue neutral once account is taken of the reduction in employers’ contributions to social security. However, since the authorities intend to phase in the reduction gradually over the year-in roughly equal installments in February, August and December”-the reform would produce a net revenue gain equivalent to 0.4 percent of GDP in 1999. The staff welcomed the reform and the lowering of labor costs it would permit, but drew attention to the one time nature of the revenue increase in 1999 and indicated that additional measures would be needed in 2000 to prevent a deterioration of the fiscal position once the full effect of the reduction in contributions is felt. 21. Noninterest expenditures of the federal goverument, net of automatic transfers to the provinces, are projected to remain virtually unchanged in nominal terms in 1999, thus declining from 11 .O percent of GDP in 1998 to 10.7 percent in 1999. The program for 1999 includes a ceiling on these expenditures, The authorities noted that at the low level of discretionary expenditure that has been reached, little room remained for significant further expenditure cuts. Therefore, they were putting emphasis on budgetary reforms that would increase the efficiency of the use of public resources (paragraph 1 I). At the same time, and “References here and below are to the Policy Memorandum attached to the authorities’ letter of intent of January 1 I, 1999. “The first phase of the reduction was advanced from April to February for producers of tradeable goods, but the fiscal impact of this change is expected to be relatively small. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 15- within the overall framework of expenditure restraint, the authorities continued to assign priority to expenditures in the areas of education and social protection programs (paragraph 12). The decline in noninterest expenditure will be nearly offset by an increase in interest payments associated with the replacement in the international market of debt previously placed at terms below current market conditions. 28. The authorities noted that the introduction, with the 1999 budget, of three-year fiscal balance and expenditure targets had been well received and had permitted the budget discussion to he framed in a medium-term context. They also reported on two proposals, being discussed in congress, to adopt a Fiscal Responsibility Law, which would set permanent limits on the public debt and the growth of current expenditure, and establish a Fiscal Stabilization Fund-to be financed by a percentage of tax revenues-to smooth out the impact of internal or external shocks on the public finances (paragraph 14). 29. The provinces are expected to reduce their deficit in 1999 by about 0.1 percent of GDP to 0.4 percent. This reduction would come about mainly as a consequence of the province’s reduced ability to finance their deficits given the of tighter credit conditions that are expected to prevail in 1999. The authorities indicated that, thus far, they had successfully maintained a record of “no bailout”, which had resulted in greater restraint being imposed by financial markets and had contributed to the adjustment efforts undertaken by most provinces in recent years. The government intends to set up a system to collect and publish frequent information on the provincial finances (paragraph 16). The authorities noted that these and related issues were part of the broader ongoing discussions on a constitutional reform of intergovernmental fiscal relations, which would redefine the distribution of revenue and expenditure responsibilities between the central and the provincial governments. Progress has already been made in this regard, and the authorities intend to present the debate’s initial findings to the public during the early part of 1999.12 30. The public debt is projected to increase by the equivalent of 1 percentage point of GDP in 1999, to about 38 percent of GDP. This increase largely reflects the need to issue government securities to comply with judicial decisions that recognize certain past obligations (e.g., to pensioners or to victims of political persecution). The authorities intend to maintain the average maturity of the public debt at around nine years, keeping the stock of short term debt at less than 1.5 percent of GDP (paragraph 17). To the extent permitted by market conditions, the authorities intend to continue in 1999 with their policy of borrowing in advance of actual needs to maintain a cushion to be used in the event of market upheavals. The quarterly borrowing limits in the program provide room for the implementation of such a strategy. ‘*See “Revenue sharing arrangements” in the accompanying background paper. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 16- C. Credit and Banking Policy 31. The authorities noted that the banking system had showed remarkable resilience when seen against the turbulence in international markets in 1998; nevertheless, they expected that the present more difftcult environment would accelerate the process of bank consolidation underway since the crisis of 1995. In the past four years, the number of banks had sbrunk from 205 to 130, with an increased participation of foreign-owned banks in the system, particularly among the larger institutions. The ratio of nonperforming loans to risk assets had dropped from 14.2 in 1995 to 9.1 in 1998, while the capital adequacy ratio (Basle criteria) had been raised to over 18 percent. With these developments, the authorities believed that the system was in a much better position to deal with an external shock than on the previous occasion. Indeed, their confidence is borne out by a stress exercise (reported in Annex II, below) that replicates the degree of deterioration in portfolio quality that occurred in 1995 and concludes that such an event today would push the ratio of nonperforming loans back up to only 11.7 percent and would create a capital adequacy shortfall in some 26 smaller banks, amounting altogether to around US$280 million or only 1.6 percent of the system’s net worth. 32. The authorities noted that over the past year transparency in the banking system had been enhanced with the implementation of regulations requiring banks to obtain a credit rating and disclose it upon request. Also, regulations on the reporting of bank’s maturity mismatches had been tightened, with information about off-balance sheet derivative transactions being compiled and published monthly by the central bank. The authorities noted that there was no evidence of any significant maturity or currency mismatch in both on- and off-balance sheet items, and that systemic risk arising from forward operations (including through derivative instruments) was low, with the net balance of such transactions accounting for about 6 percent of the banking system’s assets. 33. The central bank has gradually reduced its net domestic assets, in line with the net repurchases from the Fund and the recovery of past liquidity assistance to banks. As a result, the foreign exchange cover of the BCRA’s monetary liabilities (currency plus bank deposits) was kept at around 100 percent during 1998. The program for 1999 targets a further reduction in net domestic assets, while preserving some room to provide temporary assistance to banks. Liquidity requirements will continue at 20 percent of deposits and other liabilities while, market conditions permitting, the authorities are seeking to augment the contingent repo facility with foreign banks, so as to maintain the total coverage of deposits Y with liquid foreign exchange assets at or above 30 percent. In addition, the authorities are preparing several measures to strengthen further bank supervision and are seeking congressional approval of changes to the central bank charter and the financial entities law with a view to updating them and strengthening the operating capacity of the BCRA (paragraphs 18 and 19). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17- D. External Policies 34. The authorities noted that the deterioration in the current account outturn in 1998 was mainly the result of a sharp loss in the terms of trade. In volume terms, the developments in exports and imports were encouraging. Exports had posted a solid performance in 1998, growing by almost 9 percent in volume, while imports, in line with economic activity, had experienced a very rapid turnaround from volume growth in excess of 10 percent in the early part of the year to negative growth by year end. The performance of exports had benefited from a record harvest, but also from the continued competitive strength of manufactured exports, which reflected the sustained decline in unit labor costs in the industrial sector (Figure 3). The current account had also been affected adversely by the increase in net interest payments and profit remittances, reflecting the rising stocks of external debt and FDI. 35. The immediate prospects for exports in 1999 were clouded by the forecast of a less favorable harvest and, particularly, by the likely contraction of demand in Brazil. At best, overall exports were projected to show an only modest increase in volume in 1999 (Table 6), and a more significant slowdown was possible if demand in Brazil contracted more sharply. Nevertheless, the authorities expected that the drop in exports to Brazil would be manageable over time, although it would pose difficulties in some sectors. Commodity and fuel exports-which, together with automobiles, account for the bulk of exports to Brazil-had in good measure already found alternative outlets in 1998, as witnessed by a redirection of trade from Mercosur to Europe and Nafta; and, the drop in automobile exports was being in part offset by a corresponding drop in imports of parts and components from Brazil. The authorities recognized that a further nominal devaluation of the real would accelerate the substantial adverse effects mentioned above, but considered that Argentina’s strong gains in competitiveness in recent years provided room to accommodate a moderate real depreciation of the brazilian currency. On the import side, the effect of a Brazilian devaluation would also depend on the degree to which the additional imports from Brazil would represent a diversion of imports from third sources, particularly in the context of the projected overall deceleration of imports in Argentina. 36. Over the longer term, given the foreseeable continued rise of the burden of factor services payments, the prospects for a sustained improvement in the current account would depend on a recovery of commodity prices and on a gradual strengthening of competitiveness. Although the depreciation in Brazil would lead to a real appreciation of the peso in 1999, competitiveness could be expected to improve thereafter, reflecting the continued low inflation and moderate wage increases, the favorable impact of the reduction of social security contributions on labor costs, and the coming on stream of a number of investment projects in the tradeables sector. Accordingly, steady gains in market shares for manufacturing exports are envisaged over the medium term. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicI Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 19- 37. The authorities noted that there were rising protectionist pressures from domestic industries affected by the competition of countries whose exchange rates had been substantially depreciated during 1998, and more recently by the devaluation in Brazil. Such pressures had been resisted, and the authorities reiterated their commitment to a liberal trade system. In particular, they indicated that antidumping measures and safeguards would be used only when needed to defend against unfair trading practices and in compliance with WTO regulations, and that the 3 percent surcharge on Mercosur’s common external tariff would be eliminated, as scheduled, by end-1999. Moreover, the authorities confirmed that the specific duty on textiles and the safeguard regime that allows the application of a specific duty on footwear are being phased out in line with the policy intentions in the program. 38. The staff noted that Argentina’s sizable current account deficit and rising burden of amortizations due on its medium- and long-term debt implied relatively high gross external borrowing requirement, that made Argentina vulnerable to abrupt changes in market sentiment. Baseline projections show an overall gross borrowing requirement in 1999 of some USS27.5 billion, about half of which would be the responsibility of the nonfinancial public sector (Table 7). Measured in relation to exports of goods and nonfactor services, the borrowing requirement would amount to about 88 percent, and would decline only gradually over time to 75 percent by the end of the projection period. The authorities emphasised that Argentina is at present in a substantially stronger position to withstand a negative external shock than it was in 1995, also because of the financing it has already secured for 1999. They pointed moreover to the incipient but encouraging signs in the markets of differential treatment of Argentina’s debt when compared to that of other emerging economies. An undue delay in the normalization of financial conditions would no doubt have adverse effects on the already slowing economy, and in such a scenario a negative real growth rate for 1999 could not be ruled out. This would, as in 1995, result in both a sharp narrowing of the current account deficit and a reversal of the monetization process, with the consequent reduced accumulation of international reserves. In these circumstances, the authorities would likely purchase the Fund resources available under the extended arrangement, to help alleviate the negative effects on economic activity and employment (Table 9). 39. 0 The authorities had recently completed setting up semi-annual surveys of the foreign assets and liabilities of the private sector. This information makes it possible to improve the assessment of the private sector’s foreign currency exposure, indicating a short term external debt position of close to US$20 billion in 1998, which compares with gross foreign exchange reserves of almost US$32 billion. E. Structural reforms 40. Significant progress was made in most parts of the structural reform agenda, particularly in regard to tax policy and administration and the reforms in the financial Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 20 - sector. However, notwithstanding this overall progress, there were delays that had prevented completion of some of the reforms that were benchmarks for the second review of the program, including the leasing of telecommunication frequencies and nuclear power plants, the pending elements of the social security reform, and the approval of norms on financial guarantees and derivatives and of a new anti-trust law. Most of these reforms were expected to be concluded in the early part of 1999. Box 2 lists the reforms the authorities intend to complete before the third review in May. Box 2. Structural Benchmarks for the Third Review 1, Leasing of telecommunication frequencies. 2. Implementation of new monitoring systems for the external debt and tbe linances of provincial administrations. 3. Submission to Congress of a proposal to transform the Banco de la Naci6o into a state-owned corporation. 4. Complete sale of first package of shares of the National Mortgage Bank. 41. The authorities explained that, although their original intention had been to introduce before the end of 1998 legislation to allow the privatization of the Banco de la Nacibn, it had been necessary to modify this plan once it became clear that such a bill would not be approved by congress. Accordingly, they decided to propose the transformation of the bank into a state-owned corporation, which could receive participation of private capital and management, be listed in the stock exchange, and thus be subject to increased public disclosure requirements. The new draft legislation would be submitted to congress during the first half of 1999. Further in the area of privatization, the authorities intended to sell their residual stake in a number of previously privatized public enterprises, including in particular the 15 percent of the shares of the petroleum company (YPF) still in the hands of the government. The sale of the National Mortgage Bank (BHN) would proceed in stages and was expected to get underway in early 1999 (paragraph 1 5).13 42. In regard to the labor market reform, the staff indicated its disappointment with’ the limited progress implied by the law that was approved in September 1998, and discussed with the authorities the implementation during 1999 of further reforms that could provide some added flexibility to labor markets. These reforms include the replacement of “The shares of YPF were sold in January 1999 to the Spanish oil company FUZPSOL for US$2 billion, followed by the sale of 28 percent of the BEN’s capital to several buyers for US$308 million. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2i - some of the outdated special labor statutes with collective agreements, and the promulgation of implementing regulations for the law of small and medium enterprises, which increases flexibility for these firms (paragraph 21). 43. The authorities intend to move ahead with a number of initiatives in the health care area including, inter alia, the provision of managed care services for pensioners and a regulatory framework for health insurance (paragraph 24). Also, the program for 1999 contemplates initiatives to improve the efficiency of economic regulation and of the operations of the civil service (paragraph 23). The authorities noted that they had put in place comprehensive programs to deal with the Y2K problem, and were therefore confident to be able to deal with this contingency (paragraph 22). Finally, under the program, the authorities will continue with their efforts to improve the timeliness and coverage of economic statistics (paragraph 25). IV. Staff Appraisal 44. Argentina recorded a satisfactory macroeconomic performance in 1998, in a relatively difficult international macroeconomic environment. The economy grew at a rapid rate in the first half of the year, but slowed considerably following the hardening of external financing conditions in the wake of the Russian debt crisis in August 1998 and the incipient difficulties in Brazil. Unemployment fell, and inflation remained below 1 percent. All quantitative performance criteria for end-December 1998.were observed, except for a-small overrun in the federal government deticit target, and the authorities made substantial progress in a number of structural reform areas. 45. Since mid-January 1999, the external macroeconomic environment has deteriorated because of events in Brazil. So far, the markets in Argentina have responded calmly, but the new situation presents a major challenge to the economy. The present program for 1999 was negotiated in December 1998, consistent with the external environment and near-term projections available at that time, and the authorities are confident of their ability to adhere to the program targets through end-March 1999. However, they agreed to early discussions with the staff to reexamine the program and, if needed, introduce suitable modifications to it for the remainder of the year. The result of these discussions would be presented for consideration by the Executive Board in a review of the program scheduled to be concluded before end-May 1999. 46. The authorities and the staff agree that the most appropriate response to recent events in Brazil is to reaffirm, indeed reinforce, the strong commitment to the policy framework that has served Argentina well, including the automatic adjustment mechanism implied by the currency board, prudent fiscal and debt policies cast in a medium term framework, and significant structural reform to bolster banking soundness and flexibility in the economy. Thus far the reaction of the markets toward Argentina has been more muted than in previous Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-22- episodes of international turmoil. However, downside risks remain sizable, including likely spillover effects on the current account from the close trade relationship the country has with Brazil. This uncertainty adds to that about the continued availability of foreign financing and raises concerns about the adverse effects on economic activity and employment the adjustment may entail in the end. This highlights the need to reinforce the safety net protecting the needy and stresses the importance of revisiting labor market issues with a view to promoting greater flexibility. 47. A further slowing of the economy in 1999 would have a negative impact on the public finances and may force a reconsideration of the fiscal plans. The fiscal policy response will be re-evaluated in early April, and would obviously depend on the extent of the economic slowdown and prospects for external financing flows. Some deterioration in the fiscal position could act as an automatic stabilizer mechanism and could help cushion the output costs of the external shock. However, to preserve the integrity of the program, the authorities should not allow a relaxation of the agreed limit on noninterest expenditure of the federal government. 48. There was a minor deviation from the target for the deficit of the federal government in the program for 1998. This deviation was more than explained by adverse exogenous factors and, in the view of the staff, does not detract from the overall fiscal performance under the program. The long-standing difficulties in meeting fiscal revenue targets highlight the importance of persevering with efforts to improve tax administration and combat evasion. The staff welcomes the recent adoption of the tax reform which will address a number of structural weaknesses in the tax system, yield a small revenue gain in 1999 and permit a reduction of labor costs. On the expenditure side, ongoing effarts by the federal government to increase the cost effectiveness of its outlays, need to be complemented by similar efforts at the provincial level, which account for a large and growing share of total spending. This adds urgency to the implementation of the planned reform of intergovernmental fiscal relations-including of the revenue sharing system-which aims at increasing the correspondence between revenue saving and spending responsibilities of the provincial governments. 49. The authorities’ continued efforts to strengthen the banking system and improve the efficiency of domestic financial intermediation are welcome. The banking system has shown remarkable resilience and confidence in the face of the recent turbulence in international markets, and the staff analysis shows the system to be in a much better position to deal with an external shock than on previous occasions. Nevertheless, the staff agrees with the authorities that some further consolidation in the banking system is likely to occur during 1999. Together with the progress made during 1998 in implementing regulations requiring improved disclosure, enhancing transparency, and strengthening banking supervision, this process of consolidation will further bolster the robustness of the banking system. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-23 - 50. The widening of the external current account in 1998 is worrying, in that it occurred at the time that the level of economic activity was slowing. To be sure, Argentina faced a sharp drop in the terms of trade which are expected not to worsen further in 1999. Nevertheless, with the recent sharp drop in the value of the Brazilian real, Argentina faces another year with significant pressures on the external current account, placing renewed emphasis on policies to improve Argentina’s competitiveness. The staff would urge the authorities to resist protectionist pressures from domestic industries which would ultimately hinder, not enhance, the competitiveness of Argentine producers. The staff supports the recent reduction in import tariffs on capital goods as a means to help absorb the external shock, and is encouraged by the authorities’ commitment to eliminate the 3 percent surcharge on Mercosur’s common external tariff by end-1999. 51. Argentina remains vulnerable to adverse changes in the international capital markets in view of its sizable current account deficit and the rising burden of amortizations, which imply a continued high external borrowing requirement. Argentina’s strengthened banking system, improved tiscal position, prudent management of the public debt (including by establishing a cushion through pre-borrowing for times of especially tight market access), and increased experience with the currency board arrangement have helped to strengthen confidence. A stable and firm policy framework remains the best way to maintain access to international capital markets. 52. The progress made during 1998 in a number of areas of structural reform is welcome, particularly in regard to tax policy and~administrationand the reforms in the financial sector. The staff also welcomes the sale of the residual federal stake in the petroleum company and of the shares in the National Mortgage Bank. Reforms to enhance labor market flexibility and reduce obstacles to hiring are key not only to lower unemployment in the medium term, but especially to strengthen competitiveness and ensure the consistency between internal and external equilibrium. The staff is therefore disappointed with the limited progress implied by the law that was approved in September 1998, and strongly encourages the authorities to seek further reforms that could provide added flexibility to labor markets. The staff notes that Argentina subscribed to the SDDS and welcomes the progress made in improving the quality and timeliness of statistical information, 53. In light of the progress that has been made in implementing the program to date, and the policy intentions of the authorities for 1999, the staff supports a waiver for the nonobservance of the performance criteria on the deficit of the federal government for end- December 1998 and recommends completion of the second review under the EFF arrangement. It is envisaged that the third review under the program will be held before end- May 1999, and that a further review be held before end-November 1999. It is expected that the next Article IV consultation with Argentina will be held on the standard 12-month cycle. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 24 - IV. PROPOSED DECISION The following decision, which can be adopted by a majority of the votes cast, is proposed for adoption by the Executive Board: 1. Argentina has consulted with the Fund in accordance with paragraph 3(c) of the extended arrangement for Argentina (EBS/98/6, Supplement I), and paragraph 2 of the letter dated December 3, 1997 from the President of the Central Bank and the Minister of Economy and Public Works and Services of the Republic of Argentina, to review implementation of the program supported by the arrangement and establish performance criteria and reviews for the second year of the extended arrangement. 2. The letters dated January 11, 1999 and February 5, 1999 from the President of the Central Bank and the Minister of Economy and Public Works and Services of the Republic of Argentina, with their attached Memorandum and Annexes, shall be attached to the extended arrangement for Argentina and the letters dated December 3, 1997, with its attached Policy Memorandum and Tables, and September 8, 1998 with its attached Policy Memorandum, shall be read as supplemented by the letter of January 11, 1999 with its Policy Memorandum and Annexes, and the letter of February 5,1999. 3. follows: Accordingly, - paragraph 2(b) of the extended arrangement shall be amended to read as Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public“(b) Purchases during the second year of this extended arrangement shall not, without the consent of the Fund, exceed the equivalent of SDR 1,320 million, provided that they shall not exceed the equivalent of SDR 600 million until June 1,1999, the equivalent of SDR 780 million until August 3 1, 1999, the equivalent of SDR 960 million until December 1, 1999 and the equivalent of SDR 1,114 million until February 29,200O.“; - the following new paragraph 3(aa) shall be added to the extended arrangement: “(aa) during the second year of this extended arrangement, during any period in which the data at the end of the preceding period indicated that: (i) the limit on the net cumulative deficit of the Federal Government, or (ii) the cumulative ceiling on noninterest expenditures of the Federal Government, or (iii) the limit on the cumulative change in the net domestic assets of the ’ Central Bank, or (iv) the limit on the cumulative net disbursements of external and domestic debt of the public sector, or (v) the limit on the cumulative net increase in short-term public sector debt, respectively, specified in Annex I of the Policy Memorandum attached to the letter dated January 11, 1999 is not observed; or”; - the following new paragraph 3(cc) shall be added to the extended arrangement: Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-26- “(cc) after May 3 1, 1999 and November 30, 1999 until reviews of the program supported by the extended arrangement are completed; or” 4. The Fund decides that the second review contemplated in paragraph 3(c) of the extended arrangement for Argentina is completed and that no further understandings are necessary for Argentina to make purchases under the arrangement for an amount not to exceed the equivalent of SDR 600 million until March 30, 1999. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2-J- Table 1. Argmtim: Quantitative P&me Criteria far 1999 h-oec. 98 Jan.-Mar. 99 hn..,une B hnscp. 99 Jan-Dec. 99 Program Preliminary Margin (+) fiwm Program Program fiognm (In millim Ofpews) 1. Cumulative deficit (-) of the Federal Go”mlment -3,500 -3,837 -337 -1,300 -1.67s -2,300 -2.9JO 2. Cumul*tive sciliigonnoninterest cxpmdituns oftbc Federal GOVClMXid 38,800 38,142 658 9,JOO 18,800 28,700 38,050 3. Cumulative change in the net dancntic asseLl ofthe Central Ban!c li -600 -664 64 -7.00 -32s 490 -690 4. C"m"lati"e net dirb"rsemmu of enema, and danais dsbt ofthe public sector 21 6,900 6.564 336 2,500 J,ZOO J.200 4,000 J, Cumulative net increase in sbmt- tcm public sector debt 2,000 388 1.612 LOO0 1,000 1,000 1,000 lndicativs target3 I. Comb&d &Ii& of Federal and Provincial Govemmcnts 4,250 -5,662 -*.412 -2,475 li Includes adjustment in target of%200 million reflecdng a temporq inmasc due lo an excess in the rtock of swaps @a.es tiivcs) over projected IeveIs. 21 Includes an adjustmsnt in target ofT1.200 million refleding ovedmmowing by the public sector dqxited in ths c&al bank. -4,400 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 28 - Table 2. Argentina: Selected Economic Indicators Pq!. Fe,. prag. 1995 ,996 1997 1998 1998 ,999 (Ann”al perc-ge Oban~.$ Ndiond income and **es GDP at EOnrtarj prices Cons”mptiml lnve3tmerd Net expoti (contribution ta pwtb) Exports mm Industrial production consumcrpTicss (cap.) Nomin2.l industrial wages Ertemd SIctor (U.S. doEar basis) Export “d”mc hnpai “Ol”W Twns oftrade (dctioration -) R.%%l dfedivc eKdnangs ra\e Average (dcprecitiim -) Year-end (depreciation -1 Money and Credit Domestic credit (net) Riva(c seclor dspaits Itaer~ rates (averago) 9Oday peso tic dcposi(s 30.day peso prime rate NEdiOllal aceolmL1 Gmss domestic imestmnt Gross “a&ld savings Public fiwccs Federal go”‘mment Primary balance O”cral, Lmanw Ovdl public sector II Erlemal sector Curent account (deficit -) 21 External public debt Ofwhich: Fund ucdit Public sector eti debt smvios 31 GDP ( in bil!iom of A&) u”mployment rate @arcmt) Expor& hb. (IL% billion) Imp&, c.i.f. (USS billion) Cum,,, accox,, of balance of payments 2, (US% billion) 4.0 -5.8 -16.0 4.5 22.3 -,,.6 -6.7 1.6 1.9 25.3 -11.6 0.2 -5.4 -3.5 5.7 3.1 13.1 17.8 4.8 6.1 8.8 -2.0 6.7 18.2 5.2 0.0 0.0 6.6 19.6 7.9 -0. I 0.3 9.8 22.2 7.3 10.5 (In percent OfGDP) L8.0 17.7 16.5 15.5 -3.7 -1.3 -5.2 -2.8 -7.2 -4.0 -1.5 -2.2 7.4~4 24.9 2.2 2.2 31.6 34.1 280.3 297.4 17.5 17.2 21.2 24.0 -20.1 -23.9 -4.2 -6.4 X.6 7.8 26.5 -3.4 12.1 27.6 10.1 0.3 0.9 13.1 30.6 -1.2 2.3 3.5 17.4 26.9 7.0 9.1 20.1 16.4 0.3 -1.4 -2.2 -3.7 23.0 1.9 44.8 325.0 14.2 x4 -30.5 -11.9 4.0 3.7 6.7 4.7 7.0 8.4 I., 8.1 9.4 2.1 -1.3 -0.7 7.1 12.5 20.3 16.5 0.9 -1.0 -1.4 -3.8 26.3 1.6 34.9 340. I 27.7 -32.7 -13.0 4.3 3.7 7.8 4.6 7.7 8.0 3.5 0.8 8.8 8.4 -5.2 3.2 1.8 7.R 12.2 7.6 10.6 20.2 15.8 0.8 -1.1 -1,s -4.3 24.4 1.6 40.9 339.1 12.9 26.0 -31.5 -14.8 2.5 2.5 3.1 -0.3 2.2 3.0 I.2 2.1 3.3 -0.9 6.6 7.8 20.1 15.4 I.3 4.8 -1.3 -4.7 25.5 1.2 47.0 350.3 13.6 26.4 -32.6 -16.4 Overall balance of papcnts (uS$ billion) -2.0 .3.4 -3.6 2.6 Sources: Central Renerve Unnk of ArS@ National titute of Slntisti~, F,EL; and Fund stiestirmtes. I/ Includes federal and pmvinchl Sovcmenls, tmst fin&, and Eapita,ixd i&rest, but excludes debt consolidation. 2, The authorities UIC pqmtig furchp revirions including hi&r inter& recci@ from lbmnd. 31 In perant of exports of goods and nonfactm s&ces -4. I -2.2 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-29- Table 3. Argentina: Consolidated Public Sector Operations, 1995-1999 1995 1996 (In millions of pesos) 1991 Prog. 1998 Prel. 1998 Proj. 1999 Public sector balance -8551 -9873 -7,113 -4,728 -6,152 -4,662 Federal government -2,774 -6,494 -4,625 -3,498 -3,837 -2,948 T&t fund for banks -801 -722 -249 0 0 0 Capitalized interest -1,198 -1,169 -788 -508 -490 -192 Provincial govemments I/ -3,578 - 1.488 -1,451 -722 -1,825 -1,521 Other debt operations of the Federal government 21 -1,123 -2,544 Public sector debt Federal government Provinces of which: owed to federal govemment -1,716 -1231 1oop59 111,180 89,268 98,489 14,474 15,962 3,083 3,271 (In percent of GDP) -942 117,700 103,857 17,351 -1J20 123,578 109,880 17,439 3,741 125,281 132,684 111,438 115,778 17.573 20,759 3,508 3,730 3,854 Public sector balance -3.u -3.3 -2.2 -1.4 -1.8 -1.3 Federal government -1.0 -2.2 -1.4 -1.0 -1.1 -0.8 Trust fund for banks -0.3 -0.2 -0. I 0.0 0.0 0.0 Capitalized interest -0.4 -0.4 -0.2 -0.1 -0. I -0.1 Provincial governments I/ -1.3 -0.5 -0.4 -0.2 -0.5 -0.4 Other debt operations of the Federal government 21 -0.6 -0.4 -0.3 -0.4 -0.3 -0.7 Public sector debt Federal government PKWi”CS of which: owed to federal government 35.9 37.4 36.2 36.3 36.9 37.9 31.8 33.1 32.0 32.3 32.9 33.0 5.2 5.4 5.3 5.1 5.2 5.9 I.1 1.1 1.1 22.8 17.5 2.2 1.1 Memorandum items: General government expenditures: Total Minus intel-est and private transfers Federal/urban employment (in percent) 24.3 23.3 20.1 19.3 2.3 1.1 22.5 18.1 2.1 1.1 22.3 17.7 2.1 22.5 17.8 Sources: Ministry of Economy; and Fund staff cstimatcs. II Includes trust funds under provincial control. 2/ Debt consolidation, PAMUNDER; excludes privatization revenues Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3o- Table 4. Argentina: Summary of Federal Government Operations, 1995-1999 Pw Ret. PW& 1995 ,996 t997 ,998 ,998 ,999 (In millians ofpew) IkVCll”~ Taxer Social recurity eontibulians Ii Non-tax rwenue 21 cxber 3, Non-interest expenditure Discretionary Wagfs Goods and mvices *cmiom 41 Privats trallsfen Specific tramfet3 to provinces Other wrmt expenditure Capital A"l"maue tranarcn ‘0 pmvtnccs 51 Ptimmy bdonee 1nterrst ovenlo bdnnce RLW”“e t7.1 15.9 ,6.5 16.9 16.5 16.7 Taxes tt.3 11.3 11.9 12.3 12.0 12.6 Social security conhibuliom I/ 4.6 3.8 3.5 3.4 3.3 2.8 ten-tax revenue 2, 1.2 0.8 t.t 1.1 1.2 1.2 Other 31 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 Non-interest expenditure Diwettonary Wages Goods and services Penrio* 41 Private transfers Specitic wanders lo provinces Other current expenditure C$d Automatic transfm to provinces 5, 16.6 16.5 12.3 12.0 2.8 2.7 0.8 0.8 5.6 5.4 1.7 t.9 0.9 0.8 0.t 0.1 0.4 0.3 4.3 4.5 0.5 -0.6 1.5 1.6 -1.0 -2.2 16.2 16.0 15.7 15.3 11.6 11.1 11.0 10.7 2.6 2.4 2.4 2.3 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 3.1 3.0 5.0 4.8 1.8 1.8 1.7 L.8 0.8 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.1 0.1 0.0 0.1 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.3 4.6 4.8 4.7 4.7 Pdmmy bdme. Intent Overdl bahnce Memorandum item (In millions ofpesor) 47.817 47360 31,558 33,486 12.964 11,202 3.328 l,JO, 27 71 46,438 49,049 34,390 35,639 7.770 7,898 2,356 1,426 15,627 15,957 4,680 5,720 2,464 2,478 357 152 1,137 t,oo* 12,048 13,410 1,439 -1,790 4513 4.704 -2,774 -6,494 (In percent ofCDP) 53,731 38,642 11,347 3.J62 180 56,055 58,497 40,604 44,185 11,063 9.912 3,918 4.130 469 271 52.694 37,645 8,370 2,586 16,723 5,700 2,673 296 1.297 15,049 37,910 8,104 2,820 16,867 6,093 2,447 185 1.394 16,349 53,232 53.772 37,378 37,453 8,076 8,053 2,699 1,667 16.792 16.693 5,910 6,151 2,479 2,520 154 200 1,267 t.169 15,855 16,319 1.037 3,192 2.823 4,725 5.662 6,690 6,660 1,613 -4,625 -3,498 -3,837 -2,948 0.3 1.7 -1.4 0.9 2.0 -1.0 0.8 2.0 -1.1 3.3 2.2 6.8 Gross Domestic Fmd”ct 280.287 297,364 324,974 Sources: Ministry ofEconomy; and Fund tiff estimatss. ti Data for 1995.96 arc adjusted lo present revenue and expenditure on family benefits on a gross basis. 2, Includes BCRA rem,,. 3/ Operating results of enterprises and capital rwenue (other thsn privatisation recsipfs). 4, lnduda povineid per&x, fund ptqmn,s. 340.098 339,136 350.348 51 Comprising transfers for copsrticipatian, guarantee payments, and due to special laws. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3l- Table 5. Argentina: Summary Operations of the Financial System (II million of pea, ad of period) Prn8. 199s 1996 1997 1998 Prel. 199s Net intmutiond -es II 1. cmtd Bank 11 9.832 13,452 16,805 8,334 7,105 6,057 IO,460 9,951 9,J46 3,061 1.957 1,571 -5,187 -4,803 -5.060 18,166 20,557 22,862 13,050 14,030 15,968 1,464 2,242 365 3,652 4,285 6,529 Il. BanksmdNmB&Fi~cial lnaitutions 18,201 21.031 23,243 Netdo,,,&ica.sets CrcdittopublicsectorZ/ Credit to financial system Officinlopitalmdwplur and "wlaeind rusts (net) 5,463 5,275 4,584 8,968 8.602 7,789 I.515 1.922 2,045 -5.020 -5,249 -5,250 Monclaty liabilities Currencyisucd Govmmmtdcpasits Rerewedeposib31 23,662 26,306 27,827 16,839 16.370 17,312 0 1.343 1.360 6,823 8,593 9,155 Net foreiw assets -3.m -5,841 -6,356 Net chns on BCRA 7,574 8,998 9.536 Net dameslie assets credi,,o public sectW("et) 2, Credit to private sector Capi!Amdresewes other ("et) 59.347 62,236 67,322 7.077 7,963 8,997 68,772 70,158 74,883 -18,327 -16.841 -17,515 1,825 956 957 Liahilitieiloprivate sednr l,xa,o,mnq deposits Foreign cumetq deposits -7,320 "5,497 -4,782 2,493 4,608 7.600 42,412 47.830 55,464 8.788 9,251 6,272 49,945 53,512 63.114 -13,970 -,5,038 -16,039 -2.351 LOS 2,117 37,185 45,941 58,282 16,067 19,442 25,475 21.518 26,499 32.807 III. Conrolidatcd Financial Syatrm 63.896 65,393 70.504 28,689 27,198 29.000 35,207 38.195 41,504 Net foreip am% Ne,dot,,est,c~~et~ Credittopublis rector(net) 21 Credittoplivatcsector Netupitalmdramcs 2.JL2 46.22, 17.784 49,945 .21,508 48,733 15.404 11.811 21,518 6,955 12.023 50,736 59,585 16,960 15,453 53,512 63.114 -19,736 -18,982 57,691 71.608 17,139 19.644 14,053 19.157 26,499 32,807 (rnpacmtofGDP)41 15,176 15,190 16,887 63.295 64,246 68.503 16,045 15,222 15,426 68,772 70,lSS 74,883 .21,522 -21.134 -21,806 Iiabililin lo private *mtor Money liabilities (MI) Q"~i-lllO"~y Foreign cxchangs dcp-asitr 78,470 79,436 85.390 21.626 20,495 2LS90 21,637 20,746 22,296 35,207 38,,95 41,504 Brasd,,,oncy(M') 18.1 20.4 21.8 23.L 24.2 25.1 Cu-wwj in circulation 3.4 3.1 3.6 3.7 1.6 3.7 Peso deposits 6.9 8.1 8.4 9.4 9.1 9.2 Foreigncwrmcydepmib 7.9 8.8 9.8 10.7 II.5 12.2 Sources: CmtralBankofr\rgrntin...ndFundstaffertimats. I/ The BCRA net internation4 rererv~e~ comprise go1d, fore& currency holdings, Aladi (net) md IMF lisbiliiia. 21 All publicsector mtitia,includingprovincialgovemmcnts. 3, Includes current account depmik. maps (“pm p&v&) ad treuuly liquidity no@ (“Lclibanr”) held by financial instildons at the Ccntisl Bank. 4, Period nvnagss. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-32- Table 6. Argentina: Balance of Payments (In million ofUS. dollam, unlsss other&c indicated) Prcl. Proj. ,996 199, ,998 1999 CurTent socMI”tbalnnce ti -6,401 -11,863 -14,752 .16,432 Trade balance 188 -4.058 -5,509 4,259 Expo* (hb.) 24.043 26,392 25,954 26,362 hpo* (c.i.f) -23.855 -30.450 -31,464 .32,621 No”fac40r Eervices -1,937 -2,200 -2,385 -2.438 Receipts 4,551 4,724 4,833 5,046 Expsnditums .6,488 .6,924 -7,219 -7,483 Ftior services -5,067 -6.041 -7,293 -8,186 Profits and dividends -1.890 -2.017 -2,520 -2,915 Interest due -7.233 -8,692 -10.028 -10,926 Nonfinancial public sector -4,204 -4,929 -5,248 -5.937 Financial system -1.194 -1,417 -1,750 -1,779 Nonfinancial private sector li -1.835 -2,346 -3,029 -3,210 MeresJ eamings 4,048 4,673 5,255 5,654 Nonfinancial public sector 407 364 321 331 Financial system 1,184 1,759 2,310 2,511 Nonfinancial private sector li 2,457 2,550 2,625 2,812 other 8 -5 0 0 Tmlsfkrz (“et) 415 436 436 45, Capital account 9,815 L5.423 18,862 18,645 Nonhancisl public fector 8.811 7,540 9,099 8,663 Nations, go”-cn, 8.6% 6,695 9.125 8,370 Mukitalerat orgnnimtions 1,024 1.212 2,492 2,108 Bilaterd and cmerci.l 7,205 5,088 7,004 4,516 Frivatization 209 0 1, 2,1JO- other 218 395 -387 -404 !..%a1 go”mment9 619 1,240 288 598 F.nterp&es and otb~r 464 -395 -314 -305 BCRA 21 637 -552 0 0 Frivatc sector 5.245 9,739 7,585 7.513 Farei@ direct investment (FDI) 4,212 3,778 3,422 3,548 In Argentina 5.874 6,876 I” other cou”niss -1,662 -3,098 Portfolio investment 100 -626 621 644 Change in financial system NFA (- incraw) -1,122 -1,661 864 567 Debt creating flows 2,655 8,248 2,678 2,754 Other capital 31 -4,878 Net international reserves (- increase) -3,414 -1,304 2,178 2.470 -3,560 -4,110 -2,213 A”.sels Liabilitw Ofwhch : IMF -3,181 -3,062 368 -498 367 -45 J.441 .668 -649 -4.3 100.7 8.8 8.4 -5.2 24.4 -1,399 -814 -799 Memonndum itcmr: Current account balance @ewnt ofGDP) ores reservsJIMaK(ary base (pcrcenl) Export “0t”me @ercc”lnge chq+c) bnpon “otume (pnccnuge change) Terms ofvade @emntage change) Earnal public debUGDP (percent) -2.2 -3.7 96.7 100.2 6.6 13.1 19.6 30.6 7.6 -1.2 24.9 23.0 -4.7 99.4 2.1 3.3 -0.9 25.5 Sources: Minimy of Economy; and Fund staff estimates. 11 Rekcts the prehinary results of ntisiom undntakm by the suthitics regarding private ficial lssets and lmbilitien. 21 Excludes IMF and exchange rate valuations. 3, Ilefle~% deposit reflow, counterpart of interest earnings held abroad, dind inv&mcnl abroad not recorded elsewhere. and mmrs and amiasim. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-33 - Table 7. Argentina: Requirements and Sources of Foreign Exchange (In millions ofU.6. dollars, unlem otbcwise indicated) Eaimated Projmted 1997 1998 1999 2wo 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 26,818 Current account deficit 11,863 AmortiuUo” ofmrdhun- md lone-tern debt 31,893 Ncdi-id public sector 11 8.275 Nonhand piv.te tier 2,823 Financial sector 21 795 clmn8C In pos9 ruer”LI 3.062 sourcea 26.818 28534 NonlLunebd pubk Seder National gava~lcnt Mukilhd Lb”dsa”d”des 11 Bilateral md cmmacial Privatization 31 Other (net) Lad go-u kbt Ct’d”g flOWS Privatizalion Enlerprises No”nnsncid prlwtr sector Fwei@, dim inYedmmt 4, Portfolio invesUnmt Debt creating “ow Fl”anCisl sector Foreign dirti investment 4, Debt Creating flows other 5, 15.603 14,118 13,629 13,118 1,683 3,124 11.655 10,332 100 32 0 17 191 -387 1.731 763 980 429 75, 334 243 237 13.530 10.w4 3.085 2,822 -626 621 11.071 6,561 693 600 693 600 -3,008 Memora”d”m items: Oross farei@ exchange mewcs al end yeu At Ihe centn, bank Held .b+md 6, Sho,wmn enema, debt a, end year Nonfinancial public sedw Nmtinmcial private sec+x 71 Financid suaor 8, 9, 29,769 22,807 6,962 18,463 704 9.409 *8,sJ4 14.752 5;364 3,883 1,093 3,442 3,812 31,717 26.249 5.468 19.463 941 9.232 9,290 27,486 29,618 32,179 16,432 16.929 17,876 9,655 11w 12,614 5,370 5.017 6.170 3.465 5.279 5,211 820 1,249 1,233 15~ 1,145 1,689 27,484 29.618 32,179 13887 11,Lw 11,839 12.857 10.380 10.564 2,920 221 199 8,033 10,427 10,657 158 158 158 2JJO 0 0 -404 -425 -449 785 841 812 785 841 812 0 0 0 246 432 463 9.789 13.059 34,068 2,926 3,184 3.493 644 701 769 6,219 9,174 9.806 622 677 743 622 677 743 3,188 4223” 5.530 36,294 17,824 16.4,s 6,727 7,837 1.854 2,052 36,294 11,791 10,532 179 10,670 158 0 -474 790 790 0 469 17,301 3.832 843 12,625 81.5 815 6.386 38,938 42,620 47,522 18,146 18,517 18,837 18,581 21,843 26,391 9,118 8,912 13,039 7,653 10,457 10.802 1,810 2,474 2.556 2,210 a.260 2,287 38,938 42,620 47,522 12JOP l&369 lS,sM 11,056 10,113 14,250 161 145 130 11.239 10,340 14,521 158 158 158 0 0 0 -501 -529 -559 774 764 760 774 764 760 0 0 0 479 491 506 18,850 2*,s7s 22,897 4.205 4,613 5,061 926 1,015 1,114 12,920 15,947 15,922 894 981 1.076 894 981 1,076 7,684 8,696 8.833 Sources Argentine authoriticr, and Fund Ettiestimtes and projectiem. l, Excludes Letes. 2/ Assumes fiat20 percent oftbe end-1997 debt stock falls due in 1998 and L5 percent in 1999. 31 In 1999 indudes the sale afYPF sharer (US 1.8 billion) and BHN (US 350 million). 41 FX~bdes privatizdion. 5, Includes erron and omission. 61 LiquidityrcquirmmU ofthc bmkingryrtem. 71 Far 1998, data as nt end-June. 81 For ,998, data u at d-.%ptrmber. 9, Includes lines of credit (mainly trade credit) and other net short-term liabilities. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-34- Table 8. Argentina: Medium-Term Scenario Aa”Zll ml. Pmiead 1996 1997 1998 19% zlml zrm, 2002 2cKJ3 zoo4 2005 Gross dome& inveatmcnl Public sector Private scnor Orcnr naLional savings Publics&x P&de sector Faeign wingr Total enema, debt Public sector Private reclar Comolidaled public sector balance Federal Gova~lmt Rest ofpublic sec(or l, Current acm""t Trade balance Expms (Eo.b.) hpm (Cf.) Nonfactor services Factm services Trnnsfen (net) Capital account oiw: Fore@ direct investment overall bdance Real ODP growth ODP dc"lkv Exp.xi prissa growh Expon volume growb hnport pncer gowh Import "o,"me pwtb Term of trade change Orors external financing requirements Total e~tcmal debt Public dcb, service Of which: intereR payments Outstanding fund mdit Fund charges and repurchases Mmmmndmm itcnu: U"emplope"l rate Fund debt service/public se&v debt YW~ES 17.7 L.7 16.0 15.5 -1.7 17.2 2.2 33.7 24.9 8.9 -3.3 -2.2 -1.1 .6,409 188 24,043 .23,*55 -1,937 -5,075 415 9,823 3,414 4.8 2.4 6.6 6.6 -1.3 19.6 7.9 (,n prcent of GDP) 20.1 20.2 20.1 20.7 2.0 1.9 1.8 1.8 18.1 18.3 18.3 18.9 16.4 15.8 15.4 16.1 -0.2 0.0 0.2 0.5 16.6 15.8 15.3 15.6 3.6 4.4 4.7 4.6 34.0 37.0 38.4 39.0 23.0 24.4 15.5 25.9 11.0 12.6 12.9 13.) -2.2 -1.8 -1.3 -1.2 -1.4 -1.1 -0.8 6.7 4.8 -0.7 4.5 4s (h million of U.S. dollam) .11,858 -L4,175 .16,541 -17,059 -4,Q58 -5,512 -6,15o -5,490 26.392 25,954 26,362 30,013 .30,450 -31,466 -32,612 -35.503 -2,200 -2,389 -2,423 -2,365 -6,036 -7,310 -*,3,9 -9.728 436 436 451 525 15.418 18,885 18.754 19.534 6,646 5,690 7,684 6,024 3,560 4,110 2,213 2,475 (Annual percentage change) 8.6 4.3 2.5 4.0 0.6 0.0 0.8 1.7 -3.0 -9.7 -0.5 3.5 13.1 8.8 2.1 10.0 -1.8 .A.7 0.4 1.5 30.6 *.4 3.3 7.3 -1.2 -5.2 -0.9 2.0 2L.2 21.6 1.8 1.8 19.4 19.8 16.7 L7.3 0.8 I.1 15.9 16.3 4.6 4.2 39.0 38.8 25.8 25.4 13.3 13.4 -1.0 4.5 4.5 -17,938 -4,784 -4,029 34,170 38,714 -38,954 42,744 -2.308 -11.459 613 -2.240 42,273 717 20,694 20,636 6,610 7,253 2.756 2.810 4.5 1.7 3.5 10.0 L.5 8.1 2.0 4.5 I.8 3.0 10.0 I.5 8.1 1.5 73.1 378.0 41.8 19.6 3.0 1.9 10.9 4.6 (In pencnt of expxts of go& and nonfador services) 84.9 75.7 71.9 73.5 367.9 374.8 431.0 453.6 429.7 403.5 34.0 44.9 40.9 47.0 44.5 45.4 15.4 16.8 18.0 19.8 21.1 21.7 23.8 20.3 16.4 15.3 9.7 5.4 2.6 2.5 3.2 3.5 4.3 3.5 (I" percent) 17.2 14.2 12.9 13.6 L3.0 12.0 7.6 5.6 7.8 7.4 9.6 7.7 21.8 1.8 20.0 21.8 1.8 20.0 17.8 18.0 18.2 1.3 1.6 1.8 16.4 16.4 16.4 4.0 3.8 3.6 38.1 37.2 36.3 24.6 23.6 22.6 13.5 13.6 13.6 -0.4 0.0 -0.4 -0.2 0.2 6.4 0.1 0.4 -0.3 -17.935 -18.021 -18,038 -3,224 .2,447 -1,739 43,650 48,976 54,681 -46,874 -51,423 -56,420 -2.159 -13,390 838 -2,068 -14,485 979 20,569 20,618 7,954 8,725 2,634 2,597 -1,970 -15,474 1,145 20,580 9,573 2.541 4.5 2.0 2.0 10.0 1.5 8.1 0.5 4.5 1.9 1.5 10.0 1.5 8.1 0.0 68.4 69.4 326.5 304.1 39.0 42.4 17.3 16.1 1.0 0.5 0.7 0.4 8.5 I.7 7.3 1.0 Fund credit/quota 21 284.7 282.9 259.8 223.2 160.8 100.8 63.6 42.7 26.1 13.6 II lncludcs trvd funds. capitslizatiou of interest. and provincial govements' balance 21 Assumes no drawings undathe eaended mangemen~ Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-35- Table 9. Argentina: Availability of Purchases in 1999 Availability Amount in SDRs Conditions March 3 600 June 1 180 August 3 1 180 December 1 180 Completion of Second Review March performance and Third Rcvicw June performance September perfonoance and Fourth Review Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 36 - ANNEX I Buenos Aires, Argentina February 5, 1999 Mr. Michel Camdessus Managing Director International Monetary Fund Washington D.C. 2043 1 Dear Mr. Camdessus: Since our letter of January 11,1999, Argentina’s external economic environment has taken a turn for the worse because of events in Brazil. To deal with this situation we have taken a number of actions in recent weeks, including a reduction of import tariffs on capital goods and an advancement of the calendar for the reduction of employers’ contributions envisaged in the program. In addition, we are trying to coordinate with the other members of MERCOSUR measures to ameliorate the impact on regional trade of the devaluation of the real. We intend to maintain continued vigilance of economic events and stand ready to take additional measures if needed. In light of the changed circumstances since our January letter, we propose to advance the third review of the program, originally scheduled for September 1999, to May 1999, and to include a further review of the program by November 1999. IS/ Pedro Pou President Central Bank of the Republic of Argentina Id Roque Femandez Minister of Economy and Public Works and Services Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-37- ANNEX II STRES~ANALYSISOFTHEBANKINGSYSTEM UNDERAMACROECONOMICSHOCK 1. A measure of the resilience of a financial system is given by the extent to which the banks’ capital position would deteriorate with a rise in nonperforming loans stemming from a macroeconomic shock. To assess its approximate magnitude in Argentina, a simulation was conducted assuming that banks would experience a deterioration in their portfolio similar to that observed during the “Tequila” crisis, i.e., between December 1994 and mid-1995. 2. In conducting the simulation, banks were grouped into 10 distinct categories.’ These categories, together with data on capital adequacy ratios for each group as of September 1998 (the initial position for the simulations) are shown in Table A. In the initial position, there are 11 banks (out of a total of 124) that do not fully meet capital requirements. From this position, the same percentage change deterioration in portfolio quality that occurred in each peer group in 1995 (described in Table B) was replicated, and this resulted in an increase in the aggregate ratio of nonperforming loans to total loans from 12.5 percent to 15.7 percent-if measured according to the more stringent Argentine criterion-r from 9.1 percent to 11.7 percent, if measured by the internationally more frequently used criterion.’ Once the capital-positions for each group are adjusted for the simulated new portfolio situation, the resulting values drop to those described in the fourth column of Table A, with the number of entities with a capital shortfall increasing from 11 to 29. 3. Three of these 29 entities, however, are banks with a double-A or higher rating (some of which are domestic branches of large international institutions) and therefore would not be expected to face major difficulties in being re-capitalized after a shock.3 If these three banks ‘This classification is based on a study by the Superintendency of Banks in which homogenous groups were identified by scoring a number of selected indicators, which include: the share of each entity in the system’s total deposits and assets, the share of each entity’s branches on total branches operating in the country, computable net worth, the ratio of deposits/total liabilities, and average number of accounts by branch. *The Argentine criterion classifies as nonperforming those loans that have a payment delay in excess of 30 days; whereas in most countries the cut-off ranges from 60 to 90 days. ‘The reason why these institutions experience a capital shortfall is that, partly due to the relative ease with which they expect to raise capital from their respective headquarters, they tend to operate with capital adequacy ratios close to the limit set by the local supervisory authorities. In the case of Argentina such limits are substantially higher than those prevailing (continued...) Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-38- ANNEX II are excluded, 26 entities would face a capital shortfall amounting to around US$280 million (1.6 percent of the system’s net worth); as of end-September 1998, these 26 entities accounted for 14 percent of total financial sector deposits. 4. Although the number of distressed banks, and their share in total deposits, under this scenario is by no means small, it should be noted that the systemic risk involved is likely to be substantially lower than that observed during the Tequila crisis. First, the number of banks that run into capital position problems in 1995 reached 43, as opposed to 29 (or 26 if double or triple A institutions are excluded) in the present simulation. Second, capital adequacy standards have been substantially tightened since, implying that some of the so-called “undercapitalized” institutions in the present exercise are still substantially more solid in terms of capital-asset ratios than those that failed during the “Tequila crisis”. Finally, the coverage of banking sector liabilities with liquid international reserves is now substantially higher, reaching up to 40 percent of deposits (including the BCRA’s authorized emergency assistance for up to one-third of its gross international reserves). This implies that temporary liquidity needs of such banks could be accommodated while their recapitalization process takes place, thereby reducing the probability of a run on deposits. ‘(...continued) in the country of origin, and, so they often act as a binding constraint. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-39- ANNEX I1 Table A. Argentina: Capital Adeqnaq of Banks by Homogenous Groups Initial Situation l/ SimUlatiO” Sccnrvia We&ted Capital- Weighted Capital- A$sdFatios lkditin3 with Asset Ratios Entiiieswitb No. 0fEntiGcs (Jn percent) capitd Sholtfall (I” pcrsstd) Capital Shortfall Large retail 13 10.6 1 5.3 4 Mdi”nlretail 15 17.3 4 11.9 6 Provincial and municipal IO 16.4 0 -17.5 6 No”banking in5liIutimu 23 IS.9 0 20.1 0 Pti”&Bd 6 29.1 1 23.6 1 hgc public banks 2 35.3 0 31.7. 0 Small re!ail 22 47.3 2 32.9 7 Wbolcsale and invmtmmt 19 80.7 1 77.4 2 Large wbolcsale 10 85.3 0 75.4 1 BKN and public invdmxnt ban!e 4 788.3 2 815.3 2 Total 124 Saursos: Central Bank afllrgerdim; and Pund h,Testi,mtct 11 29 L, As ofSspk,nkr ,998. Table B. Composition of Financial System’s Loan Portfolio (In percent) Simulation Percentage Sept. 98 Scenario Change Situation 1: Normal loans 87.1 84.1 -3.4 Situation 2: Potentially risky loans 3.5 4.1 17.1 Situation 3: Loans with payment shortfalls 2.0 2.1 35.0 Simation 4: High insolvency risk 3.6 4.1 30.6 Situation 5-6: Insolvent loans 3.8 4.4 15.8 Total Memo: Average Share of Problem Loans 100.0 100.0 100.0 1. Present exercise Sept. 98 Simulation Broad definition (situations 2 to 6) 12.5 15.7 Narrower definition (situations 3 to 6) 9.1 11.7 2. During the “Tequila” crisis Dec. 94 Jul. 95 Broad definition (Situations 2 to 6) 19.3 23.2 Narrower definition (Situations 3 to 6) 14.0 17.0 Sources: Central Bank of Argentina; and Fund staff estimates. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4o- ANNEX III Status of Structural Reforms under the Extended Arrangement Timing: ‘ , , , 1 , , , 1 I I Tax Policy Measures Single presumptive tax for small enterprise (monotributo) Completed. Law enacted July 6, 1998. b. Tax reform package Completed. Law enacted December 3 1, 1998 Approval by CO”gXSS by end- 1998 Modification of tax sharing regime with provinces. Dngoing. Authorities are preparing a first drawl of B new repime, which will be submitted to provinces for their consideration. . Tax administration measures Revision ofpcnaltics and interest on past due obligations. Completed. Decrees and administrative resolutions implemented 3” overdue payment facilities; “en& interest rates were revised. b. Strengthening ofjustice system in area of tax e”forceme”t. Ongoing. Special ofices were created in some courts financed by he tax authorities; the World Bank approved B US%5 million loan kx “ilot iudicial reform “roiect. During 1998 During 1998 Privatize collection of overdue tax obligations. Ongoing. Legislation to authorise private lawyers to prosecute tax evasion cases is pending in Congress. A” interim executive &ree author&d the hiring of up to 500 external lawyers for this plrpOS.4 Completed. Special auditing “nits have been created; a new VAT receipt system was implemented beginning Jan. 1, 1999. Pilot auditing projects are underwav in two regions. d. Strengthening of tax auditing DlNing procedures I998 e. Ration&e system of tax refunds, reimbursements, and withhold@ During 1998 Partially completed. Export declarations computerized, and’ systematic monitoring of suppliers implemented. Integration of the customs administration and DGI remains pending. Ongoing. Included in an IDB-financed project. The Maria computerized customs system is being extended to all border posts in the country. Electronic tax payment system being designed. Training methodologies being designed, scholarship programs, and training begun. f. Update tax authorities’ infommtio” systems. g. Broaden the scope for electronic tax filing. h. Imp\cmcnt training program in AFIP. During 1998 1. Obtain congressional approval of customs codes. During 1998 Ongoing. Approved by the Senate. Pending in the Chamber of Deputies. Completed. Enacted by decree. Six firnx were contracted to undertake preinspection and one firm to conduct external audits. j. Introduce prc-shipment inspection of imports. During 1998 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4l- ANNEX III , I. Budgetary operations Set up multiyear budgeting process. To begin in Completed. Budget for 1999 was prepared multiyear fashion. 1999 b. Prepare budgetary estimate of tax To begin in Ongoing. Estimates ofthe cost of VAT and Income tax expenditures. 1999 exemptions were included in the 199 budget. The costs and benefits of other tax provisions will be included in the forthcoming coparticipation law. c. Prepare new procurement rules and During Ongoing. A draft procurement law has been prepared and sent to computcrize procedures. 1998 the cabinet for consideration; a register of suppliers has been established to monitor compliance with established procedures; a register of goods has been established, and purchase orders standardized. d. Introduce indicators of effkiency in To begin in Ongoing. A new version of quarterly management indicators has public expenditure programs. 1999 been prepared, program stmctwes and measurement indicators have been revised for the 1999 budget. During 1998, performance contracts were established with 5 decentralized organisations, others will be implemented in 1999. e. Upgrade public expenditure During management information systems. 1998 Ongoing. Seven agencies have adopted new MIS systems; five others are in the process of adopting the new systems; 20 agencies slated for adoption by the end of 1999. Working groups on Y2K problem. 1. Education a. Continuing implementation of Federal Education Law, Federal Education Pact, and Social Education Law. During 1998 Ongoing. Efforts on implementation continue in conjunction with provincial education authorities. 5. Social programs a. Strengthen PROMIN, PRANI, During Ongoing. Budgetary authorizations have been maintained as PROAh4E, BECAS, TRABAJAR, I998 planned, and follow-up projects will be implemented. etc. by Strengthen monitoring and During Completed. A social program database has been produced. An evaluation of social programs. 1998 information and monitoring system (SIEMPRO) has been established. c. Set up a unified register of beneficiaries. 6. Social Security System (ANSES) During 1998 Ongoing. A unified register system has been designed and implementation is underway. a. Complete restructuring program. End 1998 Ongoing. A strategic plan for ANSES was approved by decree ir October 1998. Overhead costs have been reduced from 1.6 percent of outlays in 1996 to I .3 percent in 1998; the error rate on benefits has been reduced; and management indicators are being prepared. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 42 - ANNEX III b. Conduct a benefits audit. During Ongoing. The benefits audit rate has increased; benefit plans 1998 formerly belonging to provinces are being audited. c. Lengthen base period to determine During Ongoing. pensions. 1998 d. Establish tied registry of During Ongoing. A database of beneficiaries is being prepared. The contributors and beneficiaries. 1998 contributors’ database is maintained by the tax authorities (AFLP). Both databases will be integrated in a national tax and social identification system. e. Updating of ANSES information During systems. 1998. Ongoing. A new management information system is being implemented which will include management and implementation indicators f. Reform of the Basic Pension Unit (PW During 1998. Ongoing. A draft law is being prepared. Means-tested reduction of ceiling on pensions. 1998-99 Ongoing. A draft law is being prepared. h. Broadening of the social security 1998-99 Ongoing. A draft law to make 2.5 million people in these system for poor self-employed and categories eligible for coverage was sent to Congress. The bill rural workers would require a contribution of 75 percent of standard health contribution (module previsional). Domestic servants would be covered with a contribution of Arg$60 per month. I. Health insurance coverage for the 1998-99 Ongoing. Draft law in h. above includes health benefits. self-employed. Rcfom of the State a. Design and implement strategic plans for the main public entities. During 1998 Ongoing. Strategic plans have been adopted for the Superintendency of Insurance and Superintendency of Health Services. A completed plan will soon be implemented for tax administration @IF’); several research, science and technology organizations, and the nation administration of laboratories and health institutes are currently developing plais. b. Strengthen accountability of During Ongoing. Strategic plans must include provisions for information managers of public entities (e.g. 1998 systems which periodically release financial accounts, and an through public hearings and annual report. Organization directors must convoke a public reporting requiremenls) hearing at least once a year to report on their paformance. c. Improve coordination and setting of During Ongoing. The offxe of the Chief of the Cabinet is now priorities in programs financed by 1998 coordinating and prioritizing all programs. Work is underway international organizations. with the World Bank on a management control system for all projects. Several seminars and meetings have been conducted on a logical framework for international assistance projects.. d. Public employment law During Ongoing. In May 1998, a draA law was sent to Congress. Also, 1998 negotiations have begun on reestablishing a collective bargaining agreement with public employees’ unions. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-43 - ANNEX III e f I 1 8. 1 9. 1 Decree on employment During Ongoing. A draft law on employment incompatlbdltles has been incompatlbdltles. administrative 1998 prepared and will be sent to Congress shortly; e draft decree on inquiries, and patrimonial administrative inquiries has been prepared and will be issued responslbdltles. soon; B draft decree on administrative investigations has also been prepared. Ethics law During 1998 Ongoing. A draft public ethics law has been passed by the Chamber of Deputies; e modified version was passed by the Senate, and the Deputies are now considering the Senate’s modifications. A draft ethics code has been prepared by the public ethics office and is being reviewed by the cabinet. :. Streamline control and auditing D&g procedures. 1998 Completed. A strategic auditing plan has been developed for the central government, standardiied internal audit methodologies and regulations have been issued. 1. Provide comprehensive training in control end auditing for public employees. Regulation During 1998 Completed. During 1998, nearly 3000 hours of training were provided in the areas of information systems, financial administration and control, auditing, and others. 8. Implement provincial commitments During Ongoing. San Luis province has adopted the national transport for deregulation under the Fiscal 1998 regime; Approval has been granted to Chubut province for Pact of 1993. deregulation plans in phamaceuticals, professional services, transport, and public works construction; Court appeals have bee” filed to liberalize food distribution and sales in Cordoba. At the federal level, draft laws are being prepared to deregulate professional services and sales of periodicals. b. A”ti-trust law. During Ongoing. Different competition bills have been unified in the 1998 wlmmerce committee of the Chamber of Deputies and are now under consideration in parliamentary committees. Privatization a. Bunco de la Naci6n Argentina By end Pending. The Central Bank is preparing a report on its audit of 2000 the bank, which will be reviewed before proceeding in the priva.tizetion process. The authorities have agreed to convert the bankinto estate-owned corporation during 1999 as a preliminary step. b. Banco Hipotecario National During Ongoing. A decree euthorizing the sale of the first tranche of 1998 shares is awaiting the President’s signature. c. Leasing of telecommunications First hnlfof Ongoing. Bidding for frequencies was opened on Jen. 22, 1998, frequencies. 1998 but has s&e been delayed by e numba of legal challenges. The latest legal challenge was decided in favor of the government in November, 1998, but the decision was appealed, end will be heard by e higher court Final judicial resolution is still pending. d. Leasing of nuclear power plants. During Ongoing. A decree governing the privetization process is near 1998 completion; the bidding specifications for the privatization have been completed. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 44 - ANNEX III e. Leasing of hydroelectric power During Ongoing. A proposal to allow advance sales of Yacyretb plants 1998 hydroelectric power failed to secure approval by the Argentine and Paraguayan congresses. As a result, an alternative strategy is being developed to privatize the management of the dam while undertaking improvements to make the facility more profitable (including raising the height of the dam). f. Leasing of national airports. During 1998 Completed. The airports in Buenos Aires (Ezeiza and Aeroparque) and Cordoba have been turned over to the private concessionaire; a govcmment regulatory authority has been established. 6. Comprehensive review of During Ongoing. An interdisciplinary group has been established to regulatory framework for privatized 1998 conduct the review. Completion of the review and establishment public services. of a new regulatory framework expected for mid-1999. 10. Provinces a. Promote dissemination of During Ongoing. A comprehensive report on provincial government comprehensive information on I99R debt in 1996 and 1997 was published by the federal government provincial indebtedness. was published in July 1998. An update with data for the fusl half of 1998 is being prepared. Work continues with provincial governments to harmonize accounting and reporting standards for debt and budgets. b. Continue to condition federal During Ongoing. approval of provincial debt issues 1998 on,provision of indicators of fiscal SOlW”CY. c. Continue to enforce prudential During Ongoing. regulations on provincial borrowing 1998. from commercial banks. 11. PublicDebt a. Make effol-ts to develop lbe local During market for public bonds. 1998 Ongoing. The stock of local L&s (T-Bills) will be maintained at Arg$3 billion. 5 year domestic bonds (Bon&s) worth some US$l.Z billion were placed in the local market, and an agreement was reached with the pensions funds to place locally some US$ISO million per month in 30-year bonds (J3onte27). Efforts are continuing to improve the liquidity of the secondary market. 12. Mqnetary Policy a, Augment contingent repo facility with foreign banks to at least IO percent of projected deposits DlXillg 1998 Completed. Agreements were signed with a number of banks to augment the facility to US%7 billion and to provide for its further expansion on the basis of certain collateralized assds. In November, the World Bank approved a US’.%500 million loan to serve as margin cover for the contingent line of credit. 13. Financial Sector Reforms Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-45 - ANNEX III a. Introduce nationwide automated During clearing houses. 1998 Ongoing. The Electronic Payment Medium became folly functional in December 1998. Two electronic clearinghouses are now fwxioning in Buenos Aires; A gross real time settlement system is now timctioning online; and the interbank commission on payment mechanisms is in operation BS e regulatory mechanism. b. Strengthen prudential regulations in During Completed. CAMEL risk classifications have been incorporated credit and market risk assessment. 1998 as e factor in calculating risk-weighted capital requirements for banks. New capital requirements will enter into effect in March 1999. Regulations were issued requiring banks to issue debt worlh at least 2 percent of deposits and requiring classifications by ratings agencies as a means of increasing transparency. c. Refam legal codes and procedures Duing Ongoing. A revision in the collateral law has been prepared to to speed the execution of guarantees 1998 facilitate the “se of cattle as collateral for agricultural loans; and collateral. Another draft law is being prepared to improve conditions for the “se and execution of collateral in equipment, machinery, and personal property. d. Revise legal framework governing During Ongoing. Aspects of the Bankruptcy Law are being revised to fmancial derivatives. 1998 take into account obligations from futures contracts. Procedures are being devised for supervision of derivative instruments. e. Increase the availability of records on financial market participants. During 1998 Completed. A clearinghouse on debtor information has been established, and a published “Guide to the Argentine Financial System is now available on the Internet with details on all financial institutions in the country Financial accounts for all institutions are published regularly. f Introduce legislation to standardize During Completed. A communiqod has bee” issued by the Central Bank mortgages and other asset-backed 1998 to standard& the information required for mortgage loans and loans. also to standardize the risk assessment. .4. Trade Policy a. Reduce statistical tax to 0.5 percent January I, Completed. Decree issued Jan. 9, 1998. 1998 b. Gradually phase out specific duty on 1998-2000 Ongoing. A resolution was issued by the Ministry of Economy to textiles. implement the phase-out. c. Allow expiration of safeguard Dec. 31, Pending. A plan is underway to monitor performance of the regime for footwear. 1999 footwear indusy and footwear imports 6. Labor Market Reform Package First half Partially completed. Original package was withdrawn. In its 1998 place, a less far-reaching reform was enacted in October 1998. a. Reduce dismissal costs First half Completed. The Isw reduced dismissal costs by a” average of 1998 30 percent. b. Eliminate certsin temporary First half Completed. contracts. 1998 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 46 - ANNEX II1 c. Phase out ultraclividad First half Not implemented. The law did not contemplate significant 1998 changes in ultractividad.. d. Phase out special statutes First half Pending. Trawling salesman and janitors have agreed top move 1998 from a special statue to a conventional collective bargaining arrangement. Consultations are continuing with other groups subject to special statutes. e. f. Decentralize collective bargaining negotiation. Encourage competition in Obras So&es (Union-sponsored health plans). First half 1998 First half 1998 Not implemented. The law did not include provisions to decentraliz collective bargaining. see point 16.a. below. G. Health Care a. Complete restructuring of Obras Scciales End 1998 Ongoing. 90 abras s&ales covering 7.7 million beneficiaries have joined the restructuring program (fmanced by the World Bank); 30 have had restructuring plans approved, 11 have completed their plans and are awaiting approval, and I2 are currently preparing their plans; 28 obras sociales have begun implementation of their restruchuing programs. Program funds tot&g US144 million have been disbursed so far in the restnctoring project. b. Complete restructuring of PAMI End 1998 Ongoing. Restructoring program is underway (tinanoed by the World Bank). Bids have been submitted for a contract to strengthen PAM1 administration, with work to begin in early 1999. Debt restructuring has been undertaken, personnel reduction is underway, end management systems are being improved. c. Restructure provmaal Obras During Sociales 1998 Pending. A World Bank project is being prepared in this area. A preliminary Bank mission conducted a fact-finding visit in November 1998. d. Regulation of private health care Early 1998 Ongoing. A drat? law is currently under consideration in the organizations. Health committee of the Senate: c. Strengthen autonomy and During Ongoing. Hospitals covering 83 percent of all beds have been accountability of public hospitals. 1998 Incorporated into the registry of self-managing hospitals. Training for hospital managers is underway. Cost recovery has improved, with 30 percent of costs reimbursed using a new automatic debit system. New quality control guidelines have been published, B National plan for Primary Care has been approved; a loan is being requested from the IDB to finance its implementation. .7. Judiciary a. Establish an Independent Judiciary Council. During 1998 Completed. On Jan. 6, 1998, a Law was passed creating the council. All council members were designated by July 1998, sod the council began operation in September. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4l- ANNEX III b. Upgrade Offices of the State During Ongoing. New regulations for these ofices have been put in Attorney and Public Defender. 1998 place. Loans from the World Bank and IDB we supporting iudicial reform efforts. c. Modemize provincial judicial During systems. 1998 Ongoing. Provincial judicial reform projects are underway in the provinces of Chaco, Cordoba Cotientes, NeuquCn, Salta, Santa Fe, and Entre Rios with support from a World Bank project. d. Strengthen capabilities of the Ongoing. In April 1998, the World Bank disbursed the first povemment to litigate cases. tranche of a USHO million World B&B proiect in this area. I 18. Statistics a. Revise balance of payments statistics 1998-1999 Ongoing. Work on the new statistics has been completed and final revisions are underway. Publication of the new figures is expected in February 1999. b. Implement additional household I998- 1999 Ongoing. A new survey was conducted in August, raising to 3 surveys. the number in 1998. Three survey swill be conducted in 1999, and four in 2000. New survey instruments are also being tested. c. Elaborate a new input-output I 1998-l 999 I 1999. Ongoing. The new matrix is scheduled for publication in June matIm I d. Improve the compilation and 1998-1999 See point 10.a above. dissemination of information on provincial finances. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-48- APPENDIX I I. II. III. IV. V. VI Argentina - Fund Relations (As of December 3 1,1998) Membership Status: Joined September 20, 1956; Article VIII A. Financial Relations General Resources Account: Quota Fund holdings of currency SDR Department: In millions In percent of Qf Ouota 1,537.IO 100.0 5,5402.22 351.5 In millions Percent of of SDRs Allocation Net cumulative allocation 318.37 100.0 Holdings 187.73 59.0 Outstanding Purchases and Loans: In millions In percent of SDRs ofquota Stand-by arrangements Extended Fund arrangements Financial Arrangements: DE EFF Stand-By EFF 613.00 39.9 3,252,09 211.3 SDR Millions Approval Expiration Amount Amount Date Date ADoroved -!Iham 214198 2/3/01 2,080.OO 0.00 4/l 2196 l/l l/98 720.00 613.00 3/31/92 3/30/96 4,020.25 4,020.25 Projected Obligations to Fund: (SDR millions; based on existing use of resources and present holdings of SDRs): Principal Charges/interest Total Overdue Forthcomiw .l2/31/98 mzooom200220Q3 _- 602.5 970.2 927.6 573.6 321.5 -- 152.6 122.3 83.2 50.8 31.6 755.1 1,092.5 1,OlO.S 624.4 353.1 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicVII. VII1 IX. -49- B. Nonfinancial Relations APPENDIX I Exchange Rate: On March 27, 1991 a law was passed guaranteeing the full convertibility of the au&al under a currency board arrangement and pegging the austral at AlO, per US. dollar. On January 1,1992 the peso was substituted for the austral at a rate of 1 peso per 10,000 australes. On July 3 1, 1998 the exchange rate was Arg$l.OO per U.S. dollar. Last Article IV Consultation: The 1996 Article IV consultation was concluded by the Executive Board on February 4, 1998 (EBS/98/6). Argentina is on the standard 12-month Article IV consultation cycle. Technical Assistance: (from January 1995 onwards) Missions FAD FAD FAD FAD FAD MAE STA FAD FAD Resident Experts MAE (shared with STA) STA Purpose Tax administration Tax administration Tax reform Central administration Tax reform Banking supervision Balance of payments Tax budgetary process Customs administration Time of Delivery November-December 1995 January 1997 July-August 1997 September-October 1997 February-March 1998 May 1998 June 1998 June 1998 November 1998 Advice on Central Bank accounting October 1991 until April and money and banking statistics 1995 Balance of payments statistics Six months beginning April 199s X. Resident Representative: Mr. Figuerola is resident represcntativc in Buenos Aires. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 50 - APPENDIX II STATISTICAL INFORMATION The statistical information on basic indicators for surveillance is published in a timely manner and is reliable Argentina subscribed to the Special Data Dissemination Standard (SDDS) and its metadata have been posted on the Fund’s Dissemination Standards Bulletin Board on the Internet. A. National Accounts In September 1996 the Ministry ofEconomy published new national accounts in constant 1986 prices on an annual and quarterly basis for the period 1980-95. Work is underway to publish national accounts in current prices and in constant 1993 prices. B. Prices Consumer and producer prices are collected by the National Institute of Statistics and the indices are published monthly in a timely fashion. The weights underlying the PPI have recently been updated to reflect shares of industrial output of 1993. The CPI is weighted using household expenditure data for 1985-86. An update of the CPI weights is being prepared. C. Other Real Sector Data The National Institute of Statistics has recently published detailed accounts on industrial activity, remuneration and hours worked. Employment surveys are conducted three times a year (May, August, and October). In 1998 ZI;S introduced new series for producer prices, and foreign trade volume and price indices. D. Government Finance Statistics Information on revenue and expenditure of the Central Government, decentralized agencies, public enterprises and social security system is available on a cash basis with a lag of two- three months, but data on the provincial public finances are available only on accrual basis, with a lag of about six months, and in summary form. Annual time series for the consolidated central government and for state governments that are consistent with the GFS standards are -available through 1997 in the STA database. E. Monetary Statistics Monthly data on the Central Bank, deposit money banks, and the banking survey are published in the Central Bank of the Republic of Argentina’s (CBRA) Statistical Bulletin, accessed through the Internet. Data are available generally with a lag of about two months; longer delays may occur, particularly with respect to the audited end-year central bank Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-51- APPENDIX II balance sheet. Data published in IFS are based, with few adjustments, in the CBRA Statistical Bulletin, F. Public Debt Statistical information on the public debt is available on a quarterly basis, but frequent revisions are made to the stock of outstanding debt reflecting the regularization of previously undocumented obligations. A comprehensive report on provincial government debt in 1996 and 1997 was published by the federal government in July 1998. G. Balance of Payments A recent STA mission has assisted the authorities to develop alternative data sources and estimation methods to derive more robust estimates of holdings of foreign financial assets and of the direct external debt of the Argentine nonbank private sector. The authorities have now established additional domestic, bilateral, and international data sources and use alternative estimation methods to derive separate estimates of the Argentine nonbank private sector’s holdings of foreign financial assets and related income. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDate of Latest Observation Date Received Frequency of Data Frequency of Reporting Source of Update Mode of Reporting Confidentiality Frequency of Publication Argentina: Core Statistical Indicators asofDecember31, 1998 Central Overall External Interna- Bank Reserve/ Consumer Current Govem- Debt/ Exchange tional Balance Base Rates Reserves Sheet money Broad Interest Price Money Rates Index 12/31/98 12/3 l/98 Dec. 98 l/l l/99 l/2/99 114199 Daily II Daily Monthly Monthly Daily Monthly Ministry Central Central of Bank Bank Economy 0 2/ Cable/ Cable/ Fax Fax Unres- Unres- UNeS- tricted tricted hictai Daily Daily Monthly Exports/ Imports Nov. 98 l/8/99 Monthly Monthly Ministry of Economy Cable/ Fax UNCS- tricted Monthly Account ment GDP/ Debt Balance Balance GNP Service 3rd. qtr. 3rd. qtr. 1998 Dec. 98 1998 Nov. 98 I I I I I l/25/ 98 l/19/99 Dec. 98 Dec. 98 I I I Quarterly 1 Monthly 1 Quarterly 1 Quarterly l/ Survey data. 2/ Printed table. 3/Published in the statistical bulletin with a lag of about two months. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-53 - APPENDIX III Relations with the World Bank 1. Bank lending to Argentina as ofDecember 31, 1998 totaled US$l6,078.5 million (net of cancellations). Fifty loans totaling US$9,356.9 million remain under execution, with US$5,027.9 undisbursed. The Bank’s assistance has been and would continue to focus on supporting Government efforts to: (i) enhance social development, including poverty alleviation and human resource development; (ii) improve the performance and institutional capacity of sub-national governments to deliver key social and infrastructure services; and (iii) consolidate structural reforms, including reforms in public finances, labor markets and the financial sector to ensure success&i1 implementation of the assistance program, and enhancing governance through institution building. 2. In response to turbulence in international capital markets, the Bank’s Board approved last November a US$3 billion package of special loans to support the government’s continuing reform efforts. The Special Structural Adjustment Loan (SSAL-US$2.5 billion) will support regulatory reforms (particularly in the financial sector), reforms in the allocation of expenditures in social sectors, as well as reforms in the system of intergovernmental fiscal relations. In addition, key social programs are to be protected in the federal budget. The second loan of the package is a US$500 million loan to enhance the central bank’s repurchase facility with commercial banks, thus strengthening the financial system’s safety net. The evolving Bank country assistance strategy includes continued support for public sector reforms at the provincial level, as well as new projects for addressing Year 2000 computer problems, judicial reforms, renewable energy development, water sector reforms, and, disease prevention and control. 3. Since January 1998, the following World Bank loans have been approved: El Niiio Pollution Management Mining National Highway Rehabilitation Secondary Education Model Court Social Protection Social Protection 3 Social Protection 4 Special Structural Adjustment Loan SSAL Special Repo Year 2000 42.0 18.0 39.5 450.0 119.0 5.0 284.0 90.8 2,525.3 505.1 30.3 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 54 - APPENDIX III Financial Relations with the World Bank (In millions of U.S. dollars) Commitments (Net of Can- Undisbursed cellations) Disbursements Amount I. IBRD Operations (as of December 31,1998) Fully disbursed loans 6,721.6 6,721.6 0.0 Loans in process of disbursement 9,357.0 4,329.0 5,027.9 Agricultural and rural development 287.0 45.6 241.4 Infrastructure (including flood) 1,768.7 567.7 1,201.o Power and hydrocarbon 576.0 524.7 51.3 Public sector management/reform 691.3 488.9 202.4 Financial sector 547.0 526.9 20.1 Municipal/provincial development 635.0 307.1 327.9 Water supply 64.0 46.8 17.2 Social sector (including housing) 1,757.7 796.1 961.5 Special SAL. and repurchase loans 3,030.3 1,025.3 2,005.o Total loans Repaid l/ Outstanding Committed Disbursed Pending commitments 16,078.S 11,050.6 5,027.g 3,571.g 0.0 0.0 12,.506.6 0.0 0.0 II. IFC Operations (as of December 31,1998) IFC Loans Equity Quasi Participants 691.4 205.9 167.8 1,166.l 626.4 136.6 167.7 1,118.g 246.1 12.4 62.0 298.0 III. IBRD Loan Transactions 1994 1995 Actuals 1996 1997 1998 Disbursements 547.5 Repayments 424.8 Net lending 122.7 Source: World Bank. l/ Includes repayment from third parties. 941.0 1,076.7 796.9 2,030.6 258.6 281.9 299. I 350.2 682.4 794.8 497.8 1,680.4 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public