DOCUMENT OF INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND NOT FOR PUBLIC USE FOR El AGENDA To: From: Subject EBS/95/76 CONFIDENTIAL May 9, 1995 Members of the Executive Board The Secretary Ghana - Staff Report for the 1995 Article IV Consultation and Request for Arrangements Under the Enhanced Structural Adiustment Facility Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staff report for the 1995 Article IV consultation with Ghana and its request for arrangements under the enhanced structural adjustment facility. A draft decision appears on page 21. This paper, together with the policy framework paper for Ghana (EBD/95/63, 5/g/95), is tentatively scheduled for discussion on Wednesday, May 31, 1995. Mr. Nowak (ext. 38969) or Mr. Basanti (ext. 38719) is available to answer technical or factual questions relating to this paper prior to the Board discussion. Unless the Documents Preparation Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the African Development Bank (AfDB), the European Commission (EC), and the WTO Secretariat, following its consideration by the Executive Board. Att: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public. CONFIDENTIAL INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND GHANA Staff Report for the 1995 Article IV Consultation and Request for Arraneements Under the Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility Prepared by the African Department (In consultation with the Fiscal Affairs, Legal, Monetary and Exchange Affairs, Policy Development and Review, Statistics, and Treasurer's Departments) Approved by Evangelos A. Calamitsis and Chanpen Puckahtikom May 8, 1995 Contents I. Introduction II. Background and Recent Economic Performance III. Policy Issues and Economic Program for 1995-97 1. Medium-term policy framework 2 Overall strategy Stabilization policies i: External sector policies Structural policies e. Social and environmental issues 2. The program for 1995 ," : Fiscal policy Monetary policy and financial sector reforms C. Deregulation of the petroleum and cocoa sectors 3. Balance of payments and external financing ba: Outlook and financing requirements for 1995-97 Longer-term outlook and capacity to repay the Fund IV. Program Monitoring and Technical Assistance Page 1 2 14 14 16 17 V. Staff Appraisal 18 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- ii - Contents Charts 1. Selected Economic Indicators 22 2. Exchange Rate Developments and Debt Service Payments 23 Tables 1. 2. 24 3. 4. Use of Fund Credit, March 1995-December 1997 Performance Relative to Program Benchmarks Under Staff-Monitored Program, 1994 Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 1989-97 Central Government Budgetary Operations and Financing, 1992-97 25 26 27 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. Indicators of Central Government Budgetary Operations and Financing, 1992-97 Monetary Survey, 1991-95 Summary Accounts of the Monetary Authorities, 1991-95 Balance of Payments, 1992-2001 External Financing Requirements and Resources, 1993-97 External Public Debt and Debt Service Payments, 1992-99 Medium-Term Outlook for the Balance of Payments, Sensitivity Tests, 1994-99 28 29 3,o 31 32 33 12. 13. 14. Indicators of Fund Credit, 1992-2007 Financial Benchmarks and Performance Criteria Under the First Annual ESAF.Arrangement, 1995 Structural Benchmarks and Performance Criteria Under the First Annual ESAF Arrangement, 1995-March 1996 34 35 36 Annendices I. Three-Year and First Annual Arrangements Under the Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility Attachment: Letter of Intent Attachment: Memorandum on Economic and Financial Policies of Ghana for 1995 II. Relations with the Fund III. Relations with the World Bank Group IV. Selected Social and Demographic Indicators V. Statistical Issues 37 38 4'1 43 54 56 58 59 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicI. Introduction The 1995 Article IV consultation discussions with Ghana, together with negotiations on a program to be supported by an ESAF arrangement, were held between November 1994 and March 1995. L/ The Ghanaian representatives included Dr. Botchwey, Minister of Finance, Dr. Agama, Governor of the Bank of Ghana, and other senior officials concerned with economic and financial matters. In the attached letter dated April 28, 1995, the Government of Ghana is requesting a three-year ESAF arrangement in an amount equivalent to SDR 164.4 million (60 percent of quota), in support of its economic program for 1995-97. A total of SDR 54.8 million (20 percent of quota) would be available in the first year (Table 1). After taking into account the payment of scheduled obligations, Ghana's outstanding use of Fund credit, which amounted to SDR 477.6 million (174 percent of quota) at end-March 1995, would decline to SDR 366.6 million (134 percent of quota) by end- December 1997. Ghana's economic program is to be implemented in the context of a medium-term strategy, which has been formulated by the Government in close collaboration with the staffs of the Fund and the World Bank. The program is set out in a policy framework paper (PFP), which was circulated to the Fund's Executive Board on May --, 1995 (EBD/95/--) and issued to the Executive Board of the World Bank at the same time. u Ghana is on the standard 12-month Article IV consultation cycle, and the last consultation was concluded on June 24, 1994. 1/ Ghana formally L/ Missions visited Accra during November 14-30, 1994 and February 27- March 15, 1995, and discussions were also held in Washington during January 17-20, 1995. The staff team consisted of Mr. Nowak (head-AFR), Mr. Nakao (PDR), Mr. Basanti (AFR), Mr. Cowen (AFR), and Ms. Prem (EP-AFR). Mrs. Cone11 (administrative assistant-AFR) and Ms. Pinto (administrative assistant-AFR) participated in the November and February-March missions, respectively. The missions were assisted by Mr. Choudhry, the Fund's resident representative in Accra. Mr. Mirakhor, Executive Director for Ghana, attended the policy meetings. World Bank staff also participated in the discussions. u In addition to project support, the World Bank is currently providing program assistance to Ghana in the form of a Private Sector Adjustment Credit and a Financial Sector Adjustment Credit. The next disbursements under these credits are expected to be made by end-May 1995 and by end-December 1995, respectively. 1/ During the Executive Board discussion, Directors noted that, notwith- standing the progress made in stabilizing the economy, policy performance had generally fallen short of expectations. They called on the Government to restore strict financial discipline in order to bring about a reduction in inflation and return the economy to a path consistent with external viability and sustainable growth. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 2 - accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4 of the Fund's Articles of Agreement on February 21, 1994. Ghana's relations wl,th the Fund and t'he World Bank Group are summari.zed in Appendices I and II, respectively. II. Backerround and Recent Economic Performance Following a protracted period of serious economic decline, the Government of Ghana launched an economic recovery program (ERP) in 1983, which aimed at reviving economic growth through the pursuit of tight demand management policies and the easing of structural impediments to expanding economic activity. The ERP was supported by a series of Fund arrangements, the most recent of which was a three-year ESAF arrangement that expired in March 1992. Ghana enjoyed considerable success under the ERP; inflation was reduced from 142 percent in 1983 to 10 percent by the end of 1991, real GDP growth averaged about 5 percent a year, and the balance of payments registered sizable overall surpluses throughout most of the period. In 1992 the Ghanaian authorities sought to continue the process of economic reform in the context of a program under the Fund's arrangements for enhanced consultations. However, serious difficulties were encountered in policy implementation, and the program slipped off track. In an effort to quell labor unrest and maintain a stable political climate during the run-up to the first multiparty elections under the new constitution, large wage increases and other benefits were awarded to the civil service. In addition, government revenue performance was undermined by shortfalls in cocoa tax receipts and delays in passing through higher oil import costs to retail petroleum prices. As a result, the Government's overall budget balance reverted from a surplus of 1.5 percent of GDP in 1991 to a deficit of 4.8 percent in 1992, and strong price and balance of payments pressures re-emerged (Chart 1). Private investment slumped, and real GDP growth dropped to below 4 percent. The authorities made efforts to bring economic performance back on track during 1993-94, under macroeconomic adjustment programs that were monitored informally by the Fund staff. Although performance under these programs generally fell short of expectations, particularly in the area of monetary policy, some progress was made in reducing fiscal and external imbalances and laying the basis for increased growth of economic activity (Tables 2 and 3). The government budget recorded a surplus of 2.2 percent of GDP in 1994, bolstered by proceeds from the sale of public assets, Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 3 - amounting to the equivalent of 5 percent of GDP (Tables 4 and 5), L/ and increased revenue from taxes on cocoa exports. On the other hand, plans to impose import duties on a range of zero-rated or exempted goods were not carried through, leading to shortfalls in such receipts, while overruns occurred on personal emoluments, other labor-related expenditures, and domestic interest payments. The implementation of monetary policy in 1994 was severely undermined by large arrears incurred on oil-related credits by the national oil company (GNPC) to the Bank of Ghana. As a result, despite a step-up in open market operations by the Bank of Ghana and the net repayment of debt to the banking system by the Government, broad money grew by 46 percent in 1994, as against an original target of 5 percent (Table 6). 2/ Inflationary pressures intensified in response, with the consumer price index increasing by 34 percent on an end-of-period basis in 1994. This inflation rate compares with a three-month treasury bill rate of 30 percent at the end of December 1994 and bank lending rates in the range of 29-33 percent. Ghana's external position deteriorated sharply in 1993 as a consequence of the expansionary financial and incomes policies and a worsening in the terms of trade. The current account def3cit (including official transfers) widened from 3.6 percent of GDP in 1991 to 9.2 percent in 1993, while reserves fell from the equivalent of 4.1 months of imports to 2.7 months. In response, the Bank of Ghana allowed the cedi to depreciate sharply in real terms from around the middle of 1993 (Chart 2). This action helped contain import demand and, in conjunction with a terms of trade improvement and a much stronger export performance, contributed to a marked reduction in the current account deficit, to 4.9 percent of GDP in 1994 (Table 8). Ghana experienced a major shortfall in long-term concessional aid in 1994, equivalent to some 4 percent of GDP, as a result of difficulties encountered in fulfilling macroeconomic conditions for disbursements under multilateral and bilateral aid programs. However, the impact of this shortfall on the overall balance of payments was more than offset by receipts from the divestiture program and short-term foreign borrowing by the Cocoa Board that I/ Program understandings called for divestiture proceeds in excess of baseline projections to be used for debt reduction and to improve the overall fiscal position. On this basis, the outcome for the overall budget balance in 1994 compares with an adjusted target of a surplus of 3.7 percent of GDP. 2J In the absence of GNPC borrowing, monetary growth would have been minimal. The increase in GNPC's arrears to the central bank in 1994 represented the equivalent of 43 percent of beginning-of-period reserve money (Table 7). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 4 - had not been built into the program. u Accordingly, Ghana's gross reserve position improved to 4.1 months of imports by the end of 1994, but this was well below target after upward adjustment for Cocoa Board borrowing and excess divestiture proceeds. Real GDP growth recovered to 5.0 percent in 1993, primarily on account of the impact of favorable weather conditions on agricultural output. However, growth slackened off to 3.8 percent in 1994, as a result of the uncertainties surrounding the macroeconomic situation, uneven rains, and ethnic disturbances in the north of the country. III. Policy Issues and Economic Proeram for 1995-97 1. Medium-term ~olicv framework a. Overall strategy Despite the reduction in macroeconomic imbalances and structural distortions under the ERP during 1983-91, inflation remained comparatively high during most of the period, while private sector saving and investment performance was weak. Real per capita GDP growth averaged 2 percent a year, but at this rate Ghana's average poor would not cross the "poverty line" for well over 30 years. The Government has therefore targeted an acceleration in growth, to 5.5 percent by 1997 and to 6 percent by the end of the decade. Its program for achieving this goal is based on reversing the poor record on investment by creating a sound and predictable financial environment within which Ghana can maintain a stable nominal exchange rate, while enjoying a strong and sustainable external position that is less vulnerable to external shocks. Consistent with these objectives, policies have been developed with a view to reducing inflation to 5 percent by 1997 and the external current account deficit to 2.7 percent of GDP. The authorities are of the view that savings from domestically generated sources will not alone be sufficient to generate the volume of investment needed to raise the growth rate. Moreover, Ghana cannot depend on any significant increase in foreign aid from the levels recorded in the early 1990s. It will therefore need to attract new inflows of foreign investment and concentrate on policies desi.gned to improve the quality of investment. The experience of the ERP suggests that, while much was accomplished in removing impediments to private investment, economic initiative was retarded by the absence of clear signals from the Government lJ The program had assumed that the Cocoa Board would fund its crop purchases entirely from domestic sources, but a contingency mechanism was incorporated into the program, providing for an upward adjustment in the foreign reserve target in the event that the Cocoa Board borrowed exter- nally. A similar contingency mechanism applied to excess divestiture proceeds. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 5 - regarding the role it expected the private sector to play in promoting growth. The economic program for 1995-97 seeks to provide such signals in a clear and unambiguous manner by removing state involvement and intervention in all areas of economic activity that can be handled more efficiently by the private sector. Specific actions focus on an acceleration and expansion of the divestiture program, as well as deregulation of the petroleum and cocoa sectors. Those enterprises that remain in the public domain are to be placed on a sounder commercial basis. The program also includes policies aimed at raising productivity in agriculture, which still contributes over 40 percent of output, but which has performed poorly over the past decade. lJ b. Stabilization oolicies The authorities' medium-term fiscal strategy is geared to generating the additional government savings needed to help meet the program's investment and external current account objectives. The overall budget balance, excluding divestiture proceeds, is expected to move from a deficit of 2.9 percent of GDP in 1994 to a surplus of 1.3 percent by 1997. It is anticipated that the bulk of this adjustment, or about 3 percent of GDP, will emanate from lower spending relative to GDP. In particular, labor- related expenditures, which consist primarily of civil service pay and end-of-service benefits, 2J are expected to decline by nearly 1 percent of GDP during 1995-97, while reductions in outlays on goods, services, and transfers are also planned. After an initial increase, the domestic interest burden should also shrink in line with lower interest rates and a marked reduction in the Government's domestic debt through the medium term. Major new tax initiatives have been launched in 1995, but in light of the relatively high prevailing level of taxation and the need to reduce dependence on export taxes, the Government believes that there is only limited scope for undertaking additional new measures during the rest of the program period, if the recovery of economic activity is not to be impeded. Within the overall objective of reducing the budget deficit, the fiscal strategy calls for a realignment in the structure of both revenues and expenditures. The Government remains concerned about the distortionary impact of income-based taxes on private investment, labor, and savings decisions. As an important first step In shifting the tax burden toward expenditure-based sources of revenue, a value-added tax (VAT) was introduced on March 1, 1995 (see below). Similarly, the tax on cocoa exports gives rise to considerable disincentives to production, and the Government is exploring ways of taxing cocoa producers, and agriculture more generally, in a manner that does not act as a disincentive to producers. An embryonic I/ An elaboration of agricultural and other sectoral policies is contained in the PFP. 2J End-of-service benefits represent retirement gratuities which, under a 1992 agreement reached with workers in the state enterprise and subvented organizations, are to be encashed in installments through mid-1995. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 6 - profits tax, grower licenses and fees, and property or land taxes are possible sources of revenue that are being considered. The Government also plans to restructure its expenditures by using some of the savings generated from lower outlays on labor and interest to fund improvements in the country's economic infrastructure and the provision of social services, notably in the areas of education and health. u The projections do not incorporate any net costs that may emanate from a forthcoming civil service restructuring exercise. The Government recognizes that bringing inflation firmly under control is a necessary precondition for achieving enhanced growth. Its anti- inflation policy is based upon a two-step strategy. In the first stage, which will cover at least the first year of the ESAF arrangement, money will provide the nominal anchor for prices, and accordingly broad money growth will be reduced sharply. Monetary restraint will be accompanied by a flexible exchange rate policy aimed at protecting Ghana's external competitiveness and foreign reserve position while inflation is subsiding. In implementing its monetary policy, the central bank will monitor targets that have been established for reserve money. In the event that these targets are exceeded because of "overperformance" in the balance of payments, the appropriate policy response will depend primarily on the extent to which the monetary impulse is perceived as inflationary. 2/ The authorities will remain in contact with the staff on this matter, but it would in any event be a focus of the midterm review under the first annual ESAF arrangement. Subsequently, once sufficient progress has been made in establishing a tight and credible demand-management posture and inflation has been convincingly brought under control for a reasonable period, consideration will be given to using the exchange rate as the instrument for holding down inflation. Use of the exchange rate as a nominal anchor, and a commitment to maintain the rate at a stable and predictable level, should provide added discipline in the implementation of fiscal policy and help bolster business and investor confidence. Under this regime, monetary policy would be directed toward meeting the program's overall balance of payments targets and, in particular, ensuring that Ghana accumulates sufficient foreign reserves to provide a strong cushion against unanticipated external shocks. Control of the money supply will continue to be effected through open market operations, which are currently conducted by the central bank in the form of weekly auctions of official debt. Less reliance will be placed on the use of a reserve price in the auctions and interest rates, which will continue to be market-determined, will probably rise further in real terms, lJ A discussion of the social impact of the program is provided in the PFP. 2J The program already provides for the automatic downward adjustment of the domestic credit ceilings in the event of higher-than-programmed divestiture proceeds or external financing (see below). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 7 - thereby providing support for the program's inflation and savings targets. However, open market operations are still a relatively recent monetary policy instrument, and until confidence in them has been firmly established, liquid asset requirements will continue to be used as and when necessary. The intention is eventually to lower these requirements to the level necessary for prudential purposes only. 1/ To promote the development of a secondary market, the central bank is planning on rediscounting bankers' acceptances. C. External sector oolicies As indicated above, during the first year of the program, Ghana will maintain a flexible exchange rate policy, whereby net sales of foreign exchange by the Bank of Ghana will be guided by its foreign reserve targets. The acceptance by Ghana of the obligations of Article VIII underscores the Government's intention of achieving its external objectives through market- based instruments rather than recourse to quantitative controls. Ghana continues to maintain certain capital controls in the form of surrender requirements and restrictions on overseas lending and the acquisition of foreign investments by residents. u The authorities will consider the removal of these controls, and the adoption of full currency convertibility, once inflation is brought under control and foreign reserves are raised to more comfortable levels than at present. During the ERP, Ghana undertook a number of important changes in its import protection system, most notably the dismantling of all quantitative restrictions on imports and their replacement by tariffs. The degree of effective protection has also been lowered by reductions in the dispersion of tariffs, the most recent being those announced in the 1995 budget. Other countries in the region have not moved as quickly as Ghana in undertaking tariff reform, and the Government is of the view that the structure of tariffs is appropriate at the present time. In 1994 a system of minimum presumptive duties was applied to a specific list of imports in order to address difficulties being experienced in customs collection. The Government is aware that presumptive duties are very much a second-best solution to the problem of duty evasion, and intends to retain the system only until it is satisfied that the quality of preshipment inspection has been raised to satisfactory standards and that the imports concerned attract the correct amount of duty. This should be accomplished well within the program period. lJ At end-March 1995, commercial bank holdings of liquid assets were more than 20 percent above the statutory requirement of 57.5 percent. 2J The absence of a parallel market foreign exchange premium, however, would suggest that capital movements are not significantly impeded by the exchange regime. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Publicd. -a - Structural nolicies The discussions with the authorities on structural policies revolved around the objective of limiting or removing the remaining state involvement in economic decision-making and providing strong market-based incentives :for private sector initiative. The authorities explained that they had already set up various channels of dialogue with the private sector and that a number of important policy actions, including a new Investment Act, had resulted. In addition, a legal framework has been established for (converting state enterprises into incorporated companies in readiness for privatization. The privatization program, which aims at selling or liquidating virtually all state enterprises that are not public utilities, is being accelerated and extended to cover additional companies. The sale of nearly one half of the Government's share in the largest state enterprise, Ashanti Goldfields, was successfully concluded in 1994. The Government now intends to sell several large enterprises, such as Ghana Telecommunications, three financial institutions (including the country's largest commercial bank), and 48 small- to mid-scale enterprises during 1995-97. 1/ Disbursements under World Bank lending programs are conditional upon performance in this area. The financial operations of those state enterprises that remain in the public domain are being strengthened and placed on a profit-making basis under a performance contract system. No government or central bank financial support, including loan guarantees, will be provided to these enterprises, which will be expected to cover their financing needs from internal sources or private capital markets. The government wage bill absorbs over 5 percent of GDP, but uncompeti- tive pay levels in the civil service have given rise to difficulties in attracting and maintaining high calibre staff, particularly in managerial and executive positions. Efforts in the past to cut the size of the civil service have not proven particularly successful and, to provide a comprehensive and feasible solution to the problem, the Government has established a high-level committee to draw up recommendations for reducing the size of, and restructuring pay scales in, the civil service and subvented organizations. The recommendations will be implemented from early 1996. lJ The divestiture program, including the sale of Ashanti Goldfields, covers over one fourth of the labor force employed in the mining, manufacturing, construction, transport, and finance sectors. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 9 - e. Social and environmental issues 1/ Moderate progress was made under the ERP in reducing poverty, mostly in rural areas where it remains most prevalent. 2/ The Government recog- nizes that economic growth is a necessary, but not sufficient, condition for poverty reduction, and is continuing in its efforts to expand and strengthen the social safety net and protect the most vulnerable groups. In particular, increased farm incomes arising from structural reforms in the agricultural sector should help reduce poverty further in the rural areas, while the Government's efforts to curb inflation will also benefit the most needy and those on fixed incomes. The 1995 budget provides for a real increase in spending on health and education, and also for an increase of over 50 percent in the minimum threshold for personal income tax. In addition, basic foodstuffs, livestock, and agricultural inputs have been exempted from the new VAT. Environmental problems arising from inappropriate cultivation practices and widespread deforestation pose serious threats to Ghana's rural economic base. A new forest and wildlife policy was approved in late 1994 to deal with illegal timber felling and to promote a sustainable utilization of forest resources. Cocoa farming, in particular, stands to benefit from this policy, since cocoa trees require a forest canopy to produce maximum yields. Mining regulations have also been revised in an effort to prevent the discharge of heavy metals and cyanide into local water supplies, and the Government is imposing standards on the use of chemicals and the cleaning up of mined-out areas. Attempts are being made to ensure that the cost of repairing environmental damage is borne by the private sector through the imposition of concession fees on timber and mine operators. In 1994 the Government established an environmental fund, which is financed directly by the budget, largely for addressing problems arising from urban-based pollutants. 2. The orogram for 1995 A cut in money supply growth from 46 percent in 1994 to 14 percent in 1995 lies at the core of the Government's anti-inflation policy. However, the inflationary repercussions of the rapid growth in broad money in late 1994 and early 1995 will likely continue to be felt during much of the first half of 1995, and inflation performance will also be affected by the cost- push impact of the tax measures announced in the 1995 budget. The program targets an inflation rate of just under 20 percent for 1995, which is based lJ A further discussion of these issues is contained in the PFP. 2J The "incidence of poverty" fell from 36.4 percent in 1987-88 to 31.2 percent in 1991-92 (See Appendix IV). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 10 " on the conservative assumption of a strong increase in velocity. 1/ If inflationary expectations are rapidly dampened and the velocity assumption is not borne out, then inflation performance should be correspondingly stronger than presently envisaged. The stabilization program also provides for an overall fiscal surplus of 1.2 percent of GDP, or a broadly balanced budget when divestiture receipts are excluded. This improvement in the public finances will help release the resources needed to support the program's investment target and, together with continued adherence to a flexible exchange rate policy, should contribute to a further narrowing of the external current account deficit in 1995 and a reduction in Ghana's debt service burden. a. Fiscal policy The reduction envisaged in the overall budget deficit for 1995 amounts to 2.8 percentage points of GDP, excluding divestiture proceeds. Most of the revenue effort needed to achieve this target will come from strengthened customs collections, reflecting the introduction in the budget of an imptort duty of 10 percent on about one half of the goods that were previously zero- rated or exempt from tax. a/ This measure complements a constitutional provision that no discretionary duty exemptIons may be granted without parliamentary approval. The budget also raised the rate of the sales tax, from 15 percent to 17.5 percent. u Subsequently, on March 1, the sales tax was converted into a VAT and its coverage extended to include retail sales and a range of services, such as electricity supply, telecommuni- cations, and professional services. To provide a safety margin in the program, however, the fiscal projections do not incorporate the impact on revenues of any broadening of the tax base or improvement in the efficiency of tax administration that could be associated with implementation of the VAT. With regard to other fiscal revenues, retail petroleum prices were raised by an average of 20 percent in the budget in order to offset the impact on the effective tax rate of expected exchange rate movements durjlng the 'course of 1995. From September 1995, however, the Government will impo.se an ad valorem tax on petroleum products and allow retail prices to be set by the oil marketing companies, which will protect duties from delays in adjusting prices to unexpected increases in oil import costs. Increases in petroleum duties will constitute contingency action in the event of slippages in fiscal policy performance during 1995. Despite a larger cocoa I/ This inflation target reflects an increase in the annual rate of inflation to 38 percent in February 1995, and a projected decline in the second half of the year to an annual rate of 11 percent on a seasonally adjusted basis. a/ Prior to the 1995 budget, zero-rated and exempted items constituted about 60 percent of total imports. 2/ The sales tax applies to imported as well as domestically produced goods. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 11 - crop and a real depreciation of the currency, tax receipts from cocoa are expected to decline slightly relative to GDP in 1995 because of a 127 per- cent increase in producer prices at the beginning of the 1994/95 crop season. Total government spending is targeted to be reduced by 1.2 percent of GDP in 1995. The budget provides for a modest reduction in the civil service wage bill relative to GDP, and the Government will strive to ensure that the 1995 pay agreement with the trade unions is consistent with this target. Other economies have been identified in noninterest recurrent expenditure; these cuts are reflected in quarterly ministerial allocations and are expected to generate savings of some 1.3 percent of GDP. The repayment of debts owed by state enterprises will also help improve expenditure performance. lJ However, domestic interest payments are expected to continue to rise as a result of increased net sales of central bank debt, the interest on which is borne by the Government. 2J Arrears to domestic suppliers were incurred on development spending during 1992-93. An effort to quantify these arrears is proceeding, but the exercise has proven difficult in the absence of a properly functioning system of expenditure monitoring at the commitment level. In 1994 a pilot project was established in several key ministries with a view to strengthening the tracking and control of expenditure commitments and reconciling cash spending with bank statements. This system will be extended to all line ministries during the course of 1995. In the meantime, the Government will make every effort to avoid accumulating new arrears, and funds have been allocated in the budget for partial payment of outstanding amounts. Proceeds from the sale of public assets are a nonrecurrent source of fiscal revenue and represent an important part of the country's stock of wealth. 3/ As a baseline projection, the 1995 program assumes that US$73 million in proceeds will be received from the sale of public assets, although actual receipts are likely to exceed this projection by a large margin. u The program provides for any excess divestiture receipts over projections to be used for the repayment of domestic or external debt or the acquisition of foreign assets. The program's fiscal, monetary, and balance of payments targets will be adjusted appropriately, and the Government's lJ The repayment of these debts is shown as a reduction in net lending in the fiscal accounts. 2/ The sale of central bank debt is undertaken in the context of open market operations; interest payments on this debt are expected to climb from 2.1 percent of GDP in 1994 to 2.4 percent in 1995. 3J Divestiture proceeds are shown in the fiscal accounts as an "above- the-line" revenue item. 4J Dividend receipts from the companies to be divested are relatively small, and thus no major adverse revenue loss is expected as a result of the divestiture program. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12 - interest payments could be somewhat less than presently projected as a result. b. Monetary ~olicv and financial sector reforms The repayment of domestic debt by the Government will be critical in helping the Bank of Ghana in its efforts to curtail monetary growth, while ensuring that sufficient bank credit is made available to the nongovernment sector. The central bank intends to expand the scale of its open market operations in order to ensure that the targets established for its net domestic asset position are observed, and it is prepared to allow interest rates to rise in the short run, if necessary. The Bank of Ghana has already raised the rediscount rate by 6 percentage points since the beginning of this year to 39 percent. Virtually all the expansion in broad money in 1994 was attributable to the impact on the monetary base of borrowing by GNPC from the Bank of Ghana. This source of funding has now been cut off and a ceiling placed on GNPC's indebtedness to the central bank; observance of this ceiling constitutes a performance criterion under the program. Until September 1995, by which time GNPC will have ceased its oil trading operations, the company will need to borrow approxtmately US$60 million to finance the importation of oil and the repayment of existing oil credits. The program has assumed that this borrowing will be undertaken domestically, but in the event of external financing, the Bank of Ghana's net foreign and domestic asset targets will be adjusted accordingly. The public's holdings of currency relative to bank deposits rose significantly in 1994, reflecting in part the exceptionally large increase in cocoa producer prices. The program is built on the expectation of a decline in the currency/deposit ratio during 1995, as farmers' cocoa earnings find their way back into the banking system. As a consequence, reserve money expansion will need to be limited to 4 percent in 1995. The central bank is aware that it will have to monitor movements in the money multiplier very carefully in the coming months, and will tighten monetary policy if it appears that the currency/deposit ratio has fallen below the levels envisaged in the program. The first phase of the reform of Ghana's financial sector, which consisted of a restructuring of the commercial banks' nonperforming assets and a strengthening of their capital base, is now essentially complete. The second phase is under way, and it aims to promote the process of financial intermediation and to increase competition through privatization and the licensing of new banks. In this connection, the divestiture of 60 percent of the Government's share in three commercial banks is scheduled to be completed by March 1996. lJ The Government also plans to divest its I-J These are the Social Security Bank, National Investment Bank, and Ghana Commercial Bank, which is the nation's largest commercial bank. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13 - owrlership in the country's largest insurance company. The activities of the Ghana Stock Exchange (GSE), which provides a means of raising equity capital for 1.7 publicly traded companies, were boosted in 1994 with the local issue of shares from the sale of the Government's stake in Ashanti Goldfields. The CSE seeks to deepen the equity market by floating shares in newly divestled public enterprises, and recent interest has been expressed by domestic and foreign investors in participating in local bond financing. c. . Derepulation of the petroleum and cocoa sectors GWPC's serious financial problems reflect losses on oil trading operations and investments undertaken outside its oil-trading activities. These problems prompted the Government to review the issue of state involvement in the procurement, refining, and pricing of petroleum, and to develop an action plan to deregulate the sector. Once an in-depth examination of the financial operations of GNPC has been completed, which is scheduled for June 1995, the company's operations will be confined to hydrocarbon- and energy-related exploration activities. GNPC will be relieved of all other functions, and its assets sold in order to repay outstanding debts, including those to the Bank of Ghana. After September 1995, the private oil marketing companies will be permitted to purchase crude oil for processing at the Tema Oil Refinery, and they will also be allowed to import refined products when demand exceeds the viable capacity of the refinery. In preparation for its sale, the refinery will be run on a commercial basis under a private management contract. The state- owned oil marketing company, GOIL, which accounts for one third of oil distribution, will also be privatized. In principle, GNPC is authorized to set petroleum prices at the retail level, but in practice this function has been assumed by the Government. As a consequence, the price-setting process has become politicized, and the resulting price rigidity has weakened the Government's revenue performance and contributed to a squeeze on marketing margins. It is the Government's intention to fully liberalize the pricing of petroleum products by June 1996, and allow retail prices to be set by the oil companies in accordance with prevailing market conditions. The only constraint on pricing behavior will be the requirement that each company maintain a geographically uniform schedule of prices. In the meantime, to ensure a smooth transition to the new system, retail prices will be set by the oil companies, and monitored by the Government, on the basis of a formula that automatically passes through changes in oil import costs. The deregulation process will be accompanied by the adoption of a legal framework designed to safeguard fair trading practices and maintain adequate environmental, health, and safety standards. The process of deregulating cocoa marketing is well under way. Since March 1992 private traders have been permitted to compete directly with the Cocoa Board in the purchase of cocoa from farmers; during the 1994/95 crop 9 e a s OR L I they purchased some 25 percent of the crop. Furthermore, the Cocoa tioard is implementing a downsizing and cost-cutting program, which has Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14 - involved a reduction of over 40 percent in its labor force in the past two years and the sale of some of its concerns, including a cocoa processing factory. These actions have been accompanied by a significant strengthening of producer price incentives, and have contributed to a jump in the share of cocoa export revenue received by farmers to around 50 percent in 1995 from 29 percent last year. This progress notwithstanding, there remains much room for further efficiency gains in cocoa marketing. The access of private traders to local bank credit has been constrained by sectoral exposure limits, which the banks use to guide their lending behavior. I/ Moreover, the Cocoa Board continues to fix delivery prices and to enjoy a monopoly over exports of the crop. To advance the decontrol process, the Government will complete by end-September 1995 a study to review the deregulation experience in other countries and formulate the modalities and safeguards necessary to ensure success of the deregulation exercise. The Cocoa Board will be divested of its export monopoly by end-March 1996, once the next crop purchasing season is completed. The objective will be to create a "level playing field" in cocoa marketing and, depending on the outcome of the study, the Cocoa Board may be allowed to continue to participate in the purchase of the crop until the private sector becomes fully established. It will not have any powers to license private traders. The Cocoa Board will also retain its quality control function in order to ensure that Ghana's cocoa continues to command a substantial premium in the international market; this function, however, may also be undertaken in conjunction with private sector bodies. 3. Balance of oavments and external financing a. Outlook and financing reauirements for 1995-97 The strengthening of the public finances in 1994 led to a significant reduction in the external current account deficit and debt service burden. The program seeks to narrow the current account deficit (after official transfers) further, to 3.7 percent of GDP :Ln 1995 and to 2.7 percent by 1997. Export proceeds are expected to grow by about 12 percent a year in U.S. dollar terms during 1995-97. 2/ This should permit a sufficient L/ The value of the 1994/95 crop was over one half of outstanding bank credit to the private sector at the end of 1994. u Cocoa exports have risen sharply in 1995 in response to the increase in producer prices and another, albeit more modest, rise is projected for 1996. Gold production should benefit from the Government's divestiture program and considerable foreign investment in the past two years, while electricity exports are expected to rebound now that water levels in the Volta Lake have returned to normal. Total nontraditional exports are expected to grow by an average of 19 percent a year in U.S. dollar terms during 1995-97, in response to the beneficial impact of the adjustment program, increased foreign private investment, and various large donor- assisted projects. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 15 - iI;‘.:: ‘ i i:p..:rts to sustain the program's investment and growth targets, TJhile :.r:%~i allowing for an improvement in the trade balance. The balance of payments projections for 1995 assume a recovery in long- term concessional assistance under multilateral and bilateral aid programs, largely reflecting the carry-over of undisbursed commitments from 1994. However, the reduction in the current account deficit will enable Ghana to become less dependent on external assistance over the medium-term, particularly that extended on less concessional terms; total long- and medium-term inflows are expected to decline from the equivalent of 9 percent of GDP to less than 7 percent between 1995 and 1999. Similarly, multi- lateral debt, including that to the Fund, should drop from 59 percent of GDP in 1994 to 52 percent by 1999; and the debt service ratio should decline from 27 percent to 18 percent during this period. 1/ Debt service to the Fund is projected to peak at under 10 percent in 1997 and to fall rapidly thereafter. The capital account forecasts also incorporate the impact of the winding down of the divestiture program, but anticipate a strong pick-up in direct investment. It is assumed that the cocoa crop will continue to be financed by external borrowing, but that there will be no new oil credits. u At the end of 1994, the Government's external payments arrears to official and private creditors amounted to US$92 million. These arrears were incurred over several years and largely reflect technical factors rather than balance of payments difficulties. u The Government recognizes that the regularization of financial relations with its external creditors is necessary to ensure unimpeded access to new credits. Just over half of the arrears are owed to a single official creditor, and discussions on the rescheduling of this debt are expected to be completed shortly. The remainder will be cleared through cash payments, the bulk of which will be made in 1995, and the program includes an injunction against the accumulation of new external arrears. u Ghana does not need, or intend to seek, debt relief under the auspices of the Paris Club. 1/ Excluding debt to the Fund, the multilateral debt ratio is expected to remain broadly unchanged during this period at around 48 percent of GDP. u Adjustments will be made to the balance of payments and monetary targets in the event that offshore cocoa or oil financing exceeds program assumptions for 1995. 1/ Virtually all of the arrears relate to debts assumed by the Government under guarantee provisions as a result of default by the original debtors. They have been incurred while the Government has sought to reschedule the debts bilaterally. None relate to bilateral payments agreements. 4/ The priority attached to the build up of foreign reserves precludes clearing all the arrears in 1995. After taking into account the arrears that are expected to be rescheduled, cash payments will amount to US$30 million in 1995. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public.- 16 - Ghana's foreign exchange reserves are projected to rise to the equivalent of 4.5 months of imports by end-1995 and to 5.6 months by end-1997. While this represents a healthy international liquidity position, Ghana's reserves include funds from sources such as the divestiture program and short-term Cocoa Board borrowing, which, strictly speaking, should not be regarded as freely available for balance of payments financing purposes. I/ On the basis of disbursements under commitments indicated by Ghana's donors and creditors, the financing requirement during the first annual ESAF arrangement is projected to be fully covered. The balance of payments projections for 1996-97 incorporate the volume of aid disbursements that Ghana can reasonably expect to receive, although not all these funds have been committed. u On this basis, a relatively small gap is expected for 1996-97, and commitments to fill this gap, and to cover the remainder of Ghana's financing needs, will be sought in the context of a Consultative Group meeting scheduled for mid-June (Table 9). b. Lonaer-term outlook and caoacitv to repav the Fund The current account deficit is expected to continue to decline beyond the program period, to 1.9 percent of GDP by 2000. This forecast is based on the assumption that export prices rise with world inflation and that volumes grow by about 6 percent a year, which is just slightly higher than the growth rate projected for real GDP. Nontraditional exports are forecast to increase their share in total exports from 16 percent in 1994 to 23 percent by 2000. On the expectation that the Government's efforts to raise public and private savings and promote import substitution activities are successful, the volume of imports is projected to grow by a little less than real GDP during this period. The Government's stabilization program and the effort to provide an environment conducive to private initiative should provide the basis for a strong increase in foreign investment, and this impact is reflected in the projections. It has been assumed that foreign reserves will reach the equivalent of almost seven months of imports in 2000. The time paths envisaged for the current account, direct invest- ment, and foreign reserves should allow Ghana to considerably reduce its dependence on foreign aid and nonconcessional borrowing, and should permit a moderate reduction in the external debt service burden (Table 10). Ghana's external prospects nevertheless remain somewhat vulnerable to the concentration of export earnings in relatively few primary commodities and to the continuing, albeit diminishing, dependence on foreign aid. This vulnerability underscores the importance for Ghana of building up a healthy stock of foreign reserves during the program period. To ascertain the robustness of the balance of payments outlook, the staff has undertaken a series of sensitivity tests based on alternative export and aid flow u "Excess" divestiture proceeds and borrowing by the Cocoa Board constituted about 40 percent of Ghana's reserves at end-1994. 2/ .About one half of the balance of payments support anticipated for 1996-97 has not yet been formally pledged. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17 - scenarios (Table 11). These scenarios indicate that if the program targets are adhered to, Ghana's gross reserve position should be suffi- ciently strong to sustain moderate external shocks. Consequently, while the staff recognizes the inherent uncertainties in making projections so far into the future, it believes that Ghana should not encounter undue difficulties in fulfilling its debt service obligations, including those to the Fund (Table 12). IV. Program Monitoring and Technical Assistance Performance under the first annual ESAF arrangement will be monitored on the basis of the following financial performance criteria and benchmarks: (a) the net domestic assets of the Bank of Ghana, with subceilings on claims on the Cocoa Board and the GNPC; (b) net damestIc flnanclng of the government budget; (c) the net foreign assets of the Bank of Ghana; (d) new nonconcessional external borrowing of l-12 years' maturity, with a subceiling on debt of l-5 years' maturity; (e) the stock of external short-term debt; and (f) the elimination of external payments arrears, and an injunction against the incurrence of new external arrears (Table 13). Structural performance criteria and benchmarks will include the following: (a) cocoa producer price adjustments; (b) a timetable for the termination of the Cocoa Board's export monopoly; (c) a timetable for the deregulation of the pricing and marketing of petroleum products; and (d) progress in implementing the divestiture program (Table 14). Benchmarks will apply to end-June 1995 and performance criteria to end-September 1995. Indicative benchmarks have been established for end-December 1995. The second disbursement under the first annual ESAF arrangement will be conditional upon observance of the performance criteria at end-September 1995 and completion of the midterm review, which will take place no later than December 15, 1995. The review will set indicative benchmarks for end-March and end-June 1996 and pay particular attention to the progress being made in deregulating the cocoa and petroleum sectors, including the sale of GNPC assets. Delays have been experienced in the past in the furnishing of data, and the Government has undertaken to ensure that all data necessary for monitoring performance under the program will be collected and made available on a timely basis (see Appendix V). Ghana is making use of technical assistance from the World Bank, the Fund, and a number of other multilateral and bilateral agencies to help supplement its capacity to implement macroeconomic and structural reforms. Several ongoing projects provide funding for technical support, primarily in the areas of fiscal and parastatal management, financial sector development, and private sector development. With regard to budget execution, technical support is being utilized for the implementation of the VAT, expenditure management and control systems, and poverty analysis to determine effective expenditure targeting. Technical assistance has also been directed at monetary policy and foreign exchange operations. Additional technical assistance requirements have been identified in a number of areas. These Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 18 - include the implementation of the divestiture program; strengthening nonbank financial institutions, such as the stock exchange, insurance, and pension funds; implementation of public sector reforms, including contracting out of public services and the civil service restructuring program; and the promotion of investment in nontraditional exports. A number of World Bank and other donor technical assistance projects are being initiated and coordinated to cover these needs. V. Staff Aooraisal Ghana's economic reform program suffered a serious setback in 1992, when major slippages in fiscal policy emerged during the run-up to the first multiparty elections under the new constitution. Since then, the Government has made efforts to correct the slippages and bring economic performance back on track. The results have been rather mixed, however, and the macroeconomic situation remains fragile. Fiscal and external imbalances were reduced during 1993-94, thanks in part to higher cocoa prices and receipts from the sale of public assets, and Ghana's international reserve position improved significantly, despite shortfalls in external assistance. On the other hand, acute financial difficulties experienced by the national oil company (GNPC) led to a rapid expansion in the money supply in 1994, and inflationary pressures intensified as a result. Private saving and investment remained weak, and economic growth performance was uneven. The Government is intent on pushing forward with the process of reform, and has formulated an economic program for 1995-97, which seeks to establish a low inflation environment conducive to private sector initiative and foreign investment. The removal of state involvement in activities that can be better conducted by the private sector will be critical to achieving the objectives of raising per capita GDP growth to 3 percent by the end of the decade and accelerating the process of poverty alleviation. In support of its adjustment efforts, Ghana has requested financial assistance from the Fund in the form of a three-year ESAF arrangement. The staff believes that the Government's program embodies objectives and policies that represent a realistic and well-designed strategy for addressing existing macroeconomic imbalances and structural distortions, and as such it warrants the full support of the international financial community. There remain, however, several areas of program implementation where careful monitoring by the Government is called for, and where timely corrective action will have to be taken if necessary. First, labor unrest was reported earlier this year, and the industrial relations situation may deteriorate further as the trade unions attempt to recoup real earnings lost as a result of recent increases in inflation. The Government must take a strong stand in resisting excessive pay demands in the civil service, not only to maintain stri,ct fiscal discipline, but also to help contain labor costs in the parastatal and private sectors and protect Ghana's international competitiveness. Presidential and parliamentary elections are scheduled for 1996, and any repetition of the Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 19 - pay awards granted under similar circumstances in 1992 could seriously undermine the adjustment process. Receipts from the sale of public assets, which are expected to be considerable, represent a nonrecurrent source of revenue and should not be used for funding higher civil service pay, or any other expenditure overrun. The Government intends to restructure the civil service and improve pay relativities once the deliberations of a high-level committee examining the issue have been completed. The staff would urge that the forthcoming elections not be allowed to interfere with the design of the civil service restructuring program or the speed of its implementation. Second, the program has set aside budgetary funds for the repayment of arrears on capital projects that have been incurred vis-a-vis domestic and foreign suppliers. The Government should make every effort to settle these debts as quickly as possible on a nondiscriminatory basis. In this connection, the staff welcomes the progress that has been made in installing machinery for the tracking and control of government expenditure on a commitment basis. High priority should be attached to the completion of this exercise for all ministries in 1995. With regard to fiscal revenue, the staff would urge the Government to move forward with its intention of reducing dependence on cocoa export taxes as quickly as possible. Third, at the time of the 1994 Article IV consultation, Executive Directors called upon the Government to decontrol petroleum prices. This action now constitutes an important element of the plan to deregulate the petroleum sector, the political consensus for which has been galvanized by the gravity of the GNPC's financial difficulties. The success of the deregulation program will depend on its being implemented expeditiously. The transfer of the GNPC's oil trading functions to the private sector and the liquidation of its assets will be key mileposts in this regard. The process of deregulation has been designed to dovetail with the divestiture program, progress under which will be critical in establishing the environ- ment needed for private sector initiative to flourish. Finally, the central bank will need to pay close attention to movements in the money multiplier, which has been subject to relatively large swings in recent months. The central bank should be prepared to tighten monetary policy in the event that the multiplier exceeds the levels presently envisaged in the program. During the early stages of the program at least, the exchange rate will continue to be directed at achieving the overall balance of payments targets, while monetary policy will be assigned the task of bringing inflation under control. This policy configuration should allow the program's stabilization objectives to be met, as well as enable Ghana to establish a comfortable cushion of foreign reserves and maintain its external competitiveness. Once substantive and demonstratable progress has been made in stabillzing prices and building up reserves, the Government will consider as a possible option use of the exchange rate as a nominal anchor to keep inflation down. The staff supports this strategy, but would Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 20 - emphasize that it is the strength and credibility of financial policies that will be critical in determining the success of the stabilization program, irrespective of whether money or the exchange rate is adopted as the anchor for the price level. While the successful completion of the program supported by an ESAF arrangement in March 1992 should have placed Ghana in a potentially strong position to continue to attract concessional aid and non-debt-creating inflows, slippages in policy implementation have led to growing resistance on the part of donors to extend the necessary financing. The new ESAF arrangement seeks to strengthen Ghana's external position as a basis for achieving enhanced and sustainable growth. In doing so, it should boost donor and creditor confidence in Ghana's economic program, and help catalyze the concessional aid and direct investment needed to cover Ghana's external financing requirements for 1995-97. These considerations, together with Ghana's present level of indebtedness to the Fund and past use of ESAF funds, is reflected in the level of access to Fund resources being sought under the arrangement. The access level is also intended to send a clear signal to the international financial community that renewed Fund assistance does not indicate a major relapse in economic performance, and that Ghana is resuming with determination its efforts to maintain the momentum of economic reform. On the basis of financial commitments already made, the staff considers that there is sufficient assurance that Ghana's financing needs during the first annual ESAF arrangement will be covered. Resource requirements for the remainder of the arrangement will be met at the forthcoming Consultative Group meeting. The staff would urge that the remaining external payments arrears be cleared on a timely basis. Ghana's long-term balance of payments prospects depend on the success of policies to promote export growth and diversification and to mobilize the savings and investment needed to reduce the dependence on aid, including that extended by multilateral institutions. Sensitivity tests based upon various export and aid flow scenarios indicate that the external position is relatively robust, although risks do remain. Overall, the staff does not expect Ghana to experience any major difficulties in meeting its debt service obligations, including those to the Fund. It is recommended that Ghana remain on the standard 12-month consultation cycle. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 21 - VI. JVoDosed Decision The following draft decision is proposed for adoption by the Executive Board: Ghana: Enhanced Structural Adjustment Pacilitv - Three-Year and First Annual Arrangements 1. The Government of Ghana has requested 8 three-year arrangement under the enhanced structural adjustment facility, and the first annual arrangement thereunder. 2. The Fund notes the policy framework paper for Ghan8 (EBD/95/63). 3. The Fund approves the arrangements set forth in EBS/95/76. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Publici ‘. ‘. . . I . ..~ ‘. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 23 - CHART2 GHANA EXCHANGE RATE DEVELOPMENTS AND DEBT SERVICE PAYMENTS 5.0 EFFECTIVE EXCHANGE RATES (Log scale based on 1984=100) -. . . _. . . ., *. ..__I..> ._,.‘..... -.___-. .-. -.____...* ,** .--._..___.-... *. 2.5 - Nominal effective exchange rate *.__-\ --. .._.‘\** .._* ._ .* ‘e.-‘-. --. -. 2.o--~~~~~~~~~~~~.~~~~~~~~~~~~~-~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~.,~~~~~~~~~~~,1~~- 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1 . . 5.0 4.5 4.0 3.5 3.0 2.5 2.0 80 - DEBT SERVICE PAYMENTS l/ (In percent of export earnings) 70 - 60 - 50 - 40 - 30 - 20 - including obligations to the IMF Excluding obligations to the IMF 10 I 1 , I I 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 / Sourcss: Data providsd by ths Chanaian authoritia; and staff sstimatsa. l/ Based on annual average data. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 1. Ghana: Use of Fund Credit, March 1995-December 1997 Total transactions (net) . . -4.59 -2.08 -7.30 -2.08 Purchases/disbursements . . . Tranche policies . . CCFF . . . SAF . . . ESAF * . . Repurchases/repayments . . . Trenche policies . . CCFF . . . SAF . . . ESAF . . . Total Fund credit outstanding (end of period) 477.62 473.03 470.95 463.65 461.57 Under trenche policies 39.07 34.38 32.30 28.90 26.82 Under CCFF 47.00 47.00 47.00 47.00 47.00 Under SAF 117.59 105.32 105.32 91.01 91.01 Under ESAF 273.16 286.33 286.33 296.75 296.75 Total Fund credit outstanding (end of period) 174.3 172.6 171.9 169.2 168.5 Under trancha policies 14.6 12.5 11.8 10.5 9.8 Under CCFF 17.2 17.2 17.2 17.2 17.2 Under SAF 42.9 38.4 38.4 33.2 33.2 Under ESAF 99.7 104.5 104.5 108.3 108.3 i995 i996 1997 Outstanding Apr.- July- Oct.- Jan.- Apr.- July- Oct.- Jan.- Apr.- July-- Oct. Mar. 31. 1995 June Sept. Dec. Mar. June Sept. Dec. Mar, June Sept. Dec. 27.40 -- -- 27.40 -- -- -- -- -- 27.40 -- -- -- -- -- 27.40 -- 31.99 2.08 34.70 2.08 5.49 2.08 3.40 2.08 -- -- -- -- 12.27 -- 14.32 -- 14.23 -- 16.99 -- (In million of SDRs) -7.30 -a.93 27.40 -- -- -- -- -- -- 27.40 _- 34.70 a.93 3.40 2.08 -- 14.32 -- 16.99 6.85 454.27 445.35 23.42 21.34 47.00 47.00 76.69 76.69 307.16 300.32 -13.18 -14.81 -17.98 -14.81 -17.98 27.40 -- 27.40 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- _- -_ -- -- 27.40 -- 27.40 -- 27.40 -- -- -- 27.40 40.58 14.81 45.38 14.81 45.38 3.40 2.08 3.40 2.08 3.40 5.88 5.88 5.88 5.88 5.88 14.32 -- 14.32 -- 14.32 16.99 6.85 21.79 6.85 21.79 432.16 417.35 399.37 384.56 366.58 17.94 15.85 12.45 10.37 6.96 41.12 35.24 29.36 23.48 17.60 62.38 62.38 48.06 48.06 33.74 310.73 303.89 309.50 302.65 308.27 (In percent of suota) 165.8 162.5 157.7 a.5 7.8 6.5 17.2 17.2 15.0 28.0 28.0 22.8 112.1 109.6 113.4 152.3 145.8 140.4 133.8 5.8 4.5 3.8 2.5 12.9 10.7 8.6 6.4 22.8 17.5 17.5 12.3 110.9 113.0 110.5 112.5 Sources : Data provided by the Ghanaian authorities; and staff estimates and projections. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 25 - Tab10 2. Ghana : Perfonaanco Relative to Progrua B.nchmarke Under Staff-Monitored Program, 1994 1993 1994 1994 k I&& Jun. Seutember December Act. Act. Prog. Act. Pro&. Act. Pro&. Act. (In billions of cedis: end of period) @aantitative benchmarks Net domestic aa8.t.s of the Bank of Ghana &/ 2/ Unadjusted Adjusted 316.3 348.6 279.7 2si:e 193.8 100.5 . . . . . . 267.5 112.0 25i:j -153.3 29i:i Gross financing of the Cocoa Board by the Bank of Ghana 8.2 0.1 -- 0.1 -- 0.1 -- 0.2 Net domestic financing of the government bud&et u Unadjusted . . . 28.1 -75.3 -89.9 . . . -129.3 Adjusted . . . . . . -131.3 -39:i -224.6 -50.3 -273.3 -29:i) (In millions of U.S. dollars: end of period) Net foreign assets of th. Bank of Ghana 2/ i/ Unadjusted Adjusted -377.8 -468.8 -389.0 . . . -302.0 -197.8 . . . . . . -375.8 -335.0 -219.1 -26i:i 43.7 -2ii:i) New nonconcassional external loana contracted or 8uarante.d by the Govonnaent or tha Bank of Ghana (cumulativ. on a calendar-year basis) I/ 1. l-12 years' maturity 2. l-5 years' maturity Short-term oxtarnal debt outrtanding contracted or guaranteed by tha Government or the Bank of Ghana (with an initial maturity of loss than one year) a/ 98.2 73.4 65.0 71.6 65.0 113.2 45.0 117.6 ...... 85.0 14.2 85.0 18.0 85.0 34.9 ...... 60.0 3.8 60.0 3.0 60.0 7.6 External paymonta arr.ars of the Gov.rnm.nt I/ -- -- -- . . . . . . . . . . . . 92.1 Structural benchmarks Tarret dat. Status 1. Adjuatmant of th. cocoa producer pric. for th. 1994/95 End-June 1994 Don. crop y.ar consiatont with world market trends, &ovarnm.nt budgetary roquiranonta, and the n..d to atr.ngth.n farmor inCOntiVeS. 2. Comp1.t. the r.vi.w of l ubvontod yenciaa to identify End-Jun. 1994 Reviaw thoa. to b. disaolvod and thoao to be incorporated completed into the civil service and to identify q oaaures to increase their revenue-earninS capacity. 3. Compilation of inventory of paymbnt arrears to End-June 1994 Dona domestic contractors, broken down by yaar incurrod and by ministry and work out a achodulo for liquidation of arr.ara. 4. Selection of consulting firm to implamont th. End-Septuebor 1994 Consulting first phas. of the privatization of stat.-ownod firm banks and preparation of report by th. firm on aalocted proSr.sa in identifying potential buyara. &/ Ravisod definition, .xcludinS L 216.2 billion of th. Bank of Ghana (BOG) revaluation loaae~ taken over by the Government as of Docambor 1993, which is inc1ud.d in the BOG r.valuation account. Th. n.t domestic assets of the BOG are defined as r.a.rve mon.y plus the SDR allocation account minus not foreign assets minus the revaluation account. 2/ The b.nclaaarka on not dm.atic financing of the bud&et and th. net daaoatic assets of th. Bank of Ghana will be reduc.d, and the ban&mark on not foroiSn aaaeta of tha BOG increased, by tha maount of foreign exchange proceeds from the div.atiture program in exc.as of USSllO million, which wer. not used for the purchase of foreign investments by the Government or tha prepayment of nonconceaaional axtamal debt. Any local currency proceeds from the sale of public assets were to be uaod to reduce net danaatic financing of the budget. Tha benchmarks on net domestic financing war. to ba 1ow.r.d. and thos. on net foraiSn aaa.ta raiaad, by th. amount of any new net fordgn borrowins by the Cocoa Board. a/ D.fin.d to includa net domestic financing by tha banking system, and net sales public; cumulative from January 1, 1994. A/ R.via.d classification of the not for.iSn aaa.t8 of th. BCG. S/ Cumulativ. from January 1, 1994. Includoa borrowin&. by th. BOG froan official 6/ Excluding import-related croditr and borrowin by the Cocoa Board which is not including oil credita tak.n ov.r by th. BOG from th. GNPC. z/ Reliable information ir not available r.g.ardinS the timing of the accumulation 1994. of government debt to the nonbank oxport credit agencies. government Suaranteed, but of the arrears reported at end- Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 26 - Table 3. Ghana: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 1989-97 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 Fro8t9;; Est. 1995 ro3~~6 ,s1997 National incaa. and prices Real GDP Real GDP er capita Nominal GEP (in billions of cedisl Nominal GDP GDP deflator Consumer price index (annual avers Consumer price index (end of perio External sector Exports, f.o.b. Imports, f.o.b. Ilxuort volume !:mport volume Terms of trade Rominal effective exchange rate &/ Real effective exchanS. rata g/ Cedis per U.S. dollar 2/ Government budget 3/ Ilevenua and granEa other expenditure A/ 4-X -11:5 -5.9 270.0 39.5 :3-t 4218 Money and credit 5/ Bet domestic aaijeta 6/ 71 Credit to the Gove-&a&it 6/ 7/ --'?3 ' Credit to the rest of the-ec-momy a/ 8/ Broad aamey 2%:: 'Velocity Velocity (GDP/end-of-period broad money) Reserve money Investment and savings Gross investment Gross national savings Government bud8.t 3/ Sur lus or deficTt t-1 A3juat.d 10,' Excludin aiveatiture s Re;;nzis grants receipts divestiture receipts Total .xp.hditur. External sector Currant account balance ll/ External debt outatandinr Debt service -1.8 55.4 9.8 External debt service Including the Fund Excluding the Fund 58.1 32.5 Current account balance 1 / G Cverall,balance of paymen a . . . . _^. 3:: (Annual nercentaae chanae. unless otherwise anecifiedl 3.3 0.7 “4X30 38:8 2: 10.9 ‘E -;-g -10:5 -0.1 326.3 ‘kf 13:s 11.9 -0.1 -2: 36710 3:: ::: Ii.3 -lo:6 437.1 1x 21:7 17.1 I:$.; -13:2 640.9 24.6 46.1 -6.2 97.7 5: 13:s E-9 3317 :?f 56:3 4E 29:6 64.7 %3 52:9 -23.6 82.48 16014 -t-f 11:2 27.4 2 12:; XE (In percent of GDP) ‘1::: 0.2 . . . l&I h’ -3.5 ‘kt i’1:: -4::: t . . . -- 1.5 . . . lf .z. co:2, 13.7 -4.8 -2.5 . . . -i:i 18.3 ;.; . . . 22 (0:2) 22.3 -1:2 2415 -2”$ (2.2) (2.11 17.0 (5.0) 20.8 21.5 22.3 -3.6 -5.5 -9.2 -6.3 -4.9 ‘::: “i:X 76.8 7.1 9$.$ . ‘82 (In uercent of eXporta of nooda and services) 28.9 25.1 35.7 27.8 18.8 17.4 29.1 21.1 1704 . :8:: (In millions of U.S. dollars) 3: 8’ -124.3 -376.2 -‘;f.$ . -Z;.; 421:s -264.9 ‘*’ -46’;,; -207.9 134.0 -E . : . . . . . . . . . 163.8 .:. . . . .:. -- -- -- -- 92.1 9.0 -- -- CX 2 ‘g; 21:3 5i$“i 2419 15.0 34.2 tie; -;*; 10:8 . . . . . . . . . 15.3 -Et ;::; -1717 X 55.0 75.4 32:: :01-i 33.6 3617 2-f 1414 2::30 :2 -38:0 -g*; 26:5 46.2 -10.2 7%; 4617 . . . . . . 5.0 1.9 “gt; 28:0 19.5 S:‘: :2 0:8 . . . . . . . . . 17.6 23.0 “k3 -3.5 -5.4 E 13:7 f.5’ -32:2 . . . . . . 1.2 -b:i 22.2 (1.3) 21.1 -3.7 88.5 7.1 5.5 2.4 “iP’3 !:a 12.4 8:: 29’ . . . . . . . . . f:! i:; . . . . . . . . . 11.3 1.0.2 1.:: 0 10.7 f-i 16:7 . . . . . . , . . . . . :3:: 17.‘5 14.8 1.2 . . . .2K to:51 19.9 1.5 . . . 2E co:21 19.3 -3.4 “S:$ 2.: 712 25.5 25.7 17.6 15.9 aajustea 21 External payments arrears (end of period) 13/ Gross intbmationa~rbaa-vea (and of period) . . . 17.3 _ (equivalent months of imports, c.i.f.1 "'53 ""5:: 'Yf ""Z 42i:: '"f:j 592.9 “i-f 4.1 . “73,; 1,oog Sources: Data provided by the Ghanaian authorities; and staff eatimatea and projections. l/ Program monitored infonaally by staff. 21 Annual average data. T/ Excluding project-related &rants ?/ Includin and capital outlays financed throu h net lending and s eciai efficiency outlays, external pro 2 ect aid. which ere 9 on-the 1992 en -of-aervica bonefi Ill e sch. uled to drop s arply by 1996 as the liabilities a expire. 5/ With effect from 1992, the monrtary data include the accounts of the two new merchant banks. i/ In percant of broad money at the bbginning of the period. thii Bank of 7/ The lar .m;n;zL;a in net domestic assets in 1990 reflects the takeover by the Government of the revaluation losses of & 8/ Including financing of the Cocoa Board's marketing operations, ?/ Excludes the revaluation account. but excluding other items (net). In lU/ ercent of r.aerve money at the beginning of the period. Pro ram tar eta for TI/ Inc udine; o ficial It s 1994 war. adjust& e for axceaa divestiture receipts. P f ranta. n/ TarBets adjustable or excess divestiture receipts and extarnal borrowing by the Cocoa Board. n/ Reliable information is not available rSgSrdin6 when the arrears reported at end-1994 were incurred. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 27 - Tabk 4. Ghana: Central Gwcmment Budgetary Operatioru and Financing. 1992-97 (In billtim ofcedis) 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 Act. AC!. Program u Estimate Program Projected Tax revcnuc 302 509 Taxes on income 62 110 Taxes on domer tic gmL 129 223 Of which: petroleum (70) (152) Taxes on intcmational trade 111 176 Imporb 91 140 Exporb (-) Y 20 36 878 141 (E) 429 298 131 Nontax rcvtnue 32 148 185 Income and fees 26 63 80 Divestiture rcceiptr and NPART transfers 6 86 105 Total revenue 334 658 1.063 Gra”b 33 67 60 Total revenue and grants 366 724 1.123 Excluding divestiture receipts 366 630 1.018 Expenditure Recurrent expenditure 373 643 842 Noninterest 312 509 628 Personal emolumentr 171 228 275 Other goods and rervktr 69 141 144 Subridiel and transfera &/ 72 140 209 Interts1 61 135 214 Dome& 35 94 150 Extcrlml 26 40 64 Capital expenditure Development Net lending 110 98 12 185 182 3 Special effkiency y Of which: end-of-ntti benefits Total expenditure and net lending (ii) 511 127 119 8 (2) a22 (ii) 1.080 Surplus or deficit (-1 Adjusted for excess divestiture receipts Excluding divestiture receiptr -144 . -144 43 187 -62 Financing Total tinancing (net) Foreign (net) Borrowing AlKRthtiO” Domestic (mt) Banking system Nonbanks 144 -- 43 -43 1u 102 42 &3 -114 -n 06 -05 -25 194 30 143 -108 -115 -167 - 129 -29 -53 -37 -34 -53 -92 6 -- Broad cowrage $/ Total revenue and grants Total expenditure and net lending OveraIl surplus or deficit (-) GDP at curmnt market pricer 425 668 -243 3.009 -97 . . -183 5 52 118 -66 45 -22 68 822 1,108 -286 3.949 1.259 1,399 1,609 1.507 1,574 1.841 -248 -17s -232 5,030 5,186 6,720 841 1,119 170 230 (G (2) 362 489 215 335 146 154 390 245 128 161 262 a4 1.231 1,361 39 129 1,271 1.494 I.(@9 1.409 913 1.164 683 838 297 371 154 176 232 291 230 326 166 242 64 84 179 202 171 21s 8 -12 (:I (Z) 1,157 1,416 . . . 77 114 . . . -148 -7 1.~ 2% (Z) 597 417 180 1,518 273 558 (336) 686 465 201 218 179 39 215 201 13 1,558 1,732 104 108 1.662 1.W 1.624 1,827 1,266 1,355 960 1,068 426 466 206 233 329 370 306 287 213 166 92 121 280 327 272 318 8 9 (2) (-‘-) 1.568 1.707 9s 133 . . . . . . 56 119 -95 -133 -9 -17 150 138 -160 -154 -85 -116 -85 -116 -- -- 1.768 1,951 2.017 2.179 -249 -220 7,882 8.851 Sources: Data provided by the Ghanaianauthoritier; and ataffestimaterand projections. lJ Staff-monitored program (June 1994). 5/ Eduder capital expenditure financed thmu& exr~mal project aid and mrrespondhg ganb and loans. 3J To maintain comparability with data for other yean. the 1994 program target has been adjusted by c 13 billon to reflect revenue previously netted out agairut Cocoa Beard retrenchment cuts. 4J Includes rale of public aweb of c 15 billion for which payment had not been received by end-1994. 9 ProviriDn for redeployment, retraining, and relocation of public sector tmploytt~. To maintain comparability with data for oIhtr ytan. the 1994 program target haa been adjusted by 4 13 billion to reflect tpcnding on rctrcnchment at Cocoa Board previously netted OUI agailvt the tax on cocoa exporb. 4, Includes capital expenditure financed through external project granb and loam. These data arc cubject to a certain degret of estimation trror. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 28 - Table 5. Ghana: Indicators of Central Government Budgetary Operations and Financing, 1992-97 (In Dercent of GDP) :L/ 1992 g&3 1994 1995 1996 1997 Act. Act. E-ogra m L/ Estimate Program Projected Narrow coverage y Revenue Tax revenue Tans on income Taxer on domer tic go& Of which pctrolcum Taxci on intcmational trade Imports Ewrb (-)4J 10.0 2.1 (2) 3.7 3.0 0.7 12.9 17.5 2.8 2.8 5.6 6.1 (3.8) (4.3) 4.5 a.5 3.6 5.9 0.9 2.6 Nontax revenue 1.1 3.8 3.7 Income and fees 0.9 1.6 1.6 Divestiture receipb and NPART transfers 0.2 2.2 2.1 Total revenue 11.1 16.7 21.1 Granb 1.1 1.7 1.2 Total revenue and granb 12.2 18.3 22.3 Excluding divestiture receipb 12.2 16.2 20.2 16.2 16.7 3.3 3.4 (Z) (:::) 7.0 7.3 4.2 5.0 2.8 2.3 7.5 3.6 2.5 2.4 5.0 1.3 23.7 20.3 0.8 1.9 24.5 22.2 19.5 21.0 Emcnditurc Recurrent expenditure 12.4 16.3 16.7 Noninterest 10.4 12.9 12.5 Penonal emoIumcnb 5.7 x.3 5.5 Other good8 and acrvices 2.3 3.6 2.9 Subsidies and tramfen 3 2.4 3.5 4.2 Interest 2.0 3.4 4.3 Domestic 1.2 2.4 3.0 Exwrnal 0.9 1.0 1.3 Capital expenditure 3.7 3.2 3.7 Development 3.3 3.0 3.6 Net lending 0.4 0.2 0.1 Special cffkiency q Of which: end-of-scn’ix bcnefib Total erpnditure and net lending 0.9 1.3 1.0 (0.7) (0.8) (0.6) 17.0 20.8 21.5 17.6 17.3 13.2 12.5 5.7 5.5 3.0 2.6 4.5 4.3 4.4 4.8 3.2 3.6 1.2 1.3 3.5 3.0 3.3 3.2 0.2 -0.2 (K) 0.7 v-J.9 &r~lru or deficit ( - ) Adjuted for excess divestiture rcceipb Excluding divertiturc receipb -4.8 -2.5 . . . . . . -4.8 -4.6 0.9 3.7 -1.2 22.3 21.1 . . . 1.2 2.2 . . . -2.9 -0.1 Financing Total financing (net) Q &J -0.9 -2.2 -l.z Foreign (net) -- 1.3 1.7 -1.6 -0.4 Borrowing 1.4 3.0 3.9 0.6 2.1 Amortisation -1.4 -1.7 -2.1 -2.2 -2.5 Domestic (net) 4.8 1.1 -2.6 -0.6 -0.8 Banking system 3.4 -0.6 -0.7 -0.7 -0.8 Nonbati 1.4 1.7 -1.8 0.1 -- Broad coverage 3 Total rcvcnuc and granb Total txpcnditure and net lending Overall surpllv or deficit (-) 14.1 20.8 25.0 27.0 23.9 22.2 28.1 30.0 30.4 21.4 -8.1 -1.2 - 4.9 -3.4 -3.5 17.0 17.1 3.3 3.1 6.2 6.3 (3.8) (3.8) 7.6 7.0 5.3 5.5 2.3 2.3 2.0 2.4 2.3 2.3 0.5 0.2 19.8 19.6 1.3 1.2 21.1 20.8 20.6 20.6 16.1 15.3 12.2 12.1 5.4 5.3 2.6 2.6 4.2 4.2 3.9 3.2 2.7 1.9 1.2 1.4 3.6 3.1 3.5 3.6 0.1 0.1 (2) 19.9 1.2 . 0.7 0.3 (--I 19.3 1.5 . 1.3 -1.2 -1.5 -0.1 -0.2 1.9 1.6 -2.0 -1.7 -1.1 -1.3 -1.1 -1.3 -- -- 22.4 22.0 25.6 24.6 -3.2 -2.6 Sources: Data provided by the Ghanaian authorities; and staff estimates and projections. y Totals may differ from the rum of components due to rounding. y Staff-monitored program (June 1994). ?/ Excluder capital expenditure financed through external project aid and correrponding granb and loana. g To maintain comparabilitywith data for other yean. the 1994 program target has been adjusted bye 13 billion to reflect revenue previously netted out against Cocoa Board retrenchment cocb. y Include: tale of public arstb of 4 cedis 15 bilEon for which payment had not heen received by end-1994. 9 ProvisOn for redeployment, retraining, and relocation of public sector employees. To maintain comparability with data for other years, the 1994 program target haa been adjusted by e 13 bilk to reflect rpnding on retrenchment at Cocoa Board prctiously netted out against the tax on cocoa cxporb. z/ IncluJes capital expenditure financed through external project granb and loans. These data are subject to a certain degree of estimation error. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTabls 6. Ghana: nowtuy surv*y, 1991-95 u 1991 1992 1993 1994 h JlJn* DWZWlb*&- r&E!l Jun. SePt. Dee, Proa. Act. Pro&. Act. Est. Prog. (b bill Bf& Not foreign asrots -30.4 -109.2 -112.5 -167.7 -139.5 25.0 35.1 16.5 -11.2 38.3 204.2 Bank of Ghana ?/ -106.4 -210.8 -237.4 -313.6 -308.5 -120.9 -154.4 -173.0 -200.7 -151.2 14.6 C-rcial and dwelopmont banks 68.0 101.7 124.9 145.9 169.0 145.9 172.3 189.5 189.5 189.5 189.5 361.5 581.4 595.1 531.4 547.5 372.0 611.0 654.0 666.0 616.5 577.4 34.0 253.9 267.6 203.9 220.0 45.3 283.5 327.3 338.5 289.0 249.9 Not cradit to the Govwment a/ Including rovaluatim lomom RrcludizzS revaluation losses 253.7 -73.0 Cocoa financing 35.4 356.2 334.0 28.7 6.0 55.2 29.3 163.0 247.0 6.9 -15.2 58.3 190.1 519.3 661.6 360.7 461.4 158.7 200.2 11.1 11.1 323.0 206.4 -3.7 -41.1 -- 6.9 269.0 351.0 -61.4 -96.9 308.1 660.6 ::x . . . 403:1 . . . 220.8 11.1 11.1 297.0 299.5 331.7 -30.5 -28.0 4.2 6.2 Credit to the rmst of thm l conaoy 296.3 443.6 Cttbr items, nst I/ 119.1 -46.7 -295.5 -140.0 246.0 -80.7 9.6 599.8 -270.7 R.v&mtion l CCount 3J y 1/ Broad momy tM2) WV Qu~8imonoy Count.rput to SDR allocation g 27.6 339.6 235.7 103.9 308.1 332.3 694.7 967.4 . . . 693.6 . . . 273.8 344.0 279.4 16.5 -48.1 3.4 -- 567.4 590.6 -240.8 -253.4 332.3 332.3 976.0 976.0 . . . . . . . . . . . . 11.1 11.1 332.3 1.102.8 . . . . . . 11.1 11.1 11.1 3.4 514.6 -194.9 332.3 992.5 . . . . . . 11.1 11.1 I s: Money Ilultiplior (M2/rosuvo umoy) 2.60 2.11 2.57 2.51 2.54 2.51 2.10 2.31 2.34 2.31 2.29 Annual percontyo chuyos in: Broad monv (M2) Cocoa financing Credit to t.h* rest of l conamlr A/ 19.9 52.9 27.4 21.6 31.1 5.0 46.2 50.2 37.1 24.3 14.0 19.3 56.0 -46.9 -100.0 -89.6 155.8 -72.9 -51.5 -50.6 -100.0 20.4 53.0 36.9 51.5 35.0 76.1 20.0 79.6 64.3 61.7 46.4 35.2 Contribution to the growth of M2: Not foreign ascots Nat d-stic assets. includirq revaluation losama z/ Net credit to thg Govw-zmont, l xcludin.9 revaluation losaaa J/ Cocoa financing Credit to the rut of wmaamy I/ Rwhmtion account y z/ u 14.9 -20.8 -0.6 7.5 12.7 20.8 22.3 31.6 -15.4 -12.4 -33.6 2.4 6.9 -4.0 -10.9 -5.6 -5.2 -3.7 -12.2 -10.9 f-1 -3.2 -0.5 12.8 27.9 29.5 30.8 17:s 29.7 30.5 21.5 11.8 18.0 14.7 0.2 64.7 2.6 16.7 7.9 17.5 -3.5 -17.9 30.2 -4.3 2.0 5.8 -5.0 14.6 12.9 16.2 4.9 9.0 25.4 8.1 1.4 -0.5 -0.0 30.4 23.8 2.4 1.7 -5.4 160:: -- C&a wrcent. unlosa indicated 0-j I Source : Data provided by thm Ghanaian authorities; and staff l stimatea and projections. L/ Based on the rovisod classification of thm net foreign assat* of tha Bank of Ghana and th* Ghma C-rcial Bank since January 1989, and including tha accounta of tha discount howas. With *ifact from the D*cdar 1991 rwirod ban*, the monetary data include the wcount.8 of two now wrchant b&n. 2/ Program tug&a for thg not LoroiSn aassts of the Bank of Ghana and its rwaluation account l tcludo valuation l ffacte of wchang rata changoa. 3/ Tha Govwtmwnt l ssuood responsibility for thm revaluation loss~. of thm Bank of Ghana accrmulatod through the first nine months of 1991 in Dacanbar 1991 (revised baa.). Data for 1993 and 1994 axe adjusted to include g 216.2 billion of Bank of Ghana revaluation loss08 taken ovar by the Gavmrunont in Decanbar 1993 in the revaluation account. i/ BoginninS with the Dacmbor 1991 revised beam, nonperforming bank loans .snounting to P 32.4 billion, which have haon raplaced by Bank of Ghana bonds, arm excluded from credit to the rwt of the economy and are reflsctod in other itana (not). 5/ Data from Decder 1993 onward are adjusted to include in the rwaluation account the changes in the bslanco shoot valuation of the SDR allocation. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 7. Ghana : Suasssry Accounts of the Moneta-ry Authorities, 1991-95 A/ (In billions of cedis: end of ueriod) 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 Jun. December I&& June Se&. Dec. Prog. Act. Prog. Act. Est. Progrms Net foreign assets 2/ -106.4 -210.8 -237.4 -313.6 -308.5 -120.9 -154.4 -173.0 -200.7 -151.2 14.6 Net domestic assets 220.4 409.5 316.3 279.7 284.8 100.5 294.5 282.1 297.4 253.2 146.0 Net credit to the Government 3/ Gross Cocoa Board financing Credit to the nongoverrseent sector 3/ Net issue of Bank of Ghana instruments 270.5 370.4 397.2 375.6 329.0 348.0 368.4 400.6 14.4 -- 8.2 -- 0.1 -- 0.2 -- 5.9 3.8 36.6 5.0 83.1 5.0 140.6 152.2 413.0 340.3 -- -- 152.2 152.2 Other items (net) -101.9 -148.1 31.5 175.4 -334.5 208.8 -302.9 -375.3 -455.4 -479.5 -527.5 -524.6 -504.1 202.1 247.0 202.1 256.8 256.8 256.8 256.8 315.7 -- 152.2 I -578.7 E 256.8 , Revaluation account 2/ 5/ 27.6 58.3 190.1 308.1 308.1 332.3 332.3 332.3 332.3 332.3 Reserve money 130.5 11.1 245.8 257.9 263.1 SDR allocation 11.1 11.1 11.1 315.0 280.2 11.1 276.5 461.3 430.3 417.8 423.2 481.8 11.1 11.1 11.1 11.1 11.1 11.1 Sources : Data provided by the Ghanaian authorities; and staff estimates and projections. A/ Based on the revised classification of the net foreign assets of the Bank of Ghana since January 1989. 2/ Program data for 1994 and 1995 exclude valuation effects of exchange rata changes. 3/ Includes the stock of revaluation losses of the Bank of Ghana of g 327.5 billion assumed by the Government as of December 1991, but excludes g 2 lion assumed by Government as of December 1993. These losses give rise to no direct monetary impact. A/ Mostly credits outstanding to Ghana National Petroleum Corporation (GNPC). ,16.2 bi l- ?/ Includes 2 216.2 billion of exchange losses assumed by Government as of December 1993, and corrected for changes due to the revaluation of SDR allocations as of December 1993. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 31 - Iable 8. Ghana: Balance of Payments, 1992-2001 (~millionr of U.S. dollg& 1992 1993 1994 2995 1996 1997 J998 1999 2000 ZOOL Prog . Emt. Progrm Projections Exports, f.o.b. 986.3 1063.6 1,190.) 1.226.8 1.396.8 1,570.l 1.708.3 1.858.7 2.015.1 2.188.3 2.375.6 Cocoa beans and cocoa products 302.5 285.9 333.9 320.2 399.6 453.8 474.3 496.3 519.8 544.5 570.3 Gold 343.4 434.0 481.4 548.6 600.1 646.5 695.8 741.9 798.3 858.9 924.1 Ti&er and timber produote 113.9 147.4 162.2 165.4 175.5 194.8 213.9 233.7 255.7 279.3 300.0 Other 226.6 196.3 213.0 192.6 221.7 275.1 324.3 386.7 441.3 505.6 581.1 Imports, f.o.b. -1,456.5 -1.728.0 -1.611.) -1.519.9 -1.755.9 -1.864 7 -1.985.3 -2.116.3 -2.264.3 -2.433.7 -2.619.6 Ron-oil Oil Trade baleme -1299.0 -157.5 -1574.4 :1474.9 -1.408.8 -i;555.2 -1;652.8 -1;761.5 -1;877.3 -2,008.7 -2I159.4 -2,325.7 -153.6 -664.3 -136.5 -200.8 -223.8 -239.0 -256.0 -274.3 -293.9 -470.2 -421.8 -171.1 -353.1 -359.1 -211.8 -294.6 -277.0 -257.6 -249.8 -245.5 -244.0 sa-vic.m (not) -376.3 -412.1 -410.9 -383.5 -392.2 -412.0 -424.1 -438.7 -433.4 -461.9 -469.5 Of which: interest peymmta -102.2 -1lO.S -113.8 -108.7 -113.7 -129.3 -133.0 -137.4 -142.6 -147.8 -150.3 Private tramfern (not) 254.9 261.2 270.8 271.0 28S.O 317.9 335.5 344.8 362.S 381.3 401.1 Current account balance, excluding official tranrfara -591.6 -815.2 -561.1 -465.6 -466.3 -388.7 -365.6 -351.6 -340.6 -326.0 -312.4 Offfcial transiers (net) Current account balance, including official trmefmrs 215.3 256.2 233.1 208.8 249.8 180.8 182.8 184.0 165.6 165.6 165.6 -376.2 -559.0 -328.1 -264.9 -216.5 -207.9 -182.8 -167.6 -175.0 -160.4 -146.8 Capital account Official capital (not) Long-tons loans Inflows Amortiration Mediclm-tom loans Inflows amortisation rruat Fund Private capital Direct investment Divestitur. Other (suppliers' credit, etc.1 Short-tens capital Net errors and omissions 274.1 630.1 508.1 478.8 382.3 391.9 386.4 433.2 464.3 353.6 349.4 386.5 370.2 498.1 295.3 328.6 327.1 323.8 3S0.2 353.8 237.5 227.5 311.6 462.8 515.9 312.1 380.3 342.0 326.1 333.5 337.5 267.S 257.5 350.6 508.7 572.2 369.4 443.5 427.4 416.3 436.0 450.0 385.0 375.0 -39.0 -45.9 -56.3 -57.3 -63.2 -85.4 -90.2 -102.5 -112.5 -117.5 -117.5 74.9 -92.6 -17.8 -16.8 -51.7 -14.9 -2.3 16.7 16.3 -30.0 -30.0 155.4 124.0 109.9 113.2 86.1 86.1 81.3 81.3 81.3 35.0 35.0 -80.5 -216.6 -127.7 -130.0 -137.8 -101.0 -83.6 -64.6 -63.0 -65.0 -65.0 6.4 106.3 127.5 205.8 82.5 64.8 62.6 22.5 25.0 30.0 30.0 35.0 50.0 65.0 -- 100.0 110.0 203.3 73.0 30.0 10.0 83.0 110.5 116.1 121.9 85.0 110.5 116.1 121.9 -- -- -- -- -16.1 -18.7 -12.5 -27.5 -25.5 -15.2 -118.9 153.6 -118.8 -22.3 -28.8 -- -22.2 -30.0 -- -50.2 -- -- -12.4 -- -- -2.0 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- Overall balance -124.3 41.2 180.0 163.8 165.8 184.0 203.6 265.6 289.3 193.1 202.5 Change in armam I- - reduction) I/ . . . . . . . . . . . . -83.1 -9.0 -- -- -- -- -- Financing Dsbt relief Nat foreign assets Not international rsserves Use of Fund credit Purchase(GRA) Repurcbaee(GRA) Disburrements(SAF/ESAFl Repayments(SAF/ESAFl 124.3 -- 123.0 123.0 -64.5 -- -64.5 -- -- -41.2 -180.0 -- -- -53.7 -194.9 -53.7 -194.9 -1.5 -78.9 65.1 -- -55.1 -37.1 -- -- -11.5 -41.8 -52.2 -116.0 12.5 14.9 -- -- -163.8 -82.7 -- 53.0 -167.0 -141.7 -167.0 -141.7 -82.8 -23.5 -- -- -38.9 -19.1 -- 80.1 -43.9 -84.5 -84.2 -118.3 3.2 6.0 -- -- -175.0 -203.6 -- -- -210.5 -229.7 -210.5 -229.7 -46.1 -96.1 -- -- -24.7 -50.5 80.2 80.3 -101.7 -125.8 -164.4 -133.7 6.0 5.6 29.5 20.5 -265.6 -- -265.6 -265.6 -150.4 -- -36.1 -- -114.3 -115.2 -- -- -289.3 -- -289.3 -289.3 -81.7 -- -- -- -81.7 -207.7 -- -- -193.1 -202.5 -- -- -193.1 -202.5 -193.1 -202.5 -45.4 -44.4 -- -- -- -- -- -- -45.4 -44.4 -147.7 -158.2 -- -- -- -- Other reserve (iacroaw -1 187.5 Bilateral payment qromnts 1.3 Financing gap -- Memoranduo items: Current account deficit/GDP, (in percent) Excluding official transfers 8.6 Including official transfers 5.5 Gross international reserves End of period (US8 millions) 388.2 In montha of imports (c.i.f.1 2.9 Cocoa aports Volume (in 1,000 tons) 243.1 13.4 10.8 8.6 8.0 6.3 5.5 4.9 4.3 3.8 3.4 9.2 6.3 4.9 3.7 3.4 2.7 2.3 2.2 1.9 1.6 420.4 536.4 592.9 711.2 875.6 1.009.2 1,124.4 1,332.). 1‘479.8 1,637.9 2.7 3.7 4.1 4.5 5.2 5.6 5.9 6.5 6.7 6.9 286.5 271.0 252.3 290.0 320.0 324.8 329.7 334.6 339.6 344.7 Price (in US.9 per ton) 1,244.0 998.0 1,232.0 1,269.0 1,378.0 1.418.0 1,460.O 1,505.O 1,553.O 1,603.O 1,654.0 Sources : Data provided by the Ghanaian authorities; and rtsff estimates and projections. &/ The timing of incurrence of ths l xtamal arrears to be cleared in 1995-96 ir not reliably knom. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public. - 32 - Table 9. Ghana: External Financing Requirements (In million of U.S. dollars and Resources, 1993-97 ,) 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 Est. Program A. Financing requirements c-1+2+3+4) 1,196.5 819.9 972.2 1. Current account balance (excluding -704.7 -356.9 -352.6 interest payments and official transfers) Trade balance -664.3 -353.1 -359.1 Exports 1.063.6 1.226.0 1.396.8 Imuorts -1.728.0 -1,579.9 -1.755.9 Other items (net) Nonfactor services (net) Investment income (net) Private transfers (net) 2. Debt service obligations Principal Long-term debt Of which: World Bank Medium-term debt IMF repurchases/repayments Interest Long-term debt Of which: World Bank Medium-term debt IMF charges Others 3. Reduction of arrears 4. Increase in gross reserves B. Identified dibursements (5+6+7+8+9+10) 5. Official grants (net) 6. Long-term loan disbursements Program Of which: World Bank Projects and others Of which: World Bank 7. Medium-term loan disbursements 8. Use of Fund resources (excluding prospective use) 9. Direct investment 10. Divestiture proceeds C. Other capital inflows (net) I/ 117.4 -96.8 -48.3 -9.2 -6.8 D. Debt relief E. Prospective ESAF F. Remaining financing gap (A-B-C-D-E) -40.0 -299.8 -1.4 261.2 439.6 329.1 45.9 (16.8) 216.6 66.6 110.5 60.1 (19.7) 28.6 14.0 7.9 52.2 84.2 l.078.9 256.2 508.7 195.9 (98.7) 312.8 (106.6) 124.0 65.1 25.0 30.0 35.0 50.0 65.0 100.0 203.3 73.0 30.0 1.0.0 -- -3.0 -272.6 -2.2 271.0 378.8 270.1 57.3 (19.4) 130.0 82.8 108.7 59.0 (20.5) 35.5 11.4 2.8 -- 6.5 -276.8 -1.7 285.0 418.3 304.6 63.2 (22.0) 137.8 103.6 113.7 63.0 (22.01 38.0 9.0 2.1 83.1 118.3 -294.6 1.570.1 1.864.7 35.2 -287.1 4.4 317.9 442.1 312.8 05.4 (24.0) 101.0 126.4 129.3 78.0 (22.0) 39.9 9.3 2.1 9.0 164.4 -277.0 1.708.3 1,985.3 44.4 -302.9 11.7 335.5 483.1 31iO.l !90.2 (27.0) 83.6 176.3 133.0 85.0 (21.0) 39.1 6.8 2.1 -- 133.7 916.7 887.4 774.3 755.4 200.8 249.8 180.8 182.8 369.4 443.5 427.4 416.3 31.2 138.1 130.0 115.0 (30.1) (84.6) (35.0) (35.0) 338.2 305.4 297.4 301.3 (147.7) (118.9) (143.0) (1613.0) 113.2 86.1 86.1 81.3 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 53.0 -- 80.1 80.2 -- 29.5 -- 80.3 2,o. 5 874.8 8,49.4 -259.4 -2:32.6 So,urces : Data provided by the Ghanaian authorities; and staff estimates and projections. I/ Mostly reflecting inflows and outflows of short-term debt of oil-related credits and Cocoa Board borrowing, and includes errors and omissions. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 33 - Table 10. Ghana: External Public Debt and Debt Service Paymenta, 1992-99 u 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 Est. Progrms Projections External public debt Mediws-term debt &/ Previously rescheduled Other Long-term debt 2/ 2.757.6 Bilateral loans 583.9 Multilateral loans 2,173.7 IMF 739.5 Tranche policies/CFF 149.0 Trust Fund/SAF/ESAF 590.5 Short-term loans a/ 71.2 197.2 Total 4.175.2 4.673.3 606.9 507.6 94.4 82.3 512.5 425.3 Medium-term debt 14.5 Of which: previously rescheduled 2.3 Long-term debt 66.0 Of which: multilateral loans 52.1 IMF 17.7 External public debt service Principal Medium-term Long-term IMF repurchases Interest Medium-tons Long-term IMF charges i/ Total Including IMF Excluding IMF Memorandum items: External public debt service ratio 21 Including IMF Excluding IMF 10.9 10.0 8.5 7.8 7.4 7.4 7.4 1.8 1.5 1.4 1.3 1.2 1.2 1.2 69.1 72.4 75.6 78.0 80.6 83.5 85.3 52.3 53.5 55.8 56.3 57.2 59.1 60.6 15.8 14.0 13.1 11.6 9.4 6.6 5.0 (In millions of U.S. dollars) 184.0 329.1 270.1 304.6 312.8 350.1 317.5 259.2 80.5 216.6 130.0 137.8 101.0 83.6 64.6 65.0 39.0 45.9 57.3 63.2 85.4 90.2 102.5 112.5 64.5 66.6 82.8 103.6 126.4 176.3 150.4 81.7 93.3 102.7 105.9 111.6 126.9 130.8 135.3 140.5 24.9 28.6 35.5 38.8 39.9 39.1 40.1 36.9 47.8 60.1 59.0 63.8 78.0 85.0 91.8 101.9 20.6 14.0 11.4 9.0 9.0 6.7 3.4 1.8 277.3 431.8 192.2 351.2 376.0 416.2 439.7 480.9 281.8 303.6 304.3 297.9 (In Dercent) 452.8 399.7 299.0 316.2 25.1 35.7 17.4 29.1 27.4 26.9 25.5 25.7 22.3 18.2 20.5 19.6 17.6 15.9 14.7 14.4 6.9 7.1 7.2 7.2 6.3 5.1 5.2 5.2 5.0 4.5 4.1 4.0 90.3 88.5 89.2 85.5 81.6 78.5 External public debt service/GDP Including IMF 4.0 Excluding IMF 2.8 External public debt/GDP 60.7 3,230.S 785.1 2,445.4 738.0 159.4 578.7 7.1 5.8 76.8 (In milliona of U.S. dollars: end-of-period) 490.8 439.1 424.2 421.9 438.6 71.0 71.0 71.0 71.0 71.0 419.8 368.1 353.2 350.9 367.6 3.542.5 3,922.a 4.264.8 4.590.9 4,924.4 923.0 1.026.6 1,188.9 1.333.9 1,440.7 2,619.5 2,896.Z 3,075.9 3.257.0 3,483.7 686.9 677.9 632.6 537.0 388.8 127.4 111.0 86.4 36.0 -- 559.6 566.9 546.2 501.1 388.8 174.9 146.1 146.1 146.1 146.1 4.895.1 5,185.9 5.467.7 5.695.9 5.897.9 (In nercent of total: end-of-neriod) 454.9 71.0 383.9 5.261.9 1,520.7 3.741.2 308.2 -- 308.2 146.1 6.171.1 Sources : Data provided by the Ghanaian authorities; and staff estimates and projections. I/ For 1991 and 1992, changes in reclassification and revaluation may cause discrepancies between flow figures and changes in stock figures. 2/ Including medium-term debt owed by the Bank of Ghana to foreign conmarcia banks. a/ Consists of short-term oil credits, Cocoa Board debt and Bank of Ghana debt. A/ Excluding SDR charges. z/ In percent of exports of goods and services. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 34 - Table 11. Ghana: Medium-Term Outlook for the Balance of Payments, Sensitivity Tests, 1994-99 L/ 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 Eat. Program Projections Gold export price (in USS per ounce) Cocoa export price (in USS per ton) Nontraditional exports (in millions of USSI z/ Aid inflows (in millions of U.S. dollars) Current account excluding official transfers (in percent of GDP) Debt service ratio (in percent) Overall balance of payments (in millions of U.S. dollars) Reserves, end-of-period In millions of U.S. dollars In months of imports, c.i.f. Gold export price (in U.S. dollars per ounce) Current account excluding official transfers (in percent of GDP) Debt service ratio (in percent) Gvarall balance of payments (in millions of U.S. dollars) Reserves, end-of-period In millions of U.S. dollars In months of imports, c.1.f. Shortfall in reserves (in millions of U.S. dollars) 2/ Cocoa export price (in U.S. dollars per ton) Current account excluding official transfers (in percent of GDP) Debt service ratio (in percent) Overall balance of payments (in millions of U.S. dollars) Reserves, end-of-period In millions of U.S. dollars In months of imports, c.i.f. Shortfall in raservea (in millions of U.S. dollars) A/ Nontraditional exports (in millions of U.S. dollars) Current account excluding official transfers (in percent of GDP) Debt service ratio (in percent) Overall balance of payments (in millions of U.S. dollars) Reserves, end-of-period In millions of U.S. dollars In months of imports, c.1.f. Shortfall in reawvea (in millions of U.S. dollars) A/ Aid inflows (in millions of U.S. dollars) Current account axcluding official transfers (in percent of GDP) Debt service ratio (in percent) Overall balance of payments (in millions of U.S. dollars) Reserves, end-of-period In millions of U.S. dollars In months of imports, c.i.f. Shortfall in reserves (in millions of U.S. dollars) i/ Baseline Scenario 382.2 385.0 397.0 403.0 409.0 ~415.2 1.238.0 1.378.0 1.418.1 1,460.3 1,505.4 1.953.3 192.6 221.7 275.1 324.3 386.7 441.3 580.2 703.3 618.2 609.1 630.0 625.6 8.6 8.0 6.3 5.5 4.9 4.3 27.4 26.9 25.5 25.7 22.3 18.2 163.8 165.8 184.0 203.6 265.6 289.3 592.9 711.2 875.6 1.009.2 1.124.4 1.332.1 4.1 4.5 5.2 5.6 5.9 6.5 Scenario A: Lower sold prices a/ 382.2 327.3 337.5 342.6 347.7 352.9 2;:: 28.6 9.5 27.0 7.9 27.2 7.1 23.6 6.4 19.2 5.9 163.8 75.9 86.4 97.5 151.4 163.3 592.'9 621.2 688.0 715.6 716.6 798.2 4.1 3.9 4.1 4.0 3.7 3.9 -- 90.0 187.6 293.6 407.8 1133.9 Scenario B: Lower cocoa nrices 5/ 1,238.0 1.171.3 1.205.4 1,241.3 1.279.6 1,320.3 8. 16 9.0 7.5 6.6 5.4 27.4 28.0 26.5 26.7 2X 18.8 163.8 105.9 115.5 131.4 189.4 i!O7.5 592.9 651.2 747.1 808.5 847.5 973.3 4.1 4.1 4.4 4.5 4.4 4.8 - .- 60.0 128.5 200.7 276.9 358.8 Scenario C: Lower nontraditional exports s/ 192.6 208.3 217.9 236.7 257.0 i!79.2 8.6 2z 7.3 6.0 6.7 6.5 27.4 152:4 26.3 27.0 23.9 19.8 163.8 126.7 115.3 134.0 120.4 592.9 697.8 804.8 850.1 833.7 872.4 4 . :t 4.4 4.7 4.7 4.3 4.2 - ._ 13.4 70.8 159.1 290.7 459.7 Scenario D: Lower aid flows z/ 580.2 633.0 556.4 548.2 567.0 563.0 8.6 8.0 6.3 2:z 4.9 4.3 27.4 26.9 25.4 141:7 22.3 18.0 163.8 95.5 121.6 201.0 227.7 - ._ -- -- -- -- -- 592.9 640.8 742.8 814.5 865.1 1.011.1 4 . :1 4.0 4.4 4.5 4.5 4.9 - . . 70.4 132.8 194.7 259.3 321.0 Sources: Data provided by the Ghanaian authorities; and staff estimates and projections. The scenarios make the strong assumption that imports do not adjust to the shocks. Exports other than cocoa, gold, and timber. Assumed that gold export prices will be 15 percent lower than in baseline scenario. Shortfall relative to baseline scenario. Assumed that cocoa export prices will be 15 percent lower than baseline scenario. Assumed that nontraditional exports will grow at the rate of GDP growth as compared with an average growth of 18 percent assumed in the baseline scenario. Assumed that there is a 10 percent shortfall in concessional aid. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 12. Ghana: Indicators of Fund Credit, 1992-2007 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 Est. Program Projections Outstanding Fund credit In millions of U.S. dollars In percent of quota In percent of GDP In pwcent of exports of goods and non-factor aarvices Debt service due to the Fund 3,/ In millions of U.S. dollars In percent of quota In percent of exports of goods and nonfactor s*rvic*s In percant of debt service dug In percent of gross official reserves Gross Fund financing In millions of U.S. dollars In percent of Ghana's gross financing need 2/ 739.5 730.0 686.9 677.9 196.3 196.1 175.1 169.2 10.7 12.1 12.7 11.6 66.9 61.1 50.0 43.8 85.1 80.6 94.2 112.6 22.1 21.1 24.0 28.1 7.7 6.7 6.9 7.3 30.7 18.7 25.1 27.1 21.9 19.2 15.9 15.8 -- 65.1 -- 5.4 -- 80.1 6.2 632.6 537.0 157.7 133.8 10.3 8.1 36.6 20.6 135.7 183.1 33.0 45.6 7.0 9.8 30.8 38.1 15.5 18.1 80.2 80.3 9.2 9.5 388.8 96.5 5.4 19.1 153.8 38.2 7.6 34.0 13.7 -- -- 308.2 262.6 218.2 76.3 65.0 54.0 3.9 3.1 2.4 14.0 11.0 03.5 46.9 20.7 11.6 3.8 2.0 20.9 12.5 6.3 3.2 0.4 6.4 4.4 45.6 11.3 -- -- -- -- 1.8 12.2 2.8 -- -- 181.8 133.3 45.0 33.0 1.8 1.2 37.4 9.3 1.3 9.9 2.1 -- -- 49.3 12.2 1.6 1.5 12.5 12.5 2.5 2.4 -- -- 04.0 21.0 0.7 2.6 49.1 12.2 -- -- 40.4 10.0 0.3 1.1 44.7 11.1 1.3 11.5 2.0 -- -- 12.1 3.0 0.1 0.3 28.4 7.0 0.7 7.6 1.2 -- -- 0.1 -- -- -- 12.1 3.0 0.3 3.4 0.5 -- I -- z I Sources: Data provided by the Ghanaian authoritim; and staff l stimatss and projections. &/ Excluding SDR charges. 2/ Gross financing need is defined as the am of the current account deficit, amdim- and low-tmm debt mrtization, Fund ropurchas~s/ropaymonts, the reduction in payment arrears, and incroasm in the gross foreign reaava. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 36 - Table 13. Ghana: Financial Benchmarks and Performance Criteria Under the First Annual ESAF Arrangement, 1995 1/ 1994 1995 Dec. March June Est. SeDt . Dec. Act. Bench- Perf. Indic. mark crit. bench- mark (In billions of cedis: end of period) Net domestic assets of the Bank of Ghana z/ Claims by the Bank of Ghana on: Cocoa Board GNPC I/ Net domestic financing of the govermient budget u 4/ 294.5 282.1 297.4 253.2 146.0 -- -- _- _- 14::: 152.2 152.2 152.2 152.2 . . . 32.3 44.6 -20.1 -52.7 (In millions of U.S. dollars: end of period) Net foreign assets of the Bank of Ghana z/ -214.0 -231.4 -256.1 -213.8 -70.3 Neu nonconcessional external loans contracted or guaranteed by the Goverrxnent or the Bank of Ghana u u 1. l-12 years’ msturity . . . 28 95.0 95.0 95.0 2. l-5 years’ maturity . . . 60.0 60.0 60.0 Short-term external debt outstanding contracted or guaranteed by the Goverrusent or the Bank of Ghana (with an initial msturity of less than one year) 1/ L/ 11:7.6 110.0 60.0 6D.D 60.0 Reduction in externnl payments arrears & __ . . . 6.0 30.1 30.1 I/ See below for description of program contingency mechanism. z/ Ceiling. 3/ Excludes any accrued interest. 4/ Defined as net dunestic financing of the budget by the banking system and net sales of goverment debt to the no&ank public. Cunulative from January 1, 1995. z/ Floor. &/ Comnitments on loans other than borrowing on concessions1 terms according to the DAC definition and debt rescheduling. Cusulative from January 1, 1995. z/ Excluding norms1 inport and oil related credits. 8/ Minimun reduction through cash payments. Cunulative from January 1, wirl be accmulated. 1995. No new external arrears Continqencv Mechanisms 1. Excess net foreign financing - bslance of payments. The floor on the net foreign assets (NFA) is to be adjusted upward, and the ceiling on net domestic assets (MDA) downward, by 50 percent of excess net foreign financing (nonproject loans minus cash debt service payments passing through the budget) over the amounts envisaged in the program. 2. Excess net foreign financing - budget The ceiling on net domestic financing of the budget CNDF) will be lowered by the excess of net foreign financing (nonproject loans minus cash debt service payments passing through the budget) over the amounts envisaged in the program. 3. Other external borrowing NFA will be adjusted upward, and MDA downward, by any net oil credits and any net external borrowing by the Cocoa Board in excess of the amounts envisaged in the progrenr. 4. Divestiture proceeds In the case of proceeds fras the sale of public assets that are not used for the purchase of foreign investments by the Govermnt or the prepayment of nonconcessional medius-term external debt, the following adjustments will apply. NFA will be adjusted upward, and MDA downward, by any divestiture proceeds received in foreign exchange above the amounts assuned in the progranr. NDF will be adjusted downuard by the total munt of divestiture proceeds received, in foreign exchange and local currency, above the amounts assuned in the program. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 37 - Teble 14. Ghana: Structural Benchmarks and Performance Criteria under the First Annual ESAF Arrrngement, 1995~porch 19% Actions Test dates u A. Cocoa sector 1. Adjustment of the cocoa producer price for the 1995/% crop year consistent with world market trends, governnnt budgetary requirements, and the need to strmgthen former incentives. u 2. Removal of cocoa export monopoly and implementation of recomnendations of review of modalities for cocoa sector dereguletion. B. Petroleus sector 1. Sutxsission of findings of review on restructuring of GNPC. End-Jme 19% 2. Removal of restrictions on inportotion of crude by oil mapanics. 3. Replecement of centrolized reBuletion of prices by ceilings set by oil market participants on basis of isported oil costs and marketing msrgins. Inposition of ad volorem excise duties on petrolem products. I/ End-J- 19% End-Harch 19% End-Septtir 1995 End-September 1995 C. Divestiture program Offer for sale: 1. 10 specified small- to medius-scale enterprises Implemented Merch 1995 2. 14 specified smell- to medius-scale enterprises End-March 19% 3. 60 percent of shores in Social Security Bank End-Septenkr 1995 4. 60 percent of shores in Notional Investment Bank End-Decesber1995 5. 60 percent of shores in Ghana Comercial Benk End-March 1996 1/ Benchsmrks apply to end-Jme 1995, performme criteria to end-Septankr 1995, and indicative benchmarks to end-Dece&er 1995 and end-Merch lW6. 1/ To be mderteken in consultetion with the Uorld Bank. I/ Full decontrol of reteil prices of petroleus products to be undertoken by end-June 19%. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 38 - APPEND:u Ghana - Three-Year and First Annual Arrangements Under the Enhanced Structural Adiustment Facilitv Attached hereto is a letter dated April 28, 1995, with an annexed memorandum on the economic and financial policies of Ghana, from the Minister of Finance of Ghana, requesting from the Fund a three-year arrangement under the enhanced structural adjustment facility, and the first annual arrangement thereunder, and setting forth (i) the objectives and policies of the program to be supported by the three-year arrangement; and (ii) the objectives and policies of the program to be supported by the first annual arrangement. To support these objectives and policies, the Fund grants the requested arrangements in accordance with the following provisions, and subject to the Instrument to Establish the Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility Trust: 1. (a) For a period of three years from May --, 1995, Ghana will have the right to obtain loans from the Fund under the enhanced structural adjustment facility, in a total amount equivalent to SDR 164,400,000, which shall be provided from the Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility Trust. (b) The amount of each annual arrangement will be the equivalent of SDR 54.8 million for the first annual arrangement; the equivalent of SDR 54.8 million for the second annual arrangement; and the equivalent of SDR 54.8 million for the third annual arrangement. (c) Under the first annual arrangement: (i) the first loan, in an amount equivalent to SDR 27.4 million will be available on June 15, 1995 at the request of the Government of Ghana; and (ii) the second loan, in an amount equivalent to SDR 27.4 million will be available on December 15, 1995 at the request of the Government of Ghana subject to paragraph 2 below. 2. Ghana will not request disbursement of the second loan specified in paragraph l(c)(ii) above: (a) if the Managing Director finds that the data at the end of September 1995 indicate that Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 39 - APPENDIX T (i) the limit on the net domestic assets of the Bank of Ghana, or (ii) the limits on claims by the Bank of Ghana on the Cocoa Board and the Ghana National Petroleum Company, or (iii) the limit on net domestic financing of the budget deficit, or (iv) the floor for net foreign assets of the Bank of Ghana, or (v) the limit on the contracting or guaranteeing by the Government or the Bank of Ghana of new nonconcessional external loans, or (vi) the limit on outstanding short-term external debt contracted or guaranteed by the Government or the Bank of Ghana, or (vii) the reduction in external payments arrears described and specified in paragraph 27 and Table 1 of the memorandum annexed to the letter of April 28, or (viii) any of the structural performance criteria referred to in paragraph 27 and specified in Table 2 of the annexed memorandum was not observed; or (b) if Ghana (i) has imposed or intensified restrictions on payments and transfers for current international transactions, or (ii) has introduced or modified multiple currency practices, or (iii) has concluded bilateral payments agreements which are inconsistent with Article VIII, or (iv) has imposed or intensified import restrictions for balance of payments reason; or (v) has incurred any new external payments arrears; or (cl until the Pund determines that the midterm review of Ghana's program, referred to in paragraph 5 of the attached letter dated April 28, 1995 and in paragraph 28 of the annexed memorandum has been completed, Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public* 40 - APPENDI= If the Managing Director finds that any of the performance clauses that have been established in or under this paragraph 2 have not been met, the second loan specified in paragraph l(c)(ii) above may be made available only after consultation has taken place between the Fund and Ghana, and understandings have been reached regarding the circumstances in which Ghana may request the disbursement of that second loan. 3. Before approving the second annual arrangement, the Fund will appraise the progress of Ghana in implementing the policies and reaching the objectives of the program supported by the first annual arrangement, taking into account primarily: (a) the indicators referred to in Tables 1 and 2 attached to the annexed memorandum; (b) imposition or intensification of restrictions on payments and transfers for current international transactions: cc> introduction or modification of multiple currency practices; Cd) conclusion of bilateral payments agreements which are inconsistent with Article VIII; and (e) imposition or intensification of import restrictions for balance of payments reasons. 4 . In accordance with paragraph 3 of the attached letter dated April 28, 1995, Ghana will provide the Fund with such information as the Fund requests in connection with the progress of Ghana in implementing the policies and reaching the objectives supported by these arrangements. 5. In accordance with paragraph 4 of the attached letter dated April 28, 1995, during the period of the first annual arrangement, Ghana will consult with the Managing Director on the adoption of any measures that may be appropriate at the initiative of the Government or whenever the Managing Director requests such a consultation. Moreover, after the period of the first annual arrangement, and while Ghana has outstanding financial obligations to the Fund arising from loans under that arrangement, Ghana will consult with the Fund from time to time, at the initiative of the Government or whenever the Managing Director requests consultation on Ghana's economic and financial policies. These consultations may include correspondence and visits of officials of the Fund to Ghana or representa- tives of Ghana to the Fund. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 41 - Dear Mr. Camdessus: APPENDIX I ATTACHMENT April 28, 1995 1. The objectives of Ghana's new three-year program of economic and financial adjustment are set out in the policy framework paper (PFP) for the period 1995-97, which was prepared in close collaboration with the staffs of the Fund and the World Bank. 2. The attached memorandum on the economic and financial policies of Ghana, based on the PFP referred to above, sets out the objectives and policies that the Government of Ghana intends to pursue in the three-year period covered by the PFP, as well as the objectives and policies for the first year of the program. In support of these objectives and policies, the Government requests a three-year arrangement under the enhanced structural adjustment facility (ESAF) in an amount equivalent to SDR 164.4 million (60.0 percent of quota), as well as a first annual arrangement thereunder in an amount equivalent to SDR 54.8 million (20.0 percent of quota). 3. The Government of Ghana will provide the Fund with such informa- tion as the Fund requests in connection with the progress made in implemen- ting the economic and financial policies and achieving the objectives of the program described in the attached memorandum. 4. The Government of Ghana believes that the policies and measures set forth in the attached memorandum are adequate to achieve the objectives of its program, but will take any further measures that may become appropriate for this purpose. During the period of the ESAF arrangement, the Government will consult with the Managing Director on the adoption of any measures that may be appropriate, at the initiative of the Government or whenever the Managing Director requests such a consultation. Moreover, after the period of the arrangement, and while Ghana has outstanding financial obligations to the Fund arising from loans under the arrangement, the Government will consult with the Fund from time to time, at the initiative of the Government or whenever the Managing Director requests consultation on Ghana's economic and financial policies. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 42 - APPENDIX.2 ATTACHMENT 5. The Fund will conduct with the Government of Ghana a midterm review under the first annual ESAF arrangement, to be completed no later than December 15, 1995. Sincerely yours, /S/ Dr. Kwesi Botchwey Minister of Finance Attachment Mr. Michel Camdessus Managing Director International Monetary Fund Washington, D.C. 20431 U.S.A. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 43 - APPENDIX I ATTACHMENT Memorandum on Economic and Financial Policies of Ghana for 1995 I. Introduction and Background 1. The Government of Ghana is intent on quickly stabilizing the economy and laying the basis for accelerated economic growth and poverty allevia- tion. In support of these objectives, the Government is seeking financial assistance from the Fund in the form of a three-year ESAF arrangement. The program to be supported by the ESAF arrangement has been cast within a medium-term framework for 1995-97, which is described in a policy framework paper. The macroeconomic and structural objectives and policies for the first year of the program beginning April 1, 1995 are set out in this memorandum. 2. During 1983-91, Ghana successfully implemented an economic recovery pros=, which was supported by a series of SAF and ESAF arrangements. However, slippages in policy implementation occurred during the run-up to multiparty elections in 1992, and the overall budgetary position reverted from a surplus of 1.5 percent of GDP in 1991 to a deficit of 4.8 percent. The Government has since made strenuous efforts to correct these slippages. As a result of the receipt of some 5 percent of GDP in proceeds from the sale of public assets and strong performance in the collection of income and import taxes, the budget recorded a surplus of 2.2 percent of GDP in 1994. Despite the improvement in the public finances, the Bank of Ghana experienced difficulties in controlling monetary growth because of a sharp deterioration in the financial position of the national petroleum company (GNPC), which necessitated extensive borrowing from the central bank. As a consequence, the growth of broad money rose sharply, and the annual rate of inflation rose to 34 percent by the end of 1994. 3. In order to protect its international reserve position in the face of mounting inflationary pressures, the Bank of Ghana allowed the cedi to depreciate in real terms. The demand-dampening effect of this exchange rate policy, together with favorable export performance, contributed to a contraction in the external current account deficit, from 9.2 percent of GDP in 1993 to 4.9 percent in 1994. Ghana experienced a large shortfall in long-term concessional loan inflows during 1994, arising largely from policy-related difficulties encountered by the Government in meeting macro- economic and structural conditions under World Bank and bilateral aid programs. This shortfall was covered by proceeds from the divestiture program and prefinancing of cocoa exports. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-44- APPENDIX I ATTACHMENT 4. Despite strong gains in the mining and services sectors, poor perfor- mance elsewhere as a result of the macroeconomic slippages, inadequate rains, and the impact of the ethnic disturbances in the northern regions, prompted some slackening in economic growth from 5.0 percent in 1993 to 3.8 percent in 1994. II. Policv Framework for 1995-97 5. The economic recovery program achieved a significant measure of success in correcting macroeconomic imbalances and structural distortions. Private sector saving and investment remained comparatively weak, however, and real GDP growth averaged only about 5 percent a year, or 2 percent on a per capita basis. At this rate, Ghanaian average poor would not cross the "poverty line" for well over 30 years. Consequently, the central objective of the Government's economic adjustment program for 1995-97 will be to generate the saving and investment necessary to raise real growth to 5.5 percent by 1997 and to around 6 percent by the end of the decade. Inflation is targeted to fall to 5 percent in 1996 and beyond, which would allow Ghana to maintain a stable and predictable exchange rate, while enjoying a strong externally competitive position. 6. The strategy envisaged will be based on expenditure-dampening policies aimed at bringing down inflation and reducing Ghana's external debt service burden. Private and public savings alone, however, are unlikely to generate the volume of investment necessary for enhanced growth, while there is little prospect of any significant increase in foreign aid from the levels recorded in the early 1990s. The program will therefore focus on attracting additional foreign investment and on policies designed to improve the quality of investment itself. 7. The Government is of the view that, while much has been accomplished in removing impediments to investment, incentives to save and invest can be further strengthened by the dissemination of clear signals by the Government concerning the role it expects the private sector to play in promoting economic growth. The medium-term policy framework therefore lays out a plan of action for the withdrawal of state involvement in all areas of economic activity that can be better handled by the private sector. Specific action focuses on an acceleration of the divestiture program and on deregulation of the petroleum and cocoa sectors, while the economic functions that remain in the public domain will be streamlined and rendered more efficient. III. Economic Program for 1995 8. The most pressing economic policy goal facing the Government is to quickly stabilize the economy and bring the rate of inflation firmly under control. Further fiscal adjustment and a considerable tightening of monetary policy will be undertaken to achieve this goal. However, in view of the strong expansion in the money supply that occurred toward the end of Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 45 - APPENDIX I ATTACHMENT 1994 and the entrenched state of inflationary expectations, the rate of inflation is expected to continue to rise during the first few months of this year. The rate of inflation in 1995 will, moreover, be affected by the cost-push impact of various tax increases announced in the budget. Realis- tically, therefore, it is unlikely that inflation can be reduced to much below 20 percent (on an end-of-period basis) in 1995. Real GDP growth is expected to recover to 5.0 percent in 1995. 9. In support of these targets, the program seeks to achieve a fiscal surplus of 1.2 percent of GDP in 1995 (or a broadly balanced budget, excluding divestiture proceeds) and a sharp reduction in money supply growth, to 14 percent from 46 percent in 1994. This tight demand-management stance, in conjunction with a flexible exchange rate policy, should allow for a further narrowing of the external current account deficit and a replenishment of Ghana's foreign exchange reserves. Important structural policy initiatives will be undertaken in the petroleum and cocoa sectors. (i) Financial policies 10. To meet the overall fiscal target, the budget for 1995 announced a range of measures aimed at raising revenues, excluding divestiture proceeds and grants, to 19.1 percent of GDP from 18.4 percent in 1994. An import duty of 10 percent was imposed on about one half of the goods that were previously zero rated or exempt from tax. The rate of sales tax was lifted from 15 to 17.5 percent and, on March 1, expanded into a value-added tax (VAT) that covers the retail and services sectors. L/ In addition, petroleum prices were raised by an average of over 20 percent in order to pass through changes in world oil prices and the exchange rate, while various user fees and charges were also increased. 11. Economies have been identified that will enable government expenditures to be cut by about 1 percent of GDP in 1995. As announced in the budget, the civil service wage bill will be allowed to rise by no more than 25 percent, which would represent a modest contraction relative to GDP. Savings will also be forthcoming in other areas of recurrent spending, and these are reflected in ministerial allocations. Domestic interest payments, however, are expected to rise as a result of increased open market operations by the Bank of Ghana. 2/ Measures are also being taken in the critical area of expenditure control. In 1994, a pilot project was established in several key ministries, aimed at strengthening expenditure monitoring and control mechanisms at the commitment level and reconciling lJ The VAT applies to a range of services (such as electricity supply, telecommunications, and professional services), which were not previously taxed. In the interest of caution, however, the fiscal projections do not incorporate the impact of a broadening of the tax base or any improvement in the efficiency of the tax collection machinery. 2J Open market operations are conducted primarily through the sale of Bank of Ghana debt, the interest cost of which is borne by the Government. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 46 - APPENDIX ATTACHMENT cash ispending with bank statements; the pilot project proved successful and ,will be extended in 1995 to all other line ministries. L/ 12. The Government recognizes that proceeds from the sale of public assets are a nonrecurrent source of fiscal revenue and believes strongly that the divestiture program should not lead to any depletion of the nation's stock of wealth. Consequently, while the budget for 1995 provides for the use of a specified amount of divestiture proceeds for budgetary purposes, any receipts in excess of this amount will be used for domestic or external debt reduction or for the acquisition of foreign assets. The program's fiscal and balance of payments targets will be ad;justed accordingly. 13. Monetary control will continue to be effected through open market operations, which are conducted by the central bank in the form of a weekly auction of official debt. The central bank intends to reduce its reliance on the use of a reserve price in the auction. In the short run, liquid asset requirements will continue to be kept at a high level as a second line of attack in containing credit expansion, but the intention will be to subsequently lower the requirements to levels where they are needed for .prudential purposes only. To encourage the development of a secondary Imarket, the central bank is now rediscountfng bankers' acceptances. Meeting the program's monetary targets in 1995 wil:L require a considerable expansion in open market sales by the central bank, and this may entail increases in interest rates, at least in the short term.. u Despite the pick-up in inflation in 1994, lending rates have remained broadly positive in real terms; the maintenance of positive real rates is a critical element in the effort to restrain aggregate demand, mobilize private savings, and encourage net inflows of capital. 14. The borrowing by GNPC from the central bank has largely been a consequence of poor investments undertaken in areas outside the petroleum sector. This borrowing was the major cause of the rapid monetary expansion that occurred in 1994, and substantive steps are being taken to address GNPC's financial problems. These steps are elaborated below. [(ii) Structural and sectoral nolicies '15 . Macroeconomic stabilization alone will not in itself guarantee accelerated growth in Ghana, and continuing structural reform will be necessary to limit state involvement in economic decision making and to provide strong market-based incentives for private sector initiative, Considerable progress has already been achieved since 1983 in removing structural impediments to growth: the country's economic infrastructure has l/ Technical assistance for this exercise is being funded by the World Bank. u The Bank of Ghana has already increased its rediscount rate by 3 per- centage points in January, from 36 percent to 39 percent. It was the second such interest rate hike in as many months. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 47 - APPENDIX I ATTACHMENT been rehabilitated and expanded; all commodity price and credit controls (except on petroleum products and cocoa) have been lifted; no quantitative restrictions on trade remain; the import tariff structure has been rationalized; and the exchange system is free of current restrictions. However, while these actions have exposed the economy to greater competition both at home and from abroad, obstacles to greater factor mobility and improved resource mobilization have persisted, particularly with regard to capital investment. As a first step in removing these obstacles, a new investment code was recently introduced to provide investors with a clear and simplified regulatory framework and with incentives aimed at stimulating the pace of foreign and domestic investment. 16. The sale of Ashanti Goldfields in 1994 constitutes the successful conclusion of the single most important element of the Government's divestiture program. The remainder of the program, however, has proceeded somewhat slowly, and the Government intends to accelerate the pace of divestiture in 1995. u With this in mind, it has introduced procedures with assistance from the World Bank whereby foreign and domestic technical expertise will be subcontracted to administer the divestiture program. In addition, the list of enterprises to be divested has been expanded (more banks have recently been included in the list), and the Government has accorded particular priority to the quick sale or liquidation of a large number (over 100) of small and medium-size enterprises, primarily in the manufacturing sector. Disbursements under World Bank lending programs are conditional upon performance in this area. 17. The Government intends to deregulate the pricing and marketing of petro- leum. In addition to the macroeconomic repercussions of GNPC's borrowing from the central bank, public management of the procurement, refining, and distribution of oil has given rise to dead-weight losses and operating inefficiencies. Administrative regulation of petroleum prices has, more- over, politicized the price-setting process, and delays in fully passing through increases in imported oil costs have resulted in losses in fiscal revenue. To redress these problems, GNPC's access to new credits at the Bank of Ghana has been terminated and its operations will be confined to hydrocarbons and energy-related activities. Its assets will be sold to repay outstanding debts, including those to the Bank of Ghana. u GNPC has also been placed on the list of companies to be privatized. The oil marketing companies will be free to import crude oil for processing by the state-owned oil refinery and to import products in excess of the refinery's capacity. The refinery will be operated on a commercial basis in prepara- tion for its divestiture. During a transitional period ending June 1996, retail petroleum prices will be subject to a ceiling, which will be adjusted 1/ The divestiture program, including the sale of Ashanti Goldfields, covers over one quarter of the labor force in the mining, manufacturing, transport, constructian, and finance sectors. u The timing of the sale of GNPC's assets will be determined following a review of its financial position to be completed by end-June 1995. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 48 APPENDIX I ATTACHMENT in line with changes in world oil prices and the exchange rate. This will help depoliticize the price-setting process and protect government revenues from unanticipated increases in imported oil costs. After the transitional period, retail prices will be fully decontrolled. 18. Much has been accomplished recently in removing impediments to the efficient functioning of cocoa marketing. Private traders are now allowed to compete with the Cocoa Board for the purchase of the cocoa crop, while the Cocoa Board itself has made considerable economies in its operating expenses. However, the access of private traders to commercial bank credit has been limited, and only around 25 percent of the crop is being traded privately. L/ To provide scope for further efficiency gains in cocoa marketing, the Government intends to remove the Cocoa Board's export monopoly, upon the findings of a government review to study the modalities of deregulation, which will be completed by September 1995. The Cocoa Board will continue to participate in the marketing and export of cocoa until private sector traders become fully established. The quality control function will remain in the public domain. :19 . Emoluments to civil servants amount to over 5 percent of GDP. At the same time, uncompetitive pay levels in the civil service have contributed to difficulties in attracting and retaining quality staff in managerial and executive positions. In recognition of these problems, the Government has set up a high-level National Oversight Committee (NOC) with a mandate to implement institutional reforms aimed at increasing the efficiency of the public service and downsizing and restructuring the civil service and subvented organizations. The decisions of the NOC will be based on the findings of an integrated personnel and payroll management system, which is presently being used to review the structure of the civil service salary grades. They will be implemented beginning in early 1996. 20. Under new industrial relations legislation to be considered shortly by Parliament, wage settlements negotiated with civil service trade unions on a two-year cycle will be delinked from wage awards settlements in the non- government sector. In January 1995, the minimum wage was increased by 52 percent, although this should not affect pay levels in the formal sector. During the policy framework period, minimum wage policy will be guided by the need to ensure that wage levels in Ghana remain competitive and compatible with the quest for increased investment and growth. 21. Government will reorganize the subvented agencies with a view to eliminating those agencies performing nonessential functions and contracting out those functions that can be performed more efficiently by private vendors on a commercial basis. The financial operations of those state enterprises that remain in public hands are being strengthened under a u The restricted access reflects the size of the cocoa crop, which represents the equivalent of over one-half of outstanding credit to the private sector. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 49 - APPENDIX I ATTACHMENT performance contract system. Rather than depend on government investment, lending, or loan guarantees, these enterprises will now be expected to generate funds from internal sources, the sale of equity, or the floatation of corporate bonds in domestic and foreign capital markets. (iii) External sector nolicies and financing 22. Ghana will continue to pursue a flexible exchange rate policy in 1995, whereby net sales of foreign exchange by the Bank of Ghana are guided by the need to meet its foreign reserve targets. A review of this strategy will be undertaken at the time the program for 1996 is formulated. If sufficient progress has been made in adhering to tight financial policies and lowering inflation, and if this progress is considered credible and sustainable, consideration will be given to using the exchange rate as an instrument to hold down inflation; monetary policy would be directed at meeting the overall balance of payments objectives. 23. Various tariff rate adjustments have been made in recent years, which have led to a reduction in the effective rate of protection. Other countries in the region have not moved as quickly as Ghana in undertaking tariff reform and, in view of this, the Government believes that the exist- ing level and dispersion of tariffs is appropriate for the time being. In 1994, a system of minimum presumptive duties was applied to a specific list of imports in order to address problems in the underinvoicing of imports and other areas of customs collection. This system will be retained until the Government is satisfied that the quality of preshipment inspection has been raised to satisfactory standards and that the imports concerned attract the correct amount of duty. This should be accomplished well within the program period. 24. The program envisages further progress being made in attaining a viable external position over the medium term. The current account deficit is expected to narrow to 3.0 percent by 1997, from 4.9 percent in 1994, in response to a strengthening in the public finances, the mobilization of additional private saving, and favorable market conditions for Ghana's exports. This should permit a diminution of Ghana's debt service burden over this period and a modest decline in external interest payments relative to export earnings from 8 percent to 7 percent. 25. The balance of payments projections incorporate conservative assump- tions regarding external financing from multilateral and bilateral sources, and are also based on the expectation that the cocoa crop will continue to be financed externally. The program provides for the repayment or rescheduling on a bilateral basis of external arrears that have been incurred by the Government against certain bilateral creditors; these arrears were incurred for technical reasons and do not reflect balance of payments difficulties. The Government attaches the highest priority to the clearance of these arrears as a means of ensuring access to new credits from bilateral sources. No new external arrears will be incurred. Ghana will not seek debt relief under the auspices of the Paris Club. The program Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 50 - APPENDIX I ATTACHENT will target an increase in gross reserves to just over five months by the end of 1997. The entire amount of these reserves should not be regarded as freely usable, however, since the equivalent of over 1% months of imports represents proceeds from the divestiture program and continued short term external borrowing by the Cocoa Board. 1/ Ghana's external financing requirements during the period of the first annual ESAF arrangement are expected to be covered on the basis of disbursements under aid commitments already made. u A modest financing gap is envisaged for 1996-97, which is expected to be filled in the context of a Consultative Group meeting to be held in mid-1995. 26. The ESAF arrangement will play a primarily catalytic role in mobilizing the bilateral funds necessary to support Ghana's adjustment efforts, and this consideration has governed the level of access to ESAF resources that the Government is requesting. The Government is also intent on ensuring that the level of access being sought in no way suggests that there has been a major relapse in Ghana's economic policy performance. IV. Pronram Monitoring 27. Performance under the first annual ESAF arrangement will be monitored on the basis of the following financial pe-rformance criteria and benchmarks; (a) the net domestic assets of the Bank of Ghana; (b) net domestic financing of the government budget; (c) th e net foreign assets of the Bank of Ghana; (d) new nonconcessional external borrowing of l-12 years maturity, with a subceiling on debt of l-5 years' maturity; (e) the stock of external short- term debt; and (f) the elimination of external payments arrears, and an injunction against the incurrence of new external arrears (Table 1). Structural performance criteria and benchmarks will include: (a) cocoa producer price adjustments; (b) a timetable for the termination of the Cocoa Board's export monopoly; (c) a timetable for the deregulation of the pricing and marketing of petroleum products; and (d) progress in implementing the divestiture program (Table 2). 28. Benchmarks will apply to end-June 1995 and performance criteria to end-September 1995. Indicative benchmarks have been established for end-December 1995. The second disbursement under the first annual arrangement will be conditional upon observance of the performance criteria at end-September 1995 and completion of the midterm review, which will take place no later than December 15, 1995. All data necessary for monitoring u The projections assume that there will be no new external borrowing, other than the standard 30-day credits, to finance oil imports in 1995. Should any such borrowing occur, the program's foreign reserves target will be raised accordingly. u These disbursements amount to US$920 million, of which approximately one-third represents balance of payments support. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 51 - APPENDIX I ATTACHMENT performance under the program will be collected and made available on a timely basis. The review will set indicative benchmarks for end-March and end-June 1996 and pay particular attention to the progress being made in deregulating the cocoa and petroleum sectors, including the sale of GNPC assets. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 52 - i-Ii'1 ENDIX I ATTACHMENT Table 1. Ghana: Financial Benchmsrks and Performance Criteria Under the First Annual ESAF Arrangement, 1995 I/ 1994 1995 Dec. narch June SeDt. DeZ- Act. Est. Bench- Perf. Indic: wwk crit. bench- msrk (In billions of cedis: end of wriod) Net domestic assets of the Bank of Ghana 3 Claims by the Bank of Ghana on: Cocoa Board GNPC I/ Net domestic financing of the government budget 2/ u 294.5 282.1 297.4 253.2 146.0 __ 14::: 152.2 152:; 152:; -- 152.2 . . . 32.3 44.6 -20.1 -52.7 (In millions of U.S. dollars; end of wriod) Net foreign assets of the Bank of Ghana z/ -214.0 -231.4 -256.1 -213.8 -78.3 New nonconcessional external loans contracted or guaranteed by the Govermient or the Bank of Ghana 2/ u 2: 1-12 years’ rssturity . . . 2: 95.0 l-5 years’ maturity . . . 60.0 ES! ZZ:: Short-term external debt outstanding contracted or guaranteed by the Goverwnent or the Bank of Ghana (uith an initial maturity of less than one year) 1/ u 117.6 110.0 60.0 60.0 60.0 Reduction in external payments arrears B/ -- . . . 6.0 30.1 30.1 debt v dek; I/ 8/ uiil See below for description of program contingency mechanisms. Ceiling. Excludes any accrued interest. Defined as net domestic financing of the budget by the banking system and net sales of government to the nonbank public. Cuaulative from January 1, 1995. Floor. Cansitments on loans other than borrowing on concessicmal terns according to the DAC definition and rescheduling. Cunulative from January 1, 1995. Excluding normal inport and oil related credits. Mininun reduction through cash payments. Cuwlative ,from January 1, 1995. No new external arrears be accunulated. Continqency Mechanisms 1. Excess net foreign financing - balance of Payments. The floor on the net foreign assets (NFA) is to be adjusted ward, and the ceiling on net domestic assets (MDA) domuard, by 50 percent of excess net foreign financing (nonproject loans minus cash debt service payments passing through the budget) over the amounts envisaged in the progrmn. 2. Excess net foreign financing - budget The ceiling on net domestic financing of the budget (NDF) uill be lowered by the excess of net foreign financing (nonproject loans minus cash debt service payments passing through the budget) over the amounts envisaged in the program. 3. Other external borrowing NFA will be adjusted upward, and MDA downward, by any net oil credits and any net external borrowing by the Cocoa Board in excess of the amounts envisaged in the program. 4. Divestiture proceeds In the case of proceeds from the sale of prrblic assets that are not used for the purchase of foreign investments by the Govermmnt or the prepayment of nonconcessional mediue-term external debt, the following adjustments will apply. NFA will be adjusted ward, and MDA downuard, by any divestiture proceeds received in foreign exchange above the amounts assuned in the program. NDF wi 11 be adjusted downuard by the total amount of divestiture proceeds received, in foreign exchange and local currency, above the amounts assuned in the program. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 53 - Table 2. Ghana: Structural Benchmarks and Performance Criteria Under the First Arnual ESAF Arrangement, 1995~March 1996 APPENDIX I ATTACHMENT Actions lest dates lJ A. Cocoa sector 1. Adjustment of the cocoa producer price for the 1995/96 crop year consistent with world market trends, govermt budgetary requirements, and the need to strengthen farmer incentives. 1/ 2. Removal of cocoa export monopoly and inplemntation of recomnendations of review of modalities for cwoa sector dereguIation. B. Petrolem sector 1. Submission of findings of review on restructuring of GNPC. End-Jwe 1995 2. Removal of restrictions on importation of crude by oil ccmpanies. 3. Replacement of centratized regulation of prices by ceilings set by oil swket participants on basis of imported oil costs and marketing margins. Imposition of ad velorem excise duties on petroleum products. 3 C. Divestiture program End-June 1995 End-March 1996 End-September 1995 End-September 1995 Offer for sale: 1. 10 specified small- to mediun-scale enterprises Implemented March 1995 2. 14 specified small- to mediun-scale enterprises End-March 1996 3. 60 percent of shares in Social Security Bank End-Septeatw 1995 4. 60 percent of shares in National Investment Bank End-December 1995 5. 60 wrcent of shares in Ghana Comercial Bank End-March 1996 1/ Benchmarks apply to end-June 1995, performsnce criteria to end-Septrmber 1995, and indicative benchmarks to end-December 1995 and end-March 1996. 2/ To be mdertaken in consultation with the Uorld Bank. z/ Full decontrol of retail prices of petrolem products to be undertaken by end-June 1996. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 54 - APPENDIX II I. II. III. IV. V. VI. GHANA- Relations with the Fund (As of March 31, 1995) Membershio Status: Joined g/20/57; Article VIII General Resources Account: SDR Million Quota X Quota 274.00 100.0 Fund holdings of currency 343.50 125.4 Reserve position in Fund 17.38 6.3 SDR DeDartment: SDR Million X Allocation Net cumulative allocation 62.98 100.0 Holdings 7.78 12.4 Outstanding Purchases and Loans: SDR Million X Quota Extended arrangements 39.87 14.6 Contingency and Compensatory 47.00 17.2 SAF arrangements 24.54 9.0 ESAF arrangements u 366.21 133.7 Financial Arraneements: Expira- Amount Amount Approval tion Approved Drawn IYE Date Date (SDR Million) (SDR Million) ESAF 11/09/88 3/05/92 388.55 388.55 SAF 11/11/87 11/08/88 129.86 40.90 EFF 11/06/87 11/08/88 245.40 97.55 Proiected Oblieations to Fund (SDR Million; based on existing use of resources and present holdings of SDRs): Overdue Forthcomine 3/31/95 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 Principal -- 68.8 86.2 120.4 102.3 55.4 Charges/Interest -- 7.68.6 6.6 4.2 3.1 Total -- 76.4 94.8 127.0 106.5 58.5 u Including ESAF trust resources. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 55 - APPENDIX II Ghana - Relations with the Fund (concluded) (As of March 31, 1995) VII. ExchanFe Rate Arranpement Ghana maintains a flexible exchange rate system, using the U.S. dollar as the intervention currency. Since March 19, 1992, the foreign exchange auction has been abandoned and the exchange rate of the cedi has been determined freely in the context of an extended interbank market. The exchange rate in the inter- bank market at end-March 1995 was $ 1,099 per U.S. dollar for buying and $Z 1,123 per U.S. dollar for selling, while the average bureau buying rate was $3 1,122 per U.S. dollar and the average selling rate was $Z 1,140 per U.S. dollar. Ghana has liberalized all payments and transfers for current international transactions, and with effect from February 21, 1994, has accepted the obliga- tions of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4. VIII. Article IV Consultations The 1994 Article IV consultation discussions were held during the period November 3-20, 1993 and March 13-17, 1994. The staff report (SM/94/133) was discussed by the Executive Board on June 24, 1994. Ghana is on the standard 12-month cycle for Article IV consultations. IX. Technical Assistance. 1986-94 African Department and Bureau of Statistics Statistics Department Monetary and Exchange Affairs Department Exchange and Trade Relations Department Fiscal Affairs Department X. Resident ReDresentative Bank of Ghana (monetary accounts): May 1987 Bank of Ghana and Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning (external debt): October 1988. A Fund member was on secondment to the Bank of Ghana as financial statistics advisor during April 1991-April 1994. Bank of Ghana and Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning (instruments of monetary control): June 1989, and March 1994, Foreign exchange advisor: September 1986, Monetary policy advisor: April 1991. Mission on monetary policy and foreign exchange operations, March/April, 1994. Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning and Bank of Ghana (auction market): August and September 1986. Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning (expenditure control): July 1986 (capital income tax reform): November 1989 (expenditure control): May 1990 A Fund resident representative has been stationed in Accra since June 1985. The current Fund representative is Mr. Choudhry. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 56 - Ghana - Relations with the World Bank GrOUD (As of March 31. 1995) Commentary on LendinP Operations 1. The main objective of the Bank's assistance strategy is to help the Government achieve its goals of rapid economic growth, macroeconomic st:ability, and poverty alleviation. There are three strategic elements in the Bank's assistance program over the medium term. The first is an emphasis on achieving enhanced growth in Ghana, through an expanded role for the private sector, and to achieve this in a way that preserves macroeconomic stability. The second is improved management of public sector resources to allow the Government to be an effective partner in promoting growth. The third is to sustain the achievements envisaged through more effective human resource development and physical resource preservation. 2. As of March 31, 1995, the World Bank Group had approved operations for Ghana totaling US$3,547 million, consisting of 10 loans, 92 credits (including African Facility), and 34 IFC operations (Table attached). Over the three-year period FY 1996-98, the Bank's base case lending program for Ghana, would be US$790 million. More reliance will be put on sector adjustment credits. 3. Recent and proposed Bank Group projects emphasize rehabilitation, maintenance, and institutional strengthening. These cover the transport, telecormnunications, energy, water, and urban sectors. Other operations are intended to increase output and efficiency in agriculture and mining. The Bank program also includes support for enterprise and technology develop- ment. 4. Since the formulation of Ghana's ERP in 1983, the Bank has provided a series of policy-based credits to help the Government arrest the deterio- ration in the economy and lay the basis for sustained growth. These credits financed urgently needed imports and supported the Government's strategy for economic recovery through the phased liberalization of exchange, trade, and price controls, the rationalization of capital and recurrent public expendi- tures, improvements in producer prices, privatization, and parastatal reform. In FY 92 two credits were approved, a second Financial Sector Adjustment Operation, and an Agricultural Sector Adjustment Credit, to further deepen reforms in financial and agricultural sectors. Three more adjustment operations are envisaged: in support of private sector development, a Private Sector Adjustment Credit which will focus on accelerated privatization, is expected to be approved in May 1995. Two other sector credits are planned to finance investments in highways, and in the health and education sectors. Increased attention is being paid to longer-term issues, including human resource development, agriculture, infrastructure, and the environment. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public. - 57 - APPENDIX III Ghana - Relations with the World Bank GrOUD) (concluded) (As of March 31. 1995: in millions of U.S. dollars) Lending Operations Ten loans and 56 credits fully disbursed Country operations 3/ Agriculture Energy and industry Infrastructure Trade h finance 1.542.3 (--I -- (--I 15.0 (6.9) -- (--I 330.1 (190.2) -- (--) 404.1 (390.5) 404.1 (26.5) 442.7 (324.4) -- (--I 100.0 (44.5) -- (--I 1,542.3 15.0 330.1 888.2 442.7 100.0 Population and human resources 220.8 3.143.0 168.1 (142.9) -- (--I (26.5) 220.0 Total CLO99.4) 404.1 3.547.1 Amounts repaid or sold Total outstanding i/ Held by IBBD IDA IFC 263.0 431.9 3.115.2 (46.0) (2,928.9) (140.3) Memorandum items: IBRD/IDA ouerations on a fiscal year basis Comitments Disbursements Rmannents 1980 54.4 31.7 3.5 1981 29.0 28.3 5.6 1982 -- 30.5 5.7 1983 71.5 18.8 7.4 1984 124.6 39.0 9.0 1985 131.8 52.0 10.1 1986 121.0 115.0 9.0 1987 198.6 234.6 13.0 1988 276.1 126.1 12.7 1989 260.0 211.1 9.9 1990 185.7 157.9 11.0 1991 319.5 231.7 13.8 1992 288.9 188.9 14.2 1993 289.3 206.4 15.9 1994 87.7 187.1 18.4 1995 a/ 203.2 125.3 12.1 IBRD and IDA A/ Total Of which: commitments 2/ undisbursed IFC loans and aauity uarticiDations A/ Total Of which: comitumnts z/ Undisbursad Grand total comitments Source: World Bank Group. A/ Excluding cancellations. 2/ U.S. dollar equivalent at the date of signing as of March 31, 1995. 3/ Including Technical Assistance Credits. i/ Valued at end-of-period exchange rate; it differs from total cwmitments because the latter are valued at the exchange rates of the date of signatura. 5/ To March 31, 1995. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 58 - APPENDIX2 Ghana - Selected Social and Demoeranhic Indicators I/ Area Total land area (square kilometers) 238,540 Agricultural land (in percent of total) 34.0 Population and vital statistics Total population (mid-1993, in millions) Population growth rate Urban population (percent of total) Population density (per sq. km. of agricultural Population age structure (in percent) O-14 years 15-64 years 65 and above Crude birth rate (per thousand) Crude death rate (per thousand) Infant mortality rate (per thousand) Life expectancy at birth (years) 15.8 3.1 land) 47 49 4; 13 81 56 Health and nutrition Access to safe water (in percent of population) Total Urban Rural Per capita supply of Calories (per day) Proteins (grams per day) Labor force Total labor force (in millions) Participation rate (in percent) Total Male Female 39 1,785 34 5.9 E! 29 Education Enrollment rates (in percent of age group) Primary enrollment Female Secondary enrollment Female Pupil-teacher ratio Primary Secondary Literacy (in percent of population 15 years and over) Poverty incidence (percent of population below the poverty line) u 1987-88 Urban 25.7 Rural 41.9 National 36.4 38 29 ;; 60 1991-92 25.3 34.1 31.2 Sources: Statistical Service, Ouarterlv Dieest of Statistics; IMF, Interna- tional Financial Statistics; and data provided by the World Bank. 1/ 1Jnless otherwise mentioned, data refer to the latest available estimates. u Poverty line estimated at Cedi 128,404 per year as at mid-1992. Based on the living standards surveys conducted by the Ghana Statistical Service in collaboration with the World Bank during 1987/88, 1988/89, and 1991/92. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 59 - APPENDIX V Ghana - Statistical Issues General comments While there are some weaknesses in Ghana's overall economic statistics and certain gaps remain in coverage, the systems designed to generate monetary, balance of payments, external debt, and government finance statistics have functioned reasonably satisfactorily for the purpose of monitoring performance under successive Fund-supported programs. The areas where improvements need to be made are identified below. National accounts Data on the output and expenditure sides of the national accounts are prepared by the Statistical Service. Annual output estimates are produced on a timely basis, but expenditure data are prepared with a lag of several months. With donor assistance, the Service is currently reviewing the methodology used in preparing expenditure data. The review aims at improving the consistency of the national accounts with the balance of payments produced by the Bank of Ghana, particularly with regard to the export and import deflators. Estimates of private savings and investment are also subject to data discrepancies that affect their consistency with other sources, such as the government accounts and the balance of payments. The methodology for compilation of the series on fixed capital formation is under review. Prices and labor costs Comprehensive consumer price index (CPI) statistics are available with reasonable currentness. However, the weights presently used in the CPI basket are based on a 1974 survey. The Statistical Service has conducted several Living Standards Surveys (1987/88, 1988/89, and 1991/92) and it has reported that the weights in the consumption basket have not changed signif- icantly over time. Nonetheless, a new CPI series based on revised weights is planned. The wholesale price index has been discontinued since September 1991, and no indication has been given as to when it will be resumed. Labor statistics in Ghana are produced with a considerable lag, of over two years in some cases; to reduce delays, technical assistance from UNDP and IL0 is being used by the Ministry of Employment. Public finance For purposes of monitoring on a monthly basis the main elements of the fiscal program, the timeliness of public finance statistics was improved by the introduction in 1994 of a new expenditure coding system that allows data to be generated on a cash basis from the Bank of Ghana records. However, a more comprehensive breakdown of expenditures is only available with a lag of Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicAPPENDIX about two months. The authorities are currently introducing an expenditure tracking system which will improve the qua:Lity of expenditure data and reduce the lags involved. Expenditure data on a commitment basis are not available. Official estimates relating to expenditures financed by externally funded project aid are produced with a considerable lag and are subject to estimation errors owing to timing differences, exchange valuation, and recording of the technical assistance component. However, staff estimates of these expenditures are derived from balance of payments data. Fiscal indicators are generally available on a monthly basis, but the fiscall accounts are published only on an annual basis. Data on the core public enterprises are collected by the State Enterprise Commisaion, but are not published regularly. Data on performance of some key enterprises, including the Ghana National Petroleum Corporation, are not available. However, for some enterprises a partial indication of their financial position can be derived from their outstanding credit balances with the banking system. Monetary data Monetary data are compiled routinely, and the timeliness of the Bank of Ghana balance sheet is good. Trial balance data are available weekly, and end-of-month data are reported to the Fund with a lag of 5-10 days. Monthly commercial bank accounts are reported with a lag of one month. Following long-term technical assistance from the Fund's Statistics Department, the compilation of the net foreign assets of the Bank of Ghana has recently showed significant improvements. The Bank of Ghana is in the process of expanding its computerization program. Balance of pavments and external debt Balance of payments estimates are compiled by the Bank of Ghana and are only published annually. Data for exports are available on a more frequent basis, but import data are usually subject to considerable lags, owing to unreli.able customs statistics. Recent computerization resulted In some improvements in the customs records, but there is scope for further improve- ments. External debt data are prepared by ,the Debt Unit at the Ministry of Finance. With technical assistance from the Commonwealth Secretariat, there have recently been significant improvements in the debt reporting system, but efforts are being made to realize further progress in this area. Publication Reporting to the Fund for purposes of IFS publication has recently improved. However, there are still lags of 4-5 months in reporting monetary, price, and international transactions data, and the lag in reporting exchange rates is l-2 months. The frequency of publication of the Quarterly Economic Bulletin of the Bank of Ghana has recently improved, but data are still published with lags of up to 6 months. The Quarterly Digest Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 61 - of Statistics is usually published by the Statistical Service with a longer lag. In general, statistical information from official sources is not made available on a timely basis to the public. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public