DOCUMENT OF INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND NOT FOR PUBLIC USE MASTER FILES ROOM HQ C-525 0450 EBSl99f 102 CONFIDENTIAL June 16,1999 To: Members of the Executive Board From: The Secretary Subject: Azerbaijan Republic-Staff Report for the 1999 Article IV Consultation, Midterm Review Under the Third Annual Arrangement Under the Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility, Fifth Review Under the Extended Arrangement, and Request for Modification of Performance,Criteria Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staff report for the 1999 Article IV consultation with Azerbaijan Republic, the midterm review under the third annual arrangement under the Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility, the fifth review under the Extended Arrangement, and Azerbaijan Republic’s request for modification of performance criteria, which is tentatively scheduled for discussion on Wednesday, June 30, 1999. Draft decisions appear on pages 25527. Mr. Owen (ext. 3881 l), Mr. D.G. Jones (ext. 38016), or Mr. Mered (ext. 35403) is available to answer technical or factual questions relating to this paper prior to the Board discussion. Unless the Documents Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the European Commission, the Islamic Development Bank, and the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development, following its consideration by the Executive Board. Att: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicCONFIDENTIAL INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AZERBAIJAN REPUBLIC Staff Report for the 1999 Article IV Consultation, Midterm Review Under the Third Annual Arrangement Under the Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility, Fifth Review Under the Extended Arrangement, and Request for Modification of Performance Criteria Prepared by the European II and Policy Development and Review Departments Approved by Oleh Havrylyshyn and G. Russell Kincaid June 16, 1999 The discussions were held in Baku during April 28-May 12, 1999. The mission team consisted of Messrs. Owen (head), Jones and Mered (EU2), Mr. Ma (FAD), Ms. Mouysset (LEG), Ms. Psalida (PDR), Mrs. Romanova (BLS) and Mrs. Duffield-Sorkowitz (EU2). Mr Dunn the resident representative, also participated. The mission met with Prime Minister Rasizade, Central Bank Governor Rustamov, Finance Minister Yusifov, other senior government officials, and members of the business and diplomatic communities. The mission worked closely with an overlapping mission from MAE, whose work focused on bank restructuring and supervision, and financial and foreign exchange market reforms, and with the new FAD tax administration advisor All end-March performance criteria under the program were observed. The attached letter from the authorities to the Managing Director (LOI, Appendix IV) reports on implementation of the program and outlines policy adjustments for the remainder of the year. Upon Board completion ofthe review, SDR 5.85 million would be available under the ESAF-supported arrangement and SDR 5.27 million under the extended arrangement. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2- Contents Page Executive Summary ............................................................................................................. .3 I. Recent Developments and Program Performance.. ............................................................ .4 Il. Policy Discussions .......................................................................................................... 13 A. The Macroeconomic Policy Stance.. ........................................................................... 13 B. Institutional and Structural Reforms.. .......................................................................... 14 C. External Sector ........................................................................................................... 19 III. Program Monitoring.. .............................. .................................................................... .22 IV. Staff Appraisal ............................................................................................................. .22 Text Tables 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. Text Boxes 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. Figures 1. 2. 3. 4. Appendixes I. II. III. IV. V. Selected Indicators.. ....................................................................................... 5 Status of Quantitative Indicative Targets and Performance Criteria ............... .6 Status of March 1999 Structural Benchmarks.. ............................................. 12 Summary Macroeconomic Indicators.. ......................................................... 28 Consolidated Operations of the General Government ................................... 29 Balance Sheet of the Azerbaijan National Bank and Monetary Survey.. ..... .30 Balance of Payments.. .................................................................................. 3 1 Exchange Rate and Competitiveness ............................................................ 10 Fiscal Transparency ..................................................................................... 16 The Costs of Doing Business in Azerbaijan ................................................. 17 Financial Sector Stability Assessment.. ........................................................ 18 Dealing with Y2K Problems.. ....................................................................... 18 Medium-Term Macroeconomic Framework.. ............................................... 20 Article VIII ................................................................................................. 22 Monetary Indicators ....................................................................................... 7 Exchange Rate and Intervention .................................................................... 8 Competitiveness Indicators .......................................................................... 1 1 Medium-Term Macroeconomic Indicators ................................................... 21 Fund Relations ............................................................................................ .32 Relations with the World Bag ....................................................................... .3 5 Statistical Issues.. ......................................................................................... 36 Letter of Intent.. .......................................................................................... 39 Public Information Notice-Background Section ........................................... .49 -. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3- . . . Deflationary trends have emerged in the economy in recent months, reflecting the impact of last year’s external shocks and the authorities’ tight policy response. Non- oil output registered an annual decline of 2 percent in the first quarter of 1999, and consumer prices fell 11 percent in the 12 months to April. Structural reforms have proceeded more slowly than planned. Discussions focused on measures to address these issues. All quantitative end-March performance criteria under the program were observed with large margins, reflecting overly restrictive macroeconomic policies. The cash fiscal deficit was well below its ceiling, despite weak revenue performance, and wage and pension arrears increased. The authorities continued to intervene to support the manat, which has depreciated only slightly in recent months. Structural reforms are proceeding, but with delays. Two first quarter structural benchmarks will be implemented prior to completion of the review. Preparation of public sector measures due later in the year is behind schedule, and there are increasing signs that widespread governance and corruption problems are an obstacle to private sector investment. The authorities acknowledged that the real exchange rate had become overvalued and that macroeconomic policies should now be eased. Monetary conditions have since been relaxed, mainly through the use of government deposits at the central bank to clear pension arrears. In addition, the authorities have further reduced foreign exchange market intervention and intend to permit a significant depreciation of the exchange rate. The staff argued for a move to a more flexible exchange rate regime, but the authorities preferred to continue managing the rate as it depreciates, to avoid a rapid or excessive movement. Structural reforms will be accelerated, especially to address governance problems in the tax administration and the rest of the public sector. The authorities also intend to review their strategy towards the banking sector The authorities reaffIrmed their intention to accept the obligations of Article VIII, sections 2, 3, and 4. However, they indicated during a recent review by the Fund’s legal department that they wished first to clarify the legal framework regarding taxation and tax certification of earnings by non residents. Azerbaijan’s medium-term prospects and capacity to repay the Fund remain strong. Given the authorities’ commitments and their good track record, the staff recommends completion of the review. The authorities intend to request a successor arrangement when the current arrangements expire. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4- 1. RECENT DEVELOPMENTS AND PROGRAM PERFORMANCE 1. Following an increase in real GDP of 10 percent in 1998, growth has slowed in 1999 in the wake of the Russian crisis and last year’s decline in oil prices. GDP in the first quarter of 1999 was 6 percent higher than a year earlier, but this was more than accounted for by rapid growth of oil production (Table 1). Non-oil output contracted by about 2 percent, compared with nearly 7 percent growth in 1998. The slowdown reflects the impact of cuts in foreign investment in response to the fall in oil prices, weaker external demand and deteriorating competitiveness against CIS countries, and tight liquidity. 2. Tight financial policies and an influx of cheap imports from Russia accounted for a fall in consumer prices of 8 percent during 1998 and nearly 11 percent in the 12 months to April (Figure 1). Lower import prices alone are estimated to have reduced the price level by at least 6% percent in the second half of 1998. Since December, however, the price level has been broadly flat. 3. Monetary conditions have been tighter than envisaged under the program. Manat reserve money declined by 21 percent during 1998 and a further 11 percent in the first quarter of 1999. This largely reflects a decline in manat money demand following the Russian crisis, as Azeris switched from manat to dollars, and the authorities’ decision to intervene in the foreign exchange market in response to this to prevent a depreciation of the manat (Figure 2). The share of foreign currency deposits in broad money has risen to an average of 33 percent in the first quarter of 1999, compared with 27 percent in the first half of 1998. There are also indications that more US dollar cash is circulating in the economy. With price deflation, real interest rates have risen sharply (Figure I), and bank credit to the private sector has been flat. Tight fiscal policy has also contributed to the decline in reserve money: the cash fiscal deficit was manat 130 billion (% percent of annual GDP) below the end-March program ceiling, despite weak tax revenues. Government use of its deposits at the Azerbaijan National Bank was lower than programmed (Table 2). 4. The authorities have continued to intervene to support the manat, albeit less actively than in the period immediately following the Russian crisis. The nominal exchange rate against the dollar has depreciated by only 3 percent since early December 1998, when the authorities gave up their efforts to maintain a fixed rate against the dollar. Since the onset of the Russian crisis, the real effective exchange rate has appreciated by more than 10 percent, and other measures of competitiveness suggest an even larger deterioration, reflecting the authorities’ decision to hold the rate while most competitors have experienced large depreciations (Box 1, Figure 3). Nevertheless, net international reserves were well above the end-March program floor (after adjustment for unanticipated flows), and by end- May gross international reserves had risen to 3 % months of total imports (4 months, excluding oil sector imports), helped by recent large oil bonus payments and disbursement of the second tranche of the World Bank’s SAC I. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 1. Azerbaijan: Selected Indicators 1991 1998 1999 YGiI Yi%U Ql YW PrOglam OUttWtl ounum Original Revised PrClgKVll Program Annual inflation (end of period) 0.4 0.5 Annual real GDP growth Of which: non-oil External current account In millions of US dollars In percent of GDP External debt in percent of GDP External debt service in percent of exports of GNFS Gross official reserves (end-period) In millions of US dollars Months of next year’s imports Months of next year’s imports (excluding oil sector) Exchange rate (end of period, mmaf/lJS dollar) Reserve money growth (annual. end of period) General govemment cash balance @ercent of GDP) 5.8 8.0 7.8 4.8 -915 -23.1 11.7 7.4 467 432 2.3 2.2 3.2 2.8 3,888 3.860 35.1 -1.7 -1,280 -29.8 12.5 5.1 -20.7 -4.3 -1.6 -10.5 10.0 6.2 6.9 -2.0 -1,363 -33.1 13.3 5.3 449 524 2.3 2.1 2.8 3.2 3,890 3.929 -21.3 -23.6 -4.2 -3.6 5.0 5.0 7.0 3.8 3.5 -0.3 -1,566 -1,070 -32.5 -26.9 16.6 20.7 5.5 5.3 590 605 2.2 2.8 3.6 3.1 10.0 -3.1 10.0 -4.0 Sources: Azerbaijan authorities; and Fund staff estimates. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 2. Azerbaijan: Status of Quantitative Indicative Targets and Performance Criteria l/ (In billions of manat, unless otherwise stated) end-December 1998 end-MarCb 1999 B% Adjusted Actual Base Adjusted Actual Quantitative performance criteria 0mmlative fiscal deficit of the general government she Sept. 30, 1998 stock of “et credit from the ANB to general g”vemme”t Net domestic assets of the ANB FIoor on net in@matiord reserves of the ANB (in millions of US dollars) Cunndatlve net disbuncments of external loans with O-l maturity year (ii millions of US dollars) 245 289 195 389 475 345 107 111 64 -174 219 151 609 613 580 259 682 437 119 118 127 222 111 130 :, 5 5 0 IO 10 0 ’ Cumulative contracting and guuankeing of nonconcessional external loans ;j~Iions of US dollars) 1-5 malurity yea Indicative targets Stodc of expenditure arrears of the Republican budget TOti Arrears for water, elaricity, and gas Manat reserve money Sources: Azerbaijan authorities. l! Definitions are contained in EBS/99/1, Appendix III, Annex III. 150 150 90 150 150 90 50 50 0 50 50 0 470 425 412 440 395 523 430 385 382 410 365 383 1065 1065 1057 1113 1113 937 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicFigure 1. Azerbaijan: Monetary Indicators (I” percent per anmml) Real Interest Rate (90 day manat deposit rate minus 12.month CPI inflation, percent) Source: Azerbaijan authorities. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-8- Figure 2. Azerbaijan: Exchange Rate and Intervention Interest Rate (Commercial hanks’ deposit rate; 3 month; in percent) Source: Azerbaijan authorities. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-9- 5. The current account deficit, which has widened in recent years reflecting investment in the oil sector, rose further in 1998 in response to external shocks. Imports from Russia rose particularly sharply after the depreciation of the ruble in August 1998, while the value of exports was depressed by low commodity prices and weak demand in CIS markets.’ Preliminary indications are that these trends continued into the first quarter of 1999. 6. Fiscal policy during 1998 and early 1999 was hampered by a substantial revenue shortfall due to the fall in oil prices and continuing problems with tax compliance. The authorities responded with expenditure compression, and arrears on wages and pensions began to emerge from end-September 1998 onwards. By end-April 1999, pension arrears amounted to manat 125 billion (1% months of payments, or% percent of GDP) and central government wage arrears to manat 25 billion. Government arrears to utilities companies remained substantial, at about 2% percent of GDP, but there was no increase in the first quarter reflecting the introduction of commitments control by the treasury. 7. With substantial financing available under the program ceilings, rising arrears reflected poor budgetary management. Nonetheless, there has been progress recently in strengthening budgetary management. The treasury system is now My functional, with limits on expenditures and commitments set for all budgetary institutions. A macroeconomic policy group is being established at the ministry of finance to strengthen macroeconomic analysis and planning. And the ministry of finance has prepared and submitted a proposal for computerization of the treasury. However, the treasury bill market remained dormant, which limited the authorities’ ability to meet spending obligations, given fluctuating revenues. ‘The final estimate for exports of goods in 1998 was US$678 million, US%9 million less than the partially projected figure used in the calculation of the compensable shortfall under the CCFF (EBS/99/1, Appendix IV). Thus, the final shortfall was larger than the amount compensated. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-lO- Box 1: Exchange rate and competitiveness Since the onset of the Russian crisis in August 1998, the Azerbaijan authorities have closely managed the exchange rate to avoid significant depreciation. In the period August-November 1998, they intervened heavily and maintained a constant rate against the dollar. Since December, intervention has been less but the manat has depreciated by only 3 percent against the dollar. Other CIS countries have responded to the Russian crisis very differently. Most have now given up intervention and have allowed their exchange rates to float freely. This has typically led to fairly rapid and large depreciations, generally followed by stabilization at levels 30-50 percent below their pre-crisis levels. With the exception of Russia, countries that have let their exchange rates float have experienced an increase in 12-month inflation rates of lo-20 percentage points. CIS countries account for almost 40 percent of Azerbaijan’s external trade. The sharp nominal appreciation of the manat against these currencies means that the real effective exchange rate has appreciated by more than 10 percent since last July, even though there has been some real depreciation against the dollar (reflecting modest nominal depreciation and sharp falls in consumer prices in Azerbaijan). Given that oil prices are still some US$3-4 a barrel lower than in late 1997 (when staff assessed that the level of the real exchange rate was broadly appropriate), arguably some real depreciarion would have been warranted over this period. Even more strikingly, there has been a massive real appreciation against the Russian ruble, the currency of Azerbaijan’s second largest trading partner, amounting to around 50 percent since last July. Real exchange rate measures, based on consumer prices, probably understate the deterioration in cost competitiveness that has occurred. Perhaps a better measure of this is provided by relative movements in dollar wages. Azeri dollar wages have risen sharply relative to those of its three major CIS trading partners (Russia, Ukraine, and Georgia) since last July. Russian and Ukrainian dollar wages have fallen to around the Azeri level, and Georgian wages are now substantially lower than those in Azerbaijan (Figure 3). This deterioration in competitiveness, and more generally the tight policy stance, is adversely affecting the real economy: non-oil output and prices are falling; non-oil exports fell and imports (excluding those to the oil sector) rose strongly in 1998; as a result, the current account deficit widened by 9 percent of GDP; and real interest rates increased sharply to nearly 25 percent. These developments all point clearly to the need for a significant depreciation of the real exchange rate in conjunction with fiscal and monetary policy easing. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 11 - Figure 3. Azerbaijan: Competitiveness Indicators Real Effective Exchange Rate Index (June 1993 = I .O) 5.0 , -CIS - - - Non-CIS -Total Monthly Average Wages, January 1994 -January 1999 (In U.S. dollars, period averagc) 250 r 200 150 100 50 0 -Azerbaijan ---Georgia ~ Russia _ _ _ Ukraine Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12. Table 3. Azerbaijan: Status of March 1999 Structural Benchmarks AsofJune 11, 1999 ACtiOn 1. Completion of treasnry-baset staffing review. 2. Implementation of a decompressed public sector wage scale. 3. Approval of legislation to allow the State Tax htqxctoratt (STI) and the Social Protection Fund (SPF) to enforce notices of levy against tax delinquents, and to seize and auction their pww. 4. Submission of an acceptable business plan for Agmprombank. 5. Completion of a review of the loan portfolio of Pmminvestbank (PIE?), to establish the extent of bad lOaIlS. 6. Invite foreign banks to raise their capital up to 30 percent of total bmking system capital. 7. Approval by parliament of the new law on privatization. Approval of the 1999-2000 privatization program, including a list of large enterprises to be included and specifying which will be sold Uuough voucher auctions. 8. Submit the new tax code to the president’s of&x (end- January 1999). I Status Completed. Not completed. Completed. Completed. To be completed as a vrior action. Completed. Not completed. To be completed by end- September 1999. (IS (1 struchrral benchmark. To be completed as (I prior action. Remarks Information on the civil service (administrative staff) at the central and local levels is complete The minisby of finance has received information from ministries and local treasury offices on service ministries’ staff positions (e.g., medical personnel, teachc.rs, police, etc.)-both sanctioned and a&ally filled. T%is information was snbmitted to staffon June 1, 1999. The authorities and World Bank staEargne that, given cnrrent budgetary pressures &d the need for further preparation, implementation should be postponed. Legislation now allows both the STI and the SPF to enforce notices of levy and seek court approval to seize assets of tax debtors more than 90 days in arrears. ANB regulations now require that commercisl banks hold notices of levy for 90 days. The draft new tax code contains pmvisions for attaching, seizing and disposing of property of tax debtors by the tax authoiities. Acceptable business plan submitted to staff on March 9, 1999. Special working group has finished its review of the loan portfolio of Prominvest Bank. Commission meeting to decide on the total amount of bad loans held by PIB is schxhded for early June. Protocol #19, adopted on November 28,1998, allows foreign banks to hold 30 percent of banking system capital. Foreign banks that were invited to raise their capital dozing 1998 have so far declined to do so. The presidential administration is reviewing both the draft law on privatisation and the draf privatization program for 1999-2000. Submission to parliament has been delayed by the president’s recent illness and the need for further amendments to reduce the scope for cormption. 7he dmft tax code is in the flnal stage of review in the Cabinet of Ministers. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13- 8. Progress on structural reforms has continued, but with substantial delays in some areas (Table 3). The end-June performance criterion relating to the offering for sale of five large-scale enterprises was observed ahead of schedule. Four first quarter structural benchmarks remain to be implemented, but two of these will be completed prior to the Board discussion. In some cases-notably the privatization program-implementation has been held up by the recent illness of the president. Preparation of public sector reforms due in the remainder of 1999 is lagging, with little work done since a World Bank conference on the issue in Baku in mid-March. 9. The restructuring of the four state-owned banks continues, but the prospects for the two weakest banks remain bleak (LOI, paragraphs 20-23). The preparation of the International Bank for privatization is going well: financial advisors have been appointed, the authorities have invited the EBRD to purchase a strategic stake (thus observing the end-May structural performance criterion), and it has expressed a strong interest in doing so. Preparations to offer the Savings Bank for sale are also moving ahead. However, the two weakest banks (Prominvest and Agroprom Banks) continue to deteriorate, with financial losses mounting and liquidity constraints leading to loss of contidence and transfer of business to other institutions. D. POLICY DISCUSSIONS IO. Discussions focused on measures to help revive the flagging economy, including an easing of financial policies, changes to the de facto exchange rate regime, and an acceleration of structural reforms to reduce corruption and other impediments to growth in the non-oil economy. In addition, in the context of the Article IV consultations, the staff reviewed the status of the exchange system, and discussed the authorities’ intentions concerning acceptance of the obligations of Article VIII, sections, 2, 3, and 4. It also reviewed progress towards fiscal transparency and, with the participation of staff from MAE, it assessed developments in the financial sector. A. The Macroeconomic Policy Stance 11. The authorities acknowledged that financial policies bad been overly restrictive and that the exchange rate had become overvalued. Whereas they argued that their policy stance had been appropriate in order to avoid a sharp loss of contidence and stability in the wake of the Russian crisis, they recognized that, now that the immediate crisis had passed, it was time to ease policies. They therefore proposed to use the margins under the program ceilings to reduce the stock of pension arrears by manat 90 billion (% percent of GDP) from its end-April level, as a prior action for the program review. As a result, the cash fiscal deficit in 1999 is projected to be manat 676 billion (4 percent of GDP), compared with the original Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14- program target of manat 580 billion (3 percent). However, on a commitments basis, the deficit is little changed from the original program (Table S).’ 12. Larger cash expenditures should contribute to an easing of monetary conditions. The authorities intend to finance much of the arrears reduction by drawing on accumulated privatization proceeds deposited at the ANB. In addition, the ANB is prepared to extend increased credit to commercial banks, subject to the availability of adequate collateral. The monetary targets for the remainder of the year are unchanged (Table 6) allowing room for reserve money to expand more rapidly in response to these policy adjustments. 13. The staff and the authorities agreed that, in conjunction with an easing of financial policies, some depreciation of the exchange rate would be appropriate. The staff urged the authorities to switch to a more flexible exchange rate regime, arguing that this would be the most effective way to correct the overvaluation of the exchange rate and halt the loss of reserves. However, the authorities expressed concern that market reaction to a sharp depreciation was likely to be adverse, particularly with the president ill and out of the country, and that this could precipitate an uncontrolled and excessive slide in the exchange rate. They preferred to continue to manage the rate, but to tinther reduce intervention. In their view, a nominal depreciation in the range IO-15 percent was warranted, but they agreed with staffto review this assessment at the time of the next mission at end-July. 14. In line with their intention to reduce intervention, the authorities proposed to raise the program floors for net international reserves in the second half of 1999 (by US515 million by end-December). They have also undertaken to liberalize the foreign exchange market, in line with recommendations by MAE, by removing administrative constraints between various segments ofthe market (LOI, paragraphs 9-10). 15. These policy adjustments should help to limit the downturn in output this year, and halt the decline in prices. Nonetheless, projections of nominal and real GDP in 1999 have been revised down substantially, with non-oil output now projected to decline slightly for the year as a whole (Table 4 and LOI, paragraph 7). Given current deflationary pressures, the staff believes that, even with significant depreciation, inflation can be limited to under 5 percent, the program target, during 1999. With prices flat so far this year, this would be consistent with only a modest rise in the price level during the remainder of the year. The authorities see a risk that inflation might turn out higher, in the range 5-10 percent. B. Institutional and Structural Reforms 16. Adherence to program fiscal targets for the remainder of the year will require a sustained effort to improve tax administration and further compression of non-priority spending. Revenues were below target in the first quarter and, despite the recovery in oil prices, are projected to be lower than programmed in 1999 by manat 240 billion (about * Both the cash and commitments deficits, expressed as a percentage of GDP, have increased by about % percentage point, as a result of a downward revision to projected nominal GDP. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 15- 1% percent of GDP). This reflects downward revisions to projected nominal GDP and continued problems with tax administration. The authorities are implementing a range of measures to improve tax administration (LOI, paragraph 1 l), focusing on areas where they believe corruption is most widespread-taxation of alcohol, tobacco and oil products.s Given delays in submission of the tax code to parliament, approval of the new code by end-June is now unlikely, but it should be in place well before the 2000 budget. In constraining expenditures, every effort will be made to protect budgetary allocations for health, education, and refUgees.4 However, in view of budgetary pressures and the need for &tither preparation, the authorities have been forced to postpone a planned decompression of the public sector wage scale (LOI, paragraph 13). 17. The need for a flexible source of financing to strengthen budgetary management and avoid further accumulation of arrears has prompted the authorities to implement measures to strengthen the treasury bill market (LOI, paragraph 16). In particular, in recent auctions the ministry of finance has accepted all bids, allowing a true market- determined interest rate to emerge. This has led to a rise in the interest rate, from 15 percent to 19 percent, but has also led to increased net sales which have contributed to tinancing the reduction of pension arrears. Cooperation between the ANB and ministry of finance in this area has improved markedly. 18. The authorities indicated that preparatory work was progressing on other public sector reform measures due to be implemented as structural benchmarks during the remainder of the year, but that there was likely to be some slippage (LOI, paragraphs 18- 19). Several measures were unlikely to be completed by end-June, as envisaged under the program, specifically: parliamentary approval of new laws on the prosecutors and police; preparation of plans to streamline the cabinet of ministers; drafting of a new civil service law; and implementation of a severance pay scheme. Despite some progress, significant problems remain in the area of fiscal transparency (Box 2). The authorities assured the stalf that they would accelerate work to the extent possible, subject to their own capacity constraints and the availability of assistance from the World Bank and other donors. The staff expressed concern that, in the absence of significant progress in this area, corruption would continue, further undermining tax revenues and discouraging badly needed foreign investment in the non-oil sector (Box 3). 19. The banking system remains weak and currently plays little role in financing private sector development. The staff assessment of the soundness of the financial system, based on the findings of a recent MAE mission, is set out in Box 4. In summary, there are too many private banks, many of which do not comply with prudential criteria and are probably s The projected increase in revenues as a percentage of GDP between 1998 and 1999 (Table 5) reflects higher oil prices as well as measures to strengthen the tax administration. 4 Health and education expenditures have declined aa a percentage of GDP in recent years, while spending by the social protection timd has increased. Military spending has been stable. Details are provided in the Selected Issues paper, Chapter I (to be issued shortly). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 16- Box 2. Fiscal Transparency The authorities have recently achieved progress in expenditure management, thereby enhancing fiscal transparency. With the implementation ofthe new treasury system and the implementation of quarterly limits on commitments by budgetary institutions, the monitoring of budget execution and the reporting of budget outtums should improve. Information on the extrabudgetary activities of budgetary institutions is now readily available, and these activities are to be integrated into the State budget in 2000. However, major obstacles remain. The brief survey below is based on discussions of the fiscal transparency questionnaire with the authorities and others involved in fiscal aflbirs. Clarity of roles and responsibilifies. Government involvement in the private sector is pervasive and not well-defined. In the financial sector. state-owned banks, which account for around 60 percent of the system’s total assets, have engaged in quasi-fiscal activities, reflected in the loans to current or former state enterprises, extended at the government’s direction. ANB credit to insolvent hanks has also been a source of quasi-fiscal expenditures. In the nonfinancial sector, the lack of transparent arrangements is most evident in the state enterprises’ persistent tax arrears. With regard to fiscal management, the legal framework does not currently set out transparency and accountability requirements, defining accountability mainly in terms of financial compliance. The statutory basis for determining tax liabilities is not always clear; furthermore, tax regulations are generally unclear and thcrc are serious problems with compliance. For example, ad hoc decisions are made on individual tax cases, and tax liabilities can be negotiated (especially by the state enterprises in the petroleum sector). Rrblic availabiliry of informafion. The budget law and budget reporting cover most of the central and general government. However, public information is currently not readily available on the level and composition of debt or financial assets, and not at all on the extent of contingent liabilities, tax expenditures, and quasi-fiscal activities, and only some aggregate information is presented on the outturn of the preceding fiscal year. There is currently no advance release date calendar for fiscal data Open budget preparation, execution. and reporting. Budget documentation does not currently specify the fiscal objectives, the macroeconomic framework, or identifiable major fiscal risks. Thcrc is no formal framework for medium-term fiscal targeting or fiscal sustainability, and the main indicator of the fiscal policy stance is the overall balance. In budget preparation, existing commitments under current policies are not distinguished from new policies. Independent assurances of integt?ty. There is currently no formal external audit of government accounts, and the standards for data integrity and quality set out in the IMF’s General Data Dissemination System are not currently adhered to. The national statistics office in practice has technical independence. fhc authorities are aware of the problems discussed above and intend to address these deficiencies, in :onjunction with the World Bank’s public sector reform program, as set out in the Policy Framework Paper for 1999-2001. Accordingly, new budgetary procedures will be used in preparing the 2001 budget, which for the first time will present a medium-term fmncial framework. A financial planning anit will be established and commitment accounting is being introduced to prevent the accumulation af new budgetary arrears. The auditing capability of the finance inspectorate will be enhanced. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17- Box 3: The Costs of Doing Business in Azerbaijan Domestic and foreign investors io Azerbaijan regolarly voice complaints about the investment climate. Investors face a difficult operating environment in part because of contradictory and unclear laws. These concerns are, however, compounded by rent-seeking behavior of government officials. As a result, the costs of operating a business in Axrbaijan are high. The basic legal framework for foreign investment in Azerbaijan is quite strong. Foreign investors have full rights to repatriate all earning& have protections against nationalization, and can appeal to arbitration. Otber legislative aad regulatory acts that apply to all businesses in the country are, bowever, often contradictory and/or poorly specified. Some key legislation cmtaius provisions that inhibit importaM legal processes and the structure of the legal system renders the court system virtually unusable. These factors often discourage initial investments or create uncertainty for investors once operations have begun. Weakaesses ia the legislative base include: . Tax laws andregulafions that include .wvere penalriesfir minor inJ?ingements and strictly limit deductible business expenses; . Legislation governing business regisfrafion that is contradictory, and requests for documentation that is not required by law during the registration process; . Licensing and ~egulofory oufhorily for some activities-including air, road, rail, and sea transport--that still rests witi state concems that have direct commercial interests in those activities; . A privafizafion process that has allowed Ihe state property committee 10 change at any lime the price for options that foreign investors must purchase in order to use privatisation vouchers; and l A legal sysrem in which courts are still strongly intluenwl by the prosecutor general’s office and the ministry of intemal affairs, although the constitution provides for an independent judiciary. The lack of consistency and clarity in key legislation and the regulatory and legal environment facilitates rent-seeking. This has led to dissatisfaction on the part of businesses generally. a fall off in investment. and the withdrawal of foreign owned businesses from the non-oil Sector in Azerbaijan. Tbe most visible example of investors’ coaceros about corruption in Azerbaijan was recent public debate concerning the closure of 110 Turkish-owned businesses in Baku during 1998. The authorities acknowledged that corruption and problems with the tax system were major factors behind these closures. Turkey has been the second largest source of foreign investment in Azerbaijan, and a relatively large share of this investment has been outside of the oil sector. Investor sentiment was also gauged by a business survey conducted in 1997. This survey revealed Ihal investors feel that: . The business environment for a lirm depends critically on having close relations with government officials: and . The rapid and transparcnl privatization of slrategic slate assets. and protection of private businesses from unwananted investigations and extonion by government officials and law enforcement agencies, would contribute most lo the development of the private sector. The authorities clearly recogaize these problems, and tbeir economic program includes a wide raage of measures to address them: reform of the tax code; passage of a new privatiaatioo law; judicial reform; and civil service reform Details are set out in the Policy Framework Paper, 1999-2001 @BD/94/4, January 1 I, 1999, Section KE). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-18- Box 4. Financial Sector Stability Assessment Azerbaijao’s tioancial system is frail, largely doe to its weak banking system. The country has too many poorly performing banks: only 49 of the 79 licensed banks meet all prudential criteria established by the. central bank. About 50 of the 75 private banks, representing 18 percent of all assets, are probably not viable in the medium-term. In aggregate, non-performing loans represent nearly one-third of all loans, and provisioning exists for only 16 percent of such loans. Over 90 percent of the loan portfolios of two state-owned banks (Agropmm and Prominvest Banks), are non-performing, and these banks account for nearly one-third of all loans. By intemalional accounting standards. these banks arc insolve”\ but ihc authorities oppose their closure because of their importance to the paymenls system, particularly outside the capital. Banks in Azerbaijan have faced diftkult conditions. Poor economic performance in the early 1990s. when GDP shrank by over 45 percent from 1991 to 1995, and lhc slow pact of structoral reform have limited the development of creditworthy borrowers. The conflict with Armenia and major shortcomings in the privatisation of state-owned enterprises (liabilities for outstanding loans were not transferred in the process of dismantliog the Soviet ownership structure), meant that banks held claims on many corporate and cooperative entities that no longer existed. Lack of faith in the banking system. caused by nmncroos failures (over 100 bank licenses were revoked between 1995 and 1998), and governance concerns, have hindered the ability of banks to attract depositors and expand their loan portfolios. Banks have been unable lo manage their available resources effectively bccausc of limited banking expertise Slow progress toward i&a-bank account consolidation and an inefficient payments system make these problems worse by limiting banks’ ability 10 determine (heir consolidated position and manage their liquidity. The lack of a functioning securities market, and tic abscncc of an e&ctive market for interbank funds forther hampers banks’ liquidity management. Weak monetary management and supenisioo of tinnncinl institutions have exacerbated the poor health of the finnocial system. A relatively high level and uneven enforcement of rcscrvc requirements, and shortcomings in the design and operations of other monetary ins-ems limit the central bank’s ability to implement monetary policy objectives effectively. Banks’ persistent violation of reserve requirements and prudential norms creates moral hamrds for the managers of problem instilutions, and discourages other banks from observing these regulations. Although the supervisory function of the ANB has developed various capital- , related prudential ratios for monitoring banks’ performance, it has inadequate information systems to analyze 1 comprehensively trends in individual banks or the overall banking system. Available information is compromised by different accounting standards across banks and account consolidation problems within individual banks. Moreover, lack of a clear legal framework to guide the closure of lituncial instimtions, and lax enforcement of existing regulations prevent timely resolution of banking problems. Lbnils on foreign bank pa&cipaIion in the system also constrain transfer of skills and technology which could strengthen the system and give domestic borrowers access lo additional sources of credit. Box 5: Dealing with YZK problems In February 1999, the president eslablished a state commission. led by the prime minister. io deal with all YZK- related issues in Azerbaijan. All government ministries are represented on the commission at the highest level, as are the central bank, the science academy, the railway company, the state oil and elecuicity companies, and the International Bank (IBA). The commission appointed its deputy chairman (the deputy prime minister) as national coordinator, and specific tasks have been assigned to each commission member to deal with YZK issues in their respective areas. The commission has drawn up a program to make an inventory of all computers in state agencies and begin a check of their YZK-compliance. Efforts are underway to find personnel and ways to remove noncompliant machinery and soflware, and install compliant apparatus. The mission established that work is in progress in the central bank, the IBA, the ministry of communication, and Ihe ministry of finance. The authorities foresee no o&terns with the management of Fund transactions. The World Bank (throuti the Information Dcvclopment &ogram) is providing U~$600,000 to finance Y2K-related work in A&baij& Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 19- not viable over the medium term. Prudential criteria and reserve requirements are enforced unevenly, and there is no proper legal framework for closure of financial institutions. The restructuring strategy so far has focused excessively on preserving and privatizing the four state-owned banks (LOI, paragraphs 20-23), the potential budgetary cost of which, particularly for the two weakest banks, is large. 20. In the light of these findings, the authorities intend to undertake a careful review of their strategy in close consultation with MAE and World Bank staff. The review will examine the role of Prominvest and Agroprom Banks in the payments system, especially in rural areas, and consider alternative approaches that could maintain payment services at lower cost. At this point, however, the authorities are firmly opposed to liquidation of these two banks, despite the strong recommendation of MAE and World Bank staff that this would be the best approach. Regarding the strategy towards private banks, the authorities are considering a range of recommendations by MAE to strengthen enforcement of prudential standards and reserve requirements and improve the legal framework. 21. Implementation of the privatization program has been held up. In addition, there are serious post-privatization problems, particularly in the agricultural sector, and much work is needed to restructure large public enterprises. Following fin-ther amendments to the draft privatization law to reduce the scope for corruption in the voucher auctions, parliament is now expected to approve the program by end-September (LOI, paragraph 25). Privatization of agricultural land and distribution of land titles has progressed rapidly (LOI, paragraph 24), but competitiveness and profitability of the sector has deteriorated. The staff stressed that successful implementation of measures to develop extension services, rural credit, and infrastructure, as well as real exchange rate depreciation, will be needed to address these problems. In the energy sector, the authorities argued that the need for restructuring to improve collections from customers and increase tax compliance was urgent and, with World Bank assistance, should assume a higher priority. The staff noted that timely completion this year of an audit of the state oil company would be an important next step. C. External Sector 22. The external current account deficit is projected to decline in 1999, reflecting a recovery in oil exports and a sharp fall in imports associated with oil investment. Oil production is rising strongly, and the oil price is now projected to average US%14 a barrel in 1999, US$l higher than in 1998. However, considerable uncertainties attach both to the sustainability of higher oil prices, and to the volume of oil exports, which have been adversely affected this year by frequent closures of the northern pipeline through Russia. Also, a loss of competitiveness against most CIS countries is likely to continue to dampen non-oil exports this year. 23. Foreign direct investment is expected to be sharply lower in 1999, as oil companies retrench in response to low and uncertain oil prices and the lack of any substantial new commercial oil discoveries to date. In part, the fall reflects decisions to postpone and rephase investment, which is expected to pick up again in 2000. As it does, the Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2o- current account deficit is likely to widen, before moving rapidly towards balance by the middle of the decade as oil exports take off (Box 6, and Tables 4 and 7 set out the medium- term projections). External debt and debt service ratios are projected to remain low. However, with net disbursements by bilateral and multilateral donors projected to fall next year, on the basis of current commitments, modest financing gaps may emerge in the balance of payments in 2000-200 1, The authorities indicated that they would continue to need financial support, and intend to request a successor Fund-supported arrangement when the current arrangements expire at the end of this year (LOI, paragraphs 7 and 27). Box 6: Medium-Term Macroeconomic Framework The medium-term (1999-2001) macroeconomic framework has been revised to reflect worsening growth prospects. Real growth is now expected to average 3 % percent, compared with 6% percent previously (see Figure 4, and Tables 4 and 7). Underlying this less optimistic scenario is the expectation that oil extraction will rise strongly in 1999 but then stab&e over the following two years; direct investment in the oil sector will be lower than previously projected; and non-oil sector growth will be weaker reflecting both the recent deterioration in competitiveness and the impact of lower foreign investment on construction and service sectors. Nonetheless, the non-oil sector is projected to rebound from a slight decline in 1999 to achieve positive growth of 4-5 percent a year in 2000-2001, on the assumption of improved external competitiveness. Inflation is expected to remain in low single digits-averaging under 4 percent throughout the three-year period. Following a dip in 1999, gross investment is projected to recover strongly over the next few years, and is expected to be financed by rising foreign direct investment. National savings is projected to rise reflecting fiscal consolidation and rising oil revenues. The private savings-investment balance is projected to improve as investment in the oil sector declines after 2003. 24. The authorities continue to take steps to liheralize the foreign exchange and trade regimes. They reaffrrmed they intention to accept the obligations of Article VIII, sections 2, 3, and 4, once they have clarified the legal framework concerning taxation and tax certification of earnings by non residents (Box 7). Lack of clarity in this area could impede repatriation of such earnings, which could result in exchange restrictions. In preparation for Azerbaijan’s accession to the WTO, the government submitted its memorandum to the WTO working group in March, and is awaiting the next stage in negotiations. There have been no recent changes to import tariffs, but the authorities remain committed to reducing the general import tariff rate to 10 percent by end 2000.5 5 Azerbaijan has a rating of 5 (on a scale of 1-l 0) on the Fund’s index of overall trade restrictiveness. However, given the movement of items to lower tariff rates and the removal of non-tariff barriers, this rating will likely be revised down once the authorities provide the necessary detailed customs’ data. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 21 - Figure 4. Azerbaijan: Medium Term Macroeconomic Indicators Renl GDP Growth Savings - lnvutment Balances 36 (In p.&nt of GDP) I Sources: Azerbaijan authorities; and IMF staff estimates. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 22 - Box 7: Article VIII The mission, with the participation of the Fund’s legal department, reviewed the foreign exchange system and laws of Azerbaijan, and asccrtaincd the views of the authorities relating to the acceptance by Azerbaijan of the obligations under Article VIII, Sections 2,3, and 4. Azerbaijan has adopted further steps to streamline its exchange and payments system. In particular, it has eliminated the exchange restriction arising from limitations on the transfers on foreign exchange for current international transactions by individuals, including tourism, educational, or medical allowances. With the abolition of this restriction, Azerbaijan no longer maintains any exchange restriction under the transitional arrangements of Article XIV. Similarly, Azerbaijan has eliminated the previously identified exchange restrictions, subject to Article VIII, arising from the limitation on the access to the BICEX market by individuals for payments for current international transactions, and the limitation on advance import payments of mom than 180 days. The authorities expressed their willingness to accept the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4. They indicated, however, that they felt it necessary to clarify the legal framework regarding the taxation of proceeds held by non residents as a result of current international transactions, and in particular the tax certification requirements, before accepting the obligations of Article VIII. In particular, the authorities wanted to clarity that non residents wishing to transfer balances of proceeds resulting from current international transactions should only be required to pay taxes relating to the amounts to be transferred before proceeding with such transfers. They indicated that work on this issue would start shortly. The staff supported this approach. III. PFNXRAMMONITORING 25. The authorities will implement several measures prior to the Board meeting on the program review (Annex II1 of the LOI). Implementation of the program will continue to be monitored through a set of quantitative performance criteria and indicative targets, plus structural performance criteria and benchmarks. There have been no changes in the structure or definition of the performance criteria or indicative targets. Phasing of ESAF and GRA resources remains unchanged. Progress with program implementation will be assessed further during an end-year review, to be completed by mid-December 1999. IV. STAFFAPPRAISAL 26. The authorities’ firm policy response to external shocks experienced during 1998 allowed Azerbaijan to weather the storm better than most other countries in the region, hut there are now increasing signs that policy is contributing to deflationary trends in the economy. Both monetary and fiscal policy have been tighter than envisaged under the program, while output in the non-oil economy has turned down and prices have been falling. Macroeconomic policies clearly need to be eased to support near-term economic growth. To sustain real growth over the medium term, structural reforms will need to be intensified. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 23 - 21. The authorities acknowledged that financial policies had been overly restrictive and that the real exchange rate was now overvalued. Their decision to use the margins available under program ceilings to ease monetary and fiscal policies is appropriate and, combined with a further reduction in foreign exchange market intervention, should lead to some exchange rate depreciation. In particular, the use of accumulated privatization revenues to reduce pension arrears should provide a much needed injection of liquidity, while assisting directly one of the poorest groups in society. 28. While the staff favored a move to a more flexible exchange rate regime, it recognixed the authorities’ very strong preference to continue managing the exchange rate to avoid a rapid or excessive adjustment. The authorities nonetheless clearly stated their intention to permit a meaninglid depreciation in the short-term and proposed to raise the floors for net international reserves in the second half of 1999 to limit the scope for continued intervention. The measures they intend to take to liheralize the foreign exchange market by removing some existing administrative controls, broaden their participation in the market, and clarify tax certification requirements for non residents should help to deepen the foreign exchange market and pave the way for acceptance of the obligations of Article VIII, sections 2, 3, and 4. 29. Fiscal pressures remain severe, with weak tax administration, corruption and low oil prices all to blame. While higher oil prices should help to boost tax revenues in the second half of the year, the authorities should persist with the tough measures introduced recently or planned to tackle the key problem areas, namely taxation of alcohol, tobacco, and oil products. These measures challenge some powerful interest groups, and have already met strong resistance. Success in this effort, and in implementing a range of measures recommended by FAD missions and the newly appointed FAD short-term advisor, will be a key test of the authorities’ ability and willingness to tackle systemic governance problems. 30. Budgetary and expenditure management remain weak, as evidenced by the recent emergence of wage and pension arrears, but there are some encouraging signs of progress. The authorities recognize that, given the ample margins under program fiscal ceilings and large government deposits available at the ANB, rising government arrears are unacceptable. They reflect both poor planning and the absence of an active treasury bill market. Recent developments, such as the implementation of commitment control at the treasury, proposals for computerization of the treasury, and the establishment of a macroeconomic policy group at the ministry of finance should help to strengthen planning and control. In addition, there has been important progress in developing the treasury bill market, including a very welcome improvement in cooperation between the ANB and ministry of finance on this issue. A strong treasury hill market is needed as a flexible source of financing to strengthen budgetary management and provide an instrument for monetary policy operations. 31. Cumulative delays in implementing structural reforms have hampered development of the non-oil economy. Whereas in some areas-notably pension reforms and public enterprise restructuringdelays reflect the limited availability so far of technical assistance, in other areas where substantial assistance is being provided-such as banking Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 24 - and public sector reform-the problem appears to have been a lack of implementation capacity or will on the part of the authorities. The absence of significant progress on the public sector reform agenda in recent months is particularly worrying. This is the centerpiece of the government’s strategy to tackle governance and corruption problems, and the key component of the World Bank’s proposed SAC II. A major increase in effort will be needed to avoid serious slippage in the second half of the year. The staff also urges the authorities to continue to make headway in improving macroeconomic statistics, with technical assistance from the Fund and EU-TACIS (Appendix III), and to pay particular attention to enhancing the transparency of these data. The authorities are encouraged to hdfill their commitment to reduce the maximum import tariff rate to 10 percent in 2000. 32. A complete rethink of the strategy towards the banking sector is needed, and the staff welcomes the authorities’ decision to undertake such a review. Plans to privatize two of the state-owned banks this year are broadly on track but, despite the failure of efforts over three years to revive the other two, the authorities are reluctant to contemplate their liquidation, as these two banks sustain the payments system in rural areas. But the very substantial costs of recapitalizing and restructuring these banks needs to be weighed against the costs of other options, involving perhaps merger or transfer of rural branches to a healthier financial institution. Regarding the banking system as a whole, the authorities need to develop a clear strategy involving rigorous enforcement of prudential standards, a legal framework for closure of nonviable banks, and removal of limits on foreign participation in the banking system. The staff urges the ANB to work very closely with MAE and World Bank staff on this. 33. Despite short-term problems associated mainly with external shocks and the authorities’ subsequent policy response, Azerbaijan’s medium-term potential remains strong provided economic reforms are pursued vigorously. The recent easing of macroeconomic policy should help to stimulate growth in the non-oil economy. Although Azerbaijan is likely to need financial assistance from donors for several more years, as oil production begins to rise rapidly through the next decade the balance of payments should move into a substantial surplus. The key challenge remains to avoid dissipating this wealth through poor management and corruption-within the tax system and elsewhere in the public sector. The authorities recognize this, and have reaffirmed their commitment to accelerate public sector and other structural reforms. Although the risks of slippage in this area are significant, in view of their commitment and the continued strong record of program implementation the staffrecommends completion of the program review and supports the authorities’ request for modification of performance criteria. 34. The staff recommends that the next Article IV consultation be held on the standard 12-month cycle. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-25- V. PROPOSED DECISIONS The following draft decisions are proposed for adoption by the Executive Board: A. Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility-Midterm Review Under the Third Annual Arrangement 1. The Azerbaijan Republic has consulted with the Fund in accordance with paragraph 2(e) of the Third Annual Arrangement Under the Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility for the Azerbaijan Republic (EBS/99/1, Sup. 3), and paragraph 21 ofthe Memorandum of Economic Policies for 1998-99 (the “Memorandum”) attached to the letter dated January 8, 1999 from the Prime Minister and the Minister of Finance of the Azerbaijan Republic and the Governor of the Azerbaijan National Bank 2. The letter dated June 16, 1999 from the Prime Minister and the Minister of Finance of the Azerbaijan Republic and the Governor of the Azerbaijan National Bank shall be attached to the Third Annual Arrangement Under the Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility, and the letter dated January 8, 1999 from the Prime Minister and the Minister of Finance of the Azerbaijan Republic and the Governor of the Azerbaijan National Bank, with its annexed Memorandum, shall be read as supplemented and modified by the letter dated June 16, 1999. 3. Accordingly, the performance criteria relating to the net international reserves, net domestic assets, and net credit to the General Government of the Azerbaijan National Bank set out in paragraph 2(a) of the Third Annual Arrangement for the Azerbaijan Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-26- Republic Under the Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility for September 30, 1999 shall be as specified in Annex I to the letter dated June 16, 1999. 4. The Fund decides that the mid-term review contemplated in paragraph 2(e) of the Third Annual Arrangement Under the Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility for the Azerbaijan Republic, and paragraph 21 of the Memorandum attached to the letter dated January 8, 1999, has been completed and that the Azerbaijan Republic may request disbursement of the second loan specified in paragraph l(b) ofthe same arrangement. B. Fifth Review under the Extended Arrangement 1. The Azerbaijan Republic has consulted with the Fund in accordance with paragraph 3(d) of the Extended Arrangement for the Azerbaijan Republic (EBS/96/188, Sup. 2 , 12/24/96) as amended, the second paragraph of the letter dated December 6, 1996 from the Prime Minister and the Minister of Finance of the Azerbaijan Republic and the Governor of the Azerbaijan National Bank as modified, and paragraph 56 of the Memorandum of Economic Policies for 1996-97 (“Memorandum”) attached to the letter dated December 6, 1996, as modified. 2. The letter dated June 16, 1999 from the Prime Minister and the Minister of Finance of the Azerbaijan Republic and the Governor of the Azerbaijan National Bank shall be attached to the Extended Arrangement for the Azerbaijan Republic as amended, and the letter dated December 6. 1996 from the Prime Minister and the Minister of Finance of the Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 27 - Azerbaijan Republic and the Governor of the Azerbaijan National Bank, with its annexed Memorandum, as modified, shall he read as supplemented and modified by the letter dated June 16, 1999. 3. Accordingly, the performance criteria relating to the net international reserves, net domestic assets, and net credit to the general government of the Azerbaijan National Bank set out in paragraph 3(a) of the Extended Arrangement, as amended, for June 30 and September 30, 1999 shall be as specified in Annex I to the letter dated June 16, 1999. 4. The Fund decides that the fifth review contemplated in paragraph 3(d) of the Extended Arrangement for the Azerbaijan Republic as amended, the second paragraph of the letter dated December 6,1996 as modified, and paragraph 56 of the Memorandum attached thereto as modified, has been completed, and that the Azerbaijan Republic may continue to make purchases under the Extended Arrangement. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 28 - Table 4. Azerbaijan: Summary Macroeconomic Indicators Output and prices Annual GDP growth (percent) 5.8 8.0 10.0 7.0 3.8 2.8 4.1 ofwhich: oil GDP growth -3.6 25.0 26.1 22.6 21.9 -2.3 0.6 non-oil GDP growth 7.8 4.8 6.9 3.5 -0.3 4.2 5.0 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 Actual Program Actual Origh4 Revised Proj. Proj. Program Program Inflation (percent) GDP deflator Consumer prices (period average) Consumer prices (end period) 6.2 0.0 -5.7 4.8 I.0 3.5 4.2 3.7 -0.8 -0.8 2.8 -5.5 4.0 3.0 0.4 0.5 -7.6 5.0 5.0 3.0 3.0 Nominal GDP (billions of manat) 15,352 16,580 15,930 Nominal GDP (millions ofdollars) 3.854 4,295 4,117 18,600 16.700 17.776 19.279 Money (percent growth, Dec. to Dec.) Manat reserve money Manatbroadmoney Manat broad money velocity 35.1 -20.7 -21.3 10.0 10.0 13.0 17.0 29.2 -21.3 -21.7 14.8 14.8 17.5 21.5 -16.8 29.3 25.5 -2.6 -9.9 -11.1 -13.0 Public Finances (in percent of GDP) General government cash balance General government revenue General government expenditure -1.7 -4.3 -4.2 -3.1 -4.0 -2.5 -1.5 19.7 17.2 17.3 19.3 20. I 20.7 21.5 21.4 21.5 21.5 22.4 24.1 23.2 23.0 External Sector External current account balance (percent of GDP) Gross official reserves (end of period): in millions of US dollars in weeks of next y&s imports of G&NFS -23.7 -29.8 -33.1 -32.5 -26.9 -31.9 -34.0 467 432 449 590 605 719 788 IO 9 IO II 12 13 I2 Saving-Investment (in percent of GDP) National saving Government Private Gross investment Government I / Private 31.4 32.7 37.4 35.3 28.6 35.1 38.3 Sources: Azerbaijan authorities; and Fund staff estimates. I/ Includes net lending. 9.6 5.0 6.3 5.2 4.0 5.7 6.8 0.2 -2.3 -2.3 -0.7 -1.7 0.0 1.0 9.4 7.3 8.6 5.9 5.7 5.7 5.8 33.3 34.8 39.4 37.7 30.9 37.6 40.8 1.9 2.1 2.0 2.4 2.3 2.5 2.5 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 29 - Table 5. Azerbaijan: Consolidated Operations of the General Govemment 1997 1998 ournun 1999 Revised Program Billions Percent Billions Percent Billions Percent of of Manat of GDP ofMan& of GDP Manat GDP Total revenues 3,023 19.7 2,755 17.3 3,350 20.1 Individual income tax 331 2.2 408 2.6 418 2.5 Enterprise profits tax 444 2.9 327 2.1 459 2.7 Social security contributions 388 2.5 405 2.5 500 3.0 Value-added tax 654 4.3 719 4.5 743 4.5 Excise taxes 222 1.4 95 0.6 159 1.0 Royalties 342 2.2 171 1.1 267 1.6 customs re”en”e 234 1.5 293 1.8 325 1.9 other revenues 409 2.7 337 2.1 479 2.9 Total expenditure (incl net lending) 3,280 21.4 3,430 21.5 4,026 24.1 Wages and salaries 701 4.6 811 5.1 93Y 5.6 Purchases of goods and services 1,161 7.6 942 5.9 1,051 0.3 interest payments 19 0.1 17 0.1 73 0 4 Transfers to households 9x4 6.4 1,096 6.9 1,527 91 Of which: Pensions 421 2.7 528 3.3 YOU 54 Subsidies 106 0.7 20 0.1 13 0 1 other current ccpenditures 17 0.1 12 0.1 39 0.2 Capital investment 201 1.3 185 1.2 243 1.5 Net lending 92 0.6 130 0.8 142 0.9 0fh.Z I/ 0 0.0 217 1.4 0 0.0 Overall balance, cash basis -257 -675 -4.2 -676 Available financing DOUI&iC External 257 -hl 318 143 -1.7 1.7 -0.4 2.1 0.9 615 4.2 616 233 1.5 -224 443 2.8 899 -87 -0.5 -167 -4.0 4.0 -1.3 5.4 -1.0 Overall balance, commitment basis -loo -2.6 -588 -3.7 -509 -3.0 Sources: Ministry of Finance, State Tax Inspectorate, Azerbaijan National Bank; and IMF staff projections. I! Includes offbudgetary spending in 1998 amounting to about 1.0 percent of GDP, 21 Comprises only Republican budgetary anears (wages, pensions, and utilities). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 30 - Table 6. Azerbaijan: Balance Sheet of the Azerbaijan National Bank and Monetary Survey (In billions of mamas, end ofperiod stocks) - 1997 1998 1999 Q4 Q4 Ql Ql Q2 03 44 AChld ACtUal Program Actual Program Program Program Balance Sheet of the Azerbaijan National Bank Net foreign assets 863 565 939 584 974 871 771 Net international reserves (convertible) 779 488 859 509 892 787 687 Gross international reserves (convertible) 1817 1745 2399 2061 2470 2378 2335 Foreign liabilities (convertible) -1038 -1257 -1540 -1551 -1579 -1590 -1648 other 84 77 80 74 82 84 84 Net domestic assets Domestic credit Credit to general govcmment (net, incl. counterpart funds) II Clahns on banks II Other items (net) 572 580 259 437 254 377 490 781 736 419 700 410 528 653 -6 64 -174 I51 -296 -225 -35 778 667 593 544 706 753 688 -210 -156 -160 -264 -156 -I51 -163 Reserve mcl”ey Manat reserve money Required reserves in foreign currencies 1427 1140 I193 1017 1223 1244 1256 1344 1057 1113 937 II41 1160 II72 83 83 80 80 82 84 84 Other deposits 8 5 5 3 5 5 5 Monetary Survey Net foreign assets Net intemational reserves of the ANB (convertible) Net foreign assets of commercial banks (convertible) Other 1233 695 1258 856 1225 1055 888 779 488 859 470 892 787 687 450 215 394 394 328 262 1% 4 -9 5 -8 5 5 5 Net domestic assets Domestic credit Credit to general government (net, incl. counterpaR funds) 11 Claims on enterprises and individuals I/ Other items (net) 830 1018 700 754 794 1010 1220 1978 2203 1985 2135 2099 2295 2505 -53 12 -182 95 -332 -251 -51 203 I 2190 2167 2040 243 I 2546 2556 -I 147 -1185 -1285 -1381 -1305 -1285 -1285 Broad money Manat broad money Currency outside banks Manat deposits Foreign currency deposits 2064 1713 1959 1553 2019 2065 2109 1556 1218 1291 1075 1335 1369 1406 1171 926 979 837 1004 1021 1031 386 292 312 238 331 348 375 507 494 668 478 684 696 703 Memorandum Items: ANT3 rctinancing to banks 2/ 779 667 763 684 Claims on enterprises and individuals 2/ 203 1 2190 2337 2180 ANB gross international reserves (US% millions) 467 449 622 524 ANB net international reserves (USS millions) 200 126 222 130 Erchange rate (MrmaVUS dollar, end of period) 3888 3890 3860 3929 Manat money multiplier (level) 1.16 1.15 1.16 1.15 Manat reserve money (annual percentage change) 35.1 -21.3 -9.2 -23.6 Manat broad money (annual percentage change) 29.2 -21.7 -7.9 -23.3 876 923 958 2601 2716 2826 640 616 605 231 204 I78 1.17 I.18 -11.4 1.3 -7.2 5.0 1.20 10.0 14.8 Sources: Azerbaijan National Bank, and Fund staff estimates. I/ Including impact of resolution of bad loans problem, which involves transfer of nonperforming loans to the government against a cancellation of tbe banks’ debts to the ANB, with the ANB being compensated by receiving government securities. Programmed effects are manat 170 billion in 1999 Ql and manat 100 billion in 1999 44. Actual amount in 1999 Ql was manat 140 billion. 2/Excluding impact of resolution of bad loans problem. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 31 - Table 7. Azerbaijan: Balance of Payments (In millions of U.S. dollars, unless othawsed indicated) 1997 1998 I999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 AOtWl PICI. Kev. Pro,eo4mns ACtUal Pr0g. lziwralt nccount -1.363 -1.070 -1,289 -1.488 -1,876 -984 1.223 798 -2,207 -557 -582 528 -1,110 -560 Trade balance -566 -1,046 -795 -783 -914 E-m 808 678 875 1,031 1,091 of which: oil 448 434 643 728 725 lmpns -1,375 -1,724 -1,670 -1.814 -2,005 of which: oil sectm -256 -356 -227 -313 -429 Services balance -384 -369 -243 -336 -370 Exports 342 332 352 404 454 Imparts -726 -70 1 -596 -740 -824 of which: oil sector debits -321 -286 -115 -241 -299 Incame and current transfers 36 52 -32 -170 -203 of which: p&t repatriation of oil consxtia 0 0 43 -107 -109 official tmnsfsrs 55 24 32 20 15 Capitsl account 1,008 1,266 1,105 1,427 1,576 Direct and portfolio investment 1,093 1,024 780 1,139 1,317 of which: oil companies 845 832 590 941 1,111 Official medium- and long-term loans (net) IO 60 145 118 89 Di.sbursements 88 97 167 160 119 Project loans 53 97 125 160 119 Pmgram loans 35 0 42 0 0 AmOItkdiO” -78 -37 -22 -42 -31 Other -95 182 180 170 170 Errors & cnldsstom 49 38 0 0 0 overau bahnce 143 -59 35 138 88 Fin.UKdllg -143 59 -36 -168 -111 Central bank gross reserves -253 I8 -156 -II5 -68 IMF 110 41 120 -53 -13 Residual tinaxing gap (+) 0 0 0 30 23 Memrondm item: Gross I~SCIVCE of the ANB 467 449 605 719 788 In weeks of total next-ycor’s imports of GNFS IO IO 12 13 12 In weeks of next-yr’s imports, excluding oil sector Li 14 12 16 IS 19 In pacot of M2 87.3 102.0 L26.1 In percent afncxt ye& o~emal debt service due 547.6 839.1 933.4 511.3 648.4 Current account in percent of GDP -23.7 -33.1 -26.9 -31.9 -34.0 excluding oil sector dwclopment 21 -8.8 -17.5 -18.3 -18.2 -17.4 External debt in pcrccnt of GDP 11.7 13.3 20.7 22.2 21.9 External debt service in percent of exports of GNFS 7.4 5.3 5.3 9.8 7.9 10.1 Sources: Azerbaijan author&s; and IMP sta,tTcstimates. I/ Imports of goods and non factor swvic~s, excluding oil sector opwationr. -310 -144 11 2,036 1,898 1,660 24 100 100 0 -76 115 0 160 -160 -109 -51 0 897 13 19 508.0 -39.3 -15.9 19.9 -1,584 -624 1,795 1,306 -2,420 -578 -569 581 -1,150 -595 -391 -212 8 2,300 2,169 I.864 I7 100 100 0 433 115 0 716 -716 -‘II2 -65 0 75 2,611 2,062 -2.536 -477 401 646 -1,047 -460 -594 -422 6 I.561 1,500 1,410 -53 0 0 0 -53 115 0 641 -641 -238 -38 0 -348 1,232 3,943 3,359 -2,711 456 422 717 -1,139 -295 -1,157 -1,029 4 1,384 1,311 1,438 -47 0 0 0 -47 120 0 1,037 -1,037 -503 -24 0 1.309 1,547 2,050 19 21 28 26 26 34 679.5 -29.8 -7.7 174 8.1 1160.2 1961.9 -15.1 4.8 0.3 5.5 14.1 11.2 4.1 2.2 21 Hxcludes imparts of goods and nonfactor services related to oil sector dcvclopmcot. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 32 - . APPENDIX I Azerbaijan-Fund Relations (As of May 3 1, 1999) Membership Status: Joined: September 18, 1992; Article XIV General Resources Account Quota Fund Holdings of Currency Reserve position in Fund SDR Department Holdings Outstanding Purchases and Loans Stand-by arrangements Extended arrangements Contingency and Compensatory Systemic transformation ESAF arrangements Financial Arrangements SDR Million 160.90 374.58 0.01 SDR Million 0.46 SDR Million 56.16 42.70 56.32 58.50 76.05 Percent of Quota 100.0 232.8 0.0 Percent of Allocation N/A Percent of Quota 34.9 26.5 35.0 36.4 47.3 TvDe EFF ESAF Stand-by Approval Expiration Amount Approved Amount Drawn .J& J&j@ (SDR Million) GDR Million) 12/20/1996 12/19/1999 58.50 42.70 12/20/1996 0 l/24/2000 93.60 76.05 1 l/17/1995 11/16/1996 58.50 58.50 Proiecte-d Obliaations to Fund:(SDR Million; based on existing use of resources and present holdings of SDRs): Principal Overdue Forthcoming 5/31/1999 1999 m 2001 2002 2003 9.4 39.0 30.9 37.8 56.0 Charg&Anterest 4.5 7.9 6.4 5.3 3.6 Total 13.9 46.9 37.3 43.1 59.6 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-33 - APPENDIX I 7. Exchange rate arrangements The currency of Azerbaijan is the manat which became sole legal tender on January 1, 1994. Currently, the exchange rate is under a managed floating regime. Noncash exchange rates are determined five times a week at the foreign exchange auctions conducted by the Baku Interbank Currency Exchange (BICEX). Exchange rates for cash transactions are quoted by commercial banks licensed to deal in foreign exchange on the basis of market conditions and are subject to a limit of plus or minus 3 percent around the official rate. The Azerbaijan National Bank (ANB) determines an official exchange rate against the U.S. dollar every auction day, which is equal to the most recent auction rate. Azerbaijan has been classified by the staffwith the group of countries whose currencies are independently floating. Azerbaijan avails itself of the transitional arrangements under Article XIV. 8. Article IV Consultation The fifth Article IV consultation with Azerbaijan was concluded on June 26, 1998. 9. Resident Representative Mr. Jonathan Dunn, the Fund’s third Resident Representative took up his duties in Baku in July 1997. 10. Resident Advisers An adviser on the establishment of the Treasury in the Ministry of Finance, Mr. Nurcan Aktiirk, was stationed in Baku from December 1994 until September 1996. He was succeeded by Mr. B.K. Chaturvedi, who is due to remain through October 1999. A technical long-term adviser for tax administration, Mr. Mark Zariski, was stationed in Baku from April 1995 until April 1996. Mr. Isaac Svartsman is currently the resident advisor in the ANB for bank supervision and restructuring; his assignment is for a one-year period beginning in September 1998. Mr. J. Hook has recently begun a six-month assignment as short-term advisor on tax administration. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 34 - Azerbaijan-Technical Assistance, 1995-99 APPENDIX I Department Area of Assistance Mission Dates FAD MAE FAD STA STA MAE FAD FAD FAD STA MAE FAD FAD FAD STA MAE FAD MAE STA MAE FAD LEG MAE FAD MAE BCS LEG FAD LEG STA LEG MAE Social safety Central bank operations Tax administration Balance of payments statistics Monetary statistics Central bank operations Treasury project inspection Tax administration project inspection Tax policy Balance of payments statistics Central bank operations and banking sector reform Treasury project inspection Expenditure policy Treasury project inspection Monetary statistics Foreign exchange management Tax Administration Multitopic mission Balance of payments statistics Bank restructuring and payments systems Tax administration Tax code legislation Multitopic mission Treasury project inspection Bank restructuring Book entry system Tax code legislation Tax administration Tax code legislation BOP statistics Tax code legislation Multitopic mission February 1995 March 1995 April 1995 April 1995 May 1995 October 1995 December 1995 December 1995 February 1996 March 1996 July/August 1996 September 1996 October 1996 December 1996 December 1996 January 1997 January 1997 March 1997 April 1997 May 1997 August 1997 September 1997 October 1997 April/May 1998 May 1998 October 1998 November 1998 December 1998 January/February 1999 March/April 1999 March/April 1999 April/May 1999 Source: International Monetary Fund. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-35 - APPENDIX I1 Azerbaijan-Relations with the World Bank Azerbaijan became a member of the IBRD in September 1992 and of the International Development Association in late March 1995. The current Bank assistance strategy focuses on four main areas: (i) establishment of a policy and institutional framework conducive to efficient and equitable private sector led sustainable growth; (ii) enhancement of competitiveness in critical economic sectors, largely in agriculture; (iii) alleviating poverty; (iv) and resettlement and rehabilitation of Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs). In addition to the above, environment was identified as an urgent issue that the Bank should address. A new Country Assistance Strategy is currently under preparation. As of April 5, 1999 the Association has committed $3 17 million for nine operations, of which $134 million has been disbursed: Petroleum Technical Assistance ($21.8 million, approved April 1995); Greater Baku Water Supply ($6 1 million, approved June 1995); Institution Building Technical Assistance ($18 million, approved July 1996); Rehabilitation Loan ($65 million, August 1995); Gas System Rehabilitation ($20.2 million, September 1996); Pilot Farm Privatization ($14.7 million, January 1997); Structural Adjustment Loan ($77 million, July 1997and April 1999); Urgent Environment Investment ($20 million, June 30, 1998); and, Pilot Reconstruction ($20 million, July 2, 1998) Other operations under preparation include projects in agricultural development credit, education and a cultural heritage project. The following economic and sector work has also been undertaken: a Country Economic Memorandum in September 1993; an energy sector review in December 1993; studies on the agriculture and financial sectors in July and October 1995, to determine sectoral performance, prospects and constraints; a poverty assessment in February 1996; a National Environmental Action Plan was tinalized in cooperation with Government in December 1997; a paper on a strategy to phase out leaded gasoline was presented in an interministerial conference in Denmark in June 1998; an energy sector update was completed in June 1998; and, a credit worthiness analysis was made in February 1998. For 1999, a Public Sector Strategy paper was completed and a Public Sector Reform Workshop was held in March 1999. In addition, an economic report is scheduled to be completed. Work on trade support initiated in FY98 is expected to be completed; and, informal notes are planned to be written on pension reform and infrastructure privatization. The Bank organized a Pre-Consultative Group meeting in Paris in December 1992 and a full Consultative Group meeting in May 1995 to mobilize support from bilateral and multilateral donors, including the Fund. The second Consultative Group meeting took place in Tokyo in January 1998. The Bank also organized a Conference of International Investors in Paris in December 1995 to solicit interest Tom potential foreign investors in investment opportunities in agro-industry, health care and business tourism in Azerbaijan; an investors’ conference was also organized in Tokyo in January 1998. Furthermore, the Bank has provided grants from its Institutional Development Fund to help the Government manage the coordination of external financial and technical assistance and to upgrade the Government capability in public procurement and to improve household expenditure surveys and other related statistics. In September 1995, the Bank opened a Resident Mission in Baku. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 36 - APPENDIX III Azerbaijan-Statistical Issues’ The authorities provide the Fund’s European II department with statistics readily and promptly for program monitoring purposes (see attached matrix). Most of these data are supplied through the resident representative’s office to ensure good coordination. Data are also supplied to the Fund’s statistics department for publication in International Financial Statistics, in compliance with the agreed publication schedules and format. With assistance from TACIS, the authorities have been producing a quarterly English-language bulletin (Azerbaijan Economic Trends) with commentary and tables on the main macroeconomic statistics since June 1998. In the staffs view, there have been other notable improvements in statistics. However, several major issues are still to be addressed, some of which may be covered during the next year through Fund technical assistance. Government finance statistics The new treasury system has greatly improved a wide range of data on expenditure. Timely quarterly expenditure data for the State (republican and local) budget are now available. Data on the extrabudgetary activities of budgetary institutions are also now available; these activities will be incorporated into the State budget in FY 2000. Reliable data on wage and expenditure arrears are difficult to obtain; however, the ministry of finance and utilities companies try regularly to reconcile their accounts of amounts due and paid. @mrterly expenditure data according to a functional classi&rtion are now available, starting from the first quarter of 1998. This will make it possible to assess, for example, social spending patterns. A fuNpicture of monthly State budget revenues is now available. However, data from the State Tax Inspectorate on tax arrears are not yet regularly available. Among the areas that need to be addressed are the following: l Data on public sector employment and wages are still hard to come by. The completion of the treasury-based staffing review should ease this problem. ’ This appendix highlights major changes since the 1998 Article IV consultation (see EBS/98/99, Appendix IV). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 37 - AF’ENDIX III External sector statistics A technical assistance mission from the Fund’s Statistics Department in March-April 1999 reviewed the methodology for compiling balance of payments statistics. The mission dealt with all the issues identified in previous technical assistance missions (coverage of customs data, data on oil-related activities, barter trade, and foreign direct investment). Its recommendations are being implemented by the relevant department of the central bank. National accounts The State Statistics Committee (SSC) had been receiving regular technical assistance on national accounts statistics (through peripatetic advisors from the OECD). However, this assistance has now ceased. Nevertheless, efforts are still underway to improve the coverage and methodology of the national accounts. TACIS is conducting a regional workshop on informal sector activities, which will be attended by the head and deputy head of the SSC’s national accounts division. Thereafter, beginning in the year 2000, TACIS will be working closely with the SSC to prepare data on the activities of the informal private sector in Azerbaijan. Price statistics Fund technical assistance will be provided shortly to improve the methodology for calculating the consumer prices index (in particular, re-examining coverage and the weighting system), and make preparations to enable calculation of a producer prices index. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicSurvey of Reporting of Main Statistical Indicators Observations as of end-April 1999 COLlntry~ Azerbaijan Date of latest Observation Date received Frequency of data Frequency of reporting Source of data Made of reporting Frequency of publication Confidentiality Central Central Reserve/ Bank Reserve/ Bank Exchange International base Exchange International base balance balance rates reserves rates reserves rnCl”C?V rnCl”C?V sheet sheet Broad Broad mO”i?V mO”i?V Consumer Consumer current current OVtX4l OVtX4l Public Public Interest Interest Price Price Exports/ Exports/ Account government Account government debt/debt debt/debt Rates Rates Index Index Imports Imports Balance Balance balance balance GDP/GNP service GDP/GNP service Explanatory Notes Frequency of data: D-daily, W-weekly, M-monthly, O-quarterly. Frequency of reporting: M-monthly, Q-quarterly, V-irregularity in conjunction with staff visits. Source of data: A-direct reporting by central bank, ministry of finance, or other official agency. N-official publication or press release Mode of reporting: C-electronic mail or facsimile, V-staff visits, or O-other. Confidentiality: IBI for use by the staff and the Executive Board prior to publication. and IU) for unrestricted use. li Deficit calculated from data on financing. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-39- APPENDIX IV June 16, 1999 Michel Camdessus Managing Director International Monetary Fund Washington, DC Dear Mr. Camdessus, 1. The Azerbaijan authorities recently held discussions with Fund statTin the context of the I999 Article IV consultations, the fifth review of the economic program supported by the extended arrangement, and mid-term review of the third annual arrangement under the Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility (ESAF). The financial program is on track, with all end-March 1999 performance criteria observed, and structural reforms are proceeding, albeit with delays. However, developments in the real economy have been less favorable than expected, reflecting the slow pace of structural reforms as well as external shocks associated with the Russian crisis and last year’s fall in the oil price. There are now signs of deflation, with non-oil industrial output declining, growth in agriculture, construction and services slowing, and consumer prices down sharply over the past year. Based on our discussions, this letter sets out the policies we intend to adopt to address these problems, while keeping the program on track. On the basis of recent performance and the objectives and policy intentions set out here, we request the completion of the review, which would allow us to receive SDR 5.85 million under the ESAF and purchase SDR 5.27 million under the extended arrangement. We request modification of the performance criteria relating to net international reserves of the Azerbaijan National Bank (ANB), net domestic assets of the ANB, and net credit from the ANB to the government (Annex 1). Macroeconomic developments and prospects 2. Real GDP continued to rise in early 1999, up by 6 percent in the fust quarter compared to a year earlier, but this was more than accounted for by a rise in oil production. Non-oil output declined by about 2 percent over the same period, a sharp turnaround from growth of 7 percent in 1998. The reduction in growth is partly a consequence of the weakness of commodity prices in 1998 which has led to a postponement of foreign direct investment and adversely affected activity in the services and construction sectors, In addition, activity has been affected by the impact of the Russian crisis, including weaker demand from Russia and an appreciation of the real exchange rate, especially against CIS competitors. These factors, notably the impact of the depreciation of the Russian ruble, have contributed to a fall in consumer prices of 11 percent in the year to April. 3. The impact of external shocks was also evident in the balance of payments for 1998, which showed a higher current account deficit than projected, at 33 percent of GDP, reflecting stronger-than-expected imports, especially from Russia. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 40 APPENDIX IV 4. In the face of these shocks, policy has continued to be directed at achieving the program’s financial targets and avoiding a destabilizing depreciation of the exchange rate. Since early December 1998, when we ended our policy of maintaining a constant exchange rate against the dollar, the manat has depreciated only modestly, by about 3 percent, Over this period, we have continued to intervene in the foreign exchange market, albeit less actively than in the previous four months. With the manat broadly stable, while currencies of CIS competitors have depreciated sharply, the real effective exchange rate has appreciated by about 10 percent since July 1998, immediately before the Russian crisis, 5. The firm exchange rate policy has been supported by monetary and iiscal policies, which have been tighter than envisaged under the program. Despite weaker-than-projected budget revenues, the cumulative cash fiscal deficit since end-September, 1998 was manat 130 billion below its adjusted end-March ceiling. In the process, expenditures were squeezed sharply, and domestic payment arrears rose above their indicative targets. By end-April, arrears to non-working pensioners amounted manat 125 billion, or about 6 weeks of payments. Manat reserve money was 16 percent below its end-March target and fell 11 percent during the first quarter, reflecting both falling prices and falling real money demand. The counterparts to lower manat reserve money were lower-than-programmed use of government deposits at the central bank, and lower-than-programmed credit from the ANB to the commercial banks. Real interest rates have risen sharply and are now exceptionally high, at nearly 25 percent. 6. In view of the recent trends in the real economy, we believe that there is now a need for policy adjustments to support growth. In particular, we intend to pursue a less restrictive financial policy-by making full use of the margins under the fiscal ceilings to clear pension arrears and increasing ANB credit to banks-and reduce intervention further, so as to allow a meaningful depreciation of the exchange rate. 7. Despite these policy changes, and the recent recovery in oil prices, growth in 1999 is likely to be lower than previously projected. As a result and because of recent falls in prices, the projection of nominal GDP in 1999 has also been revised down. Exchange rate depreciation will raise consumer prices, but given current disinnationary pressures, inflation during 1999 is still expected to be around 5 percent. The recent increase in oil prices should, if sustained, significantly boost exports in 1999. This, together with lower oil-associated imports as a result of cuts in planned foreign direct investment, should reduce the current account deficit below the program level. Nonetheless, on the basis of currently committed linancing from bilateral and multilateral donors, it is likely that financing gaps will emerge in the balance of payments in 2000 and beyond. Monetary and exchange rate policy 8. The recent decline in manat reserve money appears to reflect mainly a decline in money demand, in the wake of the Russian crisis. Although manat reserve money was well below its end-March target, we believe the targets for the rest of the year remain appropriate: they allow room for a reversal of the recent decline in response to an easing of the policy Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 41 APPENDIX IV stance and, possibly, some recovery in money demand, We intend to use a substantial part of the margins available under the monetary targets to increase the government’s use of its deposits at the ANB and increase ANB credit to banks. 9. In conjunction with a less restrictive monetary policy, we have further reduced intervention in the foreign exchange market, and the program’s targets for net international reserves have been revised up (Annex I). 10. In order to further Iiberalize the foreign exchange market we intend to eliminate the current trading bands of the exchange rate and other administrative controls between various sections of the market. We shall also implement procedural changes to determine the official exchange rate, which is now pegged to the BICEX exchange rate. The official exchange rate will in titure be determined and published daily based on a weighted average of the rates in all market sections. The ANB will participate regularly in all sections of the market. Fiscal policy 11. While higher oil prices should boost tax revenues in the second half of 1999, we expect revenues for the year as a whole to be manat 240 billion (1% percent of GDP) lower than programmed, as a result of lower nominal GDP and continued enforcement problems. We are implementing strong measures to try to minimize the revenue shortfall, including new procedures to enforce collection of excises on tobacco and alcohol. We will also intensify enforcement of collections from all large state enterprises where revenues have been lagging so far. To increase compliance with oil excises taxes, we have already strengthened enforcement procedures at retail gasoline stations. We will strengthen the internal audit and control procedures at SOCAR’s domestic oil sales division, and will improve the efficiency of distribution and billing of gas, electricity and water, including through privatization of the Baku electricity company. We do not intend to introduce any further tax deferral programs, and will instead step up the collection of tax arrears through increased enforcement of notices of levy against tax delinquents. We intend to work closely with the recently appointed IMF advisor on tax administration and implement the recommendations of a Fund technical assistance report on improving tax compliance, in conjunction with the implementation of the new tax code. The code has been submitted to the president’s office and will be submitted to parliament before end-June. 12. We recognize the urgent need to eliminate arrears on pension payments. Despite the problems with revenue collections, we therefore intend to reduce the stock of pension arrears to no more than manat 35 billion prior to the Executive Board meeting on the program review. To do this, we intend to make use of the margin we have under the fiscal ceilings by using accumulated privatization revenues deposited at the ANB (up to manat 80 billion in the second quarter) and stepping up treasury bill sales (net sales of up to manat 20 billion in the second quarter). Additional resources will be transferred to the social protection fund, as needed, to achieve the arrears target. If needed, appropriate revisions to the 1999 budget law will be submitted to parliament. Monthly indicative targets for wage and pension arrears, and revised quarterly indicative targets for arrears to utilities companies, have also been Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 42 APPENDIX IV established, consistent with achieving the original program targets for arrears by end- September 1999 (Annex II). 13. Faced with lower-than-budgeted revenues and the need to reduce pension arrears, observance of the program’s end-June budget deficit ceiling is likely to require finther compression of expenditures in non-priority areas. We will seek to protect budgetary allocations for health, education, refugees and internally displaced persons. However, we have decided to postpone the tiuther decompression of the public sector wage scale that had been planned for end-March (as a structural benchmark). This measure will now be implemented in conjunction with an improvement in revenue collections and a comprehensive restructuring of public sector employment, on which we are working closely with World Bank staff, 14. As envisaged under the program, to strengthen the macroeconomic analysis and monitoring capabilities of the ministry of finance, and to improve coordination with international financial institutions, a macroeconomic policy group will be established at the ministry, with the support of the Know-How Fund. It will cooperate closely with the cabinet of ministers, ministry of economy, Azerbaijan National Bank and state statistics committee. 15. The government is current on all its external debt obligations. Repayments of loans from Turkmenistan have recently been rescheduled, and discussions are underway to reschedule a loan from Kazakhstan. The government will make all scheduled payments on these and other loans on time. Financial market instruments 16. Cooperation between the ANB and the ministry of finance in the management of budgetary financing and monetary policy has been strengthened by moving the treasury bill auction from the BICEX to the central bank, introducing sealed bids and allowing a ministry of finance representative to be present at the opening of the bids. Nonetheless, the treasury bill market remains very small and does not contribute significantly to budgetary management and financing or monetary operations. To address this problem, particularly given the need to step up treasury bill sales to help finance priority expenditures, we intend to conduct treasury bill auctions on a regular schedule and accept all bids at the auctions up to the amount offered for sale. This will boost investor confidence and facilitate the establishment of genuine market-clearing interest rates. In addition, the range of market participants will be broadened to include sound insurance companies, and steps will be taken to allow individuals to participate directly. Technical improvements will be developed through a joint ANB-ministry of finance liaison committee, which will freely exchange relevant information and seek the views of market participants on ways to increase market attractiveness. This committee will be established by end-June 1999, as a structural benchmark. 17. We continue to keep under review the possibility of issuing central bank bills to assist with liquidity management, though, with liquidity conditions currently very tight, this has not proved necessary so far. If the measures we are introducing to strengthen the treasury bill market are effective, we hope that issuance of central bank bills can be avoided. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 43 APPENDIX IV Structural policies 18. Structural reforms are proceeding but not all first quarter structural benchmarks have yet been implemented. With the exception of the decompression of public wages and implementation of the privatization program, all will be completed prior to the Executive Board discussion of the mid-term review (Annex III). With growth in the non-oil sector faltering, and much work still to be done to complete end-June structural benchmarks (Annex IV), we recognize the need to increase the pace of reform, within the constraints of our capacity to implement. 19. Preparations for deep reforms of the public sector to tackle corruption and improve efficiency are underway, with the support of the World Bank. Several working groups have been established, and a high profile conference was held in Bake in mid-March to discuss the reform agenda. Work will be accelerated on draft laws on the prosecutors and police, preparation of plans to restructure and streamline the cabinet of ministers, the drafting of a new civil service law, and implementation of a severance pay scheme-all end-June structural benchmarks, 20. Two of the state owned banks-the International Bank (IBA) and Savings Bank- remain on track for privatization this year, but the condition of the other two-Prominvest (PIB) and Agroprom (APB) Banks-remains precarious as they continue to make losses. Financial advisors have been selected to handle the privatization of IBA, and we have invited the EBRD to acquire a strategic share, which would take government ownership below 50 percent. The Savings Bank has been recapitalized and financial advisors for its privatization have also been selected. 21. Prominvest Bank has signed a new memorandum of understanding (MOU) with the ANB and ministry of finance which establishes quarterly financial targets, prohibits lending to problem borrowers, and mandates asset sales. The ministerial loan review committee intends to complete its review of PIB’s loan portfolio (an end-March structural benchmark) prior to the Executive Board meeting. 22. Agroprom Bank has been split into two parts-a commercial banking unit (CBU) and loan recovery unit (LRU). We will be discussing with the World Bank the future organizational and legal structure of each unit in the near future. A one year extension of the twinning arrangement with Credit Agricole has been negotiated. A new MOU has been signed, which restricts lending by the CBU to 30 percent of LRU collections. 23. However, both PIB and APB face severe liquidity problems and depend heavily on overdrafts from the ANB. This has created payments delays and contributed to loss of business. In view of their continued failure to recover, we intend, with the help of the IMF long term advisor on banking supervision and bank restructuring and World Bank staff, to review the strategy for these banks. In particular, we will consider whether there are alternatives to the existing strategy that would maintain and strengthen the payments system- Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 44 APPENDIX IV in which APB currently plays a key role in rural areas-at lower cost. We intend to complete this review by end-July 1999. 24. In the agricultural sector we have completed the distribution of 80 percent of land titles to private farmers (surpassing the end-June benchmark of 50 percent) and expect to issue the remainder by the end of 1999. In addition, the government will take steps to improve the competitiveness of the sector by implementing, with the assistance of the World Bank and other donors, Cuther measures to develop extension services, rural credit, and the irrigation and drainage infrastructure. 25. Implementation of the 1999-2000 privatization program (an end-March structural benchmark) has been delayed, in part by the need for mrther revisions to strengthen the draft privatization law. We will seek parliamentary approval for the new law on privatization and implement the 1999-2000 privatization program by presidential decree by end- September 1999, as a structural benchmark. The tendering for sale of five large-scale enterprises (an end-June structural performance criterion) has been completed. Article VIII 26. We intend to accept the obligations of Article VIII of the IMF Articles of Agreement. For this purpose, we will take all measures necessary to remove existing impediments and potential restrictions to a free system of payments and transfers for current international transactions. In particular, we will remove all the potential restrictions on the conversion and transfer abroad by non residents of recently acquired balances as a result of current international transactions. Future relations with the Fund 27. With the policies specified above, and others which were set out in the memorandum of economic policies and policy framework paper dated January 8, 1999, we believe the performance of the Azerbaijan economy will improve and that program objectives will continue to be achieved. We hope that this will establish a good basis for discussions with Fund staff in the fall on a successor arrangement. Sincerely yours, IS/ Artur Rasizade Prime Minister of the Azerbaijan Republic IS/ ISI Elman Rustamov Governor of the Azerbaijan National Bank Fikret Yusifov Minister of Finance of Azerbaijan Republic Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 45 - ANNEX I Revised Performance Criteria I/ Floors under net Ceilings on the stocks of: international reserves of the Net domestic Net credit from the ANB Stocks: ANB assets of the ANB to general government (In millions of US dollars) (In billions of manat) March 3 1, 1999 (outturn) 130 437 151 June 30,1999 231 254 -296 September 30, 1999 204 377 -225 December 3 1, I999 (indicative) 178 490 -35 I/ Deftitions and adjustors are set out in EBS/99/1, Appendix III, Annex III. For the above three criteria, adjustors for end-June and end-September will be based on cumulative differences from revised program assumptions from end-March 1999. All other performance criteria and adjustors are unchanged Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 46 - ANNEX II Indicative Limits on the Stock of Expenditure Arrears of the Republican Budget (In billions of manat) Pensions Wages Water, eleceicity Total and gas March 3 1, 1999 (outturn) 115 25 383 523 June 30, 1999 30 25 350 405 July31,1999 20 20 August 3 I,1999 10 10 September 30, 1999 0 0 325 325 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 47 - ANNEX III Actions to be completed prior to the Executive Board Meeting Reduction of arrears to non-working pensioners to manat 35 billion. Submission of the new tax code to the president. Completion of a review of the loan portfolio of Prominvestbank, to establish the extent of bad IOUtS. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 48 - ANNEX IV Program Benchmarks for June 30,1999 still to be completed Approval by parliament of new laws on the prosecutors and police. Submission to Fund staff of a plan to restructure and streamline the cabinet of ministers. Implementation of a severance pay scheme. Submission to parliament of a new civil service law. Approval by parliament of the new tax code. Issuance of presidential decree authorizing the sale of the Savings bank. Submission to Fund staff of an acceptable privatization plan for Prominvestbank. Establishment of an ANFVMinistry of Finance Liaison Committee on treasury bills. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public‘. -49- APPENDIXV Public information Notice (PIN) No. 99/- FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE International Monetary Fund 700 1 gth Street, NW Washington, D. C. 20431 USA IMF Concludes Article IV Consultation with Azerbaijan Republic On June 30, 1999, the Executive Board concluded the Article IV consultation with Azerbaijan Republic.’ Background Throughout 1998 and into early 1999, the Azerbaijan Republic continued to implement firm financial policies in the context of an economic program supported by the Fund’s Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility and Extended Arrangement. Policies have also been supported by a World Bank Structural Adjustment Credit. As a result of these policies, economic activity continued its revival, while inflation was kept well under control. Public finances were adversely affected by the persistence of low oil prices and problems with revenue collection. Low oil prices also adversely affected the external accounts. These factors and the effects of the Russian financial crisis created major challenges for the formulation of economic policy. Implementation of structural reform was mixed. Real GDP growth during 1998 was 10 percent, higher than expected, reflecting a rapid expansion of oil production, and of construction and service industry activities associated with the oil sector, However, nonoil manufacturing activities declined by eight percent in 1998. Agricultural production grew by only four percent. Both manufacturing and agriculture faced intensified pressure from increasingly competitive Russian imports afler the steep devaluation of the ruble in midyear, The persistence of low international oil prices in 1998 led to the postponement of some planned oil sector investment. Although oil prices have recovered from their lows, these trends continued into 1999, and overall growth has tended to slow, with real I Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial infom-ration, and discusses with officials the country’s economic developments and policies. On return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the country’s authorities. In this PIN, the main features of the Boards discussion are described. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 50 - APPENDIX V GDP increasing by about six percent in the first four months of the year compared to the same period in 1998. Consumer prices declined by about 7% percent in the 12 months to December 1998 and disinflation has intensified in 1999, with consumer prices falling by nearly 11 percent in the 12 months to April 1999. Fiscal performance deteriorated in the second half of 1998, reflecting lower than expected revenues and some unplanned off-budget expenditure. Low revenue reflected both the effect of oil prices but also poor tax collection, especially excises taxes. Lower revenue was offset by some expenditure compression and a rise in arrears, and the cash fiscal deficit for 1998 was 4% percent of GDP, broadly as expected. Owing to lower oil prices and despite implementation of new and stricter tax administration, revenue performance in the first quarter of 1999 continued to be poor, and further expenditure cuts had to be made and additional arrears were incurred. The external current account deficit was larger during 1998 as export revenues were lower (despite higher oil export volumes) and import values higher than envisaged. However, weak oil prices have led to some postponement of direct investment plans. Although other capital flows were slightly larger, gross international reserves declined by about US$20 million, and represented 10 weeks of imports. By end-May 1999, gross international reserves had increased to about US$630 million (14 weeks of imports), reflecting additional oil bonus payments and disursements of the second tranche of the SAC. The exchange rate became a major concern for the authorities in 1998. Throughout most of 1998, they maintained the exchange rate of the manat against the US dollar broadly constant. This had beneficial results in terms of helping curb inflation and maintaining public confidence, especially in the light of sharp devaluation in neighboring economies, but adversely affected growth in the non-oil economy. Since December 1998, the authorities have intervened less in the foreign exchange markets and the exchange rate against the U.S. dollar depreciated by about 3 percent between then and end-May. Monetary policy has been tighter than envisaged with manat reserve money declining by about 20 percent during 1998, and by a further 11 percent in the first quarter of 1999. Real interest rates have risen sharply and there has been little increase in bank credit to the private sector. Liquidity problems have worsened, in part due to slow progress in restructuring the state-owned banks. While the authorities continue to implement a wide range of structural reforms, the pace has slowed, and delays in implementation are frequent, especially in the area of legislation on law enforcement and privatization. More positively, agricultural and land reform continues to make good progress. In banking, privatization of one state-owned bank is close to accomplishment, and steps are underway to begin the privatization process of another bank. The authorities have made efforts (with Fund and World Bank assistance) to improve governance and reduce opportunities for corruption. Significant progress has been made with fiscal expenditure management. Also, tighter rules are being drafted to cover the voucher privatization process. A Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public‘. -51- APPENDIX V large body of other public sector reforms are getting underway, with assistance from the World Bank (in the context of preparing for a second Structural Adjustment Credit). Executive Board Assessment Public lnformafion Noffces (PINS) are issued, (i) at the request of a member country. following the conclusion of the Article IV consultation for countries seeking to make known the views of the IMF to the public. This action is intended to strengthen IMF surveillance over the economic policies of member countries by increasing the transparency of the IMF’s assessment of these policies; and (ii) following policy discussions in the Executive Board at the decision of the Board. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 52 - APPENDIX V ,. Azerbaijan Republic: Selected Economic lndicaton 1996 1997 1996 1999 II Real economy Real GDP CPI (end-period) Money and credit Manat reserve money Manet broad money Credit to the economy 1.3 5.8 10.0 3.8 6.5 0.4 -7.6 5.0 33.6 35.1 -21.3 10.0 25.8 29.2 -21.7 14.8 22.9 7.6 7.8 16.7 (In percent of GDP, unless otherwise stated) Public finance Revenue Expenditure (incl. net lending) General government balance Balance of payments Current account External debt 17.6 19.7 20.4 21.4 -2.8 -1.7 -25.5 -23.7 16.6 11.7 9.7 7.4 214 467 6 10 17.1 20.1 21.3 24.1 -4.2 -4.0 Debt service ratio (in percent of exports) Gross international resewes In millions of U.S. dollars In weeks of next year’s impOr% Exchange rete -33.1 13.3 5.3 449 10 Exchange fate regime Managed floating Manat per U.S. dollar (end-period) 4098 3888 3690 (Changes in percent) Real effective exchange rate (1995=1oo) 105.3 105.4 115.8 -26.9 20.7 5.3 605 12 Sources: Azerbaijan authorities and IMF staff estimetes I/ Staff projections. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public