. DOCUMENT OF INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND NOT FOR PUBLIC USE MASTER FILES ROOM C-525 0451 EBS/95/170 CONFIDENTIAL October 30, 1995 To: Members of the Executive Board From: The Secretary Subject: Azerbaijan Republic - Staff Report for the 1995 Article IV Consultation, and Use of Fund Resources - Requests for Stand-By Arrangement and for a Second Purchase Under the Systemic Transformation Facility Attached for consideration,by the Executive Directors is the staff report for the 1995 Article IV consultation with the Azerbaijan Republic, its request for a stand-by arrangement in an amount equivalent to SDR 58.5 million, and a request expected to be received for a second purchase under the systemic transformation facility in an amount equivalent to SDR 29.25 million, which is tentatively scheduled for discussion on Friday, November 17, 1995. Draft decisions appear on page 22. Mr. Saavalainen (ext. 38825) is available to answer technical or factual questions relating to this paper prior to the Board discussion. Unless the Documents Preparation Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD), the European Commission (EC), the Islamic Development Bank (IsDB), and the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), following its consideration by the Executive Board. Att: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicCONFIDENTIAL INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AZERBAIJAN REPUBLIC Staff Report for the 1995 Article IV Consultation, and Use of Fund Resources - Requests for Stand-By Arrangement and for a Second Purchase Under the Systemic Transformation Facility Prepared by European II and Policy Development and Review Departments (In consultation with other Departments) Approved by John Odling-Smee and Mark Allen October 30, 1995 Contents Page I. Introduction II. Recent Economic Developments and Performance Under the STF 1. Pre-program period 2. Early results 3. Fiscal and monetary policies 4. External sector 5. Structural reforms III. Discussions on the Program for October 1, 1995 to September 30, 1996 1. Policy strategy and objectives 2. Fiscal policy and social safety net 3. Monetary and exchange rate policy and financial market reform 4. External policies and the balance of payments in 1996 5. Structural policies 6. Medium-term balance of payments and capacity to repay the Fund IV. Prior Actions, Performance Criteria, and Program Monitoring V. Technical Assistance VI. Staff Appraisal 1 2 8 8 9 11 13 15 16 18 19 19 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicContents Tables in text 1. Selected Economic Indicators 23 2. Consolidated Operations of the General Government in 1995 24 3. Consolidated Operations of the General Government in 1996 25 4. Balance Sheet of the Azerbaijan National Bank 26 5. Monetary Survey 27 6. Balance of Payments 28 7. Medium-Term Balance of Payments 29 8. Schedule of Purchases Under SBA and STF 30 9. Projected Payments to the Fund as of September 30, 1995 31 10. Quantitative Performance Criteria and Indicative Targets 32 September 1995-September 1996 Charts 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. GDP, Inflation, and Wages 4a Quantitative and Indicative Targets of the STF Program 4b Selected Monetary Indicators 4c Exchange Rates 10a External Sector lob Monthly Average Wage in the Baltics, Russia, and Other States of the FSU 12a Appendices I. Relations with the Fund 33 II. Relations with the World Bank 37 III. Statistical Issues 38 Attachments I. Stand-By Arrangement 41 II. Letter of Intent 45 III. Memorandum of Economic Policies 46 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicI. Introduction Azerbaijan became a member of the Fund on September 18, 1992 and its current quota is SDR 117 million. L/ The last Article IV consultation was concluded on June 8, 1994, and in this connection, the Executive Directors called for economic policies to stabilize the economy and accelerate structural reforms to fully utilize Azerbaijan's considerable economic potential, inter alia, based on its oil reserves. For 1995, such policies were designed in close cooperation with the staff of the IMF, and on April 19, 1995 the Executive Board approved the first purchase under the Systemic Transformation Facility (STF) in support of a comprehensive program for economic stabilization and structural reform. Discussions for the 1995 Article IV and XIV consultations and on a new economic program that could be supported by a Stand-By Arrangement (SBA) and the second purchase under the Systemic Transformation Facility (STF) were held in Baku during August 31- September 20, 1995. 2/w The mission established that Azerbaijan's performance under the STF supported program has been highly satisfactory, and reached understandings with the authorities on a new economic policy program. In the attached letter and accompanying Memorandum of Economic Policies (MEP) dated October 26, 1995, the Azerbaijan authorities request a one-year SBA in an amount equivalent to SDR 58.5 million, or 50 percent of quota, in support of their program covering the period of October 1, 1995 to September 30, 1996. In addition, they intend to request the second purchase under the STF equivalent to 29.25 million, or 25 percent of quota. &/ 1/ Azerbaijan avails itself of the transitional arrangements of Article XIV, Section 2. Further details on Azerbaijan's relations with the Fund are contained in Appendix I. 2/ The mission comprised Messrs. Saavalainen (head), van Rooden, Rosenberg (all EUR II), Mr. Aitken (PDR), Mr. Kanaan (FAD), and Mr. Kenjeev (BLS). The resident representative, Mr. Yaprak, also assisted the mission. 2/ The Azerbaijan representatives included the State Advisor on Economic Policy and Chairman of the Negotiation Team with the Fund, Mr. Akhundov; the Minister of Finance and Governor of the Fund, Mr. Yusifov; the Governor of the Azerbaijan National Bank, Mr. Rustamov, the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Economy, Mr. Sadikhov; the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Privatization, Mr. Azizov, the Minister of Labor, Mr. Rahimov; and senior officials from these and other ministries. The mission cooperated with the overlapping teams of the World Bank, EBRD, and OECF of Japan. q Energy prices, particularly for natural gas imports, continue to remain at levels which prevailed at the time of Azerbaijan's request for a first purchase under the STF and in the staff's assessment, Azerbaijan continues to suffer from balance of payments difficulties as a result of the shift to market-based trade that are in excess of the equivalent of 50 percent of quota. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 2 - It is proposed in the draft decision presented in Section VII that the Executive Board approve a SBA for Azerbaijan, and the second purchase under the STF. The authorities have indicated that their new program is an important step toward developing a three-year program of economic reform for which they would later request support under the Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility (ESAF). The World Bank approved on August 22, 1995 a rehabilitation credit from IDA of US$65 million to support critical imports and structural reforms in the enterprise and financial sectors. Earlier, in June 1995 two IDA credits for technical assistance and a further IDA credit for the Baku Water Supply Project had been approved. I/ The EBRD has provided a US$53 million loan to support the rehabilitation of power plants and a US$20 million loan for modernization of the water supply system in Baku. The timeliness, coverage, and accuracy of Azerbaijan's statistical data remain weak. However, sufficient progress has been made to meet the interim needs of surveillance and program work. II. Recent Economic DeveloDments and Performance Under the STF 2/ 1. Pre-Droeram Deriod Before Azerbaijan launched its comprehensive stabilization and reform program its macroeconomic imbalances remained severe. While inflation had shown signs of abating during the summer of 1994, control over macroeconomic policies loosened progressively later in the year. Indeed, the overall fiscal deficit reached 16 percent of GDP in the second half of 1994, manat broad money increased by nearly 20 percent per month, and nominal wages were more than tripled. The adverse effects of these policies were magnified as Azerbaijan experienced a severe terms-of-trade shock as transportation costs rose sharply due to the events in Chechnya, and higher wholesale prices in CIS countries spilled over to prices in Azerbaijan. As a result, monthly inflation reached hyperinflation levels --more than 50 percent in November and December 1994 and the domestic currency, the manat, lost 40 percent of its value in the last quarter leading to a substantial increase in dollar- ization of the economy. u Further details on World Bank activities in Azerbaijan are contained in Appendix II. u A detailed discussion on Azerbaijan economic developments in 1993-95 is presented in the "Recent Economic Developments" report (to be issued shortly). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 3 - 2. Early results Against this background, the STF supported economic policy program sought to achieve a rapid monetary stabilization as a prerequisite for economic progress. At the beginning of 1995 financial policies were decisively tightened. By spring 1995 monthly inflation had declined to low single digits and in the summer months virtual price stability was achieved, partly reflecting seasonal factors, though (Chart 1). I/ The nominal exchange rate remained broadly stable since the beginning of the program-- the manat depreciated only by 4.6 percent between January and September-- which greatly helped to subdue inflation. In September, however, consumer prices rose by 5.4 percent, partly owing to exceptional supply disturbances and seasonality but also due to a stronger than programmed growth in monetary aggregates earlier in the summer (see below). u Recorded real wages fell sharply during 1994 and in summer 1995 the average wage was equivalent to about US$14 per month, considerably less than in most neighboring CIS countries. However, households have been supple- menting official wages and salaries by incomes from other sources such as in-kind pay, self-employment, and private farm income. The compression of real wages has been more severe in the government sector than in the rest of the economy since the minimum wage, which determined public sector wage and social benefit levels, has not been raised since February 1995. Despite the gains in monetary stability, real GDP in Azerbaijan has continued to fall in 1995, although at a smaller rate than in previous years. In some areas, notably in oil and gas production, the decline appears to have slowed down considerably, while most state-owned enterprises report large output reductions. Economic activity appears to have increas- ingly shifted to the emerging private sector; in particular, activities in retail trade and services (hotels, restaurants, cafes) appear to be on a continuing rise. 3/ I/ Average monthly inflation in June-August amounted to -0.2 percent per month. u About 2 percentage points of the September inflation was explained by seasonal increases in sugar and fruit prices, and a temporary supply shortage of eggs. y In close cooperation with the Goskomstat, the mission produced revised GDP estimates for recent years using the expenditure approach instead of the production approach as the principal method. As a result, the preliminary nominal GDP estimate for 1994 is now some 20 percent higher than the officially recorded output reflecting better coverage of the GDP (e.g., consumption from own plots, local government consumption, and foreign direct investment). However, the estimated decline of real GDP in 1994 remains broadly unchanged, at 21 percent and the proposed change in the methodolog- ical approach still fails to measure reliably the emerging activities in the private sector. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public3. Fiscal and monetary policies Financial policies during January-September 1995 have been implemented broadly as envisaged. All quantitative targets of the program were met as of end-September 1995 (Chart 2), except that more external financing than initially programmed was used to cover the budget deficit. The fiscal deficit (on a cash basis) declined to 2.8 percent of GDP in the first half of 1995 compared with the targeted 5 percent of GDP in the STF supported program. Tax receipts remained lower than programmed due to continued tax exemptions, buildup of tax arrears, 1/ and weak tax administration. In response, expenditures, which had earlier increased rapidly in real terms, were compressed beyond the program targets through tight implementation of cash rationing. Budgetary arrears arose in this process, but most of them had been settled by end-September 1995. Reflecting these arrears repayments and unexpected liabilities arising from the default by public enterprises and organizations on government guaranteed loans, the fiscal deficit peaked at 16 percent of GDP in the third quarter of 1995 offsetting the earlier fiscal overperformance. Domestic bank financing of the budget was kept within the program limit, but the cumulative use of external financing was higher than originally programmed. This was due to the use of an additional US$lO million of the initial oil bonus to settle the defaulted government guaranteed loans as a prior action to the new program. 2/ Monetary expansion was rapidly curtailed in the beginning of the program (Chart 3). The growth of manat broad money declined from nearly 20 percent per month in the second half of 1994 to 9 l/2 percent per month in the first half of 1995. Apart from tight credit to Government, central bank credit to banks was kept within the limits implied by the program. L/ In response to harder budget constraints in enterprises imposed by tight financial policies, tax arrears increased rapidly; from manat 42 bill- ion (2.5 percent of GDP) at end-1994 to manat 123 billion (3.0 percent of projected 1995 GDP) by mid-1995. 2/ In December 1994, the Azerbaijan Parliament ratified an agreement with an international oil consortium for the development of offshore oil deposits in the Caspian Sea. This agreement resulted in net disbursement of US$120 million of a signature bonus to Azerbaijan in 1995 with further disburse- ments tied to progress in the implementation of the agreement. Initially, US$70 million of the 1995 disbursement was added to the foreign reserves of the ANB with the manat counterpart to be used for budget financing during 1995. The balance was allocated to the State Oil Company of the Azerbaijan Republic (SOCAR). Later, additional US$lO million and US$ll million tranches of this early oil bonus were allocated for budgetary purposes. In March 1995, SOCAR sold half of its stake in the international oil consortium to Exxon and Turkish National Oil Company. As a new signature bonus, Azerbaijan is to receive US$l73 million, of which US$83 million is expected to be disbursed in 1995, US$28 million in 1996, and the balance during 1997- 98. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 4a - Chart 1 AZERBAIJAN GDP, Inflation, and Wages Real GDP (annual percentage change) 10 / 1 Actual ji Projected Consumer Price Index (monthly percentage change) Projected -10 I I j -10 J FMAM J J A SO ND J FMA hi J J A S 0 ND J FMAM jggGJ A SO ND 1994 1995 Real Average Wage and Real Average Budgetary Wage Index (Jan 1994=100) I/ 100 Projected ! 90 1 80 _: 70 60 1 50 ____________________~~~..~.~..~~~ 40 ‘....-...........---.-...-.~~. _,.._.__...-._______~~~~.~.....-.---. Average budgetary wage J30 20 ’ I, , JFMAMJJASONDJFMAMJJASOPiDJFbfAMJJASOND 20 1994 1995 1996 I/ Nominal rage deflated by monthly CPI. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 411 - Chart 2 AZERBAI JAK Quantitative and Indicative Targets of the STF Program 1/ Domestrc Bank Fmancmg of the General Government 2/ 350 - Cumulatwe Use of Forqo Fmancmg of the Budget :350 350r ,350 0 STF c41ng C?Adjusted STF mlmg ,/ i 3oc -Actual / I , :300 I 250 200 150 IV I II III 100 l:j@ I looi joi- 1994 1995 Net Domestic Assets of the ANB cnn Nel International Reserver in Convertible Currencies znr .M a”” XL’ LL” r OsrF floor 7 120 / / CSTF &line I ZAdjusted SF floor I 400 i 100 IV I II 111 i994 1995 .-. 900, Reserve Money of the ANB (Indicatwel -, 900 800 3sTF ce1lmg E3Adjusted SIT cnling - Aclual 1994 1995 l/ Fourth quarter 1994 is the program base. 2/ Thud quarter 1995 figures iare prelimmary Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 4c - Chart 3 AZERBAIJAN Selected Monetary Indicators 80Reserve Money and Broad Money (quarterly percentage change) I Actual Projected ,80 I ; 70 -Manat broad money - Manat reserve money ;SO 150 140 150 ! 20 I 10: j 10 I II 10 I II III IV 1 III IV I II III I\ 1994 1995 1996 16 Velocity and Money Multiplier , 16 Actual : 14r ,:’ Projected I . l-1 .’ . . -Velocity of broad maney. mcl. form dep. -. Velocity of broad monqv. ercl. form dep. - Manat money multiplier 01 I I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV O 1994 1995 1996 20 ANB Monthly Refinance Rate 20 :tual Projected 1 O1 ; . . 0 -4 ,; -., ,*’ ,’ . 4 -5 ,’ ,I. ,,’ -IO- ,’ ; ,*’ -10 -15- -20 _ I. ,’ : ; : : ‘. : ‘;,’ -ANB refinance rate --Real rate I/ -15 I -25 -25 I II III IV I IV I 11 III IV 120 1994 1996 I/ Deflated by the average monthly inflation rate (CH) during the quarter. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 5 - Velocity of broad money first rose sharply but declined since the second quarter of 1995 suggesting improving confidence and abating inflation expectations. With a stronger than expected foreign reserve accumulation, however, the growth of base money exceeded the indicative targets. In May- July, monetary aggregates increased by 10 percent per month partly also reflecting the reduction of reserve requirement ratio from 15 percent to 10 percent in June. However, as inflation appeared to rekindle in September, the Azerbaijan National Bank (ANB) increased its sales of foreign currency in the market and reversed the earlier relaxation of reserve requirements leading to a considerable slowdown in the growth of monetary aggregates. In September, manat broad money increased only by an estimated 3-4 percent and with increased supply of foreign exchange, the nominal exchange rate appreciated slightly. Interest rates were raised as a prior action to the STF program and they peaked at 18 percent per month in mid-March. With the introduction of credit auctions, interest rate determination became more market based and with falling inflation the auction rate declined to 8 percent per month in mid-August 1995. In real terms, when measured against the past three months inflation, the monthly interest rate rose to 10 percent in the second quarter but declined to 6 percent by the end of the third quarter of 1995. 4. External sector On the external sector, while the level of foreign trade has been lower than programmed in 1995, the increase in Azerbaijan's current account deficit (excluding the operations of the oil consortium) was broadly in line with the projections. Lower trade levels largely reflected transportation difficulties across the northern border while the higher current account deficit mainly owed to a considerable deterioration in the terms-of-trade, estimated at 25 percent between 1994 and the first half of 1995. The overall balance of payments has strengthened, however, with the disbursement of part (US$83 million) of the new oil signature bonus and stronger than expected inflow of foreign direct investment associated with the operations of the international oil consortium. Gross official reserves of the ANB rose from US$2 million at end-1994 to US$115 million by end-September 1995. The rescheduling of the payments on the Turkish credit line resulted in less debt service than programmed under the STF, but this was partly offset by slower than expected disburse- ments from the World Bank. The Government has also successfully rescheduled its obligations to Turkmenistan on 1994 gas deliveries and is now current in its payments. At end-September 1995, the public external debt of Azerbaijan amounted to US$284 million, or 17 percent of GDP, the biggest creditors being Russia, Turkmenistan, and Turkey. In addition, the State Oil Company of the Azerbaijan Republic (SOCAR) carries large commercial arrears to an American oil company, Pennzoil, for investments in the gas utilization project in 1993-94. As of July 31, 1995, the total overdue debt to Pennzoil was US$166 million. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 6 - Azerbaijan's exchange and payments system underwent a number of modifications since the last Article IV consultation. The Government has eliminated an earlier multiple currency practice, maintained under Article XIV, by discontinuing the system of differentiated surrender requirements at nonmarket rates. All surrendered foreign exchange proceeds are now subject to the auction rates which are determined three times a week at the foreign exchange auctions conducted at the BICEX. The official exchange rate is determined every Wednesday at the rate established at the Wednesday auction session. The official rate is only used for valuation purposes. Rates determined at the auctions apply to all noncash transactions and official transactions. This in essence also eliminated the earlier multiple currency practice subject to Article VIII. With regard to the correspondent accounts with other FSU countries, a distinction must be made between old (pre-1992) correspondent accounts and new accounts. The old correspondent accounts are now all inoperative and, while Azerbaijan has net debit balances under such accounts vis-a-vis Russia, Ukraine, the Kyrgyz Republic, and Tajikistan, such balances are currently under dispute. New correspondent accounts have been opened with central banks of other FSU countries, and in some cases, are not yet used. With regard to those accounts which are actually in operation, they are used for official payments and are not credited with the proceeds of current international transactions. L/ Accordingly, the operation of the old and new correspondent accounts do not give rise to exchange restrictions. However, limitations 2/ remain on the availability of foreign exchange for individuals for the payments of certain invisible transactions, including tourism allowances, as well as the remittances for family living expenses abroad. These limitations give rise to exchange restrictions maintained under Article XIV. As regards the trade regime, since the beginning of 1995, the Govern- ment has significantly reduced its reliance on bilateral trade arrangements and many such agreements have become nonoperational. Although agreements exist with Turkmenistan and Ukraine, these agreements are fulfilled by procurement through market mechanisms. The staff is currently investigating whether any other exchange measures or existing bilateral payments agree- ments give rise to exchange restrictions under Fund jurisdiction. 1/ L/ Proceeds of current international transactions between residents of Azerbaijan and other FSU countries are directly channelled through correspondent accounts opened between commercial banks. r/ Foreign exchange up to US$l,OOO is freely granted, and between USSl,OOl and US$5,000 upon presentation of documents. 3 The bilateral payments agreem!ent between Azerbaijan and the Islamic republic of Iran gives rise to an exchange restriction as a result of settlement periods in excess of three months, but is currently covered under the temporary exemption decided by the Executive Board on July 20, 1994. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public5. - 7 - Structural reforms Progress in structural reforms has been slower than that in macrostabilization. Nevertheless, important steps have been taken. The price liberalization was well advanced already before the STF supported program was adopted, and further measures have included the elimination of budget subsidies on bread prices in February 1995, and raising the domestic prices of crude oil and oil products to full world market levels in October 1995. As mentioned above the payments and exchange systems were largely liberalized by unifying the exchange rate and discontinuing the system of differentiated surrender requirements at nonmarket rates in March 1995. With the abolition of the state order system in January 1995, both foreign and domestic trade were substantially liberalized. Export and import quotas and licensing requirements were abolished for all products which were traded domestically at market prices in March 1995. Until export quotas and licensing requirements were abolished as a prior action for the new economic program supported by a SBA in October, exports of strategic goods were required to be licensed by the Ministry of Foreign Economic Relations as a means of controlling under-invoicing of exports. No quotas or licensing requirements were applied for imports. In order to make up part of the lost budget revenues associated with the abolishment of the foreign exchange budget, export taxes were imposed in March 1995 on those strategic goods whose domestic prices remained significantly below world market levels, notably oil products and cotton. With oil prices now at the world market levels export taxes on oil are eliminated while such tax is still collected on cotton where domestic prices continue to remain below world market levels reflecting monopsonic market structure. On imports, low duties were assessed which varied by product but not by country of origin. While good progress was made in improving the functioning of the market through prior actions for the STF program, privatization, enterprise restructuring, and financial market reform are still at an early stage. In particular, the privatization program has not yet taken hold. While an agreement with the World Bank was reached in the summer of 1995 on a comprehensive privatization program and its implementation plan, further modifications were needed to legislation in the areas of profile restrictions, u the use of privatization proceeds, and definitions of large enterprises to be subject to case-by-case privatization. These modifications to privatization legislation were passed by Parliament only at end-September 1995. Concerning reform in the agricultural sector, the existing land code provides a legal basis for land reform, but legislation on implementation of land reform has not yet been introduced to Parliament. 1;/ These are mandated requirements to maintain original product lines, employment, supply of social services, etc., after privatization of an enterprise. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 8 - Similarly, work on enterprise restructuring has barely started. Partly this reflects current transportation disruptions and uncertainties in the overall economic environment which make it difficult to evaluate the prospects of enterprises' viability over the longer te.rm. However, it is also due to the lack of high level policy coordination which could iron out differences among strong interest groups concerning various aspects of restructuring plans. The fragility of the financial sector was exposed as the Savings Bank faced sudden liquidity problems in early October 1995 and was unable to pay interest on its deposits. This reflected a more general problem of a serious mismatch between the state banks' funding costs and the returns 'on their lending activities, and an increasing amount of nonperforming assets. Against the advice of previous Fund missions, the Savings Bank had offered a monthly interest rate of 25 percent on large deposits, while its lending rates were considerably lower. With such a Ponzi-scheme, the bank was able to attract new deposits, which provided funds for paying out interest. When the Savings Bank reduced its deposit interest rates in late summer, this resulted in a lower rate of accumulation of new deposits, exposing the underlying problems. With the assistance of the IMP, a package of measures was developed to address the problems of the Savings Bank. The management of the Savings Bank was suspended, and the bank was placed under direct supervision of the ANB and the Ministry of Finance. To' alleviate the immediate cash flow problem, the Ministry of Finance extended a 10 year loan to the Savings Bank at market terms, equivalent to US$ll million, using an additional part of the first oil signature bonus that had not yet been allocated for budgetary purposes. In addition, the Savings Bank's deposit rate structure was adjusted downward to achieve a positive cash flow. Also, a workout unit was established within the bank to recover as much as possible of the existing loan portfolio. Recovered funds as well as newly attracted deposits will be channeled to the ANB credit auctions, in order to improve the loan portfolio. With the help of international experts a thorough assessment will be made of the financial situation of the Savings Bank, which will form the basis for developing a plan for further restructuring of the bank. III. Discussions on the Program for October 1. 1995 to September 30.1996 1. Policy strategy and obiectives The authorities agreed that the gains achieved in monetary stability provide a good basis for an acceleration of the reform and elevation of the ambition level of the new program. Thus, the program's inflation target was set at 21 percent over a 12-month period through September 1996. l-J IJ Monthly inflation is targeted to decline to 1 percent per month by the end of the program period, i.e., to an annualized monthly inflation of 13 percent compared with 27 percent in the current STF program, Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 9 - This is to be achieved by continued tight financial policies, in particular by avoiding the monetization of fiscal deficits and applying tight ceilings on the central bank's credit creation. As a result, a gradual appreciation of the nominal exchange rate is expected (Chart 4). The program provides that the central bank will supply the foreign exchange market with expected foreign exchange inflows in excess of the floor for foreign reserve accumulation, and this is consistent with the projected nominal appreciation. Indeed, the real exchange rate is projected to appreciate considerably with the average wage rising from US$16 per month in September 1995 to US$24 per month by September 1996. The program aims at positive growth rates toward the end of 1996. However, year-on-year, real GDP would still decline by 6 l/2 percent due to a strong negative carry-over effect of declining production in 1995 (Table 1). This turnaround in economic activity would stem from a low starting level, emerging private sector activities, accelerated privatiza- tion, rising foreign direct investment, and declining deflationary effects of the inflation tax. The external current account deficit (excluding the operations of the oil consortium) is expected to deteriorate slightly and reach 11 percent of GDP in 1996 (Chart 5). lJ Several prior actions, as described in Section IV and Table 10, have been taken to ensure that the implementation of the program takes hold rapidly. 2. Fiscal policy and social safety net The staff projects a deficit of 7 percent of GDP for the general government budget in 1995 (Table 2). In proportion to GDP, this is somewhat higher than programmed under the STF, mainly due to a downward revision of the GDP forecast owing to lower than programmed inflation, but also reflecting unexpected expenditures related to the rescue operation of the Savings Bank. u For 1996, the program aims at further fiscal adjustment with a reduction of the overall budget deficit to 3 percent of GDP. To ensure that fiscal policy is consistent with the targeted decline in inflation, domestic bank financing will be limited to 1 percent of GDP in the fourth quarter of 1995, and in 1996, the Government will have no access to domestic bank financing, other than a short-term liquidity facility at the ANB. This also allows more central bank credit to be supplied to the banking system through the auction mechanism thus minimizing any crowding- out of private sector financing. The 1996 budget deficit will be fully financed from external sources, that is, using US$85 million of the manat counterpart of the new oil bonus disbursements in 1995-96 (US$lll million) in addition to the projected disbursements from a World Bank rehabilitation credit. IJ The current account (including oil consortium operations) is projected to record a larger deficit (20 percent of GDP) due to imports of equipment needed to rehabilitate the oil fields. LZ/ Abstracting from the revisions made in the GDP projection for 1995, the currently estimated deficit would correspond to 5.5 percent of GDP compared with the 4.8 percent of GDP in the original STF supported program. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 10 - To achieve the ambitious target set out for the fiscal program, several measures were agreed to be taken as prior actions to the new program. First, the 1995 budget was revised and it is being implemented with lowered expenditure levels. The Government's aim for the remainder of 1995 is to cut expenditures in line with lower than 'earlier expected revenue develop- ments, thus laying the groundwork for efficient expenditure control without arrears in 1996. Second, royalties of 25 percent on crude oil production and 20 percent on natural gas were introduced in October 1995 to widen the tax base. Third, VAT exemptions on foodstuffs imported from non-CIS countries were eliminated as a prior action for the program. lJ In total, these new tax measures are estimated to increase budgetary revenues by 4 to 5 percent of GDP in 1996. Nevertheless, with these revenue measures and those described in paragraph 13 and 15 in the MEP, the overall tax ratio is projected to decline from 23.4 percent of GDP in 1995 to 21.6 percent of GDP in 1996, mainly reflecting the full year effect of the elimination of the foreign exchange surrender tax (Table 3). Also, profit taxes are likely to fall with the declining state-enterprise sector, and export tax proceeds will shrink as domestic prices of oil products have now reached world market levels and cotton prices are expected to achieve such levels in 1996. To develop the tax base and structure over the medium term, the authorities intend to initiate work on a comprehensive reform of energy taxation and possibly allocate all energy related taxes, signature bonuses, and proceeds from production sharing arrangements to a special petroleum revenue fund. From such a fund, revenues could be allocated to annual budgets within a framework of medium-term fiscal programming in order to prevent potentially large fluctuations in the revenue base from building up unsustainable expenditure levels. While efficiency in tax collection needs to be much enhanced, the continued weakness of the tax base calls for further measures to control budgetary expenditures. The staff stressed that moderation is needed particularly on wage and social policies, at the same time as cost efficiency of the social safety net needs to be improved. On these expendi- tures, the authorities agreed to limit increases in government wages and social benefits to 15 percent in October 1995 with another increase of 5 percent in March 1996. With the downsizing of government employment by 10 percent during the program period and allocating such savings for pay increases, the average real wage could ,increase by 10 percent in 1996 after declining by 50 percent in 1995. The authorities also recognize that the rigidities in government wage structure and social safety net largely reflect the indexation of wages and benefits to the minimum wage. It was agreed that this linkage will be removed, new government pay scales introduced, and such an increased flexibility would be utilized to rationalize and decompress the wage structure in government agencies. lJ Remaining VAT exemptions on domestically produced food will be abolished in the 1996 budget. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 10a - Chart 4 AZERBAIJAN Exchange Rates Nominal Exchange Rates (Manat/US Dollar) l/ 0, . -. 0.2 Actual I 1000 I r j 0.4 I I / ! I Manat/US Dollar - 0.6 2000 Manat/Russian Ruble i (right scale) a/ .___.-.- ____... --. J-./ . . . . -.a----. ,_.... IO.8 ,’ _..- / 3000 . . ,+ -. ‘. ,’ . . . . I / so001 ~~~~~~,~~~~~~~~~~.~~~~~r,~~~~,~~.~~J 1.4 J FM AM J J AS OND J FMAM J J A SO ND J FMAH J .I A SON D 1994 1995 1996 Real Effective Exchange Rates (Jan 4994=400) 3/ , 250 250 Actual -World --Dollar wage index 4/ JFMAMJJASONDJfMAMJJASONDJFMAMJJASOND 1994 1995 1996 I/ Increase implies appreciation. 2/ Using US dollar/Russian ruble cross rates. 3/ Usmg total trade weights. 4/ Average monthly wage divided by monthly average US dollar/man& exchange rate. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 10b - Chart 5 AZERBAIJAN External Sector Current Account Balance (In percent of GDP) O- ,O Actual Actual ProJected ProJected Current account balance, excluding oil consortium account balance -30 L 1 -30 I iI III IV I II III IV 1994 I/ 1995 1996 Gross Reserves in Months of Imports 2/ 3.5 3.5 / / Actual Actual Projected Projected 3.0 3.0 1 1 ________~______.~.---------------.......~~~~~ ________~______.~.---------------.......~~~~~ --~--~-~.--..___.___~~. --~--~-~.--..___.___~~. 1 1 ; Gross reserves/non-consortium Imports ; Gross reserves/non-consortium Imports 2.5 2.5 reserves/total imports reserves/total imports 2.0 2.0 1 1 I I I I 1.5 1.5 1 1 --..--..--..-.-...-....--..-.~ --..--..--..-.-...-....--..-.~ 1.0 1.0 i i 0.5 0.5 i i , , I 0.0 ’ / I II 111 IV I 1994 I/ 1995 I/ No quarterly balance of payment estimates are available for 1994. 2/ Excluding the operations of the oil consortiums 1 3.0 r 2.5 1 2.0 1.5 1 1.0 i 3.5 1 0.0 II 111 N 1996 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 11 - As regards expenditures on the social safety net, work has begun on a comprehensive reform of the benefit system in line with earlier recommenda- tions by the IMF staff (see paragraph 17 in the MEP). With this reform, social expenditures would remain at 7-8 percent of GDP while the cost efficiency of the safety net could be greatly improved. To downsize the Government, the Ministry of Finance is prepared to remove public agencies and organizations from the budget and make them self-financing, private entities, lJ reduce remaining explicit and implicit subsidies to public enterprises and organizations, and reduce the number of branch ministries, especially in the production sphere. As a back-up device, the cash rationing mechanism will be continued in order to impose expenditure discipline on spending agencies by holding their discretionary outlays in check. With these measures expenditure savings could amount to 2-3 percent of GDP in 1996. Overall, the expenditure-to-GDP ratio (including net lending) is projected to decline from 30 percent of GDP in 1995 to 25 percent of GDP in 1996 mainly reflecting a sharp reduction in exceptional lending operations (payments on government guaranteed defaulted loans and the rescue operation of the Savings Bank). With the policies outlined above a further fiscal adjustment will take place in 1996. A noninflationary financing of the projected budget deficit relies on the use of the new oil bonus. The authorities agreed that all disbursements of the new oil bonus in 1995 and 1996 will be added to the reserves of the ANB with the manat counterpart, equivalent to US$85 million (3 l/4 percent of GDP), to be used for financing the budget in 1996. To ensure sufficient financing for the general government also during a prospective ESAF program, it was agreed that US$42 million of the expected oil bonus disbursements of US$62 million in 1997-98 would be allocated to support fiscal adjustment in those years. 3. Monetarv and exchange rate policv and financial market reform In reviewing the monetary developments during the STF supported progr=, the staff noted that the ANB had not yielded--unlike in 1994--to demands for larger credit expansion to finance the harvest. However, the expansion in monetary aggregates during the summer and higher inflation in September caused concern about potential acceleration of inflation in the fall. Therefore, it was agreed with the authorities that a tightening of monetary policy in the beginning of the program was warranted to contain inflation expectations. Thus, the program presumes the growth of manat broad money to decline from 15 percent in the third quarter of 1995 to 4 percent in the last quarter of 1995. lJ Several areas are under discussion, including TV, radio, research institutes, government press, certain hospitals and clinics, some education and training institutes, as well as selected technical collages. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12 - For 1996, monetary policy is geared ,toward achieving the targeted decline in the rate of inflation and maintaining the higher level of international reserves to be achieved by end-1995. The program conservatively assumes that the velocity of manat broad money will remain broadly unchanged when abstracted from seasonal variations. In line with real GDP projections and targeted inflation, the growth of manat broad money over the whole program period is expected to be 27 percent (Tables 4 and 5). Broad money, including foreign currency deposits, is expected to grow by 17 percent. IJ The velocity assumption and the stance of monetary policy will be reviewed periodically on the occasion of the quarterly program reviews. With evidence of a decline in velocity, it would be appropriate to revise the monetary targets of the program to avoid an overly tight policy stance. Taking account of ,the projected money demand, targeted foreign reserves, and assuming a modest increase in the money multiplier, ceilings have been set on the increase in net domestic assets of the ANB. These ceilings are consistent with an increase of manat reserve money during the program period by 21 percent, equal to the rate of inflation. To ensure that unexpected capital flows do not undermine the achievement of the inflation target, indicative ceilings have been established for manat reserve money. The authorities stated that reserve money developments will be closely monitored and indicative targets observed. Accordingly, the ANB will stand ready to absorb liquidity, either by increasing its sales of foreign exchange, or by issuing central bank papers or selling Treasury bills coupled with pursuit of a flexible exchange rate policy. Specifically, to offset the expansion of base money resulting from the drawdown of the manat counterpart of the US$85 million portion of the oil bonus in 1996, an equivalent amount of foreign exchange is programmed to be sold by the ANB in the foreign exchange market. The stable nominal exchange rate since the beginning of 1995 has contributed greatly to the rapid deceleration of inflation. This was achieved by tight monetary and fiscal policies while preserving flexibility in the exchange rate formation. The staff agreed with the authorities not to formally fix the exchange rate in part because the fiscal position remains very difficult. In addition, there is a possibility of large foreign exchange inflows as enterprises, in response to the tight stance of credit policy, repatriate their foreign exchange holdings. These inflows, if accumulated by the ANB under a fixed exchange rate regime, could under- mine the inflation targets of the program. For these reasons, the ANB will continue to operate within a framework of flexible exchange rates, supplying foreign exchange into the interbank market on a regular basis in order to observe the program's indicative target for reserve money. While the manat is expected to strengthen by some 20 percent during the program period the staff believes that there is room for such an appreciation given the low level of Azerbaijan's current real exchange rate (Chart 6). Under the program, however, exchange rate policies will be carefully monitored and reassessed at the time of the quarterly program reviews. lJ Adjusted for the new oil signature bonus that was received in the third quarter of 1995 by SOCAR and transferred to the ANB in early October. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12a - Chart 6 AZERBAIJAN Monthly Average Wage in the Baltics, Russia, and other States of the FSU (In U.S. dollars, period average) High wage countries 200 -Russia t Litbuanm 01 JUN DEC MAR !o JUN SEP DEC MAR JUN SEP DEC MAR JUN SEP 1993 1994 1995 Medium wage countries -Uzbekistan e Ukrame -- Bdarus - Kyrbyt Republic .~.a Moldova 01 ’ 3 j JUN SEP DEC WR 1992 JO JUN SEP DEC MAR JUN SEP DEC MAR JUN ‘SEP 1993 1994 1995 Low wage countries 0 3 ’ 3 ’ ’ ’ JUN SEP DEC MAR JUN 1992 1993 0 hJN SEP DEC MAR JUN SEP 1994 1995 Source: National authorities. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13 - The success in strengthening monetary stability in Azerbaijan has exposed serious weaknesses in the banking system. With lower inflation and high real interest rates, the four large state-owned banks are facing an increasing burden of nonperforming assets in their loan portfolio. While the work has already begun to rehabilitate the Savings Bank, the next step is to put the other three large state owned banks (Prominvest Bank, Agroprom Bank, and International Bank) under a special scrutiny. With technical assistance of the IMF and the World Bank, the authorities intend to urgently develop a reform strategy for a fundamental restructuring and rehabilitation of the state banks and the entire banking system. For this, several preparatory measures are to be implemented including conducting diagnostic studies, establishing work-out units for non-performing loans, introducing new prudential standards with stricter loan classification and appropriate provisioning for impaired loans, higher minimum capital requirements for existing banks, and restrictions for insider lending. A rapid increase in interenterprise arrears has been typical in the early stages of financial stabilization in transition economies. In Azerbaijan, these arrears rose from 35 percent of GDP in late 1994 to 65 percent of GDP at end-August, 1995. The authorities agreed with the staff that the fundamental solution to the problem of interenterprise arrears can only be achieved through substantial strengthening of financial discipline in enterprises. Meanwhile, further steps should be taken to accelerate this process. To address the stock problem of interenterprise arrears, the Government should identify a number of loss making state-owned enterprises responsible for a large portion of the arrears. These enterprises should be put under a special restructuring program and if enterprises are deemed to be not viable, liquidation procedures should be initiated by the Government. To address the flow problem, the authorities have agreed to instruct the state owned enterprises to ship products or to provide services only on the basis of prepayment or a confirmed letter of credit (GLC) as described in the MEP, paragraph 27. Also, energy companies will be instructed to interrupt supplies to customers in arrears, as necessary. The staff emphasized that strict sanctions should be imposed on enterprise managers that do not observe these measures. 4. External nolicies and the balance of navments in 1996 Azerbaijan's external outlook remains subdued in the short run (Table 6). Much of the expected deterioration in the current account during the program period is related to imports linked to the development of oil fields and other investment projects, largely covered by foreign financing from the oil consortium and to a lesser extent, the World Bank, and the EBRD. However, the nonproject current account is also forecast to worsen owing to a further increase in imports of final and intermediate goods associated with the expected real exchange rate appreciation. These imports are only partially offset by a projected recovery of exports to the CIS countries of food products such as tobacco and wine. Natural gas imports are projected to increase in 1996 as payments relations with Turkmenistan improve, allowing an increase in exports of oil products. Cotton exports are likely to remain roughly unchanged and imports of nonproject capital goods are likely to remain at their compressed 1995 levels. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14 - On the capital account, loan repayments will increase sharply in 1996 with payments on rescheduled debts to Turkey, Turkmenistan, and Russia. At the same time, disbursements from the Turkish Eximbank are expected to resume as Azerbaijan begins servicing past debts. Foreign direct invest- ments are assumed to increase slightly, and the banking sector is expected to maintain its currently high level of foreign reserves. The remaining portion of the World Bank rehabilitation loan (US$44 million) is expected to be disbursed in the first half of 1996. Aside from the US$28 million disbursement of the oil bonus, the net contribution to the balance of payments from the oil consortium investment project will rise sharply as the investment schedule appears to continue as originally planned. The program aims at increasing the ANB's gross reserves to the equivalent of three months of imports excluding the operations of the oil consortium by end-1995, and maintaining them at about the same level until the end of the program period. The resulting financing gap through September 1996, about US$115 million, is expected to be closed by the disbursements from the IMF. The program is therefore fully financed. The external financing currently available, however, is not sufficient to fully finance imports needed for all aspects of the rehabilitation of the enterprise sector which the authorities would like to accomplish in 1996. These factors emphasize the need to mobilize further project financing from the international community, as any financing beyond that assumed in the program could be used to help ease the constraint on needed imports. In this regard, the Government is prepared to request a Consultative Group meeting to be held to raise project financing and to address the external financing needs for the period of the expected ESAF supported program, in particular since current projections suggest that a financing gap of US$50 million could emerge in the last quarter of 1996, beyond the current program period. Until recently, exports of strategic goods (mainly cotton and oil products) were required to be licensed but, as a prior action to the prog=.m, the Government has now eliminated all remaining quotas and licensing requirements on these goods. Also, export taxes will be automatically eliminated as domestic prices reach world levels, given the construction of this tax, i.e., 70 percent of the difference between world market price and domestic price is taxed away. The Government imposed a temporary tax on certain strategic exports for budgetary reasons and to eliminate the distortion in supplier incentives due to differences between domestic and world prices. The scope for bilateral trade agreements will be reduced further and the authorities intend not to renew bilateral barter trade arrangements with Turkmenistan. The contracting on gas deliveries will be left to individual enterprises without the Government extending any guarantees on their obligations. The authorities also agreed to define concrete measures to reduce further the scope of direct and indirect involvement of the ministries and government committees in domestic and foreign trade, in particular in the oil and agricultural sectors. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 15 - Specifically, to reduce the role of the State Fuel Committee in distribution and marketing of oil products, the privatization of gas stations and regional fuel storages, and transferring other distribution outlets from the State Fuel Committee to the refineries was agreed as a structural benchmark for the program. 5. Structural oolicies Apart from the restructuring of the financial sector, major emphasis in structural policies is placed on rationalizing the relative price structure, rapid progress in privatization, and initiating the enterprise restructuring process. To align Azerbaijan's major relative prices with those prevailing in the world market, the price of domestic crude oil was raised to world market levels as a prior action for the SBA program, i.e., taking account of Azerbaijan's current high transportation costs, to US$65 per ton (including royalty). In this connection, the Government did not change the user prices for oil products, most of which were already at the world market level. Further price adjustments were agreed to be taken on oil product prices to reduce the cross-subsidization of industrial oils and heavy fuel during the program period. Given the highly monopolistic market structure and imperfections in the regional oil market, prices of crude oil and oil products will remain regulated, but otherwise, price regulation will be limited to natural monopolies. The program places particular emphasis on privatization (see MEP paragraphs 36-37). The authorities have now finalized with the staff of the World Bank a comprehensive privatization program and its implementation is under way. The staff emphasized that the economic recovery in Azerbaijan will crucially depend on the progress in this area. Structural benchmarks were set out for key short-term targets of the privatization program: at least 8000 small enterprises to be privatized by end-1995 which can be largely achieved by transferring ownership of leased small firms and their property to their current operators. In addition, at least 50 large-and medium-sized enterprises are to be privatized by commercial tenders, and the distribution of vouchers for mass privatization of large and medium-sized enterprises are to be started by end-March 1996. To advance the restructuring of the enterprise sector, the authorities intend to develop a restructuring program drawing on the experience gained in other CIS countries. In this exercise the Government should identify large loss-making enterprises and isolate them from the banking system, reduce overmanning and close nonviable product lines and plants. Under this progr=, budgetary support for such enterprises should be strictly condi- tional. Although the implementation of such a program had been agreed in connection of the approval of the World Bank rehabilitation credit, progress in this area has been meager and further work in tailoring the restructuring program of enterprises is required. Meanwhile, the Government intends to refrain from directing credits or extending government guarantees on domestically financed loans so as to harden the budget constraint of the enterprise sector. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 16 - Azerbaijan's macroeconomic statistics remain inadequate for efficient program monitoring (see Appendix III). Although progress has been made in some areas, notably in consumer price and monetary data, serious short- comings remain in producer and foreign trade prices, government finance, balance of payments, and national accounts data. In these areas, the authorities intend to seek technical assistance from the IMF's Statistics Department and will ensure that there will be an adequate legal basis for the collection of statistics. In this connection, the authorities have agreed to establish an interagency working group at the department head level with participation of the Ministries of Finance and Economy, the ANB, and the State Department of Statistics to oversee the development of economic statistics. This working group should develop a work program to improve macroeconomic statistics by end-1995. 6. Medium-term balance of oavments and canacitv to repay the Fund Azerbaijan's medium-term prospects are dominated by the development of oil fields in the Caspian Sea. l/ The first phase of investment by an international consortium of oil companies, entailing the rehabilitation of the existing Chirag platform, was initiated in late 1994 and has proceeded on schedule. Also, a resolution was achieved in October 1995 on construc- tiqg two pipelines for the delivery of the early oil from this project via Georgia and Russia. The first oil exports from the Chirag project are expected in 1997, although exports could begin as early as the second half of 1996. With no delays in the implementation of the oil project, economic growth could recover in 1997 and output increase by an average of 5 percent per annum over the medium term. The recovery would be led by investment, in particular those directly and indirectly related to the development of oil fields. Initially, consumption could expand rapidly reflecting pent-up demand and expected appreciation of the real exchange rate. With tight financial policies, annual inflation is projected to decline from 24 percent in 1996 to around 10 percent in the next few years. The medium-term scenario of the balance of payments is based on conservative assumptions on world oil prices and transportation costs but assumes the timely implementation of the oil project (Table 7). Over the longer term, balance of payments surpluses could be much larger than thLose projected for the end of the medium-term horizon. However, delays are possible and they could significantly alter the medium-term prospects not least due to uncertainties over the routing of the main pipeline for which a decision is expected tco be taken in late 1997. lJ For a more complete discussion of the oil consortium investment project, see Annex I in the Recent Economic Developments report, and EBS/95/59, Supplement 1, for a discussion of the impact of this project on the medium-term prospects of Azerbaijan. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17 - Even without delays in project implementation, Azerbaijan's balance of payments prospects remain precarious over the next few years until oil exports reach significant levels. The current scenario is based on a level of imports sufficient to allow for some recovery in consumption and at the same time replenish the stock of productive capital. Despite the high marginal product of new investments, foreign direct investment other than that related to the oil consortium is assumed to increase only tentatively in light of the perceived political and economic uncertainties. The most substantial revision to the medium-term scenario since the approval of the STF arrangement is associated with the state oil company's (SOCAR) invest- ment requirements as a member of the oil consortium. With the sale of one half of its share in the oil consortium in early 1995, SOCAR was relieved of its obligation to finance its share (around USS1.5 billion) in the consortium's investment program over the next 10 years, significantly improving Azerbaijan's viability in the short run. At the same time, however, the natural gas output (not related to the oil consortium development) is expected to decline faster than was previously anticipated. Based on these assumptions, the financing gap during 1996-1998 could average about US$125 million per year. Naturally, the size and timing of these gaps depend on several assump- tions, not least on the timely implementation of the consortium investment project. The main phase of the consortium investment project will begin only once a decision is made on the routing of an oil pipeline permitting large oil exports to western markets. Negotiations over the routing of the main pipeline are complex as they involve political concerns of world and regional powers. Delays are possible, and could significantly alter the medium term prospects. In addition, the scenario is particularly sensitive to the rate of decline in output of nonconsortium oil and natural gas in relation to the potential savings from energy conservation as prices are raised and payments for energy are enforced. The current scenario assumes cautiously that transportation difficulties will ease only slightly and that many of the traditional trade linkages with the FSU are no longer commercially viable. Further easing of transportation difficulties could lead to greater than projected export growth. In addition, Azerbaijan's access to private capital markets is likely to improve greatly once a decision is made on the routing of the main pipeline. Finally, in addition to the oil fields now opened up to the consortium, several more fields are now being considered for international tender. Potential bonuses and other net flows to the balance of payment from these fields will help improve Azerbaijan's medium-term viability. If unexpected political events do not interfere with the oil field development and pipeline construction, Azerbaijan's medium- to long-term balance of payments prospects are very good. Its access to private capital markets and capacity to repay the Fund will be strong. Under this scenario, debt service to the Fund would peak at 9.3 percent of nonconsortium exports in the year 2000. Azerbaijan's capacity to repay the Fund would remain relatively strong even if the pipeline construction were delayed by a few years, as some of the increased crude oil production could be exported through existing infrastructure and, alternatively, could substitute for current energy imports. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 18 - IV. Prior Actions. Performance Criteria. and Program Monitoring To ensure that the implementation of the program takes hold rapidly, several prior actions (as detailed in paragraph 8 in the MEP) were implemented. Most importantly, (i) the price of crude oil was raised to world market level by September 30; (ii) a 25 percent royalty was set on crude oil production, and a 20 percent royalty on domestically produced natural gas; (iii) exemptions of the VAT on foodstuffs imported from non-CIS countries were eliminated; (iv) all disbursements of the new oil bonus (USSlll) in 1995 and 1996 were decided to be allocated to support the ANB's foreign reserves and the 1996 budget; (v) new laws on the central bank and banking were introduced to Parliament; (vi) government payment arrears to the International Bank were settled; (vii) all export quotas and/or licensing requirements on strategic goods were abolished; and (viii) the revised 1995 Budget was approved by the 'Parliament. The proposed quantitative performance criteria for monitoring performance under the SBA are (Table 10): (i) minimum levels for net international reserves, (ii) ceilings on the net domestic assets of the ANB, (iii) ceilings on the net position of the general government with the banking system, (iv) 1: 't imi s on the use of foreign financing in financing the budget; (v) limits on the cumulative net disbursements of external debt with maturities of less than one year, excluding normal import related credits; (vi) limits on the contracting or guaranteeing of new nonconcessional medium- and long-term external debt by the public sector and the ANB with maturities from 1 to 12 years, with sublimits of 1 to 5 years; (vii) no accumulation of new external payment arrears by the Government. In addition, indicative ceilings are set out on the stock of the ANB's reserve money, and structural benchmarks set for several structural policy measures. The above performance criteria and structural benchmarks are described in detail in Annexes I-V of the MEP. The Government will remain in close consultation with the IMF in accordance with the IMF's policies on such consultations and will provide any information which the staff may require for the purpose of monitoring performance under the economic program. There will be three reviews of the program to be completed before end-March 1996, end-June 1996, and end- September 1996, respectively. In the first review, the quantitative performance criteria and structural benchmarks for end-June 1996, and end- September 1996 will be established. All reviews will also assess progress in the implementation of the systemic and structural reforms. The authorities will continue to monitor progress in program implementation through a committee chaired by the State Advisor on Economic Policy and comprising the Chairman of the ANB, the Minister of Finance, the Minister of Economy, and other officials. The authorities have also established a committee at the senior official level, which will constantly review the policy implementation and include the IMF Resident Representative as observer. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 19 - v. Technical Assistance The Fund and the World Bank, together with a number of other multilateral and national official institutions, have provided extensive technical assistance to Azerbaijan over the past year. lJ Good progress has been made in a number of important areas of interest to the Fund, in particular, in compilation of price and monetary statistics, fiscal accounting and reforms in tax administration, social safety net, banking supervision, and central bank operations. However, further work is needed in all these areas, especially in widening the base of reliable price statistics and national accounts, strengthening banking supervision, and establishing the Treasury at the Ministry of Finance. VI. Staff Appraisal Azerbaijan's economic program supported by the STF has been very successful in macroeconomic stabilization. In particular, the rapid reduction of inflation from a monthly rate of over 50 percent in late 1994 to an average of 2 l/2 percent during the last six months has been impressive. Similarly, a broadly stable nominal exchange rate and rapid accumulation of foreign reserves during the program period are indications of strong progress in monetary stability in the Azerbaijan economy. As in other transition economies at this stage of the reform, recorded real output has continued to decline while economic activities in the non-recorded sectors, such as trade and services, appear to be on the rise. In response to tight financial policies, interenterprise arrears have increased rapidly, and there are few signs to date of improved financial discipline in the traditional enterprise sector. In contrast to the gains achieved in monetary stabilization, progress in structural reforms has been mixed. In early 1995, commendable progress was made in improving the functioning of the marketplace by unifying and liberalizing the exchange regime, centralizing foreign exchange holdings in the central bank, abolishing the state order system, and eliminating subsidies. Subsequently, however, the pace of structural reforms slowed, and progress has been disappointing in particular in the area of privatization. While a comprehensive privatization program and its implementation plan were prepared in close cooperation with the staff of the World Bank, delays in enacting the required legislation according to agreed modalities has slowed progress and led to lower disbursements by the World Bank. Now that the privatization legislation has been amended, the staff urges the authorities to strengthen their efforts to speed up the privatization process. While the structural benchmarks on privatization set out in the MEP will not be easy to achieve, the staff believes that the cost of missing these benchmarks in terms of delays in the recovery of output and I/ Technical assistance provided by the Fund in the period since the last Article IV consultation is set out in Appendix I. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 20 - threats to the success of the reform program is high enough to justify the acceleration of the privatization effort. Strong support from the World Bank and the international community will be required to achieve tangible results in this area. The Government's new economic program for October 1, 1995 to September 30, 1996 aims at consolidating macroeconomic stability through continuation of a stable monetary environment, further fiscal adjustment, and enhanced financial discipline in the enterprise sector. With the policies described in the MEP, the staff believes that the program targets of low inflation and a turnaround in output decline are achievable. The challenges ahead, however, are numerous and demand skillful implementation of a mix of macroeconomic and structural policies. The real exchange rate is likely to appreciate considerably during the program period since monetary policy will be conducted in an environment of an initially undervalued exchange rate and potentially sizeable capital inflows. Consistent with this, expected foreign exchange inflows in excess of the programmed reserve accumulation are to be sold in the foreign currency market to avoid a too rapid growth of the monetary base. The authorities should not resist some nominal exchange rate appreciation since a real exchange rate appreciation through inflation could undermine the stabilization effort. In the event of large unexpected capital inflows the authorities intend to reassess, with the assistance of the staff, the appropriateness of the targets for foreign exchange accumulation, credit and money under the program. Strong monetary and exchange rate policy can achieve permanent results only in a sound financial environment. The fragility of the banking system is a cause for concern and it was exposed recently by the serious liquidity problems in the Savings Bank. The staff commends the authorities' rapid response in replacing the bank's management and restoring its liquidity, but stresses that the rehabilitation process must be continued in a prudent manner to avoid recurrence of a liquidity crisis and improve the solvency of the bank. There is little doubt that, as stabilization proceeds and financial discipline improves, the poor liquidity and solvency situation in other state-owned banks will become apparent. Therefore, a careful but rapid preparation of a restructuring strategy for the entire financial sector is crucial. In this process, enforcement of the bankruptcy legis- lation and privatization have important roles to play. The program foresees further fiscal adjustment to take place in 1996. The staff appreciates the authorities' bold commitment to allow no domestic bank financing for the 1996 budget, which is consistent with the goal of further price and exchange rate stability. The staff notes that, were the new oil bonus treated conventionally as a revenue item, the 1996 Budget is consistent with a balanced budget. The staff stresses the need to implement and collect effectively and with determination the new taxes, in particular the royalties on crude oil and natural gas production, and rapidly eliminate existing exemptions in VAT legislation which presently erode large portions of the tax base. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 21 - The achievement of the fiscal targets requires also tight expenditure control. The staff welcomes the authorities' intention to reduce the expenditure-to-GDP ratio during the program period by removing several budgetary organizations from the budget, and reducing discretionary expendi- tures to meet this target. However, the staff also notes that considerable savings can be achieved by increasing the efficiency of the public sector. Delinking government wages and social benefits from the minimum wage, and implementing the restructuring of the social safety net according to the recommendations of the Fiscal Affairs Department of the IMF deserve a high priority. Continued progress on structural reforms and macroeconomic stabili- zation are needed for Azerbaijan to fully utilize the economic benefits that can be achieved from a successful implementation of the large oil projects. It appears that the project with the international oil consortium is well on track, and with the recent resolution of the routing of oil pipelines for the early oil, it can be expected that the interest of foreign investors in Azerbaijan will strengthen. Risks exist, though. In particular, the fiscal adjustment objective is ambitious and the implementation of monetary and exchange rate policies will require skill and perseverance. The progress made in these areas under the program supported by the STF exceeded the expectations of many observers which lends support for optimism. Most importantly, the authorities need to recognize the importance of rapid progress in structural reforms as a cornerstone for the success of the program. In this connection, the staff notes that so far the high-level coordination within government of stabilization policy with structural reforms has not been sufficient. More cooperation between government agencies is also needed in order to improve the timeliness and adequacy of statistical data, which are still insufficient in Azerbaijan. The staff supports the request for the SBA with the Fund and second purchase under the STF. The staff also welcomes the intentions of the authorities to quickly proceed with formulating a program that could be supported by an ESAF arrangement from the Fund. It is recommended that the next Article IV consultation with Azerbaijan be held on the standard 12- month cycle. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 22 - VII. Proposed Decisions The following draft decisions are proposed for adoption by the Executive Board: A. 1995 Consultation 1. The Fund takes this decision in concluding the 1995 Article XIV consultation with the Azerbaijan Republic, in light of the 1995 Article IV consultation with the Azerbaijan Republic conducted under Decision No. 5392-(77/63), adopted April 29, 1977, as amended (Surveillance over Exchange rate Policies). 2. The Azerbaijan Republic's restrictions on payments and transfers for current international transactions are maintained under the transitional arrangements of Article XIV, Section 2, as described in EBS/95/170. The Fund encourages the Azerbaijan Republic to eliminate these restrictions as soon as circumstances permit. B. Reauest for Stand-By Arrangement 1. The Government of the Azerbaijan Republic has requested a stand-by arrangement for a period of 12 months in an amount equivalent to SDR 58.5 million. 2. The Fund approves the stand-by arrangement set forth in EBS,'95/170. C. Svstemic Transformation Facility 1. The Fund has received a request by the Government of the Azerbaijan Republic for a purchase equivalent to SDR 29.25 million under the Decision on the Systemic Transformation Facility (Decision No, 10348-(93/61) STF, adopted April 23, 1993, as amended). 2. The Fund approves the purchase in accordance with the request. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 1. Azrbaijan: Selected Economic Indicators Social and demopgraphic indicators (1994) Area (sq. km.) Population (thousands) Population density (per sq. km.) Life expectancy at birth (years) Infant mortalityrate (per thousand) 86.600 1,481 86 69.6 25.2 .-- .___ 1995 1996 1994 1995 1996 Ql est. Output andemployment Real GDP Totalemployment -24.4 - 13.0 Prices and costs Consumer price index Average wage Real wage 102.6 14.3 2.6 a.9 5.6 4.3 3.3 3.0 1664.4 412.2 24.2 49.8 29.2 17.5 16.1 5.8 4.3 3.3 4.1 631.1 310.3 42.1 -26.1 13.1 14.5 6.6 0.2 0.0 0.0 1.7 -58.6 - 19.9 14.5 Exicrnal sector, (million of USS) Export of goods Import of goods Current account. (incl. transfers) In percent of GDP In percent of GDP (excl. oil consortium) 93 -142 -59 11s -183 -63 General gowrnment. (% of GDP) 1/ Total revenue Totalexpenditure. incl. net lending Fiscal balance Domestic fmancing Foreign financing21 21.0 28.9 20.0 23.4 20.4 35.2 36.0 29.7 0.6 -6.3 - 16.0 -6.3 -3.9 2.9 5.5 1.0 3.3 3.4 IO.5 5.3 Financial markets Reserve money, end of period Manat reserve money, end of period Broad money, end of period 3/ Manat broad money, end of period Velocity (ratio) 2/ s/ Manat velocity (ratio)l/ Refmancing rate (percent) 41 69.8 17.2 34.6 41.0 25.1 22.0 24.P 28.5 7.7 34.6 29.3 15.1 a.9 7.1 5.8 15.8 12.1 9.5 231 180 100 Memorandum items: GDP (billion of manat) 1995 2009 Exchange rate (manat/ USS) 4334 4419 Sources: Data provided by the Azeri authorities; and staff estimates. cl2 est. 03 04 01 Qz 03 04 est. prog. prog. prog. prog. proj. act. prog. (Percentage change over previous period, unless otherwise n&) -1.4 154 -170 -52 1910 -4.1 123 -213 -131 -9.1 2.0 3.4 4.0 5.7 9.0 1994 4471 4256 I/ The ratios between 1994 and 1995 are not slrictlyeomparablc due to definitionalchanges. 2/ Includes a signature bonus from the contract with the international oil consortium. 21 Annualized quarterly GDP divided by the average stock of money. . . -4.0 -6.0 6.0 6.0 -21.2 -16.4 -6.7 -4.5 -1.7 -3.9 122 152 162 125 -219 -224 -234 -239 -135 -110 -110 -152 682 484 562 -791 -709 -917 -121 -305 -508 -8.5 -16.9 -19.6 -8.5 -10.2 -10.8 22.8 23.3 21.3 19.6 25.8 26.3 23.8 23.0 -3.0 -3.0 -2.5 -3.4 -- -- -- -- 3.0 3.0 2.5 3.4 31.7 23.4 21.6 46.5 30.2 24.6 -14.8 -6.9 -3.0 1.3 -- 5.6 3.0 4.3 4.0 1.4 4.5 4.1 4.4 8.2 4.9 3.2 2.8 1.8 4.5 5.1 4.4 11.8 6.6 6.0 6.0 6.5 6.9 9.3 9.1 9.7 10.0 642.7 143.5 642.7 119.5 827.7 77.5 486.1 108.3 6.7 6.9 9.3 11.6 250 2151 2213 2532 2863 2078 7907 4008 3810 3688 3575 1457 4372 - prog.. 21.8 24.1 19.6 30.8 6.3 9.5 9754 3770 h) W I $1 End-of-period, non-compounded. j/ In calculating these numbers, oil signature bonus funds on blocked accounts of SOCAR which are IO be transfered to the ANR are excluded from the stock of foreign currency deposits. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 24 - Table 2. Azerbaijan: Consolidated Operations of the General Government in 1995 (In biIIions of manats) Est. 01 1995 Pmjectica. Consolidated Budget 1995 Est. Year %GDP 02 %GDP 03 %GDP Q4 %GDP Proj. %GDP RcKnUC lndiv. income tax Enterpr.pmfas tax Social security contritutions Employees Employers Other V&e-added tax Ekseram ROyaltiU customs -UC !3tat.cxportstax Forex -ue Employment Fund Rmnue Qtbcr 4193 21.0 21.1 1.1 96.0 4.8 61.2 3.1 1.0 0.1 41.8 2.1 18.4 0.9 40.2 2.0 21.9 1.1 -- -- 10.4 0.5 -- -- 101.7 5.1 1.2 0.1 65.5 3.3 580.7 28.9 30.0 1.5 78.8 3.9 57.1 L.8 1.4 0.1 53.3 2.1 2.4 0.1 47.0 2.3 31.4 1.6 -- -- 5.7 0.3 76.1 3.8 2195 10.7 1.s 0.1 37.6 1.9 3805 20.0 35.3 1.8 84.0 4.4 67.0 3.5 1.6 0.1 62.6 3.3 2.8 0.1 44.6 2.3 29.8 1.6 -- -- 7.6 0.4 72.0 3.8 -- -- 1.7 0.1 38.5 2.0 4649 40.8 74.6 77.6 1.9 72.5 3.3 46.5 31.0 84.3 SZ 0.0 2.2 39.7 23.4 1845.3 23.4 2.1 1272 1.6 3.8 333.4 4.2 3.9 2631) 3.3 0.1 5.9 0.1 3.6 2302 2.9 0.2 26.9 0.3 2.3 178.4 2.3 1.6 1141 1.4 4.2 84.3 1.1 0.5 33.1 0.4 3.0 2069 2.6 -- 3172 4.0 0.1 6.6 0.1 2.0 1812 2.3 Eqmditurc 333.0 16.7 540.0 26.9 5752 30.2 542.9 27.3 1991.0 2.5.2 Waguandsalaricr 75.3 3.8 81.0 Purcbascs of goods and servicer 1071 5.4 235 4 &few 33.1 1.7 S8 6 R- fund for Cabinet Ministers 1.3 0.1 11.7 Settkmmt of refugees 7.5 0.4 10.0 other 65.2 3.3 155.1 bttmst paymmts 1.9 0.1 0.0 Current trahtfers to households 125.4 6.3 1369 PtiOnr 59.6 3.0 43.8 Price compmsaticms 54.3 2.7 71.7 Qtbn compendms aad dloaQws 11.5 0.6 15.4 Cumnt tlansrerr abroad 1.5 0.1 -- Sulsidia 6.4 0.3 10.9 Other current expenditure 6.4 0.3 41.2 Capii inwstmmt 8.3 0.4 33.2 Employmmt Fund Expenditure 0.5 0.0 1 .s 4.0 83.8 4.4 99.0 11.7 237.1 12.4 21oa 2.9 57.0 3.0 57.1 0.6 12.0 0.6 9.0 0.5 10.2 0.5 11.1 7.1 157.9 8.3 132.7 -- 2.3 0.1 7.8 6.8 141.4 7.4 1655 2.2 45.3 2.4 53.5 3.9 80.4 4.2 94.9 0.8 15.7 0.8 17.1 -- -- -- -- 0.5 11.2 0.6 12.1 2.0 67.3 3.5 20.1 1.7 30.6 1.6 26.6 0.1 1,s 0.1 1.8 5.0 339.1 4.3 10.6 789.7 10.0 2.9 2059 2.6 0.5 34.0 0.4 0.6 38.9 0.5 6.7 510.9 6.5 0.4 12.1 0.2 8.3 5692 72 2.7 2023 2.6 4.8 3073 3.9 0.9 59.7 0.8 -- 1.5 0.0 0.6 40.6 0.5 1.0 135.0 1.7 1.3 98.6 1.2 0.1 5.2 0.1 Pmsncial Balance 86.3 4.3 3.7 0.7 -0.7 -3.9 3.3 40.7 2.0 -102 -780 -3.9 - 145.7 -1.8 L.mdmg minus repaymmt 73.1 1676 8.3 5.8 46.8 2.4 3985 5.0 Pi Bahnce 13.2 -126.9 -6.3 -16.0 -124.8 - 6.3 -544.2 - 6.9 Available fmmcing Domestic Eatemd R-w I’ Replymat -132 -782 65.0 65.0 -- 1269 57.5 69.4 69.4 -- 6.3 2.9 3.5 16.0 5.5 10.6 1248 193 1OSb 149.8 43.4 63 1.0 5.3 5442 1028 441.4 4848 43.4 6.9 1.3 5.6 Memorandum items: Ext. Pi’mg (in millions of dollars.) Qilboou Borrowing Rcpaymmt Turtcy RI&i Qthcr 1.6.0 16.0 -- -- -- -- -- 24.8 1OOB 15.0 91.0 20.0 20.0 10.2 10.2 -- _^ 9.6 9.6 0.6 0.6 Epbmg late GDP 15.0 15.0 -- -- -- -- -- 4.334 1.995 4.419 2.009 - 194.7 111.0 -305.7 305.7 1042 2015 2015 -- 45.0 45.0 -- -- -- -- -- 4.477 1,907 4.256 4.371 1.986 7.898 Sourus: Ministry of Finance and State Tax haspectoratc; and IMP staff projex Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 25 - Table 3. Azerbaijan: Consolidated Operations of the General Government in 1996 (In billions of manats) 01 1996 Projections, Consolidated Budget 1996 YCZ %GDP 02 %GDP 03 %GDP 04 96GDP Proj. %GDP RCVXUC 487.9 22.8 Lndiv. income tax 43.2 2.0 Entcrprprofti tax 64.1 3.0 social sexmty contnbut1onr 82.1 3.8 Employees 2.0 0.1 Employers 76.7 3.6 other 3.5 0.2 Value-added tax 82.8 3.9 Epixtaxes 34.5 1.6 Royaitia 80.2 3.1 customs revenue 7.3 0.3 stlat. expotts tax 43.5 2.0 Forex -ue 0.0 -- Employmmt Fund Revenue 2.1 0.1 other 47.9 2.2 512.9 45.1 69.7 85.6 2.1 79.9 3.6 90.1 37.6 87.4 9.7 35.6 -- 2.1 50.0 23.3 2.0 3.2 3.9 0.1 3.6 0.2 4.1 1.7 4.0 0.4 1.6 -- 0.1 2.3 5379 21.3 558.1 46.5 1.8 48.7 14.4 2.9 77.7 08.4 3.5 92.6 2.2 0.1 2.3 82.6 3.3 86.5 3.7 0.1 3.9 96.1 3.8 102.0 40.1 1.6 42.5 96.5 3.8 114.4 13.6 0.5 15.8 27.7 1.1 7.9 19.6 1.7 2.7 3.2 0.1 3.0 0.1 3.6 1.5 4.0 0.6 0.3 -- 0.1 1.9 20968 21.6 1835 1.9 2859 2.9 3488 3.6 8.6 0.1 325.6 3.3 14.7 0.2 371.1 3.8 154.7 1.6 3785 5.9 46.4 0.5 1148 1.2 -- -- 2.9 0.1 51.6 2.0 -- 3.2 53.2 -- -- 10.4 0.1 202.7 2.1 Eqxnditurc 5432 25.3 572.1 25.9 589.1 23.4 6478 22.7 23522 24.2 Wagcsandsakks hrchavs of goods and services Defmse Reserve fund for Cabioet Mintstea Settlement of refugees other Interest paymmt5 Current transferr to households PenUonS Pnce compensations Other compensations and allowances CuHmt tranrrea abroad Subsiiies Other cumt urpenditurc Capital mvcStmmt Employment Fund Expenditure 101.6 4.7 1913 8.9 60.4 2.8 9.5 0.4 11.8 0.5 109.7 5.1 27.0 1.3 170.4 7.9 54.9 2.6 97.4 4.5 18.0 0.8 -- -- 12.8 0.6 10.1 0.5 28.1 1.3 1.8 0.1 1106 1935 62.9 9.9 12.3 108.4 26.1 184.7 59.8 1061 18.8 -- 13.3 11.5 30.3 2.0 5.0 8.8 2.9 0.5 0.6 4.9 1.2 8.4 2.7 4.8 0.9 4568 4.7 767.6 7.9 2553 2.6 40.3 0.4 49.7 0.5 4223 4.3 101s 1.0 7613 7.0 247.0 2.3 437.9 4.5 76.4 0.8 -- 0.6 0.5 1.4 0.1 1192 4.7 1253 4.4 1845 7.3 1983 7.0 65.0 2.6 67.0 2.3 10.3 0.4 10.6 0.4 12.7 0.5 13.0 0.5 96.5 3.8 107.7 3.8 24.9 1.0 23.8 0.8 1983 7.9 208.0 7.3 64.5 2.6 67.8 2.4 1143 4.5 120.1 4.2 19.5 0.8 20.1 0.7 -- -- -- -- 13.8 0.5 14.2 05 13.0 0.5 14.1 0.5 33.4 1.3 61.9 2.2 2.1 0.1 2.2 0.1 -- -- 54.1 0.6 48.8 0.5 153.6 1.6 8.2 0.1 Financial Balance -553 -2.6 - 59.1 -512 -2.0 -89.1 -255.3 -2.6 Lending minus qaymmt 10.0 0.5 -3.0 3.0 -0.0 3.0 9.5 -2.1 0.4 -3.1 3.1 0.0 3.1 9.2 0.4 8.9 Fixal Balance -653 -68.6 -68.4 -2.4 -98.7 -3.1 0.3 -3.5 3.5 -0.0 3.5 37.7 -293.0 Available fmancing Domestic EjPemaI Receipts _U Rcpaymmt 65.3 -0.0 65.3 144.7 19.4 68.6 0.0 68.6 1288 60.2 60.4 -0.1 60.5 86.7 26.2 2.4 -0.0 2.4 98.7 -0.0 98.7 1308 32.2 293.0 -0.0 2931 491.0 1979 0.4 -3.0 3.0 -0.0 3.0 Memorandum items: Ext. Finatkng (in mi%ons of dollars.) oil honur Bonmvitlg Repaymmt Turkey RUraia other 16.3 18.0 16.4 27.6 783 14.6 24.3 14.0 32.1 8S.0 21.5 9.5 9.5 4.5 45.0 19.8 15.8 7.1 9.0 51.7 14.6 10.6 1.9 3.8 30.9 4.8 4.8 4.8 4.8 19.0 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 1.8 Ephang late 4.008 3.810 3.688 3.575 3.7x) GDP 2.143 2.205 2.522 2.852 9.721 Sources: Ministty of Finance and State Tax fnspectorate; and IMP staff projcftions. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 4. Azerbaijan: Balance Sheet of the Azerbaijan National Bank (In billions of manats, end of period stocks) 1994 1995 04 01 Actwl Actual Q2 03 Actual Actual ~. ~-- 1996 04 01 02 Q3 Q4 Program Program Program Program FUEZXl --. - Net fmeign assets 4.5 541.6 499.1 476.2 661.5 Net international reserves (convalible) 3.8 447.4 425.7 306.9 584.6 @ou intanational reserves (convertible) 8.4 447.6 630.5 510.9 1,026.S Foreign liabilitia(convatible) -4.6 -0.2 -204.8 -204.0 -441.8 Required reavn held in foreign currency 0.0 93.0 73.0 170.1 77.6 Net claims on FSU states 0.7 1.2 0.5 - 0.7 -0.7 Net domestic assets Dom~ticrredit Credit togeneral government (net; itxl oil signature bonus) Credit lo general government (net;excl oil signalise bonus) Manat claims on ceneal govanment (net) Manat equivalent of oil signalwe bonus Claims on social protstioo fund (net) Claims on localgovanment (net) Claims on entcrpriser and organisations Credit to ban’ r(including ova&r&) 0th items ( t) 322.0 335.7 235.1 235.1 244.7 -0.3 - 9.3 I.0 100.2 - 13.7 9.8 150.6 394.8 130.7 68.4 236.9 532.3 272.3 -62.7 65.6 307.5 -2.0 177.8 235.4 321.4 340.7 194.6 239.8 327.5 346.8 - 240.5 - 169.8 - 13.9 -342.7 -1.2 - 1.3 -1.2 - 1.2 -15.6 -3.1 -4.9 -4.9 32 5.8 7.4 7.4 127.9 165.5 217.3 266.9 -58.6 -86.3 - 137.5 -141.6 Reserve money 323.1 548.5 643.0 865.8 7Sb.9 Manat rcsa-ve money 323.1 455.6 570.0 695.7 709.4 Ctrrency in circulation 282.3 371.6 467.6 553.8 598.8 Bank rcsewel 40.8 176.9 175.4 311.9 188.1 Carespordent accounts 17.3 48.1 68.5 105.4 64.5 Required ceserves 21.4 127.3 105.6 206.5 123.6 Required reserves in manats 21.4 34.3 32.6 36.4 46.0 Required reservea in foreign currencies 0.0 93.0 73.0 170.1 77.6 Olk 2.1 1.5 1.3 0.0 0.0 Otha deposits 3.4 2.8 6.7 5.3 5.3 Memorandum items: ANBrredit logovanment (40 ofGDP) 7.3 - 2.9 2.9 4.5 Bank financing ofgovanment (% of GDP) 8.2 -3.8 2.9 5.5 I&W intrnatioral reaeava (millions of U.S. dollars) 2.0 102.2 141.6 115.2 Net intanational resetvc~ (millions of U.S. dollars) 0.9 102.1 95.6 69.2 Ckosrresewes in month of non-conwxtium impnts 0.0 1.5 1.6 1.6 Source: Azerbaijan Natiorel Bank, and IMF staff estimates. 1.0 0.0 0.0 1.0 0.0 0.0 248.6 261.6 271.6 141.6 136.6 128.6 3.0 3.1 3.1 608.9 558.6 532.0 481.7 LO18.9 1,017.4 -486.9 -535.7 77.6 77.6 -0.7 -0.7 217.0 3aI.l 365.6 456.2 19.7 70.6 340.7 3407 346.8 346.8 -320.9 -270.1 -1.2 -1.2 - 4.9 -4.9 7.4 7.4 338.5 378.1 - 148.7 -156.1 620.6 853.4 743.0 77S.8 633.8 663.6 186.7 189.5 61.5 62.6 125.2 126.9 47.6 49.3 n.6 ?l.6 0.0 0.0 5.3 5.3 485.7 381.6 408.8 304.8 993.4 934.9 -564.6 -630.1 n.6 77.6 - 0.7 -0.7 436.3 581.7 608.2 753.8 129.7 249.2 340.7 340.7 346.8 346.8 -211.0 -91.5 - 1.2 - 1.2 -4.9 -4.9 1.4 7.4 463. I 497.2 - 163.9 - 172.1 916.7 958.1 839.2 880.6 713.6 753.6 2M.9 204.3 66.0 62.4 136.9 141.9 59.3 64.3 77.6 n.6 0.0 0.0 5.3 5.3 0.0 0.0 10.2 1.3 0.0 0.0 0.0 13.2 1.3 0.0 273.6 265.6 2.0 248.6 265.6 112.6 86.6 0.9 141.6 86.6 3.0 2.9 0.0 3.0 2.9 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 5. Azerbaijan: Monetary Survey (In billions of q anats, end of period stocks) 1995 __-._____ 1996 -__ Net fweign asseu of the ANB (convcrdble) Net foreign asrecrofcommcrcial banks (convcrtiblc) Netclaima on FSU stx~es 398.7 523.8 703.5 1.079.1 816.9 631.3 539.1 507.0 518.7 3.8 540.4 498.7 477.0 662.2 609.6 559.3 486.4 382.4 378.7 -21.5 200.4 596.1 148.7 15.6 -26.2 14.5 130.2 16.1 4.9 4.4 6.0 6.0 6.0 6.0 6.0 6.0 Net domestic a.uel( Domealk credit Credit to general government (net, including oil bonus) Credir to general govemmcnt (net, excluding oil bonus) Manat claimranccnaal govemmcnt (net) Claims on soA protstion fund (net) Claima on locsl gownmen (net) Manat equivdleot of oil signature bonus Claimson enterprisesand inditiduals O/w in ~cfcigcurrer~y Other items(net) 649.4 830.0 185.0 185.0 209.8 -11.8 -13.0 645.0 291.5 - 180.6 464.6 751.7 809.0 lJ29.8 -131.8 -3.6 108.7 166.2 161.7 204.9 -13.1 -11.4 -40.0 -27.4 -240.5 - 169.8 940.8 1.333.4 393.5 535.5 -344.4 -S78.2 657.0 598.0 829.4 962.8 1.111.6 1,172.9 1.617.0 1577.2 1.828.2 1.981.6 2,201.7 2,306.6 256.5 -53.0 -31.3 19.6 76.7 198.2 270.4 289.7 289.7 289.7 209.7 289.7 320.5 339.7 339.7 339.7 339.7 339.7 -lS.S -1S5 -lS.S -IS5 -15.5 -15.5 -34.6 -34.6 -34.6 -34.6 -34.6 -34.6 -13.9 -342.7 -320.9 -270.1 -211.0 -91.5 1,360.4 1,630.Z 1.859.4 1,962.0 2.123.0 2,108.4 -960.0 -979.2 -998.0 - 1.018.8 -1.090.1 -1,133.7 Broad money 1.048.1 988.4 1,455.t 1.736.0 J,414.9 1.460.7 1301.9 1,618.6 1.691.6 Manat broad money 431.0 580.2 750.2 863.5 897.7 943.5 984.8 1,101.4 1.174.4 Currmcy outside banks 276.1 366.1 460.9 545.8 590.8 625.8 655.6 705.8 745.8 Manat depolilr 154.9 214.1 289.2 317.6 386.9 317.6 328.9 395.6 428.6 Foreign currency depoils 617.0 408.2 705.0 872.6 5 17.2 517.2 517.2 517.2 517.2 Pclccntagccbangea Rercne money 58.2 69.8 17.2 34.6 -9.1 4.3 4.0 7.4 4.5 642.7 143.5 21.8 Mana rela-e money 58.7 41.0 2s.1 22.0 2.0 4.7 4.4 8.2 4.9 642.7 119.5 24.1 Currency incirculation 62.5 31.6 25.8 18.4 8.1 5.8 4.7 7.5 S.6 SS2.9 112.1 25.9 Dome& credic 117.7 -2.5 64.4 21.6 -2.5 IS.9 8.4 11.1 4.8 841.0 90.0 46.2 Manat bond money 63.2 34.6 29.3 15.1 4.0 S.l 4.4 11.8 6.6 486.1 108.3 30.8 Elroad moneyll 117.1 24.0 28.5 7.7 3.4 3.2 2.8 7.8 4.5 827 7 77.5 19.6 Broad q oocy(pcricd average) I/ 105.6 55.2 26.5 16.8 5.5 3.3 3.0 5.3 6.1 026.7 266.4 31.7 Manat broad money(period aswage) 63.5 45.5 31.6 21.3 9.1 4.5 4.7 8.2 9.1 508.7 238.2 44.8 Memaandum items: Inflation (end of period) 215.1 47.4 9.3 5.3 7.2 s.2 4.0 3.0 3.0 I78RO 81.0 16.1 Inflation (period avcrsge) 144.3 102.6 14.3 2.6 8.9 5.6 4.3 3.3 3.0 1664.4 411.5 23.9 Nominal GDP growth 155.1 70.6 0.7 -5.1 4.2 7.9 2.9 14.4 13.1 1168.6 280.0 23.1 Veloityof broad money(lenl)l// 8.0 8.9 7.1 5.8 5.7 6.0 6.0 6.5 6.9 6.7 6.9 6.3 Velaity of manat trosd money (level) _U 13.5 15.8 12.1 9s 9.0 9.3 9.1 9.7 10.0 9.3 11.6 9.5 Manat moneymultiplier(Ic~I) 1.3 1.3 1.3 1.2 1.3 1.3 1.3 1.3 1.3 1.5 1.3 1.3 Currcncy/manat deposits-ratio 178.3 171.0 159.4 171.9 192.5 197.0 199.4 178.4 174.0 160.2 174.6 188.3 Manat bank resavcn 81 ANBlmanat dcposiu- 26.3 39.2 3S.4 44.7 36.0 34.4 34.0 31.7 29.6 21.3 36.3 33.1 Banking ryrtem grossressvcr 132.0 126.7 223.7 286.7 321.7 302.7 301.7 314.7 339.7 132.0 321.7 339.7 1994 04 .4%lal 01 02 03 04 01 AcllJal AClUA FWsall Ropm Program --- Source: Azerbaijan National Bank, and IMF staff estimates. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 28 - Table 6. Azerbaijan: Balance of Payments (In millions of U.S. dollars) 1993 1994 1995 19% 01 Q2 Q3 Q4 cs,m, Q1 Q2 Q3 ~4 to(r, FA. p-og. I=%. F-g. m. A. chTen1 a-t: Trade Bslace Eqats fob of urtri& FSU oil producu - oil wmcctium ucresaded Impa% fob of wbidx FSU Ntual gas oil consatium uneoxded 11 .ckvica d wbidx faan services lmporu d vbicb: oil wnsatium Circcnt Trarofers of which: humanitarian aid B. clpital Account C. Erra, 6L omissions D. Ovnrllbatance E. Pnaacing Net faeign assets (- incrcaw) Cen@albankgrour- IMP TUhlCllhralY Increase in carrent lkbilitir Rcductioa of gas arean Rescheduling d gas arrcn Otbcz debt rcbcduling World Bankrcbabilitaljoo euopean Union P. Financing gap G. Porribkhanciog from IMP Ii. Remaininggap Memarmium iceam: GrolrraemoftJxANB cad of period in weeks of impa% of goods and non-ha - y -160 -121 -122 -109 697 682 362 281 198 207 65 W 0 0 0 45 -819 -791 -441 -498 -66 -193 0 0 -240 -115 -68 -87 0 0 _. 140 . . . -227 0 0 30 75 30 71 142 60 13 0 13 0 0 0 0 0 0 -64 133 18 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 -0 0 -0 0 0 54 0 54 0 54 0 0 0 0 22 0 -22 0 -21 -89 89 -2 -2 0 81 81 0 0 0 0 10 -0 0 -0 2 0 -59 -63 -52 --so -68 -17 93 11s 154 34 31 . . 44 40 49 10 44 so 0 0 0 4 3 5 -142 -183 -170 -62 -36 . . -39 -7 0 0 - I8 -30 -27 -83 -65 -39 -51 -5s -3 -1 -0 30 56 30 -68 - 107 -8s 0 -6 -10 29 57 20 2.5 48 1s 126 22 58 30 30 83 10 0 0 0 0 0 10 0 0 -16 -8 -1 0 0 0 0 0 0 -16 -8 -1 6 so 65 0 30 so 96 -50 -89 0 0 0 -29 -1 0 38 -41 6 -38 40 -6 -101 7 26 -101 -40 26 0 46 0 27 8 -52 33 13 -47 -66 -5 -5 60 0 0 19 9 1 0 0 0 17 17 19 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 102 142 115 6 8 6 -131 -305 -91 -22s 123 484 . . . 49 181 9 113 0 0 5 17 -213 -709 . . . . . . -32 -78 -42 -90 -77 -2.52 -60 -286 -1 -6 30 146 -90 -3s 1 -14 -30 20 126 1s 103 165 370 0 143 10 20 10 10 0 10 -2s -53 0 0 -10 -10 -19 -44 85 206 70 150 98 SS 0 0 0 -29 34 37 - 135 -97 -72 -72 -114 122 152 162 125 . . . . . . 61 61 61 61 10 44 so 9 0 0 0 0 5 5 5 5 -219 -224 -234 -239 -. .” -. . -40 -40 -40 -40 -43 -43 -43 -43 -78 -78 -78 -78 -58 -58 -58 -56 -9 -9 -9 -9 35 35 35 35 -93 -93 -93 -93 -14 -14 -14 -14 20 20 20 20 1s 15 1s 1s 110 7 13 13 -29 -2s -5 -5 -5 -5 -19 -15 87 a7 71 71 32 11 0 0 0 -26 -94 -98 -132 -201 -132 -247 0 46 -5 -22 0 -1 -5 -81 0 60 3 32 21 21 20 72 61 61 61 61 0 0 8 -1 8 13 27 -13 -13 0 0 0 0 0 0 21 18 18 18 18 0 0 249 249 262 14 14 13 -110 -110 93 84 7 13 13 7 7 28 18 28 70 13 13 so 5 1S 20 -16 - 18 -88 -5 -5 -20 -5 -5 -19 -6 -8 -49 87 87 34.8 71 71 285 -11 -33 -1 0 0 0 0 0 -18 -26 -10 -10 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 -2 -2 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 18 18 0 272 274 14 14 -152 71 0 -es 69 18 52 266 13 -508 -355 562 . . 244 113 0 20 -917 . . -160 -171 -311 -233 -36 140 -373 -57 80 60 357 0 -151 -17 -17 0 0 0 0 0 0 44 0 124 72 52 266 13 Sowe Gakomsta~ Azabrijao National Bank Mimtry of Fiina; Minimy d !hnomy. and IMP staff estimates. 1/ Ioclu& humanitarian assistance, shuttk us&. and oil Cadmium impatr. y Repmerd the am&-ad signing bonus paid to the Gowmwnt by the members of flx oil mmcctium. 21 In 1993. includea interstate enterprise arrears and a loan from Pennwit to SOCAR. 31 Excluding impau byoil cawxtium. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 29 - Table 7. Azerbaijan: Medium Term Balance of Payments (In millions of U.S. dollars) 1993 1944 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2wo 2001 2ou2 cumnt accolmt Trade Balaace Exports fob afuhkh:oilcotmottium y Energy N0l-l-ctXrgy scruica Ne( interest ofwbich: gap f-ing g Oil comatLm net 21 other Gmmt Tnnrfm Capital Amxnt 41 Oil borru s/ Othwcapltal (net) s/ overall balatmx Net foreign aweb (- irrceax) CkXdbaatgmu@2SCXXU Fund Purchawr Fund repurrb World Bank rehabilitation other Memonndumitcmr Gmut-acwaoftheANB end of period tiak in montln of importr of gooh and non-ktor vrvieer @I Net conhibtion of oil cotwxtium l_u D&t& in p-t of upoN -160 -l22 697 0 198 499 -819 0 -80 -739 -66 0 0 0 -68 30 160 a 13 13 0 0 0 0 87 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0.0 60 -121 -305 -109 -2Z 682 484 0 0 207 181 47s 303 -791 -709 0 -90 -W -80 -566 -629 -07 -206 0 -6 0 0 0 -30 -07 -170 7s 126 33 342 358 761 154 0 143 2a 112 28 54 -33 -18 -32 -44 54 20 70 70 100 0 -53 -88 -102 -144 22 206 348 680 770 0 150 28s 640 800 0 0 0 -4s -123 -44 26 -1 0 0 -89 37 -151 -137 -172 -2 -140 5s -2 -247 -17 0 107 72 0 0 0 0 21 44 91 02 0 -0 -0 2 249 0.0 3.0 0 160 . . . 57 11.8 -506 -355 562 0 244 318 -8% -605 670 112 321 350 -1276 -392 -184 -1092 -92.5 -1063 -519 -428 -3 917 1300 1707 306 651 1014 532 8% 1283 38s 404 424 -917 -171 -160 -157 -1436 -1728 - 1710 -503 -769 -664 -192 -176 - 158 -1244 - 1552 -1552 -233 -36 0 -57 -140 -353 -37 -4 -15s -161 60 -634 -52 -28 -402 -180 80 -40 -15 -236 -170 40 0 1oW 0 54 100 -46 1040 1200 -260 0 31 -20 -20 0 -1s -1s 0 -38 -1s -23 52 157 187 6 2x56 286 301 316 2.9 3.2 3.2 3.3 a4 288 321 524 l27 l39 MS 121 22.6 20.7 20.2 9.3 -702 -699 -47 -28 -448 -204 0 823 0 a0 100 -m 743 980 -405 0 121 -122 -61 -SS 0 383 3.7 638 121 7.1 -527 279 2053 1366 1607 44s -1774 -699 -104 -1670 -806 -4s -28 -537 -223 0 803 91 96 100 -4 617 994 -546 0 277 -27l -242 -3s 0 62s 5.8 684 a4 4.1 58 959 2594 1094 2126 468 -163s -561 -16 - 1619 -!m -41 -28 -611 -243 0 209 0 100 100 -0 109 698 -158 0 261 -267 -253 -14 -0 878 8.2 966 32 1.2 Sauar: Gmkamtat. Atcrbaijan National Bark. Minishy of Finance. Miiiatq of Ecawmy. and IMP tiff atimatn. y Aswma rm delay in the imutmmt pro-. y Arplmcranalnercrateoflpcnm(perTearooIhertodofdebc scumuktd from f-ingthegp. 3 lochada repatriati protita of the oil cotuatkm. 4/ In 1993-95 irrLda erron and omhtinr. s/ Rep-~ boasa paid by tlx oil conaattim to the GovemmeDt of Azerbaijan. 6/ II,C~UJ,X di&mcme& from Ttiy and project dkbuemen~ from the World Bank and the EBRD. I/ Iacluda repaymm~ to Rurria. UzbekLtan. Tultmeohtan (after 1995). Turkey. the EC. and Penn&. Debu to the EC are -cd to be repaid in 1997 and 19% De& to Pewwil are repaid om 5 y” beginking in 199% &’ In&da NPAof the CO~IDXC id banks. short term low. and emon and omkiim. 9/ The f-ingplp rrpruen& that &ich uhr, prior to potet&l inflow (other than FDI) from private capital market% @I Exciuding irtlportr of goods and servk by the oil conulti. u/ Irrluda SOCAR and the governmcnt’r &we of increased production of natural gar. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 30 - Table 8. Azerbaijan: Schedule of Purchases Under Stand-By Arrangement and Systemic Transformation Facility Amount L/ Expected Availabilizy Date Conditions for Purchase SDR 29.250 million (STF) Purchased (25.0) April 24, 1995 SDR 29.250 million (STF) (25.0) Upon Board approval SDR 9.360 million (8.0) Upon Board approval SDR 12.285 million (10.5) On or after February 15, 1!)96 SDR 12.285 million (10.5) SDR 12.285 million (10.5) SDR 12.285 million (10.5) On or after May 15, 1996 On or after August 15: 1996 On or after November 15, 1996 Board approval of the second STF purchase Board approval of the stand-by arrangement Compliance with performance criteria as of December 31, 1995 and completion of first program review Compliance with performance criteria as of March 31, 1996 and completion of second program review Compliance with performance criteria as of June 30, 1996 and completion of third program review Compliance with performance criteria as of September 30, 1996 Source: International Monetary Fund. 1,' Percentages of quota (SDR 117.0 million) are indicated in parentheses. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public‘l-able 9. AZERBAIJAN - Projected Payments to the Fund as at September 30. 1995 (in millions of SDRs) Overdue 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 Obligations from existing drawings 1. Principal 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 Beyond Total a. Repurchases b. ESAF/SAF repayments c. Trust Fund obligations 2.4 4.9 4.9 4.9 4.9 4.9 2.4 29.3 2. Charges and interest 17 Total Obligations 27 (percent of quota) Obligations from prospective drawings .3 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.3 1.2 .9 .7 .5 .3 .1 9.4 .3 1.4 1.3 1.3 3.8 6.0 5.8 5.6 5.4 5.1 2.5 36.6 .3 1.2 1.2 1.2 3.2 5.2 5.0 4.8 4.6 4.4 2.1 33.0 1. Principal a. Repurchases b. ESAFlSAF repayments c. Trust Fund obligations - 14.1 34.1 20.0 4.9 4.9 4.9 4.9 07.6 2. Charges and interest 17 Total Obligations 27 (percent of quota) Cumulative (existing and prospective) 1. Principal 2.5 4.1 4.1 3.9 2.8 1.5 .9 .6 .4 .l 20.7 2.5 4.1 4.1 17.9 37.0 21.5 5.7 5.5 5.3 5.0 108.4 2.1 3.4 3.4 15.3 31.6 16.3 4.9 4.7 4.5 4.3 92. i a. Repurchases b. ESAFlSAF repayments c. Trust Fund obligations _ 16.5 39.0 24.9 9.8 9.8 9.8 7.3 116.9 2. Charges and interest 17 .3 3.9 5.4 5.4 5.2 Total Obligations 27 .3 3.9 5.4 5.4 21.7 (percent of quota) .3 3.3 4.6 4.6 18.6 4.0 2.4 1.6 1 .l 43.0 27.3 11.3 10.9 36.7 23.3 9.7 9.3 7 .2 30.1 10.4 7.5 147.0 8.9 6.4 125.7 17 Projections are based on current rates of charge. including burden-sharing charges where applicable, for purchases in the GRA, and on current interest rates for SAF. ESAF. and Trust Fund. The current SDR interest rate is assumed for net use of SDRs. 27 Overdue obligations (if applicable) will be settled in full at close of business October 1, 1995. Prepared by Treasurer’s Department Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 32 - Table 10. Azerbaijan: Quantitative Performance Criteria and Indicative Targets September 1935-September 1996 Stocks, unless stated otherwise Actual -- Pro?,rm 1995 1996 September 30 December 31 March 31 June 30 L/ September 30 &/ 1. Performance criteria (Billions of manats) Ceilzng on net credit of the banking system to general government Ceiling on cunulative utilization of foreign financing Ceiling on net domestic assets of the ANB 395 Floor on total net international reserves Flooz on net international reserves in convertible currencies 69 :!41 141 Ceiling on cumulative amount of non-concessional loans contracted or guaranteed: with maturities of 1 to 12 year!: 50 69 271 2/ 290 290 290 290 with maturities of 1 to 5 years 25 150 294 423 131 218 301 (Millions of U.S. dollars) 136 128 136 120 100 50 170 75 510 437 112 112 250 100 Ceiling on cumulative net disbursements of contracted or guaranteed loans with maturities of less than 1 year 10 20 30 40 Ceiling on external arrears 0 0 0 0 0 2. Indicative targets Manat reserve money 696 710 (Billions of manats) 743 776 840 A/ Figures for June 30. 1996 and September 30, 1996 are indicative targets, and will be modified as necessary during the first program review and converted into performance criteria, where applicable. 2/ Estimate. The figures for the rest of 1995 and 1996 will be adjusted upward/downward by the amount by which the actual stock as of September 30, 1995 turns out to be higher/lower than estimated. 'The value of the stock as of September 30. 1995, however is not to exceed the level initially programned under the STF. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 33 - APPENDIX I Azerbaiian: Relations with the Fund (As of September 30. 1995) I. Membership Status (a) Date of Membership September 18, 1992 (b) Status Article XIV II. General Resources Account (In millions (In percent of SDRs) of auota) (a) Quota 117.00 100.0 (b) Fund holdings of currency 146.25 125.0 (c) Reserve position in Fund .Ol -- III. SDR Department Holdings In percent of allocation -- -- IV. Outstanding Purchases and Loans Systemic Transformation facility 29.25 25.0 v. Financial Arranpements None VI. Proiected Obligations to the Fund (SDR Million; based on existing use of resources and present holdings of SDRs): Overdue Forthcoming g/30/95 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 Principal -- -- -- -- -- 2.4 Charges/Interest -- ~ 3 ~ 14 ~ 13 1.3 14 . Total -- .3 1.4 1.3 1.3 3.8 VII. Exchange Rate Arranpements The currency of Azerbaijan is the manat which became sole legal tender on January 1, 1994. Currently, the exchange rate is allowed to float against all currencies. Noncash exchange rates are deter- mined three times a week at the foreign exchange auctions conducted by the Baku Interbank Currency Exchange (BICEX). Exchange rates for cash transactions are quoted by commercial banks licensed to deal in foreign exchange on the basis of market conditions. The Azerbaijan National Bank (ANB) determines an official exchange rate against the U.S. dollar every Wednesday which is equal to the Wednesday auction rate. On October 6, 1995, the official exchange rate for the manat was set at 4,435 per U.S. dollar. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 34 - APPENDIX Azerbaijan has been classified by the staff with the group of countries whose currencies are independently floating. Azerbaijan avails itself of the transitional arrangements under Article XIV. l/ VIII. Article IV Consultation IX. Technical Assistance X. XI. The second Article IV consultation with Azerbaijan was concluded on June 8, 1994. Azerbaijan is on a standard 12-month consultation cycle. The attached table provides information on the Fund's technical assistance activities in Azerbaijan. Resident Reoresentative Mr. Tevfik Yaprak, the second Resident Representative, took up his post in Baku in July 1995. Resident Advisers An adviser on the establishment of the Treasury in the Ministry of Finance, Mr. Nurcan Akturk, took up his post in December 1994 and a technical long-term adviser for tax administration, Mr. Mark Zariski, took up his post in April 1995. u The Article IV consultations described in this report also cover the required Article XIV consultations. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 35 - Technical Assistance, 1992-95 APPENDIX I Fund Department Area of Assistance Mission Dates FAD Budget management, tax reform, and social security system February/March 1992 MAE Central banking operations and accounting, currency issue, and foreign exchange operations October 1992 STA Monetary, balance of payment, and government finance statistics FAD Tax and expenditure reform November/December 1992 December 1992 MAE Banking supervision, foreign exchange operations, monetary policy, payments systems, and central bank organization STA Monetary statistics TRE Fund quota payment STA Consumer price statistics FAD Short term fiscal advisor MAE Central bank accounting INS Financial programming course FAD Tax administration STA Price statistics STA Monetary statistics FAD Public expenditure management STA Government finance statistics MAE Central bank operations STA Monetary statistics February 1993 February 1993 February 1993 April 1993 May/June 1993 August/September 1993 August/September 1993 November 1993 November/December 1993 February 1994 March 1994 May 1994 June 1994 September/October 1994 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 36 - APPENDIX I Fund Department Area of Assistance Mission Dates STA FAD Multitopic mission Social safety net October 1994 February 1995 MAE Central bank operations March 1995 FAD Tax administration April 1995 STA STA Balance of payments statistics Monetary statistics April 1995 May 1995 MAE Central bank operations October 1995 Source: International Monetary Fund. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 37 - APPENDIX II Azerbaiian: Relations with the World Bank Azerbaijan became a member of the IBRD in September 1992 and of the International Development Association in late March 1995. Even prior to its formal membership, a Bank economic mission began in July 1992 an assessment of the economic situation and prospects. Based on the results of this and other subsequent mission, a Country Economic Memorandum was issued in September 1993. In view of the importance of the energy sector for Azerbaijan's future growth and viability of balance of payments, the Bank completed an energy sector review in December 1993. An agricultural sector study is under way. The Bank has completed negotiations for a Petroleum Technical Assistance Project which was presented to its Board of Directors in April 1995. It also approved an Institution Building Technical Assistance Project in July 1995. This project will assist the Government in the design and implementation of reforms in key areas, including privatization, development of the financial sector, budget and treasury operations, and strengthening tax administration. The last two components will complement the technical assistance provided by the IMF. The Bank has also approved a Baku Water Supply Project. In order to support the Government's structural reform program, the Bank has also approved a Rehabilitation Credit on August 22, 1995. Other operations under preparation include a gas rehabilitation project, a pilot farm privatization, and an irrigation rehabilitation project. The Bank organized a Pre-Consultative Group meeting in Paris in December 1992 and a full Consultative Group meeting in May 1995 to mobilize support from multilateral and bilateral donors. The Fund participated in these meetings. The Bank has also provided a grant of US$340,000 from its Institutional Development Fund to help the Government manage the coordination of external financial and technical assistance. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 38 - APPENDIX III Azerbaiian: Statistical Issues The quality of statistics in Azerbaijan remains weak, mainly due to a lack of human and technical resources as well as insufficient communication between different government agencies. I./' While sufficient progress has been made to meet the minimum needs of surveillance and program work, the authorities have generally been reluctant to implement recommendations made by various IMF technica assistance missions. In order to advance the data situation, the authorities have now agreed to create an interagency working group to develop a program for improving macroeconomic statistics. National accounts statistics The authorities have been receiving technical assistance from the Fund and the OECD. As a result, there now exists a set of National Accounts for 1990-93 following the SNA classification system. However, these calculations of both nominal and real GDP are plagued by deficiencies, both in terms of methodological accuracy and coverage. The recent EUR II mission assisted the State Statistic Committee (SSC) in revising the National Accounts for 1993 and compiling a preliminary set of GDP estimates for 1994 and 1995. Because of severe inaccuracies in enterprise reporting, the mission recommended changing the basic approach for calculating GDP from the production to the expenditure method. Further technical assistance from the Fund and other international organizations is recommended. Areas that need improvement include the calculation of deflators for deriving constant price estimates, the household expenditure survey, the enterprise investment survey, and quarterly GDP data. Furthermore, the SSC needs to make better use of data from the Ministry of Finance and the Azerbaijan National Bank (ANB) when compiling National Accounts. Price statistics Good progress was made in developing a Consumer Price Index (CPI). The SSC reports a monthly 268-item Laspeyres CPI, which is reasonable in its coverage and compilation. In addition, the SSC recently began publishing a weekly CPI. Technical assistance is urgently needed to improve price data at the enterprise level and to develop a foreign trade price index. The wholesale price index compiled by the SSC appears to be flawed both in terms of coverage (only the state-owned industrial sector is captured) and accuracy (reporting enterprises systematically overstate their sales prices). While some foreign trade unit values are collected, the SSC does not publish an export or import price index. l/ The State Statistics Committee publishes a monthly bulletin of key statistical data only a few weeks after the end of the reporting period. However, these data are often not very accurate. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 39 - APPENDIX III Government finance statistics The Ministry of Finance has been working closely with the mission in adapting the classification of expenditure and revenue categories in the consolidated budgetary accounts of the general government to GFS guidelines. Although the authorities should now be able to convert accounts from the traditional (functional) classification into an economic classification, improvements still need to be made in the methods of recording so that both types of classifications are available simultaneously. In addition, changes to the traditional classification are needed before it will be possible to compile fiscal data suitable for publication in the Government Finance Statistics Yearbook. Also, closer cooperation and coordination are needed between the budget office in the Ministry of Finance and the Accounting Department of the ANB in order to ensure consistency of the accounts. Balance of pavment statistics A newly established unit at the ANB recently compiled an experimental balance of payments (BOP) for 1994, and has begun officially estimating the BOP on a quarterly basis. Some progress was made in improving the quality of the current account, as the ANB is making serious attempts to capture nonobservables such as unrecorded trade and services. Coverage of merchandize trade is not complete, particularly with regard to overland trade with countries of the former Soviet Union. In addition, there are problems of valuation of barter trade. The capital account estimate is hampered by basic data deficiencies. Most importantly, Fund missions and the ANB have so far not been able to obtain quarterly accounts of the oil consortium's investment budget execution, although these activities may account for as much as 50 percent of all the recorded imports into Azerbaijan. Without such data, meaningful BOP analysis is extremely difficult. Monev and banking statistics Since early April 1995, the ANB has been compiling daily and weekly simplified analytical balance sheets, which are regularly transmitted to the Fund. A STA mission that visited Baku in May 1995 encouraged the authorities to implement a number of recommendations, which could lead to the publication of Azerbaijan's page in IFS by the end of 1995. The authorities need now to focus on the introduction of a new plan of accounts. Some preparatory work in this area has been completed, but further technical assistance seems warranted. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicAzerbaijan: Survey of Reporting of Main Statistical Indicators as of end-Ocotber 1995 Reserve/ Base Money Interest Rates Consumer Price Index GDP/NMP Exports/ Imports Currant Account Balance Overall Govern- ment Balance June August 30- September 20 June June August 30- August September 30- 20 September 20 Monthly Monthly Monthly Exchange Rates Inter- national Reserves Central Broad Money Bank balance sheet I Date of Latest Observation October 13 August September Second auarter October 13 1 August October 13 October 13 October 17 October 17 Daily Weekly Weekly Weekly “.;.*.. Date Received October 17 August 30- September 20 October 10 August 30- September 20 Frequency of Data Weekly Monthly Monthly Quarterly I 0” I Monthly Monthly Irregular- Irregular lY -lY + Direct Direct reporting reporting by allthor- by auth- ities orities Frequency of RapGZtiZg Quarterly Weekly Irregular- lY Direct reporting by author- ities Source of Update Direct reporting by author- ities ~ Direct reporting by auth- orities Direct reporting/ Press review Direct reporting/ Press review Direct Direct reporting reporting by author- by author- ities ities Press review Direct reporting by authorities Fax/staff visit Telephone Staff visit Staff Staff visit visit + Unrestric- Use of ted use staff and Executive Board Staff visit Mode of Reporting Fax Fax Fax Fax Fax/staff visit Unrestric -ted use Embargoed for specified oeriod Unrestric- ted use Embargoed for specified oeriod Use of Use of Use of staff and staff and staff and Executive Executive Executive Board Board Board Confidentiality Unrestrict- use of ad use staff and Executive Board Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 41 - ATTACHMENT I Azerbaiian Republic - Stand-By Arrangement Attached hereto is a letter dated October 26, 1995 from the Prime Minister and the Minister of Finance of Azerbaijan, as well as the Governor of the National Bank of Azerbaijan, with an attached Memorandum of Economic Policies ("Memorandum"), requesting a stand-by arrangement and setting forth: (a) the objectives, policies and measures that the authorities of Azerbaijan intend to pursue for the period of this stand-by arrangement; and (b) understandings of Azerbaijan with the Fund regarding reviews that will be made of progress in realizing the objectives of the program and of the policies and measures that the authorities of Azerbaijan will pursue for the period of this stand-by arrangement. To support these objectives and policies the International Monetary Fund grants this stand-by arrangement in accordance with the following provisions: 1. For the period from 1995 to 1996, Azerbaijan will have the right to make purchases from the Fund in an amount equivalent to SDR 58.5 million, subject to paragraphs 2, 3, 4, and 5 below, without further review by the Fund. 2. (a) Purchases under this stand-by arrangement shall not, without the consent of the Fund, exceed the equivalent of SDR 9.36 million until February 15, 1996, the equivalent of SDR million until May 15, 1996, the equivalent of SDR 33.93 million until August 15, 1996, and the equivalent of SDR 46.215 million until November 15, 1996. (b) None of the limits in (a) above shall apply to a purchase under this stand-by arrangement that would not increase the Fund's holdings of Azerbaijan's currency subject to repurchase beyond 25 percent of quota. 3. Azerbaijan will not make purchases under this stand-by arrangement that would increase the Fund's holdings of the Azerbaijan's currency subject to repurchase beyond 25 percent of quota: (a) during any period in which the data at the end of the preceding period indicate that (i) the limit on net credit from the banking system to the government described in paragraph 43 and Annex I of the attached Memorandum, or (ii) the limit on the cumulative use of foreign financing described in paragraph 43 and Annex I of the attached Memorandum, or Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- &2 - ATTACHMENT I (iii) the limit on the net domestic assets of the National Bank of Azerbaijan described in paragraph 42 and Annex II of the attached Memorandum, or (iv) the floor on the net official international reserves of the National Bank of Azerbaijan described in paragraph 41 and Annex III of the attached Memorandum, or (v) the limit on the contracting and guaranteeing of new nonconcessional external debt with maturity of more than one year and up to and including 12 years described in paragraph 44 and Annex IV of the attached Memorandum, or (vi) the limit on the contracting and guaranteeing of new nonconcessional external debt with maturity of more than one year and up to and including 5 years described in paragraph 44 and Annex IV of the attached Memorandum, or (vii) the limit on the cumulative net disbursement of contracted or guaranteed external debt with maturity of up to and including one year described paragraph 44 and in Annex IV of the attached memorandum is not observed; or (b) if, at any time during the period of the arrangement, Azerbaijan fails to fulfil1 its intentions regarding the nonaccumulation of new external payments arrears to any external creditors as described in paragraph 44 of the attached Memorandum; or cc> after February 14, May 14, and August 14, 1996 until the reviews contemplated in paragraph 45 of the attached Memorandum are completed; or Cd) if, at any time during the period of the stand-by arrangement, Azerbaijan (i> imposes or intensifies restrictions on the making of payments and transfers for current international transactions; or (ii) introduces or modifies multiple currency practices; or (iii) concludes bilateral payments agreements which are inconsistent with Article VIII; or (iv> imposes or intensifies import restrictions for balance of payments reasons. When Azerbaijan is prevented from purchasing under this stand-by arrangement because of this paragraph 3, purchases will be resumed only after consultation has taken place between the Fund and Azerbaijan and Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 43 - understandings have been reached regarding the circumstances in which such purchases can be resumed. 4. Azerbaijan will not make purchases under this stand-by arrangement during any period in which Azerbaijan has an overdue financial obligation to the Fund or is failing to meet a repurchase expectation (a) in respect of a noncomplying purchase pursuant to Decision No. 7842-(84/165) on the Guidelines on Corrective Action, or (b) in respect of a purchase in support of debt and debt service reduction operations pursuant to Decision No. 9331- (890671, as amended, or (c) pursuant to subparagraph 16(a) or 33(a) of Decision No. 8955-(88/126), as amended, on the Compensatory and Contingency Financing Facility. 5. Azerbaijan's right to engage in the transactions covered by this stand-by arrangement can be suspended only with respect to requests received by the Fund after (a) a formal ineligibility, or (b) a decision of the Executive Board to suspend transactions, either generally or in order to consider a proposal, made by an Executive Director or the Managing Director, formally to suppress or to limit the eligibility of Azerbaijan. When notice of a decision of formal ineligibility or of a decision to consider a proposal is given pursuant to this paragraph 5, purchases under this arrangement will be resumed only after consultation has taken place between the Fund and Azerbaijan and understandings have been reached regarding the circumstances in which such purchases can be resumed. 6. Purchases under this stand-by arrangement shall be made in the currencies of other members selected in accordance with the policies and procedures of the Fund, unless, at the request of Azerbaijan the Fund agrees to provide SDRs at the time of the purchase. 7. Azerbaijan shall pay a charge for this stand-by arrangement in accordance with the decisions of the Fund. 8. (a> Azerbaijan shall repurchase the amount of its currency that results from a purchase under this stand-by arrangement in accordance with the provisions of the Articles of Agreement and decisions of the Fund, including those relating to repurchase as Azerbaijan's balance of payments and reserve position improves. (b) Any reductions in Azerbaijan's currency held by the Fund shall reduce the amounts subject to repurchase under (a) above in accordance with the principles applied by the Fund for this purpose at the time of the reduction. 9. During the period of the stand-by arrangement Azerbaijan shall remain in close consultation with the Fund. These consultations may include correspondence and visits of officials of the Fund to Azerbaijan or of representatives of Azerbaijan to the Fund. Azerbaijan shall provide the Fund, through reports at intervals or dates requested by the Fund, with such information as the Fund requests in connection with the progress of Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 44 - ATTACHMENT I Azerbaijan in achieving the objectives and policies set forth in the attached letter and annexed Memorandum. 10. In accordance with the paragraph 45 of the attached Memorandum, the Azerbaijan will consult the Fund on the adoption of any measures that may be appropriate at the initiative of the government or whenever the Managing Director requests consultation because any of the criteria in paragraph 3 above have not been observed or because the Managing Director considers that consultation on the program is desirable. In addition, after the period of the arrangement and while Azerbaijan has outstanding purchases in the upper credit tranches, the government will consult with the Fund from time to time, at the initiative of the governmen- L or at the request of the Managing Director, concerning Azerbaijan's balance of payments policies. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 45 - ATTACHMENT II October 26, 1995 Dear Mr. Camdessus: Since the beginning of 1995 the Government and the Azerbaijan National Bank have been implementing a comprehensive program of economic stabilization and structural adjustment to transform Azerbaijan into a market economy. These policies were described in our Statement of Economic Policies of March 30, 1995. On April 19, 1995 the IMF Executive Board approved the first purchase under the Systemic Transformation Facility (STF) in support of that program. With the implementation of our policies economic stabilization is taking hold and progress has been achieved in the area of structural reforms. Specifically, our financial policies have been sound, inflation has decelerated rapidly, the exchange rate has remained stable, and our foreign reserves have increased. This progress has been supported by largely completed price and trade liberalization, a reduced role of the government in resource allocation, modernization of the central bank, and more recently, further steps toward privatization. To consolidate the gains in macroeconomic stabilization, and broaden and deepen structural reform efforts we have prepared a new economic reform program in cooperation with the IMF staff, described in the attached Memorandum of Economic Policies (MEP). In support of this program, the Government of Azerbaijan hereby requests a one-year Stand-by Arrangement (SBA) in an amount equivalent to SDR 58.5 million, or 50 percent of Azerbaijan's quota. In addition, we will shortly request a second purchase under the STF equivalent to SDR 29.25 million, or 25 percent of quota. We believe that the policies and measures set forth in the attached Memorandum of Economic Policies together with the observance of the performance criteria are adequate to achieve the objectives of the program, but we are prepared to take any additional measures that may become necessary to achieve the goals of the program. We intend to continue our close cooperation with the International Monetary Fund. In the near future we plan to develop a three-year program of economic reform that could be supported by an arrangement under the Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility (ESAF). Sincerely yours, /s/ Fuad Guliyev Prime Minister of the Republic of Azerbaijan /s/ /S/ Elman Rustamov Fikret Yusifov Governor of the Minister of Finance National Bank of the Republic of of Azerbaijan Azerbaijan Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 46 - ATTACHMENT III Memorandum of Economic Policies I. Introduction 1. Since independence in October 1991, the Azerbaijan economy has suffered from severe macroeconomic imbalances largely reflecting the disruptions of traditional trade and financial links with Russia and other states of the former Soviet Union. The military conflict over the Nagorno- Karabakh territory also deepened the economic crisis, and more recently, disorder of transportation routes via Georgia and Chechnya further impaired Azerbaijan's economic conditions. In late 1994, however, Azerbaijan's economic prospects began to improve with progress toward a permanent settlement of the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict and an agreement with an international oil consortium regarding the development of oil deposits in the Caspian Sea. The Government has begun to focus increasingly on the policies needed to redress Azerbaijan's economic and financial difficulties. This task has been very difficult in an economic environment of rapidly falling output and soaring prices aggravated by the continuing transportation blockade and problems with payments arrangements with CIS countries. For 1995, we developed a comprehensive program of stabilization and structural reforms in close cooperation with the staff of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank. This program was supported by a first purchase under the Fund's Systemic Transformation Facility (STF) on April 19, 1995. 2. The implementation of the program yielded significant results. During the first nine months of 1995, the average monthly inflation declined to 6 percent from 22 percent during the corresponding period a year ago. In the summer months, the price level stabilized while some acceleration in inflation took place in the fall, partly reflecting seasonal factors. Since the beginning of the program, the nominal exchange rate has been stable, which greatly helped reducing inflation. Also, foreign reserves have begun to accumulate, and increased stability in the economy has improved our prospects for further external financing. However, real output has continued to decline and financial discipline in domestic enterprises remains weaker than hoped for. 3. We have strictly followed the financial policies as outlined in our economic program for 1,:'"5. The targets set out for financial policies have been met except that w" :lsed more external budget financing than initially programmed to pay defa:lited enterprise loans guaranteed by the Government. This cleanup operation was agreed as a prior action for our new economic program and it was pos: :>le as more of the old oil signature bonus became available to the budget. The domestic financing of the general government fiscal deficit has remained within the original program limits although this has required a sharp compression of expenditures in response to a shortfall of government revenues. In this process, we were not able to completely avoid fiscal arrears in the first half of the year, but they have also been settled now. Monetary policy has been tight, as indicated by limited credit expansion from the Azerbaijan National Bank (ANB), increased foreign reserves, and slow growth of monetary aggregates, which initially resulted in a stronger than programmed increase in the income velocity of money. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 47 - ATTACHMENT III 4. In the area of structural policies, progress has been slower than in macroeconomic stabilization. While price and trade liberalization have advanced well, privatization, enterprise and financial sector restructuring are still at early stages. However, we have recently reached agreement with the World Bank on a detailed privatization program and we intend to intensify our work on enterprise and financial sector restructuring. 5. We recognize that building up confidence in our economic policies takes time. Indeed, until our programs of oil field development come on stream, the macroeconomic situation will remain difficult. To overcome these difficulties and to deepen and accelerate structural reforms, thus laying the foundation for sustained economic growth, we have developed a new, more ambitious program for stabilization and economic reform for a 12- month period, beginning on October 1, 1995. On the basis of this new progr=, as described below, we request the financial support of the IMF in the form of a stand-by arrangement in the upper credit tranches and a second purchase under the STF. II. The Government's Program for October 1. 1995 - September 30. 1996 1. Policy objectives and strategy 6. The Government's main stabilization objectives for the program period are to consolidate the gains already achieved in macroeconomic stabilization and to reverse the declining trend in output and real incomes. Specifically, these targets include: (i) a reduction of monthly inflation to 2 percent by end-1995 and to 1 percent by the end of the program period; lJ (ii) a progressive strengthening of the external reserve position of the ANB to cover 3 months of imports of goods and services (not related to the operations of the oil consortium) by the end of the program period; and (iii) to turn around the decline of real GDP during the program period. To strengthen the groundwork for sustained growth in the period ahead, structural reforms will be accelerated. To this end, the key objectives are to complete the liberalization of trade and exchange systems, achieve tangible results in privatization, take concrete steps in enterprise restructuring, and initiate a comprehensive reform of the financial sector. 7. Our policy strategy is to rely on tight financial policies to consolidate the gains achieved in macroeconomic stabilization. To this end, we will: (i) limit the growth of net domestic assets and reserve money of the central bank consistent with the program's inflation target; and (ii) aside from the use of the manat counterpart of the oil signature bonus, achieve zero cumulative domestic bank financing of the general government during 1996. In the period of October 1, 1995 through December 31, 1995 the domestic bank financing of the general government will be limited to no more than 1 percent of GDP with the limit on external financing at 5.3 percent of lJ This implies a 21 percent increase in the price level during the program period. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 48 .- ATTACHMENT III GDP. lJ To accelerate the progress in the area of structural reforms, we have set out a number of structural benchmarks for the program implementation as agreed with the staff of the IMF (Annex V). 8. The Government of Azerbaijan recognizes that achievement of the program objectives will be difficult and, therefore, has taken already the following prior actions: (i) the price of crude oil (ex. Baku) was raised to world market level, i.e., US$52 per ton (excluding royalty), as of October 27, 1995; (ii) a 25 percent royalty was set on the tax exclusive value of crude oil production, and natural gas was made subject to royalty at the rate of 20 percent as of October 27, 1995; (iii) on October 27, 1995, the Government introduced a bill to revise legislation which eliminates the exemptions of the VAT on foodstuffs imported from non-CIS countries (excluding medicines and baby food); (iv> a formal agreement was reached that US$153 million of new oil signature bonus of US$173 million (US$83 million in 1995, US$28 million in 1996, and the balance in 1997-98) is to be added to the ANB foreign exchange reserves with the equivalent of US$85 million of the counterpart funds to be used for financing the budget in 1996. Specifically, all disbursements in 1995 and 1996 (US$lll million) will be used to support the ANB's foreign reserves and the budget, and be transferred to the ANB upon arrival; (v> new laws on the central bank and banking were introduced to Parliament in October 1995; (vi) US$25 million of the government's payment arrears to the International Bank were settled as of September 30, 1995; (vii) all export quotas and/or licensing requirements on strategic goods were abolished as of October 27, 1995; and (viii) the revised 1995 budget, which was prepared in close cooperation with the staff of the IMF was approved by Parliament on September 29, 1995. 9. With these prior actions, and policies described below in detail, we believe that the implementation of the new stabilization and reform program will rapidly take hold and domestic and international confidence in our sustained reform efforts will be strengthened considerably. lJ Nearly half of this financing will be used to cover the one-time liquidity injection to the Savings Bank (see paragraph 24). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 49 - ATTACHMENT III 2. Fiscal policy and social safety net 10. The pursuit of a prudent fiscal policy is the cornerstone of the Government's stabilization effort. Accordingly, for 1996 we intend to introduce to Parliament a general government budget that is based on zero cumulative domestic bank financing during the year, apart from the gradual use of the manat counterpart of the oil bonus at the ANB. To lay the foundation for such a budget in 1996, we have revised the 1995 budget and will implement it with the new tax measures (prior actions) and necessary expenditure cuts to ensure the achievement of the fiscal performance criteria. 11. In implementing our economic program supported by the STF purchase, we took several administrative measures to improve tax collection. These included a reorganization of the customs management, enforcement of the collection of the VAT on imported goods, strengthening of the control of large taxpayers, assignment of an IMF resident expert to develop tax administration, and stronger efforts in collecting tax and payment arrears from state-owned enterprises. In addition, to broaden the tax base, several exemptions and privileges were eliminated in value-added taxation as well as in customs duties. 12. While these measures improved efficiency in tax collection, several taxes, in particular the VAT and customs duties have performed more weakly than projected. Our response to a shortfall of revenues was a sharp compression of expenditures. In particular, wages and salaries were kept in check, expenses of the general administration reduced, defense expenditures cut, and allocations to local governments reduced. We intend to continue implementing cash rationing as a back-up device to ensure our strict compliance with the established credit limits of the program supported by the stand-by arrangement. We recognize, however, that cash rationing is not a sustainable way to achieve budgetary balance unless it can lead to permanent savings in spending agencies' discretionary expenditures. The revised 1995 Budget was aimed at supporting such developments and preventing new arrears from arising by realigning the Budget's expenditure provisions with actual and prospective revenue developments during the remainder of 1995. 13. In the 1996 Budget, we will continue to strengthen the tax base. Most of the remaining exemptions and privileges in payroll, profit and value- added taxation will be eliminated, and fixed amount taxes converted into ad valorem taxes (See Annex V). With a new royalty on crude oil and natural gas, tax receipts are expected to increase considerably. However, to offset part of the effect on consumer prices of these new taxes, excise taxes on several oil products were reduced. Apart from these revisions in petroleum taxation, we intend to start work on a comprehensive reform of energy taxation for which we will seek technical assistance from the IMF. In this connection, we will examine the possibility of establishing a special fund for budgetary revenues from petroleum production. With such an arrangement, taxes on profits, royalties, state production shares from ventures with foreign oil companies, as well as future oil bonuses, could be channelled to the budget smoothly within a framework of medium-term fiscal programming. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 50 - ATTACHMENT III 14. Our fiscal management is gradually improving by centralizing all budget accounts of the Republican Government at the ANB and by progress achieved in setting up a Treasury. We intend to make the new Treasury fully operational for the fiscal year 1996, and as further steps, we will integrate all extrabudgetary funds into the 1996 Budget while no new extrabudgetary funds will be created. The local governments will continue to have no access to credit from the banking system without prior permission from the Ministry of Finance. 15. On the expenditure side, we have successfully reduced the size of several spending categories (e.g. subsidies, defence, administrative outlays), and in the 1996 Budget we will continue to: (i) remove public agencies and organizations from the budget and make them self-financing; (ii) reduce remaining explicit and implicit subsidies to public enterprises and organizations; (iii) reduce the number of branch ministries, especially in the production sphere; and (iv) to substantially improve cost recovery ratios in public utilities (housing 'rents, transportation fares, heating, water, sewage etc.) by removing exemptions and increasing user prices. 16. Government wage policies have been very tight during the period of the STF supported program and real wages in government agencies have continued to decline. Partly this has reflected the rigid wage setting mechanism for government employees whose remuneration is tied to the developments in the minimum wage, thus preventing flexibility in the structure of government wages as well as social benefits. While budget constraints remain tight and the growth of the government wage bill must be contained, room for adjustments in average wages and wage structure can be created by reducing government employment and delinking wages from the minimum wage. Accordingly, we intend to reduce government net employment by 10 percent during the program period. Similarly, we recognize the importance of delinking minimum wage from wages and social benefits. Thus, in October 1995, new government pay scales were introduced without a linkage to the minimum wage, and increases in government wages (as well as in social benefits) for the remainder of 1995 will be limited to 15 percent in October, with a further increase of 5 percent in March 1996. This latter increase will be used to rationalize and decompress the wage structure in government agencies. Wage increases for the remainder of 1996 will-- depending on the progress in downsizing government employment--be determined in cooperation with the staff of the IMF in connection with the first program review. 17. On expenditures on the social safety net, we have initiated a compre- hensive reform following the recommendations of the IMF, including the removal of the linkage between the minimum wage and social benefits. Accordingly, we have drafted laws to improve the targeting of cash compensa- tions, including measures to combine child allowances with cash compensa- tions for bread, and targeting those only to families with two or more children. We will continue this reform, seek further technical assistance from the IMF, and in the 1996 Budget the following measures will be taken: (i) reducing pensions for working pensioners; (ii) raising the eligibility Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 51 - ATTACHMENT III age for old-age pensions; and (iii) restructuring maternity and sick leave. The savings accrued from these measures, will be used to upgrade the social safety net for the most needy. With reforms in the secondary social safety net (i.e., benefits subject to means testing) and the pension system we will ensure that none of the needy is removed from the safety net unintentionally. 18. With the policies outlined above we expect the overall revenue-to-GDP ratio to increase during the program period. In 1996 as a whole, however, the revenue-to-GDP ratio could still decline slightly as our new tax measures may not fully compensate for the full-year effects of the elimination of foreign surrender taxation and a substantial reduction in export tax collection. With the expenditure policies described above, and a sharp reduction in exceptional lending operations (payments on government guaranteed defaulted loans, the rescue operation of the Savings Bank), the expenditure-to-GDP ratio (including net lending) is projected to fall by 5 l/2 percentage points of GDP in 1996. As a result, we expect a deficit of 3 percent of GDP to remain in 1996. To ensure a smooth fiscal adjustment consistent with the program's stabilization goals, this deficit will be covered by disbursements from the World Bank and by using US$85 million of the new signature bonus from the sale of the SOCAR's share in the international oil consortium to Exxon and the Turkish National Oil Company. 3. Monetary policy and financial market reform 19. Significant progress has been made in strengthening the ANB's capacity to conduct monetary and exchange rate policies. Official foreign exchange holdings and their management have been concentrated at the ANB, automatic overdraft facilities of state banks have been eliminated, and credit auctions are gradually replacing refinancing credits as an allocation mechanism of central bank funds. Further steps in this process were taken recently when a new central bank law and a modern banking law were introduced to parliament guaranteeing a great deal of independence to the ANB. These measures, combined with tight control of credit, have greatly stabilized monetary conditions in Azerbaijan. 20. The ANB will continue to pursue a tight monetary policy consistent with the inflation targets of the program. Thus ( our monetary program foresees no accumulation of domestic bank credit to the general government in addition to the gradual drawing down of the counterpart funds of the oil signature bonus in 1996. This would allow more room for credit allocation to the private sector through the auction mechanism. With the targeted accumulation of gross international reserves, manat base money would grow by 21 percent, and assuming a slight increase in the money multiplier, manat broad money would increase by 27 percent during the program period. With tight monetary policy the velocity of manat broad money is projected to remain broadly unchanged during the program period when abstracted from seasonal variations. The floor for net international reserves, ceilings on net domestic assets of the ANB, limits on domestic bank credit to the Government and on a cumulative drawdown of the manat equivalent of the oil Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 52 - bonuses and World Bank disbursements constitute the performance criteria of the monetary program while the ceiling on ANB's manat reserve money is closely monitored as an indicative target. We believe that these limits, as set out in Section III and detailed in Annexes I-III, should provide an adequate increase of credit to the private sector and strengthen financial discipline in the Azerbaijan economy. 21. In late March 1995 we began allocating central bank credit through credit auctions, and presently 25 percent of refinance credit is supplied through this mechanism. Early experience has been promising and the interest rates applicable to existing ANB refinance credits will continue to be based on the rates determined in the credit auctions. We intend to move from monthly to weekly auctions and increase the auction volume so that more than 50 percent of the programmed ANB credit to banks will be allocated through this mechanism by end-March 1996. The ANB continues to monitor carefully the financial position of the participating banks, require security, and prohibit insolvent banks' participation in the auctions to minimize the risk of adverse selection, i.e., that banks with solvency problems will bid up interest rates to artificially high levels and distort credit allocation. For this reason, we continue to set separate refinance credit limits for the two largest state owned banks (Prominvest and Agroprom) the financial position of which remains very weak. The ANB will also continue to abstain from any subsidization or directing of credits. 22. Full monetary control also requires instruments which can be used to drain liquidity from the market in case of excess liquidity. For this purpose the ANB will seek technical assistance from the IMF for developing such practices, e.g., sales of Treasury bills and/or central bank papers. Over time, our aim is to move completely to open market operations in order to smooth out short-term fluctuations in liquidity. 23. With a sharp deceleration of inflation and a move to a market based interest rate determination, real interest rates rose sharply in the first half of 1995. While this trend has now reversed with declining inflation expectations and increasing confidence in our policies, real interest rates still remain high with adverse effects on economic activity. With prudent financial policies we expect the downwa,rd trend in interest rates to continue as confidence builds up. But we also realize that high interest rates largely reflect high credit risk of borrowers and structural weaknesses in the financial system as a whole. Therefore, we will refrain from administrative measures to lower interest rates, and concentrate our efforts on alleviating the structural problems in the financial system. 24.. The fragility of the financial system was exposed recently as the Savings Bank has been unable to fully honor its interest obligations to the public since August 1995. However, we were able to stabilize the Savings Bank's liquidity situation by allocating an additional US$ll million of the Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Publicinitial oil signature bonus to the budget L/ and extending a long-term loan for the Savings Bank to support its financial position. At the same time, the management of the bank was replaced, a workout unit to collect underperforming loans was established, and we are developing further restructuring measures with assistance of the IMF, World Bank, and international consultants. We shall also put other large state owned banks (Prominvest Bank, Agroprom Bank, and International Bank) under a special scrutiny. These banks are saddled not only with a legacy of poor assets but also with more recently committed nonperforming loans; given their large size they impose a significant systemic risk for the entire financial sector. Years of improper loan classification, principal rollovers and interest capitalization have resulted in overstating the quality of their loan portfolios, as well as earnings and capital. With the technical assistance of the staff of the IMF and the World Bank the Government will develop an overall financial reform strategy by end-March 1996 that will aim at a fundamental restructuring and rehabilitation of the banking system. 25. As part of this strategy and in line with the new banking law, new prudential standards will be introduced before end-1995, including stricter loan classification and appropriate provisioning for nonperforming loans, and improved on-site examinations and off-site monitoring of banks. Also before end-1995, work-out units will be established within the above mentioned banks to recover as much as possible of nonperforming loans. For this to be effective, profound changes in bank governance are required, as problem borrowers are often major shareholders of these banks and insider lending remains a common practice. To avoid new nonperforming loans, these, as well as other banks need to rapidly improve their risk evaluation methods and monitoring of borrowers. We will also seek foreign participation in the form of ownership rearrangements and further international consultancy in restructuring the banking system. 26. Overall, our banking sector remains highly fragmented. Many small banks are little more than financial subsidiaries of state owned enterprises and due to the lack of proper classification of assets and provisioning for loan losses, large portions of bank's own capital have in effect already been used. To promote consolidation of the banking sector, we will raise the minimum capital requirement, and the minimum amounts that must be subscribed and paid in, of existing banks to the manat equivalent of US$50,000 by end-December 1995, and make a further increase to the manat equivalent of US$lOO,OOO by end-June 1996. 27. We realize that the fundamental solution to the problem of interenterprise arrears can only be achieved through substantial strengthening of financial discipline in enterprises. We intend to take u The initial oil signature bonus, which was released after the ratification of the oil contract by Parliament in December 1995, amounted to US$120 million. Of this amount, US$SO million had earlier been allocated to finance the 1995 Budget. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 54 - ATTACHMENT III several steps to accelerate this process. The Government has already carried out a number of partial netting operations, including the Government itself so that both budgetary expenditure and tax arrears were cleared simultaneously with interenterprise arrears. These and future netting operations of interenterprise arrears did not and will not involve any bank credit or budgetary resources. Enterprises will be free to securitize their existing arrears and trade them among themselves. Such securities, however, will not carry any government or central bank guarantee and will not be discountable at or accepted as collateral by the central bank, nor will they be accepted to settle taxes. To prevent the build up of new tax arrears bankruptcy procedures will be enforced. As regards arrears between enterprises, the Government will identify a number of loss making state- owned enterprises responsible for a large portion of the arrears. These enterprises will be put under a special restructuring program. If an enterprise is deemed nonviable, liquidation procedures will be initiated by the Government. In addition, for customers that are in arrears, state-owned enterprises will be instructed to ship products or to provide services only on the basis of prepayment or a confirmed letter of credit duly guaranteed by commercial banks. These letters of credit will also not carry any government or central bank guarantee and will not be discountable at or accepted as collateral by the central bank and cannot be used to pay taxes. The central bank will impose prudential limits on the amount of guarantees that a bank can extend in relation to a bank's capital. Also, energy companies have been instructed to disrupt supplies to customers in arrears. Strict sanctions will be imposed on ente:rprise managers who do not observe these measures. 4. External sector policies 28. Azerbaijan has made good progress in liberalizing its external trade regime during the early implementation of its STF supported economic program. We dismantled foreign exchange surrender requirements, the state order system, and abolished export and import quotas and licensing requirements on most goods in last spring. Most recently, as a prior action for the program supported by the stand-by arrangement, we eliminated remaining quotas and licensing requirements on strategic goods (mainly energy and cotton products). In this area, restrictions are applied only to trade in arms and medicines. For budget:ary reasons, and to eliminate distortion in supplier incentives due to a wedge between domestic and world prices of certain strategic goods (energy products and cotton) we imposed temporary export taxes on these goods earlier this year but these taxes will be eliminated during 1996 as domestic prices are assumed to reach world market levels. We will also reduce further the scope of direct and indirect involvement of the ministries and g,overnment committees in domestic and foreign trade, in particular in the oil and agricultural sectors. For this purpose, we intend to ensure that t.here are no direct and indirect restrictions on sales and distributl.n Iof products, such as forced selling practices and other abuse of monopsony power. In this connection, the role of the State Fuel Committee will be reduced by allowing the refineries to freely sell their products at market conditions. This will be achieved by Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 55 - privatizing gas stations and regional fuel storage facilities and transferring the control of the pipeline network to the refineries. To provide more efficient channels for commodity distribution and free price formation, specialized commodity exchanges will be set up, foreign investors will be allowed to invest in production, storage and processing of agricultural products, and commercial banks will be encouraged to finance producers, with the future harvest as collateral. 29. To liberalize the exchange system, Azerbaijan has removed the system of differentiated surrender requirements at below market exchange rates, and a unified exchange rate now applies to both current and capital account transactions. The official exchange rate continues to be set so as not to deviate by more than 2 percent of the market rate determined at the Baku International Currency Exchange Market (BICEX). With the abolition of the Government's foreign currency budget, the Government now purchases and sells foreign exchange at the ANB at the prevailing market exchange rate. For the most part, residents are allowed to purchase foreign exchange in the market for all current international transactions. Similarly, nonresidents are allowed to purchase foreign exchange in the market for purposes of repatriating their earnings (after paying domestic taxes on such earnings) and their capital. Any restrictions on other capital account transactions will be kept to a minimum and lifted as our external reserve position strengthens sufficiently. While foreign currency deposits are allowed, banks' foreign currency exposure will continue to be limited for prudential reasons. Specifically, in conformity with the recommendations of the IMF's MAE department, banks are required to limit the difference between their foreign currency liabilities and assets to 5 percent of their capital, thereby holding down their exposure to the risk of large valuation losses from changes in exchange rates. 30. During the period of the stand-by arrangement from the Fund, Azerbaijan will not impose or intensify restrictions on payments and transfers for current international transactions, impose or intensify import restrictions for balance of payments reasons, or introduce or modify multiple currency practices, or conclude bilateral payments agreements that are inconsistent with the Fund's Articles of Agreement. Specifically, the Government intends not to renew the bilateral barter trade arrangements with Turkmenistan and leave contracting on gas deliveries from Turkmenistan to individual enterprises without extending any guarantees on their obligations. Finally, the Government and the ANB will review with the staff of the IMF the existing regulations on current account transactions and take all necessary measures in order to eliminate all restrictions remaining under Articles VIII and XIV and to accept the obligations of Article VIII by end-March 1996. 31. The stable nominal exchange rate since early 1995 has contributed greatly to the rapid deceleration of inflation. This was achieved by tight monetary and fiscal policy within a framework of a flexible exchange rate regime. We believe that flexibility in our exchange rate policy remains warranted, in part because our fiscal position remains very difficult. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 56 -. ATTACHMENT III Moreover, in response to a tight credit stance we foresee a possibility of considerable foreign exchange inflows for some time as enterprises repatriate their foreign exchange earnings. These inflows, if accumulated by the ANB under a fixed exchange rate regime, could undermine the inflation targets of the program. For these reasons, the ANB will continue to rely on a flexible exchange rate regime, supplying foreign exchange through the auction into the interbank market on a regular basis in line with the agreed financial program. With this policy approach the manat is expected to strengthen considerably during the program period. This is appropriate since the real exchange rate in Azerbaijan has remained very low compared with that of its trade partners in the region. The ANB has full freedom to implement these policies and will ensure that the indicative ceiling on base money will be observed. 32. Our financial program aims at increasing the ANB's gross reserves to the equivalent of 3 months of imports of goods and services not related to the operations of the oil consortium by December 31, 1995, and maintaining them at approximately same level until the end of the program period. The ANB will invest its international reserves only in convertible currencies, government papers, and offshore banks of outstanding quality. The financing gap through September 1996, about US$115 million, can be closed by the disbursements from the IMF, and it appears that the macroeconomic program is fully financed. The external financing currently available, however, is not sufficient to fully finance imports needed for all aspects of the rehabilitation of the enterprise sector we would like to accomplish during the program period. In addition, current projections suggest that a financing gap of US$50 million could emerge in the last quarter of 1996; i.e., beyond the present program. These factors emphasize the need to mobilize further balance of payments support and project financing from the international community, as any financing beyond that assumed in the program could be used to help ease the constraint on needed imports. In this respect, we are prepared to request a Consultative Group meeting to be held in 1996 to raise project financing and to address our external financing needs. 5. Structural policies 33. The Government recognizes that strong financial policies alone cannot achieve the necessary transformation of the Azerbaijan economy. In implementing our 1995 economic program we have taken several measures to improve the functioning of the market. With the elimination of bread price subsidies from the budget, raising energy prices to world market levels, and largely liberalized foreign trade and exchange system, our price mechanism and relative price structure is rapidly changing to meet the requirements of a market economy. Legislative work is also in progress; we have adopted new laws on joint stock companies, accounting, bankruptcy, collateral, and mortgages, and will introduce a new company law and legislation on the regulation of public utilities and natural monopolies in the near future. However, privatization, enterprise restructuring, and strengthening of financial discipline in enterprises have progressed slower than we hoped Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 57 - for, and these areas will be given special emphasis in our new economic program. 34. As price liberalization is largely completed we will concentrate our efforts to reduce further existing implicit and cross subsidization schemes which distort particularly the prices of public goods and services, and energy. While we have raised the prices of many implicitly subsidized public services, such as housing rents, public utilities, and transportation, their cost-recovery ratios remain low. In the 1996 Budget, we will raise these fees further with a view to substantially improve the cost-recovery of operating and maintenance costs by end-1996. Procedures to ensure prompt payments of utility bills, such as cutting off supplies when necessary, will be strengthened, including for electricity and gas. To assist the poorest segments of population to cope with tariff increases, we will introduce targeted compensation schemes as needed. 35. Our prices of crude oil and oil products now meet world market levels (adjusted for transportation costs), but the relative price structure of petroleum product prices contains serious elements of cross-subsidization from consumers to industries as gasoline prices remain high relative to prices of industrial oils. The Government will continue to control prices of petroleum products given the highly monopolistic market structure and imperfections in the regional oil market, and we intend to make further adjustments on oil product and domestically produced natural gas prices to eliminate cross-subsidization of industries by the end of the program period. Apart from this, price regulation will be limited to natural monopolies (electricity, gas, district heating, rents, water and sewage, and public transport). As regards other industries in strong monopolistic or oligopolistic market positions, the register of so-called monopolistic enterprises will be abolished by end-1995, and we will guarantee free entry into their markets by competitors. The new competition law will be enacted by end-June 1996. 36. We aim at rapid progress in privatization during the program period. The privatization program, which was prepared in close cooperation with the staff of the World Bank, was approved by Parliament in July 1995. The program, and its implementation plan cover practically all small and most large and medium-sized enterprises. Our plan is to privatize approximately two-thirds of state assets in the productive sector in the first stage of the privatization program, that is, during 1995-97. Total employment in the enterprises to be privatized is estimated at 1.9 million, or 70 percent of the labor force. We have already started the small-scale privatization and intend to privatize 8000 mainly small enterprises accounting for about 5 percent of state-owned assets by end-1995. The Government's intention is to complete the small scale privatization process by end-1996. The small scale privatization will largely take place through cash auctions, purchasers will be required to pay 50 percent in cash, and pay the balance over the following three years. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicATTACHMENT III 37. For a mass privatization of large and medium-sized enterprises the Government has developed a voucher scheme. We will start corporatizing large- and medium-sized enterprises, and the distribution of vouchers would start in early 1996. At least 50 large- and medium-sized enterprises will be privatized by commercial tender by end-March 1996. At the same time, case-by-case privatization of the larger enterprises would be initiated. The stocks of enterprises to be privatized would be distributed as follows: (i) at least 50 percent to the general public through voucher auctions; (ii) 15 percent to be sold to existing employees at concessional prices (either for cash or vouchers); (iii) lo-20 percent for open sale through cash auctions or to strategic investors, including foreigners; and (iv) up to 25 percent to be retained by the state in closed investment funds. The Government will allow full participation by foreign investors in the privatization process, including the acquisition of secure rights to occupy land associated with the purchase of enterprises. In order to stimulate agricultural production and extend privatization to this sector, Parliament has adopted two laws on reforms in agriculture which provide the legal framework for land privatization and private farming. To accelerate progress in this area, the Government will set up a proper system of titling, property registration and cadastre arrangements by end-1995 and introduce new legislation for land privatization by end-March, 1996. 38. The Government recognizes that Azerbaijan's transformation into a market economy will require thorough restructuring of the enterprise sector. The imposition of financial discipline on enterprises is fundamental to this restructuring process. For this purpose, the Government will refrain from directing credits to enterprises or extending government guarantees on domestically financed loans. Financial discipline will also be supported by the vigorous enforcement of the bankruptcy law. Apart from abstaining from budgetary subsidies to enterprises, the Government will limit the access of loss-making state-owned enterprises to credit from state-owned banks. A particular restructuring program will be developed for large loss-making enterprises whose economic and social importance is such that government intervention seems inevitable. Such enterprises will be isolated from the banking system, their restructuring by labor shedding and closure of plants or production lines will be imposed, and any government transfers to such enterprises will be made strictly conditional, and transparent in the budget. 39. We are well aware of the need to continue improving our macroeconomic statistics for program monitoring. Progress has been made in improving statistics, in particular in consumer price and monetary data, and the State Statistics Committee is revising its national accounts estimates by using the more accurate expenditure method. However, weaknesses remain in producer and foreign trade prices, government finance, balance of payments and national accounts data. In these areas we continue to seek technical assistance from the IMF Statistics department and we will ensure that there is an adequate legal basis for collection of statistics. An interagency working group will be created at the department head level with participation of the Ministries of Finance and Economy, the ANB, and the Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 59 - State Department of Statistics to oversee the development of economic statistics. This working group will develop a work program to improve macroeconomic statistics by end-1995. We have requested also the Resident Representative of the IMF to participate in this work as an advisor. III. Performance Criteria 40. The following quantitative performance criteria, as described in further detail in Annexes I-IV, are set out for the stand-by arrangement: (i) minimum levels for net international reserves; (ii) ceilings on the net domestic assets of the ANB; (iii) ceilings on the net position of the general government with the banking system; (iv) limits on the use of foreign financing in financing the budget; (v) limits on the cumulative net disbursements of external debt with maturities of less than 1 year, excluding normal import-related financing; (vi) limits on the contracting or guaranteeing of new nonconcessional medium- and long-term external debt by the public sector and the ANB with maturities from 1 to 12 years, with sub- limits of such debt with maturities from 1 to 5 years; and (vii) no accumulation of new external payment arrears by the Government. In addition, we have set an indicative ceiling on the stock of the ANB's manat reserve money, and structural benchmarks for several structural policy measures as described in Annex V. The above performance criteria are set for December 31, 1995, and March 31, 1996. The performance criteria and structural benchmarks for June 30, 1996, and September 30, 1996 will be determined at the time of the first review of the program, however, we have already defined indicative performance targets for these test dates. 41. The program targets the floor under the minimum stock of net official international reserves of the ANB (as defined in Annex III) which amounted to US$69 million on September 30, 1995 to US$141 million as of December 31, 1995, US$136 million as of March 31, 1996, US$128 million as of June 30, 1996, and US$112 million as of September 30, 1996. Consistent with these targets, we will ensure that convertible net official international reserves (as also defined in Annex III) of the ANB which amounted to US$69 million on September 30, 1995, do not fall below US$141 million on December 31, 1995, US$136 million on March 31, 1996, US$128 million on June 30, 1996, and ~~$112 million on September 30, 1996. 42. As defined in Annex II, our new program sets tight limits for net domestic assets of the ANB: net domestic assets of the ANB, which amounted to manat 395 billion on September 30, 1995, shall not exceed manat 131 billion as of December 31, 1995, manat 218 billion as of March 31, 1996, manat 301 billion as of June 30, 1996, and manat 437 billion as of September 30, 1996. In addition, indicative limits have been established on manat reserve money of the ANB. As defined in Annex II, manat reserve money of the ANB, which amounted to manat 696 billion on September 30, 1995, shall not exceed manat 710 billion as of December 31, 1995, manat 743‘billion as of March 31, 1996, manat 776 billion as of June 30, 1996, and manat 840 billion as of September 30, 1996. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 60 ~ ATTACHMENT III 43. The stock of net domestic bank credit to general government (as defined in Annex I) which is estimated to amount to manat 271 billion on September 30, 1995, shall not exceed manat 290 billion as of December 31, 1995, and reflecting zero domestic bank financing of the budget, it will not exceed that level through the test dates of March 31, June 30, and September 30, 1996. Limits are set out for the cumulative use of foreign financing. The cumulative use of foreign financing during the program period (i.e., oil signature bonus and counterpart funds to World Bank disbursements), as described in Annex I, shall not exceed manat 150 billion as of December 31, 1995; manat 294 billion as of March 30, 1996; manat 423 billion as of June 30, 1996; and manat 510 billion as of September 30, 1996. 44. The Government intends to strictly limit recourse to foreign borrowing on nonconcessional terms. As defined in Annex IV, the cumulative amount of nonconcessional loans contracted or guaranteed with maturities of 1 to 12 years will not exceed US$SO million as of December 31, 1995, US$lOO million as of March 31, 1996, US$170 million as of June 30, 1996, and US$250 million as of September 30, 1996. Nonconcessional loans contracted or guaranteed with 1 to 5 years maturities will not exceed US$25 million as of December 31, 1995, 1JS$50 million as of March 31, 1996, US$75 million as of June 30, 1996, and US$lOO million as of September 30, 1996. Furthermore, cumulative net disbursements of loans with a maturity of less than one year (excluding normal import related credit) will not exceed US$lO million as of December 31, 1995, US$20 million as of March 31, 1996, US$30 million as of June 30, 1996, and US$40 million as of September 30, 1996. The Government intends to further strengthen its debt monitoring and management practices, and places high priority on the timely settlement of its payment obligations to its external creditors. We will not incur any new external arrears. IV. Program Review and Monitoring 45. The Government will remain in close consultation with the IMF in accordance with the IMF's policies on such consultations and will provide any information as the Fund may request for the purpose of monitoring performance under the economic program. There will be three reviews of the program to be completed before end-March 1996, end-June 1996, and end- September 1996, respectively. In the first review, the quantitative performance criteria and structural benchmarks for end-June 1996 and end- September 1996 will be established. All reviews will also assess implementation of the systemic and structural reforms, as described in this memorandum. The Government stands ready to take any further measures, in consultation with the IMF staff, that might become necessary to ensure the fulfillment of the program's objectives. The program monitoring group which the Government set up for reviewing progress under the STF-supported program will constantly review the policy implementation of the new program and will cooperate closely with the Fund resident representative in Baku. Attachments Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 61 - ANNEX1 Limits on Net Credit from the Banking System to the General Government and the Use of Foreign Financing (In billions of manats) Cumulative Utilization Stock of Net of Foreign Finance Credit from During the Program Banking System l/ Period 2/ Estimated position on September 30, 1995 J/ 271 December 31, 1995 290 150 March 31, 1996 290 294 June 30, 1996 290 423 September 30, 1996 290 510 The general government is defined to include the republican (central government), local budgets and all extrabudgetary funds at all levels of government. Net credit from the banking system to the general government is defined as all claims of the banking system (the Azerbaijan National Bank (ANB), all government and privately owned commercial banks, the Savings Bank, and the so called charity organizations) on the general government less all deposits of the general government with the banking system, excluding counterpart deposits of loans received for balance of payments support (including but not limited to the World Bank import rehabilitation loan and loans from official donors) which will be blocked in the ANB. Counterpart funds generated from the domestic sale of humanitarian aid projected under the program will be treated as grants to the general government and will be used to reduce the financing needs of the general government. The net credit limit will also include holdings of Treasury bills and bonds by the banking system. The signature bonus from the oil contract with the international oil consortium will be treated as a foreign financing item of the overall fiscal deficit. It will be deposited in the ANB on a special account and drawn down gradually in line with the limits on the cumulative utilization of foreign financing indicated in the above table. Data for monitoring net credit from the banking system are taken from the monetary survey of the ANB. The Ministry of Finance shall provide information on, and confirm the amounts outstanding under loans for balance of payment support, and all foreign currency transactions of the general government. L/ These limits will be adjusted downward/upward by 50 percent of any excess/shortfall of net foreign financing of the budget (including official balance of payments support--i.e., World Bank disbursements, and debt rescheduling) over programmed amounts. In case of any excess of net foreign financing due to smaller than programmed debt repayment, the limits will be adjusted downward by 100 percent of such an amount. In addition, these limits will be adjusted downward by 50 percent of any excess over programmed amounts of the oil signature bonus. 2J Maximum cumulative utilization of oil signature bonus deposits and counterpart funds to World Bank disbursements. 2 The figures for the rest of 1995 and 1996 will be adjusted upward/downward by the amount by which the actual stock as of September 30, 1995 turns out to be higher/lower than the currently estimated stock. The value of stock as of September 30, 1995, however, shall not exceed that initially programmed under the STF. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 62 - ANNEX II Limits on Net Domestic Assets and Reserve Money of the Azerbaijan National Bank 1. Net Domestic Assets of the Azerbaijan National Bank (ANB) (In billions of manats) Limits 1/ Stock on September 30, 1995 395 Ceiling on: December 31, 1995 March 31, 1996 June 30, 1996 September 30, 1996 131 218 301 437 Net domestic assets of the ANB are defined as the difference between: (i) issuance of manats & deposits of banks with the ANB (including obligatory reserves) plus certificates issued by the ANB plus deposits of nongovernment, nonbanks with the ANB; and (ii) net international reserves in convertible currencies of the ANB (as defined in Annex III) plus net assets on the ANB's correspondent accounts with central banks in nonconvertible currency areas. Thus, net domestic assets of the ANB consist of the following assets and liabilities: net credit to the general government; credit to domestic banks; gross credit to enterprises; and other net assets. I-/ These limits will be adjusted downward/upward by 50 percent of any net excess/shortfalls of the programmed official balance of payments support, and debt rescheduling. In case of any excess of net foreign financing due to smaller than programmed debt repayment, these limits will be adjusted downward by 100 percent of such an amount. In addition, these limits will be adjusted downward by 50 percent of any excess over programmed amounts of the oil signature bonus.. Also, these ceilings are based on a 10 percent reserve requirement ratio and will be adjusted upward/downward for any increase/decrease in the reserve requirements of the banking system. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 63 - ANNEX II 2. Indicative Ceilings on the Stock of Manat Reserve Monev of the ANB (In billions of manats) Ceilings Stock on September 30, 1995 696 Ceiling on: December 31, 1995 710 March 31, 1996 743 June 30, 1996 776 September 30, 1996 840 Manat reserve money of the ANB is defined as the sum of currency issue, required reserves (excluding reserve requirements in foreign currency on foreign currency denominated deposits), and balances on commercial banks' and Savings Bank's correspondent accounts at the ANB. These ceilings are based on a reserve requirement ratio of 10 percent. These ceilings will be adjusted upward/downward for any increase/decrease in reserve requirements. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 64 - ANNEX III Floors Under the Minimum Stocks of Official International Reserves (In millions of dollars) Floors A/ 2/ 1. 2. Total net official international reserves Stock on September 30, 1995 Floor as of: December 31, 1995 141 March 31, 1996 136 June 30, 1996 128 September 30, 1996 112 Net official international reserves in convertible currencies Stock on September 30, 1995 Floor as of: December 31, 1995 141 March 31, 1996 136 June 30, 1996 128 September 30, 1996 112 69 69 u These floors will be adjusted downward/upward by 50 percent of the amounts that the official balance of payments support and debt rescheduling are smaller/larger than programmed amounts. In addition, 50 percent of any excess over programmed amounts of the oil signature bonus will be added to the required net international reserve floors. In case of less than programmed debt repayment, these floors will be adjusted upward by 100 percent of such an amount. a In monitoring these floors, the amount that banks hold as required reserves at the ANB in foreign currency, are excluded. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 65 - Total net official international reserves of the ANB are defined as the difference between the gross international reserves of the ANB and the official reserve laibilities of the ANB. Gross international reserves of the ANB are defined as the ANB's holdings of monetary gold, holdings of SDRs, any reserve position in the IMF, holdings of convertible currencies that are readily available, and net asset position of the ANB with central banks of the Baltics, Russia, and other states of the former Soviet Union. For the purposes of this calculation, holdings of rubles issued by Gosbank, or the 1992 series notes of the Central Bank of Russia, will not be included in holdings. Excluded are also capital subscriptions in foreign international institutions (except the Fund). Official reserve liabilities of the ANB are defined as outstanding Fund purchases, and liabilities of the ANB to non-residents with a remaining maturity of up to and including due year. Excluded are liabilities arising from balance of payments support loans of maturities longer than one year, including loans from the European Union (EU), the IBRD and other international financial institutions, foreign governments and foreign banks. Net international reserves of the ANB in convertible currencies are defined as the difference between the gross international reserves of the ANB in convertible currencies and the official reserve liabilities of the ANB in convertible currency. Gross international reserves of the ANB in convertible currencies are defined as the ANB's holdings of monetary gold, holdings of SDRs, any reserve position in the Fund, and holdings of convertible currencies by the ANB that are readily available. Again, excluded are capital subscriptions in foreign international institutions (except the Fund). Official reserve liabilities of the ANB in convertible currencies are defined as outstanding Fund purchases, and convertible currency liabilities of the ANB to non-residents with a remaining maturity of up to and including one year. Excluded are liabilities arising from balance of payments support loans of maturities longer than one year, including loans from the European Union (EU), the IBRD and other international financial institutions, foreign governments and foreign banks. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 66 - ANNEX IV Limits on Short-, Medium-, and Long-Term External Debt (In millions of dollars) Cumulative Contracting Cumulative Net and Guaranteeing Disbursements of External Debt O-l year l-12 year Maturity Maturity 1-5 year Maturity During the period from September 30, 1995 to: December 31, 1995 10 50 25 March 31, 1996 20 100 50 June 30, 1996 30 170 75 September 30, 1996 40 250 100 External debt limits apply to the contracting and/or guaranteeing of nonconcessional medium- and long-term external debt with original maturities of more than one year up to and including twelve years that are contracted or guaranteed by the Government, the ANB, or any other agencies on behalf of the Government, with sublimits on the contracting and/or guaranteeing of such debt with maturities of up to and including five years. Excluded from the short-term debt (O-l year maturity) are normal import-related credits. The definition of the Government is the same as in Annex I. Excluded from the limits are the use of Fund resources; but other balance of payments support would be covered by these limits, including loans from official creditors and foreign banks. Disbursements and repayments shall be valued in the currency of transactions and converted into U.S. dollars each month at the average exchange rate. Compliance with these limits shall be verified at quarterly intervals for the dates shown above. Information on net disbursements of external debt, as well as the outstanding stock of government debt with maturities of up to and including one year, will be reported by the Ministry of Finance to the ANB, which will in turn report such figures to the Fund staff. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 67 - , ANJWXV Azerbaiian: Structural Reform Benchmarks under the Program By end-December. 1995 -- Elimination of the following exemptions and privileges in payroll, profit and value-added taxation: vacation pay (payroll taxation), budget supported organizations and village based enterprises and cooperatives (profit taxation), domestically produced foodstuffs including dairy products, meat and chicken, bread, grain, and grain products (VAT). -- Conversion of the fixed amount taxes of the following items into ad valorem taxes: marble, granite, metal ores, and salt. -- Delinking wages and social benefits from the minimum wage. -- Establishing Treasury Central Unit with appropriate legal framework. -- Completion of the privatization of at least 8000 small enterprises. -- Privatization of all gas stations and regional storages of oil products; transferring the control of other distribution outlets for oil products from the State Fuel Committee to the refineries. -- Raising the wholesale price of domestically produced natural gas to an equivalent of US$9 per 1000 m3. -- Increase in the minimum capital requirement of existing banks from US$20,000 to the manat equivalent of US$50,000. -- Introduction of new prudential standards for banks along the lines described in paragraphs 25 and 29. -- Instructions for state-owned enterprises for customers that are in arrears to ship products or to provide services only on the basis of prepayment or a confirmed letter-of-credit duly guaranteed by commercial banks. -- Introduction of the program to improve macroeconomic statistics as described in paragraph 39. BY end-March. 1996 -- Adjustment of housing rents and prices of communal services to cover no less than 25 percent of costs. -- Commencement of the distribution of vouchers for mass privatization. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 68 - ANNEXV -- Privatization of at least 50 large- and medium-sized enterprises through commercial tender. -- Accomplishment of the closure of all bank accounts of the budget institutions and merging them into the Treasury Single Account. -- Allocation of more than 50 percent of the programmed ANB credit to banks through credit auctions. -- Elimination of all restrictions remaining under Article VIII and XIV. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public