DOCUMENT OF INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND I AND NOT FOR PUBLIC USE MASTER FILES ROOM HQ C-525 0451 EBS/99/5 1 CONFIDENTIAL April 1,1999 To: Members of the Executive Board From: The Secretary Subject: Jordan-Staff Report for the 1999 Article IV Consultation, Request for Extended Arrangement, and Use of Fund Resource+ Request for Purchase Under the Compensatory and Contingency Finsking Facility Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staff report for the 1999 Article IV consultation with Jordan, Jordan’s request for an Extended Arrangement, and its request expected to be received for a purchase under the Compensatory and Contingency Financing Facility, which will be brought to the agenda for discussion on a date to be announced. Draft decisions appear on page 28. Mr. Furtado (ext. 38423) or Mr. D. Hardy (ext. 38490) is available to answer technical or factual questions relating to this paper prior to the Board discussion. Unless the Documents Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the WTO Secretariat on Friday, April 9, 1999; and to the Arab Monetary Fund, the European Commission, and the Islamic Development Bank, following its consideration by the Executive Board. Att: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicC&l-FIDENTIAL I. II. III. Iv. v. VI. VII. INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND JORDAN Staff Report for the 1999 Article IV Consultation, Request for Extended Arrangement, and Request for Purchase Under the Compensatory and Contingency Financing Facility Prepared by the Middle Eastern Department and the Policy Development and Review Department (In Consultation With Other Departments) Approved by P. Chabrier and Ishan Kapur April 1,1999 Contents Page ExecutiveSummary .................................................... . Introduction ........................................................... . Background and Recent Developments ..................................... 5 PoiicyFramework.....................................................l 1 Program for 1999 ..................................................... 12 A. FiscalPolicy......................................................l 3 B. Monetary and Financial Sector Policies ................................. 16 C. External Sector Policies ............................................. 17 D. Public Enterprise Reform and Privatization .............................. 19 Medium-Term Outlook and Capacity to Repay the Fund ..................... .20 Statistical and Fiscal Monitoring Issues .................................. .21 StaffAppraisal ..................................................... ..2 3 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2- . . Text Boxes 1. Revisions to National Accounts Data ...................................... .6 2. Fiscal Reporting and Monitoring Issues .................................... .7 3. Food Subsidies in Jordan, 199699 ....................................... 15 4. Issues in Fiscal Management ........................................... .23 Text Tables 1. Main Data Revisions, 1996-97 .......................................... .29 2. Key Economic Indicators, 1996-2001 ..................................... 30 3. Summary Fiscal Operations, 1996-2001 .................................. .31 4. SummaryMonetatySurvey,1996-1999 ................................. ..3 2 5. SummaryAccountsoftheCentralBank,1996-1999 ........................ .33 6. Summary Balance of Payments, 1996-2003 ............................... .34 7. Summary of External Debt and Debt Service, 1996-2003 ..................... .35 8. Indicators of Fund Credit , 1998-2008 .................................... .36 9. Selected Social Indicators .............................................. .37 Charts 1. Real Sector Developments and Outlook, 1996-2001 ......................... .38 2. Fiscal Operations, 1996-2001 .......................................... .39 3. Monetary Developments and Outlook, 1996-2001 .......................... .40 4. Reserves, Interest Rates and Exchange Rate ............................... .41 5. External Current Account Developments and Outlook, 19962001 ............. .42 Appendices I. Schedule of Purchases Under the Proposed Extended Arrangement1999-2002 ........................................... ..4 3 II. Extended Arrangement .................................................. III. Compensatory Financing .............................................. .48 IV. FundRelations ..................................................... ..5 2 V. World Bank Group Strategy and Operations ............................... .54 VI. Statistical Issues ..................................................... .56’ Attachment . I. Letter of Request and Memorandum on Economic and Financial Policies, 1999-2001 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .58 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3- EXECIJTIVESUMMARY Background and recent developments- Economic performance during 1996-98 fell - substantially short of that targeted under the extended arrangement. While the program was successful in maintaining low inflation and building up official foreign exchange reserves, major data revisions since May 1998 have revealed that real GDP growth slowed to an annual average of about 1 percent in 1996-98, partly because of constraints on exports to neighboring countries and the end of the post-Gulf war construction boom. Also, the fiscal deficit had widened to 10.3 percent of GDP by 1998, reflecting the slowdown in growth but also because of long delays in the compilation of reliable national accounts and fiscal statistics that prevented timely policy adjustment. Important structural reforms were undertaken, especially in the first two years of the program, in financial market development, trade liberal&&ion, and tax reform. However, the pace of structural reform slackened towards the end of the program period. Domestic and regional political uncertainities, combined with the large fiscal deficit, put pressure on foreign exchange reserves in 1998, and again in February 1999. Policy framework-The proposed three-year program envisages an improvement in the growth performance to 3-4 percent by 2001, maintenance of low inflation (in the range of 2-3 percent), and a gradual strengthening of the international reserve position to about US%l.7 billion (5 months of imports and 21 percent of JD broad money). The budget deficit would be substantially reduced to 4 percent of GDP (1% percent of GDP after grants) by 2001. The adjustment effort would be accompanied by structural reforms emphasizing tax reform, civil service pension and social security reform, financial sector reform, trade reform, and privatization, supported by substantial steps in statistics and improvements in transparency and program monitoring. The program for 1999-This aims at stabilizing the economy and setting the stage for a sustained recovery over the next two years; it targets a slight improvement in the growth rate of real GDP at factor cost to 1.2 percent, year-on-year inflation rate of 2 percent, and end- year official foreign exchange reserves of US$l.2 billion. The fiscal deficit would be reduced to 7.9 percent of GDP, monetary policy would seek to support the current exchange rate peg, and the process of structural reform would resume, notably in the tax (preparations for VAT), tariff (performance criteria on lowering the maximum tariff) and public enterprise reform areas. The financing plan for 1999 includes new Paris Club debt reIief over the period 1999-2001. Staff appraisal-The staff expresses the following main views: (i) the budget for 1999 involves significant adjustment and represents a major advance in terms of coverage and transparency; the replacement of the GST with a VAT is an important reform for the medium-term health of the budget; (ii) monetary policy-especially the level of interest rates-must continue to be geared to ensuring the stability of the dinar and restoring international reserves to a safer level in relation to JD broad money; (iii) the comprehensive strategy for the state enterprise sector is welcome and needs to be pursued vigorously; (iv) further substantial progress with trade reform is important for the country’s long-term growth prospects; (v) initial steps taken to resolve the recent problems with fiscal and national accounts data need to be continued; and (vi) the program warrants support under an extended arrangement with annual access equivalent to 25 percent of quota; the temporary shortfall in exports of goods and services warrants support under the CCFF, with a purchase equivalent to 20 percent of quota. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4- 1. INTRODUCTION .- 1. Discussions for the 1999 Article IV consultation and use of Fund resources were held in Amman during January 25-February 25.’ The Jordanian representatives included the Finance Minister, the Governor of the Central Bank of Jordan (CBJ), and the Ministers of Planning, Industry and Trade, Energy and Water, Agriculture, and Administrative Reform, as well as representatives of public enterprises, commercial banks, and the private sector. The discussions provided the basis for the preparation by the authorities, with assistance from the Fund staff, of a Memorandum on Economic and Financial Policies (MEFP) for 1999-2001. In support of the three-year adjustment and reform program set forth in the MEFP, the Government of Jordan is requesting an extendedarrangement in an amount equivalent to SDR 127.88 million (75 percent of Jordan’s new quota of SDR 170.5 mUion)? The authorities are also requesting a purchase under the Compensatory and Contingency Financing Facility due to a temporary export shortfall, in an amount equivalent to SDR 34.1 million (20 percent of quota).3 2. The Executive Board last discussed Jordan on April 23,1998. In concluding the Article IV consultation and completing the fourth review under the extended arrangement that expired in February 1999: Directors welcomed the achievement of low inflation, relatively high growth, and the build-up of foreign exchange reserves in 1997, commending the authorities for the progress achieved in fiscal consolidation and structural reforms5 Directors encouraged the authorities to accelerate the implementation of structural policies, emphasizing, inter alia, tax reform, trade liberalization, privatization, and public sector reforms. 3. Jordan has used substantial Fund resources and liberallzed its exchange system. During 1996-98, Jordan made purchases from the Fund amounting to SDR 203 million out ‘The staff team consisted of Messrs. Furtado (Head), Hardy, and Erickson von Alhnen (MED); Mr. Bond (PDR); Ms. Fouad (FAD); and Mrs. Wood (Special Projects Assistant, MED). Mr. Burton joined the mission during February 5-l 5. Mr. Fischer visited Amman on February 15 for policy discussions. 2The proposed schedule of purchases is shown in Appendix I and the draft text of the proposed arrangement is presented in Appendix II. The authorities’s letter of transmittal and MEFP are presented in Attachment I. 3The basis for requesting a purchase under the CCFF is presented in Appendix III. 4Executive Board Meeting 98/46. The Board documents are EBS/98/65 and Supplement 1, and SM/98/84. ‘As discussed below, subsequent revisions in the fiscal data and national accounts indicated that the budget deficit had been substantially larger and the growth performance much weaker than originally reported. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public. . -5- of a total access of SDR 226 million (186 percent of the previous quota of SDR 121.7 - million) envisaged in the extended arrangement. As of February 28,1999, Jordan’s outstanding Fund purchases totaled SDR 33 1.2 million (194.3 percent of new quota). Jordan has accepted the obligations of Article VIII, +tion 2,3 and 4; and in 1997 it abolished most remaining restrictions on capital account transacti~ns.~ 4. The mission coincided with a major political transition in Jordan. Upon ascension to the throne in February 1999, Ring Abdullah affirmed his intention to continue the policy directions set by his father. Following the succession, a new government was appointed in March 1999, just seven months after the last reshuffle. However, continuity in economic policy is expected to be maintained as key members of the economic team remained in government.’ II. BACKGROUNDANJOUCENTDEVELOPMENTS 5. Economic performance during 1996-98 fell substantially short of that targeted under the EF’F-supported program. The program originally targeted real GDP growth of 6.5 percent per year, maintenance of low inflation, and an improvement in foreign exchange reserves, from a low level to US$ 1 .l billion by end-l 998. Achievement of these objectives was predicated on a strengthening of financial policies under the fixed exchange rate regime, and a range of structural reforms. The program was successful in some areas, notably the maintenance of a low rate of inflation, and the build-up of official foreign exchange reserves. However, as became apparent once data were revised in the spring of 1998, growth decelerated sharply from 1996 onwards-real GDP at factor cost grew at an annual average of about 1 percent in 1996-98, well below the rate of population growth, and unemployment has remained stubbornly high’ (see Box 1, Tables 1 and 2, and Chart 1). Contributing to the slowdown were constraints on exports to neighboring countries (notably Iraq) and the end of the post-Gulf war construction boom. Moreover, new data showed that the fiscal deficit had remained high (Box 2). These revisions made clear that the data set that was available until May 1998 had portrayed a fundamentally distorted picture of the state of the Jordanian economy and performance under the extended arrangement; the magnitude of the data revisions demonstrated that national accounts and fiscal statistics had to be improved before the true economic situation could be evaluated and monitored. Several important structural reforms were undertaken, especially in the first two years of the program, in financial market development, trade liberalization, and tax reform. However, the pace of structural reform 6Jordan’s relations with the Fund are summarized in Appendix IV. Relations with the World Bank group are summarized in Appendix V. ‘The MEFP has already been endorsed by the new cabinet. *The unemployment rate is officially estimated at 14 percent; according to other sources, the unemployment rate could be above 20 percent. World Bank estimates that about 15 percent of the population live in poverty. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-6- slackened towards the end of the program period (see below). The data revisions and policy - slippages were important factors in the authorities’ decision to allow the extended arrangement to lapse and to request a new three-year arrangement beginning in 1999. . Box 1. Jordan: Revisions to the National Accounts 1. In May 1998, the Jordanian Department of Statistics (DOS) released preliminary national accounts statistics for 1996 and 1997 which indicated a much lower growth performance than previously estimated by the Economic Situation Evaluation Committee @SEC).’ Following additional data revisions, the growth rate of real GDP at market prices is now estimated at only 1 perceut in 1996, as opposed to the earlier estimate of 5.2 percent; and growth is now estimated to have been 1.3 percent in 1997, against the earlier ESEC estimate of 5 percent (Table 1). These revised growth estimates are con&tent with the modest growth in imports recorded in recent years and suggest that money demand, as measured by velocity of broad money, has been stable. The lower growth estimates also help explain reports of persistent high unemployment and poverty faced by a substantial portion of the Jordanian population. Furthermore, the revisions to the national accounts are corroborated by those to the fiscal statistics (see below). 2. Given the large difference between the GDP forecasts of the ESEC and the actual GDP data compiled by the DOS, the authorities have reviewed the methodologies and procedures applied by the two bodies with assistance from the Fund’s Statistics Department. This review suggested that the DOS applies methodologies and procedures in the compilation of national accounts that are largely in line with international standards, and that the data released for 1996-97 are plausible and consistent with data from previous years. There are, however, areas for improvement, such as the compilation of quarterly national accounts statistics and producer price indices, the treatment of indirect taxes, and the estimation of sectoral growth rates. Most importantly, the long delays in the release of actual national accounts data, both preliminary and final, continue to be a major hindrance to the monitoring and forecasting of the main economic aggregates. Regarding the GDP forecasts of the ESEC, the review concluded that the applied methods and procedures were unsystematic and nontmnsparent and, therefore, prone to missing ccommic turning points. Furthermore, forecasts were not updated in light of new information as it became available. ’ The ESEC is the government body entrusted with monitoring macroeconomic developments and forecasting real and nominal GDP for the ongoing year and the immediate future. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-7- Box 2. Jordan: Fiscal Reporting and Monitoring Issues 1. Final (audited) fiscal accounts are published with a one-year lag. Thus, the final accounts for 1996 were made available with the 1998 Budget law, approved in January 1998, and those for 1997 were made available in early 1999. The 1996 and 1997 final accounts differ significantly from those previously used in Fund documents, and show that the fiscal situation has been much weaker than originally reported. The deficit was revised from 4.6 percent of GDP to 7.8 percent for 1996, and from 3.6 percent of GDP to 7.7 percent for 1997. The revisions affected both revenues and expenditures (see Table 1). The large revisions were partly due to the absence of a formal process to consolidate within-the-year preliminary data, combined with the lag to produce final data, although there were also unwarranted delays in reporting revised data to the staff. Actions to improve data collection and reporting are discussed in Section VI. 2. The above-the-line revisions were accompanied by corresponding adjustments in the facing data. Specifically, a higher level of government borrowing is now reported from nonbank sources, mainly the Social Security Corporation (SSC) and other public entities. This effectively reduced net bank claims on the public sector (a performance criterion) because the deposits of the SSC and these entities were not netted out under the program definition of the ceiling. 3. In addition to the lag in producing final annual accounts, there was no formal consolidation of monthly data, and no reconciliation was attempted between revenue and expenditure data and the sources of financing, except at the time of the IMF missions. Such reconciliation is complicated by the excessive number of government accounts with the banking system. At the CBJ, these accounts comprise, besides the main Treasury account, other Ministry of Finance accounts (related, for example, to foreign grants and debt servicing); sundry Trust accounts; and accounts of other ministries and government units. Government accounts at commercial banks comprise Treasury accounts relating to operations outside Ammaq and accounts of other ministries and government units. Flows through some of these accounts (such as escrow accounts) are unrelated to the budget, and flows through many others (such as earmarked revenue accounts) should be reflected in the budget but currently are not. ln addition, there is some error in the coverage due to the inclusion of accounts of non-central government units. 6. In 1998, growth decelerated further and inflation remained low. Economic activity continued to be hampered by the tensions in the region, which constrain trade with neighboring countries, and was also affected by the sharp drop in international oil prices, which contributed to a marked decline in remittances from expatriate workers. In addition, the slowing of the pace of domestic reforms may also have negatively impacted investment and growth. Real GDP at factor cost grew by only 0.6 percent, down from 1.5 percent in 1997, with substantial declines in agriculture and construction.’ The twelve-month rate of increase in consumer prices declined sharply, from 6.3 percent in 1997 to 0.5 percent in 1998, due to depressed demand in the economy, declining international commodity prices (especially of food), and on average some nominal effective appreciation of the Jordanian dinar vis-A-vis the currencies of trading partners. Nevertheless, year-on-year CPI inflation increased to 4.5 percent in 1998 (fi-om 3.0 percent in 1997), reflecting the full-year impact of administrative price increases that took place in 1997. ‘Growth in real GDP at market prices was higher in 1998, at 2.2 percent, as the authorities kept retail prices of petroleum products constant despite falling world oil prices, thus effectively raising indirect taxes. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-8- 7. The preliminary outturn indicates that overall fiscal deficit (before grants) widened by 3 percentage points of GDP to 10.3 percent in 1998 (see Table 3 and Chart 2): The fiscal deficit after grants was 6.4 percent of GDP. The budget deficit, which is based on revenue and expenditure estimates as recorded in Treasury operations only, reached 10.7 percent of GDP.” Budgetary revenue increased by 0.3 percentage points of GDP, as an improvement in collections fkom customs duties more than compensated declines in income tax and taxes on domestic transactions. The increase in customs duties was due mainly to a shift in the composition of imports toward bigher-taxed goods. Revenue fkom income tax continued to decline (following a drop in 1997), chiefly reflecting the effect of slow growth on corporate profitability. Budgetary expenditure increased by more than 3 percentage points of GDP, reflecting mainly: (i) clearance of domestic payments aRears (1.5 percent of GDP) that had been built up over several years;“’ (ii) increase in net lending to public enterprises (0.9 percent of GDP);12 and (iii) increases in capital expenditure and military expenditure (each by about 0.4 percent of GDP).13 In 1998, the fiscal deficit was largely financed domestically; as nonbank debt was reduced by 2.6 percent of GDP, net bank-borrowing reached 8.7 percent of GDP.14 8. Monetary developments in 1998 were dominated by rapid growth in domestic credit in the context of a weak demand for the dinar (see Tables 4 and 5, and Chart 3). In particular, net credit to government increased by almost 8% percent of beginning-of-period broad money, and credit to the private sector grew by more than 7% percent (the equivalent of 5 percent of beginning-of-period broad money).15 While the rate of growth of broad money in 1998 (7.6 percent) was close to that registered in 1997, the growth of the deposit base shifted heavily towards foreign currency deposits (FCDs) and cumzncy in circulation “‘The distinction between the fiscal and the budget deficit arises fkom fluctuations in the non- treasury balances held by various ministries and government departments in the central bank and commercial banks (see Box 2). In past years, balances in these accounts have tended to increase, in part reflecting spending commitments that have not yet been called upon. As a result, the budget deficit tended to overstate the overall fiscal deficit. “This amount includes 0.3 percent of GDP of arrears accumulated during 1998. 121n 1998, total government support for public enterprises and universities reached JD 172 million (3.3 percent of GDP). 13The latter on account of a one-month salary bonus granted in June. 14The short-term debt outstanding at end-1997 to the Social Security Corporation and other public entities, amounting to JD 106 million, was filly repaid in 1998. In addition, the float was reduced by JD 50 million. “Commercial banks’ net claims on government increased by JD 270 million in 1998, or almost 5 percent of beginning-of-period broad money, mostly through the acquisition of new government securities and the arrangement of a syndicated loan. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-9- declined, as the demand for the Jordanian dinar (JD) was affected by the tensions over Iraq - and concerns over King Hussein’s health.16 The increase in FCDs led commercial banks to increase their foreign currency assets, principally in the form of deposits with foreign correspondents, so as to maintain a nearly balanced foreign currency position. As the CBJ sold foreign exchange to banks to match higher FCDs, official foreign exchange reserves (excluding gold and required reserves against FCDs) dropped from US$l.7 billion (5% months of imports or 25 percent of JD broad money) at end-1997 to about US$1.2 billion (4 months of imports or 17 percent of JD broad money) at end-1998.17 9. During 1998, the CBJ reacted to pressure on offMal reserves by raising central bank interest rates, in particular those on its certificates of deposits (CDs) (see Chart 4a). Rates on CDs rose from below 6 percent towards the end of 1997 to about 10 percent from August 1998 onwards. The CBJ also introduced an overnight repurchase facility, which is used on occasion to cap interbank rates, and an overnight deposit facility, the interest rate on which acts as a floor on interbank rates. Despite the increase in interest rates over the year, central bank losses were reduced to modest levels (preliminarily estimated at below JD 10 million, or 0.2 percent of GDP in 1998) because of the decline in the stock of its CDs outstanding, associated with the loss of official reserves and the government’s greater recourse to borrowing ti-om commercial banks. 10. In early 1999, the official reserve position came under renewed pressure around the time of King Hussein’s death. As foreign exchange reserves fell to US%1 billion, the CBJ signaled its intention to support the dinar by raising the interest rate on the overnight deposit facility (from 8.25 percent to 8.75 percent), and that on its 7-day repurchase facility (from 11.5 percent to 12.25 percent). More recently, the pressures have subsided and the reserve level has stabilized at about US$l.25 billion, supported by a US$150 million deposit from the United Arab Emirates, and a swap operation amounting to US$125 million between the CBJ and a major commercial bank. 11. There are signs that the prolonged period of low growth is beginning to affect the quality of banks’ loan portfolios. Reported problem loans increased from 6.3 percent of all loans at end-1996 to almost 9 percent at end-l 997, the latest period for which comprehensive data are available. The extent of the problem may be understated as loan classification and provisioning standards in Jordan are somewhat weaker than international best practice, primary because no provisions are required until a loan is more than 180 days past due. However, bank profits in 1998 announced to date have been satisfactory, and measured capitalization is high as most banks reportedly exceed the 12 percent risk-weighted capital ‘%oncurrently, JD deposits in the West Bank and Gaza declined by 20 percent. 170fficial foreign exchange reserves include the proceeds of a US$ 110 million loan from domestic commercial banks syndicated in December 1998. They exclude the CBJ’s gold holdings (valued at approximately US$200 million) and the counterpart to commercial banks’ required reserves (approximately US$550 million). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- lo- adequacy requirement. The largest commercial bank (accounting for approximately - 40 percent of deposits) is very well diversified internationally and has a reputation for probity in lending. The CBJ has continued to strengthen its banking supervision capacity, including through the integration of on- and off-site supervision and the introduction of more systematic bank evaluation criteria (CAMBL). 12. The external current account deficit (excluding grants) declined from 5.5 percent of GDP in 1997 to 4.8 percent of GDP in 1998 (see Table 6 and Chart 5). Including grants, the current account was balanced in 1998 (compared to a surplus of 0.4 percent of GDP in 1997), as foreign grants declined by US$56 million. Imports fell by 6% percent, due partly to the drop in world oil prices, and partly to the slowing of the domestic economy. Total exports fell by 4 percent in U.S. dollar terms, owing to the difficult regional environment and a drop in export prices; in volume terms, exports grew by an estimated 2 percemL8 Export performance was hampered by sharp declines in exports to several regional countries (mainly Iraq, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, and Syria), partly as a result of the impact of lower oil prices on economic activity in these countries and continued regional political tensions. Several export items performed relatively well, including fertilizers and phosphates, as new capacity came on stream, and a number of manufactured items (paper, electrical and telecommunications equipment, and clothing), reflecting, inter alia, increased activity in industrial zones which export duty-free to the United States. The services account worsened by US$200 million, reflecting, most importantly, the impact of the regional slowdown on workers’ remittance receipts, which declined by 7 percent. 13. The Jordanian dinar has appreciated in real effective terms in recent years, and is now about 10 percent above its average level in the early 1990s. In 1998, the real effective exchange rate was approximately stable over the first eight months and then fell about 5 percent through December. These developments in the real effective rate largely reflect movements of the U.S. dollar against other major currencies, and are paralleled by movements in the nominal effective exchange rate (see Chart 4b). However, in the absence of data on unit labor costs, it is difficult to assess whether the real effective exchange rate based on consumer prices accurately reflects competitiveness. Although the adverse regional environment seems to have been the primary cause of the weak performance of exports, real appreciation of the dinar may well have contributed. 14. The capital account of the balance of payments shifted from a surplus in 1997 to a deficit position in 1998. The public sector capital account improved by US$l 10 million, reflecting a decline in amortization payments as well as an increase in recorded loan disbursements, despite delays in finalizing an Economic Reform and Development Loan (ERDL-III) from the World Bank. The private sector capital account worsened substantially, reflecting lower transfers of workers’ savings and large capital outflows in the second half of the year (the latter attributable to concerns over the health of King Hussein). As a result, Jordan’s balance of payments shifted from a surplus of US$273 million in 1997 to a deficit of “Based on preliminary export price and volume indices available through October 1998. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public. -ll- US$97 million in 1998. Exceptional financing (rescheduled debt service) more than covered - the overall balance of payments deficit, permitting an improvement in the net foreign asset position of the banking system. 15. Jordan’s external debt position has been stable in recent years. The stock of medium- and long-term public and publicly guaranteed external debt was equivalent to 103 percent of GDP at end- 1998 (see Table 7), about the same as at end- 1995. In the intervening period, changes in this ratio reflected mainly fluctuations in the exchange rate of the U.S. dollar vis-a-vis other major currencies in which Jordan’s external loans are denominated.‘g 16. Implementation of structural policies was uneven over the past year. Progress was made in the privatization area by selling most of the government’s remaining shares in the Jordan Cement Factories Company (JCFC), privatizing the management of the Water Authority of Jordan (WAJ) in the Amman area, and entering into a concession arrangement for the Ma’in spa. However, the key privatization of the Jordan Telecommunications Company (JTC) has been deferred pending a review of the related strategy. In the tariff reform area, a new Customs Law took effect in January, which eliminated existing exemptions and removed the Cabinet’s prerogative to grant new exemptions; however, the law’s authority to eliminate existing exemptions has been challenged, and is currently under legal review. Progress on tariff reduction has fallen short of what had been envisaged under the previous EFF-supported program. During 1998, a Wage Subsidy Pilot Program and a Training and Employment Support Program were initiated as part of the Social Productivity Program (SPP); these programs are aimed at promoting employment, especially of entrants into the labor force.” Various infrastructure projects are being developed to benefit less advantaged regions, camps and squatter settlements. III. Powcy FRAMEWORK 17. The macroeconomic objectives of the proposed EFF-supported program take into account the depressed economic conditions in the region and impediments to Jordan’s exports to neighboring countries. The program envisages an improvement in the growth performance to 3-4 percent by 2001 (see Table 2 and Chart l), and the maintenance of low inflation (in the range of 2-3 percent). The mining sector and non-traditional export activities are expected to lead the growth process, and construction and agriculture would also “The debt stock includes US$555 million of externally held par and discount Brady bonds, which are collateralized by about US$l50 million of 30-year, zero-coupon U.S. Treasury bonds. An additional US$96 million of Brady bonds are held by domestic commercial banks. 2%nemployment is reportedly concentrated among young entrants into the labor force, the number of which is growing rapidly due to population growth. The traditional expedient of working as an expatriate in other Arab countries has been more difficult in the period since the Gulf war. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12- contribute, although agricultural output in 1999 may be adversely affected by drought. ._ Inflationary pressures are projected to remain very subdued. The international reserve position would strengthen to about US$1.7 billion (including purchases from the Fund), or 5 months of imports and 21 percent of JD broad money by the end of the program period in early 2002. The proposed reserve targets take into account the fact that Jordan is a small open economy, and is vulnerable to several sources of risk, including regional political and economic shocks and changes in world oil prices. Moreover, confidence in the currency requires a perception by the markets that the CBJ can meet potential shifts in demand for the JD. 18. The macroeconomic objectives would be pursued in part through fiscal consolidation and prudent monetary policy. The budget deficit would be substantially reduced to 4 percent of GDP (1% percent o:f GDP after grants) by 2001. The path of adjustment seeks to balance the need to restore confidence in the sustainability of fiscal policy, and to improve the State’s finances structurally, with the avoidance of undue recessionary effects from rapid fiscal contraction. The reduction in the budget deficit over the three-year period is projected to come about mainly through expenditure retrenchment as the public enterprise reform program would reduce reliance on government transfers. Tax reform will be geared more towards improving the business environment than raising overall revenue. The external current account deficit (excluding grants) would rise somewhat in 1999, but would subsequently go back to about 5 percent of GDP (2 percent of GDP after grants). 19. The adjustment effort would be accompanied by a structural policy component emphasixing reforms in the areas of taxes, civil service pension and social security, financial sector, trade, and privatixation. As indicated in the MEFP (paragraph 1 l), the authorities envisage a reduction in the role of the public sector in the economy which, in addition to privatization, would be supported by a rationalization of public expenditure.2’ In some of these areas, the timetables for refonm are slower than the staff had suggested, and in others details remain to be worked out. However, the authorities attached great importance to making at this stage only those policy commitments that they were reasonably confident could be implemented on schedule. The government will continue the efforts started in 1998 (see paragraph 16) to protect the more vulnerable social groups and promote employment generation, in particular through the Social Productivity Program. IV. PROGRAMFOR 1999 20. The proposed 1999 economic program aims at stabilixing the economy and setting the stage for a sustained recovery over the next two years. It envisages a slight improvement in the growth rate of real GDP at factor cost to 1.2 percent, a year-on-year “The related strategies are being developed in consultation with the World Bank. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13- inflation rate of 2 percent,22 and end-year official foreign exchange reserves of US$1.2 billion (including purchases from the Fund, but excluding the impact of swaps and special deposits). Given the external factors that hamper the growth process, the slight pick-up in overall economic activity is predicated mainly on expected large investments in the mining sector and the bottoming-out of the decline in the construction sector. In pursuit of the macroeconomic objectives, the recent widening of the fiscal deficit would begin to be reversed monetary policy would seek to both ensure the stability of the dinar and achieve moderate domestic credit growth, and the process of structural reform would resume. A. Fiscal Policy 21. The 1999 program envisages a reduction in the overall fiscal deficit (excluding grants) to 7.9 percent of GDP.23 Taking into account that the fiscal deficit in 1998 included a sizeable clearance of domestic payments arrears,24 the deficit target for 1999 represents an underlying adjustment in the overall balance of 1.2 percent of GDP. On this basis, the improvement in the primary balance amounts to 2.0 percent of GDP. The fiscal deficit after grants would decline to 4.2 percent, and is projected to be financed both domestically (1.6 percent of GDP) and externally, including through exceptional financing from official bilateral donors. As indicated in paragraph 13 of the MEPP, the authorities are committed to adopting contingency measures, including further cuts in current spending and lower priority capital expenditures, if this were needed to meet the budgetary targets. 22. The fiscal targets are to be achieved through both revenue and expenditure measures (see Table 3 and Chart 2b). Revenue is programmed at 2.2 percentage points of GDP above the 1998 outturn. An improvement of 0.8 percent of GDP is expected for tax revenue, on account of higher collection of income tax (0.4 percent of GDP) and the strict enforcement of land taxes in the regions of Zarqa and Jordan Valley. The former is expected to result fi-om the better enforcement of tax collection, based on a careful survey of public enterprise profits estimates in 1998 and the hiring of 100 additional assessors by end-June. Revenue will also increase by the full year effect of the lowering of the GST threshold and the imposition of full customs duties on goods transported by Royal Jordanian Airlines (RJ), which were both implemented in late 1998. Nontax revenue is expected to increase by 1.5 percent of GDP on account of a strict enforcement of fees on expatriate labor (0.3 percent 22Twelve-month (end-of-period) CPI inflation is projected to be higher (at 3.6 percent) than year-on-year inflation, partly reflecting the increase in the rate of the GST (see below). 23This overall deficit comprises a narrowly defined budget deficit of 7.0 percent of GDP, and possible additional spending financed by a drawdown of non-Treasury accounts of 0.9 percent of GDP. 24A total of JD 64 million (1.2 percent of GDP) was paid out in 1998 for the clearance of domestic payments arrears accumulated in previous years. Excluding these payments, the deficit in 1998 amounted to 9.1 percent of GDP. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14- of GDP), higher transfers of capital gains from the Jordan Investment Corporation - (0.3 percent of GDP), higher transfers from. the mining companies and other public entities, and other miscellaneous revenues. The mission expressed some concern that revenue projections were optimistic, particularly given the experience of recent years. The authorities, however, were confident that the revenue target could be achieved. In the event, it was agreed that the program would include quarterly indicative targets on domestic budgetary revenue to provide an early signal in case a shortfall were to develop. 23. Expenditure measures are also envisaged. Expenditure covered by the Treasury is projected to decline by 1.4 percent of GDP. This would occur despite an increase in interest payments (by almost 1 percent of GDP) and in gross lending (by 0.7 percent of GDP), the latter mostly reflecting payments of the guaranteed debt service of WAJ and RJ. The main expenditure measures are: (i) elimination of the food cash transfer (which was not well- targeted because eligibility was virtually unrestricted), together with a lowering of.the price of bread by 25 percent--estimated to yield, on balance, 1.3 percent of GDP (see Box 3); and (ii) reduction in capital expenditure by 0.6 percent of GDP. Spending on the social sectors will continue to be protected under the program. The share of education outlays in total spending will increase from 10.6 percent in 1998 to 10.9 percent in 1999, while that of health will increase from 5.5 percent to 5.9 percent over the same period. The share of military spending is budgeted at about the same level. in relation to GDP as in 1998 (9.5 percent). 24. In addition to expenditure from the Treasury account, spending amounting JD 49 million (0.9 percent of GDP) is expected to be made out of trust accounts (see Box 2). This is in a large part due to some exceptional spending items that were committed and recorded as Treasury spending at the end of 1998, whose budgetary allocation was transferred from the treasury account into trust accounts, and which are expected to be actually paid in 1999. These include the last disbursement of the food cash transfer (0.3 percent of GDP) and settlement of remaining domestic payment arrears (0.2 percent of GDP). Measures to improve public expenditure management are discussed in Section VI. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 15- Box 3. Food Subsidies in Jordan, 199649 1. Prior to 1996, there was a generalizedfood subsidy system covering wheat, barley, powdered milk, sugar, and rice. While the price of wheat and barley was subsidized, a system of untargeted food coupons was in place for the other items, 2. This open-ended system was replaced in August 1996 by a cash compensation system for bread and barley, while coupons for sugar, rice and milk continued to be used. The bread cash transfer was JD 1.28 per individual per month, and JD 2.08 for vulnerable groups targeted through the National Aid Fund (NAF). Due to the increase in world wheat prices and the unrestricted access to the cash transfers, the food subsidy amounted in 1996 to JD 100 million (2.1 percent of GDP), 0.6 percentage points of GDP higher than its budgetary appropriation.” 3. In 1997, fur&r changes were introduced: (i) the coupons for rice, sugar and milk were replaced by monthly cash transfers, bringing the total monthly transfer to JD 2 per individual, and (ii) eligibility for the subsidies was limited, albeit only marginally, by imposing an income threshold of JD 5OOper month for eligibility. The cost of the subsidy was JD 7 1 million (1.4 percent of GDP), with an overrun of 0.4 percent of GDP over the budgetary allocation. In 1998, this amount was estimated at JD 38 million. In addition, cash transfers included in the wage bill, pensions and military outlays, and National Aid Fund (NAP), raised this total to JD 84 million (1.6 percent of GDP). 4. The reform introduced in the 1999 budget consists of eliminating the cash transfers, except for the NAF beneficiaries (amounting to JD 3 million for the year). In order to cushion the immediate social impact of the virtual elimination of cash transfers, the price of bread was lowered by 25 percent, involving a budgetary subsidy amounting to JD 15 million (0.3 percent of GDP). This subsidy will be discontinued in the next fiscal year. ’ The figures referred to here do not include amounts recorded in the wage bill, the pension and military outlays and National Aid Fund, unless otherwise specified. 25. A number of structural reforms in the fiscal area will be initiated in 1999?’ A draft amendment to the income tax law, which reduces exemptions and equalizes the tax base, will be sent to FAD for an assessment before being submitted to Parliament by end- September 1999. The authorities hope to submit to Parliament, by September 1999, a draft law converting the GST into a Value Added Tax (VAT), prepared with technical assistance from the United Kingdom; and are committed to doing so no later than the end of the year. The draft law contains all the features of a full-fledged VAT and extends it to the wholesale and retail levels; as regards services, the current positive list of taxable items is replaced by a negative list of exempted items (as is already the case in the treatment of goods). To prepare for the new VAT department, 100 auditors will be recruited by end-September. Moreover, the authorities intend to examine the existing Investment Promotion Law with a view to 25Measures to improve fiscal monitoring and control are discussed in Section VI below, Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-16- rationalizing exemptions, and have requested FAD’s views in this respect.26 The authorities _ are seeking to obtain further technical assistance for the reform of the civil service pension system;27 the related amendments to the Social Security Law will be submitted to Parliament once they have been discussed with trade unions and other concerned parties. 26. The authorities recognize that financial control at public enterprises must be tightened. Therefore, projections have been prepared for their financial operations in 1999, which will be monitored in the context of program reviews. To avoid a reemergence of domestic enterprise arrears, all nonfinancial public enterprises have been required to prepare fully-funded budgets for 1999. Several major public enterprises are being commercialized and restructured prior to privatization (see below), and are expected to have little recourse to new domestic bank financing in the coming year. B. Monetary and Financial Sector Policies 27. Under the 1999 program, the exchange rate peg will continue to serve as a nominal anchor. The authorities are convinced that competitiveness is adequate, pointing to the satisfactory performance of exports other than those to Iraq and Saudi Arabia. They also believe strongly that any change in the exchange rate regime at the present juncture would be highly destabilizing, even if greater flexibility would eventually be desirable. While the staff expressed some concerns about competitiveness, it also recognized the risks involved in a change in the exchange rate regime in current circumstances. Accordingly, the monetary program of the CBJ is designed to build up foreign exchange reserves while maintaining low inflation. Exchange rate policy, however, will be kept under watch, and will be a subject of discussion in program reviews. 28. To achieve the objectives of monetary policy, the CBJ will have to continue to ensure that interest rates are at a level sufficient to underpin demand for the Jordanian dinar. This will require that rates be adjusted promptly in the event of any new adverse shock. For the 1999 as a whole, broad money is expected to grow in line with nominal activity, and, with limited domestic financing of government, the expansion of credit to the private sector should be adequate to meet investment needs (see Table 4). It is expected that the dollarization experienced during the first quarter of 1999 will ease in the course of the year, and that the demand for JD money will return to a more normal growth path. The main source of monetary expansion in the remainder of 1999 is expected to be an increase in NFA 26A previous FAD technical assistance mission suggested that the current law is excessively generous by international standards, especia1l.y as regards exemptions from the GST. 27A 1996 FAD technical assistance mission projected that the cost of the civil service pension scheme would rise rapidly in the medium term. The scheme is relatively generous, especially for early retirees, and hinders labor mobility. FAD recommended, inter alia, that, as far as possible, pensions be brought under the SSC “umbrella,” and that eligibility criteria be tightened. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17- following a decline in the first quarter. The programmed increase in NDA of the banking _ system in the last three quarters is accounted for by the expansion in credit to the private sector. However, given the uncertainties over money demand, the appropriateness of the monetary program will be reexamined as pa’.. of the quarterly program reviews. 29. On the structural front, new banking and deposit insurance laws will be adopted, and regular auctions of government securities will be initiated. The new Banking Law, to be submitted to Parliament before the Executive Board meeting, aims mainly at strengthening prudential regulations and bank licensing, clarifying the legal status of electronic payment media, and integrating provisions relating to Islamic banking. The new Deposit Insurance Law will also be submitted to Parliament in the near future; the Deposit Insurance Corporation will be set up immediately following passage of this law. The development of the clearing, payment, and settlement systems is set to continue, for example, with the full implementation of a two-day standard for check clearing by end-April 1999 and the definition of the architecture of a real-time gross settlement system by year end. The CBJ will continue to benefit from technical assistance from the Fund in this area and,in the strengthening of its banking supervision capacity. With a view to deepening the financial markets, making transparent the true cost of government borrowing, and reducing the cost of monetary policy born by the CBJ, the authorities plan to initiate regular auctions of government securities by end-September 1999, a plan for which will be agreed in the context of the first program review. C. External Sector Policies 30. The external current account deficit is projected to rise modestly in 1999. The deficit would increase somewhat to 5.5 percent of GDP excluding grants (0.4 percent of GDP including grants), reflecting mainly a 4 percent increase in imports in line with the growth of nominal GDP (see Table 5). As oil prices are expected to remain low, and consequently regional economic activity to remain subdued, exports of goods are projected to grow by only about 1 percent in volume terms (4 percent in U.S. dollar terms). Likewise, workers’ remittances are projected to grow at only 1 percent. The authorities expect an increase in tourism as the millennium celebrations approach; thus, a somewhat healthier growth is projected for travel and transportation and tourism receipts. 3 1. The program incorporates a resumption of the process of trade liberalization.28 As an end-June performance criterion, the authorities intend to lower the maximum import tariff rate from 40 percent to 35 percent. The authorities had also intended to set to zero tariffs on many industrial inputs. The staff pointed out that the reduction in tariff rates on inputs would tend to limit the decline in effective rates of protection due to the reduction in the maximum tariff rate, and would lead to a substantial revenue loss. As the authorities felt 28Due to the delays in the reduction of the maximum tariff rate, there were virtually no changes to the tariff regime in 1998. Jordan has at present a rating of 7 in the overall trade restrictiveness index. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 18- that only a package containing tariff reductions for industrial inputs would be acceptable to _ Parliament, they have decided to set tariffs on industrial inputs at 10 percent. As part of the performance criterion, the revenue loss from the tariffreductions will be offset by an increase in the GST rate from 10 percent to at least 12 percent. In this context, the government also intends to reduce exemptions under the GST. The Customs Law that took effect in January 1999 further aligned trade-related legislation to WTO requirements, especially regarding customs valuation rules and antidumping and countervailing duty regulations; negotiations for access to the WTO are proceeding, and the government hopes to attain membership before the end of 1999. The authorities confirmed that the remaining tariff exemptions granted by special concession (rather than by law) are not being renewed as they expire. The authorities plan to continue trade reform over the medium term, including a further reduction in the maximum tariff rate to 30 percent in the first quarter of 2000, which will be announced in the context of the next budget, to be submitted to Parliament in December 1999. 32. The targeted buildup in official foreign exchange reserves implies gross external fmancing requirements (net of private Inflows) of USS1.l billion in 1999. It is expected that these requirements will be met by disbursements of grants (US$370 million); disbursements of official bilateral and multilateral loans (US$432 million, including US$120 million from the World Bank under the ERDL-III); purchases under the CCFF and the proposed EFF (US$93 million); and debt relief from official bilateral creditors (US$221 million). As debt relief from official bilateral creditors under the May 1997 Paris Club rescheduling agreement amounts only to US$5 million, the authorities intend to seek a new Paris Club rescheduling in the near future.29 Current projections suggest that some US$885 million in exceptional financing (including purchases from the Fund) will be required over the three-year period of the EFF. About three-fourths of this amount is expected to be covered by additional rescheduling bf official bilateral debt to Paris Club creditors, and debt relief on comparable terms from non-Paris Club creditors.3o This borrowing policy would be consistent with a stable public and publicly guaranteed external debt as a ratio to GDP in 1999, followed by significant declines in the external debt to GDP ratio, to below 100 percent by end-200 1. 33. Jordan maintains external payments arrears (US%367 million at end-1998), related to the servicing of debt to some non-Paris Club official bilateral creditors. Jordan is currently seeking to negotiate debt relief from these creditors on terms at least comparable to those granted by Paris Club creditors. These arrears do not constitute restrictions on the making of payments and transfers for current international transactions, and are therefore consistent with Jordan’s obligations under Article VIII. 29The May 1997 agreement expired at the end of February, 1999; for details, see EBS/97/105. “‘The projections assume a three-year rescheduling through March 2002, on terms essentially equal to those granted in the May 1997 agreement. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 19- D. Public Enterprise Reform and Privatization 34. The government’s public enterprise reform program for 1999-2001 focuses on the four key non-mining enterprises. The reform strategy, which is being developed in close consultation with the World Bank, concentrates on the Water Authority of Jordan (WAJ), Royal Jordanian airlines (RJ), the National Electric Power Company (NEPCO), and the Jordan Teleconmmnications Company (JTC).3’ Progress to be made in this area during 1999 includes: (i) improving the financial position of WAJ; (ii) restructuring and commercializing RJ; (iii) restructuring NEPCO with a view to privatizing power generation and distribution, and creating an independent regulatory body for the power sector; and (iv) developing a strategy for privatizing JTC. The government also intends to divest its holdings of shares in a number of industrial companies during 1999. . Although water rates were increased in 1997, WAJ has continued to make losses on operations and has accumulated substantial domestic arrears. To improve the efficiency of WAJ’s operations, and thereby reduce the burden it places on the budget, the government signed on March 10,1999, a four-year management contract with a foreign ti for the Greater Amman Services area (representing about 40-50 percent of total WAJ operations), as part of a US$55 million World Bank-financed project. It is expected that this project will, inter alia, reduce the amount of “unaccounted for . water”, from about 50 percent currently to about 25 percent over the next five years. If the envisaged efficiency gains are realized, WAJ losses on operations should be reduced to low levels. However, higher water rates may be needed to cover the construction and operating costs of some of the larie projects that WAJ is presently contemplating. . RJ is burdened by a large foreign and domestic debt, relatively high and inflexible labor costs (RJ employees have the status of civil servants), and an inappropriate aircraft fleet. The airline has already been taking action to rationalize its route structure and dispose of unsuitable aircraft; in recent years, it has made a small profit on operations excluding interest. The government has decided to split RJ into two parts-a holding company with the non-core activities, such as catering and duty free shops, and a subsidiary for the airline operations. The non-core operations will be divested to private concessionaires, and a foreign partner will be sought for the subsidiary. The govemment is now in the process of reviewing the necessary legal and financial restructuring of the company, with the help of outside advisers. For the airline subsidiary to be viable, the government may have to take over RJ’s foreign debt (which 31Nonfinancial public enterprises dominate the mining, utilities, and transportation sectors. The two major enterprises involved in the extraction of potash and phosphates are both price takers in international markets, and are run on a commercial basis. They have both initiated investment programs to expand capacity and increase value added, for example, by processing more of the raw materials into fertilizer. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2o- . . it is already servicing), and perhaps some of its domestic debt. It will also be necessary to reduce staffing. NEPCO has been profitable in recent:. e ars, although it still needs outside financing of its capital budget. In preparation for pri vatization, the government divided NEPCO into three companies on February 1,1999. NEPCO will continue to operate the transmission grid, while power generation and distribution will be privatized. The next steps in the restructuring process, to be completed by end-June 1999, comprise the separation of assets and liabilities and preparation of separate financial statements; and agreement on tariff formulas between NEPCO and the generation and distribution companies. A privatization strategy for the generation and distribution companies will be completed by end-December 1999, and implemented in 2000. Meanwhile, preparations are ongoing to award a concession to an independent power producer to build and operate a new generating plant, and to establish the necessary regulatory framework to govern pricing in the industry. JTC has been a major source of both income tax revenue and dividends to the government, and is expected to continue to generate substantial cash surpluses in the years ahead, despite an expanded investment program. Efforts have been made to sell 40 percent of JTC to a strategic investor, but weakening buyer interest and domestic opposition resulted in the cancellation of the sale in October last year. However, the government remains committed to privatization in the telecommunications sector, and is now reviewing the prospects and modalities for achieving the privatization objective. The cabinet is to decide on a new strategy by end-June 1999. . Following the sale of 33 percent of the shares of JCFC (the cement producing company) in November 1999, the Jordan Investment Corporation (JIC) intends to divest its shares in at least 10 industrial companies during 1999, of which a minimum of 3 are to be sold by end-June and 8 by end-September. JIC will also attempt to sell part of its remaining holdings in JCFC (amounting to 16 percent of the company’s equity), and is looking for an international bank to purchase its shares in the Housing Bank. A concession to operate and expand the Aqaba railway should be awarded shortly. V. MEDIUM-!I'ERMOUTLOOK~QNDCAPACITYTOREPAYTHEFIJND 35. The medium-term projections point to the achievement of balance of payments viability, provided that there are no major adverse developments in the external environment or in the domestic economy. Jordan remains vulnerable to a variety of external risks, such as continued low oil prices (the program assumes a modest recovery over the medium term), which depress demand for Jordanian goods and services, including labor; regional tensions, which may affect exports and tourism; and poor investor sentiment towards emerging markets. Domestically, continued low growth and unemployment may undermine the authorities’ ability to maintain the momentum of adjustment and reform. Nevertheless, if sound financial and economic policies continue to be pursued beyond the program period, Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2l- and absent major adverse shocks, the stock of external debt should decline from 103 percent - of GDP at the end of 1998 to 80-85 percent of GDP by 2003. The debt service ratio will remain manageable, at about 22 percent of exports of goods and nonfactor services through 2003; the rough constancy of this ratio despite the declining debt stock as a ratio to GDP reflects the provision, under previous debt rescheduling agreements, for an amortization profile that is graduated over time (see Table 7). 36. Obligations to the Fund comprise only a small share of Jordan’s total external debt service. If all purchases are made under the extended arrangement, outstanding Fund credit would rise to 236 percent of quota by end-March 2002, about 7 percent of Jordan’s medium- and long-term public and publicly guaranteed external debt. Debt service obligations to the Fund would peak at 2.6 percent of exports of goods and nonfactor services in 2003, accounting for 11.8 percent of total external debt service obligations (see Tables 7 and 8). The envisaged improvement in the balance of payments, together with the relatively low share of Fund credit in total external debt, would provide reasonable assurances regarding Jordan’s capacity to meet its financial obligations to the Fund. VI. STATISTICALANDFIWALMONITORINGISSUES~~ 37. The large revisions to the national accounts statistics in 1998, and the lags with which they were announced, raised serious issues about the authorities ability to identify and react appropriately to economic developments. Delays in the availability of national account statistics led to excessive reliance on forecasts made by the Economic Situation Evaluation Committee (ESEC), which were derived in an opaque manner from partial and often outdated indicators. A review of the methodology applied by the Department of Statistics (DOS), conducted with the assistance of the Fund’s Statistics Department, indicated that, although the methodology used in compiling national account statistics was broadly in line with international standards, significant deficiencies remained, notably in the delay with which even preliminary estimates were released. The authorities have initiated a program of improvements at the DOS, as outlined in the MEFP. The magnitude of past forecasting errors has led the ESEC to exercise much greater caution in its approach, and to track more accurately updated indicators from the DOS as they become available. 38. The government is addressing with Fund technical assistance the deficiencies which contributed to the major revisions of the 199697 fiscal accounts and persistent problems of fiscal management (See Box 4). FAD technical assistance missions visited Amman in 1998 to advise on issues relating to fiscal management, reporting, and monitoring, and the measurement of the deficit. The authorities have already started to implement the recommendations, and the 1999 program includes a number of measures that would revamp fiscal management and the accounting system. Concerning budgetary procedures, the 1999 Budget Law imposed a ban on the use of advances to finance non-budgeted expenditures, 32Statistical issues are further addressed in Appendix VI. See also Boxes 1 and 2. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 22 - which can only take place if a supplementary budget is issued. In addition, a financial order - will be issued by end-June 1999 requiring ,that no new spending be committed after December 15,1999, in order to avoid the end-of-year rush to expenditure and the surge in float. The authorities intend to strengthen commitment accounting by extending it to all ministries, with the aim of improving cash management and monitoring any emergence of arrears.33 Concerning monitoring, government accounts at the CBJ have been appropriately classified and are being monitored on a daily basis by the Ministry of Finance; the government accounts at the commercial banks are being reclassified along the same lines (completion of this work constitutes a prior action), and will also be closely monitored. In line with FAD recommendations, trust accounts and other accounts will be further rationalized and grouped on the basis of the nature of transactions for which they are used; the precise steps involved will be determined in the context of the first program review. The results of this work will permit a better coverage of fiscal operations outside those reflected in the Treasury account. For the future, the authorities stated that the exceptional factors leading to sizeable drawdowns from non-Treasury accounts are not expected to recur in 200041, and they intend to integrate all government accounts more fully into the budgetary process. The specific steps necessary for this purpose will be discussed during program reviews, and more technical assistance will be requested as needed. 39. Several actions have been taken to improve the reporting and monitoring of fiscal developments in the program. A fiscal monitoring unit will be established at the Ministry of Finance (a prior action), which will be in charge of preparing comprehensive monthly fiscal tables and analyzing fiscal developments. The authorities intend to provide monthly data on revenues, expenditures, and domestic financing to Fund staff, as well as detailed quarterly data on external financing and net lending to public enterprises. In addition, the quantitative fiscal targets and performance criteria have been redefined, and are now directly linked to the government’s fiscal operations,. and take into account deviations from the fiscal path financed by nonbank borrowing. In agreeing to the redefinition of the fiscal performance criterion (an all-inclusive ceiling on net bank claims on the general budgetary government), the Finance Minister noted that, while all government accounts will be monitored closely, he has at present only limited control over transactions affecting important government accounts with the banking system held by other ministries and government departments. 40. The mission drew attention of the authorities to the Code and the Manual on Fiscal Transparency. The authorities have begun completing the questionnaire provided on the lM.F web site, together with the process of self-assessment against the IMF Code of Good Practices on Fiscal Transparency-Declaration on Principles. A number of activities under the program, such as those described in the preceding paragraph and the restructuring of public enterprises, will contribute to improved fiscal transparency. 33Technical assistance may be required in this area. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-23- Box 4. Jordan-Issues in Fiscal Management 1. The formulation and conduct of fiscal policy in Jordan have been hampered by structural problems relating to management and monitoring. As of mid- 1998, fiscal management problems included: (i) extensive recourse to advances to finance non-budgeted expenditures; (ii) the carry-over of expenditure by transferring funds into trust accouuts, and recording these amounts as expenditure at the time of the transfer, while actual spending would occur in the following year; (iii) the abnormally large float, especially at the end of fiscal years; (iv) the absence of commitment recording of expenditures, which precluded an appropriate accounting of domestic payments arrears; and (v) the lack of direct control by the Ministry of Finance over a number of bank accounts held by other ministries and departments. 2. A number of measures have been taken in recent months. In this context: (i) a supplementary budget was issued in 1998 to regularixe all spending effected through advances and clear outstanding domestic payments arrears; (ii) the float has been reduced, from about JD 90 million at end- 1997 to JD 40 million at end-1998; (iii) the 1999 budget bans the use of advances to finance non-budgeted expenditures-any such spending has to be subject of a supplementary budget law; (iv) the budget’s coverage has been widened to include previously off-budget spending that used to be made through advances, such as servicing of guaranteed debt of public enterprises; and (v) the Minister of Finance now receives the daily balances of government accounts at tire CBJ, displayed in broad categories according to the holders of accounts. - 3. The program incorporates further actions to improve fiscal management and monitoring. Prior actions comprise two elements: establishment of a fiscal monitoring unit at the Ministry of Finance to compile and analyze monthly fiscal data; and completion of categorization of government accounts, focussing on those in commercial banks. In addition, a formal decision will be adopted, by end-June 1999, not to commit any expenditures after December 15, to avoid a surge in end-of-year float. Further work on mtionalizing government accounts will also be done. Specific steps and benchmarks in this regard will be discussed in the context of the next review, and would include identifying the sources and uses of all accounts both in the CBJ and commercial banks; reducing the number of government accounts in both the CBJ and commercial banks, and restricting their functions (this may need additional special&d technical assistance). Efforts are underway to introduce commitment-based accounting in all ministries. VII. STAFF APPRAISAL 41. The Jordanian economy faces a difficult situation. Only limited progress was made in strengthening economic performance under the previous extended arrangement, which revised data has revealed was off track in important respects from the start. While the external position has improved, economic growth has slowed sharply since 1995, reflecting impediments to trade with neighboring countries as well as weak domestic policies and a slowing of structural reforms, with per capita income declining significantly over the past three years. At the same time, the fiscal deficit, under pressure fi-om weak economic growth, has widened substantially, in the process becoming a serious threat to macroeconomic stability. Indeed, central bank financing of the budget deficit, together with political uncertainties, has resulted in a significant loss in reserves since mid-1998. Progress has been made in some structural reforms, but the pace has fallen short of expectations, with certain aspects of privatization and trade liberalization in particular lagging. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 24 - 42. The new program is designed to steadily reduce macroeconomic imbalances and - restore international reserves to a safer level. The Government’s primary objective, however, is to increase economic growth, so that per capita incomes can again begin to rise; the structural reforms and sound macro policies envisaged in the program are intended to raise economic efficiency and encourage private sector investment. But as long as economic conditions in many countries in the region remain depressed, and impediments to trade with the West Bank and other natural trading partners in the region persist, it is likely to prove difficult to achieve a significant rise in living standards. Accordingly, the program’s growth objectives have had to be relatively modest. 43. A three-year program of fiscal adjustment is at the core of the Government’s economic strategy. Substantially eliminating over the program period the need for domestic financing of the budget, as envisaged, is key to ensuring financial stability and to creating the conditions under which interest rates can come down and remain low. While the 1999 budget incorporates a substantial reduction in the budget deficit, the overall fiscal adjustment implied is more modest, once account is made for the amount of arrears cleared in 1998 and the likely spending fkom accumulated balances in accounts outside the Treasury. This overall adjustment nevertheless represents a significant first step toward the program’s medium-term fiscal goals. The budget for 1999 also incorporates important reforms that will have lasting beneficial effects, notably the elimination of the overly generous food cash transfer and a further switch away from taxes on trade toward the taxation of domestic consumption. Revenue performance, however, will need to be carefully watched, as the revenue projections for 1999 in some areas are relatively optimistic; the indicative target on revenues should help provide an early warning if problems are developing. In the event of shortfalls, offsetting measures will need to be taken promptly. 44. The budget for 1999 represents a major advance in terms of coverage and transparency. Importantly, all expenditure categories that were in the past handled off- budget through advances have now been brought into the budget, and the use of advances was banned in the 1999 Budget Law. The clearing of domestic payment arrears in the second half of 1998 and early 1999, and the reduction in the float from the very high level at the end of 1997 have also helped to clarify and regularize the budgetary situation. In addition, the authorities are now better able to monitor government financial developments, including those related to trust and other non-Treasury accounts-information on all government accounts with the CBJ is now available to the Finance Ministry on a daily basis, and govemment accounts with commercial are being reviewed and classified. However, the present arrangement under which the recording of expenditure is based on Treasury operations rather than on the actual drawdown of balances in government accounts is unsatisfactory, and should be corrected in the context of the budgetary framework for the next fiscal year. In addition, the Ministry of Finance should have a greater degree of control over operations affecting all government accounts. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 25 - 45. The replacement of the GST with a VAT is an important reform for the medium-- term health of the budget. The timetable incorporated in the program allows for substantial time to build public support for the new tax, and the authorities should try to move ahead faster so that the VAT can be in place at the start of 2000. 46. Monetary policy must continue to be geared to supporting the exchange rate and restoring international reserves to a safer level in relation to JD broad money. For this reason, the monetary program is relatively conservative, but it does assume that demand for JD broad money stabilizes after the first quarter, once the arrangement is in place. In the event of a renewed movement into FCDs from JD deposits (and associated demands for foreign exchange by commercial banks), the central bank must be ready to raise interest rates fhther to counter the pressures on reserves, although large and sudden interest rate increases would probably be counterproductive. Indeed, in the past the CBJ has reacted to pressures promptly, with well calibrated responses. As confidence in the program grows, it should be possible for interest rates to be gradually lowered. 47. The present tight peg to the dollar has provided Jordan with a high degree of financial stability, including during turbulent periods in the region. This stability, however, has come at the price of relatively high interest rates, particularly over the last nine months. The peg to the dollar also exposes Jordan to variations in competitiveness associated with fluctuations in the value of the dollar against other international currencies; on balance, the dinar has appreciated somewhat in real effective terms over the past few years. Exchange rate policy issues will be taken up in the context of program reviews, on the basis of an assessment of growth and balance of payments developments. More generally, recent experience elsewhere has shown that it is becoming increasingly difficult for emerging market economies to maintain pegged exchange rate regimes, and indeed the dinar has come under pressure on more than one occasion in the past year. The authorities should therefore prepare the ground, including by developing the foreign exchange and domestic money markets, for a move to greater exchange rate flexibility once domestic and international financial market conditions have settled down. 48. The authorities’ comprehensive strategy for the state enterprise sector is very much to be welcomed. Transfers to public enterprises have been a major source of pressure on the budget over the recent past, and actions to stop this drain are essential for the success of the program. In particular, management responsibility for a large part of WAJ’s operations has already been given to a foreign company as part of a broader World Bank financed project to improve the financial viability of the water sector. Also, preparations for privatizing RJ, another major loss maker, are moving forward. The envisaged privatization of the power and telecommunications sectors hold out the promise of major efficiency gains for the economy. With the failure to privatize JTC last year in mind, the timetables for these actions allow for carell formulation and implementation of privatization strategies, and for building the necessary support. Every effort, however, should be made to move ahead with the enterprise reform program as expeditiously as possible. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-26- 49. Further progress with trade reform is essential to improve the effkiency of ._ Jordan’s economy, and to encourage outward-oriented growth. The commitment to reduce the maximum tariff from 40 percent to 35 percent by midyear is a promising start. However, the reduction of duties on industrial inputs, while strengthening competitiveness in some sectors, would in itself tend to raise effective rates of protection and also result in a significant revenue loss. Further significant reductions in the maximum tariff rate over the life of the program will be essential if a substantial improvement in the tariff structure is to be achieved. In addition, progress is also necessary in reducing tariff exemptions. 50. The external financing needs of the program are large, reflecting the difficult external situation and Jordan’s heavy external debt service burden. In addition to the financing already committed by bilateral creditors and multilateral institutions, generous support from bilateral creditors, including through the Paris Club, is required. 51. The problems with fiscal and national accounts data damaged confidence in the authorities’ ability to adequately monitor developments and to react to them. These problems, in the context of a Fund-supported program, have been of major concern to both the authorities and the staff. Indeed, until last May the staff was working on the basis of a wrong view of economic developments in Jordan, which had a major impact on the assessment of performance under the previous extended arrangement. The authorities fully recognize that timely and reliable economic data are essential for sound economic management, and the steps that have been taken to strengthen statistics, especially in the area of fiscal monitoring, are welcome. Efforts to further improve the country’s statistical infrastructure and compilation procedures should continue to be given the highest priority, including through the allocation of adequate resources. While the staff believes that the quality and timeliness of available statistics are now sufficient for surveillance and program monitoring purposes, vigilance for possible weaknesses or inconsistencies in macroeconomic data must be maintained. 52. The proposed program would contribute significantly to addressing the underlying problems facing the Jordanian economy. The improvements in the transparency and coverage of the budget, and the comprehensive program for public enterprise restructuring are particularly notable elements. At the same time, policies in some reform areas remain to be developed in detail, the timetables for some reforms are relatively gradual, and the commitment on trade liberalization is modest. In addition, there are significant risks, including the possibility of renewed pressure on the dinar as Jordan enters a new political era, and that continued slow ec.onomic growth will undermine the authorities’ ability to undertake the necessary fiscal adjustment. All told, however, the staff believes that the risks are manageable, particularly given the quarterly monitoring during the first year, and that the program warrants support under an extended arrangement with annual access equivalent to 25 percent of quota. The staff also believes that the temporary shortfall in exports of goods and services, which is due to factors largely beyond the authorities’ Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 27 - control,34 warrants support under the CCFF, with a purchase equivalent to 20 percent of - quota; in the view of the staff, the poor track record under the previous arrangement should preclude higher access under the CCFF. 53. It is expected that the next Article IV consultation with Jordan be conducted on the standard twelve-month cycle. 34See Appendix III. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-28- VII. PROPOSED DECISIONS The following draft decisions are proposed for adoption by the Executive Board: A. Request for Kxtended Arrangement 1. The Government of Jordan has requested an Extended Arrangement from the Fund in an amount equivalent to SDR 127.88 million for a period of three years from April - 1999. 2. The Fund approves the Extended Arrangement set forth in EBS/99/5 1. 3. The Fund waives the limitation in Article V, Section 3(b)(iii). B. Purchase Under Compensatory and Contingency Financing Facility 1. The Fund has received a request by the Government of Jordan for a purchase equivalent to SDR 34.1 million for the compensatory financing of a temporary shortfall in export earnings under Section II of the Decision on the Compensatory and Contingency Financing Facility (Decision No. 8955-(88/l26), adopted August 23, 1988, as amended). 2. The Fund approves the purchase in accordance with the request. 3. The Fund waives the limitation in Article V, Section 3(b)(iii). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 29 - Table 1. Jordan: Main Data Revisions, 1996-1997 . Pr: . .: linary Data Preliminary Data as z.‘; EBS/98/65 Provided During the (4/l/1998) July 1998 Mission Current Data Real GDP at market prices 1996 1997 Total revenue 1996 1997 Total expenditure and net lending 1996 1997 Overall budgetary balance, excluding grants 1996 1997 Memorandum item Nominal GDP at market prices 1996 1997 (AMu~ percentage changes) 5.2 0.8 5.0 2.2 (In millions of Jordanian dinars) 1,503 1,431 1,574 1,496 1,741 1,799 1,799 1,777 1,763 1,775 -239 -368 -368 -202 -267 -380 5,147 4,761 4,711 5,606 4,999 4,946 1.0 1.3 1,431 1,395 Source: Data provided by the Jordanian authorities. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3o- Table 2. Jordan: Key Economic Indicators, 1996-2001 Est. Prog. Proj. Proj. 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 Output and prices Real GDP at factor cost Deflator of GDP at factor cost Real GDP at market prices Nominal GDP at market prices Consumer price index (annual average) Consumer price index (end-period) Expenditure and savings Consumption Government Other Total investment Government Other Savings/investment balance Government Other Gross national savings Government Other Fiscal operations Total revenue and grants ofwhich : grants Total expenditure and net lending l/ Overall fiscal balance, excluding grants Overall fiscal balance, including grants Total public and publicly guaranteed debt External sector Current account balance (including grants) Current account balance (excluding grants) Merchandise exports Merchandise imports Net remittances Monetary sector Net foreign assets Net domestic assets Broad money Memorandum items: Official foreign exchange reserves (in millions of U.S. dollars) 2/ U. S. dollar per Jordanian dinar (period average) Real effective exchange rate (percent change; period average) 1.3 2.3 1.0 3.3 6.5 2.5 1.5 0.6 1.2 2.5 3.6 3.5 2.1 3.0 1.3 2.2 2.0 2.5 5.0 5.9 4.2 5.6 3.0 19 28 6.3 ii:‘5 3:6 2:4 (In percent of GDP) 3.5 2.5 3.5 6.1 2.4 2.4 94.6 25.6 69.0 91.9 24.3 67.6 30.7 7.7 23.0 96.4 95.6 94.0 92.2 26.6 26.8 25.8 24.5 69.8 68.8 68.2 67.7 26.8 25.7 26.5 28.0 5.8 6.2 5.6 21.0 19.5 20.9 25:; 0.4 0.0 -0.7 -1.7 -2.7 -5.0 -3.5 -2.3 3.1 5.0 2.8 0.5 28.2 5.9 22.3 -3.3 -3.2 -0.1 -1.8 -1.2 -0.6 28.4 27.1 25.3 26.1 26.5 26.6 4.5 3.1 1.2 2.1 3.5 4.7 24.0 24.1 24.1 24.0 22.9 21.9 35.0 32.8 32.2 34.4 32.8 33.2 4.7 4.5 3.9 3.8 2.7 2.6 38.0 35.4 38.6 38.6 35.7 34.6 -7.6 -7.2 -10.3 -7.9 -5.5 -4.0 -2.9 -2.6 -6.4 -4.2 -2.9 -1.4 134.5 125.6 131.8 132.6 128.6 124.4 -3.3 0.4 0.0 -0.7 -1.7 -1.8 -9.5 -5.5 -4.8 -5.5 -5.4 -5.3 (Annual percentage changes) (Annual percentage changes in U.S. dollar terms) 2.5 1.0 -4.0 4.2 5.2 5.9 16.1 -4.4 -6.5 4.0 62 27.0 0.8 -8.2 0.7 ::f. 5:3 (Changes in percent of beginning of period broad money) 0.5 8.4 2.1 1.9 3.6 2.3 -0.2 -0.7 5.6 4.2 2.9 5.0 0.3 7.8 7.6 6.0 6.6 7.2 698 1,694 1,170 1,191 1,510 1,691 1.41 1.41 1.41 1.41 1.41 1.41 5.0 7.5 6.0 . . . . . . . . . Sources: Jordanian authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections. l/ Includes net change in nontreasury accounts. 2/ Excluding gold, and commercial banks foreign currency deposits at the CBJ. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-31- Table 3. Jordan: Summary Fiscal Operations, 1996-200 1 1996 1997 Prel. 1998 Prog. 1999 Proj. 2000 Proj. 2001 Budgetary revenue and grants 1,650 1,620 1,688 1,874 1,888 2,027 Revenue 1,431 1,395 1,485 1,668 1,734 1,866 Tax revenue 841 798 859 935 1,022 1,110 Nontax revenue 590 597 627 734 713 757 Grants 220 225 203 206 153 160 Budgetary expenditure I / Current expenditure Capital expenditure Net lending Net advances 1,799 1,775 1,449 1,488 364 287 -14 -1 . . . . . . 2,047 2,052 2,052 2,111 1,676 1,661 1,684 1,739 326 305 334 360 46 85 35 12 0 0 0 0 Budget balance, excluding grants 21 -368 Net change in nontreasury accounts 31 10 Overall fiscal balance, excluding grants -359 Overall fiscal balance, including grants -139 -380 -562 -3:; -5:; -129 -334 -384 -49 -433 -227 -317 -245 -31; -24: -164 -85 Financing Foreign fmancing (net) Net loans Debt rescheduling Interest Principal Budgetary privatization receipts Domestic fmancing (net) Net bank financing Nonbank financing Financing gap 139 220 -16 235 51 184 -8’: -112 31 0 129 59 -151 210 61 148 3 -ii 121 0 334 13 -161 174 1:; 32; 457 -136 0 227 -19 -23 4 1 4 0 90 100 -10 157 164 -37 -37 : 0 100 -30 -30 0 131 85 -87 -87 ii : 41 41 13: Budgetary revenue and grants 35.0 Revenue 30.4 Tax revenue 17.8 Nontax revenue 12.5 Grants 4.7 (In percent of GDP) 32.8 32.2 34.4 28.2 28.4 30.6 16.1 16.4 17.2 12.1 12.0 13.5 4.5 3.9 3.8 35.9 39.1 37.7 30.1 32.0 30.5 5.8 6.2 5.6 0.0 0.9 1.6 . . . 0.0 0.0 -7.7 -10.7 -7.0 0.5 0.5 -0.9 -7.2 -10.3 -7.9 -2.6 -6.4 -4.2 2.6 6.4 4.2 i:: 0.2 -0.4 0.0 0.0 h:i ::A ii:; 32.8 33.2 30.1 30.5 17.8 18.2 12.4 12.4 2.7 2.6 Budgetary expenditure l/ Current expenditure Capital expenditure Net lending Net advances 38.2 30.8 -‘o:: . . . 35.7 29.3 5.8 Fl:: 34.6 28.5 5.9 0.2 0.0 Budget balance, excluding grants 21 -7.8 Net change in nontreasury accounts 31 0.2 Overall fiscal balance, excluding grants -7.6 Overall fiscal balance, including grants -2.9 -5.5 0.0 -5.5 -2.9 Financing Foreign financing (net) Budgetary privatization receipts Domestic financing (net) Financing gap 2.9 4.7 0.0 -1.7 0.0 -4.0 0.0 -4.0 -1.4 1.4 -1.4 i’!: 2:2 Memorandum items Primary focal balance GDP at market prices -2.6 -2.4 -5.7 -2.5 -0.5 4,711 4,946 5,237 5,457 5,763 (In millions of Jordanian dinars) Sources: Jordanian authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections. l/ Expenditures in 1998 include JD 64 million (1.2 percent of GDP) in clearance of domestic arrears accumulated prior to 1998. 21 Corresponds to Treasury operations. 3/ For historical years the net change in nontreasury accounts is assumed to correspond to the statistical discrepancy between the budget deficit measured from above the line and the financing data. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 32 - Table 4. Jordan: Summary Monetary Survey, 19961999 1996 -.-- 1997 1998 1999 Program l! Mar. Jun. Sept. Dec. Net foreign assets 1,842 Net domestic assets 3,333 Net claims on government 623 of which : on general budgetary govermnent 716 Claims on non-financial public enterprises 409 Claims on financial institutions 132 Claims on the private sector 3,363 Other items (net) -1,193 Broad money 5,175 Currency in circulation 952 Jordanian dinar deposits 3,388 Foreign currency deposits 836 Net foreign assets 16 Net domestic assets Net claims on government of which : on general budgetary government Claims on non-financial public enterprises Claims on financial institutions Claims on the private sector Other items (net) -12:: -121 47 -2 163 -86 Broad money 16 Currency in circulation -99 Jordanian dinar deposits 61 Foreign currency deposits 53 (Stocks in millions of Jordanian dinars) 2,263 2,375 2,277 2,308 2,403 3,313 3,628 3,773 3,852 3,862 547 996 1,104 1,119 1,125 z: 1,115 1,223 1,238 1,244 381 391 391 391 129 126 126 126 126 3,535 3,813 3,868 3,964 4,015 -1,323 -1,688 -1,716 -1,748 -1,795 5,577 6,003 6,050 6,160 6,265 988 953 953 968 983 3,750 3,860 3,787 3,875 3,954 839 1,190 1,310 1,317 1,328 (Flows in millions of Jordanian dinars) 421 112 -98 -67 28 -20 315 145 224 234 -76 450 108 123 129 -69 469 108 123 129 16 -44 10 10 10 -3 2;:: 0 0 0 172 55 151 202 -130 -365 -28 -60 -107 401 427 47 157 262 35 -35 0 15 30 362 110 -73 15 94 4 351 120 127 138 2,486 3,878 1,096 1,215 391 126 4,089 -1,824 6,364 996 4,030 1,338 111 249 99 99 10 27: -136 361 43 170 148 (Changes in percent of beginning-of-period broad money) Net foreign assets 0.3 8.1 2.0 -1.6 -1.1 0.5 1.9 Net domestic assets 0.0 -0.4 5.6 2.4 3.7 3.9 4.2 Net claims on government -2.4 -1.5 8.1 1.8 2.0 2.1 1.7 of which : on general budgetary government -2.3 -1.3 8.4 1.8 2.0 17 Claims on non-financial public enterprises 0.9 0.3 -0.8 0.2 0.2 2; 0’2 Claims on financial institutions 0.0 -0.1 -0.1 0.0 0.0 0:o 0:o Claims on the private sector 3.2 3.3 5.0 0.9 2.5 3.4 4.6 Other items (net) -1.7 -2.5 -6.5 -0.5 -1.0 -1.8 -2.3 Broad money 0.3 7.8 7.6 0.8 2.6 4.4 6.0 Currency in circulation -1.9 0.7 -0.6 0.0 0.3 0.5 0.7 Jordanian dinar deposits 1.2 7.0 2.0 -1.2 0.2 28 Foreign currency deposits 1.0 0.1 6.3 2.0 2.1 1:: 215 Memorandum items Annual growth in claims on the private sector (percent) 5.1 5.1 7.8 6.8 6.0 7.2 Ratio of foreign currency to total deposits (percent) 19.8 18.3 23.6 25.4 25.1 24.9 Source: Central Bank of Jordan, and Fund staff projections and estimates. I/ The flows and percent changes are cumulative from end- 1998. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 33 - Table 5. Jordan: Summary Accounts of the Central Bank, 1996-1999 1996 1997 1998 1999 Program l/- Mar. Jun. Sept. Dec. Net foreign assets Net domestic assets Net claims on Government 1,318 of which : on general budgetary government Net claims on NFPEs, local government, and the SSC Net claims on financial institutions Net claims on private sector Net claims on commercial banks CDs Other items, net (asset: +) 138 590 596 ;: 8 399 -618 -268 Jordanian dinar reserve money Currency Commercial banks’ reserves Legal reserves Excess reserves 1,456 996 460 447 13 Net foreign assets 125 Net domestic assets Net claims on Government of which : on general budgetary government Net claims on NFPEs, local government, and the SSC Net claims on financial institutions Net claims on private sector Net claims on commercial banks CDs Other items, net (asset: +) -319 -96 -97 8 19 0 -2;: 17 Jordanian dinar reserve money Currency Commercial banks’ reserves Legal reserves Excess reserves -195 -94 -101 -ii; Net foreign assets 7.5 Net domestic assets Net claims on Government of which : on general budgetary government Net claims on NFPEs, local government, and the SSC Net claims on financial institutions Net claims on private sector Net claims on commercial banks CDs Other items, net (asset: +) -19.3 -5.8 -5.9 0.5 A-‘0 1:8 -18.0 1.0 Jordanian dinar reserve money Currency Commercial banks’ reserves Legal reserves Excess reserves -11.8 -5.7 -6.1 -0.4 -5.6 (Stocks in millions of Jordanian dinars) 1,935 1,612 1,394 1,418 1,502 -167 -8 151 177 155 663 861 969 984 990 666 861 969 984 990 -24 -16 -16 -16 -16 30 -47 -47 -47 -47 9 361 34: 34: 34: 34: -1,056 -972 -921 -910 -938 -149 -191 -191 -191 -191 1,768 1,604 1,545 1,595 1,657 1,038 1,005 1,006 1,021 1,036 730 599 539 574 621 496 489 508 520 531 234 110 31 54 91 (Flows in millions of Jordanian dinars) 617 -323 -218 -194 -110 -305 159 159 184 163 ;; 199 195 108 108 I23 123 129 129 -20 9 0 0 -1 -77 : 0 0 1 1 0 0 0 -38 -13 -438 84 5: 6; 3: 119 -42 0 0 0 312 -164 -59 -9 53 42 -33 -6; 16 30 270 -131 -25 22 50 -8 31 42 221 -123 -:; -56 -19 (Changes in percent of beginning-of-period JD reserve money) 42.4 -18.3 -13.6 -12.1 -6.9 -21.0 9.0 9.9 11.5 10.1 5.0 11.2 ti’; 77 7’6 80 4.8 11.0 0:o 0:o 8’0 -1.3 0.5 0:o -0.1 -4.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 t:: 0.0 -2.6 -0.8 0.0 0:O 0.0 -30.1 8.2 -42:: ii ii 2.1 0.0 21.5 -9.3 -3.7 -0.6 3.3 2.9 -1.9 1.0 1.9 18.6 -7.4 j’; -1.6 3.4 -0.4 1:2 1.9 :*“6 15.2 -7.0 -4.9 -3.5 -1:2 1,575 142 961 961 -16 -79 34; -889 -191 1,718 1,049 669 541 128 -37 150 100 99 0 -32 0 0 83 0 113 43 70 52 18 -2.3 9.3 6.2 6.2 0.0 -2.0 0.0 0.0 5.1 0.0 7.1 2.7 4.3 3.2 1.1 Source: CBJ, and Fund staff estimates and projections. l/ The flows and percent changes are cumulative from end-1998. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public,-34- Table 6. Jordan: Summary Balance of Payments, 1996-2003 (In millions of U.S. dollars) FM Prog. Proj. Proj. Proj. Proj. 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 Current account excluding grants Trade balance Exports f.o.b. Imports c.i.f. Services (net) ofwhich : rcmittmces (net) Private transfers -630 -385 -358 -421 -436 -458 -453 -448 -2,473 -2,264 -2,070 -2,150 -2,258 -2,403 -2,550 -2,706 1,817 1,836 1,762 1,836 1,932 2,046 2,175 2,316 4,290 4,099 3,832 3,987 4,190 4,449 4,724 5,022 1,864 1,897 1,692 1,725 1,817 1,940 2,091 2,252 1,444 1,455 1,336 1,345 1,401 1,475 1,562 1,657 -20 -18 20 5 5 5 -5 5 Foreign grants 408 414 359 370 296 306 Current account including grants -222 29 1 -51 -140 -152 Capital account Public sector Disbursements Amortization Private sector (net) FDI -129 -85 462 547 -44 Portfolio and other capital flows Transfer of workers’ savings Errors and omissions l! ..I 1:: -260 244 -202 261 463 446 180 181 164 -79 -98 -92 321 413 -5 2: 81 -396 -2 64 432 368 -66 10 10 75 -161 298 4;: 339 207 145 37 65 -40 190 10 440 430 180 120 45 55 -40 Overall balance -351 274 -97 -53 158 39 Financing Increase in NFA (-) Central bank Commercial banks IMF (net) Arab Monetary Fund (net) Debt rescheduling 2/ Financing gap 351 -274 -123 -704 -107 -456 -16 -248 97 111 37: 2:: 0 0 97 53 -158 -180 -230 -350 355 -50 -323 -535 -180 -27 23 73 26 8 -15 -18 246 5 0 0 219 184 -39 -226 -188 -38 -2: 0 201 Memorandum items: Official foreign exchange reserves In months of imports 31 Current account balance as percent of GDP Including grants Excluding grants Exports as percent of GDP Imports as percent of GDP Debt service as percent of exports of GNFS External public debt as percent of GDP GDP (in millions of US dollars) 698 1,694 1,170 1,191 1,510 1,691 1,746 1,81 I 2.1 5.4 4.0 3.9 4.7 4.9 4.8 4.7 -3.3 0.4 0.0 -0.7 -1.7 -1.8 -1.5 -1.2 -9.5 -5.5 -4.8 -5.5 -5.4 -5.3 -4.9 -4.5 27.3 26.3 23.9 23.9 23.8 23.7 23.5 23.2 64.6 58.8 51.9 51.8 51.5 51.6 51.0 50.4 25.7 23.1 22.9 22.0 21.4 23.2 23.0 22.3 109.5 101.2 103.1 103.0 100.6 96.8 89.4 81.8 6,645 6,976 7,386 7,697 8,128 8,623 9,270 9,965 315 325 -138 -123 271 337 0 440 42) 440 444 270 340 150 160 90 130 50 50 -20 0 132 213 -132 -213 -94 -105 -55 -65 -39 -40 -72 -103 -16 -5 0 0 50 0 Source: The Jordanian authorities; and staff estimates. l/ Projection for 1999 includes an estimate of unrecorded capital outflows in the first quarter. Projections for 1999-2003 include the projected decline in external holdings of the Jordanian dinar. 2/ Includes change in deferred payments. 3! Excluding re-exports. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 7. Jordan: Summary of External Debt and Debt Service, 1996-2003 1996 1997 Prel. Prog. Proj . Proj. Proj. Proj. 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 Total public and publicly guaranteed external debt I/ 7,277 7,06 1 7,612 Medium- and long-term 6,937 6,634 7,143 To bilateral and multilateral creditors 11 5,951 5,770 6,353 To London Club creditors 21 760 682 625 To other creditors 226 182 165 Use of Fund resources 340 427 469 Service on public and publicly guaranteed external debt Ofwhich : to the Fund Amortization Ofwhich : to the Fund Interest Ofwhich : to the Fund 942 824 823 35 40 31 566 474 422 22 22 9 376 350 401 13 17 21 Total public and publicly guaranteed external debt l/ 109.5 101.2 103.1 Medium- and long-term 104.4 95.1 96.7 Use of Fund resources 5.1 6.1 6.4 Service on public and publicly guaranteed external debt 14.2 11.8 11.1 Amortization 8.5 6.8 5.7 Interest 5.7 5.0 5.4 Total public and publicly guaranteed external debt l/ 198.6 197.7 of which : to the Fund 9.3 12.0 Service on public and publicly guaranteed external debt ofwhich : to the Fund Amortization ofwhich : to the Fund Interest Ofwhich : to the Fund 25.7 23.1 1.0 1.1 15.5 13.3 0.6 0.6 10.3 9.8 0.4 0.5 (In millions of U.S. dollars) 7,925 8,177 8,347 7,382 7,609 7,772 6,656 6,944 7,169 580 540 503 146 124 101 543 568 575 827 843 963 40 56 403 390 5;; 20 33 53 424 453 460 20 23 23 (In percent of GDP) 103.0 100.6 96.8 95.9 -93.6 90.1 7.1 7.0 6.7 10.7 10.4 11.2 5.2 4.8 5.8 5.5 5.6 5.3 8,285 8,148 7,782 7,748 7,240 7,262 468 433 74 53 503 401 1,008 1,038 110 122 543 552 87 103 465 485 22 19 89.4 81.8 83.9 77.7 5.4 4.0 10.9 5.9 5.0 10.4 5.5 4.9 (In percent of goods and nonfactor services) 211.5 211.2 207.9 201.3 188.7 13.0 14.5 14.5 13.9 11.5 22.9 22.0 21.4 23.2 23.0 0.9 1.8 2.5 11.7 1;: ii.3 12.1 12.4 0.3 0:5 0:9 1.3 2.0 11.1 11.3 11.5 11.1 10.6 0.6 0.5 0.6 0.6 0.5 175.1 8.6 22.3 2.6 11.9 2.2 10.4 0.4 Sources: Jordanian authorities; and staff estimates and projections. l/ Short-term debt is reportedly negligible. 2/ Includes external holdings of par and discount Brady bonds. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 8. Jordan: Indicators of Fund Credit, 1998-2008 (In SDR million, unless otherwise specified) Projections 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 Total Fund credit outstanding at end-period In SDR million 333.4 385.4 404.2 409.0 357.7 284.3 214.0 157.1 105.0 66.0 42.7 In U.S. dollar million 469.4 542.7 568.5 575.0 503.2 400.5 301.5 221.3 147.9 93.0 60.1 In percent of: Quota GDP Exports l/ Public and publicly guaranteed debt 195.5 226.0 237.1 239.9 209.8 166.7 125.5 92.1 61.6 38.7 25.0 6.4 7.1 7.0 6.7 5.4 4.0 2.8 1.9 1.2 0.7 0.4 13.0 14.5 14.5 13.9 11.5 8.6 6.1 4.2 2.6 1.5 0.9 6.2 6.8 7.0 6.9 6.1 4.9 3.8 2.8 1.9 1.2 0.8 Transactions under the EFF and the CCFF Purchases undet the EFF and the CCFF Repurchases Charges and interest 23.7 66.1 42.6 42.6 10.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 6.8 14.1 23.8 37.8 62.0 73.4 70.3 56.9 52.1 39.0 23.3 15.8 14.2 16.0 16.5 15.9 13.4 10.5 8.0 5.9 4.1 2.8 Debt service to the Fund In SDR million In U.S. dollar million In percent of: Exports l/ Service on public and publicly guaranteed debt 22.6 28.3 39.8 54.3 77.9 86.8 80.8 30.7 39.9 56.0 76.3 109.6 122.3 113.8 0.9 1.1 1.4 1.8 2.5 2.6 2.3 3.7 4.8 6.6 7.9 10.9 11.8 11.2 64.9 91.4 1.7 9.2 58.0 43.1 26.1 81.7 60.7 36.8 1.4 1.0 0.6 8.4 6.3 3.9 Sources: IMF Treasurer’s Department; and Fund staff estimates. l/ Exports of goods and noufactor services. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 37 - Table 9. Jordan: Selected Social Indicators Population Population, total (millions) (1997) 4.4 Population growth (in percent) (1996) 3.7 Labor force growth (in percent) (1996) 5.3 Age dependency ratio (dependents as proportion of working age population) (1996) 0.8 Poverty (percent of population below national poverty line) (1991) 15 Population below US%2 per day (in percent) (1992) 23.5 Education Illiteracy rate (percent of people above 15, male) 7 Illiteracy rate (percent of people above 15, female) 21 Net primary enrollment ratio (percent of relevant age group, male) (1995) 89 Net primary enrollment ratio (percent of relevant age group, female) (1995) 89 Health Life expectancy at birth (male, years) (1996) 69 Life expectancy at birth (female, years) (1996) 72 Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 live births) (1996) 30 Under-5 mortality rate (per 1,000) (1996) 35 Access to safe water (percent of population) (1995) 89 Access to health care (percent of population) (1993) 90 Immunization (measles, in percent of children under 12 months) ( 1995) 92 Imrnunization (DPT, in percent of children under 12 months) (1995) 100 Communications Television sets (per 1,000 people) (1996) 175 Radios (per 1,000 people) (1995) 325 Daily newspapers (per 1,000 people) (1994) 48 Mobile phones (per 1,000 people) (1996) 3 Phone lines (per 1,000 people) (1996) 60 Fax machines (per 1,000 people) (1995) 7.3 Personal computers (per 1,000 people) (1996) 7.2 Source: Wold Bank, World Development Indicators (1998). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-38’ - 18 13 8 3 -2 -7 -12 Chart 1. Jordan: Real Sector Developments and Outlook, 1996-2001 a. Inflation and Growth (In percent per annum) . . . . . . \ *. AverageCPI . .’ . . * . . 19% 1997 1998 Prog. 1999 Proj. 2000 Proj. 2001 b. Sectoral growth (In percent) 19% 1997 1998 Prog. 1999 Proj .2000 Proj. 2001 7 6 5 4 . 3 2 1 0 18 13 8 3 -2 -7 -12 Sources: Data provided by the Jordanian authorities; and staff estimates. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-39 - Chart 2. Jordan: Fiscal Operations, 1996-2001 a. Fiscal Deficit (In percent of GDP) 12 10 8 6 45 40 3s 30 25 20 /- \ / \ / \ / \ ---_ ---/ Fiscal deficit excluding grants \ \ \ Fiscal deficit including grants 1996 1997 1998 Prog. 1999 b. Revenue and Expenditure (In percent of GDP) Proj. 2000 Proj. 2001 .-- .-- Total expenditure and net lending Total expenditure and net lending RR RR ---- ---- _ Cl$t scale) _ Cl$t scale) -2 -2 -v -v ---- ---- -- -- ---, ---, (right scale) (right scale) -1.. -1.. --._ --._ --.. --.. ._............. ._............. _.-- _.-- _.-- _.-- Domestic revenue (left scale) Domestic revenue (left scale) 1996 1997 1998 Prog. 1999 Proj. 2000 Proj ,200 1 12 10 8 6 Source: Data provided by the Jordanian authorities; and staff estimates. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public..4ot - 9.0 8.0 7.0 6.0 5.0 4.0 3.0 2.0 1.0 0.0 -1.0 Chart 3. Jordan: Monetary Developments and Outlook, 1996-2001 a. Banking System (Changes in percent of beginning-of-period broad money) .*- -- . . .** --.. .’ -U- .’ -. , ’ \ ;‘“.,.’ 4. , \ / -. , . I \ . / --- , -------, , . , Net foreign assets . . --....._ ,#’ Net domestic assets .I..., 50.0 r- 40.0 30.0 20.0 10.0 0.0 -10.0 -20.0 -30.0 1996 1997 1998 Pmg. 1999 b. Central Bank of Jordan Proj.2000 Proj.2001 (Changes in percent of begixming-of-period JD reserve money) a . * ‘, Net foreign assets I . ’ I . . , . . I \ r \ I \ -.---. Net domestic assets 19% 1997 1998 Pmg. 1999 Proj. 2000 Proj. 2001 Sources: Data provided by the Jordanian authorities; and staff estimates. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public. -4’r - Chart 4. Jordan: Reserves, Interest Rates and Exchange Rate a. International Rew es and Interest Rates USS million ls800 *.‘- 1,600 1,400 1,200 1,000 -.-.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Interest rate on 3-month CDs (right scale) 800 600 400 200 0 International reserves Percent , 12 170 160 150 140 130 120 110 100 Y 8 6 4 1 2 ’ 10 Jan-96 May-96 Sep-96 Jan-97 May-97 Sep.97 Jan-98 May-98 Sep-98 Jan-99 b. Real and Nominal Effective Exchange Rate (1990 = 100) P- --/ --\ / \ C- Nominal effective exchange rate / r-,/ /-- / f /’ R---d H-d -MR Real effective exchange rate 170 160 150 140 130 120 110 100 Jan-96 APT-96 Jul-96 Ott-96 Jan-97 Apr-97 Jul-97 Ott-97 Jan-98 Apr.98 Jul-98 Ott-98 Sources: Data provided by the .Iordanian authorities; and Information Notice System. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 42 - 2 -I -4 -7 -10 70 65 60 Chart 5. Jordan: External Current Account Developments and Outlook, 1996-2001 a. External Current Account (In percent of GDP) _..- ..---... _..- ---..- . . - - - . ._ . . . . . . . . . . . . - . - - . . . . . . ..-- . , I hrrcnt nccount . , , (excluding official transfers) . .’ . , .’ , .’ , 1996 1997 1998 Pmg. 1999 Pmj. 2000 Pmj. 2001 b. Imports, Exports and Remittances (In percent of GDP) ---. ---. --\ ‘\ ‘A Exports (f.0.b.) --.-.-.-.-.-.-.-.a.-.-.-.-.-.-. Workers’ remittances 1996 1997 1998 Pmg. 1999 Pmj. 2000 Pmj. 2001 30 25 20 15 Sources: Data provided by the Jordanian authorities; an.d staff estimates. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 43 - APPENDIX I Jordan: Schedule of Purchases Under the Proposed Extended Arrangement, 1999-2002 Availability Date Amount of Purchase In Percent (SDR million) of Quota Conditions l/ April 1999 August l&l999 November 15,1999 February 15,200O May 15,200O August l&2000 November 15,200O February 15,200l May 15,200l August 15,200l November 15,200l February 15,2002 Total 10.66 10.66 10.65 10.66 10.66 10.65 10.66 10.66 10.65 10.66 10.66 10.65 127.88 6.25 6.25 6.25 6.25 6.25 6.25 6.25 6.25 6.25 6.25 6.25 6.25 75.00 Board approval. Observance of end-June 1999 performance criteria and completion of the first review. Observance of end-September 1999 performance criteria and completion of the second review. Observance of end-December 1999 performance criteria. Observance of end-March 2000 performance criteria. Observance of end-June 2000 performance criteria. Observance of end-September 2000 performance criteria. Observance of end-December 2000 performance criteria. Observance of end-March 2001 performance criteria. Observance of end-June 2001 performance criteria. Observance of end-September 200 1 performance criteria. Observance of end-December 200 1 performance criteria. l/ The timing and frequency of reviews during 2000-02 will be set at end-1999. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-44- APPENDIX II Jordan: Extended Arrangement Attached hereto is a letter from the Minister afFinance and the Governor of the Central Bank of Jordan, dated March 31,1999, with an at-ached Memorandum on Economic and Financial Policies (the Memorandum), requesting an extended arrangement from the Fund and setting forth: (a) the objectives and policies that the authorities of Jordan intend to pursue for the period of this extended arrangement; (b) the policies and measures that the authorities of Jordan intend to pursue during the first year of this extended arrangement; and (c) understandings of Jordan with the Fund regarding reviews that will be made of progress in realizing the objectives of the program and of the policies and measures that the Jordanian authorities will pursue for the second and third years of this extended arrangement. To support these objectives and policies, the International Monetary Fund grants this extended arrangement in accordance with the following provisions: 1, For a period of three years from April . . . . 1999 Jordan will have the right to make purchases from the Fund in an amount equivalent to SDR 127.88 million, subject to paragraphs 2,3,4, and 5 below, without further review by the Fund. 2. (a) Until May 15,2000, purchases under this extended arrangement shall not without the consent of the Fund exceed the equivalent of SDR 42.63 million, provided that purchases shall not exceed the equivalent of SDR 10.66 million until August 151999, the equivalent of SDR 21.32 million until November 151999, and the equivalent of SDR 31.97 million until February 15,200O. (b) Until May 15,2001, purchases under this extended arrangement shall not without the consent of the Fund exceed the equivalent of SDR 85.26 million, provided that purchases shall not exceed the equivalent of SDR 53.29 million until August 15,2000, the equivalent of SDR 63.94 million until November 15,2000, and the equivalent of SDR 74.60 million until February 15,200l. (c) In the third year, purchases under this extended arrangement shall not without the consent of the Fund exceed the equivalent of SDR 95.91 million until August 15, 2001, the equivalent of SDR 106.57 million until November 15,2001, and the equivalent of SDR 117.23 million until February 15,2002. 3. Jordan will not make purchases, under this extended arrangement (a) during any period in which the data at the end of the preceding period indicate that Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 45 - APPENDIX II (i) the limit on net domestic assets of the Central Bank of Jordan, or - (ii) the limit on net bank claims on the general budgetary government, or (iii) the floor on the net international reserves of the Central Bank of Jordan, or (iv) the ceiling on the contracting of new nonconcessional public and publicly-guaranteed external debt with an initial maturity of over one year, or (v) the ceiling on the contracting of new nonconcessional public and publicly-guaranteed external debt with an initial maturity of over 1 year up to and including 5 years, or (vi) the limit on the stock of government and government-guaranteed short-term external debt, specified in paragraph 28 and Table 1 of the Memorandum, is not observed, or (b) if, by June 30, 1999, Jordan has not implemented the tariff rate reduction and GST rate increase described in paragraphs 13 and 22 and Table 2 of the Memorandum; or (c) if, by December 3 1,1999, the draft VAT law specified in paragraph 18 and Table 2 of the Memorandum has not been submitted to Parliament; or (d) if, by December 3 1,1999, a budget has not been submitted to Parliament incorporating the tariff reduction specified in paragraph 22 and Table 2 of the Memorandum; or (e) if, at any time during the period of the arrangement, Jordan accumulates arrears on any external payments as described in paragraph 28 of the Memorandum; or (f) after August 14, 1999 and November 14, 1999, respectively, until the reviews contemplated in paragraph 28 of the Memorandum are completed; or (g) if, at any time during the period of the extended arrangement, Jordan (0 imposes or intensifies restrictions on the making of payments and transfers for current international transactions, or (ii) introduces or modifies multiple currency practices, or Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 46 - APPENDIX II (iii) concludes bilateral payments agreements that are inconsistent with - Article VIII, or (iv) imposes or intensifies import restrictions for balance of payments reasons. When Jordan is prevented from purchasing under this extended arrangement because of this paragraph 3, purchases will be resumed only a&r consultation has taken place between the Fund and Jordan and understandings have been reached regarding the circumstances in which such purchases can be resumed. 4. Jordan will not make purchases under this extended arrangement during any period in which Jordan has an overdue financial obligation to the Fund or is failing to meet a repurchase expectation (a) in respect of a noncomplying purchase pursuant to Decision No. 7842-(84/165) on the Guidelines on Corrective Action, or (b) in respect of a purchase in support of debt and debt service reduction operations pursuant to Decision No. 933 l- (89/167), as amended, or (c) pursuant to subparagraph 16(a) or 33(a) of Decision No. 8955- (88/126), as amended, on the Compensatory and Contingency Financing Facility, or (d) pursuant to section 2, paragraph (f) of the Guidelines for Fund Support of Currency Stabilization Funds. 5. Jordan’s right to engage in the transactions covered by this extended arrangement can be suspended only with respect to requests received by the Fund after (a) a formal ineligibility, or (b) a decision of the Executive Board to suspend transactions, either generally or in order to consider a proposal, made by an Executive Director or the Managing Director, formally to suppress or to limit the eligibility of Jordan. When notice of a decision of formal ineligibility or of a decision to consider a proposal is given pursuant to this paragraph 5, purchases under this arrangement will be resumed only after consultation has taken place between the Fund and Jordan and understandings have been reached regarding the circumstances in which such purchases can be resumed. 6. Purchases under this extended arrangement shall be made in the currencies of other members selected in accordance with the policies and procedures of the Fund, unless, at the request of Jordan, the Fund agrees to provide SDRs at the time of the purchase. 7. Jordan shall pay a charge for this extended arrangement in accordance with the decisions of the Fund. 8. (a) Jordan shall repurchase the amount of its currency that results from a purchase under this extended arrangement in accordance with the provisions of the Articles of Agreement and decisions of the Fund, including those relating to repurchases as Jordan’s balance of payments and reserve position improves. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 47 - APPENDIX II (b) Any reductions in Jordan’s currency held by the Fund shall reduce the - amounts subject to repurchase under (a) above in accordance with the principles applied by the Fund for this purpose at the time of the reduction. 9. During the period of the extended arrangement, Jordan shall remain in close consultation with the Fund. These consultations may include correspondence and visits of officials of the Fund to Jordan or of representatives of Jordan to the Fund. Jordan shall provide the Fund, through reports at intervals or dates requested by the Fund, with such information as the Fund requests in connection with the progress of Jordan in achieving the objectives and policies set forth in the attached letter and annexed Memorandum. 10. In accordance with the second paragraph of the letter dated March 3 1,1999, Jordan will consult with the Fund on the adoption of any measures that may be appropriate at the initiative of the Government or whenever the Managing Director requests consultation because any of the criteria in paragraph 3 above have not been observed or because the Managing Director considers that consultation on the program is desirable. In addition, after the period of the arrangement and while Jordan has outstanding purchases under this arrangement, the Government will consult with the Fund from time to time, at the initiative of the Government or at the request of the Managing Director, concerning Jordan’s balance of payments policies. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-48- APPENDIX III Jordan: Connpensatory Financing 1. The Jordanian authorities are requesting a purchase in the amount of SDR 34.1 million (equivalent to 20 percent of new quota) under Section II, paragraph 12 (b) (ii), of the CCFF decision (Decision No. 8955-(88/126), adopted on August 23, 1988, as amended). The request is being made in respect of a shortfall in aggregate earnings from merchandise exports and services (excluding investment income and ‘other services’ category), during the period July 1,1998-June 30,1999 (Table 1). 2. The calculations supporting the request for compensatory financing relating to the shortfall in aggregate receipts from exports of goods and services for the 12-month period ending June 30,1999 are made in accordance with the early drawing procedure set out in Paragraph 14 of the CCFF decision. Actual data for merchandise exports are available through November 1998 and for service receipts through December 1998. Accordingly, in consultation with the authorities, the staff has estimated the value of merchandise exports receipts for the last seven months of the shortfall year, and service receipts for the last six months of the shortfall year. In accordance with the provisions of paragraph 16 (a) of the CCFF decision, the authorities will be expected to make a prompt repurchase in respect of the outstanding purchase, in an amount equivalent to the overcompensation, if the amount purchased on the basis of estimated data exceeds the amount that could have been purchased on the basis of actual data for the entire shortfall year. As soon as actual data for the entire shortfall year become available, the staff will report to the Board on this matter. Causes of the export shortfall 3. The calculated shortfall, equivalent to SDR 66.6 million, in earnings from exports of goods and services is attributable to declines in nontraditional exports of goods (mainly chemicals and ‘other’ exports such as household goods, live animals, and oils and fats), as well as in workers’ remittances and transportation receipts in the services account. Jordan’s aggregate earnings from goods and services (in SDR terms) are estimated to essentially stagnate during the shortfall year ending June 30, 1999, but are projected to rise by almost 4 percent a year in the two post-shortfall years (Table 2). Therefore, it is the staffs assessment that the estimated shortfall in export earnings in the 12-month period ending June 30,1999 will be temporary. 4. The staff also believes that the anticipated shortfall in earnings from exports of goods and services is iargely beyond the controZ of the authorities. The major factors accounting for the shortfall are the generally sluggish regional economic activity, especially in the neighboring oil-exporting countries, and the political tensions in the region, both of which have contributed to weaker regional demand for Jordan’s exports of goods, expatriate labor, and transportation services. The impact of these factors on exports of services-especially of worker’s remittances-has been especially pronounced. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 49 - APPENDIX III 5. The projected increase in the growth of exports of goods and services beyond the - shortfall year reflects the anticipated improvement in the regional economic environment. In addition, mining exports are expected to benefit from several large projects, which will result in large capacity gains over the coming few years. At the same time, nontraditional exports are expected to benefit from the establishment of several industrial trade zones, established to permit duty-&e exports to the United States. Cooperation and access limit 6. Jordan falls into the category in which its balance of payments difficulties extend beyond the current export shortfall, and, in view of the poor track record under the previous extended arrangement, its past relations with the Fund have not been satisfactory. Based on this, and the fact that the authorities are concurrently requesting an arrangement in the upper credit tranches, Jordan’s record of cooperation falls under paragraph 12 (b) (ii) of the CCFF decision, which limits the total possible access under the export element to 20 percent of quota. Accordingly, the staff supports the Jordanian authorities’ request for a purchase in an amount equivalent to.20 percent of quota. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-5o- APPENDIX III Table 1. Jordan: Determination of the Amount of Compensation Under the CCFF (In millions of SDRs) _ Year - Ending June 30 Est. l! Projected In percent 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 of quota Aggregate export of goods and services 3,018.4 3,074.3 3,054.8 3,164.6 3,303.l Trend value 2/ 3,121.4 Aggregate earnings shortfall (- excess) 3141 66.6 39.1 Proposed purchase 34.1 20.0 Memorandum items: Jordan’s quota in the Fund (SDR million) 170.5 Exchange rate (U.S. dollar&DR) 5/ 1.4174 1.3577 1.3892 1.4072 1.4060 Aggregate earnings (U.S. dollar million) 4,278.4 4,174.0 4,243.g 4,453.l 4644.1 Merchandise exports (U.S. dollar million) 6/ 1,522.4 1,470.8 1,481.0 1,575.5 1,659.5 Services (U.S. dollar million) 7/ 2,756.0 2,703.2 2,762.g 2,877.6 2,984.6 Sources: Jordanian authorities; and Fund staff estimates. 1,’ Based on actual data for the first five months for exports, and the first six months for services receipts. 21 Geometric average of exports earnings for the five years centered on the shortfall year. 31’ The amount by which export earnings in the shortfall year are below their trend value. 4/ The constraint that the average export earnings in the two post-shortfall years not exceed 20 percent of their average level in the two pre-shortfall years is not binding in this case (paragraph 15 of the CCFF Decision). 5/ US$ per SDR exchange rates are based on the WE0 forecasts of January 21, 1999. 6/ Excluding re-exports. 7/ Excluding investment income and “other services” category. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public. . -5l- APPENDIX III Table 2. Jordan : Aggregate Earnings and Shortfalls by Major Categories 1996/97-2000/01 1997 Year Ending June 30 bst. I! ProJecttons Geometric Shortfall 21 1998 1999 2000 2001 Aggregate earnings 3,018.4 Total services 1,944.4 Workers’ remittances 1,145.7 Travel 525.2 Transportation 273.5 Total domestic exports 1,074.o Traditional exports 354.9 Phosphate rock 133.5 Phosphatic fertilizer 105.3 Potash 116.1 Nontraditional exports 719.1 Fruits and vegetables 82.3 Manufactures 192.3 Chemicals 220.4 Others 224.1 Aggregate earnings Total services Workers’ remittances Travel Transportation Total domestic exports Traditional exports Phosphate rock Phosphatic fertihzer Potash Nontraditional exports Fruits and vegetables Manufactures Chemicals Others 9.5 11.7 17.4 6.1 1.3 -i-z 19:5 -14.4 -5.0 9.4 -;*‘8 13:1 18.2 Value Phosphate rock Phosphatic fertilizer Potash 92 ;: Volume Phosphate rock Phosphatic fertilizer Potash 96 1;: Unit Value (In terms of SDR) Phosphate rock Phosphatic fertilizer Potash Memorandum item: U.S. dollar per SDR (WEO) 31 1;: 92 1.4174 (In millions of SDRs) In percent of quota 3,074.3 3,054.g 3,164.6 3,303.l 66.6 39.1 1,991.l 1,988.8 2,045.O 2,122.8 28.7 16.8 1,160.9 1,104.2 1,142.4 1,180.2 42.2 24.8 576.6 647.4 660.6 690.8 -30.3 -17.8 253.6 237.2 242.0 251.8 14.1 1,083.2 1,066.O 1,119.6 1,180.3 37.8 2;*; 352.0 377.8 385.3 402.0 -3.9 -213 139.4 144.9 150.2 157.4 -0.1 112.5 112.1 111.7 117.6 -0.3 j-4 100.1 120.8 123.4 127.0 -3.7 -2:2 731.2 688.2 734.3 778.3 41.4 24.3 108.4 113.2 122.7 132.4 -2.8 -1.6 218.5 222.9 241.1 258.0 2.6 1.5 243.3 212.6 223.6 234.8 14.1 161.0 139.5 146.9 153.1 23.0 138:: (Annual percentage change) 1.9 -0.6 3.6 4.4 2.4 -0.1 2.8 1.3 3.5 ;: f 9.8 12; -7.3 -6:5 $:8 d:X -E -1.6 z-t 3.; 1:: :-; -13:8 20.7 -0:4 -El 4:s i-g 3:*:: 1316 -5 4’4 9 210 8 s:4 6’0 7:9 8.2 7.0 10.4 -12.6 5.2 -28.2 -13.4 5.3 2:s (Indices, Shortfall year =lOO) 96 100 104 109 100 100 100 105 83 100 102 105 94 100 105 110 97 100 104 112 85 100 103 106 103 100 99 99 103 100 98 100 xs” iii 1.3577 1.3892 1.4072 1.4060 Source: Jordanian authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections. l/ Shortfall year based on partly estimated data for the last seven months December 1998-June 1999. 2/ The constraint that the average export earnings in the two post-shortfall years not exceed 20 percent of their average in the pre-shortfall years is not binding in this case. 3/ US$ per SDR rate is based on the WE0 as of January 21,1999. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicI. II. III. Iv. V. VI. - 52 - Jordan: Fund Relations (As of February 28,1999) Membership Status: Joined 8/29/‘52; Article VIII General Resources Account: @oh Fund holdings of currency Reserve position in Fund SDR Department: Net cumulative allocation Holdings Outstanding Purchases and Loans: Extended arrangements Financial Arrangements: TYPe EFF EFF Stand-by Approval Expiration Date Date 2109196 2/08/99 5125194 2/09/96 2126192 2125194 ?% 294:3 0.0 16.89 1.01 331.20 100.0 6.0 !?fiz? . Amount Amount Approved Drawn APPENDIX IV - . (SDR Million) (SDR Million) 238.04 202.52 189.30 130.32 44.40 44.40 Projected Obligations to Fund (SDR Million; based on existing use of resources and present holdings of SDRs): Overdue F0-p 02/28/99 iii99 m 2ml i2!J!E 2QQ3 Principal -- 11.9 23.8 37.8 53.5 55.5 Charges/Interest I=. 22 l2.h LlA 38 zz Total -- 21.8 36.4 49.2 63.3 63.2 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 53 - APPENDIX IV Nonfinancial Relations VII. Exchange System ’ Although the Jordanian dinar, which is a fully convertible currency, is officially pegged to the SDR, the authorities have tightly linked its exchange rate to the U.S. dollar since October 1995, at JD 1 =US$1.4104. VIII. Article IV Consultation The 1997 Article IV consultation was concluded by the Executive Board on April 23,1998. The Executive Board’s decision is documented in EBS/98/65, Appendix III. IX. Technical Assistance During the last several years, extensive technical assistance has been provided to Jordan. This included: (i) assistance in the use of computing facilities by the Bureau of Computing Services (BCS); (ii) technical assistance from the Fiscal Affairs Department (FAD) in the areas of procedures for budget preparation and execution, financial reporting, sales taxation, reform of the tax system, and pension reform; (iii) technical assistance from the Monetary and Exchange Affairs Department (MAE), in the areas of, inter alia, monetary management; banking supervision; the clearing, payment and settlement system; and banking legislation; and (iv) technical assistance from the Statistics Department (STA) in money and banking, and national accounts statistics. Technical assistance in 1998 included three FAD missions to advise on means to improve budget monitoring and execution; several STA missions and visits to advise the authorities on preparing quarterly national accounts and a producer price index, and establishing a system for regularly updating and publishing estimates; and an MAE mission to assist the CBJ in the areas of monetary management, money market development, bank supervision, banking regulation, and the payments system; and the stationing of a long-term advisor in the area of banking supervision. ’ For a historical background, see EBS/97/105, Appendix III. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 54 - APPENDIX V Jordan: World Bank Group Strategy and Operations 1. As of January 31,1999, Jordan had received 56 Bank loans and 15 IDA credits totaling US%1,640.6 million net of cancellations and terminations. All the credits and 46 of the loans have been fully disbursed. Project implementation and disbursement performance have been satisfactory. The IFC has made loans and equity investments in Jordan with total commitments of US$134.0 million; and, in addition, about US$70.3 million in syndications.’ 2. In recent years, the most important objective of the World Bank has been to assist the government in launching the country on a sustainable growth path, while helping it in restoring the country’s creditworthiness. This objective has been pursued through a series of policy-based adjustment loans to support structural reforms in energy (US$80 million, completed in December 1997), agriculture (US$SO million, completed in May 1997), and economic reform and development (ERDL I, US$SO million, approved in October 1995, and ERDL II, US$120 million, approved in December 1996). Japan, Germany, Italy, and the EU each cofinanced one or more of these loans. The government has already implemented the time-bound action programs for the adjustment operations in energy and agriculture, including sector institutional restructuring under the ESAL and modified reform measures agreed with the Bank under the ASAL. An action program in trade, finance, the regulatory environment, and private sector development was formulated in connection with ERDL I. ERDL II supported continued trade liberalization, regulatory reform, financial sector reform and privatization. A third and final ERDL, emphasizing financial reforms, privatization, and on-the-ground implementation of previously agreed reforms, in an amount of US!§120 million, is expected to be disbursed in the first halfof 1999. 3. The other major priority of the World Bank is to support of the government’s direct interventions to fight poverty, in particular through the Social Productivity Program. The Bank is supporting this broad program to address the problems of the poorest segment of the population through a combination of infrastructure improvements in poor communities, an innovative income transfer program, a program to match job training efforts to the needs of the economy, and micro-enterprise support. Bank loans would support the community infrastructure and job training components, while Bank technical services are helping in design of the other components of the program. The World Bank continues to address critical physical, institutional, and policy constraints through investment projects in tourism, Greater Amman water supply, and health sector refolm. Assistance is also planned in public sector reform, export and investment promotion, agricultural services, and wastewater recycling. Provided the government’s adjustment and reform programs stay on track, the World Bank expects to be able to commit approximately US$400-500 million in new lending to Jordan during FY 99-01. ‘In support of the government’s efforts to mobilize the required external financing, Consultative Group (CG) meetings were convened in January 1993, May 1994, and July 1996. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 55 - APPENDIX V 4. The World Bank’s non-lending and economic and sector work provides analytical - support for the government’s adjustment and reform programs, and for the Social Productivity Program. This work forms the basis of the Bank’s current policy agenda and dialogue with the government. Recent work has dealt with trade incentives, financial development, the role of government, the nature of and response to poverty, the needs and opportunities facing the private sector, women in the labor force, the water sector, the health sector, and the higher education sector. Most ongoing and planned work will consist of technical assistance to the government in adopting and implementing the reforms proposed in this recent work. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-56- APPENDIX VI . I Real sector 1. To better monitor economic developments and enhance program monitoring, there is a need to compile GDP on a quarterly basis, improve statistics on expenditure components, compile a producer price index, and improve sectoral price indices. Also important, statistics need to be compiled and released on a timely basis. In this regard, the Department of Statistics has received Fund technical assistance. Moreover, there is a need to improve labor market statistics, especially to collect comprehensive information on wages and salaries. Government finance 2. In order to gain a more comprehensive view of fiscal developments, the authorities need to compile consolidated fiscal accounts covering the central government and other components of the public sector. To this end, a fiscal monitoring unit has been created at the Ministry of Finance to, inter alia, compile budgetary data. During 1999, the government will undertake a review of the coverage and classification of autonomous agencies, and will reclassify trust accounts in line with the recommendations of recent FAD technical assistance. Monetary and balance of payments accounts 3. Monetary data for the central bank and the deposit money banks are reported on a regular basis. For improved policy formulation and better program monitoring and surveillance, there is a need for disaggregated data on private capital inflows. Data dissemination 4. Currently, most of the disseminated statistics are provided through the bulletin of the CBJ (enhanced to contain more analytic information, as of the January 1998 issue) and the various publications of the Department of Statistics. The CBJ has placed its Monthly StatisticaZ Bulletin on the Internet. The authorities also intend to subscribe to the Fund’s general data dissemination system and are taking preparatory steps in this regard. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public,. Jordan: Survey of Reporting of Main Statistical Indicators, as of March 10, 1999 Central Bank BalalXX sleet 1131199 Consumer if2 Jan. 99 Dec. 98 March 99 Feb. 99 M M M - M M Q CBJ CBJ Monthly statisdcal bulktin ObtdtXl on mission UMeSUiCtd unresticted Monthly Bulletin of CBJ Monthly Bulletin of CBJ Current account balance Dec. 98 Feb. 99 Q Q Atthetime of mission CBJ obtained on mission uMestricted Monthly Bulletin of CBJ Overall government balance Dec. 98 Feb. 99 M Q Q Ministry of Finanfe FAX/ Obtained on mission uMestricted Monthly Bulletin of CBJ External public debt/ debt service Dec. 98 Feb. 99 Q A At the time of mission Ministry of FilBllU Obtained on mission unr*raicted MdY Bulletin of CBJ Reserve/base money International reserves 314199 3/10&B W M W CBJ Email unrestricted Monthly Bulletin of CBJ Broad money Interest 1131199 l/31/99 3/10199 Mar. 99 M M M M monthly CBJ CBJ Email Monthly statistical bulletin Unrestricted UIlnstriUed Monthly Bulletin of CBJ Monthly Bulletin of CBJ Exchange rates 2/28/99 3110198 M M h4 Central Bank of Jordan (CBI) Cable uMestricted Monthly Bulletin of CBJ GDP/GNP Est. 1998 Feb. 99 A A Atthetime of mission Ministry of Fii with !!zEzz Obtained on mission UmeStlicted Monthly Bulletin of CBJ Date of latest observation 1131198 3/10199 3/10/99 Date received M Frequency of data M - M M Frequency of publication Frequency of WJoning M M soMce of Update CBJ CBJ Mode of reporting Email Email unrestricted Unrestricted Confidentiality Monthly Bulletin of CBJ Monthly Bulletin of CBJ Published data - Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 58 - ATTACHMENT I March 31,1999 Mr. Michel Camdessus Managing Director International Monetary Fund Washington, D.C. 2043 1 U.S.A. Dear Mr. Camdessus: The attached Memorandum on Economic and Financial Policies sets out the medium-term economic and financial program in support of which the Government of Jordan is requesting a three-year arrangement fkom the Fund under the Extended Fund Facility in an amount equivalent to SDR 127.88 million (75 percent of quota). The government is also requesting a purchase under the Compensatory and Contingency Financing Facility in an amount equivalent to SDR 34.1 million (20 percent of quota). The government believes that the policies set forth in the attached Memorandum are adequate to achieve the objectives of the program. However, it stands ready to take any additional measures appropriate for this purpose, and will consult with the Fund on the matter in accordance with the policies of the Fund on such consultations. The government will also provide the Fund with such information as the Fund may request on policy implementation and achievement of program objectives. Sincerely yours, Michel Marto Minister of Finance Ministry of Finance Ziad Fariz Governor Central Bank of Jordan Attachment: Memorandum on Economic and Financial Policies Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 59 - ATTACHMENT I JORDAN Memorandum on Economic and Financial Policies, 19994001 March 31,1999 1. This Memorandum sets out the government’s economic policy framework for the period 1999-200 1, and specifies in detail macroeconomic and structural policies for the first year of the program. Financial support for the program is being requested from the IMP under an extended arrangement. I. BACKGROUND 2. Since the initiation of Jordan’s economic reform program in the early 199Os, economic policies have aimed at reducing internal and external imbalances, and instituting a range of structural reforms. However, in recent years the pace of economic activity has lost momentum as the construction boom that followed the Gulf war ran its course and Jordan continued to face impediments to trade with the West Bank; tensions in the region have also inhibited trade with neighboxing countries. In 1998, Jordan was affected by the sharp drop in international oil prices, which led to a weakening of the regional economy and a marked decline in remittances from expatriate workers, and by tensions in the region associated with Iraq. These developments, together with a heavy burden of external debt service, have put pressure on the budget and limited the improvement in the balance of payments. 3. We estimate that real GDP at factor cost grew by only 0.6 percent in 1998, down from 1.5 percent in 1997. Real GDP at market prices grew at an estimated 2.2 percent because of substantially higher effective taxation of petroleum products. The depressed level of economic activity was particularly pronounced in agriculture and construction, although there have recently been indications that the decline in construction may have begun to bottom out. The average increase in consumer prices was 4.5 percent in 1998, with the rise reflecting administrative price increases late in 1997; consumer price inflation was 0.5 percent during 1998, as domestic demand was subdued and international commodity prices declined. 4. The recorded budget deficit (before grants and excluding rescheduled interest) rose by 3 percentage points of GDP in 1998, to 9.6 percent of GDP; the deficit including rescheduled interest amounted to 10.7 percent of GDP. Budgetary spending increased substantially in 1998, reflecting a broadening of the coverage of expenditures to include outlays that were previously off budget and the clearance of substantial domestic payments arrears. There were also increases in capital outlays and in some categories of current spending. On the revenue side, collections from customs duties improved sharply, partly reflecting better enforcement and reductions in exemptions. Income tax and non-GST domestic indirect taxes declined, however, partly because of the slowdown in economic activity in 1997. Despite foreign grants amounting to 4 percent of GDP, the budget deficit was reflected, inter alia, in substantial net domestic financing of the government, exceeding 6 percent of GDP. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-6O- t ATTACHMENT I 5. Monetary developments in 1998 were dominated by fluctuations in demand for the - Jordanian dinar and the government’s heavy recourse to domestic bank financing. Broad money grew at over 7% percent in 1998, somewhat faster than nominal GDP and close to the rate observed in 1997. However, the composition of the deposit base shifted heavily in favor of foreign currency-denominated deposits, as a result first of the regional tensions early in the year, and then of concerns over the health of His Majesty King Hussein starting in July. This, together with some private capital outflows, led to a fall in the Central Bank of Jordan’s (CBJ’s) net international reserves (excluding gold and required reserves held against foreign currency deposits), from US$1.7 billion at end-1997 to about US$1.2 billion (4 months of imports) at end-l 998. However, the net foreign assets of the banking system as a whole increased modestly during 1998, and the international reserves of the CBJ including gold and required reserves in foreign currency still amounted to about US$l.9 billion at end-year. 6. In response to the above developments, the CBJ, continuing its prudent policy, acted decisively to raise interest rates to support the exchange rate and maintain international reserves. The benchmark interest rate on the CBJ’s certificates of deposits (CDs) was increased from about 6.5 percent in the spring of 1998 to more than 10 percent in August. Interest rates on other central bank instruments were raised in parallel, and the central bank introduced overnight deposit and repurchase facilities in order to control interbank rates more precisely. Corresponding to this increase in rates, commercial banks’ excess reserves were maintained considerably below the ample level that had prevailed in the last quarter of 1997. 7. Despite the slowdown in economic activity in several economies in the region, the external current account balance (including grants) remained essentially at zero in 1998; excluding grants, the current account deficit was slightly reduced to 4.8 percent of GDP. Exports decreased by 4 percent, reflecting mainly declines in exports to countries in the region. Excluding exports to Iraq and Saudi Arabia, exports grew by close to 4 percent, with an especially strong performance of exports of fruits and vegetables; manufactured exports and traditional exports also increased in both value and volume terms. In addition to the fall in total exports, workers’ remittances declined by nearly 7 percent, due to the regional slow- down and the domestic political uncertainty. These declines, however, were offset by a 6.5 percent fall in imports, resulting partly from lower oil import prices. At the same time, the capital account shifted into deficit, reflecting net private capital outflows during the second half of the year. As a result, the overall balance shifted from a surplus of 4 percent of GDP in 1997 to deficit of over 1 percent of GDP in 1998. 8. Implementation of certain structural reforms progressed in 1998. On privatization, the government sold as programmed most of its remaining shares in the Jordan Cement Factories Company (JCFC), signed the concession contract for Ma’in spa, and has succeeded in privatizing most of the public transportation system. However, the sale of government shares in the Jordan Telecommunications Company (JTC) has been delayed while its privatization strategy is being revised. Also, a private management contract for the Amman Services Area of the Water Authority of Jordan (WAJ) could only be finalized in early 1999, and tariff reform was deferred because of concerns about the growing budget deficit. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-6l- ATTACHMENT I II. POLICYFRAMEWORKFOR 1999-2001 9. The overall macroeconomic objectives of the program are to steadily raise economic growth, maintain low inflation, and strengthen the international reserves position. However, in the short term at least, economic growth will be held back by the continued depressed level of economic activity in the region, and impediments to Jordan’s exports to neighboring countries. Jordan’s high external debt burden is also a constraint on overall economic performance. For 1999 we are now projecting that output growth at constant market prices will be limited to about 2 percent, somewhat less than envisaged earlier. Subsequently, however, economic growth is expected to pick up on account of a resumption of export growth, supported inter alia by several large investments in the mining sector. Implementation of the structural reform program would over time also contribute to export and GDP growth. All told, we expect growth to rise to at least 3-4 percent by 2001, but this will be barely enough to halt the decline in per capita income. Year-on-year inflation should he in the range of 2-3 percent during the program period. The external current account deficit (excluding grants) is projected to rise somewhat in 1999, in part because of continued weakness of remittances, but would then narrow to about 5 percent of GDP before grants (2 percent of GDP after grants). At the same time, we are targeting a steady increase in the stock of official reserves over the program period. 10. These macroeconomic objectives are to be pursued through fiscal consolidation, prudent monetary policy, and wide-ranging structural reforms. Following the slippages in fiscal policy in recent years, the budget deficit will be reduced to 7.0 percent of GDP (about 3.3 percent of GDP after grants) in 1999, as envisaged in the 1999 budget, and further to 4 percent of GDP (1 ‘/z percent of GDP after grants) over the subsequent two years. We also intend to further reduce over the program period the burden past deficits have imposed on the CBJ, through additional sales of Treasury securities. The envisaged budget path will strengthen confidence in financial stability, notably by ensuring a significant reduction in the ratio of public debt to GDP. Also, by largely eliminating the need for domestic financing of the budget, it would create greater room for credit to the private sector, facilitate a reduction in interest rates, and contribute to the strengthening of the external position. The targeted fiscal consolidation, however, will involve a painful adjustment effort that will constrain, inter alia, public investment, not least because interest payments are a large and growing share of budget outlays-interest payments on public external debt in 1999 are projected to amount to close to 5 percent of GDP, while the burden of external debt service on the budget will be on the order of 9 percent of GDP. 11. The structural reform program will aim at improving efficiency and strengthening the foundation for a resumption of strong economic growth. Its impact on the pace of economic development, however, is likely to be constrained by regional impediments to trade. Given the large share of government in the economy, the reform program aims to reconfigure and reduce the role of the public sector. At the same time, the composition of tax revenue would be further re-oriented from trade-based to consumption-based taxation, and distortions would be reduced by continuing with the process of tariff reform and developing a full-fledged VAT. With respect to tariff reform, the government intends to reduce the maximum tariff, Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 62 - ATTACHMENT I from 40 percent to 30 percent by early 2000 (see paragraph 22), and will consider further - reductions during the three-year period, provided the overall economic situation strengthens as we now expect. As regards public expenditure, the government is developing, in collaboration with the World Bank, a comprehensive strategy for raising its effectiveness and enhancing its social impact. This strategy will focus on health, education, infiastmcture, and private sector and social development. 12. Beyond the scope of the budget, the reform program will emphasize the privatization of key public enterprises (particularly in the air transport and electric power sectors), and the transfer of management to the private sector for other public sector entities. We envisage that over the three-year period, and possibly much sooner, we will complete the privatization of the generating and distribution components of the power sector and the operating arm of Royal Jordanian (RJ), and that a new privatization strategy for JTC will be fully implemented. The mobilization of domestic and foreign savings will be enhanced, and their allocation made more efficient, through financial sector and comprehensive pension reforms. The adjustment and reform program will also incorporate elements specifically designed to protect the more vulnerable social groups and promote employment generation; these include implementation of the Social Productivity Program with financial assistance from the World Bank and other creditors. III. MACROECONOMICPROGRAMFOR 1999 Fiscal policy 13. In line with the policy ti-amework, the government is targeting in 1999 a reduction in the budget deficit to 7 percent of GDP, excluding grants. Revenue is projected to increase by the equivalent of about 2 percent of GDP while expenditure in relation to GDP is to be cut by 1% percentage points, despite an increase in interest payments of about 1 percent of GDP. The revenue target is supported by an increase in the rate of General Sales Tax (GST), concurrently with a reduction in GST exemptions, and a proposal in this regard has been submitted to Parliament. At the same time, we plan to lower the maximum tariff rate from 40 percent to 35 percent, and to reduce tariff rates on industrial inputs to 10 percent. These tariff reductions will only be implemented once a compensating increase in the GST rate to at least 12 percent has been ratified by Parliament. The reduction in the maximum tariff rate to 35 percent and the increase in the rate of the GST to offset tariff reductions constitute a performance criterion for end-June 1999. Measures will also be adopted to strengthen the collection of the income tax and the GST (see below). The targeted reduction in expenditure will be achieved mainly through the eliminanon of the food cash transfers, and cuts in current and capital expenditure. Following the elimination of the food cash transfer, the price of standard bread was lowered by 25 percent, largely reflecting the fall in the international price of wheat, but still involving a small subsidy; this subsidy is to be maintained for no more than one year. The 1999 budget includes estimates for all expenditure categories that were previously off-budget. The government stands ready to adopt contingency measures, Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 63 - ATTACHMENT I including further cuts in current spending and lower priority capital expenditures, if this is _ needed to meet our budgetary target. 14. As part of our fiscal program, we have established limits on net bank claims on the general budgetary government. In addition to the budget deficit described above, these limits allow for a drawdown of balances in accounts other than the Treasury account equivalent to 0.9 percent of GDP, primarily related to spending for which financing was provided by the Treasury in previous years. On this broader basis, the fiscal deficit in 1999 is equivalent to 7.9 percent of GDP. 15. The government recognizes the importance of improving the financial performance of public enterprises. From 1999, the government has required public enterprises to adopt fully financed budget plans and, in this context, has agreed on financial plans aimed at improving their financial performance. The Budget Department will monitor closely the operations of the major public enterprises and their financial relationships with each other and with the government. The structural reforms being undertaken in the public enterprise sector (paragraph 23) should go a long way toward improving financial discipline and operational performance in the largest enterprises, particularly for the WAJ through strengthened tariff collection and recovery of overdue payments. Performance of key public enterprises vis-Lvis their budget plans will be evaluated in the context of the quarterly program reviews. Monetary policy 16. The monetary program of the CBJ is designed to build up official international reserves while maintaining low inflation, The program is conservatively based on a rate of broad money growth broadly in line with that of nominal GDP. The envisaged reduction in the fiscal deficit will begin to ease the heavy burdens that the budget has been placing on monetary policy. Together with greater tinancial discipline in the rest of the public sector, the lower deficit is expected to leave adequate room for an expansion in credit to the private sector, while allowing the targeted buildup in international reserves. Interest rate policy will continue to be dictated by the dual objective of keeping within the program’s credit ceilings and achieving the program’s targets for international reserves, while preserving the stability of the exchange rate. Accordingly, interest rates on CDs and other instruments will be adjusted as necessary to achieve these goals. In line with this policy, interest rates on overnight deposits, repos, and CDs were raised significantly in late January and early February in response to some loss in reserves on account of renewed political uncertainty. The appropriateness of the monetary program will be reexamined in the context of program reviews. External outlook 17. The financial policies described above are expected to contain the external current account deficit in 1999 at about one half of 1 percent of GDP including grants, 5% percent of GDP excluding grants. This small increase in the deficit would reflect a pickup in imports by the private sector, associated with the expected modest recovery in economic activity (at Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-64- ATTACHMENT I factor cost), and some increase in import prices. The value of exports of goods is projected to increase by 4 percent, on account of, inter alia, moderate growth in traditional exports, and growth of nontraditional exports in line with regional demand. Services exports, including worker’s remittances, are projected to rise only slightly. The current account deficit will be covered mainly by multilateral and bilateral. financing in support of the structural reforms. The external Cnancing of the program is discussed further below. IV. STRUCTURAL POLICIES FOR 1999 Fiscal reforms 18. The program emphasizes a range of measures aimed at improving budgetary operations, including the monitoring and reporting of fiscal data. On revenues, the focus will be on widening the tax base and improving tax collection. A draft law aimed at converting the GST into a value added tax (VAT) has been prepared. Given the economic importance of this legislation, extensive consultations with the private sector will be required, but we will make every effort to submit it to Parliament by end-September; and in any event, submission to Parliament by end-December 1999 constitutes a structural performance criterion. Amend- ments to the income tax law, widening the tax base and rationalizing exemptions, will be submitted to Parliament by end-September. In the meantime, we intend to request technical assistance to review the draft amendments. We are conducting a review (to be completed by end-September 1999) of GST exemptions under the Investment Promotion Law, with a view to rationalizing them. We are also taking steps to improve tax administration. The Income Tax Department will hire 100 additional assessors by end-June 1999. Ahead of the creation of the new department to be established following adoption of the VAT law, 100 auditors will be recruited by end-September 1999 (instructors to provide training for new staff have already been trained). Amendments to the social security law have been prepared at the technical level and are now being discussed by the concerned parties; these amendments are based on the recently completed actuarial study and aim at improving the long-term financial soundness of the system. In parallel, we are considering reforms to the civil service pension system and we will be requesting technical assistance to this end. A timetable for moving ahead in these areas will be established by the second program review. 19. The government is strengthening budget procedures and monitoring mechanisms. As regards budget procedures, a financial order will be issued by end-June 1999 specifying that no new spending will be committed after December 15, 1999 to avoid an end-of-year rush of expenditures and a surge in the float. The 1999 budget law has banned recourse to spending through advances; a supplementary budget is required for any expenditures not included in the original budget. In order to allow more effective monitoring of spending commitments and domestic payments arrears, the govermnent will undertake efforts to strengthen commitment accounting across all .Ministries; the government will seek technical assistance from the Fund in this area. Prior to the Executive Board’s consideration of the program, a fiscal monitoring unit will be created at the Ministry of Finance to compile, follow up, report, and analyze budgetary data; and the work initiated on the categorization Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 65 - ATTACHMENT I and updating of trust accounts will be completed, thereby substantially improving the quality- of our fiscal statistics. The government will also undertake during 1999 a review of the coverage and classification of autonomous agencies, as well as the bank accounts covered under the “general budget”; and it will reclassify trust accounts in line with FAD’s technical assistance recommendations. In this context, we will identify the sources and uses of all government accounts both in the CBJ and in the commercial banks, which will be rational&d. We also intend to integrate these accounts into the budgetary framework in 2000-01. The further steps that may be needed in this area will be -specified in the context of the next program review. Monetary and financial sector reforms 20. The government will continue to pursue policies that promote efficient financial intermediation. We will submit to Parliament, prior to the Executive Board meeting, a new banking law, which aims mainly at strengthening prudential regulations and bank licensing, clarifying the legal status of electronic payment media, and integrating provisions relating to Islamic banking. A new deposit insurance law will be submitted to Parliament in the near future; the Deposit Insurance Corporation will be set up immediately following passage of this law. The development of the clearing, payment and settlement systems is set to continue, with the objective of shortening the period for check clearing and establishing the architecture of a real-time gross settlement system in the near future. With a view to deepening the financial markets and reducing the cost of monetary policy borne by the CBJ, we plan to initiate regular auctions of government securities by end-September 1999; in this regard, a plan outlining the amounts, timing, and maturities of the new issues of government securities will be agreed in the context of the first program review. 21. During 1998, the CBJ integrated its off- and on-site banking supervision activities to ensure that all information is fully used. Priority has been attached to training the approxi- mately 45 bank inspectors, with assistance from the Fund and bilateral donors. In addition, all Jordanian banks and branches of foreign banks were inspected, and rated according to the CAMEL framework. In the period ahead, the CBJ will continue to strengthen its banking supervision capacity and ensure that provisioning is adequate. Trade reform 22. In line with the government’s objective of continuing to strengthen the trade regime, a new Customs Law took effect on January 1, 1999, which removed the Cabinet’s prerogative to grant new exemptions. In addition, remaining tariff exemptions will be eliminated as they expire, except those under existing laws. The maximum import tariff rate will be lowered from 40 percent to 35 percent by end-June 1999. We also intend to set tariffs on industrial inputs to 10 percent. In the budget for the year 2000, to be submitted to Parliament in December 1999, we will announce our intention to reduce the maximum tariff rate further to 30 percent by end-March 2000, and the tariff structure will be rationalized. The government hopes to attain membership in the WTO before the end of 1999. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 66 - ATTACHMENT I Public enterprise reform and privatization 23. The government’s public enterprise reform program for 1999-2001 focuses on WAJ, RJ, the National Electric Power Company (NEPCO), the JTC, and divestiture of government holdings of shares in a number of industrial companies. . The government has approved a four-year management contract with a French company for the operations of the Amman Services Area, which represents about 40-50 percent of total WAJ operations. Signing this contract is the first step in a US$55 million World Bank-financed project to improve the efficiency and financial viability of the water sector. It is expected that this project will reduce the amount of water that is supplied but not billed from about 50 percent currently to about 25 percent over the next five years. Also, the government will review water tariffs regularly to ensure that they properly reflect water supply costs. . The government has decided to split RJ into two parts-a holding company with the noncore activities, such as catering and duty fb~ shops, and a subsidiary for airline operations. The noncore operations will be partly divested to private concessionaires, and a strategic partner will be sought for the subsidiary. The government is now in the process of reviewing the necessary legal and financial restructuring of the company, with the help of outside advisers. The legislation creating the RJ subsidiary will be submitted to Cabinet by end-June and to Parliament by end-September 1999. . The government effectively divided NEPCO into three companies on February 1, 1999. NEPCO will continue to operate the transmission grid while power generation and distribution will be privatized. The next steps in the restructuring process, to be completed by end-June 1999, comprise the separation of assets and liabilities and preparation of separate financial statements; and agreement on tariff formulas between NEPCO and the generation and distribution companies. Prior to the Executive Board meeting, a law will be enacted creating an independent regulatory body for the power sector. A privatization strategy for the generation and distribution companies will be completed by end-December 1999, and implemented in 2000. Furthermore, the process of selecting an Independent Power Producer for Jordan’s first privately owned and operated power station (in Al Samra) has begun; the government has asked that bids be submitted by end-March and we expect that the award will be granted no later than end-September 1999. To ensure a smooth resolution of labor issues, employees have been given the choice of remaining with NEPCO or joining one of the companies to be privatized. . The government remains committed to privatization in the telecommunications sector. Following the lack of success last October in selling 40 percent of JTC to a strategic investor, the government is reviewing the prospects and modalities for achieving the privatization objective. A cabinet decision on a revised strategy will be adopted by end-June 1999. Based on this strategy, further steps toward the privatization of JTC will be elaborated in the context of program reviews. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public.* . - 67 - ATTACHMENT I Following the sale of 33 percent of the shares of the Jordan Cement Factories iompany (JCFC) in November 1998 (the remaining holdings equal 16 percent of JCFC’s - equity), the Jordan Investment Corporation (JIC) intends to divest shares in at least 10 companies during 1999, of which a minimur ., :jf 3 by end-June and 8 by end-September. The JIC will also attempt to sell part of its remaining holdings in the JCFC and is looking to sell its shares in the Housing Bank. Social policies We are moving forward on the implementation of the Social Productivity Program F&P). All funding requirements of Phase I (1998-2000) have been secured from the World Bank, other donors and funding institutions, in addition to the contribution of the government. Many Phase I projects have now been initiated: a wage subsidy pilot project for the poor; the training and employment support program; the implementation of the small and micro enterprises development project in southern Jordan; the awarding of engineering contracts for inl?astructure projects in identified camp and squatter settlements; and the signing of contracts for the improvement of physical and social infrastructure in less advantaged local councils. Furthermore, the monthly allowance for poor families has been raised from JD 60 to JD 82. Statistical issues 25. In addition to the actions to improve the quality of fiscal data described in para- graph 19, we are taking steps to improve economic data in other areas. As regards the national accounts, the Department of Statistics (DOS), with IMF technical assistance, is: (i) developing a producer price index; (ii) improving quarterly GDP statistics, including their timeliness; and (iii) developing national accounts in constant prices on the expenditure side. To this end, the DOS has been reorganized and additional staff recruited. Also, work to improve the quality of the estimates of GDP is ongoing. V. EXTERNAL FINANCING AND PROGRAM MONITORING 26. The government believes that the policies described in this Memorandum will contribute importantly to improving efficiency, raising economic growth, and strengthening the external position. However, particularly given the regional impediments to trade and Jordan’s heavy external debt service burden, the achievement of even the program’s modest growth objectives will require substantial external financial support on appropriate terms. On the basis of the external current account projections and the targeted reserve buildup, gross external financing requirements (net of private inflows unrelated to privatization) are currently estimated at US$l billion in 1999 and a total of US$3 billion over 1999-2001. 27. In support of its medium-term economic and financial program, the government of Jordan is requesting multiyear financial assistance from the IMF under the Extended Fund Facility in an amount equivalent to SDR 127.88 million (75 percent of quota). The Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Publicl . - 68 - ATTACHMENT I government is also requesting financial ass:istance under the Compensatory and Contingency- Financing Facility in an amount equivalent to SDR 34.1 million (20 percent of quota) to compensate for an export shortfall. Taking into account projected disbursements of official grants and loans, a financing gap of some US$220 million remains for 1999; over the three- year program period, the financing gap is projected at some US$600 million. Thus, the government is requesting additional external support from bilateral donors, including generous support from the Paris Club. The government is also still seeking to reach agreement on its external arrears to some non-Paris Club creditors, on terms comparable to those granted by the Paris Club under the last restructuring. 28. Purchases under the extended arrangement are subject to observance of prior actions and performance criteria, completion of program reviews, and a continuous performance criterion on the nonaccumulation of new external payments arrears (excluding arrears on debt service to official bilateral creditors, on which the government intends to seek a rescheduling). The following quarterly performance criteria will be used to monitor progress under the program: (a) floors on the net international reserves of the CBJ; (b) ceilings on the net domestic assets of the CBJ; (c) ceilings on the net bank claims on the general budgetary government; (d) ceilings on the outstanding stock of public and publicly guaranteed short- term external debt; and (e) ceilings on the contraction of new nonconcessional medium- and long-term public and publicly-guaranteed external debt with an initial maturity of more than one year, with a sub-ceiling on debt with an initial maturity of up to and including five years. The program also includes indicative targets on the budget deficit and budget revenues excluding grants and privatization receipts. In addition, during the period of the extended arrangement, the government will not impose or intensify restrictions on payments and transfers for current international transactions, introduce or modify multiple currency practices, conclude bilateral payments arrangements that are inconsistent with Article VIII of the Fund’s Articles of Agreement, or impose or intensify import restrictions for balance of payments reasons. The quantitative performance criteria and the indicative targets are specified in Table 1, and the structural performance criteria and benchmarks are presented in Table 2. In 1999, purchases under the extended arrangement will be subject to quarterly program reviews. It is expected that we will shift to semiannual reviews after 1999, and the appropriateness of such a move will be reviewed at end-year. Attachments: Table 1. Quantitative Performance Criteria and Indicative Targets Under the Extended Arrangement, 1999 Table 2. Prior Actions and Structural Performance Criteria and Benchmarks Under the Extended Arrangement, 1999 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Publici’ -69- ATTACHMENT I . I Table 1. Jordan: Quantitative Performance Criteria and Indicative Targets Under Extended Arrangement, 1999 End-March l/ End-June End-Sept. End-Dec. Performance criteria Net international reserves of the CBJ 2/ Net domestic assets of the CBJ 3/ Net bank claims on the general budgetary government 4/5/6/ Outstanding stock of government and government- guaranteed short-term external debt Contraction of new nonconcessioual medium- and long-term public and publicly-guaranteed external debt Oj’which : with maturity of up to and including five years Indicative targets Budget deficit excluding grants Domestic budgetary revenue Memorandum items Programmed sum of foreign grants, net external financing of the budget (excluding project loans), and privatization proceeds from abroad ofu~/rich : foreign grants Programmed net domestic nonbank financing of government Maximum upward adjustment to net bank claims on the general budgetary government Maximum reduction (reflecting excess of foreign grants) in the downward adjustment to net bank claims on the general budgetary government (Cumulative flows from January 1, in millions of Jordanian dinars) -218 -194 -110 -37 l/ 159 185 162 150 11 108 123 129 100 (In millions of U.S. dollars) 25 25 25 25 200 325 425 525 125 150 175 200 (Cumulative flows from January 1, in millions of Jordanian dinars) 107 209 298 384 365 771 1,197 1,668 21 128 188 254 36 73 146 206 -20 -40 -40 -10 10 10 10 10 20 20 30 40 Source: Quarterly macroeconomic program. l! Indicative targets. 2/ These floors will be adjusted upward (downward) by the amount that the ceilings on net bank claims on the general budgetary government are adjusted downward (upward) due to an excess (shortfall) in the sum of foreign grants, net external financing of the budget (excluding project loans) and privatization proceeds from abroad. 3/ These ceilings will be adjusted downward (upward) by the amount that the ceilings on net bank claims on the general budgetary government are adjusted downward (upward) due to an excess (shortfall) in the sum of foreign grants, net external financing of the budget (excluding project loans) and privatization proceeds from abroad. 4/ These ceilings will be adjusted upward by the extent to which the sum of foreign grants, net external financing of the budget (excluding project loans), and privatization proceeds from abroad falls short of the levels specified above. The maximum upward adjustment will not exceed the amount specified above. 5/ These ceilings will be adjusted downward by the extent to which the sum of foreign grants, net external financing of the budget (excluding project loans), and privatization proceeds from abroad exceeds the levels specified above. The downward adjustment will be reduced by the extent to which foreign grants exceed the amounts specified above, up to the maximum specified above. 6/ These ceilings will be adjusted downward (upward) by the extent to which net domestic nonbank financing of government exceeds (falls short of) the amounts specified above. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 70 - ATTACHMENT I Table 2. Jordan: Prior Actions and Structural Performance Criteria and Benchmarks - Under the Extended Arrangement, 1999 ACTIONS 1 ‘. TIMING STATUS I. Tax Policy and Administration Reduction in the maximum import tariff rate to 35 percent, together with an increase in the GST rate to at least 12 percent. Hiring of 100 additional assessors by the Income Tax Department. Submission to Parliament of draft amendment to income tax law widening of the tax base and rationalizing exemptions. Hiring of 100 auditors by the GST Department, Submission to Parliament of draft VAT law described in paragraph 18. Submission to Parliament of a budget for 2000 incorporating a reduction in the maximum import tariff to 30 percent before end-March 2000. II. Expenditure Management Formal decision not to commit any budgetary spending after December 15 of each financial year with a view to improving expenditure management. III. Fiscal Monitoring and Reporting Creation of a fiscal monitoring unit at the Ministry of Finance to prepare, update, report, and analyse fiscal data. Completion of the work initiated on the categoriza- tion and updating of trust accounts held at the CBJ and commercial banks. IV. Public Sector Reform and Privatization Enactment of law creating an independent regulatory body for the power sector. Performance criterion End-June End-June Benchmark End-September Benchmark End-September End-December End-December End-June Benchmark -- -- Benchmark Performance criterion Performance criterion Prior action Prior action Prior action Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-7l- ATTACHMENT I ACTIONS TIMING STATUS - Submission to Cabinet of the legislation creating the FU subsidiary. End- June Benchmark Cabinet decision on a revised strategy for privatizing JTC. End-June Benchmark Separation of assets and liabilities, preparation of separate financial statements, and agreement on tariff formulas between NEPCO and the generation and distribution companies. Submission to Parliament of the legislation creating the RJ subsidiary. Granting concession to independent power producer. Cabinet decision on a privatization strategy for the generation and distribution companies. Divestment by JIG of shares in at least 10 companies during 1999, of which: Divestment from at least 3 companies Divestment from at least 8 companies Divestment from at least 10 companies End-June End-September Benchmark End-September End-December End-June End-September End-December Benchmark Benchmark Benchmark Benchmark Benchmark Benchmark V. Financial Sector Reform Submission of new Banking Law to Parliament. Introduction of regular series of auctions for government securities. -- End-September Prior action Benchmark Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public