DOCUMENT OF INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND NOT FOR PUBLIC USE l-z-l IAGENDAI MASTER FILES ROOM HO C-525 0451 EBSl99193 CONFIDENTIAL June 10, 1999 To: Members of the Executive Board From: Subject: The Acting Secretary Peru-Staff Report for the 1999 Article IV Consultation and Request for Extended Arrangement Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staff report for the 1999 Article IV consultation with Peru and Peru’s request for an Extended Arrangement, which is tentatively scheduled for discussion on Thursday, June 24, 1999. A drawl decision appears on page 24. Mr Lizondo (ext. 38650) or Mr. W. Lewis (ext. 37155) is available to answer technical or factual questions relating to this paper prior to the Board discussion. Unless the Documents Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the WTO Secretariat on Friday, June 18, 1999; and to the European Commission, the European Investment Bank, and the Inter-American Development Bank, following its consideration by the Executive Board. Att: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public. . Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicCONFIDENTIAL INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND PERU Staff Report for the 1999 Article IV Consultation and Request for an Extended Arrangement Prepared by Western Hemisphere and Policy Development and Review Departments (In consultation with the Fiscal AITairs, Legal, Monetary and Exchange Affairs, Statistics, and Treasurer’s Departments) Approved by Claudio M. Loser and Jesus Seade June 9, 1999 Contents Page ExecutiveSummary.. ............. ...................................... 3 I. Introduction. ........................................... . ......... 4 II. Background and Recent Developments ................................. 5 III. Policy Discussions .......... ....................... ......... 10 A. B. C. D. E. F. Fiscal Policies .................................. Monetary and Financial Sector Policies ............... External Sector Policies and Prospects ............... Other Structural Reforms ......................... Medium-Term Outlook and Capacity to Repay the Fund Other Issues ................................... 11 14 16 17 18 ,. 19 IV. Performance Criteria and Review Clauses 20 V. StaffAppraisal................................................... 20 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2- Contents Page Boxes 1. 2. 3. Poverty and Income Distribution ........................ Restructuring of Private Sector Debt to Peruvian Banks ....... Reform of the Banking Law ............ ............... Tables 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 7 9 ‘16 Selected Economic Indicators ....................................... 25 Operations of the Combined Public Sector ...................... ....... 26 Operations of the Central Government ..... .......... ........ .. .. 27 Indicators of External Vulnerability ................................. 28 Public Sector Social Expenditure ....... ........ ..... ... ...... 29 Balance of Payments and External Debt ... ............................ 30 Quantitative Performance Criteria, 1998 ................................ 3 1 Monetary Survey .... ... ............................ ........ 32 Medium-Term Outlook .. ..................................... ... 33 Projected Payments to the Fund as of April 30, 1999 .............. ....... 35 Proposed Schedule of Purchases Under the Extended Arrangement, 1999-2002 36 Figures 1. Selected Economic Indicators, 1996-99 37 2. Trade Indicators, 1996-99 38 3. External Indicators, 1995-99 39 4. Monetary Indicators, 1996-99 40 5. Interest Rates, 1997-99 41 6. Labor Market Indicators, 1994-99 42 7. Banking Indicators, 1995-99 43 I. Fund Relations ...................... ........ II. Relations with the World Bank Group .............. III. Relations with the Inter-American Development Bank IV. Statistical Issues ............................... V. Privatization and Concession Program in 1999 ........ VI. Public Information Notice ....................... VII. Extended Arrangement .......................... Attachment 44 47 50 52 54 55 58 1. Letter of Request and Memorandum on Economic and Financial Policies 61 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3- EXECUTIVE SUMMARY Background . During the 1990s Peru, with support from the Fund, has made major progress in eliminating large disequilibria that beset the economy at the beginning of the decade. . In 1998 economic performance was adversely affected by the El Nifio disturbance and other external shocks. As a result, the currency depreciated significantly in real effective terms, and international reserves fell, although they remained at comfortable levels. The end-1998 performance criteria under the recent extended arrangement were not observed for international reserves, net domestic assets of the central bank, and the fiscal accounts. . In early 1999 weak economic activity continued, while the decline in international reserves was halted and inflation remained low. Policy Discussions . The authorities are requesting a new three-year extended arrangement, intended as precautionary, that is aimed at promoting sustainable growth, consolidating progress towards external viability, and continuing to lower inflation and reduce poverty. They consider Fund support to be critical for enhancing market confidence and catalyzing public sector capital inflows. . The program for 1999 assumes a 3 percent growth in real GDP and envisages inflation of 6 percent, a decline in the external current account deficit, and a moderate accumulation of net international reserves. In view of the weakness in economic activity, the program allows for an increase in the fiscal deficit in 1999, to 1.2 percent of GDP. The overall position of the public sector would be brought back close to balance by 2001. . The program also envisages the onlending of public sector resources for the restructuring of private sector debt to Peruvian banks with a view to facilitating the resumption of bank lending. The authorities will continue implementing a flexible exchange rate policy and maintaining an open trade regime. . The reform agenda includes a program of privatization and concessions and reforms for the financial sector, the social sectors, and public financial management. It also includes additional titling of private land and the sale of government-owned agricultural lands, aimed at raising growth in the agricultural sector. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4- 1. INTRODUCTION 1. Discussions for the 1999 Article IV consultation and on a new extended arrangement were held in Lima during the periods March 1-16 and April 5-16, 1999.’ In a letter to the Managing Director dated June 7, 1999 and its attached memorandum on economic and financial policies, the authorities describe the policies that they intend to follow during the period through March 2002 and request a three-year extended arrangement in an amount equivalent to SDR 383 million, equal to 20 percent of quota on an annual basis (Attachment I). The authorities intend to treat the new arrangement as precautionary. 2. The last three-year extended arrangement, which expired on March 3 1, 1999, was in an amount equivalent to SDR 300.2 million, including an augmentation of SDR 5 1.2 million to help finance Peru’s debt and debt-service reduction (DDSR) operation with foreign commercial creditors in February 1997. Except for the purchase associated with this operation, Peru did not draw under the arrangement. The last review of the program was completed on January 22, 1999 (EBS/98/232). Peru has accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4 (Appendix I). 3. At the conclusion of the last Article IV consultation on June 3, 1998, Directors noted Peru’s record of skillful economic management, praised the authorities for their macroeconomic policies in 1997, and emphasized the need for continued implementation of prudent policies and structural reforms in the context of a less favorable external environment in 1998. They noted the importance of maintaining a strong fiscal position to reduce the country’s reliance on foreign savings. 4. Political support for the program that underpins the requested Fund arrangement is strong. Despite two cabinet changes this year, the government remains committed to the economic policy strategy that has been pursued with Fund support throughout the 199Os.* President Fujimori’s current five-year term extends to July 2000, with presidential elections scheduled for April of next year. ‘The Peruvian representatives included the Prime Minister (who is Minister of Economy and Finance); the Ministers of Education, Fisheries, Health, Industry and Trade, Labor, Mining and Energy, the Presidency, and Transport and Communications; the President of the Central Reserve Bank of Peru; senior public officials; and representatives of the private sector. The staff team consisted of Mr. Lizondo (Head), Ms. Alonso (FAD), Messrs. Chua, Lewis, and Melhado (WHD), and Ms. Murgasova (PDR). Mr. Bonangelino joined the March mission, and Mr. Hendrick, Advisor to the Executive Director, participated in the policy discussions, Mr. Wolfe, the Resident Representative, assisted the missions. *Initially by a Fund-monitored rights accumulation program (1991-92) and subsequently by two extended arrangements up until end-March 1999, Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-5- 5. The timeliness and quality of economic statistics are generally adequate for effective surveillance, and for formulating and monitoring the financial program. A revision of the national accounts, however, is overdue, to enhance the analysis of developments in output and demand (Appendix IV). Peru has subscribed to the Special Data Dissemination Standard, and is expected to meet all its requirements by end-June 1999. n. BACKGROUND AND RECENT DEVELOPMENTS 6. Over the last several years Peru has made major progress on three fronts in eliminating large disequilibria that beset the economy at the beginning of the decade: economic stabilization, structural reforms, and normalization of the external debt situation. I. Important fiscal adjustment and reforms were supplemented by a liberalization of the exchange rate, interest rates, and the trade and payments system; and labor market rigidities were reduced. Hyperinflation and falling output gave way to a sustained reduction in inflation (6 percent in 1998) and real GDP growth that averaged 5 percent from 1991 to 1998. The fiscal deficit was eliminated in 1997 and, as the balance of payments moved toward a sustainable path, international reserves rose from negligible amounts to comfortable levels (Tables l-3). At end-1998 gross international reserves were equivalent to 11 months of imports of goods and services, 129 percent of short-term external debt,’ and 73 percent of broad money (Table 4).’ 8. Several structural reforms were aimed at shifting control over productive activities from the public to the private sector, strengthening the financial system, opening the pension system to private sector administration, and improving social conditions. . The government sold major public enterprises in the telecommunications, energy, financial, fishing and mining sectors, and reduced its participation in the electricity and petroleum sectors also through the award of concessions. Regulations have been simplified in order to establish clear guidelines to foster private sector investment. . In the financial sector, a new banking law was enacted in 1996 to strengthen the Superintendency ofBanks and Insurance (SBS), and the authorities have taken steps ‘Including amortization of medium- and long-term debt falling due over the following 12 months. ‘By comparison, gross international reserves for the six largest economies in Latin America were equivalent to 40 percent of broad money and 7.4 months of imports (unweighted averages). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-6- to enhance the soundness of the banking system, including by phased increases in capital adequacy ratios and in provisioning requirements. . A tilly funded private pension system, based on contributions to individual accounts, was created in 1993 as an alternative to the public pension system. . The government has implemented reform programs for education and health, and poverty levels have declined through the combined effect of more rapid economic growth and targeted efforts to alleviate poverty, especially in the poorest regions of the country (Box 1). 9. The government has virtually completed the process of normalizing relations with external creditors and restructuring external debt, including the clearance of all arrears to international financial institutions in 1993, a Paris Club rescheduling in 1996 that provided relief of US$l.3 billion in the period 1996-98, and a DDSR operation with commercial creditors in 1997. Peru graduated from Paris Club rescheduling at the end of 1998, and a re-profiling of the stock of debt became effective on January 1, 1999. Remaining arrears are small, and external public debt has declined from 55 percent of GDP in 1993 to 32 percent at end-1998.5 10. In 1998 economic activity weakened under the combined influence of external shocks which included the El Niiio weather disturbance, a sharp drop in export commodity prices, and a liquidity squeeze stemming from turbulence in international financial markets. Growth of real GDP slowed to 0.7 percent, and the overall fiscal position (with privatization proceeds included below the line) shifted from balance to a deficit of 0.5 percent of GDP (Figure 1). EI N&I caused severe disruptions to output and exports, as it damaged infrastructure and led to a sharp fall in fishing (and related manufacturing activities) and a slowdown in agriculture. The decline in export volume was compounded by the drop in export prices, and as a result the external current account deficit widened to 6 percent of GDP (Table 6; Figures 2 and 3). A pronounced reduction in foreign lines of credit to the banking system after the Russian crisis in August 1998 led to a slowdown in credit and to higher interest rates (Figures 4 and 5), which in turn exacerbated a falling off of domestic demand (down by 4 percent in the second half of 1998, year on year). The urban unemployment rate, 7.9 percent in the fourth quarter of 1998, was only slightly higher than a year earlier (Figure 6). The various adverse shocks to the economy during the year led to a steady deterioration in the quality of bank loan portfolios (Figure 7). ‘Principal arrears of US$I 5 million are owed to two non-Paris Club bilateral creditors that have not yet accepted the terms of the last Paris Club rescheduling. There is also a US$22 million commercial credit that is in litigation. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-7- Box 1. Peru: Poverty and Income Distribution Poverty Social welfare in Peru has improved significantly during the 1990s. Between 1991 and 1997, the incidence of extreme poverty declined from 27 percent to 15 percent and the percentage of the population living below the poverty line declined from 55 percent to 49 percent. Between 1994 and 1997, the poverty rate declined faster in urban than rural areas, with the result that the differences in poverty rates between rural and urban areas increased somewhat. Other social indicators such as malnutrition rates, access to safe water, and electricity and sanitation connections also indicate improved living standards among the poor. The improvement in the social welfare of the poor has been underpinned by robust economic growth, which averaged 3.6 percent over 1991-97 in real per capita terms. Direct government action through stepped up social expenditure also contributed to the better outcome (Table 5). For example, between 1994 and 1997, the government provided more than half a million households with water, electricity, and sanitation connections through its poverty alleviation programs. Over the long run, however, greater access to schools and an enhanced quality of education are still the soundest bases for lifting the majority of the population out of poverty. In this regard, investment in public education helped raise Peru’s literacy rate from 85 percent in 1991 to 90 percent in 1997~ Income distribution Income inequality in Peru declined from the mid-1980s to the mid-1990s. However, it rose slightly between 1994 and 1997, even though it remained below the average for Latin America. The main reason for this increase in inequality appears to be a growing disparity of salaries across levels of education. This finding is in line with recent literature pointing to education as a key determinant of income distribution and emphasizes the importance of improving access to, and quality of, education for low-income groups. II. A shortfall in tax revenue owing to weak economic activity and pressures in the exchange market resulted in noncompliance with three end-December 1998 performance criteria (Table 7). The fiscal revenue shortfall was offset by cuts in expenditure during most of 1998, but late in the year this shortfall became more pronounced at the same time that expenditure increased-albeit remaining below program levels for the year as a whole-and the fiscal target for the fourth quarter was missed. Since August, the reduction in banks’ access to foreign credit lines and the increased uncertainty in the external environment led to pressures on the currency, which were reflected in a significant depreciation of the currency Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-8- and a decline in international reserves. As a result, the end-1998 target on net international reserves and limit on net domestic assets of the central bank were not met. Progress in the implementation of structural reforms was limited in 1998, including the privatization program that yielded USIO.3 billion, less than half of the programmed amount.6 12. In early 1999 economic activity continued to be weak, while the decline in international reserves was halted and inflation remained low. Real GDP growth in the first quarter of 1999 was 1 percent (year on year), while the 12-month inflation rate declined from 6 percent in December 1998 to 3.4 percent in April 1999 (underlying inflation, which excludes some food items with volatile prices and urban transport, was 5.5 percent), partly reflecting weak domestic demand. Net international reserves continued to decline through March but turned up in April. The currency depreciated by 15.3 percent with respect to the U.S. dollar over the year to end-April 1999, and by 13.3 percent in real effective terms over the year to March 1999. The central bank followed a policy of only infrequent intervention in the foreign exchange market throughout the turbulence on international financial markets since mid-1998, and since end-February 1999 the currency has appreciated modestly. The slow growth of monetary aggregates in 1998 and early 1999 reflects both the dampening effect of the economic slowdown and the portfolio shift toward foreign assets that may have been accentuated by the international market turbulence just mentioned (Table 8). 13. In late 1998 and early 1999 the authorities took a number of steps in response to the liquidity squeeze and to the weakening of the banking system. The authorities (i) reduced reserve requirements on foreign currency deposits;’ (ii) provided temporary liquidity through central bank rediscount operations in foreign currency;’ (iii) introduced a mechanism for banks to swap loans for treasury bonds;’ (iv) began to develop a program for channeling public sector resources for onlending to finance bank debt restructuring (Box 2; discussed Cn-ther in Section 1II.B below); (v) broadened the coverage of the deposit insurance “For a review of progress with structural reforms in 1998, see EBS/98/232, Appendix IV ‘Foreign currency deposits account for about 77 percent of total deposits. The average required reserve ratio on foreign currency deposits was reduced in three steps during the second half of 1998, from 43.8 percent to 38.8 percent, while the marginal reserve requirement was lowered in two steps from 45 percent to 20 percent. ‘Banks’ access to the rediscount window cannot exceed their capital plus reserves, and they may not use this window for more than 90 days in any 1 SO-day period. 9To participate, banks must increase their capital, meet strict limits on new lending to related parties, and obtain approval of the SBS for the distribution of profits: Eligible loans must be in one of the two highest of the five loan-quality categories. As of late May 1999, US$llO million had been swapped. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-9- Box 2. Peru: Restructuring of Private Sector Debt to Peruvian Banks The authorities have introduced a program to assist in the restructuring of private sector debt to Peruvian banks. Under this program, COFIDE, a second-tier public sector financial institution, would lend medium-term resources denominated in U.S. dollars to banks, which in exchange would lengthen the maturity of their U.S. dollar-denominated credits to the private sector. The purpose ofthis initiative is to ease the liquidity situation of solvent private sector borrowers and to facilitate a resumption of bank lending. COFIDE’s lending for this program would be limited to US$l billion (1.7 percent of GDP), all of which is expected to be disbursed by end-1999. About half of this amount would be provided by the government (out of the resources to be obtained from adjustment loans from the World Bank and the IDB, and possibly co-financing by JEXIM), and the rest would be raised abroad directly by COFIDE. COFIDE loans would carry an interest rate covering the cost of the funds plus a margin. Restructured bank credits would have a maximum maturity of seven years and a grace period of up to two years, and the interest rate would be freely negotiated between the banks and their clients. The program includes a number of features aimed at limiting the risk to public sector resources: (i) restructuring would be confined to credits in one of the two highest categories of performance, and would lead to an increase in provisioning requirements; (ii) banks’ access to these loans would be subject to COFIDE’s prudential lending limits for individual banks (COFIDE has a strong record of prudence in its operations, with its nonperforming loans amounting to only 0.5 percent of its total loan portfolio); (iii) the banks would bear the credit risk for the restructured credits; and (iv) the loans from COFIDE could not be used to restructure credits to connected parties. scheme,” and (vi) established rules for the placement of deposits by public sector entities, which are allocated through periodic auctions to permit a larger number of banks to compete for these deposits.” “The maximum coverage was raised from the equivalent of US$4,500 to USS20,OOO per individual account holder, and the deposit insurance was extended to corporate demand deposits. “The rules include prudential limits on the concentration of deposits in each financial (continued.. .) Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-lO- 14. Bank liquidity eased in early 1999, at least for the largest banks, but without there being a commensurate pickup in bank lending. Banks have reported an upturn in the availability of external credit lines since the beginning of the year; their use of these lines leveled off in the first quarter of 1999 after having declined markedly from August 1998 to the end of the year. Despite an easing of bank liquidity, however, banks remain cautious in their lending, owing to concerns over enterprises’ debt-servicing capacity. m. POLICY DISCUSSIONS’2 15. The government’s medium-term economic program is designed to promote sustainable growth of output and employment, consolidate progress toward external viability, and continue efforts to reduce inflation. The anti-poverty strategy is based on policies for sustained growth, complemented by targeted efforts to address priority social needs. The authorities are seeking continued Fund support for their economic program as a means of emphasizing their commitment to sound policies, thereby enhancing market confidence and also catalyzing public sector capital inflows, including adjustment lending by the multilateral institutions. 16. The discussions with the authorities centered on the three-year program for which the government is seeking Fund support, and in more detail on the 1999 program. The objectives of the program over the period 1999-2001 include raising output growth to 6 percent a year, lowering annual inflation to 3 percent, and making tirrther progress toward external viability. The fiscal deficit, after increasing in 1999, would almost be eliminated by 2001. The program for 1999 assumes a 3 percent growth in real GDP and envisages an inflation rate during the year of 6 percent, a decline in the external current account deficit to 5 percent of GDP, and a moderate accumulation of net international reserves that would keep gross reserves in the range of I l-12 months of imports of goods and services, and at about 72 percent of broad money.” 17. Policies for 1999 were formulated against the backdrop of concerns about the current weakness in economic activity. The authorities plan to address these concerns by allowing a moderate increase in the overall fiscal deficit and by facilitating the resumption of bank lending ‘I(.. .continued) institution, a lengthening of maturities, and a move from foreign to domestic currency deposits. i2Paragraph references in this section refer to the memorandum on economic and financial policies (see Attachment I). “The offtcial targets for growth and inflation specify a range, namely, 34 percent for real GDP growth and 5-6 percent for inflation during 1999. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- II - through the onlending of public sector resources for the restructuring of private sector debt to banks. The growth projection for 1999 assumes that a recovery will gradually build momentum in the course of the year, initially through a rebound of output in the primary sectors and exports, and in the second half of the year from a more broadly based recovery of domestic demand and output, A. Fiscal Policies 18. The authorities and the mission were in agreement about the need to strengthen the public finances over the medium term, so that by the end of the program period the fiscal deficit would be virtually eliminated. The main fiscal issues concerned (i) the appropriate fiscal stance for 1999 in view of the weak economic activity; (ii) plans for achieving targeted increases in the primary surplus over the following two years; (iii) whether the needs for expenditure on infrastructure and the social sectors should be met through revenue increases or by changes in the composition and quality of fiscal expenditure; and (iv) the additional need for structural reforms in the fiscal area. 19. Discussions regarding an appropriate fiscal target for 1999 focused on the need to strike a balance between a fiscal response to the cyclical downturn and considerations that called for further fiscal consolidation. The authorities recognized that any fiscal relaxation should be modest in size, given the need to maintain confidence in the government’s sound economic management, and to support efforts to improve the external current account. Moreover, the size of the fiscal consolidation required to achieve a satisfactory outcome for 2000-01 ought to be kept to manageable proportions. As a result, the fiscal program for 1999 implies a reduction in the primary surplus of the combined public sector to 0.9 percent of GDP from 1.3 percent of GDP in, 1998, and a widening in the overall deficit to 1.2 percent of GDP (0.5 percent in 1998).r5 20. General government revenue is projected to decline only slightly in 1999 (by 0. I percentage point of GDP). income tax revenue would decline by 0.4 percentage point of GDP, owing primarily to the low level of final tax payments in March/April of this year on 1998 income (advance payments made during 1998 nearly covered the fitI1 liability) and to the reduction-which became effective in January 1999-in the corporate minimum income tax. This decline in income tax revenue is expected to be almost hrlly offset by gains in indirect tax revenues resulting from the real depreciation of the currency and continued improvements in tax administration. The decrease in the primary surplus would reflect mainly the 16 percent ‘%r 1999 the government also will channel resources through the banking system for home mortgages, in an amount equivalent to 0.3 percent of GDP, bearing the credit risk on one third of that amount; these operations are classified below the line in the fiscal accounts. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12- increase in wages and pensions that took effect in April 1999,” and the payment of pension supplements. 21. The peace treaty with Ecuador will permit a reallocation of central government resources away from military expenditure. Nonwage military spending is projected to decline by 0.4 percentage point of GDP in 1999, and a “peace dividend” will result from the agreement between Presidents Fujimori and Mahuad to freeze the level of purchases of military equipment. Also, the Peruvian Government has abolished compulsory military service, which might lead to a tmther shift away from military expenditure. 22. Concerning the risk of mounting pressures for tax reductions and higher levels of government expenditure, particularly as next year’s presidential elections draw closer, the authorities stressed their firm commitment to the fiscal targets. They pointed to their good record in meeting these targetsI and indicated that any further adjustments that may be needed-in particular, if the recovery of tax revenues following the weak performance in January-April were to be slower than anticipated-would likely come from cuts in lower priority expenditure. Moreover, in the event. that central government revenue were to recover more quickly than programmed, the additional revenue would be saved. To this effect, the program includes an adjuster to the fiscal target so that central government revenue above programmed levels would be fully saved until the primary surplus of the combined public sector reaches 1.3 percent of GDP (equal to the level in 1998). 23. There was agreement that the credibility of fiscal policy should be enhanced through the adoption of a specific plan of measures to achieve the targeted increase in the primary fiscal surplus envisaged for 2000-01 (to 1.3 percent and 1.6 percent of GDP, respectively). Revenue will increase by an estimated 0.2 percentage point of GDP in 2000 as a result of a recent change in the income tax law, which closed a loophole that had allowed double depreciation of assets for firms involved in mergers. In addition, to compensate for the scheduled elimination at end-1999 of a payroll tax currently yielding 0.6 percent of GDP, the authorities are considering a variety of measures, such as adjustments to personal income taxation-since marginal and average rates are low for middle-income earners-and fUrther increases in specific excise taxes. In any event, the authorities have undertaken to put in place the needed revenue measures for 2000 before completion of the first program review (scheduled for no later than December 1999). 24. Although the authorities acknowledge the need to develop infrastructure and the social sectors, they also attach importance to limiting the size of government. Accordingly, their strategy is to strengthen efforts to improve the quality and efficiency of “This was the first increase since August 1997. “In six years of programs supported by extended arrangements, only in the last quarter of 1998 were the quarterly performance criteria on the fiscal program not met. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13 - expenditure, and to emphasize increases in the yield, efficiency, and equity of the tax system. To this effect, they intend to seek technical assistance from the Fund to review aspects of the tax system, and to begin implementing some changes in 2000 (para~ 9). Meanwhile, they would refrain from expanding the scope of sectoral or regional tax preferences, as well as from adopting other revenue-reducing measures. The staff pointed to the low tax burden relative to other countries in the region, and suggested that there was still scope for raising the tax effort. Although tax reforms boosted the central government tax/GDP ratio from 7.9 percent in 1991 to 13.2 percent in 1997, several tax measures since 1997 have eroded the yield as well as the neutrality of the tax system.l’ 25. The government’s economic program encompasses the following structural reforms in the fiscal area: . To strengthen tax administration, the tax agency S~UNAT will implement a series of programs in 1999, including the collection of social security (health insurance and pension) contributions on behalf of the,recipient agencies (SUNAT is better placed for the effective monitoring and enforcement of such contributions); the concentration of enterprise audits in sectors where there is believed to be signiticant scope for better tax compliance (e.g., fishing, construction, mining); and a closer examination of the validity of tax exemptions claimed under a law passed early this year for promotion of the Amazon region (para. IO). . To increase the effectiveness of government expenditure, the authorities’ plans include: (a) Modification of education, health care, and nutrition programs to make them more efficient and equitable, with support from a World Bank adjustment loan for the social sector (paras. 28829). These programs will be closely linked to the anti-poverty effort and plans to strengthen the social safety net (paras. 27 and 30). (b) Utilization of the system of financial administration for the central government budget (SIAF) for expenditure management and control purposes; this work began early this year, and will be evaluated in the coming months (para. 12). Moreover, greater efforts will be made to improve efficiency in a wide range of decentralized agencies (inter alia, through performance contracts for agency employees and managers), with support from an IDB adjustment loan for public financial management. “The fiscal cost of tax measures introduced in 1997-99 is roughly 1 percentage point of GDP, only partially compensated by improvements in tax administrations See EBS/98/232, Box 1 ‘for a summary of recent tax rate reductions, most of which were decided before the economic slowdown in 1998 weakened the prospects for tax collections. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14- (4 Assessment of manpower needs in the various branches of government, as part of the government’s effort to redefine the role and appropriate dimensions of the public sector (para. 23). . To improve the pension system, a second round of reforms will he pursued with support from a World Bank financial sector adjustment loan (paras. 24-25). The objectives include the further issuance of “recognition bonds” for individuals who have shifted to the private system;18 broadening the range of investments open to the pension Kmds; and lowering administrative costs of the private system. As part of the reforms included in the World Bank loan, an investment plan will be developed to diversify the placement of funds by the main public pension fund (FCR), which now holds most of its assets in the central bank. B. Monetary and Financial Sector Policies 26. Monetary policy will be guided by the inflation objective set for 1999, and the central bank will manage liquidity mainly through open market operations. The monetary program assumes that base money, the monetary authorities’ intermediate target, will increase at a rate slightly below projected inflation. The authorities explained that the reduction of the marginal reserve requirement on dollar deposits to 20 percent in late 1998 was partly in response to the shortage of bank liquidity in foreign currency. This reduction in reserve requirements, together with the 20 percent liquidity requirement imposed around the same time by the SBS on banks’ short-term liabilities, also served to remove the bias that had existed in favor of banks’ direct foreign borrowing and against dollar deposits as a funding source.” For the foreseeable future, the authorities do not anticipate a need to make frequent use of reserve requirements as a monetary policy instrument. 21. The staRvoiced concern about the situation of the banking system in view of the continued deterioration of loan portfolios, and recommended a strengthening of banks’ loan- loss provisioning.20 The authorities said they would proceed with the increase in provisioning requirements that already had been scheduled for end-1999, but did not see a need at present for a further increase. They indicated that, following the intervention of a medium-sized bank in late 1998 and the imminent merger that will bring foreign capital to a large domestic bank with a low capital base, the banking system remained essentially sound. They emphasized that ‘*These bonds represent the individual’s accumulated rights acquired through past contributions to the public system, and are to be redeemed upon retirement. “Before these changes in late 1998, dollar deposits were subject to a marginal reserve requirement of 35 percent, while foreign borrowing was subject to no requirement. “The share of nonperforming and refinanced loans rose to 12.8 percent in February 1999, from 9.9 percent in September 1998. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 15- they were monitoring developments closely and did not foresee serious problems, except perhaps in a few small banks. The government decided not to withdraw for the time being its deposits from a number of small banks, some of them adversely affected by a flight to quality, giving them some time to resolve their problems (e.g., through merger) or to enter a resolution procedure. The SBS also has begun to strengthen capital requirements to take appropriate account of market risk, beginning with regulations for exchange risk that took effect in March 1999. 28. The authorities explained their strategy for channeling public sector resources through the second-tier public bank (COFIDE) for onlending that would finance a restructuring of the corporate sector’s bank debt, and noted that the program included features to limit the risk to those resources (para. 16). The authorities and the staff agreed on the need for caution in the use of this mechanism, to avoid incurring fiscal costs as a result of onlending by COFIDE. The program will be limited to US$l billion, and the use of public funds for these purposes would be seen as only a transitory measure. 29. A key part of financial sector reform will be the implementation of the revised banking legislation that was signed into law in early May 1999 (Box 3 and para. 14). The aim of the reform is to strengthen SBS’s ability to step in quickly to deal with banks that get into trouble, by clarifying trigger points for bank surveillance and intervention; increase the efficiency of bank liquidation procedures and reduce the cost of bank liquidation; and give the deposit insurance fund (FSD) a role in supporting bank restructuring. It represents a significant improvement over the previous law. The staff is concerned, however, about the absence of proper legal protection in the law for SBS staff against action from bank shareholders. 30. The authorities have recently submitted to Congress a proposal to reform the law on corporate restructuring which would facilitate dealing with highly indebted firms without forcing bankruptcy. This proposal includes the possibility of capitalising or writing off creditors’ claims on the affected firms. While the tax agency SUNAT is an important creditor in many cases, its claims would not be capitahzed or written off. Instead, to encourage an agreement by other creditors, SUNAT would be willing to reduce its seniority for a portion of its claims on the firm to that of creditors without collateral. This proportion would be equal to the share of claims written off or capitalized by the least-affected among other creditors. These features of the proposal seem to involve limited risk for the public finances. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 16- Box 3. Peru: Reform of the Banking Law In May 1999 Peru enacted a reform of its banking law aimed at enhancing the soundness of the banking system mainly by strengthening the ability of the Superintendency of Banks and Insurance (SBS) to detect bank problems and pursue appropriate remedies. The reform: . clarifies and tightens the conditions under which the SBS can place a bank under surveillance or intervention, thereby permitting it to step in sooner when banks are facing difficulties; . allows for splitting a failed bank into a “good bank” (good assets and some liabilities), which is transferred to another financial institution, and a “bad bank,” which is liquidated. This is expected to increase the efficiency and reduce the cost of bank resolution; . gives the deposit insurance fund (FSD) an active role in supporting and monitoring bank restructuring, and under exceptional circumstances allows the FSD to take temporary control of a bank; . permits banks to use the rediscount window for 90 days out of the last 180 days (compared with a previous limit of 90 days out the last 360 days) before triggering mandatory surveillance status, thus providing the central bank with more flexibility in its role as lender of last resort; and . gradually reduces the limit on connected lending from 75 percent of capital at present to 30 percent by end-2003. C. External Sector Policies and Prospects 31. In 1999, despite a projected 11 percent decline in the terms of trade, the external current account deficit would narrow, reflecting a recovery in the volume of traditional exports from last year’s El Nirio-related low level and a decline in imports owing to weak domestic demand. In response to the envisaged weakening of short-term private capital inflows, the government has stepped up its plans for foreign borrowing in 1999, which might include a sovereign bond issue for USS350 million. Still, more than two thirds of the 1999 current account deficit is expected to be covered by foreign direct investment and private sector medium- and long-term credits. At the same time, net international reserves would rise by USSO. billion. (Net international reserves as defined for program monitoring purposes, with the financial system’s foreign currency deposits in the central bank as a reserve liability, would remain roughly unchanged.) Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17- 32. The monetary authorities intend to continue with a flexible exchange rate policy, undertaking intervention in the foreign exchange market only to smooth short-term movements in the rate and consistent with the program’s international reserve target. The authorities and the staff agreed that the flexible exchange rate system has served Peru well in helping the economy adjust to external shocks and in maintaining an adequate level of international competitiveness. 33. The authorities reaffirmed their commitment to an open trade regime. Peru’s trade regime is essentially open and transparent, with two tariff rates (12 and 20 percent) and no nontariff trade barriers of major significance.*’ In April 1999 the excise taxes on domestically produced and imported cigarettes were unified, thus removing a trade distortion. Also, the authorities plan to reduce the tariff surcharge on selected agricultural imports from 5 percent to 3 percent by end-1999, and to reduce the higher of the two import tariff rates by 2 percentage points in 2000. The staff also recommended the reduction of the variable import surcharge that is levied on four agricultural products, but the authorities explained that they had no immediate plans in this regard. D. Other Structural Reforms 34. In addition to the structural reforms already mentioned (pension system, banking law, public financial management), the reform agenda encompasses the government’s program of privatization and the granting of concessions which is the main vehicle for shifting control over productive activities from the public to the private sector. This program is expected to raise USSSOO million (1.4 percent of GDP) for the Treasury in 1999, including from the sale of a large mine and shares in previously privatized enterprises (paras. 21, 22 and Appendix V).22 During the program period the emphasis will increasingly shift from privatization to concessions (the latter for management of infrastructure and for exploration of state-owned natural resources-oil, minerals, and forests). Staff estimates indicate that, upon completion of the program for 1999, some 80 percent of the public enterprise sector in *‘Peru is rated two on the l-10 scale oftrade restrictiveness developed in the Fund study on trade liberalization (EBS/97/163). This reflects a moderate level of tariff protection (weighted average of 13.5 percent, excluding a five-point surcharge on selected agricultural imports), and a low degree of protection from nontariff trade barriers. ‘*The list appearing in Appendix V is contained in the technical memorandum of understanding signed by the authorities. The revenue from privatization included in the program is lower than the level estimated in Appendix V (US$ I billion) because of uncertainty as to whether all sales will yield the estimated amounts. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-18- operation as of the early 1990s will have been privatized.23 Remaining public enterprises will be in the electricity, oil refining, and water utility sectors. 35. Reforms that will be supported by adjustment loans from the World Bank and the IDB-in addition to those in the financial and fiscal sectors already mentioned-include: (i) measures to foster development of the domestic capital market; and (ii) efforts to improve the quality and quantity of the government’s spending in the social sectors. The government’s reform program also includes additional titling of private lands and the sale of government- owned agricultural lands, both of which are aimed at raising growth in the agricultural sector (para. 20). 36. The government will seek to promote a deepening of the domestic capital markets over the medium term, initially by studying the feasibility and appropriateness of a program of issuing long-term government securities for the purpose of establishing a yield curve. The staff indicated that, while government securities may provide a benchmark as sought, the authorities should proceed only if careful study of this issue shows that the initiative is consistent with good public debt management. Also, there was a risk that an ambitious program of domestic bond issues could generate pressures for higher public expenditure. The authorities are planning to establish a public debt management office with the support of the IDB, which they believe is needed regardless of the eventual strategy for fostering the development of the domestic capital market. 31. In the social sector, the government attaches high priority to reducing poverty and improving the overall impact of social programs, including by improving the targeting of resources for nutrition, education, health, and rural development. To this end, the government plans to identify key social programs that would be protected from budget cuts, including basic education and basic health. At the same time, it will seek to strengthen existing poverty alleviation programs through better design and closer coordination among ministries, based in part on a new poverty map expected to be published by December 1999. E. Medium-Term Outlook and Capacity to Repay the Fund 38. Medium-term projections developed by the authorities and discussed with the staff point to further progress toward external viability. Based on the policies described above, the external curlent account deficit is projected at slightly below 5 percent of GDP in 2000-02 before declining to 3% percent of GDP in the following two years, and gradually to under 3 percent by the end of the projection period, 2008 (Table 9). The relatively stable current account deticits projected for the next few years reflect large foreign financed investment projects in the mining and energy sectors (including the US$3 billion Camisea *‘The calculation is based on privatization proceeds to date and amounts programmed for 1999, and estimates of the asset value of productive enterprises that would remain in the public sector at the end of 1999. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- l9- project for the construction of a natural gas pipeline, due to start next year, and a zinc and copper mining project at Antamina). A sensitivity analysis shows that if the prices of fishmeal and copper, Peru’s two most important export commodities, were IO percent lower than in the baseline scenario, the external current account deficit would be larger by about 0.1 and 0.2 percentage point of GDP, respectively. Also, if external interest rates were 1 percentage point higher during the’projection period than projected, the current account deficit would be higher by 0.1 percent of GDP on average. In each of these three simulations, the external debt/GDP ratio would be higher by at most 2.3 percentage points, and debt service as a percentage of exports of goods and services by at most 1 percentage point, than in the baseline scenario during the projection period. 39. Over the period to 2008 there would be relatively modest increases in total domestic investment, but its composition would change markedly. Large investment projects in the extractive industries would be completed around 2002, giving way to a more broadly based expansion of private investment in subsequent years. Private saving is projected to increase relative to GDP, based in part on the projection of a sustained rising trend in per capita real incomes. 40. The medium-term projections indicate a steady improvement in the indicators of external vulnerability during the period 2000-08, foreshadowing Peru’s complete return to current account sustainability over the next several years. Although significant reductions in the external current account deficit would be apparent only after the Antamina mining and the Camisea natural gas projects are fully on stream, indicators of external debt and debt service burdens would decline steadily throughout most of the projection period. Also, gross international reserves are projected to remain above seven months of imports of goods and services, and above 40 percent of broad. money, throughout the period to 2008. 41. Peru should not have difficulties in discharging its obligations to the Fund, assuming a continuation of sound economic policies. As noted above, the Peruvian authorities intend to treat the extended arrangement as precautionary. However, if Peru should decide to purchase all available resources under the proposed arrangement, its total debt service to the Fund would increase from SDR 73 million in 1999 to a peak in 2002 of SDR 160 million, or 0.3 percent of GDP (Table IO). Fund credit outstanding to Peru would fall from a peak of 98 percent of quota in 2000 to 21 percent of quota in 2008. F. Other Issues 42. Indications available to the staff are that Peru has been making progress in preparing electronic systems to meet the year 2000 (Y2K) challenge. A national coordinating office has been established in the National Statistics Institute (INEI) to help ensure that all the main sectors of the economy will be Y2K compliant before year’s end. SUNAT’s data system for tax administration and the financial sector’s payments system are Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 20 - Y2K compliant, and the authorities are satisfied with progress to date in the diagnosis and correction of potential problems with computers and software applications in other areas, IV. PERFORMANCECRITERIAANLBREVIEWCLAUSES 43. The quarterly performance criteria for 1999 are presented in the memorandum on economic and financial policies attached to the letter of intent from the authorities (Attachment I, Table 1). Also, a number of structural benchmarks have been included to help monitor progress with structural reforms. Performance criteria under the extended arrangement would cover the same variables and be defined in the same way as in the preceding extended arrangement, with two exceptions. First, the fiscal performance criterion will be defined as a ceiling on the combined public sector borrowing requirement (PSBR), rather than a ceiling on net domestic financing as in the past. Given the uncertainty about the amount and timing of foreign financing from adjustment loans from the World Bank and IDB and from a possible sovereign bond issue, this change will give the authorities greater flexibility on the financing side without compromising the monetary program. Second, as explained earlier, the program includes an adjuster to the fiscal target so that central government revenue above programmed levels would be saved, until the primary surplus reaches 1.3 percent of GDP.14 There will be semiannual program reviews, the first of which will be scheduled for completion by end-December 1999. V. STAFFAPPRAISAL 44. Throughout the 1990s Peru has accomplished much under Fund-supported programs in laying the basis for sustainable, strong economic growth. Inflation has declined to low levels, a severe external debt problem has been virtually overcome, and the economy has moved onto a path of greater efficiency as a result of a series of fiscal and other structural reforms, market liberalization (exchange rate, interest rate, trade and external payments systems), and the transfer of productive activities to the private sector. 45. External shocks adversely affected economic performance in 1998 and early 1999 and posed new challenges to policy makers. The economic slowdown in 1998 following EZ Nirio and the drop in export commodity prices was exacerbated later in the year by a credit crunch resulting in part from a cutback in foreign lines of credit. The authorities’ monetary measures late in the year, including the reduction of reserve requirements on foreign currency “The other quantitative performance criteria comprise ceilings on the net domestic assets of the central bank, floors on net international reserves, ceilings on short-term external debt of the nonfinancial public sector, ceilings on the contracting or guaranteeing of medium- and long-term external public debt with subceilings on debt falling due with a maturity of 1-12 years, and a continuous ceiling on external payments arrears. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-21. deposits, were an appropriate response to the liquidity squeeze. It is commendable that, during most of 1998, the authorities were able to keep the fiscal program on track by offsetting shortfalls in tax revenue through expenditure restraint. However, as the revenue shortfall became more pronounced near the end of the year, and expenditure increased somewhat, the year-end fiscal target was not met. 46. The authorities’ plans for 1999 are appropriate in not seeking to stimulate the economy too quickly, even though activity has remained weak into the early part of the year. To use macroeconomic policies more aggressively to stimulate economic activity could put at risk the longer term objectives that the government has been pursuing. The chosen path will pay dividends in terms of giving confidence to domestic and foreign investors who seek a stable and sound policy environment. 47. The fiscal program provides for a modest decrease in the primary surplus in 1999, which in the staff’s view strikes an appropriate balance between the needs to strengthen the public finances over the longer run, and to adapt fiscal policy at a time of sluggish economic activity-particularly since the resulting deficit ofjust over 1 percent of GDP does not pose financing problems. The inclusion of an adjustment to the limit on the fiscal deficit in the event of higher than projected central government revenue helps safeguard against unplanned increases in expenditure. 48. The staff fully endorses the authorities’ objective of bringing the fiscal accounts close to balance in the course of the program period. In this context, the authorities’ strategy for meeting the country’s social and development needs puts greater emphasis on more efficient, higher quality fiscal expenditure than on increases in the level of fiscal expenditure. The emphasis on improving the effectiveness of expenditure is particularly well- suited to Peru’s circumstances, and should be pursued by continuing to limit the growth in expenditure from across-the-board increases in wages and pensions and to rationalize military outlays, and by increasing spending on infrastructure, education, and health services. The staff also encourages the authorities to keep open the various options for increasing the yield and eficiency of the tax system as a means of mobilizing resources for priority~expenditures. 49. The authorities’ two-pronged approach to the alleviation of poverty is a cogent one. While they are convinced that the most important ingredient to a successful poverty- reduction strategy is the maintenance of policies that foster strong and sustainable growth, they complement this strategy with targeted social programs aimed at helping Iif? individuals and families out of poverty. Particularly important from the viewpoint of Peru’s growth potential over the medium to longer run is the investment in human capital through education programs and the provision of adequate primary health care, which is being protected by exempting key social programs from budget cuts that may be required for stabilization purposes. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 22 50. The authorities’ policies toward the financial sector acknowledge the need for vigilance and prudence in fostering bank soundness. Banks’ caution in lending to a business sector that has weakened should be respected. The debt restructuring program implemented by the second-tier public bank should be managed prudently, and it is important to resist any pressures that might arise for relaxation of its terms and conditions. The May 1999 reform of banking legislation offered the potential for the bank supervisory agency (SBS) to address bank problems at an early stage, and gives a better chance of resolving them before a state of insolvency is reached. The success of the strategy for a more effective role of the SBS in dealing with bank problems may hinge on finding effective ways to provide legal protection to its staff in carrying out their offtcial duties. 51. The staff welcomes the authorities’ intention to revive their privatization and concession program in 1999, and to give new impetus to the structural reform program also in other areas. The privatization program begun several years ago is well advanced, although there was a temporary slowdown in 1998. The authorities intend to pursue this process further, and in the staffs view they would be well advised to accelerate the process to complete soon those privatizations still pending. Doing so would yield efficiency gains for the economy, and it would create an opportunity-by saving the proceeds from privatization-to help meet future pension obligations, including to redeem the recognition bonds that are issued to individuals who have transferred to the private pension system. There is an obvious need to assess the size of these and other contingent liabilities that the government has in the social security sector, so that timely plans can be drawn up for meeting them. 52. The staff supports the authorities’ intention of maintaining a flexible exchange rate system and an open trade and payments system. The floating rate system with only limited intervention has served Peru well in helping the economy adjust to external shocks, and merits being continued. The trade system is transparent and open, and the authorities are committed to keeping it that way. The staff welcomes the authorities’ intention to reduce the import tariff surcharge applied to selected agricultural imports from 5 to 3 percentage points by end-1999, and to persevere with their plans to reduce tariff dispersion by lowering the higher of the existing two customs tariff rates by 2 percentage points in 2000. 53. Progress has been made in preparing data systems for Y2K requirements, and the staff welcomes the authorities’ intention to continue efforts in this area. Peru’s provision of economic statistics is generally satisfactory, and these data are adequate for effective surveillance and for formulating and monitoring the financial program. However, it remains for the authorities to expedite the work on the revision of the national accounts, which has been subject to significant delays. 54. The staff is of the view that the authorities’ program is consistent with progress toward external viability, while fostering economic growth and advancing structural reforms. There are risks to the program in the form of a possibly slower than expected recovery with its attendant fiscal consequences, pressures for added support to the financial Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 23 - sector in the event of continued stagnation of bank lending, and uncertain prospects for capital flows. The authorities recognize these risks, and their strong record of prudent financial policies gives confidence that, if needed, appropriate corrective action will be taken in a timely fashion. The staff therefore supports Peru’s request for a three-year extended arrangement from the Fund. 55. It is recommended that the next Article IV consultation be held on the standard 12-month cycle. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 24 - VI. PROPOSEDDECISION The following decision, which can be adopted by a majority of the votes cast, is proposed for adoption by the Executive Board: 1. Peru has requested an Extended Arrangement for the period from [June , 1999 to May 3 1. , 2002 for an amount equivalent to SDR 383 million. 2 The Fund approves the extended arrangement attached to EBS/99/93. 3. The Fund waives the limitation in Article V, Section 3 (b) (iii). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 25. Table 1. Peru: Selected Economic Indicators 1998 Projections 1995 1996 1997 Prog. Prel. 1999 I/ 2000 2001 (Annual percentage change) Real GDP 7.3 2.5 7.2 4.0 0.7 3.0-4.0 5.5 6.0 Real domestic demand 11.9 0.2 6.7 3.6 -0.2 -1.7 5.1 5.5 Of which : Private consumption 8.1 1.6 4.0 3.5 -0.3 1.4 4.4 5.0 Consumer prices End of period Period average 10.2 11.X 6.5 7.5-9.0 11.1 11.5 8.5 Exports (US. dollars) 21.9 5.8 15.5 Imports (U.S. dollars) 38.7 1.8 8.3 Terms of trade 2.8 0.2 5.2 Real effective exchange rate (depreciation -) 2/ -3.3 0.9 7.4 I. Money and Credit -4.0 4.1 -5.1 -16.0 -4.1 -8.0 -11.1 Broad money 31 Credit to the private sector 31 24.2 28.0 15.0 37.6 35.6 27.4 (In percent of GDP) 11.0 0.4 7.3 10.7 10.5 12.4 8.4 10.8 10.0 9.4 II. Savings and Investment Gross domestic investment Public sector Private sector 41 National savings Public sector 5/ Private sector External savings 24.4 23.3 24.5 4.3 3.8 3.8 20. I 19.5 20.6 17.1 17.4 19.2 2.1 3.5 4.4 14.9 13.9 14.9 7.3 5.9 5.2 III. Balance of Payments 24.7 24.6 22.9 23.4 23.8 3.9 3.8 3.8 3.9 3.9 20.8 20.7 19.1 19.6 19.9 18.8 18.5 17.9 18.4 19.0 4.3 3.6 2.8 3.1 3.5 14.5 14.9 15.0 15.3 15.5 5.9 6.0 5.0 5.0 4.8 Current account Capital and financial account Net international reserves (increase -) -7.3 -5.9 -5.2 8.9 9.0 7.8 -1.6 -3.2 -2.7 IV. Combined Public Sector -5.9 -6.0 6.9 4.3 -0.9 1.6 Combined public sector primary balance 0.4 1.3 1.7 1.7 1.3 Interest due 3.2 2.3 1.7 1.7 1.7 Combined public sector overall balance -2.8 -1.0 0.0 0.0 -0.5 6.0 5.060 7.3 4.4 9.4 -6.3 .11.2 -5.0 5.7 -0.7 0.9 2.1 -1.2 4.0 3.0 5.3 3.5 13.9 11.5 10.3 7.6 3.8 4.2 -5.0 -4.x 6.0 5.6 -1.0 -0.7 1.3 1.6 2.1 2.0 -0.8 -0.3 Sources: Central Reserve Bank of Pew and Fund staff estimates and projections li The program was designed on the basis of real GDP grow11 of 3 percent and inflation during 1999 of 6 percent. 2/End of period; based on information Notice System. 3/Flaws in foreign currency are valued at program exchange rate. 41 Includes change in inventories. 5/ Excludes privatisation receipts. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 26 - Table 2. Pent: Operations of the Combined Public Sector 11 ( In percent of GDP ) 199x Projections 1995 1996 1997 Prog. Prel. 1999 2000 2001 Central government primary balance RWenUe Current Capital Noninterest expenditure current Capital Rest of the general government primary balance Revenue Current Capital Noninterest expenditure Current Capital Public enterprise primary balance Current balance Capital balance Nontinsncinl public sector primary balance Central bank operating balance Combined public sector primary balance Interest payments Combined public sector uverall balance Statistical discrepancy Financing External tinancing Domestic financing Privatization Memorandum items: General gwmnnent revenue General government noninterest expenditure Central government primaly balance before transfers Rest of the general government primary balance before transfers Military expenditure Public sector final demand 2/ General government expenditure plus public enterprise investnlent Fiscal impulse 31 -0.1 1.0 0.8 13.7 14~7 14.2 13.3 14.2 14.1 0.4 0.5 0.1 13.8 13.7 13.4 IO.1 10.4 10.2 3.6 3.2 3.2 0.3 0.2 0.3 5.0 5.0 5.1 4.7 4.8 4.9 0.3 0.2 0.2 4.6 4.8 4~8 3~4 3.6 3.8 1.2 1.2 1.0 0.2 0.1 0.6 0.9 0.8 1.1 -0.7 -0.7 -0.5 0.4 1.3 1.7 -0.0 0.0 0.1 0.4 1.3 1.7 3.2 2.3 1~7 -2.8 -1.0 0.0 -0.1 -0.4 -0.1 2.7 0.7 -0.1 2.3 0.7 -0.6 -1.1 -3.3 -0.4 1.5 3.2 0.8 1.1 0.9 14.1 14.1 14.1 13.8 0.0 0.3 13.1 13.2 9.9 10.3 3.2 2.9 0.3 0.4 5.2 5.5 5.0 5.4 0.2 0.1 4.9 5.1 3.8 4.2 1.2 0.9 0.3 -0.1 0.6 0.6 -0.4 -0.7 1.6 1.2 0.1 0.1 1.7 1.3 1.7 1.7 -0.0 -0.5 0.0 0.3 0.0 0.7 0.4 0.3 -1.3 0.1 1.0 0.3 0.6 1.0 1.4 13.8 14.2 14.3 13.6 14.0’ 14.2 0.2 0.2 0.1 13.2 13.1 12.9 10.4 10.3 10.1 2.8 2.8 2.8 0.2 0.2 0.2 5.6 5.6 5.6 5.5 5.5 5.5 0.1 0.1 0.1 5.4 5.3 5.4 16.6 17,6 17.1 16.4 16.5 16.0 1.6 2.7 2.9 -1.6 -1.8 -1.9 2.0 2.4 1.8 12.8 13.3 13.7 16.9 16.9 16.7 0.8 -1.3 0.2 -0.7 0.0 17.0 17.3 15.7 16.0 3.3 2.9 -2.0 -1.9 .~. 1.8 13.1 13.8 16.1 16.9 4.5 4.4 4.4 1.0 1.0 1.0 -0.0 -0.1 -0.0 0.5 0.4 0.2 4.5 a.4 -0.2 0.8 1.2 1.5 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.9 1.3 1.6 2.1 2.1 2.0 -1.2 -0.8 -0.3 -0.0 0.0 -0.0 1.2 0.8 0.3 1.8 0.6 0.0 -2.0 -1.0 -0.8 1.4 1.2 1.1 17.1 17.4 17.5 16.3 16.1 16.0 2.8 3.2 3.7 -2.1 -2.1 -2.2 1.5 13.2 12.8 12.7 16.8 16.6 16.2 Sources: Central Reserve Bank of Peru; and Minisby of Economy and Finance II Comprises the operations of the nonfinancial public sector and the operating balance of the central bank 21 General government expenditure less transfers to households and interest payments, plus investment by public enterprises. 3/ Change, in percentage points of GDP, in the general govemment structural primary balance (excluding transfers from public enterprises). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 27 - Table 3. Peru: Operations of the Central Government (In percent of GDP) 1995 1996 1997 1998 Projections Prog. Prel. 1999 2000 200 I Current primary balance 3.2 3.7 3.8 4.2 3.5 3.2 3.7 4.1 Current revenue 13.3 14.2 14.1 14.1 13.8 13.6 14.0 14.2 Tax revenue l/ 12.6 13.3 13.2 13.3 12.8 12.7 13.0 13.2 Direct taxes 3.6 4.3 4.1 4.0 3.9 3.5 3.6 3.7 Indirect taxes 9.0 9.0 9.1 9.3 8.9 9.2 9.4 9.5 Other current revenlle 0.7 0.8 0.9 0.8 1.0 0.9 1.0 1.0 Current noninterest expenditure 10.1 10.4 10.2 9.9 10.3 10.4 10.3 10.1 Labor services 21 5.5 5.3 5.3 5.3 5.4 5.7 5.7 5.4 Goods and services 2.0 2.5 2.1 1.9 2.1 1.8 1.8 1.8 Transfers 2.6 2.7 2.8 2.7 2.8 2.8 2.8 2.9 Capital balance -3.3 -2.7 -3.0 -3.1 -2.6 -2.6 -2.6 -2.7 Capital revenue 0.4 0.5 0.1 0.0 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.1 Capital expenditure 3.6 3.2 3.2 3.2 2.9 2.8 2.8 2.8 Gross capital formation 2.2 1.9 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.1 2.2 other 1.5 1.3 1.2 1.1 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.6 Primary balance -0.1 1.0 0.8 1.1 0.9 0.6 1.0 1.4 Interest payments 3.0 2.2 1.6 1.6 1.6 2.0 2.1 1.9 External 2.9 2.1 1.6 1.5 1.5 1.9 2.0 1.8 Domestic 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 Overall balance -3.1 -1.2 -0.8 -0.5 -0.0 0.5 3.3 1.7 -0.8 -1.4 -1.0 -0.6 Statistical discrepancy -0.1 -0.4 -0.1 0.3 0.0 0.0 -0.0 Financing 3.0 0.8 0.7 1.0 1.4 1.0 0.6 Memorandum items: Primary balance before transfers Overall balance before transfers 1.6 2.7 2.9 -1.4 0.5 1.3 2.9 2.8 3.2 3.7 1.3 0.8 1.2 1.8 Sources: Central Reserve Bank of Peru; and Ministry of Economy and Finance II Starting in 2000 assumes replacement of revenue from payroll tax by increases in income taxation. 21 Includes wages, salaries, and employer contributions to social security. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 28 - Table 4. Peru: Indicators of External Vulnerability (In percent, unless othewise indicated) 1999 1998 Latest Date of 1995 1996 1997 Prel. Observ. l/ Observ. Proj Financial indicators Public sector debt/GDP 21 90.day prime lending rate, domestic currency 31 90.day prime lending rate, foreign currency 3/ Velocity of money 41 Credit to the private sector/GDP Share of foreign currency deposits in total deposits Share of foreign currency loans in total credit Nonperforming loans/total loans 51 Loan-loss provisionslnonperforming loans 51 Risk-based capital-assets ratio Commercial banks’ short-term foreign assets (USS millions) Commercial banks’ short-term liabilities (USS millions) External indicators Exports, U.S. dollars (percent change) Imports, U.S. dollars (percent change) Terms of trade (percent change) Real effective exchange rate, (end-petiod, percent change) Current acwunt balance (percent of GDP) Capital and financial account balance (percent of GDP) Medium- and long-tam external public debt (percent of GDP) 61 Total external debt, percent of exports of goods and services Public external debt service, percent of exports of goods and services 71 Gross official reserves (in millions of U.S. dollars) 3/ Gross official reserves, percent of short-term external debt 8/ Gross official reserves, percent of broad money 9/ Gross official reserves (in months of imports of goods and services) Net international reserves (USS millions) 3/ Net international reserves (program definition; US% millions) IO/ Financial market indicators Stock market index (U.S. dollars) Foreign currency debt rating (Moody’s) Spread of Peruvian Brady bonds, basis points I Ii 46.4 5.9 IS.0 72.4 71.1 6.1 77.6 9.4 569 I.246 21.9 5.8 15.5 -16.0 38.7 1.8 8.3 il.1 2.x 0.2 5.2 -8.0 -3.3 0.9 7.4 -11.1 -7.3 -5.9 -5.2 -6.0 8.9 9.0 7.8 4.3 45.1 42.8 30.2 32.3 490.2 460.4 341.2 390.5 -7~3 3199 -11.9 3/99 -13.3 3/99 9.4 -6.3 -11.2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... -5.0 5.7 37.4 387.1 37,9 30.9 23.8 27.7 7,471 9,262 10,824 9,666 119.4 140.8 145.8 128.8 74.7 75.6 78.2 73.4 9,612 514199 74.7 4/30/99 26.2 9,836 141.9 72.3 9.2 II.2 12.0 Il.0 11.6 5/4/99 11.8 6,304 8,236 9,968 8,965 8,926 5113199 9.353 3.68X 4.669 6,255 5.900 5.516 5113199 5.953 519.2 44.1 31.3 33.6 19.8 .l9.l 27.0 14.4 13.2 17.5 4.8 4.7 4.5 19.5 22.2 23.7 74.9 72.0 75.5 74.2 77.2 78.8 5.4 5.8 8.1 79.0 79.7 84.5 10.0 10.2 II.2 454 578 678 1,513 2,984 2,937 551.1 B2 39.0 26.6 5/18/99 17.5 5118199 78.0 4/17/99 80.5 4/17/99 9.1 2199 75.4 2199 11.0 2199 926 4122199 2,794 4122199 657.3 422.3 535.9 5/14/99 02 Ba3 Ba3 s/17/99 421 655 492 5/14/99 4.2 28.4 77.9 80.7 678 2,587 Sources: Central Reserve Bank ofPeru, and Fund statTestimates and projections II Percentage changes are from I2 months earlier; data for exports and imports refer to 12-month flows through March 1999. 21 Dws not include floating debt. 31 At end of period. 41 Defined as the inverse of the ratio of broad money to GDP. 5/Ammal average. 61 Includes Central Reserve Bank of Peru debt. 71 includes debt service to the Fund. 8/ Short-term debt includes amortization of medium and long-term loans falling due over the following year. 91 At end-period exchange *ate. 101 Includes financial system’s foreign currency deposits in central bank as reserve liability. 1 II Over 20-year U.S. Treasury bond yield. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 29 - Table 5. Peru: Public Sector Social Expenditure 1995 1996 1997 Prel. 1998 Proj. 1999 (In millions of new soles) Total social expend&we 10,094 Social sectors 6,282 Education 4,83 1 Health 1,451 Social security I/ 1,379 Poverty alleviation programs 21 1,247 Social investment programs (FONCODES) 410 Agriculture emergency aid and land titling programs 112 Nutrition programs 420 Rural roads 19 Water and sanitation 45 Other 3/ 241 Other social programs 41 250 Housing Development Fund (FONAVl) 5/ 936 11,196 6,727 4.929 I:798 1>441 1,546 368 148 388 70 119 453 420 1,062 (In percent of general government expenditurc) Total social expenditure Social sectors Education Health Social sew@ Poverty alleviation programs Other social programs Housing Development Fund (FONAVl) 39.0 40.0 24.3 24.1 18.7 17.6 5.6 6.4 5.3 5.2 4.8 5.5 1.0 1.5 3.6 3.8 (In percent of GDP) 47.9 45.4 45.8 28.3 28.3 27.5 20.9 20.5 19.9 7.4 7.8 7.6 5.7 6.2 6.5 7.3 6.6 5.9 2.7 2.6 5.2 3.9 1.7 0.7 Total social expenditure 7.6 7.5 8.4 8.0 8.4 Social sectors 4.7 4.5 5.0 5.0 5.0 Education 3.6 3.3 3.7 3.6 3.6 Health 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.4 Social security 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.1 1.2 Poverty alleviation programs 0.9 1.0 1.3 1.2 1.1 Other social programs 0.2 0.3 0.5 0.5 0.9 Housing Development Fund (FONAVl) 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.3 0.1 Memorandum items: Poverty alleviation programs General expenditure government (In millions of new soles) 1,914 1,905 25,856 27,968 2,893 2,647 3,492 30,622 32,665 36,134 14,658 14,841 16,549 8,654 9,249 9,936 6,387 6,692 7,188 2,267 2,557 2,748 1,735 2,025 2,360 2,250 2,163 2,148 626 497 732 316 240 359 474 465 605 206 195 195 162 197 87 466 569 170 840 857 1,870 1,179 547 235 Source: Ministry of Economy and Finance. I/ Health expenditure incurred by the Peruvian Institute for Social Security (IPSS). 2/Excludes health and education projects. 31 includes electrification projects, community reallocation programs, multisectoral projects, private propeny titling, and other social safety nets (Apoyo Social PL-480). 41 Includes expenditure on justice and rural development projecls. 5/ FONAVl provides credit for housing and small business development. It ceased new operations in 1998. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 30. Table 6. Peru: Balance of Payments and External Debt (In millions ofU.S. dollars) 1998 0”s 1995 1996 I997 Pr0g. Prel. 1999 2000 2001 Current *CEO”Rt -4,318 -3,604 -3,410 -4,Wl -3,788 -2,889 -3,015 -3.104 -2.186 -2,000 -1.739 -2,366 -2,477 -1.420 -1,343 -1.17, Merchandise trade Exports Traditional Nontraditional Imports Consumer goods intermediate goods Capital goods Other Services, income and cnrrent transfers (net) Services Invcslrnent income current transfers Capital and financial acmunt Public sector Disbursements Amortization Bonds (net) Capital transfers (net) Privatization receipts Foreign direct investment (FDI) Other private capital Medium- and long-term loans Portfolio investment Financial system Short term (incl. errors and omissions) Financing Change in central bank reserves (increase-) Exceptional tinancing Of which: Debt relief Change in arrears 1/ Memorandum items: Total external debt (end of period) Public sector medium- and long-term Private sector medium- and long-term Shgrt term External arrears of public sector (end ofperiod) 5,576 5,897 61814 6,541 5,723 6,259 7,130 7,948 3.981 4.213 4.692 4,095 3,691 4.146 4.779 5.348 I;595 1,684 2;122 2,446 2;032 2;113 2;351 2;600 -7,761 -7,897 -8,553 -8,907 -8,200 -7,679 -8,473 -9,119 -1.786 -1,847 -1,910 -1,987 -1,884 -!.795 -1,956 -2,097 -3;237 -3,237 -3,436 -3,495 -3,387 -3,300 -3.591 -3;861 -2.396 -2.417 -2.816 -3.117 -2.592 -2.448 -2.795 -3.020 1343 1397 1390 1307 1337 1136 1130 :140 -2,133 -1,604 -1,671 -1,634 -1,311 -1,469 -1,672 -1,933 -764 679 -747 -744 -52, -477 -49, -602 -1,933 -1,573 -1,606 -1,611 -1,454 -1,684 -1,948 -2,127 565 647 682 721 664 692 767 796 5.115 4,111 2,421 3,197 -60 -71 -76 I.132 3,691 4,614 -293 -415 567 463 -859 -878 0 0 19 3 547 1,688 I.536 1,882 1,882 1,456 415 219 145 342 306 -205 1,016 1,100 628 -1,010 -929 .I,932 1,557 922 777 773 783 -837 -844 -859 0 0 0 -6 0 0 145 630 50 1,884 2,246 1,918 3,153 1,306 529 378 395 605 327 394 -370 2,683 323 -79 -235 194 373 -1,706 -111 1.367 -1,732 -639 I.003 26 528 364 1:700 -792 224 0 800 3,615 3.580 462 -9 1,225 900 -763 -909 0 ‘0 0 0 715 700 1,298 2,274 2,857 -33 164 32 684 343 26, -150 -36 412 -259 -212 -212 -308 69 25 -308 -600 -476 -388 -600 476 80 0 0 727 602 5,309 394 373 88 0 0 680 319 -6,138 -16 -9 -8 0 0 33,434 33,466 28,510 29,212 30,014 31,243 25.652 25.197 18.788 19.100 19.563 20.799 I:426 I:645 5,400 5,700 10,231 10,541 (ln percent ofGDP, unless otherwise specified) Current account balance -7.3 -5.9 -5.2 -5.9 FDI and nrivate MLT canital. in oercent of the 2;445 21442 3;050 6,408 7,044 6,645 30 23 23 3:734 6,138 I5 31,884 31,847 21,260 21,254 4,077 4,338 6,118 5,968 I5 IS -6.0 -5.0 -5.0 -4.8 cnrren~ account deficit’ ’ 45.2 58.3 66.3 66.0 66.6 68.6 86.8 100.5 Merchandise exports 9.4 9.7 10.5 9.7 9.1 10.9 11.x 12.3 Merchandise imports 13.1 13.0 13.1 13.2 13.0 13.4 14.0 14.2 Medium- and lone-term nublic debt 45.1 42.8 30.2 29.3 32.3 37.4 35.9 33.5 Public debt service 2/ ’ Export volume, percent change Itnmt volnme. oercent chance 37.9 30.9 23.8 26.1 27.7 26.2 24.0 23.2 5.8 4.9 15.4 1.6 -5.7 20.4 9.2 7.6 23.8 1.2 13.9 3.5 -1.0 -8.5 9.8 8.3 . Sources: Central Reserve Bank of Peru, Ministry of Economy and Finance; and Fund staff estimates and projections. I/ Includes accumulation of arrears to private and bilateral creditors pending the conclusion ofdebt negotiations, and payments and rescheduling of arrears. In 1997, stock of arrears includes principal only. 21 As a percentage of exports of go& and services. Includes debt service to the Fund. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-31- Table 7. Peru: Quantitative Performance Criteria, 1998 March 3 I June 30 SK.30 Dec. 3 1 Cumulative flows from December 3 1, 1997 (In millions of new soles) Net domestic financing of the combined public sector Unadjusted limits -635 Adjusted limits I/ 2/ -845 Actual -265 -1,262 Margin 417 Net domestic assets of the central reserve bank Unadjusted limits 704 Adjusted limits II 31 308 Actual -8 -892 Margin 1,200 (In millions of U.S. dollars; unless otherwise indicated) Net international reserves of the central reserve bank Unadjusted targets Adjusted targets I/ 31 Actual Margin External payments arrears of the public sector 4/ Targets Actual Margin Contracting or guaranteeing of nonconcessional external public debt with maturity of at least one year Total Limits Actual Margin One to 12-year maturity Limits Actual Margin Short-term net external debt of the public sector Limits Actual Margin -192 -75 183 375 0 0 0 0 300 100 80 220 200 100 80 120 50 50 -4 54 -922 -615 1,073 1,779 473 2,648. 600 -869 -22 -353 2,546 2,682 1,937 3,146 609 -464 -63 256 -958 -802 -810 .1,054 I48 -252 0 0 0 0 0 0 700 900 82 506 61X 394 250 80 170 50 -4 54 300 137 163 50 -4 54 Sources: Central Reserve Bank of Peru; Ministry of Economy and Finance; and EBS/98/81 I/ The targets and limits have been adjusted in accordance with the table attached to the letter of intent dated May 5, 1998 (EBS/98/81). 2/At end-December, the adjustments were: US$25 million for higher than envisaged loan disbursements; US$651.2 million for a shift in public sector deposits at the central bank and US%208.1 million for social security fund (IPPS) deposits in commercial banks to the public pension fond FONAHIW 3/At end-December, the adjustments were: US$25 million for higher than envisaged loan disbursements; disbursements USS431.3 million for a shortfall in privatization receipts; and US$601.2 million for a shift in public sector deposits at the central bank to the public pension fond FONAHFV 41 Excludes debt-service obligations assumed to be rescheduled, deferred, or that are in the process of negotiation. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-32- Table 8. Peru: Monetary Survey 1998 Projections 1995 1996 1997 Prog. Prel. 1999 2000 2001 I. Central Reserve Bank (Change in percent of currency in circulation at the beginning of period) II Net international reserves 89.6 155.G 144.1 47.9 275.2 33.9 (Change in millions of US$) 929 1,932 1,732 639 -1,003 388 Net domestic assets -62.0 -149.0 -126.2 -38.1 78.3 -28.9 Net credit to nonfinancial public sector’ -40.0 -11X.0 -24.3 -9.2 64.0 -7.1 Rest of banking system -25.0 -79.6 -47.9 -40.4 67.9 -15.6 Other 3.0 48.6 -34.0 11.6 -53.6 -6.2 Currency in circulation 27.6 6.6 17.9 9.9 3.1 5.u (Change in percent of liabilities to the private sector at the beginning of period) l/ Net foreign assets Net domestic assets Net credit to nonfinancial public sector Credit to the private sector Other COFIDE Other Liabilities to the private sector Base money 36.9 9.2 19.1 9.7 5.5 5.9 8.0 Broad money 24.2 28.0 15.0 11.0 0.4 7.3 10.7 Domestic currency 33.0 21.9 25.6 11.3 -1.6 10.3 13.9 Foreign currency 19.5 31.4 9.9 10.9 1.5 6.0 9.4 Credit to the private sector 37.6 35.6 27.4 12.4 8.4 10.8 10.0 Domestic currency 63.0 34.0 16.2 18.4 6.9 17.5 12.3 Foreign currency 30.7 37. I 31.3 10.‘) 8.9 9.4 9.6 Memorandum item Program exchange rate (Si. per USIF) 2.30 2.45 2.70 2.87 2.87 II. Banking System 10.4 17.1 -1.8 4.7 13.8 10.9 16.7 6.3 -6.5 -22.7 -1.1 -4.6 29.7 31.4 25.8 13.0 -9.4 2.2 -8.0 -2.1 -0.9 -1.4 -2.3 -0.4 -8.5 3.6 -5.7 -1.7 24.2 28.0 15.0 11.0 (12-month percentage change) I/ -7.3 5.7 6.1 4.7 7.8 1.5 4.6 5.8 7.9 -2.5 -4.0 -2.8 8.8 12.5 12.1 11.2 -8.9 -8.5 -3.4 -2.6 -0.2 -7.1 -0.6 0.2 -8.6 -1.4 -2.8 -2.8 0.4 7.3 10.7 10.5 8.0 10.5 14.9 8.6 9.4 14.3 8.3 52.3 38.6 600 476 -42.1 -26.6 -25.3 -12.0 -12.1 -7.7 -4.8 -6.9 10.1 12.0 Sources: Central Reserve Bank ofPeru; and Fund suffestimates. I/ Flows in foreign currency are valued at the program exchange rate for the corresponding period Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-33 - Table 9. Peru: Medium-Term Outlook Projections 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 I. Balance of Payments and Other External Indicators Current aCEO”“t Merchandise trade Exports IlIlPOrts Services Investment income Current transfers Capital and financial account Public sector Disbursements I/ Amortizlltion due Private sector Privatizntion receipts Other 2/ Overall balance Change in central bank reserves Exceptional financing 3/ Total external debt service Public external debt service Gross reserves Gross reserves, percent of broad money Current account deficit Merchandise exports Merchandise imparts Total external debt (In billions ofU.S. dollars) -3.79 -2.89 -3.01 -3.10 -3.26 -2.73 -2.71 -2.82 -2.83 -2.93 -2.48 -1.42 -1.34 -1.17 -0.97 -0.10 0.62 0.70 0.77 1.01 5.72 6.26 7.13 7.95 8.93 10.79 12.64 13.89 15.12 16.44 -8.20 -7.68 -8.47 -9.12 -9.89 -10.89 -12.02 -13.18 -14.35 -15.43 -0.52 -0.48 -0.49 -0.60 -0.73 -0.74 -0.7X -0~X4 -0.86 -0.86 -1.45 -1.68 -1.95 -2.13 -2.42 -2.78 -3.53 -3.68 -3.82 4.19 0.66 0.69 0.77 0.80 0.85 0.90 0.92 1 .oo 1.07 1.11 2.42 3.20 3.61 3.58 3.92 2.92 3.03 3.06 3.11 3.25 -0.08 1.13 0.46 -0.01 0.18 0.09 -0.05 -0.13 -0.19 -0.14 0.78 1.92 1.23 0.90 1.07 1.12 1.12 1.13 1.30 1.38 -0.86 -0.79 -0~76 -0.91 -0.X9 -1.03 -1~16 -1.25 -1.48 -1.53 2.50 2.07 3.15 3,59 3.74 2.83 3.07 3.18 3.30 3.39 0.05 0.80 0.72 0.70 0.57 0.06 0.06 0.03 0.03 0.03 2.45 1.27 2.44 2.X9 3.17 2.77 3.02 3.15 3.27 3.36 -1.37 0.31 0.60 0.48 0.66 0.19 0.26 0.24 0.28 0.32 1.00 -0.39 -0.60 -0.48 -0.66 -0.19 -0.26 -0.24 -0.28 -0.33 0.36 0.08 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 (In percent of exports of goods and services) 3X.6 37.4 34.1 33.9 31.8 28~4 26.2 25.4 25.3 24.6 27~7 26.2 24.0 23.2 21.7 19.3 17.7 17.0 17.0 16.6 (In months of imports of goods and services) 11.0 11.8’ 11.2 10.7 10.3 9.6 x.9 x.4 7.9 7.6 73.4 72.3 69.3 65.2 62.7 58. I 54.6 51.3 48.4 44,5 (In percent of GDP) 6.0 5.0 5.0 4.8 4,7 3.6 3.4 3.2 3.0 2.9 9.1 10.9 11.8 12.3 13.0 14.4 15.6 15.9 16.0 16.0 13.0 13.4 14.0 14.2 14.4 14.5 14.8 15.1 15.1 15.0 47.7 54.6 52.8 49.5 46.6 43.0 40.0 37.2 34.5 32.1 -3.14 1.00 17.69 -16.69 -0.88 -4.42 1.16 3.51 -0.10 1.44 -1.54 3.61 0.03 3.58 0.37 -0.37 0.00 lG.1 16.1 7.3 43.6 2.8 16.0 15.0 29.9 Total medium- and long-term public debt 4/ 32.3 37.4 35.9 33.5 31.4 28.X 26.5 24.5 22.4 20.6 19.0 II Output and Prices Real GDP Real domestic demand Of which: Private consumption Private investment Consumer prices (end of period) (Annual pcrcentagc change) 0.7 3.0 5.5 6.0 6.0 9.0 8.0 6.0 6.0 6.0 6.0 -0.2 -1.7 5.1 5.5 5.1 5.1 5.2 5,7 6.0 6.0 6.0 -0.3 1.4 4.4 5.0 4.G 4.5 4.5 5.3 5.9 5.9 6.0 -1.5 -9.8 7.0 6.6 6.9 6.3 6.4 6.1 6.2 5.9 5.9 6,O 6.0 4.0 3.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 9. Peru: Medium-Term Outlook Projections 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 (I” percent of GDP) III. Savings and Investment Gross domestic investment Public sector Private sector 51 National savings Public sector 61 Private sector External savings Combined public sector primary balance Interest due Combined public sector overall balance Net external financing Net domestic financing 71 Privatisation receipts 24.6 22.9 23.4 23.8 24.1 24.0 24.1 24.3 24.3 24.4 24.5 3.x 3.x 3.9 3~9 3.9 3.9 3.9 4.0 4.1 4.2 4.3 20.7 19.1 19.6 19.9 20.3 20.1 20.2 20.3 20.3 20.2 20.2 18.5 17.9 18.4 19.0 19.4 20.4 20.7 21.0 21.3 21.5 21.7 3.6 2.x 3.1 3.5 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.1 4.2 4.3 14.9 15.0 15.3 15.5 15.9 16.6 16.X 17.0 17.2 17.3 17.4 6.0 5.0 5.0 4.x 4.7 3.6 3.4 3.2 3.0 2.9 2.8 IV. Combined Public Sector 1.3 0.9 1.3 1.6 1.6 1.7 1.7 1.6 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.7 2,l 2.1 2,o 1.9 LX 1.7 1.5 1.4 1.4 1.4 -0.5 -1.2 -0.8 -0.3 -0.3 0.3 1.X 0.6 0.0 0.2 -0.1 -2.0 -1.0 -0.8 -0~7 0~3 1.4 I.2 1.1 0~8 -0.1 0.1 -0.1 0.1 0.1 -0.1 -0~1 0.1 0.1 -0.2 O,l 0.0 0.1 -a,1 0.0 0.0 0.1 -0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.0 -0.1 0.0 Sources: Central Reserve Bank of Peru; and Fund staff estimates and projections, II Includes bonds. 21 Includes errors and omissions. 31 Includes debt relief from Paris Club creditors, and debt forgiveness. 41 Includes Central Reserve Bank ofPeru debt. 51 Includes changes in inventories. 61 Excludes privatisation receipts. 7/includes statistical discrepancy. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 10. Peru: Projected Payments to the Fund as of April 30, 1999 I/ (In millions of SDRs) overdue 1999 2000 200, 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 Beyond Total Obligatiions from existing drawings I. Principal a. Repurchases b. ESAFiSAF Rcpaymcnts 2. Charges and Interest 21 a. on Fund credit b. on use of SDRs Total obligations (percent of quota) Obligations from prospective drawings I. Principal a. Repurchases b. ESAFiSAF Repayments 2. Charger and Interest 21 a. cm Fund credit b. an "se of SDRs Total obligations (percent of quota) Cumulative (existing and prospective) I. Principal a. Repurchases b. ESAWSAF Repayments 2. Charges and interest 2, a. an Fund credit by on "se of SDRs Total obligations (percent ofquota) (percent ofGDP) (percent ofexports of goods and services) Memorsndm item: Purchases Fund credit outstanding (end-period) (percent of quota) (percent of GDP) 0 0 0 0 0 0 53~6 107.1 120.5 133.9 80.3 26.8 26.8 26.8 13.4 0 0 589.0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 16.7 IS.9 14.7 9.7 4.9 3.1 2.1 1.1 0.2 0 0 71.3 2.1 2.7 2.7 2.7 2.7 2.7 2.7 2.7 2.7 2.7 2.7 29.4 12.4 128.7 137.9 146.3 87.9 32.6 31.6 30.5 16.3 2.7 2.7 689.6 11.3 20.2 21.6 22.9 13.8 5.1 4.9 4.8 2.5 0.4 0.4 108.0 0 0 0 0 2.5 19.6 39.3 58.9 63.8 63.8 135.0 383.0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 I.1 5.5 10.0 13.9 14.6 14.3 13.3 11.6 9.2 6.8 7.4 107.7 , 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 ,,I 5.5 10.0 13,9 17.0 34.0 52.6 70,5 73~1 70.6 142.4 490.7 : 0.2 0.9 1.6 2.2 2.7 5~3 8.2 11.0 11.4 111 22.3 76.9 I 53.6 107,l 120.5 133.9 82.8 46~4 66.0 85.7 77.2 63.8 135.0 972.0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 17.8 24.4 24.6 ' 23.6 19.5 17.4 15.4 12.6 9.4 6.8 2.1 2,7 2.7 2.7 2.7 2.7 2~7 2.7 2.7 2.7 73.5 134.2 147.8 160.2 105.0 66.6 84.2 101.0 89.3 73.4 11,5 21.0 23.2 25.1 16.4 10.4 13,2 15.8 14.0 I,,5 0.18 0.31 0.32 0.33 0.20 0.12 0.14 0.15 0~12 0,09 1.28 2~06 2.05 2.00 1.11 0.61 0.71 0.78 0.64 0.49 7.4 179.0 2.7 29.4 145.2 ,,180.3 22~7 184.9 88.4 117.8 117.8 58.9 0 0 0 0 623.7 634.5 63 I .8 556.8 474.0 427.6 361~6 275.9 97.7 99.4 99.0 87.2 74.3 67.0 56.6 43.2 1.5 I.5 I,4 1.1 0.9 0.7 0.6 0.4 0 0 198.7 I 35.0 31.1 21~2 0.3 0.2 383.0 Sources: Treasurer's Depanment; and Fund staff estimates. Ii Assuming all scheduled purchases arc made. 2, Projections are based on current rates ofcharge, including burden-sharing charges where applicable, for purchases in the GRA and on current interest rates for SM. ESAF, and Trust Fund. The current SDR interest rate is assumed for net "se ofSDRs. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 36 - Table 11. Peru: Proposed Schedule of Purchases Under the Extended Arrangement, 1999-2002 1/ Amount of Purchase Availability Date Conditions Include ) 1. SDR 29.46 million 1 June 23, 1999 Board approval of EFF 2. SDR 29.46 million August 15, 1999 Observance of end-June I999 performance cnteria I 3. SDR 29.46 million November IS, 1999 Completion of the first review and observance of end-September 1999 performance criteria 4. SDR 29.46 million February I5,2000 Observance of end-December 1999 pelformance criteria 5. SDR 29.46 million May IS, 2000 Completion of the second review and observance of end-March 2000 performance criteria 6. SDR 29.46 million August 15,200o Observance of end-June 2000 performance criteria 7. SDR 29.46 million November IS, 2000 Completion of the third review and observance of end-September 2000 perfommce criteria I 8. SDR 29.46 million I February IS, 200 I Observance of end-December 2000 oerfonnance criteria I Completion of the fourth review and observance of end-March 200 I performance criteria Observance of end-June 2001 performance cnteria I I I. SDR 29.46 million I November 15,200 I I Completion of the fifth review and observance of end-Seotember 2001 oerformance criteria I 12. SDR 29.46 million 13. SDR 29.48 million February IS, 2002 May 15.2002 Observance of end-December 2001 performance criteria Observance of end-March 2002 performance criteria Source: Staff estimates. II Total access proposed under the EFF is SDR 383 million (60 percent of quota) Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 31 - Figure 1. Peru: Selected Economic Indicators, 1996-1999 Inflation (12-mooth increase) ci” JAN APR ,;y; a, JAN APR ,Ju) CXI 1&H MR ,;;; 02, JAN Al 139 Combined Public Sector Primary Balance I/ 2.5y I ,,,, a ,ICIIC I IIIIII..I IIImII A’“,;;; CCT IA” APR,$J -XT IAN A’“,$ CCT JAN AI ,991 &al Cross Domestic ‘Product ‘er.mh.ge char@ lrom gear earlier) - Moonthl~ GDP -- 12.month moving auemge i ,..’ . . . Y APR JUL c.3 JAN APR J”L 02, JAN IPR JUL XT Yli AP 1996 899, ,998 19% stock Blces (IGBL in U.S. dollar 1erms) 1wo i 9w Source: Centrd Rererve BO”k Of Peru, I/ 12-month cumulative. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 38 - Figure 2. Peru: Trade Indicators, 1996-1999 .- Exports in U.S. Dollars: Percentage Change I .- 30 (ISmonth moving average) 30 -10. - Ovedl - Non-traditional -20. -301 ‘, ” ” ” ” ” “, “, 1 “‘, “, ” 1 ” 1 JAN APR JUL CCT JAN APR JUL CXT JAN APR JUL OCT JAN -30 1996 1997 1998 1999 50 50 Imports in U.S. Dollars: Percentage Change 40. (K-month moving average) .40 - olJerall - Consumption goods .30 -- capita1 good.9 .20 -10. -201 ” ” ” ” ” ” ” ” ” ” ” ” ” ” ” ” ” 1 .’ 1 JAN APR JUL OCT JAN APR JUL OCT JAN APR JUL CCT JAN -20 1996 1997 1998 1999 0 Trade Balance Trade Balance -500 (In millions of U.S. dollars) -2500. -2500. -3000JA~ ’ -3000JA~ ’ APR APR J”L OCT J”L OCT JAN JAN APR APR JUL OCT JUL OCT JAN JAN APR APR JUL CCT JUL CCT 1996 1996 1997 1997 1998 1998 1993 1993 Sc.“,c.% Central Resewe Bank Of Peru. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 39 - Figure 3. Peru: External Indicators, 1995 1999 11.0 11.0 Net International Reserves (In billions of U.S. dollars) 8.8 8.8 0.0 “I’,‘I”“I’I’,““.I,“““““.“‘l JAN APR ,J”; CCT JAN APR ,J”; OCT JAN APR ,;$ OCT JAN APR ,;$ OCT JAN APR 0.0 1999 Real Effective l/ and US$/Sol Exchange Rates ,,5-.-. --Real (rss3=roo. left SC&) --US$/Sol (tight scale) 95 ‘~~‘~~~“““‘~,~“““I,~~‘~~~~,‘~(““”~’~~””’.I JAN APR JUL OCT JAN APR JUL CCT JAN APR JUL OCT JAN APR J”L C!CT JAN APR 0.25 1995 1996 1997 1996 1999 1200 Country Risk 2/ (Spread between Peru Brady bonds and 1000. 20.year U.S. treasury bond yield) 800. 600. 400. 200 “‘~~~““““~~“““‘1~~~“‘,‘~“‘~““,~~,~””’~1 JAN APR J”L C&T JAN APR JUL CCT JAN APR J”L OCT JAN APR J”L OCT JAN APR 200 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 Sources: Central Reserve Bank of Peru; and Fund stall estimates. 1/ Trade-weighted index ol nominal exehaoge ratea deflated hy seasonally adjusted relative consumer prices, An increase (decreaw) indicates appreciation (depreciation). 2/ Perusian Brady bonds were first issued on March 31. ,997. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 40 - Figure 4. Peru: Monetary Indicators, 1996- 1999 35 05 MOIEY Share of Credit and Deposits in Foreign Currency (I” percent of total) - Broad money -- Base nwnDy -80 Private Sector Credit ,” (12.month percentage ehan~e) 1, .” f“. L-/L/ ; .A. - D”‘mlll .r ,...~ : :,,..., ;; ‘..\ -- hwign culTEn< i I \. J’ i I : i JO- i . . . 25 i ‘!, . \ \ :i :’ :,.-., : .j?. ;. i TJ it ,,.,_ _” \ 7 i., clllllllllllil JAN MR $,I 03 &UN APR ,:&I; 03 JAN APR & 02, JAN 191 I ‘ublic Sector Deposits In Banking System In millions Of U.S. dollars) I 11,1,,,/,1, I ,,,,,,, *,,,I,, I MR pl; (ET ,AN APR y; [ET IAN APR ,;N& OCT JAN 19’ IMO iwo iwcl 55w mo Ix0 IWO JMO 3cm sources: Central Reserve Bank Of Peru: sod Fund *tar, estimates. I/ U.S. dollar abcra arc valued at program exchange rater. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 41 - Figure 5. Peru: Interest Rates, 1997-1999 20 (In percent per year) Deposits, 3 l- 179 Days cl ,I”““,“I’,“I,,I’,,I,“, JAN MAY SEP JAN MAY SEP JAN MA 1997 1998 1999 20 15 IO 5 0 35 Lending Rates 35 (go-Day Prime) 30. 30 -Domestic Currency --US. dollars 40 Interbank Rates 35. 30. 25. 20. --Oomestic Currency --US. dollars 0 '/ j'-, ,"'I,, A,, ,', ,I, /', JAN MAY SEP JAN HAY SEP JAN MA 1997 1998 1999 saurcs: Central Resews Bank 0, Peru. 10 35 IO 25 20 15 IO 5 3 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 42 - Figure 6. Peru: Labor Market Indicators, 1994- 1999 350 3oo $;r;y1;;4yo;; Real Terms 200 150 100 50 50 “““““‘/““““““““(.‘,“““““““““““““””’ JAN MAY SEP JAN MAY YP JAN MAY SEP JAN MAY SEP JAN MAY SEP JAN 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 115 Index of Blue Collar Wages in Real Terms 115 (December 1993=100) 110. 110 105. ,,jy., 105 ,... .q, s, ,do . . . . ..’ ,, ..,’ : :;; i,, 100 \ 6 95. .\I ,:’ :.,, ./ : :., 95 ..\ ,.,I’.. 90~ . . . . .._. ,’ ‘\ ,. . ._.__,__.. ...-- . ...‘. ..___ 90 . . . . . . . . . .._______-_ _______ -__ 65 ,,,,,,,I’,,/,,,,,,,,,,,‘,,,“‘, ‘,,‘,,I,,,‘(,,,‘,‘,,,,,,‘,,‘,,, JAN MAY SEP JAN MAY SEP JAN MAY SEP JAN MAY SEP JAN MAY SEP JAN a5 1994 1995 1996 1997 ,996 1999 1 I.0 Formal Unemployment Rate in Urban Areas 11.0 ‘OS (In percent) 10.5 10.0 10.0 9.5 9.5 9.0 9.0 a.5 a.5 a.0 a.0 7.5. 7.5 7.0 _ 7.0 6.5~ ’ ” JAN MAY SEP JAN MAY SW JAN ,“A,’ SEP JAN MAY SEP JAN MAY SEP JAN 6.5 1994 1995 1996 1997 ,998 1999 Sources: Ministry 01 Labor; Csnhal Rsrsrvs Bank 01 Peru: and Fund rtafl srtimotsn. 350 250 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 43 - Figure 7. Peru: Banking Indicators, 1995-1999 14.0 14.0 Loan Quality (In.percenL) 12.0. 12.0 10.0. 10.0 8.0. ,: -a.0 ‘..,. _\ Nonperforming Loans/Total Loans ..:’ 6.0. .x..-. .._,_____ ,.....______.. . . .,,__._.. . .._______ ,,/..'~ ...---....... _,_._... .. 6.0 ._ ..,,_. _.". . . . . .__.._, ,,... ..__. ..... .,,,, . . ..I 4.0.- Refinanced Loans/Total Loans 4.0 2.0JAN MAY SEP 1995 100 100 Loan Provisions 95 90. 85. 90 hi a5 80 75 70 60 55 ,,,,,‘..,.,l._l.(,,,,,,1,,,,,,...’,I””””’),’/ JAN MAY SEP J*N MAY SEP JAN MAY SEP JAN MAY SEP JAN 55 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 90.0 14.0 Liquidity and Capital Adequacy Ratios (In percent) 13.5 85.0 t 80.0. Liquid Assets/(lmmodiate Obligations & Savtnos Deposits).+, ,Le,t state, source: S”parinte”dsncy Of Banks OrId ,“s”ro”cs. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-44- APPENDIX I Peru: Fund Relations (As of April 30,1999) I. Membership Status: Joined 12/3 l/45; accepted Article VIII status on February 15, 1961 II. General Resources Account SDR Million Percent Quota Quota 638.40 100.0 Fund holdings of currency 1,227.39 192.3 III. SDR Department SDR Million Percent Allocation Net cumulative allocation 91.32 100.0 Holdings 7.53 8.3 IV. Outstanding Purchases and Loans SDR Million Percent Quota Extended arrangements 588.96 92.3 V. Financial Arrangements Amount Amount Approval Expiration Approved Drawn Type of Arrangement Date Date (SDR Million) (SDR Million) EFF 7/01/96 313 II99 300.20 160.50 EFF 3118193 3117196 1,018.10 642.69 Stand-By 4126184 4124185 250.00 30.00 VI. Projected Obligations to Fund (SDR Million; based on existing use of resources and present holdings of SDRs): Overdue Forthcomine 4130199 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 Principal Charges/interest Total 0 53.6 1,07.1 120.5 133.9 80.3 0 18.8 21.6 17.4 12.5 7.6 0 72.4 128.7 137.9 146.4 87.9 VII. Exchange Arrangements Peru maintains a unified, floating exchange rate. On April 30, 1999, the average of official buying and selling rates was 3.34 new soles per U.S. dollar. The central government maintains external payments arrears. Peru maintains a clearing arrangement with Malaysia. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public4s APPENDIX I VIII. Last Article IV Consultation The 1998 Article IV consultation was concluded on June 3, 1998 (EBS/98/81) MAE Ix. Technical Assistance Department Dates FAD March 1995 and September 1995 October 1996 Purpose Tax administration. Review of the Financial Management Information System (SIAF). November 1996 and March 1997 1996-97 September 1997 Tax administration. Long-term assistance for the SIAF Public expenditure management and development of the SIAF. September 1995 February 1996 Monetary policy and foreign exchange management. Central bank accounting framework, certificates of deposit market, and foreign exchange risk. July 1996 1991-96 Supervisory issues and prudential policies. Long-term technical assistance through an advisor to the President of the central bank. October 1996 Technical and legal advice on proposed changes in the Banking Law. March 1997 and August 1997 Unification of the domestic and foreign operation desks at the central bank, and reform of the payment system. May 1997 Reorganization of the Superintendency of Banks and Insurance. April 1998 Modernization of the payments system. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicSTA - 46 - December 1996, National account statistics, new June 1997, base year for the national account series September 1997, and January 1998 December 1997 Measurement of worker remittances in the balance of payments. TRE March 1999 Central bank accounting. X. Resident Representative Mr. Wolfe took up his assignment in September 1997 APPENDIX I Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 47 - APPENDIX II Peru: Relations with the World Bank Group Background 1. Since the World Bank resumed its lending operation with Peru in 1992, it has approved 7 quick-disbursing loans in the amount of USS 1.833 billion, 2 technical assistance loans of USS41.8 million and 12 investment operations of US$l. 117 billion. Investment lending covers various sectors including transport, urban water, urban property, health, education, agriculture, and rural development. Objectives 2. The overriding objective of the World Bank’s assistance program for Peru continues to be to support the government’s effort to achieve a sustained, continuous reduction in poverty. The lending program focuses on increasing human capital, developing market- integrating infrastructure, strengthening private property ownership and public institutions, and enhancing macroeconomic stability. Lending 3. The Peru Country Assistance Strategy (CAS), discussed on July 22, 1997 by the Board, proposes a lending program of USS200 million a year on average over the period 1998-2000, significantly lower than the base case of US$425 million a year endorsed by the previous CAS. This reduced level of lending reflects the government’s willingness to controls its overall borrowing level in the context of significantly stepped up concessionary bilateral lending. Lending in FY 1998 amounted to USS172.5 million (an El Nifio emergency loan of US$150 million and a judiciary reform loan of USS22.5 million which was canceled at the request of the government in FY 1999 before it became effective). So far in FY 1999, the Bank has approved an urban property rights loan of US$38 million. Responding to a recent request from the Peruvian Government for an adjustment operation in the amount of US%500 million, the Bank is preparing two quick-disbursing operations to support the second-generation reforms in the financial sector (Financial Sector Adjustment Loan in the amount of USS300 million) and in the social sector (a Poverty SAL in the amount of US$200 million) in concerted efforts with the Fund and the IDB. The self-imposed cap on the lending volume by the government is no longer in effect and the bank is preparing a CAS Progress Report to reflect this shit? in lending strategy. Non-lending Services (NLS) 4. Current CAS has introduced a shift toward lower lending and increased non-lending services. Building on previous work done on poverty, a poverty work program has been initiated in FY 1998 in close collaboration with the Prime Minister’s office. The first Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 48 - APPENDIX11 multi-year poverty dialogue took place in October 1998. For the occasion, the Bank issued a status report on poverty evaluating social progress in Peru since 1994. The second poverty dialogue is scheduled for September 1999. The Bank completed studies on education finance and health finance for the poor and recommendations of the studies form a basis for policy reforms of the Poverty SAL. In addition, the Bank has prepared a report on an indigenous development in consultation with indigenous groups. World Bank Technical Assistance (TA) 5. The Bank has so far secured a number of grants from Japan, Canada, and other bilateral donors to support project preparation, economic and sector work, supervision and implementation issues. The Bank’s Institutional Development Fund (IDF) grant was recently obtained to strengthen the Ombudsman’s office. In addition, a small grant from the Post Conflict Unit was approved to carry out a beneficiary assessment in the border area with Ecuador, following the peace agreement. Peru has also obtained an InfoDev grant to prepare an action plan to deal with Y2K problems. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 49 - APPENDIX II Statement of World Bank Loans (As of April 30, 1999) LOall Fiscal Year Number Approved norrower Seventy one (71) loans fully disbursed l/ In millions oflJ~S. dollars Total(nel oicancellation) Undisburscd 2,975.X Partially disbursed or undisburscd loans 37010 1994 Republic of Peru 37170 1994 Republic of Peru 3x110 1995 Republic of Peru 38260 1995 Republic of Peru 39620 1996 Republic of Peru 40680 1997 Republic of Peru 40760 1997 Republic of Peru 41300 1991 Republic of Peru 42500 1998 Republic of Peru 43840 1999 Republic ofPeru 13-k Health and Nutrition TransportRehabili(ation Lima Water Rehabilitation and Management Project (SI?DAP&) Primaly Education Quality Project Rural Roads Rehabilitation and Maintenance FONCODES II lrngation Rehabilitation Sierra National Resource Management El Nifio Emergency 1Jrbau Property Rights 34.00 12.61 150.00 21.66 150.00 75.79 146.40 93.94 90.00 21.75 150.00 68.63 85.00 64.91 51.00 30.65 15o.nn 118.23 38.00 36.00 Total 4,019.75 Ofwhich: amo~nf repaid 1,226,09 Total outstanding 2.793.66 Total undkbu,wd 544.17 I/ Includes the 1979 Program Loan (US61 15 million). 1992 Financial Sector Adjustment Loan (US%400 million), 1992 Trade Policy Loan (USS300 million), and 1992 Structural Adjustment Loan (USSI 50 million), 1993 Privatization Adjustment Loan (US%250 million), 1997 Pension Reform Adjustment Loan (USSIOO mdlian), and 1997 DDSR Loan (USSI 83 million). Statement of IFC Investments (As of March 3 I, 1999) In millions ofU.S. dollars Partici- QU%- pation Equity cqwty l@l”S TOtA Total commitments held by lFC 76.61 27.18 11.52 131.57 246.88 ‘Total disbursed 61~79 21.07 9.34 121.37 213.17 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 50 - APPENDIX III Peru: Relations with the Inter-American Development Bank Background 1. Since 1991 the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) has played a major role in supporting the Peruvian Government’s strategy of economic stabilization, structural reforms, and normalisation of relations with the international financial community. The IDB also finances investment projects in the road system, the electrical sector, agriculture, health, education, and the social emergency programs, justice, as well as global credit programs for small, medium-sized, and micro enterprises, Currently the IDB is helping Peru consolidate its structural reforms by financing programs aimed at modernizing the public sector, reducing poverty, creating the conditions for growth in agriculture, and protecting the environment, Lending 2. Peru’s total outstanding debt with the IDB at end-April 1999 amounted to USS2.3 billion and current commitments (undisbursed balance) amounted to US$l.3 billion, corresponding to 25 projects under implementation. The 1999-2000 lending program for Peru includes 13 loan operations for a total of about US$1,530 million; including 2 sector loans, one under emergency conditions for US$300 million for the financial sector, and another for US$200 million, under traditional IDB terms to strengthen public finances. Recent economic and sector work 3. A macroeconomic assessment as well as a comprehensive review of major economic, social, and institutional issues was carried out in 1998 in the process of preparing the Country Paper, the Bank’s strategy document for Peru. In addition, IDB project teams also performed specific sector work to collect background information for future projects that could be supported by the IDB. Nonreimbursable technical cooperation 4. During the past eight years the IDB has extended several grants for institutional building programs through the following institutions: SUNAT (tax administration), SUNAD (customs), FONCODES (social programs), Congress, the Ministry of Economy and Finance, the Republic General Comptroller, the Institute for the Defense of Competition and Intellectual Property, the municipal savings banks, and the financial institutions providing credit to microenterprises and indigenous enterprise associations. Peru also has received grants to establish an environmental authority, and for studies on pollution in the Mantaro Valley as well as several social programs. In addition, the Bank has provided resources of the Multilateral Investment Fund (MIF) to finance projects managed by the private sector. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-5l- APPENDIX 111 Statement of 1DB Loans (As of April 30, 1999) lJS$ Millions Number Approved Borrower ” Exccut”riPurp”sc Disbursed Undisbursed 130 loam fully disburse I/ 25 loans with ““disbursed belances (less caocellalioos) li 678,OC 7411oc 7901oc 836/OC 8471°C 6x1 901/OC 9OZOC 9061OC 93uoc 9561OC 1992 ,993 ,993 1994 1994 1995 1995 ,995 1995 1996 I996 Republic of Peru Republic of Peru Republic of Pew Republic of Peru Republic of Peru Republic of Pclu Republic ofPeru Republic of Peru Republic of Peru Republic of Peru Republic ofPem MEF Financial sector adjurrment MlNSA - Health services strengfhening MEM - Electricity fransn~ission MTC - Road Rehabiliration and Improvement PRONAP Support 1” Basic Snnilatioo Sector MEM - Elrcniciry hnnsmiasion MTC - Rural Infreslruclurc Transpoflali”” Plan MEF - Public investment Progrnm MAO - Lend Titling FONCODES Suppon 1” Foncodes I, MED - Qualify improvement Educnrion Agun)lia Energy of Peru LTD. Power Generation 9811OC 1996 Aguaytia Energy of Peru, S.R. LTDA 985/OC 1996 lOZSiOC 1997 10361OC 1997 1050/0c 1997 10581OC 1997 lO611OC 1997 1091NOC 1998 1091w0c 1998 lll5,OC 1998 11281OC 1998 11371oc 1998 11441oc 1998 11501oc 1998 Total disbursed O/which: repaid Total outstanding Republic of PClu Republic of Per” Republic of Peru Republic of Peru Republic of Peru Republic of Peru Energin del SW S.A. Energia del SW S.A. Republic of Peru Republic of Pew Republic of Pew Republic of Petu Republic of Peru MEF - sector In”cshnent Loan MAO - Agricultural Sanitation SUNAD. Customs SUNAT. Tax Adminisearion III MEF El Nixio Emergency CEPJ Modemiration of luske Adminisnation Enersur Energy project Enersur Energy projecr MEF - Inlegratcd Financial Adminishation System COFIDE Microcntcrprise Credit II COFIDli Multiscctorial Credit II MPMDII thunnn Development MTC Road Rebsbilitati”” nod Improvanent 2.779.01 958.80 19.34 67.65 31.30 218.43 123.21 10.74 72.75 1.52 10.28 R3.54 24.92 5I.50 75.76 4.66 0.64 0.65 91.43 3.68 1.02 6.02 59.96 3.737.81 1,441.Ol 2.296.8 I,28452 2.48 0.34 10.73 33.56 16.78 11.75 17.12 2.46 10.66 66.02 74.54 8.50 73.86 40.58 0.14 2.03 57.81 16.19 75.00 255.00 0.46 23.72 138.19 46.60 300.00 Source: Inter-American Developmcnl Bank. li lncluder monetmy sdjusrmeo~s and recuperetion in expon financing loens Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 52 - Peru: Statistical Issues APPENDIX IV Outstanding statistical issues Red sector The CPI for 1991-94 was revised in 1995 following the adoption of a new base year but CPI before 1990 was not, despite a Fund mission to support this undertaking. Technical difftculties with the INEI database prevent revisions to correct a bias in these data. The mission also recommended that a national urban CPI be constructed based on information in 25 cities, but CPI indices currently only monitor 6 major cities, including the Lima metropolitan area. In 1996 a national accounts mission evaluated the sources for and methods used in updating the national accounts series from the base year 1979 to a new base year, 1994. The mission concluded that the adopted methodology conformed with the 1993 System of National Accounts, but that preliminary estimates for the new base year should not be published because of incomplete data, inadequate consistency checks, and problems in calculating changes in inventories. Additional missions in 1997 and 1998 helped establish a new benchmark for 1994 and recommended a new approach that combines a supply framework along with input-output tables. Using this approach, the authorities are preparing a revised series of national accounts with a view to publishing it next year. Governmentfinance Central government accounts are prepared on a commitment basis and adjusted to a cash basis. In 1998 the BCRP reported data on the operations of the general government for 1997 for the Government Finance Statistics Yearbook, but no domestic debt data were reported. There are inconsistencies between fiscal data reported “above the line” and financing data. Balance of payments A mission visited Lima in 1997 to look into the estimates of workers’ remittances, which were thought to be understated, with the attendant effect of overstating the current account deficit. The mission concluded that a new methodology developed to estimate workers’ remittances was reasonable, although there were weaknesses in the way surveys were conducted. On the mission’s recommendations, measures have been devised to improve the timeliness and response rates of the surveys. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicPeru: Core Statistical Indicators (As of April 30, 1999) CcnlJal bank balance “Fd sheet money k 4127199 313,199 4130199 4130199 Current Overall aCCo”“t gO”~~olt balance balance + Dec. ,998 Dec. 1998 315199 315199 Interna- tional rnenen 4128199 4130199 D 0 A li c ” Exporw mpo* Feb. ,999 4/16/99 h, hl A hl c Exchmgc ra,e 4130199 ” D A E c D RWTVd base mane, 4123199 Commler price index hr. ,999 GDP/GNP Feb. ,999 Eaemal debt Dec. ,998 rates 412919Y Date ofla,crt observation 4!10,99 4Di99 4116199 4130199 Dare reccivcd Frequency of data Ii Q Q Q Q $ A A hl hl c c 0 M M Q Q w w Frequency of rcponing li ” Source of data 2, A A + \I E c c A A hf A M Mode of reponing 31 E c c Confident- iality 4, Frequency of pubiication li c c c 7-- w D M Q li 0~~ Daily, W = Weekly, M= .Monthly; Q= Quarterly. and A = Annual. 21 .A= Direct repelling by central bad: Ministry of finance; or other ofiicial agency, 3, E = Electronic, and M _ mail, 4, c = For unrestricted use. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 54 - APPENDIX V Peru: Privatizatiott and Concession Program in 1999 1. Sale 01 shares in enterprises previously priwtizcd Telecommunications (Telefonica dell’mi) Petroleum sector (Relapasa) Electricity Edelnor Edcgel Egenor E. E. Piura Etevensa 1. Agriculhwal land Tierras Chira-Piura Ticrras Chavimochic ficnas Chinecas Tierras Majes Tierras Olmos Tierrss Jequetepeque-Safia Tierras Pasta Grande 3. Mining prospects Quicay Gold prospects Mixed metals 4. Mines and mining projects Paragsha (Cerro de Paw) Michiquillay Toromocho Alto Chicama project 5. Sea parts and airports Ilo-Matarani sea ports Lima airport 6. Telecommunications licenses Expected 536.0 11.3 12.2 115.0 14.5 70.0 Personal communications systems Other wirckss telephony 7. Other concessions Highway, route 5 Three railways Biabo forest Five oil field prospects 8. Public buildings 9. Other TOTAL 118.0 150.0 1,027.O Source: Ministry ofEconomy and Finance. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 55 - APPENDIX VI Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 99/-- FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE [Date] IMF Concludes Article IV Consultation with Peru On June 24, 1999, the Executive Board concluded the 1999 Article IV consultation with Peru and approved a three-year extended arrangement in an amount equivalent to SDR 383 million (for further details, see press release number 99/--).I. Background During the period 1991-97, Peru made major progress in eliminating large disequilibria that beset the economy at the beginning of the decade-through economic stabilization, structural reforms, and normalization of the external debt situation, all with support from the Fund. In 1998 economic activity weakened under the influence of the N Afirio weather disturbance, a sharp drop in export commodity prices, and a liquidity squeeze stemming from turbulence in international financial markets. El IWO caused severe disruptions to output and exports, as it damaged infrastructure and led to a sharp fall in fishing and a slowdown in agriculture. A pronounced reduction in foreign lines of credit to the banking system after August 1998 led to a slowdown in credit and higher interest rates, which in turn exacerbated a drop in domestic demand and put some strain on the banking system. Real GDP growth slowed to 0.7 percent, and the fiscal position shifted from balance to a deficit of 0.5 percent of GDP, as weak economic activity restrained tax revenue. The external current account deficit increased to 6 percent of GDP, and net international reserves declined by US$l billion. However, by end-1998 international reserves still remained at a comfortable level. In late 1998 and early 1999, the authorities took steps to ease liquidity and, in response to the weakening of the banking system, they also broadened the coverage of deposit insurance and designed a program for channeling public sector resources through the ‘Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial information, and discusses with officials the country’s economic developments and policies. On return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the country’s authorities. In this PIN, the main features of the Board’s discussion are described. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 56 - APPENDIX VI second-tier public bank for onlending to finance bank debt restructuring. Bank liquidity eased in early 1999 but, in view of the weak outlook for the business sector, banks remained cautious in their lending. The program for 1999 assumes a 3 percent growth in real GDP and envisages inflation during the year of 6 percent, a decline in the external current account deficit, and a moderate accumulation of net international reserves that would keep gross international reserves in the range of 11-12 months of imports of goods and services, and at around 72 percent of broad money. The growth projection for 1999 assumes that a recovery will gradually build momentum during the year, initially through a rebound of output in the primary sectors and exports, and in the second half of the year from a more broadly based recovery of economic activity and domestic demand. Executive Board Assessment <Begin Typing Here> Public Jnformation Notices (PINS) are issued, at the request of a member country, following the conclusion of the Article IV consultation for countries seeking to make known the views of the IMF to the public. This action is intended to strengthen IMF surveillance over the economic policies of member countries by increasing the transparency of the IMF’s assessment of these policies. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 57 - APPENDIX VI Peru: Selected Economic Indicators Prel. Proj. 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 (Annual percentage change, unless otherwise indicated) Real economy Real GDP Inflation l/ Terms of trade Real effective exchange rate (depreciation -) l/2/ Nominal exchange rate (in soles per U.S. dollar) l/ Money and credit Base money Broad money 3/ Credit to private sector 31 7.3 10.2 2.8 -3.3 2.31 36.9 24.2 37.6 2.5 7.2 0.7 3.0-4.0 11.8 6.5 6.0 5.0-6.0 0.2 5.2 -8.0 -11.2 0.9 7.4 -11.1 2.60 2.72 3.15 ::: 9.2 19.1 5.5 5.9 28.0 15.0 0.4 7.3 35.6 27.4 8.4 10.8 (In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated) Savings and investment Gross domestic investment 24.4 23.3 National savings 17.1 17.4 External savings 7.3 5.9 Balance of payments Current account -7.3 -5.9 Capital and financial account 8.9 9.0 Gross official reserves (in months of imports of goods and services) I/ Gross official reserves (in percent of broad money) I/ Public finances Combined public sector primary balance 4/ Combined public sector overall balance 41 Public sector medium- and long-term external debt 9.2 11.2 74.7 75.6 0.4 1.3 -2.8 -1 .o 45.1 42.8 24.5 24.6 22.9 19.2 18.5 17.9 5.2 6.0 5.0 -5.2 -6.0 -5.0 7.8 4.3 5.7 12.0 11 .o 11.8 78.2 73.4 72.3 1.7 1.3 0.9 0.0 -0.5 -1.2 30.2 32.3 37.4 Sources: Central Reserve Bank of Peru; and Fund staff estimates. II At end of period. 21 Based on Information Notice System. 31 Flows in foreign currency are valued at program exchange rate. 41 Revenue excludes privatisation receipts. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 58 - APPENDIX VII Peru: Extended Arrangement Attached hereto is a letter, with annexed memorandum and tables, dated June 7, 1999, from the Minister of Economy and Finance and the President of the Central Reserve Bank of Peru requesting an extended arrangement and setting forth: (a) the objectives and policies that the authorities of Peru intend to pursue for the period of this extended arrangement; (b) the policies and measures that the authorities of Peru intend to pursue during the first year of this extended arrangement; and (c) understandings of Peru with the Fund regarding reviews that will be made of progress in realizing the objectives of the program and of the policies and measures that the authorities of Peru will pursue for the second and third years of this extended arrangement. To support these objectives and policies, the International Monetary Fund grants this extended arrangement in accordance with the following provisions: 1. For the period from 1999 to May 3 1, 2002, Peru will have the right to make purchases from the Fund in Gount equivalent to SDR 383 million, subject to paragraphs 2, 3, 4, and 5 below, )vithout fmther review by the Fund. 2. Purchases under this extended arrangement shall not, without the consent of the Fund, exceed the equivalent of SDR 29.46 million until August 15, 1999, the equivalent of SDR 58.92 million until November 15, 1999, the equivalent of SDR 88.38 million until February 15, 2000, the equivalent of SDR 117.84 million until May IS, 2000, the equivalent of SDR 147.30 million until August 15, 2000, the equivalent of SDR 176.76 million until November 15, 2000, the equivalent of SDR 206.22 million until February 15, 2001, the equivalent 235.68 million until May 15, 2001, the equivalent of SDR 265.14 million until August 15, 2001, the equivalent of 294.60 million until November 15, 2001, the equivalent of SDR 324.06 until February 15, 2002 and the equivalent of SDR 353.52 million until May 15, 2002. 3. Peru will not make purchases under this extended arrangement: (a) during any period in which the data at the end of the preceding period indicate that (i) the limit on the borrowing requirement of the combined public sector, or (ii) the limit on the net domestic assets of the Central Reserve Bank, or (iii) the target on the net international reserves of the Central Reserve Bank, or Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 59 - APPENDIX VII (iv) the ceiling on short-term external debt of the public sector, or (v) the ceiling and sub-ceilings on the contracting or guaranteeing of nonconcessional external public debt specified in Table I annexed to the memorandum is not observed; or (b) if at any time during the period of the arrangement Peru incurs in external payments arrears of the public sector as defined in Table 1 annexed to the memorandum; or (c) after December 3 I, 1999 until the review contemplated in paragraph 3 of the letter dated June 7, 1999 is completed; or (d) after May 31, 2000, until performance criteria for 2000 and the timing of hrture reviews of the program have been established; or (e) if at any time during the period of the extended arrangement Peru (i) imposes or intensifies restrictions on the making of payments and transfers for current international transactions; or (ii) introduces or modifies multiple currency practices; or III) concludes bilateral payments agreements which are inconsistent with Article VIII’, , r (iv) imposes or intensifies import restrictions for balance of payments reasons When Peru is prevented from purchasing under this extended arrangement because of this paragraph 3, purchases will be resumed only after consultation has taken place between the Fund and Peru and understandings have been reached regarding the circumstances in which such purchases can be resumed. 4. Peru will not make purchases under this extended arrangement during any period in which Peru has an overdue financial obligation to the Fund or is failing to meet a repurchase expectation (a) in respect of a noncomplying purchase pursuant to Decision No. 7842-(841165) on the Guidelines on Corrective Action, or (b) in respect of a purchase in support pf debt and debt service reduction operations pursuant to Decision No. 9331-(89/167), as amended, or(c) pursuant to subparagraph 16(a) or 33(a) ofDecision No. 8955-(88/126), as amended, on the Compensatory and Contingency Financing Facility. 5. Peru’s right to engage in the transactions covered by this extended arrangement can be suspended only with respect to requests received by the Fund after (a) a formal ineligibility, or (b) a decision of the Executive Board to suspend transactions, either generally or in order to consider a proposal, made by an Executive Director or the Managing Director, formally to Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 60 - APPENDIX VII suppress or to limit the eligibility of Peru When notice of a decision of formal inehgtbrhty or of a decision to consider a proposal is given pursuant to this paragraph 5, purchases under this arrangement will be resumed only after consultation has taken place between the Fund and Peru and understandings have been reached regarding the circumstances in which such purchases can be resumed. 6. Purchases under this extended arrangement shall be made in the currencies of other members selected in accordance with the policies and procedures of the Fund, unless, at the request of Peru, the Fund agrees to provide SDRs at the time of the purchase. 7. Peru shall pay a charge for this extended arrangement in accordance with the decisions of the Fund. 8. (a) Peru shall repurchase the amount of its currency that results from a purchase under this extended arrangement in accordance with the provisions of the Articles of Agreement and decisions of the Fund, including those relating to repurchase as Peru’s balance of payments and reserve position improves. (b) Any reductions in Peru’s currency held by the Fund shall reduce the amounts subject to repurchase under (a) above in accordance with the principles applied by the Fund for this purpose at the time of the reduction. 9. During the period of the extended arrangement, Peru shall remain in close consultation with the Fund. These consultations may include correspondence and visits of offtcials of the Fund to Peru or of representatives of Peru to the Fund. Peru shall provide the Fund, through reports at intervals or dates requested by the Fund, with such information as the Fund requests in connection with the progress of Peru in achieving the objectives and policies set forth in the attached letter and annexed memorandum. 10. In accordance with paragraph 3 of the attached letter, Peru will consult with the Fund on the adoption of any measures that may be appropriate at the initiative of the government or whenever the Managing Director requests consultation because any of the criteria in paragraph 3 above have not been observed or because the Managing Director considers that consultation on the program is desirable. In addition, after the period of the arrangement and while Peru has outstanding purchases under this arrangement, the Government of Peru will consult with the Fund from time to time, at the initiative of the government or at the request of the Managing Director, concerning Peru’s balance of payments policies. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-61 - ATTACHMENT I Lima, Peru June 7, 1999 Mr. Michel Camdessus Managing Director International Monetary Fund Washington, D.C. 2043 1 Dear Mr. Camdessus: 1. The attached memorandum describes the economic policies that the Government of Peru intends to follow during the period from April 1999 through March 2002 and provides the details of the objectives and policies of the government during the first year of the program. These policies aim at promoting the sustained growth of per capita income and generation of employment, consolidating progress toward external viability, lowering inflation to industrial country levels, and reducing poverty. The program’s success will require continued fiscal and monetary discipline and a deepening of structural reform efforts. 2. The Government of Peru seeks continued support from the International Monetary Fund for its economic program and hereby requests a new extended arrangement for a three- year period through May 2002 in an amount equivalent to SDR 383 million. It is not expected that purchases under the arrangement will be necessary, since the successful implementation of the economic program supported by the Fund should generate the required external resources. Accordingly, the government intends to treat the arrangement as precautionary. 3. The Government of Peru believes that the policies described in the attached memorandum are adequate to achieve the objectives of the economic program, and will take any additional measures that may be appropriate for this purpose. During the period of the arrangement the authorities of Peru will consult periodically with the Fund on policy issues and measures, in accordance with Fund’s policies on such consultations. The first review with the Fund covering the implementation of the economic program described in the attached memorandum, including an assessment of progress with structural reforms, will be completed prior to December 3 1, 1999. The performance criteria for end-March 2000 shall be established at the time of the first review. IS/ Victor Joy Way Rojas Minister of Economy and Finance Sincerely yours, ISI German Suarez, President Central Reserve Bank of Peru Attachment Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 62 - ATTACHMENT I Memorandum on Economic and Financial Policies of the Government of Peru for the Period April 1, 1999 to March 31,2002 1. BACKGROUND 1. Over the last several years Peru has made major progress through sound economic management in creating the conditions for sustained economic growth and the restoration of external viability. Hyperinflation was stopped, and a sharp drop in output in the late 1980s was reversed. Supported initially by a Fund-monitored rights accumulation program (1991-92), and subsequently by two extended arrangements up until end-March 1999, inflation fell from over 7,650 percent in 1990 to 6 percent in 1998, while real GDP grew by 5.0 percent a year on average from 1991 to 1998. Prudent fiscal policies reduced the combined public sector deficit from 8.7 percent of GDP in 1990 to 0.5 percent of GDP in 1998. The net international reserves of the Central Reserve Bank rose from US.SO.5 billion at end-1990 to about USS9 billion at end-1998 (with gross reserves equivalent to 11 months of imports of goods and services). . . 2. In support of its macroeconomic policy, Peru implemented an ambitious structural reform program in the 1990s to enhance economic efticiency and improve social conditions. The government sold major public enterprises in the telecommunications, energy, financial, fishing and mining sectors and reduced its participation in the electricity and petroleum sectors through the award of concessions and sales to the private sector. In the financial sector, the authorities introduced a new banking law in 1996 to strengthen the Superintendency of Banks and Insurance (SBS), and have since continued to improve the soundness of the banking system. A private pension system, based on individual capitalization, was created in 1993 as an alternative to the public pension system, and workers are encouraged to switch from the public to the private pension system. Fiscal reforms have simplified the tariff system, revamped customs procedures, strengthened tax administration, and reduced bureaucratic procedures. Regulations have been simplified in order to establish clear guidelines for fostering private sector investment, particularly in the areas of telecommunications, energy, agriculture, and mining. The government has implemented reform programs in education and health, and poverty levels have declined through the combined effect of more rapid economic growth and targeted efforts to alleviate poverty, especially in the poorest regions of the country The incidence of extreme poverty declined from 26.8 percent in 1991 to 14.7 percent in 1997, and the government intends to reduce it to no more than 10 percent by end-2000. 3. The government has taken a series of major steps to normal& relations with external creditors and restructure external debt, thereby facilitating the return to external viability. These actions started with the regularization of relations with Paris Club creditors in 1991, followed by the clearance of all arrears to international financial institutions in 1993. Offtcial external debts to the Paris Club creditors were renegotiated in 1996, with a Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 63 - ATTACHMENT I rescheduling agreement that provided relief of US$l.3 billion in the period. 1996-98. Peru graduated from Paris Club rescheduling at the end of 1998, and a re-profiling of the stock of debt became effective on January 1, 1999. In early 1997, Peru successfUlly concluded a debt and debt-service reduction operation with commercial creditors. 4. The economy was weakened in 1998 by the combined effects of El Nirio, a sharp drop in export commodity prices, and a liquidity crunch stemming from turbulence in international financial markets. Growth of real GDP slowed to 0.7 percent and the external current account deficit widened, while the overall fiscal position deteriorated from balance to a deficit of 0.5 percent of GDP. The economic program for 1999-2001 is thus framed against the need to regain the momentum of sustained growth and consolidate progress toward a sustainable external position and lower inflation, while the government also perseveres in its efforts to improve social conditions and reduce poverty. II. MACROECONOMIC PROGRAM 5. The government intends to direct its economic policies toward promoting sustainable growth of output and employment, consolidating progress toward external viability, and continuing efforts to reduce inflation. Our policies for sustained growth, which are central to our anti-poverty strategy, are complemented by focused efforts to address priority social needsThe government’s strategy for growth envisages policies that will foster a thriving private sector, which must be the main source for generating employment, including in sectors such as construction and agriculture that are labor-intensive. 6. The macroeconomic program will aim at restoring real GDP growth in 1999 to 3-4 percent and raising it to 6 percent by 2001, while maintaining inflation at 5-6 percent in 1999 and lowering it to about 3 percent by 2001. An increase in net international reserves of US$O.4 billion is envisaged for 1999, followed by fiuther increases in 2000-01 that will keep international reserves fairly stable in relation to imports. 7. Gross domestic investment and national savings will be strengthened through a deepening of structural reforms that will further increase private sector participation in the economy, reduce the role of the public sector in economic activity, and lessen the reliance on external saving. Total investment is projected to increase from 22.9 percent of GDP in 1999 to 23.8 percent in 2001 on the strength of private investment, especially in the energy, mining, construction, and telecommunications sectors. Over this period, national savings are projected to grow from 17.8 percent to 19.0 percent of GDP, with public savings accounting for more than half of this increase. Reliance on foreign savings would decline from 6 percent of GDP in 1998 to 5 percent of GDP in 1999, and the longer-term objective is to bring the external current account deficit below 3 percent of GDP. However, large foreign- financed investment projects in the mining and energy sectors will boost import requirements over the period 2000-02, so that by the end of the program period (2001) the current account deficit is expected to be just under 5 percent of GDP. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 64 - ATTACHMENT I 8. Over the medium term, the government will continue to raise public savings and make room for private investment. The combined public sector primary surplus (excluding privatization proceeds) is projected to decline from 1.3 percent of GDP in 1998 to 0.9 percent of GDP in 1999, before improving to 1.6 percent of GDP in 2001, when the overall position is expected to be in approximate balance. The decline in the primary surplus in 1999, to 0.9 percent of GDP, reflects a moderately lower level of tax collections (resulting from the lagged effect of the slowdown in economic activity in 1998) and higher outlays for public sector wages and pensions following the first increase since August 1997. These changes could not easily be offset in view of the need to continue with the reconstruction of public infrastructure damaged by El Nifio. The fiscal objectives of the program for 1999 will be monitored on a quarterly basis through a ceiling on the combined public sector borrowing requirement as set out in Table 1. Also, this ceiling will be adjusted downwards in the event that central government revenue exceeds programmed levels, up to the point where the primary surplus reaches 1.3 percent of GDP, so as to save the additional revenue and thus strengthen the fiscal position. However, if revenues fall short of programmed levels, the government will take additional measures that may be needed to achieve the fiscal targets for 1999. Looking ahead to the fiscal program for 2000, the government will adopt the measures needed to achieve the revenue objectives, in particular to offset the scheduled elimination of the special solidarity tax (IES). These measures will be approved prior to completion of the first program review. 9. The government will seek to enhance the efficiency and equity of the tax system. To improve the yield performance of the tax system by broadening the tax base and reducing evasion, eliminating distortions, and enhancing its equity, the government will seek technical assistance from the Fund in the area of tax policy in 1999. The government will evaluate the recommendations and start to implement in 2000 those reforms that it considers desirable. Meanwhile, the government will refrain from expanding the scope of sectoral or regional tax preferences or exemptions and, more generally, it will avoid further discretionary revenue- reducing actions. 10. The government will continue its efforts to strengthen tax administration. In 1999, the tax administration agency SUNAT will continue its work to reduce tax evasion. By August 1999, it will start collecting social security and pension contributions on behalf of the public health care agency (ESSALUD) and the National Pension Bureau (ONP), which will contribute to the modernization of the state and is expected to lower collection costs and reduce evasion. SUNAT has started to gradually introduce mechanisms that will permit the filing and payment of taxes by electronic means, thus facilitating tax compliance; it is expected that at least 90 percent of tax revenue will be collected in this way by 2000. SUNAT also will establish an integrated control system by mid-2000, which will permit close monitoring of tax compliance. In addition, in 2000 SUNAT will improve the identification system for individual taxpayers on the basis of their national identity document, which will facilitate cross-checking of data. In 1999, it will fmalize the audits of the fishing and construction sectors initiated in late 1998 and it will also carry out an audit of the mining sector, including close examination Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 65 - ATTACHMENT I of drawback claims; subsequently it will conduct other audits concentrated in specific sectors. SUNAT also will examine carefully the tax exemptions claimed under the recently enacted Amazon Law in order to minimize tax avoidance and evasion in this area. 11. The peace treaty with Ecuador will permit a reallocation of central government resources away from military expenditure and toward the social sectors. The reduction in arms purchases in 1999 will provide room for increased spending in the areas of health and education, including to improve the wages of teachers and health care workers. The government will pursue a results-oriented approach to reducing poverty by improving the targeting of poverty alleviation programs. Focus will be placed on the poorer segments of the population in both urban and rural areas (see paras. 27-29). 12. An integrated system of financial administration and expenditure control for the central government budget (SIAF) is well advanced. Since end-1998, almost all units of the central government are registering their payment operations in this system regularly. With effect from January 1999, the system is being used also for expenditure management and control purposes. The budget directorate communicates monthly expenditure allocations to spending units through the SIAF, and this is the basis for the subsequent steps from expenditure commitment to cash payment, each of which is subject to verification in the system as it is taking place. By September 1999 the SIAF’s operation as an instrument of expenditure management and control will be evaluated. 13. The monetary program is based on the inflation objective for 1999, for which the central bank will continue to utilize base money as its intermediate target. To ensure that the growth in private sector credit is in line with the program objectives, the central bank will keep credit developments under close review, and will continue to utilize prudent policies with respect to reserve requirements and open market operations as needed. A ceiling on the expansion of net domestic assets and a floor on the accumulation of net international reserves of the central bank have been established as indicated in Table 1. For program monitoring purposes, the calculation of net international reserves treats banks’ foreign currency deposits in the central bank as a reserve liability. Thus, in Table 1 international reserves are broadly stable in 1999, compared with an increase of US30.4 billion on an unadjusted basis. 14. The government recognizes that the maintenance of a healthy banking system and its efficient operation require a sound macroeconomic environment, and vice versa. Several actions have been taken in recent years to enhance the soundness of the system and the SBS’s ability to detect bank problems and pursue appropriate remedies. Most recently, a banking reform was enacted in May 1999 that will: (i) permit the SBS to step in sooner by clarifying trigger points for surveillance and intervention; (ii) increase the efficiency of liquidation procedures and reduce the cost of bank liquidation (transferring the “good’ assets to another financial institution and liquidating the rest); (iii) strengthen the SBS’s ability to pursue appropriate remedies by providing a proper legal framework for its activities; (iv) give the deposit insurance fund (FSD) an active role in supporting and monitoring bank Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 66 - ATTACHMENT I restructuring and allow the FSD to take temporary control of a bank under exceptional circumstances; and (v) tighten the limits on connected lending. 15. In the area of prudential regulations for the banking sector, the SBS is proceeding with scheduled increases in provisioning requirements, and is strengthening capital requirements so as to take appropriate account of market risk. Also, simplified money laundering regulations will be issued by December 1999. The SBS will continue to rely on forward-looking supervisory processes, by improving the existing risk-based supervision approach, which includes an analysis of credit, market, liquidity, operational and contagion risk. To have access to accurate and timely information on the financial institution’s exposure to the above risks, the SBS will take steps to modernize the credit risk bureau with an updated information system. 16. In view of the virtual halt of bank lending in late 1998 and early 1999, the government is taking steps to facilitate the resumption of lending by channeling public sector resources for the restructuring of private sector debt to domestic banks. The aim of this program is to lengthen the maturity of bank loans and provide the banking system with additional liquidity that does not entail a fiscal subsidy. To this end, public sector resources are being onlent to banks by COFIDE, a second-tier public sector financial institution. It is intended that this credit program not be used to support insolvent borrowers or unsound banks. Accordingly, the credits for this purpose will be subject to COFIDE’s prudential lending limits for individual banks; banks will bear the credit risk on the refinanced loans; and banks will not be allowed to refinance debts of related parties. It is intended that the refinancing program, as with all of COFIDE’s lending activities, not impede the process of bank restructuring or consolidation that may be needed in some cases. COFIDE’s operations will remain second-tier only, i.e., it will refrain from direct lending to the corporate sector. Since the debt _ restructuring program will be limited in size and duration, COFIDE’s lending for this restructuring will be limited to US$l .O billion, which we expect to be-fully disbursed by end-1999. We estimate that no further lending for debt restructuring will be needed beyond this amount. 17. The government will continue to implement a flexible e:change rate policy, permitting the economy to adapt to terms-of-trade and other external shocks. During the period of the arrangement, central bank interventions in the foreign exchange market will be aimed at smoothing out temporary fluctuations in the exchange rate, and the central hank will continue the practice of not intervening in the forward foreign exchange market. 18. The government aims at consolidating the recent gains in Peru’s external debt position over the next three years. To continue improving the terms of Peru’s debt, the program places a ceiling on the contracting or guaranteeing of nonconcessional medium- and long-term external public debt and on the outstanding short-term debt of the nonfinancial public sector as described in Table I. The servicing of all public sector debt will continue to be made as scheduled. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 67 - ATTACHMENT I III. STRUCTUR~LREFORMS 19. In the period 1999-2001, the government will intensify the structural reform program that was started in the early 1990s. The areas to be covered will include privatization and concessions, the regulatory framework, financial sector reform, and social programs including for education, health, and poverty alleviation. To facilitate the monitoring of progress with this program, selected elements will be subject to structural benchmarks as shown in Table 2. 20. The government will take steps to reinvigorate its privatizatidn and concession program. To enhance the efficiency of the economy, the government has implemented a program of privatization since the early 1990s that has successfully transferred numerous enterprises to the private sector. In 1999, the government will make greater inroads in this area. First, the government will sell its remaining equity in previously privatized enterprises. Second, it will privatize the remaining publicly owned mine and some small manufacturing enterprises. Third, as part of the government’s reform program aimed at raising potential growth in the agricultural sector, it will sell 25,000 hectares of agricultural,land. This program also includes additional titling of private lands, including the issue of at least 80,000 rural land titles in 1999. Fourth, the government will also make available for sale a list of fixed assets that would include major office buildings. In 2000, all remaining public enterprises in the mining sector will be offered for sale. The government, as shareholder in a number of sugar plantations, will encourage the injection of capital and transfer of management control of these former sugar cooperatives to strategic partners. Further steps in the privatization program, to be implemented in 2000 and 2001, will be discussed prior to the completion of the second review under the extended arrangement. 21. The increased use of concessions will complement the privatization program in reducing public sector participation in activities that are best leftto the private sector. The government will award concessions for: the management of a number of forests, starting with Biabo in 1999; the Lima-Pativilica and Lima-Canta-Unish highways in 1999 and the Lima-Ica highway in 2000; the Ilo and Matarani seaports in 1999, and three other port concessions, including Callao, in 2000; the Lima airport in 1999 and airports in Arequipa, Cusco, Trujillo, and Iquitos in 2000; three fields for mining exploration owned by Centromin in Quicay, Toromocho, and Michiquillay in 1999; six fields for mining exploration owned by Mineropetu in 1999, and I1 other mine prospects in 2000-01; and five oil prospecting sites in 1999 and a similar number of sites in 2000-01; and all state railway lines in 1999. It also will auction the licenses in 1999 for new wireless communications systems. As long as the public sector continues to participate in the petroleum sector, it will follow sound business practices in the setting of domestic prices of refined petroleum products. The tender for the Camisea natural gas project has been announced for mid-1999 and should be adjudicated by end-1999. Total receipts from the privatization and concession programs are expected to yield at least US$SOO million for the Treasury in 1999. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 68 - ATTACHMENT I 22. In the context of the privatization and concession agenda, the government will continue to strengthen the regulatory framework for economic activities, particularly for agricultural and rural development. To provide adequate regulation of recent legislation on land rights, including the legal framework for sales and transfers of agricultural land, revised norms will be issued by end-1999. These regulations will provide for an updated rural land registry that will, in conjunction with the rural land titling program, help secure the property rights of rural landowners. To promote growth in rural areas through more efficient use of agricultural resources, a draft law on water rights will be prepared for presentation to congress in 2000. This reform would allow for the transfer of water rights and establish a framework for tariffs on water usage based on the cost of providing the necessary infrastructure, and would modify regulations for associations of water users. With a view to fostering growth in the economy more generally, the government will review its policies on the promotion of technological innovation, and will assess whether it properly supports research and development activities undertaken by the private sector. 23. The program of privatization and concessions is part of the government’s effort to redefine the role and appropriate dimensions of the public sector. Over the next year we will undertake preliminary studies regarding government fimctions (current and prospective) and assess our manpower needs in the various branches of government. These studies will form part of our continuing efforts to ensure a high quality of government expenditure. 24. To consolidate recent pension reform efforts, the government will introduce additional measures to strengthen the private pension system (SPP) and ensure the actuarial soundness of the public National Pension System (SNP). With respect to the SPP: (i) the pension supervisory authority (SAFP) will be granted access to personnel records of employers in payment arrears; (ii) the SBS and SAFP will improve coordination in the supervision of interlinked banks, insurance companies, and privately administered pension funds (AFPs); (iii) the SAFP will identify an expanded set of permissible investments for the APPs; (iv) a study will be completed, under a World Bank loan, on the steps needed to reduce administrative costs and will develop specific targets for their reduction; and (v) the government will issue 40,000 recognition bonds for an estimated S/. 700 million (0.35 percent of GDP) in 1999, and 40,000 in each of the following two years. 25. For the SNP, the government: (i) will improve accounting controls and the cost- efficiency of the system by permitting SUNAT to collect pension contributions, register contributors to the SNP, and resolve disputes on behalf of the SNP; and (ii) will ensure that adequate funding of future obligations of the SNP is put in place by transferring additional resources to the FCR (Fond0 Consolidado de Reservas) and establishing a solid, long-term investment program for the FCR. Conservative portfolio management practices will be followed for this timd, as well as for the supplementary pension fund (FONAHPU). 26. To strengthen domestic capital markets, the government will focus on two key areas. First, to improve the effectiveness of capital market regulation, it will establish a mechanism to enhance coordination among the SBS, the SAFP, and the Superintendency of Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicATTACHMENT I Companies and Securities (CONASEV). Second, the government will seek to promote a deepening of the domestic capital markets over the medium term, initially by studying the feasibility and appropriateness of a program of issuing long-term government securities for the purpose of establishing a yield curve. By end-1999 it is expected that tax legislation will be adapted as needed to be consistent with the development of new financial instruments and markets, including for the development of a secondary mortgage market. 21. In the social sector, the government attaches high priority to reducing poverty and improving the overall impact of social programs through better coordination among the various ministries and agencies involved. With support from the World Bank, the government will identify key social programs that, beginning this year, will be protected from budget cuts, including basic education and basic health. At the same time, the government will continue to improve the targeting of existing poverty alleviation programs and will strengthen them through better design and closer coordination among ministries, based in part on a new poverty map that will be published by December 1999. In addition, the government will develop a set of core social indicators to measure improvements and track progress in its programs, and will develop a monitoring and evaluation plan by Decemb.er 1999. 28. To make spending on education more efficient and equitable, the government will provide teachers with methodological guidance materials and training based on the analysis of school performance by October 1999. The government will progressively allocate more resources for basic education in 2000 and 2001 to boost investment in the education of children in poverty as well as to improve teaching standards in rural areas. To achieve a better balance in the use of public sector resources for education, the government will gradually shift its budget in this area toward basic education for both equity and efficiency reasons. In addition, the teacher payroll will be verified and updated, and a unified registry established by June 2000. 29. In the area of health care, the government will improve primary care for the poor, and broaden access to publicly provided health care for the non-poor. On primary health care, the government will raise the current funding level,progressively starting in 2000. The government will introduce programs to encourage community management of health care establishments, and introduce 600 more establishments of this kind by January 2000. The government will enhance access to basic services by establishing maternal-infant health insurance in six health regions by December 1999. Regarding access to health care, early this year the government implemented a fee-based plan to expand insurance coverage by ESSALUD and private insurers for the self-employed, the unemployed, and their dependents. 30. As an important part of the overall strategy to strengthen the social safety net, the government will improve the targeting of social spending, including for the provision of basic infrastructure and food and nutrition programs to the poorest segment of the population, and it will take steps to increase the cost-effectiveness of such programs. The government will make explicit the nutritional objectives and targeted Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 70 - ATTACHMENT I population for each program and design entry and exit criteria for program beneficiaries by June 2000. In addition, the government will develop a system of control that would permit external monitoring, supervision, and evaluation of its programs, including the administrative control of food distribution by June 2000. For basic infrastructure, the government will undertake projects in water and sewage systems, roads and electrification in the poorest regions of the country 31. The government remains firmly committed to open trade, capital, and exchange regimes, and it will continue to deepen trade and customs reforms. It is firmly committed not to introduce nontariff barriers for protectionist purposes or in a manner that is otherwise inconsistent with Peru’s obligations as a member of the WTO. In 2000, it will narrow the tariff dispersion by 2 percentage points. Peru will continue to participate in regional trade agreements aimed at expanding the benefits of liberal trading systems. 32. The government has launched a comprehensive program to deal with the Y2K problem, coordinated through a central ofice in the National Statistics Institute (INEI). SUNAT’s data system for tax administration and the financial sector’s payments system are Y2K compliant, while a plan is being put in place to prepare the banking system for this contingency. By November 1999 it is expected that the utilities sector will be in full compliance, and tests of compliance for the treasury’s expenditure management system will be completed. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-71. ATTACHMENT I Table 1, Peru: Quantitative Performance Criteria, 1999 Prel. March 3 I June 30 Sept. 30 Dec. 3 I (Cumulative amounts from December 3 I, 1998, in millions of new soles) Borrowing requirement of the combined public sector I/ 21 869 1,750 2,255 2,340 (Cumulative change from December 3 I, 1998, in millions of new soles) Net domestic assets of the Central Reserve Bank 3/4/S/6/ 1,180 2,511 1,050 I3 (Cumulative change from December 3 I, 1998, in millions of U.S. dollars) Net international reserves of the Central Reserve Bank 3/ 4/ 5/6/ 71 -434 -733 -313 53 Short-term external debt of the nonfinancial public sector 50 50 50 50 External payments arrears of the public sector 81 0 0 0 0 (Cumulative amounts from December 31, 1998, in millions ofU.S. dollars) Contracting or guaranteeing of nonconcessional cxte~mal public debt with maturity of at least one yea! 270 1,780 2,590 2,600 0 which: l-12 years’ maturity 30 670 I.060 1,060 II Including the operating balance of the central bati; privatization proceeds arc included below the line 2/The limits on the borrowing requirement of the combined public sector will be adjusted downward to the extent that revenue ofthe central government exceeds Sf. 12,625 million at end-June, Sl. 19,670 million at end-September, and SI. 27,265 million at end-December. The downward adjustment to the borrowing requirement will not exceed SI. 400 million at end-June, S/. 600 million at end-September, and SI. 800 million at end-December 1999. 3/ The limits on net domestic assets will be adjusted downward, and the targets for the net international rcscrvcs will be adjusted upward, to the extent that privatization proceeds in for~eign currency exceed the assumed amounts of US$l41 million by end-June, US$336 million by end-September, and US%00 million by end-December 1999. The amounts in excess will be deposited at the Central Resewc Bank 41 The limits on net domestic assets will bc adjusted downward, and the targets for not international resewes will be adjusted upward, to the extent that net foreign bornowing of the nonfinancial public sector exceeds US%355 million at end- June, US%386 million at end-September. and tJS$l,O38 million at end-December 1999. These amounts will be deposited at the Central Reserve Bank 5/The targets for net international reserves will bc adjusted downward, with commensurate upward adjustments to the limits on net domestic assets, for shortfalls from programmed amounts of privatization proceeds in foreign currency, of net foreign borrowing, and ofwithdrawals for portfolio rnnnagemcnt purposes ofdeposits held at the Central Reserve 13ank by the Consolidated Pension Reserve Fund @CR) and any other funds managed by the ONP This downward adjustment will not exceed US$300 million at end-June, US%500 million at end-September, and US$600 million at end-December 1999, and within the total the downward adjustment for shortfalls in privatization proceeds will not exceed US%100 million at end- June, US$200 million at end-Septembw, and lJS$200 million at end-December 1999. 61 The limits on net domestic assets will be adjusted upward, nnd the targets for net international reserves will be adjusted downward, by the amount used to prepay external debt, including debt equity swaps in the privatiLation process, 71 For the purpose of the program, the definition of net international resewes includes, as a reserve liability, the financial system’s deposits in foreign currency that are held in the Central Reserve Bank, 81 Excluding arrears associated with nonrescheduled debt to foreign creditors outstanding BS of end- 1998. o:\“*TA\PA\P~\991,~~~~.~~0 .l”nc’l, ,999 wxpm, Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 72 - Table 2. Peru: Structural Benchmarks ATTACHMENT I To be completed by June 30,1999 1. Open bidding process on Camisea natural gas project To be completed by Sept. 30,1999 1. Bring one public enterprise in the mining sector to the point of sale 2. Sale of remaining shares in privatized enterprises in the telecommunications sector 3. Award concessions for mining exploration of 3 fields To be completed by Dec. 31, 1999 1. Award concession for operating Lima airport 2. Award concession for Ilo and Matarani seaports 3. Award concession for all railway lines 4. Award contract on Camisea natural gas project 5. Sale of remaining shares in privatized enterprises in the energy sector 6. Sale of agricultural land: 25,000 hectares 7. Issue 80,000 rural land titles in 1999 8. Establish set of social indicators to improve the targeting of social expenditure Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public