DOCUMENT OF INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND NOT FOR PUBLIC USE EBS/02/25 CONFIDENTIAL February 14,2002 To: Members of the Executive Board From: The Secretary Subject: Sierra Leone-Staff Report for the 2001 Article IV Consultation and the First Review Under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility and Request for Waiver of Performance Criterion Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staff report for the 2001 Article IV consultation with Sierra Leone, the first review under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility, and Sierra Leone’s request for a waiver of performance criterion. A draft decision appears on pages 23 and 24. This paper, together with the decision point document for the enhanced HIPC for Sierra Leone (to be issued), will be brought to the agenda for discussion on a date to be announced. At the time of circulation of this paper to the Board, the Secretary’s Department has received a communication from the authorities of Sierra Leone indicating that they consent to the Fund’s publication of only the letter of intent. Questions may be referred to Mr. Kakoza (ext. 36514) and Mr. Tharkur (ext. 38539). Unless the Documents Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the WTO Secretariat on Monday, February 25,2002; and to the African Development Bank, the European Commission, and the Islamic Development Bank, following its consideration by the Executive Board. Att: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicCONFIDENTIAL INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND SIERRA LEONE Staff Report for the 2001 Article IV Consultation and the First Review Under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility and Request for Waiver of Performance Criterion Prepared by the African Department (In consultation with the Fiscal Affairs, Legal, Monetary and Exchange Affairs, Policy Development and Review, Statistics, and Treasurer’s Departments) Approved by Donal Donovan and Masood Ahmed February 13,2002 Contents Page Executive Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .3 I. Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .5 II. Recent Developments and Performance ................................................................. .6 A. The Peace Process.. ..................................................................................... .6 B. Recent Economic Developments and Performance .................................... .8 In. Objectives and Policies for 2002 .......................................................................... .12 A. Fiscal Policies ........................................................................................... .13 B. Monetary and Financial Sector Policies .................................................... .16 C. External Sector Policies ............................................................................ .17 D. Structural Policies ..................................................................................... .18 E. Capacity Building ..................................................................................... .19 Iv. Staff Appraisal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20 Appendices I. Letter of Intent.. ..................................................................................................... .40 Table 1: Quantitative Performance Criteria and Benchmarks .......................... .53 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2- II. III. Iv. V. Table 2: Structural Benchmarks and Performance Criteria Under the Program Supported by the PRGF Arrangement .............................................................. .54 Relations with the Fund ....................................................................................... ..5 5 Relations with the World Bank Group.. ............................................................... ..5 8 Statistical Issues .................................................................................................... .59 Public Information Notice.. ................................................................................... .63 Boxes 1. 2. Status of Reintegration Activities for Ex-Combatants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7 Summary of Proposed Strategy and Timetable for Revenue Administration Modernization . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .14 Figures 1. 2. 3. 4. Effective Exchange Rate Developments, January 1996-October 200 1 ............... ..2 5 Selected Economic Indicators, 1996-2004.. ......................................................... ..2 6 Exchange rate Premium, January 1996-October 200 1.. ........................................ .27 Trends in Interest Rates, Exchange Rate and Consumer Price Index (CPI), 1996-Oct. 2001 ..................................................................................................... .28 Tables 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 2000-07.. ....................................... .29 Central Government Financial Operations, 2000-07 ............................................ .30 Monetary Survey, December 2000-December 2002 ............................................. .32 Balance of Payments, 2000-07 .............................................................................. .33 Medium-Term Balance of Payments Assumptions, 2000-07 .............................. ..3 4 External Financing Requirements and Sources, 2000-04 .................................... ..3 5 Use of Fund Credit, December 2000-December 2005.. ........................................ .36 Arrangements Under the PRGF, 200 l-04.. ........................................................... .37 Selected Social and Demographic Indicators ........................................................ .3 8 Indicators of External Vulnerability.. .................................................................... .39 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3- EXECUTIVE SUMMARY l Remarkable progress was made by Sierra Leone in advancing the peace process during 2001. As a result, the disarmament and demobilization of ex-combatants was completed in early January 2002, facilitated by the full deployment of the UN peacekeeping force (UNAMSIL). The improved security across the country has permitted the free movement of people and the return of displaced populations to their communities. General elections are planned for May 14,2002, and over twenty parties plan to contest them, including the one formed by former rebels, the Revolutionary United Front (RUF). l Economic performance continued to improve during 2001. Real GDP is estimated to have risen by 5.4 percent, slightly higher than programmed, while inflation fell to an average of about 3 percent, compared with the program target of 8 percent. Gross external reserves of the Bank of Sierra Leone (BSL) amounted to 1.3 months of import cover, less than the 1.6 months of import cover targeted under the program, owing to the shortfall in external balance of payments assistance. The leone depreciated by 30 percent against the U.S. dollar between end-December 2000 and end-December 200 1. l The quantitative and structural performance criteria for end-September 2001 were observed, except for the one relating to net domestic bank credit to the government, which was slightly exceeded. Performance criteria relating to end-December 2001 are estimated to have been met. Performance with regard to structural benchmarks was mixed. There were significant delays in implementing some key elements of the civil service reform, and in passing legislation granting autonomy to the Central Statistical Office (CSO). l For 2002, the program aims at a real GDP growth rate of 6-7 percent; an average rate of inflation of under 5 percent; and gross external reserves of the BSL equivalent to 1.9 months of import cover. Domestic revenue is projected to increase by 0.6 percentage point to 14.4 percent of GDP. Expenditure is programmed to rise to about 42 percent of GDP from 3 1 percent in 200 1, largely on account of a projected increase in capital and rehabilitation outlays. The overall budget deficit (excluding grants) is to rise from 17.1 percent of GDP in 200 1 to 27.9 percent in 2002. Given the slow recovery in exports and the projected strong growth in imports, the external current account deficit (excluding official transfers) is projected to widen from about 29 percent of GDP in 2001 to about 39 percent. l Structural reforms have been strengthened by the elaboration of new reform programs in the fiscal and financial sectors. Fiscal reforms aim at streamlining and improving the efficiency of tax administration, leading to the introduction of a value- added tax by 2005. Reforms in the financial sector aim to build capacity in the BSL. The pace of the civil service and of the public enterprises reforms is to be accelerated. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4- * The fiscal targets for 2002 are attainable, but subject to several risks. These include the uncertainty attached to the cost of reestablishing control in formerly rebel-held areas; the management of the cost of the military reintegration program; and the programmed elections, which could put a strain on fiscal discipline. l Given the advances made under the peace process and the satisfactory performance under the PRGF-supported program through December 2001, the staff considers that Sierra Leone qualifies to advance to the decision point under the HIPC Initiative. The staff also recommends that the Executive Board grant the waiver of the nonobservance of the end-September 200 1 performance criterion on net domestic bank credit to the central government. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-5- I. INTRODUCTION 1. A mission’ visited Freetown during November 26-December lo,2001 to conduct the 2002 Article IV consultation discussions and the first review under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF) arrangement, and to update the debt sustainability analysis (DSA), with a view to preparing a decision point document for Sierra Leone under the enhanced Initiative for Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC Initiative). The last Article IV consultation with Sierra Leone was concluded on January 22,200l. Sierra Leone accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4 of the Fund’s Articles of Agreement on December 1995, and maintains an exchange system that is free of restriction on payments and transfers for current international transactions. 2. On September 20,2001, the Executive Board approved a three-year PRGF arrangement in support of Sierra Leone’s medium-term program. At the same time, the Executive Board agreed that Sierra Leone qualified for debt relief under the enhanced HIPC Initiative. In their deliberations, Directors noted the substantial progress that had been made under the peace process and commended the authorities on their comprehensive interim poverty reduction strategy paper (I-PRSP), which they considered a good basis for the Fund’s concessional assistance. Directors underscored the key factors that they considered crucial for the successful implementation of the program, namely, the consolidation of the peace process, especially the effective execution of the disarmament, demobilization, and reintegration (DDR) program; the timely implementation of structural reforms; the pursuit of prudent macroeconomic policies; and continued financial and technical assistance from the international community. Directors agreed that Sierra Leone could reach the decision point under the enhanced HIPC Initiative in December 2001, provided that adequate progress continued to be made under the peace process, and that the program supported by the PRGF arrangement remained on track.2 i The mission comprised Mr. J. Kakoza (head), Mr. M. Tharkur, Mr. S. Aiyar, all of AFR, Mr. Y. Yang (PDR), Mr. L. Bandiera (PDR), and Ms. L. Cheng (assistant, AFR). The Sierra Leonean representatives included Mr. Peter Kuyembeh, Minister of Finance; Mr. James Koroma, Governor, Bank of Sierra Leone; Mr. S. Kamara, Financial Secretary; and other senior government officials. The mission also had discussions with representatives of the Chamber of Commerce, commercial banks, public enterprises, nongovernmental organizations, and the donor community in Freetown. * Owing to post-September 11,200 1 problems with scheduling staff travel, the review mission to Sierra Leone was delayed until late November 2001, and, therefore, the Executive Board’s consideration of the first review and the decision point document could not be undertaken by end-December 2001, as originally planned. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-6- 11. RECENTDEVELOPMENTSANDPERFORMANCE A. The Peace Process 3. Substantial progress continued to be made in advancing the peace process in Sierra Leone. As the UN Secretary-General reported to the Security Council in December 2001, “the full deployment of United Nations peacekeepers in Sierra Leone has led to a secure environment, increased freedom of movement, the gradual return of refugees and an economic resurgence in the provinces.” A major factor accounting for the improved security outlook has been the successful implementation of the DDR program across the country, facilitated by the full deployment of UN peacekeepers (UNAMSIL). As a result, 45,8443 ex-combatants have been disarmed and demobilized, and are being reintegrated into their communities; the number of ex-combatants demobilized is significantly higher than the 38,000 originally expected during the third phase of the DDR program that started in May 2001. The “DD” part of the DDR program was officially ended in January 2002, following the completion of the disarmament exercise in the Kenema and Kailahun Districts. The reintegration component of the DDR program is expected to continue through 2002. 4. With the improvement in security around the country, the return of displaced persons to their homes picked up momentum in 2000-01. Although statistics on the movements of the displaced population are sketchy, it was estimated that, at the peak of the civil war, close to half of the country’s population of 4.7 million was internally or externally displaced. The bulk of the displaced population sought refuge in Freetown and other urban centers. Data provided by the National Commission for Reintegration, Rehabilitation, and Reconstruction (NCRRR) indicate that, between September 2000 and October 2001, over 141,000 refugees returned to Sierra Leone from the West African subregion, leaving an estimated 160,000 in the subregion. The return of internally displaced persons (IDPs) to their home areas has been harder to track; however, there is sufficient evidence to suggest that many of the IDPs not choosing to stay in urban areas have started to return home in significant numbers. A substantial amount of resources is being deployed toward the care and resettlement of the displaced population through the NCRRR but more important, through the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and several bilateral, multilateral, and nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), whose activities have been difficult to track and systematically quantify (see Box 1). 3 Of the total number of ex-combatants disarmed (as of January 5,2002), 18,156 ( or 39.6 percent) were from the Revolutionary United Front (RUF), 27,490 (60 percent) were from the Civil Defense Forces (the CDF, which are progovernment militias), and 198 (0.4 percent) were rebel soldiers from the former Sierra Leone Army (SLA). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-7- Box 1: Status of Reintegration Activities for Ex-Combatants, January 3,2002 Ex-Combatants Eligible for Short-Term Reintegration Opportunities (STROP) Children Adults Total Phase I 189 1,414 1,803 Phase II 2,355 16,698 19,051 Phase III . . . 45,x44 Total . . . 661698 Number of Ex-Combatants Registered at NCDDR Reintegration Program (As of November 13,200l) Vocational education Formal education Apprenticeship Public works Agriculture Awaiting trade test Total Registered In Program 12,677 5,583 5,781 3,312 2,470 2,312 168 152 4,610 2,319 112 . . . 25,818 13,678 Additional Opportunities Already Created (As of lO/lS/Ol) Vocational education 1,785 Agriculture 900 Apprenticeship 1,722 Public works 1,430 Child reintegration . . Total 5,837 Child Ex-Combatants Recently Registered in Reintegration Program Skills training 284 Formal education 840 Total 1,124 5. Parliamentary and presidential elections are scheduled to take place in May 2002. Several parties, including the one formed by the Revolutionary United Front (RUF), are expected to contest. If conducted freely and fairly, these elections are expected to help in consolidating the peace. 6. Holding fair elections, resettling displaced persons, and finding gainful employment for ex-combatants remain the most immediate challenges to further progress on the peace front. Ex-combatants, apart from having very limited or no education and civilian work skills, are being reintegrated into an economy where unemployment and Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-a- underemployment levels are extremely high. To date, it is reported that many ex-combatants have fallen back on illegal diamond mining, a situation that will have to be addressed as the government consolidates its control over the diamond-mining areas. In this regard, the authorities underscored the need for adult education and skills training in the reintegration process, as well as for some transitional work programs for ex-combatants and formerly displaced persons. B. Recent Economic Developments and Performance 7. Available indicators4 show that economic activity continued to rebound in 2001, reflecting growing confidence in the peace process and increased access to areas previously controlled by rebels. The recovery was generally broad based, although the rise in agricultural production continued to be constrained by the pace of the DDR program. Real GDP is estimated to have risen by 5.4 percent, slightly higher than programmed, while the annual average rate of inflation fell to 3 percent, well below the program target of 8 percent (Table 1 and Figure 2). Gross external reserves of the Bank of Sierra Leone (BSL), at about 1.3 months of import cover, fell short of the program target (1.6 months’ cover), owing to the shortfall in external balance of payments support. 8. Performance under the program through end-September, 20015 was broadly on track. All quantitative performance criteria for the end-September 2001 test date were met except the one relating to net domestic bank credit to the government, which was slightly exceeded owing to the shortfall in external budgetary support. The structural performance criterion in regard to the passage by the parliament of the Other Financial Institutions Bill was observed. Performance in regard to other structural benchmarks was mixed. The settlement of cross debts between the government and public enterprises was made as scheduled. However, the government, while making a serious effort to pay utility bills (water and electricity) on time, was unable to become fully current on a sustained basis. The delay in paying utility bills was said to be due in part to the initial difficulty in agreeing on the appropriate amounts of the billing, but also on the need to cut back on outlays owing to delays in external budgetary support. Legislation converting the Central Statistical Office (CSO) into an autonomous agency of government was not passed because of a heavy legislative program and delays in the provision of related technical assistance from the Fund (STA). Agreement was reached on a timetable for the implementation of key reforms in the fiscal sector, following technical assistance from the Fund’s Fiscal Affairs Department (FAD). Agreement on the timetable for reforms in the financial sector was, however, delayed 4 National account statistics for Sierra Leone suffer from serious deficiencies, including, until very recently, the problems created by lack of accessibility to certain agricultural and mining areas of the country. 5 The program covers the period from July 1,200l to June 30,2002. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-9- beyond the end-September 2001 target date owing to the postponement of the technical assistance mission from the Fund’s Monetary and Exchange Affairs (MAE) Department to early November 200 1. 9. Preliminary data relating to performance under the program indicate that it remained broadly on track through end-December 2001. All quantitative performance criteria relating to that date are estimated to have been observed. Delays nevertheless prevented the authorities from paying utility bills on time, which complicated the program of settling cross debts between the government and public enterprises. The passage of the legislation relating to the CSO was delayed beyond the end of 200 1, as was the initiation of diagnostic studies of key ministries under the civil service reform. 10. Fiscal performance during 2001 was marked by the excellent performance on the revenue front, difficulties in managing the wage bill and domestic arrears, a shortfall in external budgetary support, and greater-than programmed reliance by the budget on domestic bank financing. Total domestic revenue collected during 2001 amounted to an estimated 13.8 percent of GDP, compared with the program target of 12.3 percent of GDP (Table 2). The buoyant revenue performance was due to the substantial increase in economic activity and dutiable imports, reliance on presumptive income taxes, and continued campaign to collect tax arrears. 11. Total expenditure and net lending in 2001 is estimated to have amounted to 30.8 percent of GDP, or 9.9 percentage points of GDP below the programmed level. The difference between planned and actual expenditure is largely explained by underspending on the capital budget, which was nearly 9 percentage points of GDP below the budget estimate. Substantial amounts of multilateral and bilateral project financing have been committed to Sierra Leone, but the country has not been able to fully utilize them largely because of the lack of security, but also because of capacity constraints. With technical assistance from the European Union (EU) and the UNDP, the authorities expect that some of the capacity constraints will be eased. .t 12. Current expenditure in 2001 was broadly in line with the program, except for the foreign-financed component of the DDR program, which was below budget. There was, however, a substantial overrun on the wage bill, which exceeded the budget estimate by abou 11 percent (0.7 percent of GDP). The overexpenditure on the wage bill was mainly due to the higher-than-budgeted wage and salary payments to teachers. Although the 2001 budget provided for 17,500, the actual number of teachers paid in 2001 was about 20,500. This discrepancy reflects serious inadequacies in budgeting for teachers, resulting from the poor control6 on the hiring of teachers by the Ministry of Education. In regard to goods and 6 The majority of schools in Sierra Leone are private (“mission”). They receive grants from the government to cover teachers’ salaries. The schools recruit teachers as needed without prior authorization from the Ministry of Education. Subsequently, the schools claim the (continued.. .) Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- lo- services, there was strong pressure for increased outlays during the second half of 2001, especially to facilitate the deployment of the police and other services to areas where disarmament had been accomplished. 13. The verification of domestic arrears remained incomplete in 2001. Of the original stock of identified arrears of Le 35 billion, only Le 13.96 billion remained verified; of this, Le 4.8 billion was paid in 2001. The stock of Le 35 billion had been arrived at through a publicized request for creditors to submit claims by a specified date. The authorities explained, however, that creditors who were outside the country or missed the deadline continued to press their claims. As a result, estimated additional unverified claims amounting to about Le 22 billion have been lodged with the Ministry of Finance for consideration. Furthermore, there is close to Le 6 billion in outstanding claims by contractors relating to material losses during the war and overdue payments on projects. Arrears have also arisen because bills incurred by government employees staying in leased government-owned hotels were not promptly settled by relevant ministries. It is in this context that the staff and authorities agreed that an independent audit by a private auditing firm should be conducted to sort out the domestic arrears situation. 14. There were several technical delays in the disbursement of budgetary assistance, some of which were related to required audits of prior aid utilization. ln the case of budgetary assistance from the EU, a dispute about audits done for 1998 and 1999, together with delays in fielding an audit for aid disbursed in 2000, led to the postponement of any new aid disbursements from the agency until late 2002, at the earliest. As a result of the delays, budgetary assistance (excluding project- and DDR-related assistance) fell short of the programmed level by 3.6 percent of GDP. Consequently, domestic financing was higher (2.3 percent of GDP) than programmed (1.4 percent of GDP).7 15. Monetary conditions during 2001 were dominated by fiscal developments, the commercial banks’ continuing excess liquidity situation, and these banks’ limited lending to the private sector. Reflecting, largely, the substantial increase in net bank credit to the government, broad money rose by 3 1 percent (Table 3). Faced with a significant increase in their deposit base and limited growth in private sector credit, banks competed to augment their share of government securities. Against this background, and influenced by the relatively low inflation, yields on treasury bills and government bonds generally declined salary grant for the teachers recruited. The process for adding the new teachers to the payroll takes time; consequently arrears accumulate. 7 Sierra Leone has generally very good relations with donors and delays in the disbursement of budgetary assistance are usually due to technical reasons. The major providers of budgetaryibalance of payments assistance are the U.K. (24 percent), the World Bank (35.8 percent), the EU (3 1 percent), and the African Development Bank (6 percent). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- ll- during 200 1 .8 The spread between bank loan and deposit rates remained wide (20- 30 percent), having narrowed only marginally in response to the decline in treasury bill and bond yields. 16. The banks continued to reduce their stock of nonperforming assets: as of end- November 2001, it had fallen to 34 percent of their loan portfolio and 4 percent of total assets from 47 percent and 6 percent, respectively, as of end-December 2000. The nonperforming loans that remain are said to be fully provisioned. Banks have also been able to raise their capital to the level of 15 percent (riskweighted) required under the new Banking Act. A discount house set up during 2000 has helped commercial banks to reduce their unremunerated excess reserves at the BSL, and could become a major player in the limited secondary market for treasury bills and bonds. A housing finance company was established in 200 1, although its operations have remained limited to date. 17. Exports continued to be limited by the suspension of rutile production and the pending rehabilitation of coffee and cocoa plantations. The implementation of the UN- sponsored diamond export certification scheme has helped to raise the level of officially recorded diamond exports to US$27.9 million in 2001 from US$lO.l million in 2000. However, total diamond exports from Sierra Leone are estimated at about US$74 million in 200 1, based on bilateral trade partner data (Table 4). Reflecting the growth in economic activity and increasing reconstruction operations, imports are estimated to have risen by 58 percent in current U.S. dollar terms. The external current account deficit (excluding official transfers) widened to 29 percent of GDP in 200 1 from 18 percent in 2000. There was a substantial shortfall in official inflows (13.2 percent of GDP), compared with the programmed level.’ However, private capital inflows, including NGOs and UNAMSIL related inflows, were much larger than programmed, which helped to finance a level of imports significantly above the programmed level. The surge in imports reflected a substantial rise in private sector imports, as well as imports related to the UN and NGO operations. 18. The foreign exchange market tightened as a result of high demand for imports and a shortfall in external program assistance. Consequently, the leone depreciated by 30 percent against the U.S. dollar in the official foreign exchange auction between January and end-December 2001. The real effective exchange rate appreciated by an estimated 6.2 percent between end-December 2000 and end-November 2001 (Figure 1). The ’ The treasury bill rate fell from 20.5 percent in December 2000 to a low of 8.6 percent in February 2001 before rising to 16.1 percent in June; the rate then fell to 14.2 percent in September, and rose to 14.5 percent in December 2001. 9 About 72 percent of the shortfall was accounted for by the shortfall in project-related financing, which amounted to nearly 9.0 percent of GDP. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12- uncertainty about the disbursement of external program assistance was a major cause of the volatility in the foreign exchange market. A new development in that market during 2001 was UNAMSIL’s decision lo to auction its foreign exchange to banks on a regular basis (every two weeks), thereby accounting for the equivalent of 30-40 percent of the amount sold in the official foreign exchange auction per month. The auction rates received by UNAMSIL were reported to be slightly higher than the rates in the official auction, although precise information on the UNAMSIL auction is not available. 19. Limited progress was made in implementing the civil service reform. The office of the Public Service Reform Program, which oversees the civil service reform and other reforms in the public sector, was created and a civil service coordinator appointed, with assistance from the U.K. Department for International Development (DFID). With the aid of external and domestic consultants, government regulations were reviewed and codified, and a review of the salary and grading system was started. A new strategy for divestiture and further reforms in the public enterprise sector was adopted with support from the World Bank, and the creation of the National Commission for Privatization (NCP) was approved by the cabinet. Work continued in developing the medium-term expenditure framework (MTEF), and the first public expenditure tracking survey (PETS) was conducted under the supervision of the MTEF technical committee. The diagnostic studies of key ministries envisaged under the civil service reform were, however, not launched as planned. III. OBJECTIVES AND POLICIES FOR 2002 20. Poverty reduction remains the government’s overriding medium-term objective. As indicated in the I-PRSP, this objective is to be attained through the adoption of measures that a) enhance growth and provide opportunities for the poor to participate in income-generating activities; b) improve the quality of life for the poor by enhancing services delivery; and c) consolidate peace and ensure security throughout the country. In the context of the improving security situation and increasing confidence, policy discussions focused on deepening of macroeconomic and structural reforms. 21. The revised medium-term projections broadly maintain the original real GDP growth objectives of 6-7 percent per year during 2002-04, but target a slightly lower rate of inflation (under 5 percent per annum). A lower level of gross external reserves of the BSL (in months of import cover) is targeted, although the actual U.S. dollar value of reserves is higher owing to a much higher level of imports than originally projected. Medium-term fiscal policies aim at faster increases in the revenue to GDP ratio (from 14.4 percent in 2002 to nearly 16 percent in 2004); however, total expenditure and net lending as a proportion of GDP are projected to be higher (42 percent and 38 percent, respectivelly) than originally projected (29 percent and i” UNAMSIL officials explained that they were required by their regulations to ask for bids for foreign exchange sales. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13- 32 percent, respectivelly), reflecting in part the planned increase in poverty-related outlays. The external current account deficit is projected to remain high (39 percent and 30 percent of GDP, respectivelly) during 2002-04. These deficits are projected to be financed by sustained high levels of concessional inflows and substantial private inflows related to the rehabilitation of rutile mining. Significant risks to the program in the medium term remain, namely: the continuing though, much reduced; risk of reversal in the peace process; the potential risk of fiscal slippage in the context of a large demand for resources to address the numerous social challenges, and, finally, the risk that the large financing and technical assistance requirements for implementing the program may not be fully met or might be delayed. 22. For 2002, real GDP is projected to grow by 6-7 percent, and the program aims at holding average inflation under 5 percent, and at raising the gross external reserves of the BSL to the equivalent of 1.9 months of import cover. A. Fiscal Policies 23. Discussions on fiscal policy centered on measures to address slippage that had occurred during 2001 and the road map for fiscal reforms over the medium term. The budget targets a revenue increase of 0.6 percent of GDP in 2002 as a result of the projected growth in economic activity, continued improvements in tax administration, and the reduced smuggling that could follow from the lower effective import taxation. Given the projected external budgetary support, including projected HIPC Initiative assistance equivalent to 4.4 percent of GDP, the overall budget deficit is programmed to rise to 27.9 percent of GDP from 17.1 percent in 2001. This deficit level, would, nevertheless, allow the budget’s recourse to domestic financing to decline from 2.3 percent of GDP in 2001 to 1.2 percent in 2002. The implementation of the budget for 2002 will be subject to a number of risks. These include the uncertainties relating to the costs of extending government control to all parts of the country; the possibility that the Military Reintegration Program (MRP) might turn out to be more costly than envisaged; and the potential for extrabudgetary expenditures in the run-up to the elections. There is always the risk that external budgetary support may be delayed again, which would necessitate a reduction in outlays and/or greater reliance on domestic financing.” It is partly on account of these risks that some key donors are planning to have an informal donors’ meeting in Freetown in June 2002 to review the implementation of the program. l1 The issue of EU budgetary support is currently being reviewed. Arrangements are under way to resolve disputed audits. On this basis, the staff has assured that the second tranche of EU assistance (Euro 16.58 million), which should have been disbursed in 2001, would be disbursed later in 2002. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14- 24. The budget for 2002 has continued to implement the simplification and reduction in import taxes recommended by the technical assistance mission from FAD (1999). In this regard, the excise duty on imported goods has been abolished, except for imports of alcohol, petroleum products, and tobacco. In addition, following further technical assistance provided by FAD during May-June 2001, the authorities have established a timetable for key fiscal reforms to be implemented over the medium term to further improve the buoyancy and efficiency of the tax system. The FAD technical assistance report found that the direct tax system under the new Income Tax Act was comprehensive and well structured; the indirect tax system was, however, less well structured. The administration of both tax systems was found to be poor. The main problems observed were the following: (a) departments were underresourced in terms of qualified staff and equipment; and (b) they relied extensively on manual processes, with little investment in human resources and technological development. Pay levels were tied to an inflexible civil service salary structure that provided limited incentives for attracting and retaining qualified staff. In addition, the war had destroyed a significant part of the departments’ infrastructure, changed taxpayers’ attitudes to tax obligations, and made operations outside Freetown difficult, if not impossible. 25. The FAD technical assistance mission noted that the tax administration could not be modernized under the existing outdated civil service structure; therefore, it suggested that the best solution was to restructure the two departments along functional lines under the oversight of a National Revenue Authority (NM). The phasing of the reforms recommended envisages the creation of the NRA, followed by the modernization of processes and equipment of the two departments. The timetable proposed suggested that these changes could be accomplished during the period June 2001-June 2002. At a later stage (2003-05), when these changes have been put in place, the process of introducing the value- added tax (VAT) could begin. Box 2: Summary of Proposed Strategy and Timetable for Revenue Administration Modernization Phase Stage 1 Action Develop and implement National Revenue Authority Date June2001-June2002 Stage 2 Modernize income tax and customs administration and computerize cover functions June 2002-December 2003 Stage 3 Prepare and implement value-added tax January 2003-December 2005 (VAT) Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 15- 26. The authorities have accepted these recommendations and are trying to follow the timetable, although there have been delays in accomplishing some of the tasks. A development team to manage the implementation of the NRA has been set up. The revision of the income tax and customs legislation to allow for the NRA is under way, with technical assistance from the Commonwealth Secretariat in the United Kingdom. The Commissioner General of the NRA has been appointed, and the appointment of the chief executives of the two departments is under consideration. Legislation to set up the NRA has been drafted and is with the parliament. As part of the planned changes in processes and computerization, the Customs Department is planning to introduce a computerized customs clearance and valuation system (ASYCUDA) during 2002, following technical assistance from the Commonwealth Secretariat. 27. The FAD technical assistance report also made recommendations aimed at improving budgeting procedures, and expenditure management and reporting. With regard to budgeting procedures, it was recommended that (a) the ministries should be given a budgetary framework indicating available resources; (b) an operation and maintenance budget for the recurrent cost of the development budget be introduced; and (c) an adequate budget schedule be adopted. The report also called for the timely production and audit of government accounts, and timely reporting on budget execution. Some recommendations relating to budget procedures have been adopted with the budget for 2002. The others are being considered in the context of the ongoing development of the MTEF. Audits of 1999- 2000 government accounts have been done by the Auditor General. 28. In line with the government’s poverty alleviation strategy, current expenditure on health and education will rise from 3.2 percent of GDP in 2001 to 3.4 percent in 2002. In addition, considerable sums are to be expended by the government, donors, and NGOs on the resettlement of refugees and internally displaced people, who are among the poorest segments of the population. The NCRRR plans to spend Le 49 billion (3 percent of GDP) on resettlement and rehabilitation activities during 2002. Furthermore, expenditure relating to the reintegration component of the DDR is being directed toward alleviating poverty among the ex-combatants and their families by providing transitional subsistence support and training for developing work skills. The capital budget also contains a significant amount of resources directed at the repair and reconstruction of rural roads and social infrastructure. The government has prepared a contingent budget for the utilization of interim HIPC Initiative relief, projected to amount to US$35.4 million in 2002. The tentative allocation of expenditure financed by HIPC Initiative resources is as indicated in the decision point document. 29. In view of the pressure put on the wage bill by the MRP, teachers’ salaries, and police recruitment, no general wage increase was provided in the budget for 2002. The authorities Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 16- explained that the recruitment made under the MRP12 was consistent with the LomC peace agreement, which included a provision allowing ex-rebels to join the national army if they met the army’s recruitment criteria. The number of extra soldiers recruited under the MRP in 2002 is expected to be reduced by two-thirds after two years, in line with the expected retention rate. Also, the authorities emphasized that there was strong pressure to recruit teachers to allow for the full implementation of the government’s free primary education program. The staff urged, nevertheless, that given the many problems identified in managing the teachers’ wage bill, new modalities will need to be put in place to avoid fraud and other abuses. These modalities are expected to be developed within the context of several donor programs in the sector, including the planned education project of the World Bank. In addition, the implementation of the civil service program, particularly the diagnostic review of key ministries, should provide guidelines for streamlining the civil service. In the meantime, a ban has been imposed on the recruitment of new teachers until September 2002. The government is committed to elaborating new measures to strengthen controls on teachers’ payroll and avoid accumulation of new salary arrears to teachers by the time of the second review scheduled for end-June 2002. The authorities also intend to get current on payments for utilities during 2002. B. Monetary and Financial Sector Policies 30. Monetary policy will continue to be focused on containing inflation and attaining the gross external reserves objective under the program. Assuming relatively stable velocity, broad money is projected to rise by about 11 percent in 2002. Taking into account the programmed increase in credit to the government and the targeted buildup of gross external reserves, credit to the private sector is projected to rise by 28 percent, which would still represent a small proportion of commercial bank assets. With inflation contained, interest rates are expected to stabilize during 2002. 31. With technical assistance from MAE, a program to modernize and strengthen the operations of the BSL was elaborated, together with a broad-based technical assistance program aimed at supporting the BSL’s reform efforts. The initial focus of the reform efforts would be on strengthening bank supervision, and improving organization and management. The MAE mission also assessed technical assistance needs in the areas of liquidity, management, monetary operations and policy, and the payments system. The mission also worked with the authorities to develop a detailed action plan for 2002 in these areas, including a schedule of technical assistance visits. Technical assistance programs in central bank accounting and auditing which could also take account of the fundings of the stage two Safeguard Assessment, are also being considered. l2 The original proposal under the MRF’ would have meant a 24 percent increase in the size of the army, and would have increased the military payroll by about 25 percent. The 2002 budget provides for slightly less than half the proposed increase in army personnel. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17- C. External Sector Policies 32. The authorities intend to maintain a flexible exchange system anchored by the weekly foreign exchange auction. The November 2000 MAE mission reviewed the foreign exchange auction and found it to be soundly operated with only a few minor shortcomings. The authorities intend to pursue prudent external debt-management practices, including by avoiding nonconcessional loans. Technical assistance in the form of training, equipment, and software for improving external debt management has been committed by the Commonwealth Secretariat. The government intends to request debt relief from non-Paris Club bilateral and private creditors on terms comparable to those granted by the Paris Club. 33. Exports are projected to increase by about 4 percent in U.S. dollar terms, while the U.S. dollar value of imports is projected to rise by 38 percent in 2002. Export projections reflect the expectation that r-utile exports are unlikely to resume before the end of 2002. The sharp increase in imports is accounted for by imports of machinery and equipment related to the reconstruction of the r-utile mining operations, the bulk of which is expected to take place in 2002. The external current account deficit (excluding official transfers) is projected to widen to 39 percent of GDP from about 29 percent in 200 1. A significant increase in net medium-term capital inflows is expected, reflecting not only a rise in official net inflows, but also the substantial private inflows related to the financing of the i-utile mine reconstruction. 34. An updated debt sustainability analysis (DSA) was prepared jointly by the Sierra Leonean authorities, and Fund and World Bank staff on the basis of loan-by-loan data provided by the authorities and creditors for debt and arrears outstanding as of end-2000. Arrangements have been made with all multilateral creditors for the clearance of external debt-service arrears due to those creditors. The revised DSA is broadly consistent with the data in the preliminary DSA, although a lower average growth rate for exports has been adopted in line with the revised medium- to long-term prospects. With the update, the net present value of debt relief rises from US$553 to US$600 million, while the common reduction factor increases from 78.8 percent to 80.2 percent. 35. Sierra Leone’s external financing requirements are shown in table 6. Taking into account identified official balance of payments and project inflows, other private capital inflows and debt relief on Naples terms from bilateral and private creditors, a financing gap of US$89.4 million remains. If Sierra Leone’s decision point is approved, this should provide interim debt relief under the Enhanced HIPC Initiative amounting to US$35.4 million. The balance of the finance gap of US$54 million is expected to be covered by disbursements under the Fund’s PRGF arrangement. 36. Regarding trade policy, the authorities are committed to further trade liberalization. Sierra Leone already has a reasonably liberal trade regime, with an average tariff of 15.9 percent and no significant nontariff barriers. In January 2002, in an effort to simplify import taxation and eliminate the discrimination against imports that was Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 18- implicit in the administration of excise taxes, the government removed excise duties on all imports except alcohol, tobacco, and petroleum products. The authorities intend to continue to reduce tariff levels and their dispersion during 2003-04, as the country’s tax base expands and tax administration improves. 37. Sierra Leone is a member of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS). In December, 1999, the Heads of State of ECOWAS approved a two-track approach to integration in West Africa. Following this approach, countries outside13 the CFA Zone are expected to forge increased cooperation and integration in the framework of the Monetary Cooperation Program. The Monetary Cooperation Program for the non-CFA zone countries calls for the eventual creation of a common currency and central bank, thereby creating the “Second Monetary Zone” under ECOWAS. The Monetary Cooperation Program specifies several convergence criteria prior to the monetary union in 2003. Sierra Leone is far from meeting 2 out of 4 primary convergence criteria. D. Structural Policies 38. The authorities emphasized that as peace is consolidated, increased government efforts will be deployed towards the implementation of structural reforms. Apart from reforms in the fiscal and financial sectors described above, planned reform measures in 2002 are in the areas of public enterprises and the civil service, public expenditure management, and mining sector policy. Regarding the program for the reform and divestiture of public enterprises the focus will be on making up for the delays during 2001. Following the establishment of the NCP and appointment of an Executive Secretary, the NCP will undertake the following actions: (a) develop a detailed work program, including an inventory of the assets of nonperforming public enterprises, as well as the nonessential assets of performing ones; (b) prepare for the repeal of the old privatization legislation and draft a new law in its place; and (c) prepare a medium-term plan for implementing divestiture policy, as well as a regulatory framework for public utilities. In addition, the government will review current policies with regard to the leasing of government hotels. The program for public enterprise reform is being implemented in collaboration with the World Bank. 39. Measures will also be taken to advance the pace of the civil service reform. In this regard, diagnostic studies of key ministries will be launched, as indicated in the attached letter of intent (Appendix I). With assistance from the World Bank and the EU, the government plans to review and strengthen the financial management information system linking expenditure commitment, control, accounting, and reporting. The system will be documented and its operations made accessible to more qualified users. These changes, as well as the separation of operations from system management, would facilitate the extension of the system to more government ministries. The government considers that a revival of the I3 These countries include Nigeria, Ghana, Guinea, The Gambia, Liberia, and Sierra Leone. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 19- mining sector will be critical to the economy’s reconstruction. Furthermore, the operation of the diamond sector has important social consequences, including the sector’s role in the civil conflict. Consequently, the government, with assistance from the World Bank, has commissioned a study of the sector that will form the basis of structural reforms over the medium term. 40. As indicated in the letter of intent, the authorities are committed to the adoption of policies to promote the private sector. In this regard, a report on a recent study undertaken by a joint team of government and private sector participants, with assistance from the UNDP, was issued in December 2001 entitled “Private Sector Development and Competitiveness in Sierra Leone.” The report recommended (among other things) the following: the liberalization of investment procedures; the removal of restrictions on foreign ownership; the inclusion of all fiscal investment incentives in the tax code; the improvement of infrastructure facilities; better trade and investment promotion efforts; and sustained macroeconomic stability. E. Capacity Building 41. The implementation of the authorities’ poverty reduction program and the deepening of the related structural reforms will exert strong pressure on the country’s limited capacity. Consequently, the government and its development partners have taken special care in designing structural and sectoral reforms to ensure that measures are implemented to bolster local capacity where necessary. The Fund has provided and is expected to continue providing technical assistance to strengthen the capacity of revenue agencies, the Bank of Sierra Leone, and the CSO. The DFID has a broad program aimed at capacity building, including in the areas of the military, police, local governments, expenditure management, civil service reform, judicial reforms, the PRSP process, education, and support to other sectors. The EU is supporting capacity building in the treasury management information system, and providing resident experts in the Ministries of Finance and Development. The World Bank, apart from its current and planned sectoral interventions in the health, education, infrastructure, and transport sectors, has plans to strengthen capacity building in several areas, including the PRSP process, public sector management, and (through its institutional reform and capacity-building project) legal and judicial reforms, property rights, agricultural extension, etc. Other agencies with extensive capacity-building programs include the African Development Bank, the UNDP, and several bilateral donor agencies. 42. With the improvement in security and accessibility to previously rebel-held areas, the government intends to expand the participatory process for the PRSP. As indicated in paragraph 47 of the attached letter, diagnostic policy and sector reviews are planned during 2002. Poverty databases are expected to be significantly improved through the conduct of a new household expenditure survey and a population census during 2002. In light of the planned workload and need for time to process new household survey and census data, the Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 20 - completion of the full PRSP is now expected to be in mid-2003, instead of the original completion target date of end-2002. 43. Sierra Leone’s economic data bases remain weak as indicated in Appendix III. Social data bases remain sketchy, with many seriously outdated. Efforts to rebuild the data bases are focused on the restructuring of the Central Statistical Office (CSO), which expected to accelerate in 2002. Data reporting to the Fund has been adequate. Following the restructuring of the CSO, the authorities intend to request technical assistance to strengthen the capacity of that institution. IV. STAFF APPRAISAL 44. Sierra Leone made remarkable progress in advancing the peace process during 2001. Thanks to the full deployment of UN peacekeepers and strong support from the international community, the disarmament and demobilization of ex-combatants were successfully completed in January 2002. As a result, the security situation has improved significantly across the country, allowing for the free movement of people and the return of the displaced populations to their communities. The reintegration of ex-combatants into their communities is now under way. These advances in the peace process are expected to be complemented by the planned elections in May 2002, which should provide an opportunity for a peaceful change of government and the participation of the former rebels in the electoral process. 45. The task of consolidating the peace will, however, continue to face several challenges. First, the demobilization of nearly 46,000 poorly educated ex-combatants will have to be followed up by measures to provide them with marketable skills, so that they can find gainful employment in an economy already suffering massive unemployment and underemployment; this will remain a major social and security concern. Second, the resettlement of the displaced populations would need to be handled expeditiously to reduce their suffering and to facilitate their participation in the electoral process. Third, the holding of free and fair elections will be a major milestone on the road to national reconciliation and peaceful political accommodation. Fourth, the government would need to quickly reestablish its authority in all parts of the country in the context of the significant capacity constraints. Finally, although the completion of the disarmament and demobilization of ex-combatants is a major advance in the peace process, that process remains fragile. The continued strong support of the international community will be essential to ensure that these challenges are effectively addressed. 46. Despite the shortfall in external balance of payments support, the government’s program remained broadly on track during 2001, and the economy’s overall performance continued to improve. The performance criteria for end-September 200 1 were observed, except for the one relating to net domestic bank credit to the government, which was slightly exceeded. Information received to date indicates that the quantitative performance criteria for end-December 2001 are likely to have been met. Performance with Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2l- regard to structural measures and benchmarks was, however, mixed. There were significant delays in implementing some key aspects of the civil service reform, and legislation to convert the statistical office into an autonomous agency was not passed by Parliament as planned. 47. Although overall expenditure remained within the 200 1 budgeted level, overruns on the wage bill highlighted a major weakness in the expenditure control system-the lack of adequate control by either the Ministry of Finance or the Ministry of Education of the teachers’ wage bill, which led to the frequent accumulation of wage and salary arrears to teachers. These problems should be addressed in a comprehensive manner within the contexts of the civil service reform (the diagnostic study of the Ministry of Education), and of the planned lending operations in the education sector of several donors, including the World Bank. The staff is concerned not only about the delay in completing the verification of identified domestic arrears, but also by the discovery of additional ones. The planned audit of these arrears by a private audit firm should seek to ensure transparency and establish the validity of the stock of domestic arrears, with a view to elaborating a plan for their clearance. 48. The fiscal objectives for 2002 are achievable, assuming continued external budgetary support and sustained peace. Nevertheless, there are considerable risks that the authorities will need to guard against to avoid fiscal slippage. First, in the rapidly evolving situation, the cost of reestablishing government control in areas previously held by the rebels has been difficult to estimate, and could exert strong pressure on goods and services outlays. Second, although the cessation of hostilities should ideally lead to the containment of defense and security outlays, the implementation of the military reintegration program would require strict fiscal discipline to ensure that the cost of this program is contained within the budgeted limits. Third, in the run-up to the general elections, the pressure to incur extrabudgetary outlays could increase and should be strongly resisted. Finally, pending the completion of the diagnostic review of the education sector, strict controls should be placed on the management of the teachers’ wage bill, including the completion of the verification exercise for all teachers and the monitoring of recruitment by grant-aided schools. 49. The staff welcomes the strengthening of structural reforms occasioned by the new reform programs elaborated for the fiscal and financial sectors. Fiscal reforms are expected to streamline tax administration and improve the efficiency of the tax system. Furthermore, budgetary reforms, including the ongoing implementation of the MTEF and programmed improvements in the treasury’s financial information and control system, should also strengthen budgetary management and control. The reforms in the financial sector appropriately aim at a comprehensive capacity building in the Bank of Sierra Leone to help the institution to improve its oversight responsibilities as the economy recovers from the war. The staff urges the authorities to advance the implementation of the civil service reform to make up for recent delays. The recent removal of excise duties on most imports will be beneficial to poverty reduction, as well as to economic efficiency. The staff encourages the Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 22 - authorities to undertake further tariff reductions as part of the overall effort to strengthen the tax system and to promote export growth. 50. An off-site safeguards assessment of the Bank of Sierra Leone (BSL) has been undertaken by staff based on documentation provided by the authorities and is near completion. The preliminary conclusion drawn from this assessment is that the safeguards in place to manage resources at the BSL may not be adequate and that an on-site assessment needs to be conducted. However, it is not expected that the on-site assessment could be completed by the time of the Executive Board’s consideration of the first program review, as required under the safeguards policy. Nevertheless, the staff proposes to complete the first review because, based on the information available, the vulnerabilities identified in the BSL’s safeguards appear to be limited. Moreover, the staff is of the view that an on-site assessment can most usefully be undertaken after the external audit for the year 200 1, which is now underway, is completed and the authorities take steps to implement the recommendations proposed by the external auditors. The staff expects that the on-site safeguards assessment, which could incorporate remedial measures, will be completed by the second program review. 51. Given the considerable progress made in regard to the peace process, and the satisfactory performance under the PRGF-supported program, the staff considers that Sierra Leone has qualified to advance to the decision point under the enhanced HIPC Initiative. The authorities have prepared a contingency budget for the use of the potential interim HIPC Initiative relief. The staff believes that this budget is consistent with the authorities’ poverty reduction objectives as outlined in their I-PRSP. On the basis of the significant shortfall in external budgetary assistance, and the generally satisfactory performance under the program, the staff also recommends that the Executive Board grant the waiver of the non-observance of the end-September 2001 performance criterion on net domestic bank credit to the government. 52. It is proposed that the next Article IV Consultation discussions with Sierra Leone be held on the standard 12-month cycle. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 23 - PROPOSED DECISION The following draft decision, which may be adopted by a majority of votes cast, is proposed for adoption by the Executive Board: 1. Sierra Leone has consulted with the Fund in accordance with paragraph 2(e) of the three-year arrangement for Sierra Leone under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF) (EBS/O1/118, Supp. 1) in order to review program implementation. 2. The letter of the Minister of Finance dated December 8,2001, with its annexed tables, shall be attached to the PRGF arrangement for Sierra Leone, and the letter of the Minister of Finance dated June 21,200 1 shall be read as supplemented and modified by the letter dated December 8,200l. 3. Accordingly, (0 the following shall be added as a new paragraph 2(aa): “(aa) Sierra Leone will not request the disbursement of the fourth loan referred to in paragraph l(c)(iv) above if the Managing Director of the Trustee finds that the data as of end-March 2002 indicate that any of the ceilings and floors referred to in paragraph 2(a)(i) to 2(a)(viii) of this arrangement as specified in Table 1 of the letter of the Minister of Finance dated December 8,200l was not observed; or” Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 24 - 4. The Fund decides that the first review contemplated in paragraph 2(e) of the PRGF arrangement for Sierra Leone is completed and that Sierra Leone may request the disbursement of the second loan in an amount equivalent to SDR 9.33 million notwithstanding the nonobservance of the end-September 2001 quantitative performance criterion on the net domestic bank credit to the central government specified in paragraph 2(a)(i) of the arrangement, on the condition that, with respect to the disbursement subject to the performance criterion above, the information provided by Sierra Leone on performance under this criterion is accurate. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 25 - r 0 8 Oo\ 2 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 26 - Figure 2. Sierra Leone: Selected Economic Indicators, 1996-2004 65 -25 5 0 -5 -10 -15 -20 -25 -30 -35 -40 -45 Output and Prices (Percent change) Consumer price index I I 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 Balance of Payments Current account \ s , . , ’ I . , Current account \ ‘I- r , balapce , A ,/ , (excluding official transfers) 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 Fiscal Developments (In percent of GDP) 30 Total expenditure ,H * / / , -20 - \ (excluding grants) . ,’ \ # I \ \ , \.*- -a” 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 150 100 50 0 -50 100 Monetary Developments I/ (Percent change) Net domestic assets Net foreign A assets government Broad money Sources: Sierra Leonean authorities; and staff estimates and projections. l/ In percent of broad money at the beginning of the period. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 27 - Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 28 - . 3 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 29 - Table 1. Sierra Leone: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 2000.07 2000 2001 200 I 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 Act. Pr0g. Est. PKlg. Proj. Proj. Proj. Proj. Proj. Income and expenditure Real GDP GDP deflator Nominal GDP Consumer prices (end of period) Consumer prwes (annual average) 3.8 5.0 5.4 6.6 7.0 6.5 6.0 5.0 5.0 6.1 8.0 6.1 4.6 4.4 4.4 4.4 4.3 4.3 10.2 13.4 11.8 11.5 11.7 11.3 10.6 9.5 9.6 -2.7 8.0 3.5 4.8 4.3 4.3 4.3 4.0 4.0 -0.9 8.0 3.0 4.7 4.3 4.3 4.3 4.0 4.0 Money and credit Broad money (includmg foreign currency deposits) (excludmg foreign currency deposits) Velocity (level; excl. foreign currency deposits) Velocity (level; incl. foreign currency deposits) Domestlc credit 11 Government l/ Private sector li (annual percentage change) Reserve money Interest rate 21 9.1 14.4 31.0 11.3 11.6 10.4 11.8 9.3 14.4 7.7 15.2 31.3 10.6 11.6 9.9 12.4 10.6 14.4 7.1 7.0 6.1 6.1 6.1 6.2 6.1 6.0 5.8 6.1 6.1 5.2 5.2 5.2 5.3 5.2 5.2 5.0 -11.8 11.0 17.6 9.3 6.5 4.9 4.1 2.6 4.3 -13.6 9.5 14.5 5.9 3.8 2.9 2.3 0.8 0.5 I.5 1.7 3.2 3.4 2.7 2.0 1.8 I.8 3.8 12.1 13.0 25.2 27.9 18.9 13.4 11.5 11.6 11.6 9.2 22.2 28.5 11.6 11.0 10.1 12.5 11.4 21.5 20.0 20.0 20.0 15.0 13.0 12.0 12.0 12.0 11.0 External sector Exports (U.S. dollars) 22.3 Imports (U.S. dollars) 31 100.3 Terms of trade (- deterioration) -3.3 Real effective exchange rate (- depreciation; end of period) 32.1 9.5 49.3 0.9 9.4 4.1 54.1 57.6 37.6 -2.9 1.2 2.2 0.7 6.2 (In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated) 126.8 137.7 128.6 117.8 120.4 111.6 16.8 20.4 19.6 101.0 100.0 92.0 9.0 17.3 16.9 6.2 14.2 15.9 2.8 3.1 1.0 -13.4 -12.9 -2.9 -17.8 -20.4 -11.6 -3.0 -6.0 -4.6 -14.8 -14.4 -7.1 -22.4 -30.2 -19.9 -29.0 -39.1 -30.9 -26.8 -37.7 -28.6 -2.2 -1.4 -2.3 -0.3 -5.0 -3.2 13.8 14.4 15.1 30.8 42.3 40.2 24.4 27.5 24.2 -17.1 -21.9 -25.2 -10.7 -18.1 -14.1 -5.2 -5.5 -3.3 2.3 1.2 0.8 141.3 129.1 112.1 (In percent of exports of goods and nonfactor services) 25.5 10.0 8.8 8.7 10.7 11.5 I.6 3.9 0.7 0.1 0.1 0.1 Gross domestlc expenditure Gross domestlc consumption Government Private Gross domestic mvestment Government Private Gross national saving Gross domestlc saving Government Private Cument account balance, including official transfers Current account balance, excluding official transfers Goods and nonfactor services (net) Unrequited private transfers and factor services (net) 116.1 125.8 108.1 104.0 14.3 16.0 93.8 88.0 8.0 21.8 5.2 15.0 2.8 6.8 -1.8 8.6 -8.1 -4.0 -2.9 -3.7 -5.2 -0.3 -9.8 -13.2 -18.1 -21.9 -16.1 -25.8 -2.0 -2.1 127.1 128.6 125.6 123.8 110.3 110.9 109.7 109.5 18.7 19.9 18.7 18.5 91.6 91.0 91.0 91.0 16.8 17.7 15.9 14.3 14.7 14.6 13.1 12.6 2.2 3.0 2.9 1.7 -2.5 -2.4 -0.7 -1.2 -10.3 -10.9 -9.7 -9.5 -2.8 -3.3 -1.7 -0.9 -7.5 -7.6 -8.0 -8.5 -19.3 -20.1 -16.7 -15.5 -29.8 -31.7 -28.5 -26.6 -27.1 -28.6 -25.6 -23.8 -2.6 -3.1 -2.9 -2.8 Overall balance of payments Government revenue Total expenditure and net lending Of which : current expenditure Overall fiscal balance (commitment basis, excluding grants) (commitment basis, including grants) Domestic primary fiscal balance 41 Domestic financing External debt 51 0.4 -0.9 11.4 12.3 28.7 40.7 22.7 25.4 -1.5 -3.0 -2.6 -4.4 15.9 16.6 17.0 17.5 37.9 39.2 36.2 35.1 23.0 24.5 23.1 22.4 -17.3 -28.4 -9.3 -14.0 -5.5 -6.1 0.1 1.4 190.8 181.1 -22.0 -22.6 -19.3 -17.6 -11.5 -11.0 -7.4 -7.1 -2.0 -1.1 -0.8 -0.3 0.7 0.6 0.2 0.0 91.3 86.8 79.5 63.9 Debt service due 51 47.9 53.3 External interest due 51 12.8 20.3 118.2 49.7 45.2 13.3 11.6 8.5 (In millions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise indicated) 37.5 32.7 24.0 23.2 7.2 6.7 6.3 5.9 Memorandum items: External current account balance, excluding official transfers Gross international reserves (in months of imports) 6/ GDP (billions of leones) GDP -213.8 -311.8 -267.0 48.6 74.1 86.0 -115.0 -208.1 -278.0 -317.5 -304.1 -303.9 49.6 57.6 93.0 100.0 110.0 126.5 1.7 1.6 1.3 1.9 2.0 2.0 2.1 2.2 2.5 1,330.3 1,507.9 1,487.7 1,658.7 1,852.5 2,061.2 2,280.7 2,497.4 2,736.S 634.0 685.4 736.4 (Annual percentage change, unless otherwise indicated) Sources: Sierra Leonean authorities: and staff estimates and projections. l/ Changes as a percentage of beginning-of-period money stock (including foreign currency deposits). 21 Treasury bill rate (end of period). 31 Includes imports purchased with bilateral aid, those related to rehabilitation and reconstruction programs, and unports of embassies and peace-keeping force (UNAMSIL). 41 Domestic revenue minus total expenditure and net lending, excluding interest payments, HIPC expenditires, and externally financed capital expenditure and DDR program. 51 As percent of exports of goods and nonfactor services; after Naples flow and additional debt relief obtained from October 2001. 61 In months of imports of goods and services of subsequent year. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 31 - Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 32 - Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 33 - Table 4. Sierra Leone: Balance ofpayments, 2000-07 (In millions ofU.S. dollars, unless otherwise indicated) 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 Current account balance Trade balance Exports, to.b. Rutile Diamonds I/ Other Imports, to.b. O/w: duty-free Petroleum Rice Other Services Nonfactor services (net) Receipts Payments Interest payments due before debt relief 41 Investment income (net) Transfers Official Private transfers (net) -62.2 -61.7 75.0 0.0 70.0 5.0 -136.7 -27.2 -22.1 -87.4 -60.1 -40.6 35.0 -75.6 -14.1 -5.4 59.6 52.8 6.8 -164.7 -241 .O -171.9 -180.2 -201.2 -177.5 -177.4 -133.3 -210.9 -156.0 -153.4 -173.6 -163.2 -160.1 82.1 85.4 131.6 165.2 181.8 197.8 214.9 0.0 0.0 37.8 63.7 75.9 77.8 84.9 74.3 80.4 88.0 94.2 98.8 103.7 119.8 7.8 5.0 5.9 7.3 10.2 15.2 19.5 -215.4 21 -296.3 21 -287.7 -318.6 -355.4 -360.9 -375.0 69.1 74.9 51.2 57.3 63.5 66.6 69.7 -31.6 -36.5 -37.1 -37.6 -39.8 41.8 -43.9 -31.4 -27.1 -19.4 -19.1 -20.6 -21.7 -21.7 -152.4 31 -225.5 -223.9 -253.8 -286.0 -286.0 -299.6 -86.6 -110.7 -123.5 -137.6 -157.3 -155.1 -158.7 -63.9 -90.0 -91.0 -100.1 -112.9 -109.9 -111.7 38.8 40.0 42.0 44.3 46.8 49.4 52.1 -102.8 -130.0 -133.0 -144.4 -159.7 -159.3 -163.8 -16.1 -14.5 -14.8 -15.1 -15.2 -15.5 -15.6 -6.6 -6.2 -17.7 -22.4 -29.2 -29.8 -31.3 55.2 80.6 107.6 110.7 129.8 140.8 141.4 49.1 70.8 95.1 97.8 116.3 126.6 126.6 6.1 9.8 12.5 12.9 13.5 14.2 14.9 Current acccunt balance Excluding official transfers -I 15.0 -213.8 -311.8 -267.0 -278.0 -317.5 -304.1 -303.9 Capital acc0unt Medium- and long-term capital (net) Off&l DWVillgS Amortization (scheduled due) Prinxte (net) Net foreign direct investment Loans (net) DraWin@ Amotiization Short-term capital 6/ 64.9 162.6 201.5 144.5 166.6 171.1 149.9 127.4 48.9 50.2 111.5 94.7 99.1 94.6 75.6 47.2 46.9 48.0 68.3 64.3 62.3 47.1 31.8 16.1 60.2 68.8 91.0 89.8 89.8 75.0 60.0 45.0 -13.2 -20.8 -22.7 -25.5 -27.5 -27.9 -28.2 -28.9 2.0 2.2 43.3 si 30.4 36.8 47.6 43.8 31.1 2.0 2.2 2.2 17.2 18.7 30.1 32.0 37.7 0.0 0.0 41.1 13.2 18.1 17.5 11.8 -6.7 0.0 0.0 41.1 13.2 18.1 24.1 18.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 -6.7 -6.7 -6.7 16.0 112.4 89.9 49.7 67.6 76.4 74.3 80.1 Overall balance 2.7 -2.1 -39.6 -27.4 -13.6 -30.1 -27.6 -50.0 Financing Change in arrears (+ increase) Debt relief 7/ Change in net foreifl assets (- increase) Central bank Net Fund credit Disbursements Repayments Gross reSeT”c!S (- increase) -2.7 2.1 39.6 27.4 13.6 30.1 27.6 50.0 20.5 -239.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 255.9 81 7.2 -4.1 -12.9 -21.2 -9.2 -3.1 -23.2 -14.8 -57.0 -43.9 -27.5 -14.9 -14.6 -29.6 -23.2 -14.8 -57.0 -43.9 -27.5 -14.9 -14.6 -29.6 -11.9 -15.8 -31.5 -32.0 -20.5 -7.9 -4.6 -13.1 13.5 59.8 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 -25.4 -75.6 -31.5 -32.0 -20.5 -7.9 -4.6 -13.1 -11.3 1.1 -25.5 -11.9 -7.0 -7.0 -10.0 -16.5 Financing @p 0.0 0.0 89.4 75.4 54.0 66.2 51.4 82.7 Possible SOUTC~S of financing IMF Possible HIPC assistance Other 0.0 54.0 36.0 0.0 35.4 39.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 1 a.0 34.6 60.4 45.4 48.5 1.4 9, 5.9 / 6.0 91 34.2 Memorandum items: Current account balance (in percent of GDP) Excluding official transfers Gross official reserves Gross official reserves (in months of imports) IO/ -9.8 -22.4 -30.2 -19.9 -19.3 -20. I -16.7 -15.5 -18.1 -29.0 -39.1 -30.9 -29.8 -3 I .7 -28.5 -26.6 49.6 48.6 74.1 86.0 93.0 100.0 110.0 126.5 I .7 1.3 1.9 2.0 2.0 2.1 2.2 2.5 Debt-service ratio, including the Fund I I/ Debt-service ratio, excluding the Fund I I/ Nominal GDP 47.9 -1 18.2 49.7 45.2 37.5 32.7 24.0 23.2 22.9 -I 80.7 24.6 26.8 27.7 29.2 22.2 18.3 798.0 864.7 Exchange rate (leone per U.S. dollar) 634.0 736.5 2,09a.6 2,200.o 933.8 1,002.9 1,065.5 1,143.7 Est. Est. Proj. Proj. Proj. Proj. Proj. Proj. Sources: Sierra Leoncan authoritw and staffestimates and projections. II Include unrecorded diamond exports estimated from partner-country data. 21 Imports surge because ofthe resumption of investment in wile mining and security-related operations by the UN and British troops. 3/ Includes imports purchased with bilateral aid and those related to rehabilitation and reconstruction programs. 41 Official interest payments due, includingFund charges. 51 Assumes that investment increases in Futile mining, financed by foreign loans and government onlending ofan EU gant. 61 Includes capital outflows associated with unrecorded diamond exports, change in trade credit, capital inflows to finance duty-free imports by the United Nations Assistance in Sierra Leone (UNAMSTL) and others. and ermrs and omissions 71 Naples flow rescheduling provided by the Paris Club in October 2001 and additional reliefby other creditors. a/ Tncludlngreschedulingofarrears 5239.1 million. 91 Currently unidentified tinancing. 101 In months of imparts oftotal goods and services ofsubsequent year. I I/ AfterNaples flow reschedulingprovided by theParis Club in October 2001 and additional reliefby other bilateral and multilateral creditors Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 34 - Table 5. Sierra Leone: Medium-Term Balance of Payments Assumptions, 2000-07 (In billions of Lames, unless otherwise indicated) 2000 200 1 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 Est. Est.. Proj. Proj. Proj. Proj Proj Proj. Economic growth and prices (annual percentage change) Real GDP Inflation, average GDP deflator Inflation of main trading partners (in U.S. dollar terms) Export deflator (local terms) Import deflator (local terms) Relative mflation of Sierra Leone and main tradmg partners 3.8 5.4 6.6 7.0 6.5 6.0 5.0 5.0 -0.9 3.0 4.7 4.3 4.3 4.3 4.0 4.0 6.1 6.1 4.6 4.4 4.4 4.4 4.3 4.4 -5.5 -1.7 2.0 1.9 1.9 1.9 1.9 1.9 13.4 -5.4 4.8 4.1 4.1 4.1 4.1 3.1 17.3 -6.5 2.5 3.4 3.3 3.9 4.0 3.0 4.9 7.9 2.9 3.1 3.0 3.0 3.1 2.1 Balance of payments Exports of goods and nonfactor services (GNFS) (in millions of U.S. dollars) Exports of goods and nonfactor services (3-year mvg. avg.) (in millions of U.S. dollars) As a percent of GDP Imports of goods and nonfactor services (in millions afU.S. dollars) As percent of GDP Interest payments (due) 4/ (in millions of U.S. dollars) Current account, excluding grants (in millions of U.S. dollars) Current account, including grants (in percent of GDP) (m millions of U.S. dollars) Current account, excluding grants (in percent of GDP) (XI millions of U.S. dollars) Goods and nonfactor services (net) Unrequited private transfers and factor services (net) Overall balance of payments (in percent of GDP) Aid flows (in million of U.S. dollars) Project loans Program loans Project grants Program grants Overall balance (in milhons of US dollars) Overall financing gap (in millions of U.S. dollars) Gross official reserves (in million of U.S. dollars) Gross official reserves (in months of GNFS imports) I/ Export volume growth (percentage change) Import volume growth (percentage change) Terms of trade (percentage change) Oil prices (US$ per barrel) 21 230.8 244.2 260.7 371.9 462.6 519.8 579.3 638.7 110.0 120.9 125.4 173.6 209.6 228.6 247.2 267.0 207.6 217.6 246.9 299.9 374.2 463.7 535.4 592.3 98.9 107.7 118.8 140.0 169.5 203.9 228.4 247.6 15.1 15.5 16.0 17.7 20.5 21.8 22.8 23.1 445.4 642.7 886.2 901.2 I ,022.o 1,171.3 1,219.3 1,289.1 212.3 318.2 426.3 420.7 463.0 515.1 520.2 538.8 33.5 43.2 53.4 48.6 49.6 51.4 48.8 47.1 -241.3 -43 I .9 -648.2 0.0 -589.4 -721.9 -712.7 -127.2 -115.0 -213.8 -311.8 0.0 -267.0 -317.5 -304. I -303.9 -241.3 -43 I .9 -648.2 -572.1 -613.7 -721.9 -712.7 -727.2 -115.0 -213.8 -311.8 -267.0 -278.0 -317.5 -304.1 -303.9 -9.8 -22.4 -30.2 -19.9 -19.3 -20. I -16.7 -15.5 -62.2 -164.7 -241.0 -171.9 -180.2 -201.2 -171.5 -177.4 -18.1 -29.0 -39. I -30.9 -29.8 -31.7 -28.5 -26.6 -115.0 -213.8 -311.8 -267.0 -278.0 -3 17.5 -304.1 -303.9 -16.1 -26.8 -37.1 -28.6 -27.1 -28.6 -25.6 -23.8 -2.0 -2.2 -1.4 -2.3 -2.6 -3.1 -2.9 -2.8 0.4 -0.3 -5.0 -3.2 -1.5 -3.0 -2.6 -4.4 126.5 177.7 161.8 184.9 187.6 191.3 186.6 171.6 25.8 35.2 65.0 55.0 55.0 45.0 35.0 25.0 47.9 93.4 26.0 34.8 34.8 30.0 25.0 20.0 7.1 18.8 34. I 63.7 65.0 75.0 80.0 80.0 45.1 30.3 36.7 31.4 32.8 41.3 46.6 46.6 2.7 -2.1 -39.6 -27.4 -13.6 -30. I -21.6 -50.0 0.0 0.0 185.8 161.6 119.2 150.6 120.5 197.8 0.0 0.0 89.4 15.4 54.0 66.2 51.4 82.7 49.6 48.6 74. I 86.0 93.0 100.0 110.0 126.5 1.7 1.3 1.9 2.0 2.0 2.1 2.2 2.5 17.3 11.3 2.2 52.6 24.3 8.9 7.7 7.6 56.6 62.3 38.1 -3.2 10.5 10.6 0.7 3.0 -3.3 1.2 2.2 0.7 0.7 0.1 0.1 0.1 28.2 25.0 21.0 20.0 19.0 19.0 19.0 19.0 Net present value (NPV) of external debt (as percent of GNFS exports) 3/ 766.9 665.2 672.6 495.9 414.7 379.9 354.6 328.6 NPV of external debt (as a percent of GDP) 133.1 109.2 105.7 99.6 93.1 86.6 82.2 76.7 NPV of debt (as a percent of domestlc revenue) 1.163.3 793.5 732.3 660.4 585.4 522.5 484.5 437.4 Memorandum items: Nominal GDP In bdlions of leones Percentage change In millions of U.S. dollars Government revenues In billions of leones In millions of U.S. dollars GDP per capita (in U.S. dollars) 1,330.3 1,487.7 1,658.7 1,852.5 2,061.2 2,280.7 2j497.4 2,736.5 10.2 11.8 11.5 11.7 11.3 10.6 9.5 9.6 634.0 136.5 798.0 864.7 933.8 1,002.9 1,065.5 1,143.7 152.2 204.7 239.4 279.3 327.7 371.9 423.9 479.9 12.5 101.3 115.2 130.4 148.5 166.2 180.9 200.6 134.3 153.8 163.3 171.8 185.6 193.5 200.6 210.0 Population growth rate (percentage change) 1.0 1.5 2.0 3.0 3.0 3.0 2.5 2.5 Population estimate (millions) 4.719 4.790 4.886 5.032 5.032 5.183 5.313 5.446 Sources: Sierra Leonean authorltxs; staff estimates and World Economic Outlook projections. Ii In months of imports of subsequent year. 21 Projectmns for 2001-2006 are based on oil price baseline ofoctober l I, 2001. 31 After Naples flow rescheduling provided by the Pans Club in October 2001 and additional rebef by other creditors Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 35 - Table 6. Sierra Leone: External Financing Requirements and Sources, 2000-04 (in millions of U.S. dollars) 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 Current account (excluding interest and official transfers) Debt-service obligations 52.7 112.5 68.7 72.3 63.1 Interest 14.1 16.1 14.5 14.8 15.1 Amortization 38.6 96.4 54.2 57.5 48.1 Reduction of arrears -20.5 239.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 Increaseingrossreserves 11.3 -1.1 25.5 11.9 7.0 Gross financing requirement -144.4 -548.3 -391.6 -336.4 -333.1 Identified disbursements Loans for balance of payments support IMF IBRD AfDB Grants Project loans Foreign direct investment & Priv. Loans Debt relief l/ 0.0 Short-term capital movements 2/ 16.0 Financing gap 31 0.0 Sources of Financing Identified: 0.0 0.0 54.0 36.0 18.0 IMF disbursements 0.0 0.0 54.0 36.0 18.0 Possible HIPC Relief 0.0 0.0 35.4 39.4 34.6 Residual balance 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 1.4 -100.9 -197.7 -297.3 -252.2 -262.9 128.5 179.9 205.1 215.4 224.4 47.9 93.4 26.0 34.8 34.8 13.5 59.8 0.0 0.0 0.0 34.4 24.5 22.1 30.0 30.0 0.0 9.1 3.9 4.8 4.8 52.8 49.1 70.8 95.1 97.8 25.8 35.2 65.0 55.0 55.0 2.0 2.2 43.3 30.4 36.8 255.9 7.2 -4.1 -12.9 112.4 89.9 49.7 67.6 0.0 89.4 75.4 54.0 Sources: Data provided by the authorities; and staff estimates and projections. l/ Naples flow rescheduling provided by the Paris Club in October 2001 and additional relief by other creditors. For 200 1, the amount includes the rescheduling of arrears of $239.1 million. 2/ Includes capital outflows associated with unrecorded diamond exports, change in trade credit, capital inflows to finance duty-free imports by the United Nations Assistance in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) and others, and errors and omissions. 31 After identified disbursements, debt reschedulings and short-term capital movements. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public8 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 37 - Table 8. Sierra Leone: Arrangements under the PRGF, 2001-04 Date Event Disbursement In millions In percent of SDRs of quota September 20,200l Approval of arrangement 9.33l 9.00 September 30,200 1 February, 2002 December 3 1,200 1 March 3 1,2002 June, 2002 June 30,2002 September 30,2002 December, 2002 December 3 1,2002 March 3 1,2003 June, 2003 June 30,2003 September 30,2003 December 3 1,2003 December 3 1,2003 March 3 1,2004 June 2004 Test date First review Test date Test date Second review Test date Test date Third review Test date Test date Fourth review Test date Test date Fifth review Test date Test date Sixth review . . . 9.33 . . . . . . 18.66 . . . . . . 14.00 . . . . . . 14.00 . . . 14.00 14.00 . . . 9.00 . . . . . . 18.00 . . . . . . 13.50 . . . . . . 13.50 . . . . . . 13.50 . . . . . . 13.50 ’ Upon Executive Board approval, an additional amount equivalent to SDR 37.51 million (36.17 percent of quota) was disbursed and used to replace an equivalent amount of outstanding purchases from the emergency post-conflict assistance policy. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 38 - Table 9. Sierra Leone: Selected Social and Demographic Indicators Sierra Leone Sub-S&wan Africa Total land area (thousands of square kilometers) 72,326 24,271 Agricultural land (in percent of total) 74 53 Population and vital statistics (1999, unless otherwise indicated) Total population (in millions) Population growth rate (in percent) Urban population (in percent of total) Population density (per square kilometer) Population age structure (in percent, 1996) O-14 years 15-64 years 65 and above Infant mortality rate (per thousand) Life expectancy at birth (years) Male Female GDP per capita in U.S. dollars (2000) 134 Poverty rate (in percent) I/ 82 Health and nutrition (2000, unless otherwise indicated) Access to safe water (in percent of population) Total Urban RUmI Population per physician Population per hospital bed Daily per capita calorie supply Percent of requirement Protein intake per capita (1990, grams per day) Labor force (in millions; 1999) Total labor force (1999) Percent of formal labor force (1997): Female Agriculture Industry Services Education (1999) Percent of age group enrolled in: Primary school Secondary school Tertiary education Adult literacy rate (in percent) 5 644 3 3 34 34 65 27 45 44 52 53 3 3 182 107 38 49 36 46 41 48 34 58 21 20,695 2,035 85 44 3 275 32 61 17 22 46 64 29 14,347 1,310 42 70 8 42 78 16 27 1 3 30 41 Source: Central Statistical Office; Draft Sierra Leone 2000 National Human Development and Related Indicators, 2000: Human Developme l/This figure is for 1989/90. It measures the percentage of the total population living on under US$I per day in 1989/90. (the equivalence of US$I per day in 1989/90). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 39 - Table 10. Sierra Leone: Indicators of External Vulnerability 1999 2000 2001 Est. 2002 Proi. 2003 Proi. Consumer price inflation (end of period) 34.1 -2.7 3.5 4.8 4.3 Export volume (percent change) 1.3 17.3 11.3 2.2 52.6 Import volume (percent change) -2.9 56.6 62.3 38.1 -3.2 Current account balance, including official transfers (percent of GDP) -2.8 -9.8 -22.4 -30.2 -19.9 Capital account balance (in millions of U.S. dollars) -19.3 64.9 162.6 201.5 144.5 Of which: Foreign direct investment 1.7 2.0 2.2 2.2 17.2 Foreign portfolio investment 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Gross official reserves (millions of U.S. dollars) 38.3 49.6 48.6 74.1 86.0 In months of imports of GNFS 2.0 1.7 1.3 1.9 2.0 In percent of broad money 43.1 37.8 35.6 48.5 49.6 Gross external debt (millions ofU.S. dollars) l! In percent of GDP In percent of merchandise exports 1,213.7 1,210.o 1,229.7 1,312.7 1,361.4 182.8 190.8 167.0 164.5 157.4 1,978.g 1,613.g 1,498.6 1,536.5 1,034.2 Short -Term Foreign Liabilities (millions of U.S. dollars) 2/ In percent of gross total external debt In percent of gross official reserves In percent of banking system gross reserves 120.1 164.6 153.8 9.9 13.6 12.5 . . . 313.5 331.8 316.6 . . . 213.5 222.2 220.0 . . . . . . . . . . . . . External debt service commitment (in millions ofU.S. dollars) l! 53.9 52.7 External debt service paid (in millions of U.S. dollars) 36.5 32.2 89.8 61.7 89.8 . . . 76.4 . . . Real effective exchange (percentage change;- depreciation) 2.8 32.3 6.2 . . . . . . Banking system real liquidity (percentage change) 37.6 8.4 29.8 3.0 4.8 Real credit to the private sector (percentage change) -38.7 14.9 18.3 23.1 14.6 Commercial banks’ net foreign assets position (millions of U.S. dollar 17.9 24.5 21.3 21.4 21.8 Sources: Sierra Leonean Authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections l/ Projections are after Naples flow rescheduling provided by Paris Club in October 2001 and additional relief from other creditors. 2/ Total foreign liabilities of the financial sector less long term foreign liabilities Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 40 - APPENDIX I December 8,200l Mr. Horst Kiihler Managing Director International Monetary Fund Washington DC 2043 1 Dear Mr. Kohler: 1. We recently held discussions with Fund staff on the 2002 Article IV consultation discussions, and on the first review of Sierra Leone’s program supported by the three-year arrangement under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF) approved by the Executive Board on September 20,200l. We also reviewed the debt sustainability analysis with a view to facilitating Sierra Leone reaching the decision point at an early date. This letter reviews progress in implementing our program’ during 200 1, and outlines the broad policy objectives to be pursued during 2002. 2. The implementation of our program remained broadly on track during 200 1. However, one of the end-September 2001 performance criterion on net domestic bank credit to the government and some structural benchmarks relating to that date were not met. Taking into account the causes of the failure to observe the performance criterion and structural benchmarks, and the measures described in this letter, the government requests a waiver of the end-September, 2001 performance criterion that was missed. Following the completion of the first review of the program by the Executive Board, the government requests the second disbursement of SDR 9.33 million. I. THE PEACE PROCESS 3. I am glad to report that substantial progress has been made in advancing the peace process. The disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR) program picked up speed in May 200 1, and the disarmament and demobilization component was successfully completed in early January 2002. In the process, over 37,000 ex-combatants were processed and are now being assisted in reintegrating into their communities. With the completion of the third phase of the DDR program, a total of 45,844 ex-combatants have been demobilized since July 1999, including 5,596 child soldiers. The reintegration process is expected to continue through 2002. The successful reintegration of ex-combatants, including the provision of adequate skills to enable them to make a living in civilian life, is of paramount importance to the consolidation of the peace process, for which Sierra Leone will continue to ’ The first program covers the period July 2001 to June 2002. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4l- APPENDIX I seek assistance from our development partners. The reintegration process will not be an easy task, as the majority of the ex-combatants lack basic education and occupational skills, in an economy that is desperately coping with widespread unemployment. 4. The successful disarmament and demobilization of ex-combatants and the reestablishment of government control and UN peacekeeping force (UNAMSIL) deployment over areas previously held by the rebels have permitted the return of refugees and internally displaced populations to their communities. We estimate that of the nearly two-and-a-half million people previously displaced internally or externally, more than 50 percent have returned to their homes; the rest should be able to do so in the coming months. The Sierra Leonean army and police are being deployed along our borders to secure them, while internally, the army and police have taken control over security in all areas, including the mining and main agricultural areas. 5. The peace process is to be further strengthened by the holding of the parliamentary and presidential elections planned for mid-May 2002. The Revolutionary United Front (RUF), the main rebel group during the civil war, has formed a political party and plans to contest these elections, as do many other (20) political parties in the country. The government intends to extend the democratization process to lower levels of government in due course, in line with our program of public sector reforms and decentralization. II. PERFORMANCEDURING 2001 6. Data relating to performance through September 2001 indicate that the program’s overall macroeconomic objectives were broadly met, although technical delays in the disbursement of budgetary assistance have led to greater reliance on bank financing. These delays also prevented a more orderly supply of foreign exchange to the weekly auction, leading to volatility in the exchange rate movements. Some progress has been made in implementing structural reforms, although there were significant delays in the implementation of some key structural reform measures. 7. Available indicators show that economic activity continued to rebound in 2001, with continued expansion in commerce, light manufacturing, construction, electricity, and service sectors and a cautious but steady pickup in agricultural production. Real GDP is estimated to have risen by 5.4 percent in 2001. Inflation remained negative through April 2001 but picked up after that time, rising to 2.6 percent in October 2001; nevertheless, the annual average rate of inflation for 2001 is now estimated at 3.0 percent, compared with the program target of 8 percent. Gross foreign exchange reserves of the Bank of Sierra Leone (BSL) are estimated at the equivalent of 1.3 months of import cover at end-December 200 1, significantly less than programmed, owing to the technical delays in the disbursement of external aid. 8. The quantitative performance criterion for end-September 200 1 relating to net domestic bank credit to the government was slightly exceeded, reflecting the difficulties we faced in limiting recourse to domestic financing in the context of substantial technical delays Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 42 - APPENDIX I in the disbursement of budgetary assistance. The other quantitative program performance criteria and benchmarks for end-September 2001 were met. The structural performance criteria in regard to the passage by parliament of the Other Financial Services Bill by end- September 2001 was attained. The structural benchmark relating to the passage of the bill to grant autonomy to the Central Statistical Office by end-September 2001 was, however, missed due to the heavy legislative schedule. 9. Technical assistance from the Fiscal Affairs Department (FAD) of the Fund was provided, as scheduled, in June 200 1, and the government has accepted the main recommendations, and agreed on the timetable for implementing the proposed fiscal reforms. The technical assistance mission from the Monetary and Exchange Affairs Department (MAE) of the Fund was delayed beyond September 2001 owing to unforeseen difficulties. It, nevertheless, visited Freetown in November 2001. The recommendations provided by the mission have been accepted by the Bank of Sierra Leone and the government. We have also agreed on a timetable for the proposed reforms in the financial sector, as well as on the type of technical assistance that would be necessary to implement them. The proposed reforms in the fiscal and financial sectors are described below. 10. Although all information relating to end-December 2001 performance criteria and benchmarks is not available, the quantitative performance criteria and benchmarks for that test date are estimated to have been met. Performance in regard to structural benchmarks continued to remain mixed. 11. The implementation of the budget for 2001 remained broadly on track, despite strong pressure for outlays on some expenditure categories and technical delays in the disbursement of external budgetary assistance. During the period January-September, domestic revenue performance, at Le 155 billion (10.4 percent of GDP), exceeded the program target for the period by 13.3 percent (1.3 percentage points of GDP). This performance was due to the buoyant collection of direct taxes and customs receipts resulting from improved tax administration, reliance on presumptive taxes, and increasing control over import duty exemptions. The revised estimate for the year 2001 as a whole is now for total revenue of Le 205 billion (13.8 percent of GDP), or 1.5 percentage points of GDP above the original program target. 12. Total government expenditure was broadly contained below the overall budget limits in 2001. Nevertheless, the wage bill exceeded budget estimates largely on account of higher- than-budgeted outlays on teachers’ salaries and allowances. The larger-than-budgeted wage bill for teachers reflected shortcomings in the budgeting process, difficulties in implementing the verification exercise for teachers, and employment practices in schools, all of which led to a significant underestimation of teachers on the government payroll. Expenditure on goods and services stayed below budget through the third quarter of 2001; in the fourth quarter, efforts were made to effect savings on goods and services to compensate for the late arrival of external budgetary aid. Capital expenditures fell significantly short of budget estimates owing to the slower pace of opening up the country for regular project implementation and to capacity constraints. Expenditure on the DDR program increased sharply after the Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-43 - APPENDIX I relaunching of the program in May 2001, although there were significant delays in mobilizing external aid for the donor trust fund for the program. The overall budget deficit (excluding grants), at 17.1 percent of GDP, was only marginally lower than its level in 2000 (17.3 percent). 13. The government has maintained its scheduled payments to public enterprises, in conformity with the agreed plan to settle cross debts between the government and these enterprises. The government has also improved its record in effecting payments for utilities; nevertheless, we have not yet managed to fully meet all utility bills on a current basis owing to smaller-than-budgeted resources. The government has also maintained its plan to reduce domestic arrears. The stock of identified and verified arrears, estimated at Le 35 billion as of end-December 2000, was reduced by Le 4.8 billion in 2001. Nevertheless, arrears continued to accrue, though at a slower pace than before, especially in the form of teachers’ pay arrears and, to a lesser extent, arrears to domestic suppliers and contractors. 14. The estimated 3 1 percent rise in broad money during 2001 was faster than programmed (14.4 percent at end-December 2001), owing to the higher-than-programmed recourse to domestic bank financing by the government budget resulting from the delayed disbursements of budgetary aid. Despite the very high liquidity of the commercial banks and large spreads between deposit and lending rates, credit to the private sector remained generally flat through the first half of 2001; it increased significantly in the third and fourth quarters, raising the year-on-year rate of increase to 25.2 percent. The level of nonperforming loans in the banking system continued to decline in 2001 to 39.1 percent of the banks’ loan portfolio in September, while accounting for only about 5 percent of total bank assets. 15. The implementation of the UN-sponsored export certification scheme for diamonds had a positive impact on recorded exports, with recorded diamond exports rising to US$27.9 million in 200 1, compared with US$lO. 1 million in 2000 and US$l.2 million in 1999. Nevertheless, the export sector performed below its potential capacity owing to the continued suspension of r-utile and bauxite production, and the slow recovery in agricultural export production. The recovery in this area will depend not only on the return of the displaced rural population, but would also require the rehabilitation of coffee and cocoa plantations, the reestablishment of marketing channels, and access to regular credit facilities for crop financing. Imports rose by US$78.9 million (or by 58 percent) in 2001, reflecting the large import demand for humanitarian, rehabilitation, and reconstruction activities. The external current account (excluding transfers) rose to 29 percent of GDP. Official transfers and capital inflows, at US$ll7.9 million, fell short of the programmed level by US$97.2 million (13.2 percent of GDP), although short-term capital inflows increased substantially. As a result, gross external reserves of the BSL amounted at the end of December 2001 to US$48.6 million (1.3 months of import cover), significantly lower than programmed. 16. The delays in the disbursement of external assistance led to a substantial reduction in the planned supply of foreign exchange at the foreign exchange auction, which, in turn, increased the volatility of the nominal exchange rate movements. The leone depreciated by 30 percent against the U.S. dollar in 2001 on a year-on-year basis. However, the leone Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 44 - APPENDIX I appreciated on average by 6.2 percent between end-December 2000 and end-November 2001. Sierra Leone obtained debt relief from the Paris Club on Naples terms in October 2001, covering the period from October 1,2001, through September 30,2004. Sierra Leone also reached agreement with several multilateral and non-Paris Club bilateral creditors in regard to the rescheduling or cancellation of external debt arrears. 17. Progress has also been made in implementing structural reforms and capacity building, although there were significant delays in implementing some key structural reform measures. In the area of economic management, work has continued in developing the medium-term expenditure framework (MTEF). The MTEF Technical Committee, established to guide ministries, departments, and agencies (MDAs) in budget formulation, monitoring and execution, has played a greater role in the budget process for 2002. In July 200 1, a task force was established within the technical committee to coordinate public expenditure tracking surveys (PETS), with a focus on poverty reduction outlays and services delivery. A PETS was undertaken during August 6-19,200l to track expenditure from headquarters to the regional and district centers, and assess services delivery. The survey tracked outlays on health, education, social welfare, agriculture, rural development, and security. The survey report, covering nine districts and the Western area, was published in November 2001, and the results are being used to improve the effectiveness of expenditure allocation and services delivery in the budget for 2002. 18. In the area of civil service reform, initiatives were undertaken to develop new personnel management and pay policies, and to regularize daily workers. Steps were taken to convert the Establishment Secretary Office into a Personnel Management Office. With assistance from a Swedish consulting firm (SIPU), personnel management regulations have been reviewed and are to be codified. The office of the Governance Reform Secretariat, supported by the U.K. Department of International Development (DFID), was created and a civil service coordinator appointed. The diagnostic studies of six ministries envisaged in 2001 were not, however, carried out, owing to delays in mobilizing the necessary experts and financial resources. 19. A National Commission for Privatization (NCP) is being instituted to implement the Strategic Plan for Divestiture of Public Enterprises, approved in May 2001. In the meantime, public enterprises have maintained quarterly reporting on their operations. Transactions between public enterprises are being generally settled on a cash basis; however, some enterprises have continued to accumulate arrears to other public enterprises (utilities). At the same time, the settlement of interenterprise arrears has been slow. 20. The Anti -corruption Commission has been actively pursuing its duties and publicizing its activities, which have included a number of high-profile court cases. The final government accounts for 1999 and 2000 have been submitted to the Auditor General for review, while parliament has reviewed the Auditor General’s reports on the accounts for 1998. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 45 - APPENDIX I 21. Progress is being made in preparing the full poverty reduction strategy paper (PRSP). In this regard, initiatives are under way to improve poverty databases. Preparations got under way for a household expenditure survey to be undertaken during 2002, and planning started for a population census expected to be carried out by the end of 2002. Preparations are under way to set up the Poverty Alleviation Support Coordination Office (PASCO) while a search for a national coordinator has been launched. The terms of reference for sectoral studies are being developed or reviewed, and funding for these studies is being sought. III. OBJECTIVESANDPOLICIESFOR 2002 22. The completion of the disarmament and demobilization of ex-combatants and the resettlement of the displaced populations into their communities should improve greatly the prospects for stronger economic performance during 2002. Prospects are particularly good for a strong recovery in agricultural production, as the reduction in insecurity and the planting by the resettled population should combine to raise the food and cash crop output. Greater accessibility to rural areas should also permit the resumption of trading and other services, and allow for the implementation of rehabilitation and reconstruction activities. The economy should also be boosted by the investment planned in preparation for the resumption of r-utile production expected in the first quarter of 2003. 23. Against this background, the macroeconomic objectives for 2002 are (a) to attain a real GDP growth rate of 6.6 percent; (b) to limit the annual average rate of inflation to under 5 percent; and (c) to raise gross external foreign exchange reserves of the BSL to the equivalent of 1.9 months of import cover. Given the outlook for commodity prices and the current level of commitments from donors of budgetary and balance of payments support during 2002, the above overall objectives are consistent with a rise in the overall budget deficit (before grants) to about 27.5 percent of GDP, and an external current account deficit (excluding official transfers) of 39.1 percent of GDP. The primary budget balance would, however, deteriorate slightly from a deficit of 5.2 percent of GDP in 2001 to 5.5 percent in 2002. 24. Domestic revenue is projected to rise by 17.0 percent over its level in 2001 to 14.4 percent of GDP. The projected increase reflects the recovery in economic activity and continuing efforts at improving tax administration at all levels. The projected domestic revenue also takes into account the changes in the tax system introduced with the budget for 2002. These changes are aimed at (a) continuing the simplification and reduction in tariffs and other taxes on imports, in line with recommendations of the FAD technical assistance (1999) and with effective tax rates in neighboring countries; (b) reducing import duties on imports of basic goods needed in the provision of primary education and health care; and (c) improving efficiency in tax administration and reducing smuggling. Consequently, in the case of import taxes, the excise duty has been removed for all imported commodities except tobacco, petroleum products, and alcohol. In addition, the import duty on basic educational materials and pharmaceutical products for primary health care has been reduced from 20 percent to 5 percent. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 46 - APPENDIX I 25. The new Social Security and Insurance Trust (SSIT) became effective on January 1, 2002. Under the scheme, employers are required to pay SSIT contributions of 10 percent of the employees’ basic pay. In addition, all employees are required to contribute 5 percent of their basic pay to the SSIT. The SSIT will provide pension, disability, and other social safety net benefits to contributors who have reached the age of 60 and have contributed for 180 months. The government is aware that the new payroll taxes on employers will cause an increase in the cost of employment, that could slow the nascent economic recovery. Therefore, to alleviate some of the burden on employers, some adjustments have been made in the income tax rate on small and medium-sized enterprises by lowering the highest marginal tax rate from 40 percent to 35 percent, in line with the highest corporate income tax rate. 26. The new SSIT contributions are projected to amount to Le 17.6 billion (1 .O percent of GDP) in 2002, including the public sector contributions, or Le 9.1 billion (0.5 percent of GDP), excluding the government payment to the SSIT. 27. Total expenditure is programmed to rise to 41.9 percent of GDP in 2002 from an estimated 30.8 percent in 2001. Current expenditure increases by 3 1.1 percent to 28.7 percent of GDP, reflecting the 18.3 percent increase in the wage bill and 13.1 percent growth in goods and services. The rise in the wage bill is accounted for by three main factors. First, the introduction of the SSIT requires that the government pay 10 percent of government employees’ basic wages and salaries to social security; this factor alone accounts for about 42 percent of the increase in the wage bill in 2002. The introduction of the SSIT, however, also requires employees to contribute 5 percent of base pay to social security. Second, the implementation of the Military Reintegration Program (MRP)2 has necessitated an increase in the size of the armed forces and related wage bill; a parallel recruitment drive by the Sierra Leone police force has also led to a significant increase in the wage bill for the police. The third factor accounting for the overall increase in the wage bill is the impact of regular “wage drift” owing to promotions and automatic annual in-grade rises. The rise in outlays on goods and services takes into account the added cost of extending government control throughout the country and the projected average rate of inflation. 28. Capital expenditure is projected to rise significantly to 12.6 percent of GDP in 2002, although at slower pace than previously projected, owing mainly to capacity constraints. The government has recently received technical assistance from the EU to alleviate some of capacity constraints in this area. Outlays on the reintegration of ex-combatants under the 2 Under the LomC peace agreement, provision was made for the recruitment of members of the rebel armies into the restructured Sierra Leone army. Consequently, the planned recruitment would allow a select group of ex-rebel soldiers to join the army. These recruits will be subject to the regular rigorous tests. Those who meet the new army standards will be retained, but a substantial number will be released into civilian life over the next three years. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 47 - APPENDIX I DDR program are estimated to amount to about Le 36.3 billion (US$17.4 million, or 2.2 percent of GDP). 29. Expenditure allocations during 2002 reflect the government’s policy to reorient government outlays to activities that promote poverty reduction and improve service delivery to the poor, in line with the interim-PRSP. To this end, increased resources are targeted to the resettlement of the displaced population, the reestablishment of educational and health services in rural areas, the care for war victims, including ex-child soldiers, and the repairing of rural roads. The government is also committed to ensuring that farmers receive an adequate supply of seeds, tools, and materials to restart their farming activities and rebuild their homes. 30. The government is committed to improving expenditure control and management, particularly in the area of the verification and recruitment of teachers, and the management of subventions to grant-aided schools and educational institutions. To this end, the government has decided to implement the following measures: l The Ministry of Youth Education and Sports (MYES) has commissioned the Central Statistical Office (CSO) to undertake a census of each educational institution (primary, secondary, and vocational), with a view to ascertaining the enrollment in each institution, the availability of text books in key areas, the number of teaching staff and the quality of the infrastructure, and the nonteaching staff available at each institution. Apart from providing information on the status of educational institutions nationwide, the census will provide a cross-check on key data relating to the teachers’ payroll; this census is expected to be completed by June 2002. l In order to ensure the proper verification of domestic arrears to suppliers and contractors, the government has also decided to hire the services of a private audit firm to audit the current stock of domestic arrears to suppliers and contractors, including the verification of outstanding overdue bills from leased government-owned hotels (Cape Sierra and Mammy Yoko). It is expected that this audit will be completed by March 2002. This audit will complement and extend the work done by the Accountant General. 31. The government plans to improve upon its financial management control system with support from the World Bank. This system, developed with technical assistance from the EU, links expenditure control to the accounting and commitment control systems. The proposed improvements will provide a complete documentation of the system and separate its administration from its operation. The documentation of the system, including user manuals, should allow a greater number of staff to access the system. The EU plans to support an extension of the finance management support project to extend this system to line ministries and district administrations. 32. In anticipation of the HIPC Initiative assistance, we have prepared a contingent budget for the use of this debt relief. The priority expenditures to be included in this budget Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-48 - APPENDIX I include outlays on the education sector, including a significant increase in the number of teachers and expenditure on education materials in support of our universal free primary education; increased outlays on health care, including vaccinations, the rehabilitation of hospitals and clinics, and the provision of drugs and logistics; shelter for the returning refugees and internally displaced population; the repair of roads and rural community infrastructure; support for war victims and ex-child soldiers; and funding for adult vocational education. 33. Monetary policy will continue to aim at containing inflation and increasing the gross foreign exchange reserves of the BSL. To this end, the BSL will continue to manage the growth of its net domestic assets, which are programmed to rise by no more than 2.9 percent during 2002. Gross foreign exchange reserves are programmed to rise to the equivalent of 1.9 months of import cover. Consistent with these objectives, net bank credit to government is programmed to be reduced significantly to about 1 .O percent of GDP from an estimated 2.3 percent of GDP in 2001. Credit to the private sector is projected to rise by 27.9 percent. The government will encourage the commercial banks to develop modalities for crop financing, which would be critical for the recovery of cash crop production and exports. 34. Exports prospects are expected to remain poor, partly reflecting the impact of recessionary conditions in the world economy, but mainly owing to domestic supply constraints. However, with the diamond certification scheme operating in a more peaceful environment, an increase in recorded diamond exports is envisaged. Import demand is projected to remain strong to meet rehabilitation and reconstruction requirements; import growth, however, is projected to be lower than earlier projected, owing to a higher-than- expected level of imports in 2001. The external current account deficit (excluding official transfers) is projected to rise to about 39.1 percent of GDP in 2002, from 29 percent in 2001. The overall balance of payments is expected to record an increase in the deficit to 5 percent of GDP (-0.3 percent in 2001). The revised balance of payments projections for 2002 include a financing gap of about $90 million, which is expected to be covered by support under the PRGF and projected interim relief under the enhanced HIPC Initiative. 35. The government intends to maintain a liberal foreign exchange regime, anchored to the foreign exchange auction, as the basis of a market-determined exchange rate. The BSL’s interventions in the foreign exchange market will be limited to attaining its gross foreign exchange objectives and maintaining orderly market conditions. 36. The government also intends to further liberalize and simplify its trade system. To this end, excise duties were removed from all imports, except alcohol, tobacco, and petroleum products, effective January 2002. As a result, the average cumulative import taxation has declined from 27.7 percent to 25.5 percent. The program of tariff reduction is expected to continue during 2003-04, as our tax administration improves and the tax base expands with increased economic activity. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 49 - APPENDIX I 37. We plan to strengthen our external debt-management capacity and to adhere to our commitment to avoid nonconcessional external borrowing in line with the program.3 The government will endeavor to obtain relief from other bilateral and private creditors on terms comparable to those provided by the Paris Club. 38. The government is firmly committed to implementing structural reforms to enhance growth and improve services delivery, as described in the interim PRSP and our memorandum of economic and financial policies. In this regard, following technical assistance from the Fund’s Fiscal Affairs and Monetary and Exchange Affairs Departments (FAD and MAE), we have developed road maps of key reforms in the fiscal and financial sectors. 39. Regarding the civil service reform, the government intends to catch up with delays in the implementation of some aspects of the program. In particular, diagnostic studies of key ministries envisaged to have been carried out last year will begin during 2002, covering the key Ministries of Agriculture, Education, Health, and Transport. At the same time, progress will be made in developing a training program for civil servants, as well as a performance- based assessment system. 40. The FAD technical assistance mission found that, while direct taxes were well structured, indirect taxes were much less so, and that the administration of both was poor. Tax departments suffered from inadequate resources, antiquated manual processes, and little investment in human resources and equipment. The revenue departments also suffered from being part of a cumbersome, centralized, and inefficient civil service structure. The civil war had exacerbated these problems by destroying records and infrastructure, and promoting smuggling in the wake of widespread insecurity. Against this background, the FAD technical assistance team recommended that the reform of the direct and indirect tax administration would be better achieved within the context of a unified National Revenue Authority (NRA). Following the establishment of the NRA, the team recommend the restructuring of the revenue departments along functional lines and a revision of their operating methods. The reform timetable envisages the introduction of a value-added tax (VAT) during 2003-05 following a sustained improvement in the NRA’s capacity. The proposed timetable for implementing the NRA was accepted by the government, and is being followed. The draft legislation establishing the NRA has been prepared and is expected to be presented to parliament shortly, and the NRA should commence operations by July 2002. Measures are also being taken to improve the capacity of the Income Tax and the Customs and Excise Departments. Recommendations regarding the timetable and steps leading up to the implementation of the VAT were also made. 3 Nonconcessional external borrowing is defined as any external loan with a grant element of less than 35 percent. External loans (debt) are as defined in the technical memorandum of understanding. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 50 - APPENDIX I 41. Regarding budget formulation and execution, the FAD team made recommendations relating to improvements in budget preparation, the unification of the recurrent and development budgets, budgetary management and reporting, and accounting and auditing. The government has already incorporated the recommendations relating to budget preparation and reporting into the budget for 2002; actions in regard to accounting and auditing were already under way and will be continued. The unification of the recurrent and development budgets is being undertaken in the context of the medium term expenditure framework (MTEF) being implemented with technical assistance from the DFID and the EU. The EU plans to provide an MTEF advisor during the course of 2002. 42. The recommendations of the technical assistance from the MAE focused mainly on the efficacy of bank supervision and central bank organization, and reviewed technical assistance needs in the area of monetary operations, liquidity management, and the payments system. The technical assistance team found the organization of the BSL in relatively good condition, considering the destructive impact of the war on its infrastructure and human resources. The team highlighted the need for coordinating monetary operations better, improving incentives for attracting and retaining skilled personnel and developing an action plan to improve organization and management. In addition, the team also outlined an action plan for improving bank supervision during 2002. Finally, the team agreed with the BSL on a number of follow-up technical assistance missions that would develop more detailed reform plans in core operational areas of the BSL during the course of 2002. 43. The government, in collaboration with the World Bank and other donors, intends to develop a policy framework that would govern the development of microfinance schemes. Current efforts to address the need for such schemes through the government budget have proved to be highly inefficient and misdirected. 44. Regarding public enterprises’ reform and divestiture, measures will be taken to implement the next steps of the Strategic Plan for Divestiture of Public Enterprises approved by the cabinet in May 2001. Actions to be implemented during 2002 include the appointment of Executive Secretary for the National Commission on Privatization (NCP), the appointment of the members of the NCP; the development of a detailed inventory of the assets of nonperforming public enterprises; the drafting of legislation for privatization consistent with the government’s strategic plan; a review of policies relating to the lease of government-owned hotels; and the initiations of preparations for the regulatory framework. The NCP will act as a “prudent shareholder” on behalf of the government for all public enterprises (PEs) and is charged with preparing PEs for privatization during 2002-04. The plan for the divestiture of the PEs is to be supported by financial and technical assistance from the World Bank under the Second Economic Rehabilitation and Recovery Credit (ERRC II) and the Public Sector Management Credit (PSMS II). The government also plans to continue its policies to reduce cross debts between itself and the PEs, as well as intraenterprise debt. 45. The government has given the highest priority to the revival of the mining sector. The sector is not only a major source of employment and exports, but also has played a role Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-5l- APPENDIX I in the civil conflict. To provide a sound basis for policy reform in this area, the government, in collaboration with the World Bank, has commissioned a study of the mining sector. A revised mining policy and strategy will be developed following the completion of the study, envisaged in December 2002. 46. Long-term growth in Sierra Leone will depend critically on how well the government can mobilize the private sector to invest and expand operations. The government, therefore, attaches the highest priority to the creation of an environment in which the private sector can thrive. Measures envisaged in the medium term to attain this objective include (a) reducing effective protection through the rationalization (including the eventual introduction of the VAT) and reduction of import taxation; (b) privatizing selected PEs; (c) modernizing and reducing the cost of utilities; (d) improving the legal and regulatory framework; (e) institutionalizing property rights; and (I) improving the effectiveness of the financial sector. Key actions taken toward the attainment of these objectives include (a) the proposed divestiture plan for PEs; (b) the ongoing review of the economy’s competitiveness; and (c) the ongoing work on improving the legal and regulatory framework. 47. The government is making every effort to advance the preparation of full PRSP. During 2002, we are planning to undertake diagnostic policy and sector reviews. In addition, public expenditure reviews are also planned in consultation with our development partners. Participatory data collection activities will be extended to all areas, including previously inaccessible areas. The preparation of the PRSP will be facilitated by financial and technical assistance from the World Bank, the DFID, and other donors. Given the pace of preparations to date, it is likely that the full PRSP will be completed in mid-2003, rather than at the end of 2002, as previously planned. IV. TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE AND DATA ISSUES 48. The implementation of our program has relied and will continue to rely heavily on technical assistance from bilateral and multilateral donors. In elaborating our reform programs in various policy areas and sectors, we have tried to identify the minimum technical assistance required for the successful implementation of the reform programs. In many cases, considerable technical assistance has been provided or is promised. In some cases, gaps remain, which will have to be filled; we plan to coordinate closely with our development partners to ensure that technical assistance is provided on a timely basis. 49. Sierra Leone’s databases remain weak, and considerable technical and financial support will be required to upgrade them. Assistance is expected to be provided by the World Bank for the next household expenditure survey, while the United Nations Fund for Population Activities (UNFPA) will provide support for the population census, both scheduled to be implemented during 2002. Long-term assistance will be required to improve other statistics. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 52 - APPENDIX I V. PROGRAM MONITORING 50. The implementation of the program will continue to be monitored on the basis of quantitative and structural performance criteria and benchmarks indicated in Table 1 and Table 2, and on the basis of periodic reviews. The second review of the PRGF-supported program will be conducted not later than June 30,2002, based on performance through end- March 2002 and will include agreement on a program for 2002/03. Sincerely yours, IS/ Peter Kuyembeh Minister of Finance Republic of Sierra Leone Attachments (2) Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 53 - APPENDIX I Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 54 - APPENDIX I Table 2. Sierra Leone: Structural Benchmarks and Performance Criteria Under the Program Supported by the PRGF Arrangement For calendar year 200 1 Pass new Financial Institutions Bill in parliament September 30,200l (performance criteria) Passage of the bill setting up the autonomous Central Statistical OffIce September 30,2001 (benchmzzk) Make regular settlement of cross debts between public enterprises and the government according to the timetable agreed between the two paties Continuous Ongoing Do not accumulate arrears in regard to the electricity and water bills Tom the National Power Authority and Guma Valley Water Company Continuous For calendar year 2002 Central Statistical Office Pass bill setting up the autonomous Central Statistical Office June 30,2002 Fiscal refmms I/ Develop and implement a National Revenue Authority (NRA) Appoint the board of the NIU Pass enabling legislation of the NRA Develop staff transition policy for divisions of NRA Appoint Chief Executive Officers of Income Tax and Customs Divisions of NRA July 3 I,2002 January 3 I,2002 March 3 1,2002 March 3 1,2002 March 3 1,2002 Complete audit of the stock of government’s domestic arrears to suppliers and contractors, including verification of overdue bills corn the govemment-owned hotels March 3 1.2002 The non-accumulation of arrears in regard to the electricity and water bills from the National Power Authority and Guma Valley Water Company Continuous Government will elaborate measures to control the teachers’ payroll within the limits of the budget June 30.2002 Financial sector reforms 21 Bank of Sierra Leone (BSL) Conduct review of human resources management with focus on performance-based appraisal, training, remunerations and promotions policy Finalize strategic phan for banking supervision reforms Prepare draft regulations on liquidity, large credits, and requirement for independent audits Prepare draft CAMELS rating system Evaluate check-based payment system ‘and develop proposals to improve its eniciency Develop computer program for conducting treasury securities market Develop action plan for introduction of repo instruments December 3 1,2002 June 30,2002 hme 30,2002 Jlme 30,2002 June 30,2002 September 30, 2002 December 3 I, 2002 Other sectors Complete the mining sector study Complete diagnostic studies of the Alnctions and staffing in Ministries OfAgriculture, Education, Health, and Transport December 3 1,2002 December 3 I,2002 Done Outstanding Not fully achieved Benchmark Performance criterion Benchmark Benchmark Perfo-ce criterion Benchmark Benchmark Perfo-ce criterion Benchmark Benchmark Benchmark Benchmark Benchmark Benchmark Performance criterion l/ Fiscal reform are expected to be pursued in line with the recommendations of the IMF FAD mission of June 2001. 2/ Financial sector reforms are expected to be pursued in line with the recommendations and pace of support from the IMF MAE Department. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-55 - APPENDIX II Sierra Leone: Relations with the Fund (As of November 30,200l) Membership Status: Joined g/10/62; Article VIII. General Resources Account: SDR Million Quota 103.7 Fund holdings of currency 103.69 Reserve position in Fund 0.02 % Quota 100.0 99.99 0.02 SDR Department: Net cumulative allocation Holdings SDR Million 17.45 1.18 % Allocation 100.0 6.75 Outstanding Purchases and Loans: Structural Adjustment Facility arrangements ESAF/PRGF arrangements SDR Million 13.51 109.11 % Quota 15.6 105.2 Financial Arrangements: TYPe Approval Date Expira- tion Date Amount Approved (SDR Million) Amount Drawn (SDR Million) PRGF 9/26/O 1 9125104 130.84 46.84 ESAF 3128194 514198 101.9 96.85 SAF 3128194 3127195 27.02 27.02 Projected Obligations to Fund (SDR million; based on existing use of resources and present holdings of SDRs): Overdue 08/31/2001 Forthcoming 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 Principal 0.0 1.8 24.3 24.8 15.7 5.7 Charges/interest 0.0 0.3 0.q 0.8 0.7 0.7 Total 0.0 2.1 25.2 25.6 16.4 6.4 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 56 - APPENDIX II Safeguards assessment Under the Fund’s safeguards assessment policy, the Bank of Sierra Leone (BSL) is subject to a full Stage One safeguards assessment with respect to the PRGF arrangement approved on September 26,200l. The Stage One safeguards assessment of the BSL is under way. Exchange rate arrangement Since April 25, 1990, the exchange rate has been market determined. Commercial banks may buy and sell foreign exchange from and to individual customers, as well as trade between themselves or with the BSL on a freely negotiable basis. The BSL calculates an official exchange rate every Friday morning as the weighted average of the auction rate, commercial banks’ mid-rate, and bureaus’ mid-rate in the previous week, for customs valuation purposes and for official transactions. As of end-December 2001, the BSL mid-rate was Le 2,161.27=US$l. With effect from December 14, 1995, Sierra Leone has accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2,3, and 4. On June 29,2001, Sierra Leone removed the remaining exchange restriction in the form of a tax clearance certificate required for payments and transfers of certain types of current international transactions. Article IV Consultation The 2000 Article IV consultation was concluded by the Executive Board on January 8,200l. Sierra Leone is on the standard 12-month cycle for Article IV consultations. Technical Assistance Mission MAE mission to assist in the introduction of weekly foreign exchange auctions at the BSL FAD mission to conduct fiscal sector review and to recommend reforms in expenditure management and revenue administration. MAE mission to conduct financial sector diagnostic and prepare medium-term program of reform Date January-February 2000 May 200 1 November 2001 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 57 - APPENDIX II Resident Representative A Fund resident representative was stationed in Freetown until May 1997. Depending on the security situation, a resident representative could be reassigned to Sierra Leone in 2002. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 58 - APPENDIX III Sierra Leone: Relations with the World Bank Group Given the fragility of the political and security situation in Sierra Leone, the World Bank managed its assistance to the country in 2001 under an updated transitional support strategy. The strategy has two main elements. First, the World Bank continued to support economic recovery and rehabilitation-direct budget support and support through the Community Reintegration and Rehabilitation Project. Second, as the security situation and economic performance improve, the World Bank will shift gradually to support longer-term development objectives. A particular focus will be on helping the government to prepare and implement its poverty reduction strategy. Key sectors include education, agriculture and rural development, infrastructure, and capacity building. The World Bank is preparing the transitional support strategy for 2002-03. To meet Sierra Leone’s exceptional financing needs in this transitional period, an IDA allocation of US$40 million was approved for the calendar-year 2001. This included (a) a US$lO million supplement to the ongoing Economic Rehabilitation and Recovery Credit; and (b) a successor ERRC (ERRC II) of US$30 million. Given the improvement in the security situation, the government requested enhanced balance of payments support to meet the reconstruction needs. In this light, the amount of the ERRC II was increased to US$50 million. This type of support will be necessary until normal revenue mobilization has been established in the country. Sierra Leone: Financial Relations with the World Bank Group (As of January 15,2002; in millions of U.S. dollars) Commitments Of Which: IBRD IDA Undisbursed IBRD/IDA lending operations Transportation Sector 0.00 35.00 Freetown Infrastructure 0.00 26.00 Roads Rehabilitation and Maintenance 0.00 45.00 Second Public Sector Management 0.00 3.50 Urban Water Supply 0.00 36.00 Health Sector 0.00 20.00 Power Sector Rehabilitation 7.00 21.00 Community Reintegration and Rehabilitation 0.00 25.00 ERRC II 0.00 50.00 Total 7.00 288.00 Total disbursed (IBRD and IDA) 18.70 452.70 Of which: repaid 23.80 18.70 11.17 0.60 2.39 3.10 2.43 1.12 0.65 1.88 26.70 50.04 Source: World Bank Group. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 59 - APPENDIX IV Sierra Leone: Statistical Issues 1. Owing to the prolonged civil war, Sierra Leone’s macroeconomic databases have serious deficiencies, particularly in the areas of the balance of payments, national accounts, and key social indicators. From the May 1997 coup to March 1998, statistical compilation virtually collapsed because of institutional damage and the departure of key skilled personnel from the administration. Since April 1998, however, the authorities have endeavored to rehabilitate the data collection and compilation systems. The authorities are fully cooperative in providing data to the Fund for purposes of policy formulation and program monitoring, and available data are provided to the Fund in a timely manner. The authorities are trying to disseminate economic and financial data to the public on a regular basis. 2. A major and sustained improvement in the coverage and timeliness of economic data will require the restructuring of the institutional framework along the lines recommended by the 1998 STA macroeconomic statistics mission. Budgetary resources remain scarce for the main statistical unit, the Central Statistical Office (CSO); this situation most adversely affects the compilation of national accounts and price statistics. Cooperation and coordination between the main statistical agencies also need to be improved. National accounts 3. National accounts data are prepared by the CSO on the basis of information received from government ministries and agencies and public enterprises, as well as through its own occasional surveys of public and private sector activity. A major project to improve the system of national income and social accounts was undertaken with Fund/United Nations Development Program (UNDP) technical support. As a result, a set of revised national accounts for the period 1986187-l 994195 was published in December 1995. The main revisions dealt with adjusting trade figures to reflect illegal diamond mining and fishing activity. However, large adjustments were also made to the exports of nonfactor services, for which the CSO was unable to provide sufficient explanation. Generally speaking, data on the exports and imports of services still need further improvement, despite ongoing efforts to strengthen direct estimation techniques. Fund missions continue to make their own estimates and projections of key national accounts aggregates, as well as adjustments to historical data on the basis of available information. Prices 4. The consumer price index (CPI) for Freetown is prepared monthly by the CSO and published with a lag of about three weeks. The CPI covers the capital city only, although with the onset of peace the CSO intends to extend coverage of the CPI to towns and selected rural areas. At the moment, extensive use is being made of the CPI to deflate national account estimates at current prices. A wholesale price index, which has remained dormant for many years, needs to be reestablished. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 60 - APPENDIX IV Government finance statistics 5. The budget reporting system was established with technical assistance provided under the Fund/UNDP technical assistance project. Monthly data on central government revenue, current expenditure, and financing are being provided, with appropriate disaggregation. The European Commission (EC) is providing technical assistan e to the Accountant General’s Department that will improve the timeliness and quality of fiscal data. Data on capital expenditure are very poor and need to be improved urgently. The resumption of reporting annual and monthly GF data for their publication in the GFS Yearbook and IFS is highly recommended. Monetary statistics 6. The main components of the central bank balance sheet are available on a daily and weekly basis. They provide an early warning system on key financial targets. The full monetary survey is prepared with a lag of about six weeks, with comprehensive coverage of commercial banks. For the most part, differences between data on budget financing from the Ministry of Finance and credit to government from the Bank of Sierra Leone (BSL) are now easily reconciled. 7. The BSL is compiling monetary data using a system prepared by the 1996 STA mission for data reporting to AFR and STA. Most of the mission’s recommendations have been implemented, resulting in substantial improvements in the quality of the monetary data. However, there are sometimes data problems resulting from mispostings in the balance sheet of the BSL and misclassifications of new accounts. Balance of payments statistics 8. Sierra Leone’s external transactions are characterized by a large volume of activity in the informal sector, owing principally to the smuggling of diamonds. A considerable portion of imports is financed by these unrecorded exports. As a result, official balance of payments statistics tend to substantially understate transactions. The staff has been addressing this problem through the use of third-country (principally EC members) import data. 9. Information on official program grant and loan receipts is relatively good and is prepared by the staff on the basis of contact with the Sierra Leonean authorities and donor agencies. In contrast, data on private capital flows are very poor. Some information on private banking flows can be derived from the monetary survey. Other private capital flows, especially those linked to the informal diamond trade, are effectively captured only in errors and omissions. Data on the gross and net official reserves positions of the BSL are provided monthly to the Fund with a short lag. 10. Information on public external debt is good. A comprehensive debt-reporting system has been in operation to monitor official external debt and related interest payments. Data on Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-6l- APPENDIX IV the present stock of private sector external debt are satisfactory, following the verification exercise made in connection with the July 1995 commercial debt buyback operation. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 62 - APPENDIX IV E 4 CJ w” E 4 E 4 24 z 4 u r.5 c 4 w r+ u” ti 4 t- w” 3 4 n Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 63 - APPENDIX V EXTERNAL RELATIONS DEPARTMENT Public Information Notice (PIN) No. FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE International Monetary Fund 700 lgth Street, NW Washington, D. C. 20431 USA IMF Concludes 2001 Article IV Consultation with Sierra Leone On [Month, dd, yyyy], the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded the Article IV consultation with Sierra Leone.’ Background Remarkable progress was made by Sierra Leone in advancing the peace process during 2001. As a result, the disarmament and demobilization of ex-combatants was completed in early January 2002, facilitated by the full deployment of the UN peacekeeping force (UNAMSIL). The improved security across the country has permitted the free movement of people and the return of displaced populations to their communities. Available indicators show that economic activity continued to rebound in 2001, reflecting growing confidence in the peace process and increased access to areas previously controlled by rebels. Real GDP is estimated to have risen by 5.4 percent from 3.8 percent in 2000, while the annual average rate of inflation fell to 3 percent, well below the program target of 8 percent. Gross external reserves of the Bank of Sierra Leone (BSL), at about 1.3 months of import cover, fell short of the program target (1.6 months’ cover), owing to the shortfall in external balance of payments support. I Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial information, and discusses with officials the country’s economic developments and policies. On return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the country’s authorities. This PIN summarizes the views of the Executive Board as expressed during the [Month, dd, yyyy] Executive Board discussion based on the staff report. Washington, D.C. 20431 l Telephone 202-623-7 100 l Fax 202-623-6772 l www.imf.org Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 64 - Fiscal performance during 2001 was marked by the excellent performance on the revenue front, difficulties in managing the wage bill and domestic arrears, a shortfall in external budgetary support, and greater-than programmed reliance by the budget on domestic bank financing. Total domestic revenue collected during 2001 amounted to an estimated 13.8 percent of GDP, while total expenditure and net lending is estimated to have amounted to 30.8 percent of GDP, or 9.9 percentage points of GDP below the programmed level. Capital expenditures fell sharply below progrmmed levels because of security uncertainties in rural areas, but also because of capacity limitations. Monetary conditions during 2001 were dominated by fiscal developments, the commercial banks’ continuing excess liquidity situation, and these banks’ limited lending to the private sector. Reflecting, largely, the substantial increase in net bank credit to the government, broad money rose by 31 percent. The spread between bank loan and deposit rates remained wide at 20-30 percent and commercial banks continued to reduce the stock of nonperforming assets. Exports continued to be limited by the suspension of rutile production and the pending rehabilitation of coffee and cocoa plantations. The implementation of the UN-sponsored diamond export certification scheme helped to raise the level of officially recorded diamond exports to US!$27.9 million in 2001 from US$lO.l million in 2000. Total diamond exports from Sierra Leone are estimated at about US$74 million in 2001, based on bilateral trade partner data. Reflecting the growth in economic activity and increasing reconstruction operations, imports are estimated to have risen by 58 percent in current U.S. dollar terms. The external current account deficit (excluding official transfers) widened to 29 percent of GDP in 2001 from 18 percent in 2000. There was a substantial shortfall in official inflows, compared with the programmed level. However, private capital inflows were much larger than programmed, which helped to finance a higher-than-programmed level of imports. The foreign exchange market tightened as a result of high demand for imports and a shortfall in external program assistance. Consequently, the leone depreciated by 30 percent against the U.S. dollar in the official foreign exchange auction between January and end- December 2001. The uncertainty about the disbursement of external program assistance was a major cause of the volatility in the foreign exchange market. Sierra Leone obtained debt relief from the Paris Club on Naples terms in October 2001, covering the period October 1, 2001 through September 30,2004. An updated debt sustainability analysis DSA was prepared jointly by the Sierra Leonean authorities and the World Bank and Fund staff, in preparation for Sierra Leone’s decision point under the Enhanced HIPC initiative. Arrangements have been made with all multilateral creditors for the clearance of external debt-service arrears due to those creditors. With the updated DSA, the estimated net present value of debt relief amounts to US$600 million, giving a common reduction factor of about 80 percent. Executive Board Assessment <Begin Typing Here> Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 65 - (i) at the request of a member country, following the conclusion of the Article IV consultation for countries seeking to make known the views of the IMF to the IMF surveillance over the economic policies of member the IMF’s assessment of these policies; and (ii) following policy discussions in the Executive Board at the decision of the Board. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 66 - Table 1. Sierra Leone: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 1997-2001 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 Est. National Income and prices Real GDP Nominal GDP Consumer prices (end of period) Consumer prices (annual average) Money and credit Broad money (including foreign currency deposits) Velocity (GDP/broad money) Domestic credit l/ Government 1 / Private sector l/ Reserve money Treasury bill rate 2/ External sector Exports (US. dollars) Imports (U.S. dollars) Terms of trade (- deterioration) Real effective exchange rate (- depreciation; end of period) Exchange rate (leones per U.S. dollar, average) Gross domestic expenditure Gross domestic consumption Government Private Gross domestic investment Government Private Gross national saving Gross domestic saving Government Private Current account balance, including official transfers Overall balance of payments External debt 4/ Government budget Domestic revenue Total expenditure and net lending Overall fiscal balance (commitment basis, including grants) Domestic primary fiscal balance 5/ Domestic financing External current account balance, excluding official transfers Gross international reserves (in months of imports of goods and services) 61 -16.0 -26.2 -5.7 22.3 9.4 -56.1 4.9 -19.9 100.3 57.6 -0.5 5.0 -4.9 -3.3 1.2 24.3 -27.7 2.1 32.1 6.2 981.9 1,565.4 1,819.3 2,098.3 2,020 (In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated) 101.9 107.2 106.0 116.1 126.8 104.3 101.9 105.7 108.1 117.8 9.0 8.9 11.5 14.3 16.8 95.3 93.0 94.3 93.8 101.0 -2.4 5.3 0.3 8.0 9.0 1.5 4.9 2.4 5.2 6.2 -3.9 0.4 -2.1 2.8 2.8 -3.4 -1.0 -2.5 -1.8 -13.4 -4.3 -1.9 -5.7 -8.1 -17.8 -3.6 -1.6 -4.4 -2.9 -3.0 -0.7 -0.3 -1.3 -5.2 -14.8 -1.0 -6.3 -2.8 -9.8 -22.4 -3.6 -7.1 -5.7 0.4 -0.3 134.6 175.7 178.2 190.8 141.3 5.4 7.3 7.1 11.4 13.8 13.0 20.1 22.0 28.7 30.8 -7.0 -10.4 -9.5 -9.3 -10.7 -4.1 -3.8 -5.5 -5.5 -5.2 4.3 4.0 7.4 0.1 2.3 (In millions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise indicated) (Annual percentage change, unless otherwise indicated) -17.6 -0.8 -8.1 3.8 5.4 -3.8 26.0 14.9 10.2 11.8 66.9 -5.7 36.7 -2.7 3.5 14.9 35.5 34.1 -0.9 3.0 47.1 11.3 40.8 9.7 31.0 6.6 7.5 6.1 6.1 5.2 57.5 17.6 56.2 -11.8 17.6 50.9 16.7 58.8 -13.6 14.5 6.2 1.2 -2.6 1.5 3.2 109.0 -20.4 39.0 9.2 28.5 8.8 34.4 34.7 20.0 20.0 -27.5 -60.8 -53.0 -115.0 -213.8 38.5 43.5 38.3 49.6 48.6 2.8 3.1 2.0 1.7 1.3 GDP (billions of leones) 834.5 1,051.3 1,207.7 1,330.3 1,487.7 Sources: Sierra Leonean authorities; and staff estimates and projections. l/ Changes as a percentage of beginning-of-period money stock (including foreign currency deposits). 2/ Treasury bill rate (end of period). 41 As percent of exports of goods and nonfactor services. 5/ Domestic revenue minus total expenditure and net lending, excluding externally financed capital expenditures. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public