DOCUMENT OF INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND NOT FOR PUBLIC USE ARCHIVES ROOM HQ C-532 I 0451 EB S/00/2 CONFIDENTIAL January 7,200O To: Members of the Executive Board From: The Secretary Subject: Republic of Tajikistan-Staff Report for the 1999 Article IV Consultation, First and Second Reviews Under the Second Annual Arrangement Under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility, and Request for Waiver of Performance Criteria Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staffreport for the 1999 Article IV consultation with the Republic of Tajikistan, the first and second reviews under the second annual arrangement under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility, and a request for a waiver of performance criteria, which is tentatively scheduled for discussion on Monday, January 24,200O. A draft decision appears on pages 25-27. Mr. Saavalainen (ext. 38825) and Mr. J.-Y. Wang (ext. 37675) are available to answer technical or factual questions relating to this paper prior to the Board discussion. Unless the Documents Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the Asian Development Bank, the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the European Commission, the Islamic Development Bank, and the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development, following its consideration by the Executive Board. Att: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicCONFIDENTIAL INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUN-D REPUBLIC OF TAJIKISTAN Staff Report for the 1999 Article IV Consultation, First and Second Reviews Under the Second Annual Arrangement Under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility, and Request for Waiver of Performance Criteria Prepared by European II and Policy Development and Review Departments (In consultation with other departments) Approved by Gerard Belanger and C.G. Muiiiz January 7,200O Contents Page Executive Summary.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .3 I. Introduction.. ........................................................................................................................... . II. Performance Under the Program ............................................................................................ .5 III. Policy Discussions .............................................................................................................. 10 A. Policy Objectives and Strategy.. ................................................................................ 10 B. Fiscal Policy ............................................................................................................. 13 C. Monetary and Exchange Rate Policy ......................................................................... 16 D. External Sector Policies ............................................................................................ 18 E. Structural Policies ..................................................................................................... 19 IV. Balance of Payments Outlook and Capacity to Repay the Fund.. ........................................ .20 V. Technical Assistance, Statistics, and Y2K Issues.. ............................................................... .21 VI. Staff Appraisal .................................................................................................................... 22 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicText Tables 1. Quantitative Performance Criteria and Indicative Targets, June 1999-December 1999 ................................................................................ .28 2. Selected Economic Indicators, 1998-2000 ............................................................ 29 3. General Government Finances ............................................................................. .30 4. Accounts of the National Bank of Tajikistan ....................................................... ,32 5. Monetary Survey ................................................................................................. .33 6. Balance of Payments, 1998-2000 ........................................................................ .34 7. Medium-term Balance of Payments, 1998-2010 .................................................. ,3 5 8. Debt Service Capacity, 1998-2010.. .................................................................... .36 9. Capacity to Repay the Fund.. ............................................................................... .37 10. Indicators of the Sustainability of Public and Publicly Guaranteed Debt .............. .38 11. Implementation of Main Structural Measures Under the Second Annual PRGF Arrangement .................. ........................................................................ .39 12. Revised Review and Phasing of Disbursements Under the Remainder of the Second-Y ear and Third-Year PRGF Arrangements ........................................... .4 1 Text Boxes 1. Performance Criteria for End-June and End-September.. ....................................... .9 2. Debt Rescheduling Negotiations,, ......................................................................... 18 Figures 1. 2. 3. Inflation and Exchange Rates, March 1998-October 1999 ..................................... .6 External Shocks, 1998-1999 .................................................................................... 8 Monetary Program ............................................................................................... 11 Appendices I. Fund Relations .................................................................................................... .42 II. Relations With the World Bank.. ......................................................................... .44 III Relations With the Asian Development Bank.. .................................................... .45 IV. Fund Technical Assistance, 1992-99 ................................................................... .46 V. Enhanced Bank-Fund Collaboration .................................................................... .48 VI. Statistical Issues .................................................................................................. .50 -2- Attachments I. Letter of Intent ..................................................................................................... 53 II. Supplementary Memorandum of Economic Policies for 1999-2000 .................... .54 Annexes I. Quantitative Performance Criteria and Indicative Targets Under the Second ............ Annual PRGF Arrangement .............................................................................. .64 II. Structural Performance Criteria and Benchmarks ................................................ .65 III. Targets for Tax Administration Reform.. ............................................................. .66 IV. Targets for Treasury System Reform.. ................................................................. .67 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3- a Tajikistan’s external environment has been difficult during 1999. Its terms of trade deteriorated further, and the large reversal of the private capital flows associated with the cotton sector’s fmancing placed a severe constraint on economic activity. These developments were compounded by weak policy performance resulting in a further depreciation of the exchange rate and a sharp acceleration of inflation in the summer. About half of the performance criteria for end-June and end-September were not met. 0 The authorities have taken corrective actions and tightened fiscal and monetary policies since September. Following the price hike in the summer, consumer prices declined in September and October and the nominal exchange rate remained broadly stable. Restoring an adequate level of international reserves was the main focus of policy discussions. The authorities agreed to bring the NBT’s international reserves close to the original program target by end-December. Provided that the prior actions will be satisfied, including the interim financial policy targets, the program is expected to be back on track by the time of the Board meeting. l The program’s growth targets were reduced and inflation projections raised in light of recent developments. Fiscal policy aims at a balanced budget in the fourth quarter and, in view of the high public debt service, the fiscal adjustment will need to continue in 2000. Monetary policy will be tight to strengthen the balance of payments and reduce inflation. On exchange rate policy, the central bank will refrain from intervening in the market except for smoothing the temporary fluctuations in the exchange rate and ensuring the achievement of the targeted foreign reserve level. Further strengthening of fiscal and monetary institutions is essential to improve policy performance and governance of public resources. 0 On structural policy, while small scale privatization and land reform have made significant headway, the privatization of cotton ginneries and larger enterprises remains problematic. Targets were set to increase the success rate at the privatization auctions and to improve payment collection. On bank restructuring, two banks were liquidated during 1999 and bank-restructuring agreements with the Savings Bank and the Agroinvestbank will continue. l The staff believes that in light of the track record in the latter part of 1999, and forceful implementation of corrective actions and prior actions, the program can be kept on track during the remainder of the program period. However, the required policy adjustment to achieve the targets set for the balance of payments and price stability is a demanding task, which does not leave any room for C.&her policy slippages. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4- 1. LNTR~DUC~ION 1. On June 24, 1998, the Executive Board approved a three-year arrangement under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF)’ for Tajikistan in an amount equivalent to SDR 96 million, or 160 percent of the then quota. Access to Fund resources was increased to SDR 100.3 million, or 115 percent of new quota in December 1998. The current second annual arrangement, approved on July 2, 1999, supports the government’s economic program for the period April 1999-April2000, and amounts to the equivalent of SDR 30 million, or 34 percent of new quota. Three disbursements totaling to SDR 47 million have been made under the three-year arrangement. The fourth and fifth disbursements are subject to completion of the first and second quarterly reviews of the second-year arrangement and observance of the end-June and end-September 1999 performance criteria, respectively.2 2. The first review under the second-year arrangement could not be completed as originally scheduled by end-September because some performance criteria for end- June 1999 were not observed, and policy performance weakened sharply during July- August. Discussions on remedial policy measures were initiated during a staff mission in August. These were continued in September 1999 during the IMF-World Bank Annual Meetings in Washington and during the period October 20-November 5, 1999 in Dushanbe, together with discussions for the 1999 Article IV and XIV consultation.3 Tajikistan continues to avail itself of the transitional arrangements under Article XIV. 3. In the attached letter to the Managing Director dated December 30, 1999, and a Supplementary Memorandum of Economic Policies (Attachments I and II), the authorities report on the implementation of the PRGF-supported program and outline the near-term ’ On November 22, the name of the Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility (ESAF) was changed to the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF). 2 See EBS/99/105 (6/18/99) and supplement 1 (7/l/99), and EBD/99/73 (6/18/99). Relations with the Fund, the World Bank Group, and the Asian Development Bank are summarized in Appendices I-III. 3The staff team comprised Messrs. Saavalainen (Head), Wang, Jafsrov (all EU2), Bakker (PDR), Ms. Jacobs (FAD), and Mr. Kenjeev (BLS, interpreter), and was assisted by Mr. Lorie (Resident Representative). Messrs. Rebucci (EP, EU2) and Brooks (EP, FAD) participated in the August mission. Ms. Sharipova, Assistant to Mr. Cippa, Executive Director, participated in some discussions during the October mission. Mr. Odling-Smee joined the team on November 4-5 for its final meetings. The team met with President Rakhmonov, Prime Minister Azimov; State Economic Advisor, Mr. Babaev; National Bank of Tajikistan (NBT) Chairman, Mr. Alimardonov; Minister of Finance, Mr. Muzafarov; and other ministers and senior officials. It also met with Mr. Nuri, the United Tajik Opposition (UTO) leader, as well as representatives of the diplomatic and business community. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Publicpolicies to bring the program back on track. They propose performance criteria and structural benchmarks for the remainder of the second-year program (through April 2000) and request a waiver for the non-observance of those performance criteria that were not met at end-June and end-September 1999 (Table 1). 4. The last Article IV consultation was concluded on December 17, 1998. Directors noted Tajikistan’s vulnerability to external shocks and called for tight fiscal and monetary policies and a flexible exchange rate policy in response to such disturbances. They emphasized the importance of accelerating structural reforms and strengthening Tajikistan’s institutional capacity. 5. The implementation of the 1997 Peace Agreement is expected to be completed within the next few months. Following the completion of Phase II of the Military Protocol, which implied fill disarmament of the opposition fighters, a referendum on amendments to the constitution was held on September 26. Voters showed strong support for the continuation of the secular state and the constitutional changes that, inter alia, allow the opposition to freely participate in the political process. The presidential election was held on November 6 and the incumbent President, Mr. Rakhmonov, was re-elected with a large majority of votes. Political tensions increased in the run-up to the election as the opposition protested about irregularities in the election process. Nevertheless, the UT0 lifted the opposition’s boycott before the voting began. The parliamentary elections are now scheduled to take place in February 2000, which will complete the implementation of the 1997 Peace Agreement. II. PERFORMANCE UNDERTHE PROGRAM 6. Macroeconomic performance weakened in the summer but has since improved. Consumer prices rose by 25 percent cumulatively in July-August bringing the 1Zmonth rate of inflation to 64 percent (Figure 1). Delayed adjustment of prices to a depreciation of the exchange rate, temporary supply disturbances, as well as excessive monetary expansion contributed to the sudden rise in the price index.4 As supply constraints eased and financial policies were tightened, some price hikes were reversed and the overall consumer prices index declined in September and October. Nevertheless, inflation during 1999 is now expected to be significantly higher than envisaged under the program (Table 2). During the 12-month period through August, the nominal exchange rate depreciated by 47 percent vis-a- vis the U. S . dollar reflecting the impact of the Russian crisis, the continuing deterioration of 4 Prices of bread and other flour products rose by 40-50 percent, rice by 25 percent, and gasoline prices more than tripled in August. To a large extent, the higher prices of flour products reflected increased costs of imports from Kazakhstan and domestic producers’ supply restraint. Higher prices of rice were due to supply disturbances reflecting the unsettled situation at the Uzbek border. Gasoline prices rose as fuel imports were temporarily halted due to liquidity problems of the national oil company. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-6- 160 140 120 100 80 60 40 20 0 -20 Figure 1. Taj ikistan: Inflation and Exchange Rates, March 1998-October 1999 Inflation (1Zmonth percent change) 1500 1400 1300 1200 1100 1000 900 800 700 600 500 -Actual - - - Program Mar 1998 May JUI Sep Nov Jan 1999 Mar May JUl Sep Nominal and Real Exchange Rates I 15 . fi - 14 / \ m / ’ /-. - 13 ’ ? /‘, 12 _ Nominal exchange rate TR/USS, (Left scale) - 7 - 6 I I I I I I I I I I I I 1 I I I I I I 5 Mar May Jul Sep Nov Jan Mar May Jul Sep 1998 1999 Source: Goskomstat and National Bank of Tajikistan. I/ Proxied by average dollar wages. Downward movement implies depreciation. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-7- the terms of trade, and domestic policy slippages (Figure 2). In real terms, the Tajik ruble depreciated by 30 percent vis-&vis the U.S. dollar. Since September the nominal exchange rates at both the auction (TICEX) and the street cash markets have remained broadly stable. With the low U.S. dollar wages relative to those in neighboring countries, Tajikistan’s external competitiveness has remained broadly satisfactory. 7. Tajikistan’s balance of payments was under heavy pressure because the private capital inflows associated with the cotton sector’s financing were reversed. The external private financing of the cotton sector turned from a large inflow in 1998 to substantial outflow in 1999 as old cotton loans were being repaid and no new financing was received in part owing to the non-availability of government loan guarantees. 8. These developments adversely affected imported inputs with negative impact on economic growth. The officially reported real GDP increased less than anticipated, by only 0.9 percent in the first nine months of 1999 compared to the same period a year ago. Cotton output was lower reflecting largely weaker yields due to diminished use of fertilizers and pesticides.5 The grain harvest was also less than a year ago. Overall, these developments resulted in a lower-than-anticipated demand for money, which made the achievement of the program targets more difficult. 9. Policy performance was mixed in the second quarter of 1999 and deteriorated further in the third quarter. As a result, about half of the performance criteria for end-June and end-September were not met (Box 1). Improved tax collection helped keep the cash deficit of the general government below the relevant performance criterion at end-June, but in fact this was achieved through wage and pension arrears. By end-August, however, the fiscal deficit had already exceeded the end-September performance criterion as tax collection weakened and spending due to the nation’s 1 lOOti anniversary festivities and the completion of several capital projects. Domestic credit expansion also accelerated in July-August accommodating the larger fiscal deficit, quasi-fiscal operations, and the cotton sector’s financing requests, Moreover, the NBT extended loans to certain public entities, including a directed credit to Tajik Bail for completion of a railway project. As a result, the NBT’s net domestic assets at end-September exceeded the program target by a wide margin and its net international reserves declined to negative US$6 1 million, compared to the adjusted program target of negative US$37 million. 5 For the 1998 crop, about US$SO million of foreign financing from the Credit Suisse First Boston Inc. (CSFB) was made available for equipment, planting, growing, and harvesting. The financing of the 1999 crop amounted only to US$55 million, of which about US$25 million was provided by the NBT and about US$30 million by the CSFB through postponement of debt repayments. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-8- Figure 2. Tajikistan: External Shocks, 1998-99 (Index January 1998=100) ,02 Terms of Trade 100 . 98 - 96 l 94 . 92 - 90 . 88 . 86 Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep act NW Dee Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Ott 1998 1999 105 World Market Price of Cotton 100 - 95 - 90. 85 - 80 - 75 - 70 . 65 . Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Ott Nov Dee Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Ott 1998 1999 160 World Market Price of Oil 150 - 140 . 130 . 120 - 110 - 100 - 90 . 80 - 70 - Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Ott Nov Dee Jan Feb Mar Apr h4ay Jun Jul Aug Sep Ott 1998 1999 Sources: World Economic Outlook; and IMF staffestimates. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-9- Box 1. Performance Criteria for end-June and endSeptember Of the eight quantitative performance criteria for end&me, four were observed. The targets were met on tax collection, the general government fiscal deficit, the National Bank of Tajikistan’s (NBT) net credit to the government, and the ceiling on contracted or guaranteed non-concessional extemal loans. However, the quantitative performance criteria set for the NBT’s net domestic assets @IDA), its net intem&ional reserves @JlR), wage and pension arrears, and extemal debt arrears were not met. ‘I&e targets for the NDA and NIR were not reached essentially due to the delay in the disbursement of the second tranche of the World Bank’s Structural Adjustment Credit as the policy conditionality attached to its release. was not satisfied, especially in the area of privatization. Government wage payments for May were delayed as was a small amount of pension payments, but both these arrears were eliminated in early July. Minor extemal payments anzars to the Kyrgyz Republic were paid in cash in September. On structural performance criteria, sale agreements were signed for 12 renmihg cotton ginneries after the third international tender on June 28, which satisfied this performance criterion. However, because the NBT directed about 50 percent of the gross credit during the second quarter outside the credit auctions in compensation for the cotton sector’s shoti~l in foreign financing, the performance criterion calling for the sole reliance on credit auctions was not observed. Four of the eight quantitative performance criteria for end-September were met. Again, tax collection exceeded the target and no non-concessional loans were guaranteed or contracted. Similarly, government wages and pensions were paid on time and Tajik&an did not incur externa! arrears. However, the program went off track with regard to all four fmancial policy targets. The ceiling on net domestic assets of the NBT was breached by an amount equivalent to 35 percent of reserve money, although its net credit to government exceeded the target only slightly. As a result, net international reserves of the NBT were about US%24 million lower than provided by the program floor. The fiscal deficit was 0.6 percent of GDP higher than allowed for by the program. The structural performance criterion for end-September, requiring all gross NBT credit to be issued via credit auctions, was not observed as a new U&$2.6 million loan was extended to Tajik RaiL To address the problem of directed credits, a presidential decree has been issued prohibiting all NBT lending except through the credit auction mechanism. The authorities request a waiver for the non-observance of those performance criteria that were not met at end-June and at end-September because corrective actions have been taken and overall economic objectives of the program can be satisfied. The achievement of the demanding October-November interim financial targets indicate good progress toward bringing the oroeTam back on track. 10. In response to the growing financial imbalances, the authorities tightened fiscal and monetary policies in September and tight policies continued in the fourth quarter. A short-term policy agenda was formulated together with the Fund staff, aiming to bring the program back on track.6 With intensified revenue mobilization and a drop in outlays reIated 6 A short-term corrective policy agenda was agreed during the Annual Meetings in Washington in September with the conclusion of a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU). Key elements to the package included an immediate strengthening of the tax collection effort, tighter expenditure controls especially in the area of capital expenditure and the so-called national economy programs. The fiscal deficit was not to exceed TR 1.2 billion in October and the NBT’s net domestic assets were to be reduced by at least TR7.6 billion. The NBT’s net credit to government was to remain unchanged in October. To strengthen the capacity to implement the program on a sustained basis, the authorities were committed to: (i) issue a decree prohibiting any government agency from contracting for the acquisition of goods and services without a signed approval by the Ministry of Finance; (ii) close all non-bank enterprise accounts at the NBT; (iii) issue a decree prohibiting all NBT lending (including to the government agencies) except through credit auctions; (iv) start weekly reporting of (continued.. .) Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Publicto the nation’s anniversary festivities and capital spending, the budget was nearly balanced in September. This fiscal adjustment has continued since, which, together with renewed efforts by the NBT to collect overdue loans, enabled the NBT to reduce its NDA and increase foreign exchange reserves, As a result, the interim targets set for fiscal and monetary policies to establish a track record of policy performance were broadly satisfied in October and November (Figure 3 and Table l).’ 11. Of the program’s eight structural benchmarks for end-June and end-September, seven were effectively met (Table ll).* However, the structural benchmark for end- September on the collection of full payments for sold cotton ginneries was not observed. Of the 23 ginneries with a sale contract, only two ginneries had been tilly paid at that time. The privatization of cotton ginneries has continued to be plagued by weak collection of sale proceeds and irregularities in the privatization process, including the existence of de facto minimum prices that slowed the pace of privatization. III. POLICY DISCUSSIONS 12. Discussions focused on further policy adjustment to bring the program back on track (Tables 2-7). The authorities acknowledged that strong adjustment will be needed to restore macroeconomic stability and strengthen the balance of payments. They also realized that their stabilization efforts have repeatedly veered off track in the past year despite periodic corrective measures, Therefore, institutional measures were needed to strengthen the authorities’ policy implementation capacity, A. Policy Objectives and Strategy 13. Recent domestic and external developments called for a revision of the program’s macroeconomic objectives. The twelve-month inflation is now projected to fall to 35 percent by end-December 1999 and further to 26 percent by end-April 2000 as the implementation of corrective policies since September has eased pressures on prices and the revenue collection by the State Tax Committee, the State Customs Committee, and the Social Protection Fund to the Ministry of Finance; and (v) establish an Economic Program Monitoring Croup with the IMF Resident Representative as an observer and with the obligation to report to the President on a monthly basis. ’ While the end-November NDA target was met, the October ceiling of TR 156.7 billion was exceeded by TR 0.3 billion. The October fiscal deficit was marginally (TR 0.1 billion) higher than the targeted level. * Relating to the small- and large-scale privatization, land reform, tax administration, and external debt management (EBS/99/105, Attachment III, Annex I). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public180,000 160,000 80.000 60.000 Figure 3. Tajikistan: M&by Program Net Domestic Assets in billions of rubles) HActual n Origiual Program l/ ORevised program June 2l September 3/ October November Decanber J=-Y MOU Prior Antion Prior Action Net International Reserves (in millions of US dollars) -50 - -60 - I n Original Program q Revised target -70 ’ March June 21 September 31 October November Deocmber JanuarY April 41 MOU Prior Action Prior Action Sources: Tajik authorities; and MF staff estimates. ll The original program was revised on the basis of the exchange rate of 1,430 TR per US dollar instead of the previously assumed 1,038 TR per US dollar. 21 Taking into account the program adjustor of US% 10 million as partial adjustment for the &lay in disbursement of the second tranche ofthe World Bank’s Structural Adjustment Credit (USS 40 million). 31 Taking into account the shortfall of US$7.5 million in net foreign financing of the budget which resulted ikom the delay in the World Bank disbursement of US$ 15 million, and postponement of the programmed debt repayment of USS 7.5 million to the EU. 4/ The original program level is for end-March 2000. -- Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12- exchange rate. For 2000 as a whole, the program’s inflation projection was revised upward from 7 percent to 13 percent. In light of the lower cotton and gram production as well as constrained private consumption and investment, real GDP is now expected to grow by 3.5 percent in 1999 compared to 5.5 percent projected in the original program. Output is forecast to grow by 5 percent in 2000, somewhat less than initially anticipated. 14. Restoring an adequate level of international reserves was a main policy objective. This was justified as official gross international reserves had declined to about 4 weeks of imports at end-September 1999 and Tajikistan is facing high debt service obligations in the coming years. The authorities agreed to brin ! the NBT’s international reserves close to the original program target by end-Decembe . Official foreign reserves were programmed to increase to 6 weeks of imports by end-December 1999 and further to 8 weeks of imports by end-April 2000. Achieving these objectives would necessitate a strong commitment to tight fiscal and monetary policies. Instead of a deficit, a balanced budget was programmed for the fourth quarter. In addition, the strategy relies heavily on the recovery of overdue loans by the central bank from the cotton sector, quasi-fiscal borrowers, and banks. These efforts are to be supported by a continuation of a flexible exchange rate policy, which has served Tajikistan well in view of the frequent external shocks. 15. It became clear, however, that the targeted balance of payments adjustment could lead to an excessive import compression without the support of external private creditors. Full repayment of the cotton sector debt to the CSFB by year-end on top of the targeted official reserve build-up would have greatly exceeded the projected foreign exchange inflow of the cotton sector during the period. lo Together with Fund staff, the authorities met with the representatives of the CSFB and obtained their consent to a postponement of the cotton sector debt repayment according to a specific time schedule until April 2000 (SMEP, paragraph 17). The government did not extend new guarantees for the remaining balance.” According to the agreement with CSFB, 40 percent of the cotton sector foreign exchange inflow net of sales tax will be directed to debt repayment by the cotton sector. 16. The authorities agreed with this strategy. An alternative policy option, including a slower adjustment of the balance of payments with less ambitious targets for fiscal and credit policy, was not considered optimal as it would give a weaker signal about the government’s ’ Taking into account the delays in the disbursements of the Fund and the World Bank. lo As of end-September, the remaining stock of the cotton sector debt amounted to US$44.5 million, including US$13.5 million interest that could be reduced if the Tajik borrowers make repayment before end-May 2000. I1 While CSFB will call the existing guarantee, it will refrain from enforcing it as long as debt reduction proceeds as agreed. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13 - resolve to address the economic imbalances and re-build policy credibility. Besides, the foreign exchange inflow is seasonally strong in the last quarter of the year, which made the timing of the envisaged adjustment appropriate. The risk remains, nevertheless, that if cotton and aluminum prices at the world market do not rise (moderately) as expected and export volumes are lower than projected, for example, due to lower-than-anticipated harvest and ginnery yields, the achievement of the foreign reserve target by the end of the program period could require excessive contraction of domestic absorption. The next quarterly review will provide an opportunity to reassess the feasibility of this target. 17. The authorities believed that with the presidential election over and despite the upcoming parliamentary elections, they were now in a better position to strengthen financial discipline and implement strong prior actions for the completion of the program reviews. The NBT will reduce its NDA from the end-September level by the equivalent of 35 percent of reserve money by end-December 1999, and further by 16 percent of reserve money by end-March 2000, bringing its domestic and foreign assets close to the level envisaged under the original program. l2 Moreover, to eliminate the past stop-go cycle of policy implementation, institutional measures will be taken to strengthen the fiscal and monetary institutions. 18. A solid record of policy performance in October-December was envisaged before Board consideration of the first and second reviews. This period of track record implied that the test dates for the program performance criteria for the fourth and fifth Joan under the second-year PRGF arrangement had to be set for end-January and end-April 2000. After that, loan disbursements for the remainder of the three-year arrangement would return to the original schedule. The proposed rephasing of loan disbursements is presented in Table 12. B. Fiscal Policy 19. To bring the overall deficit at 3.0 percent of GDP in 1999 requires a balanced budget in the fourth quarter (a prior action). To achieve this objective, the authorities were committed to strictly enforce the presidential decree that prohibits any government entities from contracting for the acquisition of goods and services without signed confirmation by the Ministry of Finance. They also stand ready to cut-if the revenue targets cannot be met-expenditures on the national economy programs, mainly spending on construction, transportation, and agribusiness, as well as capital expenditure. r2 The new performance criterion for NIR at end-April is lower than the original program’s end-March target reflecting the revised assumption on the timing of the ADB disbursement, and the need to start expanding credit through credit auctions for financing of the new cotton crop in April (see paragraph 29). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14- 20. In view of the high public debt service and the need to provide room for private sector financing, the fiscal adjustment needs to continue in 2000. In the drafi budget submitted to Parliament, the overall fiscal deficit (excluding foreign financed capital expenditures) is targeted to decline to 2.2 percent of GDP in 2000. This deficit will be financed largely from concessional borrowing from the World Bank and the Asian Development Bank as well as from privatization proceeds. The NBT will not finance the budget deficit. 21. Total tax revenue is conservatively projected at 12.2 percent of GDP, unchanged from 1999. The tax incidence will continue to shift from production towards consumption, with the sales tax rates on cotton reduced from 23 percent to 20 percent and on aluminium from 4 percent to 3 percent, respectively. As these sales taxes still comprise a large share of total revenue, revenue enhancing measures are needed to achieve the overall revenue target. The government will strengthen tax and customs administration according to a specific time schedule through the full implementation of the Large Taxpayers Inspectorate (LTI) and VAT reforms as recommended by the Fund tax advisers (SMEP, Annex II). Automatic taxation through banks’ settlement accounts for all taxpayers under the LTI will be eliminated by March 2000 to achieve greater transparency and efficiency in tax payment, and reduce undue intervention of the authorities in the tinctioning of the banking system. The scope of tax offsets will be reduced by regularizing the financial relations between the budget and Tajik Rail, which has been servicing Tqjikistan’s external debt to Uzbekistan in kind, offset against its tax obligations. In addition, the authorities will limit the VAT exemptions for TADAZ in compensation for the sales tax reduction, increase the specific land tax by 40 percent to take account of past inflation, ad take legislative actions to ensure that local governments implement the retail sales tax at the rate of at least 4 percent.13 The enterprise property tax and the simplified small business tax introduced in 1999 should continue to yield increased receipts as the tax compliance improves. Together, these measures are expected to improve revenue performance by 0.4 percent of GDP and thus help offset the reduced yield in sales taxes. 22. The government recognizes that a public expenditure reform is essential to contain spending pressures within the tight budget constraint. The debt service burden is expected to rise sharply from 0.4 percent of GDP (3 percent of total revenue) in 1999 to 2.5 percent of GDP (19 percent of total revenue) in 2000. This increase reflects a large up- front debt repayment needed for new financing from the European Union, and principal as well as interest payments to Russia which will be resumed with the conclusion of the debt reduction agreement. Expenditure pressures will also reflect the need to strengthen the social safety net. l3 The Tax Code provides a tax rate up to a maximum of 5 percent but the effective rate has only reached 1.5 percent during 1999. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 15- 23. In order to increase the efficiency in providing public services, the authorities intend to start rationalizing the public sector wage bill in the context of the 2000 budget. The budget is to provide for an average wage increase for government employees of 15 percent effective January 1, 2000, with larger increases for key employees in order to increase retention. Further rationalization of government employment is expected to take place after the new parliament has been elected and the government restructuring plan developed in March 2000.14 Capital expenditures are budgeted to decline from 2.6 percent of GDP in 1999 to 1.6 percent of GDP in 2000, though they could be raised somewhat if foreign financing is obtained for the Public Investment Program (PIP) under preparation for the prospective Consultative Group meeting in spring 2000. 24. The recently completed household survey revealed that poverty is widespread and correlates strongly with family size. In addition, the existing cash compensation scheme reached only a small proportion of eligible recipients. Is The authorities intend to increase expenditures on the social safety net to 2.2 percent of GDP in 2000, up from 1.9 percent of GDP in 1999. This includes a reserve of TR 6 billion (0.5 percent of GDP) for further reforms of the social safety net to be designed before next May based on the poverty survey analysis conducted together with World Bank and IMP staffs. The current ineffective cash compensation scheme will be replaced by a program providing targeted social assistance to the needy, such as school-going children. Further reform of the Social Protection Fund is also envisaged. All pensions below the minimum pension will be brought to TR2,OOO per month, the current level of the minimum pension. At the same time, working pensioners’ benefits will be frozen, early retirement provisions will be tightened, and the pension law will be amended to increase the minimum pension age by six months on January 1,200O. These measures are necessary to preserve the longer-term financial soundness of the pension system. Finally, social conditions are expected to improve through lower inflation and stabilization of the exchange rate, thereby protecting the real income of the population. 25. The authorities welcomed the initiative to prepare a Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP) and hoped that such a program would help the new administration alleviate the pervasive poverty in the country. The preliminary results of the poverty assessment by the World Bank staff will become available in early 2000 and provide a basis for launching the project during the February staff mission. The authorities’ aim is to develop a draft interim-PRSP by May 2000 for staff comments. i4 The completion of the public sector employment survey has been postponed and is being redesigned to take into account the information needs related to the government restructuring. The government restructuring and reorganization is expected to be covered under the World Bank’s second Structural Adjustment Credit during 2000-O 1. is This largely explains the lower-than-programmed total spending on the social safety net in 1999. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 16- 26. Further strengthening of fiscal institutions is essential to improve policy performance and governance of public resources more generally. With the implementation of the presidential decree of October 22, fiscal management is being centralized within the Ministry of Finance. The State Tax Committee, State Customs Committee, and Social Protection Fund have started weekly reporting of revenue collections to the Ministry of Finance. The Ministry of Finance has also been given enhanced authority to restrict spending as agencies cannot contract for the acquisition of goods without the ministry’s confirmation. Expenditure control will be strengthened by consolidating all extra- budgetary foreign exchange accounts of the budgetary organizations into the single treasury account, establishing an audit mechanism in the treasury, and expanding treasury coverage to all central and regional budget transactions except in rayons where banking facilities are not yet available. The aim is to fully establish the treasury system in 2000 (SMEP, Annex IV). Also with Fund technical assistance, the 2000 budget has been prepared on GFS accounting standards, which will facilitate budget analysis, forecasting, and monitoring in the coming year. C. Monetary and Exchange Bate Policy 27. Monetary policy will be tight to strengthen the balance of payments and reduce inflation. Velocity is assumed to decline only marginally during the remainder of the second- year program. Later, money demand should recover faster with declining inflation expectations and gradually improving confidence in the banking system. Consistent with the program’s inflation target and projected demand for real balances, ruble broad money is projected to grow at an annualized rate of 30 percent during the remainder of the program period, and by 34 percent during 2000 in part reflecting the expected decline in currency substitution. The program’s credit and foreign reserve targets imply a 17 percent annualized rate of growth of reserve money during 2000. 28. The revised monetary program calls for a sharp reduction in the NBT’s net domestic assets and a significant improvement in its net foreign assets. These adjustments were agreed as prior actions. Key elements of the credit tightening included in the fourth quarter of 1999: (i) collection of cotton sector loans of US$lO million, (ii) collection of TR 5 billion of overdue loans from quasi-fiscal borrowers and banks, (iii) a small reduction of the net credit to the general government; and (iv) accumulation of privatization proceeds of at least US$3 million in the special account at the NBT. By end- November, about half of the required NDA aad NIR adjustments had materialized. 29. Financing of the 2000 cotton crop is expected to be covered by limited lending from the commercial banks funded through credit auctions by the NTB, the cotton sector’s retained export earnings, and new loans from external private creditors. Both P. Reinhart (a key export agent for the cotton sector) and CSFB have indicated their interest in providing new pre-financing for the 2000 cotton harvest, if the balance of the cotton debt declines as agreed. As the debt burden eases, several cotton companies are expected to be able to cover an increasing part of the spring planting costs from their own resources’ provided that export volumes and prices develop as projected. In view of this, and with the Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17- programmed large loan recovery during October 1999-March 2000, the NBT’s direct exposure to the cotton sector is expected to be eliminated and its indirect involvement diminish during the next harvest cycle.i6 Uncertainties related to world market prices of cotton and the size of the final 1999 harvest, however, underscore the tentative nature of this financing plan. 30. On exchange rate policy, the NBT will refrain from intervening in the TICEX except for smoothing the temporary fluctuations in the exchange rate and ensuring the achievement of the targeted foreign reserve level. This policy implies full downward flexibility of the exchange rate at the TICEX. In the event of market pressures for an appreciation of the exchange rate, the NBT will first take the opportunity to accumulate reserves. In the foreign exchange market, the spread between the deposit auction and cash market rates has varied between lo-14 percent. The authorities explained that in addition to transaction costs, the high spread largely reflected the risk premium that banks attached to importing foreign exchange cash to Tajikistan given the internal and external security concerns. While the staffwas not aware of any formal restrictions, it noted that the large spread could also be due to informal cash restrictions and moral suasion in the determination of the exchange rate which prevent effective arbitrage in the market. The NBT will address these issues with banks and ensure sufficient availability of foreign exchange cash to help prevent the spread between the TICEX rate and the cash market rate from exceeding the estimated transaction costs of 7 percent. 31. Sustained implementation of sound monetary policy requires further development of the mechanisms for the allocation of financial resources. With the implementation of the presidential decree of October 22, 1999, the NBT has closed all non- bank enterprise accounts at the NBT. By the same decree, it will no longer finance any quasi- fiscal activities, To further increase the competition in the foreign exchange market and facilitate better financial intermediation, free access to these markets will be ensured for all sound commercial banks acting on behalf of their clients. The authorities will also promote the emerging inter-bank foreign exchange market and ensure that the exchange rate at the TICEX and the interest rate at the credit auctions are not subject to collusion or any other indirect influence by market participants, The credit auction mechanism will be overhauled in close cooperation with the forthcoming MAE mission. The authorities agreed that these measures were critical for improving transparency and discipline in the financial sector. l6 At this stage, the monetary program is based on the assumption that US$13 million new credit will become available from external sources. In addition, a similar amount of financing from domestic commercial banks is envisaged. These credits would be largely funded through credit auctions as the NBT would reallocate the collected 1999 cotton credits back to the economy. With the residual financing expected to come from the sector’s own resources (in part helped by the postponement of US$l 1 million debt repayment to CSFB until October-November 2000) the estimated total cost of US$50 million could be covered. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 18- 32. As envisaged under the program., the financial relations between the NBT and the Ministry of Finance will be regularized through the conversion of the stock of government debt to the NBT into interest bearing instruments. A working group for this purpose has been set up, with the Fund Resident Representative as an observer and it is expected to submit a specific proposal on the implementation of the scheme outlined in the SMEP, paragraph 20, for government and NBT Board approval shortly. D. External Sector Policies 33. The authorities agreed that concluding rapidly the ongoing debt rescheduling discussions is necessary to build up creditworthiness (Box 2). Facing an increasingly heavy debt service burden, they are also committed to resisting the mounting pressures for guaranteeing nonconcessional external borrowing. Several foreign suppliers have approached the authorities offering financing but requiring government guarantees to such projects as the Anzub tunnel ensuring the winter time connection of the industrial Leninanbad region to the rest of the country, the Rogun hydropower station, the Dushanbe telecommunication network, etc.. So far the authorities have declined the requests for government guarantees. Box 2. Debt Rescheduling Negotiations During 1999, Tajikistan has continued to negotiate with three of its largest creditors: Uzbekistan, Russia, and the European Union. Negotiations with Uzbekistan aimed at a revision of the 1997 debt restructuring agreement, which had a very compressed maturity structure with no grace period. In January 1998, the Uzbek govermnent had agreed to reschedule Tajikistan’s debt in line with the terms discussed during the 1997 creditors’ meeting, but this agreement was rejected by the Uzbek parliament. Meanwhile, Tajikistan has continued to service its debt according to the old schedule. On the debt to Russia, agreement is being finalized to reduce it from US$l40 million to US$l 10 million. Negotiations are also under way with the European Union (ELI) to refinance the outstanding debt of US$80 million on more concessional terms. A new EU macroeconomic assistance loan and a significaut grant have now been approved by the European Parliament A EU mission is expected to finalize the discussions in Dushanbe in January 2000. With Fund staff assistance, the authorities also met with the representatives of Turkmenistan. The resulting preliminary agreement on settlement of the correspondent account debt is currently under review by both governments. Discussions were also held on discrepancies in the Tajik-Kazak debt relations during the Annual Meetings. Agreement has been reached with the government of Pakistan to restructure the debt on terms stipulated by the 1997 creditors’ meeting; although it is not yet known what impact the recent change of government in Pakistan will have on this deal. Agreement also seemed near with the government of India, while negotiations with China have so far not been successful. 34. Discussions on trade policy centered on preserving Tajikistan’s relatively liberal trade system. On the IMP trade restrictiveness index, which measures trade restrictiveness on a scale from one to ten, with one suggesting the lowest and ten the highest level of restrictions, Tajikistan scores one, reflecting both the relatively low average tariff rate, as well as the absence of major non-tariff barriers. This compares well with the other members of the customs union, which have a higher score on this index than Tajikistan. Since joining the customs union with Russia, Belarus, Kazakhstan, and Kyrgyz Republic in April 1999, Tajikistan has altered its tariff structure. Imports from member countries of the customs union are no longer subject to tariffs. Imports from the 48 least developed countries are also Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 19- free. For other countries, however, the uniform tariff of 5 percent has been replaced with a tariff structure ranging from 5 to 30 percent, with an average tariff rate of about 8 percent. Meanwhile, the authorities have initiated the application process for membership in the World Trade Organization (WTO). In view of these developments, the staffwarned against imposing any discriminatory tariffs and non-tariff trade barriers as the maintenance of an open trade system helps to ensure a competitive market structure. The authorities agreed that possible future tariff adjustments will have to be consistent with WTO policy goals in order to speed up the accession process. E. Structural Policies 35. The recent setbacks in Tajikistan’s stabilization record highlighted the structural weaknesses in the economy, particularly in the enterprise and financial sectors. The proposed structural benchmarks for the remainder of the second-year program (SMEP, Annex II) focus on privatization, land reform, bank restructuring, and energy pricing. 36. The authorities accorded high priority to the completion of the privatization of cotton ginneries. While all cotton ginneries had a sale confirmed at end-June, in most cases payment was not received as agreed, and the ginneries have been re-offered for sale several times. The authorities argued that as the unfavorable external environment had worsened domestic investors’ liquidity position, payment collection for the assets sold had suffered. However, they agreed that increasing transparency, including elimination of the de facto minimum prices, was essential to quicken the pace of privatization. Overall, out of the universe of 27 ginneries, five were initially owned by private production cooperatives, four ginneries have been sold and fblly paid, and in three cases 30-50 percent of the purchase price has been collected. The sixth international tender was held on December 14 where another eight ginneries were sold. A new auction for the remaining seven ginneries is planned for end-December. At present, foreign investors have equities in four ginneries. The completion of the privatization through full payment collection is a prior action for the completion of the program reviews. The World Bank staff is working closely with the authorities to ensure the conclusion of the process as the release of the third tranche of its SAC is subject to conditionality in this area. 37. With regard to the privatisation of medium- and large-scale enterprises, specific measures and quantitative targets (SMEP, paragraphs 23-24) were set out to increase the success rate at the auctions in terms of sale contracts and to ensure fuil payment. In addition to offering more enterprises in frequent auctions, the State Property Committee will refrain from applying any arbitrary coefficients in setting the auction starting prices. The Dutch auction method will be used for those enterprises that fail to be sold in English auctions. The program aims at completion of the privatization of small-scale enterprises by end- 1999. 38. On bank restructuring, two banks were liquidated during 1999. The NBT will take further measures to ensure that banks comply with prudential regulations, recover Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public‘- 20 - overdue loans, make loan loss provisioning, and improve risk assessment procedures. The audits of the Savings Bank, Agroinvestbank and Vneshekonombank under international accounting standards have been completed and, in cooperation with the Fund staff, the authorities will make further restructuring decisions on these banks on the basis of the auditors’ recommendations. The AIB will be re-capitalized and no directed lending will be imposed on this bank. The government’s policy toward re-capitalization of other banks is pending the results of international audits. A tough stance, including liquidations and specific restructuring programs, will be taken against those banks that have systematically failed to comply with prudential regulations. Particular attention will be given to operations of the two largest banks, Orion Bank and Vnesheconombank, which are currently outside the bank restructuring program. 39. Despite some resistance at local levels, land reform has made significant headway. As of end-September 1999, more than half of the state and collective farms have been dismantled and nearly 45 percent of the arable land is now in private hands. There are indications that privatized farms are more responsive to price signals and that their productivity is higher than the state farms. The Land Reform Committee is committed to making further progress in the remainder of the second-year program. Under the program, another 100 state and collective farms (over one fourth of the remaining state farms in Tajikistan as of end-September) will be privdtized through the issuance of marketable land share and use certificates to private farmers (SMEP, paragraph 25). 40. The government is aware that the recent depreciation of the exchange rate has eroded the cost recovery ratio of the national electricity company, Barki Tojik. However, with the low level of income, it is politically difficult to increase electricity tariffs without compensation for the poorest segments of the population. Resourcesare now included in the 2000 budget for a special compensation scheme and the authorities agreed to raise households electricity tariffs based on a review of the cost recovery calculation currently under way with ADB technical assistance (SMEP, paragraph 26). They also agreed that privileges for free usage of electricity by certain groups of the population would be eliminated next spring. IV. BALANCEOFPAYMENTSOUTLOOKANDCAPACITYTOREPAYTHEFUND 41. Tajikistan’s balance of payments situation, while remaining difficult, is expected to improve over the three-year PRGF arrangement (Tables 6-9). During 2000, gross reserves are expected to increase from 1.4 months of imports to 2.9 months. This increase reflects a decline in the current account deficit but also an improvement in the capital account: official disbursements are projected to increase largely due to the expected disbursements from the Fund and to the release of the delayed second tranche of the World Bank Structural Adjustment Credit. 42. Although Tajikistan’s debt service ratio is projected to increase in the next several years, its payment obligations to the Fund will remain relatively moderate. Reflecting the improving balance of payments situation, official gross reserves are Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-21- programmed to increase significantly over the PRGF program period, from 1.5 months of imports in 1998 to 3.2 months of imports in 2001. After 2001, the import coverage of gross reserves would stabilize as imports increase with foreign investment and other capital inflows. The official net reserve position would improve significantly as well, but it would turn positive only in 2001. Debt service to the Fund will peak at 3.3 percent of exports in 2006, or 12 percent of gross reserves. Outstanding credit to the Fund will peak at 110 million SDR in 2001. Repayments to the Fund will remain modest relative to export revenue and Tajikistan is expected to meet its future obligations in a timely manner. 43. Tajikistan’s external debt is very high relative to its fiscal revenue (Table 10). In 2000, debt service on external public debt is projected to reach 25 percent of fiscal revenue (excluding grants) and, if debt service to the IMF is included, this ratio increases to 32 percent. With the ratio of net present value of public and publicly guaranteed debt to fiscal revenues (excluding grants) at 443 percent, it is well above the HIPC threshold of 250 percent.” This reflects primarily the very low revenue ratio as other indicators of indebtedness are not as weak. At the end of 1999, the ratio of the net present value of public and publicly guaranteed debt to exports was 83 percent, well below the HIPC threshold of 150 percent. The high debt burden relative to fiscal revenue underlines the importance of improvements in tax administration. However, this takes time and a new round of negotiations on debt rescheduling may be needed in 2000-2001. V. TE~HNICALAWISTANCE,STATISTIC~,AND Y2KIssu~s 44. Tajikistan’s weak institutional capacity calls for intensive technical assistance in fiscal management, monetary operations, and development of the legal system. During 1999, the Fund has provided technical assistance to Tajikistan in the areas of tax administration, implementation of the VAT reform, computerization of the State Tax Committee, the establishment of the Treasury, and the conversion of the budgetary framework to a GFS based system (Appendix IV). The Fund also provided advice on aspects of the monetary operations and helped prepare the legislation to strengthen external debt management, following the similar assistance with the Tax Code last year. The authorities were highly appreciative of such support but also noted that sustained assistance, including extensive training of the local staff, is needed to bring about a lasting improvement in their institutional capacity. They expect the Fund to continue to provide assistance in the above areas and additional support, including necessary legal advice, for the strengthening of the Ministry of Finance. 45. With the introduction of the new charts of accounts, compilation of monetary statistics on a timely basis has improved significantly. Progress has also been made in *’ In the context of the enhanced I-UPC Initiative, this criterion can only be applied if the revenue to GDP ratio is at least 15 percent. Assuming a revenue ratio of 15 percent, the debt to revenue ratio would have been 372 percent, still well above the threshold. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public“22- preparing for the introduction of a country page in IFS, with assistance of STA. However, economic policy making and monitoring in Tajikistan continue to be hampered by the lack of reliable and timely data, particularly with regard to national accounts, prices, balance of payments, and government finance statistics. The authorities have requested international assistance in these areas, including from the Fund, but so far have received relatively scant response from other providers. The staff has advised the authorities to further strengthen their absorptive capacity and redouble their efforts to attract assistance from the international community. 46. The potential for Y2K problems in Tajikistan is less than in more developed countries because its level of computerization is relatively moderate. Since conducting the impact assessment in 1998, most enterprises, especially in the banking sector, have converted or replaced Y2K non-compliant software. The most recent test was conducted in September 1999. The authorities are confident that the correction process will be completed on time. VI. STAFF fiFTRAISAL 47. Tajikistan faced a difficult external environment during the first half of its second- year PRGF-supported program. Terms of trade deteriorated further and the large reversal of the private capital flows associated with the cotton sector’s financing placed a severe constraint on economic activity. The negative effects of these developments were compounded by weak policy performance, and resulted in a depreciation of the exchange rate and sharp acceleration of inflation. 48. It is regrettable that soon after the Board approval of the second-year ESAF arrangement, the authorities were unable to keep fiscal and monetary policies on track. The large deviations from the program targets reflected strong spending pressures in the run-up to the national celebration and presidential election, and also highlighted Tajikistan’s weak fiscal and monetary institutions, particularly in budgetary execution and allocation of financial resources. The reoccurrence of the quasi-fiscal operations of the central bank is a case in point. 49. The first priority is to restore macroeconomic stability so that the hard-won stabilization gains since the signing of the 1997 Peace Agreement are not lost. It is commendable that the authorities started tightening fiscal and monetary policies in September and this appears to have achieved the intended early results. The staff welcomes the authorities’ strengthened resolve to bring inflation under control and the important remedial measures that have been taken. However, the economy has not yet fully adjusted to the external shocks and the policy adjustment under way needs to be continued in the months ahead. Success in this endeavor requires sustained policy implementation rather than the earlier observed stop-and-go policy cycles. 50. The staff agrees that a balanced budget in the fourth quarter of 1999 and further reduction of the fiscal deficit in 2000 are both necessary and appropriate. Such a fiscal stance Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 23 - is necessary for price and exchange rate stability and because the burden of public debt service will increase in 2000 and beyond. Stronger fiscal discipline will also promote adjustment in the private sector thereby contributing to a sustainable recovery of the economy. In addition, the authorities need to show strong determination in strengthening their fiscal institutions, in particular the Ministry of Finance and the treasury system. The staffwelcomes the authorities early intention to prepare an interim-PRSP. 51. Tajikistan’s high external debt burden underscores the need to restore an adequate level of the NE3T’s international reserves through aggressive collection of overdue loans from the cotton sector, banks, and other domestic borrowers. Equally important is that this withdrawal of central bank credits combined with no further quasi-fiscal operations directly confronts the nonpayment culture and poor governance of the public resources. Strong implementation would also help restore credibility of the central bank and strengthen the financial discipline in the system more generally, paving the way for a sounder and market- based financing of the 2000 cotton crop. In this respect, it is crucial that the cotton sector reduce its debt to external creditors according to the agreed time schedule. 52. Strengthening the independence of the central bank is essential to prevent government intervention in credit allocation. The decree prohibiting directed credits from the central bank is an appropriate measure, but strict implementation will require strong support from the highest levels of government. The central bank also needs to strengthen its initiative to develop inter-bank markets which would replace over time the credit and foreign exchange auctions as a principal tool for liquidity and foreign exchange allocation, and allow the central bank to distance itself from these operations. Similarly, bank restructuring should be accelerated by continuing the liquidation of non-viable banks and bringing those banks that do not comply with prudential regulations under the operational restructuring program. 53. While progress in debt rescheduling negotiations has been satisfactory, efforts need to continue to resolve the remaining disagreements especially with the European Union, Uzbekistan, Turkmenistan, and Kazakhstan. The staff has already provided assistance in these arrangements and stands ready to provide further assistance if both parties agree to it. 54. Tajikistan’s achievements in the liberalization of trade and exchange regimes are commendable but determination is needed to continue on this path. The application for WTO membership is an important step to ensure that trade regime remains liberal. While the staff is not aware of any formal restrictions on the availability of foreign exchange, the authorities need to ensure that no informal restrictions are applied-as suggested at times by a rather high spread between the auction and curb market rates, Overall, the NBT’s flexible rate policy has served well the program objectives and provided a flexible adjustment mechanism to recent external shocks. 55. In the area of structural policies, the irregularities observed in the privatization process are a cause for concern. While small scale privatization has proceeded broadly as programmed, the privatization of cotton ginneries and larger enterprises has been conducted without sufficient transparency. If this process does not improve significantly during the Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 24 - remainder of the program period, market-based economic discipline will remain weak and would seriously threaten the credibility of t.he authorities’ ownership of market reforms. This would endanger the financial support of the international community for Tajikistan’s economic program. 56. The staff believes that, in light of the track record in the latter part of 1999 and forceful implementation of corrective actions and prior actions, the program can be kept on track during the remainder of the program period. The staff therefore supports the authorities’ request for a waiver and recommends the completion of the first and second reviews under the second-year PRGF arrangement. However, while the policy adjustments are demanding, the weakness of the external position leaves no room for slippages. 57. It is proposed that the next Article IV consultation with Tajikistan be held on the standard 12-month cycle. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-25 - VII. PROPOSED DECISION The following draft decision is proposed for adoption by the Executive Board: 1. The Republic of Tajikistan has consulted with the Fund in accordance with paragraph 2(g) of the second annual arrangement under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (then Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility) (EBS/99/105, Supplement 3) and paragraph 2 of the letter of June 17, 1999, from the President of the Republic of Tajikistan, and paragraph 44 of the Memorandum of Economic Policies for 1999-2000 (the “Memorandum”) attached to the letter of June 17, 1999 from the President of the Republic of Tajikistan. 2. The letter dated December 30, 1999 from the President of the Republic of Tajikistan and its annexed Supplementary Memorandum of Economic Policies shah be attached to the second annual arrangement under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility for the Republic of Tajikistan, and the letter of June 17, 1999, together with its attached Memorandum, shall be read as supplemented and modified by the letter of December 30, 1999 and its annexed Supplementary Memorandum of Economic Policies. 3. Accordingly, the second annual arrangement under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility for the Republic of Tajikistan shall be modified in the following manner: a. Paragraph l(d) shall be modified to read as follows: Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 26 - “(d) the fourth loan, in an amount equivalent to SDR 6.66 million, will be available on March 15,2000, at the request of the Republic of Tajikistan, subject to paragraph 2 below, and” b. Paragraph l(e) shall be modified to read as follows: “(e) the fifth loan in an amount equivalent to SDR 3.33 million, will be available on June 15, 2000, at the request of the Republic of Tajikistan, subject to paragraph 2 below.” C. Paragraph 2(a) shall be modified to read as follows: “(a) If the Managing Director of the Fund finds that, with respect to the second loan the data as of end-June 1999 and, with respect to the third loan, the data as of end- September 1999 and, with respect to the fourth loan, the data as of end-January 2000, and with respect, to the fifth loan, the data as of end-April 2000, indicate that: ” 4. The performance criteria set out in paragraphs 2(a)(i) through 2(a)(G), of the second annual arrangement under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility for the Republic of Tajikistan for end-January 2000 and end-April 2000 shall be as specified in Annex 1 to the Supplementary Memorandum of Economic Policies attached to the letter of December 3 0, 1999 from the President of the Republic of Tajikistan. , Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 27 - 5. The Fund determines that the first and second reviews contemplated in paragraph 2(f) of the second annual arrangement under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility for the Republic of Tajikistan are completed, and that the Republic of Tajikistan may request disbursement of the second and third loans specified in paragraphs l(b) and l(c) of the same arrangement, notwithstanding the nonobservance as of end-June 1999 of the performance criteria specified in paragraphs 2(a)(i), 2(a)(ii), 2(c), 2(d), and 2(e)(v) of the second annual arrangement and the nonobservance as of end-September 1999 of the performance criteria specified in paragraphs 2(a)(i), 2(a)(ii),2(a)(iii), 2(a)(iv), and 2(d) of the second annual arrangement for the Republic of Tajikistan. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 1. Tajlkistan: Quantitative Performance Criteria and Indicative Targets, Jane-December 1999 (In stockn, unless otherwise indicated) 1. Qnamtitdve PerfonwtceT~ GZilhg~lK!tdotU&iCUSUSOftbcNBT CeilingmNBTsuctc?cditm8cocr8l~t cT&iungIillg~mullvcovcmuNbahucohriag oacnlgovmnmcc twage,andnonworkillg pcosimdpoaioo- Taxa&ctioaoftheS’KmdXC 99.6 131.2 102.6 98.6 -10.0 -9.1 0 19.0 -10.0 IO 5.0 32.2 -61.6 0 10 0 0 0 0 0.1 64.0 67.2 72.9 73.1 74.7 75.0 77.0 77.1 78.5 1,038 1,038 I.038 1,038 1.436 1,436 1,436 1,436 1,436 (Billions of mbks) 110.9 136.2 92.2 96.1 -21.0 -25.6 0.0 0.0 39.7 56.0 (hfillions of dollars) -36.6 -60.8 10.0 0.0 10.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 156.7 157.0 149.7 149.6 120.3 116.8 120.3 117.9 -1.2 u -1.3 u n/a . . . 0.0 0.0 0.0 . . . Id8 da a/a . . . -57.1 -57.1 -50.6 -50.5 -41.0 10.0 0.0 0.0 . . . 10.0 0.0 0.0 . . . 0.0 0.0 0.0 . . . 0.0 0.0 0.0 . . . 137.4 118.9 0.2 51 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 2. Tajikistan: Selected Economic Indicators, 1998-2000 1998 1999 2000 YCX Ql 42 Q2 43 Q3 44 44 Year Year Ql Ql Year Year Actual Actual Prog. Actual Prop. Actual Prog. Revised Prog. Revised Prog. Revised Prog. Revise (Percentage change over proceding period, unless otherwise indicated) Production Nominal GDP (in billions of TR) 1,025 Nominal GDP (in millions of U.S. dollars) 1,289 Real GDP 5.3 Key prices CPI (12 months, end-of-period) Terms of trade Monetary Indicators Reserve money (end of period) Ruble broad money (end of period) Velocity II General Government Revenue (cash basis) 2/ Expenditure (cash basis) Cash balance (excluding PIP, deficit - ) Exchange Rate (TR per USS, end of period) Offiid curb-market External saztor Exports of goods Imports of goods Current account balance (In percent of GDP, excluding transfers) (In percent of GDP, including transfers) Net international reserves Gross intemational reserves In months of imports 31 168 258 262 364 405 408 512 166 219 222 304 290 340 357 . . . . . . . . . . . . . *.. *.. 1,199 1348 1,029 1035 5.5 3.5 225 235 1,365 1,740 187 164 1,137 1512 . . . . . . 6.0 5.0 2.7 -4.0 5.4 18.4 19.3 23.7 58.5 13.2 34.7 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13.2 34.7 10.0 -6.3 -5.5 . . . 31.3 7.0 13.0 . . . 1.1 1.3 4.9 14.8 21.1 0.3 1.3 6.3 13.8 8.8 1.7 2.0 -3.9 3.5 8.3 15.6 5.7 2.6 6.2 20.8 21.6 20.4 20.3 21.4 19.8 23.0 (In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated) 17.5 19.4 0.0 1.6 17.6 17.1 18.0 16.9 1.8 8.3 24.0 34.3 19.8 23.0 20.9 22.8 18.6 22.4 12.0 16.1 14.0 18.7 10.5 8.6 12.7 11.5 12.8 12.6 18.6 19.0 13.5 13.0 15.8 24.4 17.9 22.1 13.5 13.3 12.9 11.5 15.8 15.7 23.0 24.2 15.9 15.2 -3.8 -8.4 -3.9 -3.5 -3.0 -4.7 -0.2 0.0 -3.0 -3.0 -3.7 -5.2 -1.9 -2.2 977 1038 1190 1250 . . . 1287 . . . 1436 . . . ___ . . . Moo . . . 1632 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... ... ... ... (In millions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise indicated) 586 145 152 166 182 176 1% 155 681 641 142 180 724 715 -73 1 -178 -163 -199 -164 -179 -186 -138 -738 -694 -207 -192 -790 -780 -107 -23 -7 -36 20 5 16 25 -50 -29 -61 -5 -81 -44 -12.7 -22.2 -8.7 -22.6 2.5 -3.1 -0.4 3.1 -102 -8.1 -38.5 -11.6 -11.0 -8.1 -8.3 -13.8 -3.0 -16.2 6.6 1.7 4.7 7.0 4.9 -2.8 -32.5 -3.1 -7.0 -3.6 -32 -44 -24 -62 -29 -61 -31 -41 -31 -41 -20 -32 2 -10 65 52 71 34 82 41 86 58 86 58 107 83 145 133 1.5 1.3 1.7 0.8 1.9 1.0 2.0 1.4 2.0 1.4 2.3 1.8 3.2 2.9 Sources: Tajik authorities, and Fund staff estimates. I/ Nominal GDP divided by average ruble broad money. 1 21 Includes grants. 3/ Imports of goods and services excluding alumina and electricity. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTabie 3. T4tktstm Geneni Government Fl- (In Miiiions of Tajik rubies) Act. %GDt AU. AU. Ad Rtv.~. Ori$.prop. KGD? ltev.f’rqr. XCD? Revbe Revised Revised Ori&-. %CDT Rev.-. KGD? T&i revenue Tax revenoe 8&s taxes 0fwhieh:Ailmlinlml cotton hlividuai i-e tax Payroll tax (mmgovemnlent) Entqrisctaxcs Retail S&a Tax value-sddcd tax Excise taxes custornsrevmue Ldndtax Roadtax olbertaxa Noa-tax revenue Graob Total Jkpe~~Iiture corrent Wages and salaries Gwdsandservices sube.idiesandotberlransfm socialsafetynet social protection tiJnd cashmmpmMtiodothcr -payments Externaldebt Domestic debt cppitrl Road fuad Net leading Overall balawe, cash basis E~chding tinrig tinand capital 123315 119pll 40,974 7,526 32,553 iOJl2 8,314 10,900 . . . 19,765 1,490 12,365 6164 5,231 4,065 $937 0 162,168 nM47 36,935 60,659 6,241 23,993 19,6l I 4,382 7,315 7315 0 5,016 -394% 12.0 27pas 4w43 34770 59,010 lWl8 12.8 17031 12.6 tyu 44,576 2w4 1%=8 13.5 225345 11.7 ww 47311 33,4% %- 143,423 12.0 lw= 12.2 tsgs 43,652 w3J 169s13 12A 212;ns 4.0 5,647 13,576 5,139 17,685 40,412 3.4 42,659 3.2 6,225 16,601 5,000 44,332 3.2 49,101 0.7 2053 2,793 2,919 3,699 7359 0.6 11,464 0.9 1,383 4,150 1.~ 6,862 0.5 ll.650 3.2 3595 10,783 2221 13,986 33.053 2.8 30,584 2.3 4,150 12,451 4.m 37.469 2.7 37,451 1.0 2,439 3.812 3243 3,948 13,637 1.1 13,442 1.0 IW 3,600 1,734 15,537 1.1 18,459 0.8 2,016 4313 3309 3.511 10,246 0.9 13,149 1.0 IJO0 2,186 l,%i 11,678 0.9 18.020 I.1 3,471 4.990 2,432 5,036 14.751 1.2 15,949 1.2 827 3,527 2,269 17.586 1.3 17,031 0.0 9 295 257 373 659 0.1 934 0.1 300 300 134 L’100 0.1 3.066 1.9 5,476 8.073 AS06 10,537 26,456 2.2 30,892 23 2,450 6899 3.671 30,757 23 41,710 0.1 135 2,610 2.891 2243 4,056 0.3 7,879 0.6 449 1,346 1,187 6,419 0.5 13.975 I.2 2,812 4,476 4,449 9,227 15.558 1.3 20,964 1.6 1371 6,213 2,036 21,439 1.6 23JOO 0.6 1,008 1,834 1962 3,570 6,164 0.5 8,374 0.6 457 1370 834 6,164 0.5 11,no 0.5 829 1.573 1,433 I.555 5.670 0.5 5289 0.4 284 852 715 7.081 0.5 8.ooO 0.4 lJ43 1,959 1.555 275 5.815 0.5 5,032 0.4 253 759 891 6,620 0.5 7,894 0.4 lst2 1,432 lf75 1,~ 5961 0.5 m OA 308 924 651 7w 0.5 7594 0.0 0 0 0 0 3,934 03 0 08 0 0 0 w 0.6 w 15.8 4w6 5%w5 53&77 ss;lcs 133 3332 4&7@9 4lJ31 Slfil, 3.6 l2.000 8,023 15,541 16,059 5.9 14251 3ip3 13,001 22,618 0.6 2,093 2,430 2,546 I.083 2.3 4,593 6,068 7277 8,724 1.9 4,433 5,827 6,455 7,901 0.4 160 241 822 823 0.7 295 955 2,866 3,136 0.7 295 955 886 3,136 0.0 0 0 I.980 0 23 7J45 w 9mJ 556s 05 589 L-J &la lJ21 -03 -11 -229 333 460 189,024 160,952 48,139 645n 5,093 30,675 26,015 4,660 IO.156 IO.156 24 s&70 -I$73 15.8 211,141 15.7 i&641 13A 17&279 13.0 6~ 4.0 5 1,623 3.8 6,872 5.4 81,989 6.1 4,027 0.4 8,152 0.6 344 2.6 26,263 1.9 3,150 2.2 24,616 1.8 3.m 0.4 2,046 0.2 67 0.8 7,252 0.5 1,015 0.8 5,272 0.4 I.015 0.0 1,980 0.1 0 2.0 35s 2.6 600 0.5 0 0.0 467 Xl.1 594 0.0 167 19,671 16,271 2,ooo 7.901 7w 700 3,044 3.044 0 w 0 SW 17w3 6,100 6,604 532 3,588 2.61 I 426 I.024 I.024 0 u32 5% 35 217,071 15.9 26q18L 153 g 177,636 13.0 236w 13.6 ’ 55.360 4.1 71,760 4.1 64,993 4.8 54236 5.4 2,730 0.2 7k5a 0.4 40,125 2.9 38.470 2.2 34.125 2.5 31,970 1.8 WJ’JO 0.4 6,500 0.4 14,428 1.1 24.080 1.4 14,428 I.1 22380 1.3 0 0.0 iJ~ 0.1 33854 2.5 27m 1.6 7,081 0.5 0 0.0 -IV= -0.1 1,740 0.1 -3.8 -14#50 -9,102 -1W 242 -3&706 . . . . . . -3.0 ~1.100 . . . -3.0 -1f17 -l%= lpol -32,213 -2.4 -J8soo . . . . . . . . . -uJ88 49 . . . 0 . . . . . . . . . 13.0 123 2.8 0.7 2.2 I.1 1.0 1.0 0.2 2.4 0.8 1.4 0.7 0.5 0.5 0.4 03 I -3.2 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public1998 1999 2ooo Ql Q2 Q3 44 YClr Y-r Jml. Q1 Apfl Year YUr Act. %CDP Act A&. Act t&v. rrogr. orig.pmgr. %GDP Rev. Pqr. K GDP Ilrvised Revised Revised Otlg.prg. %GDP Rev. Rgr. X GDP Totai finattclng 38,653 3.8 14,050 9,102 18,907 -242 35706 3.0 41,100 3.0 lJ17 low -1,008 32,213 2.4 38,800 2.2 Net extcmal financing 16,948 1.7 6,719 5,106 20,366 World Bank financing (SAC) 16,948 1.7 1,727 1 20.366 ADB 0 0.0 4,992 5,105 0 Principal repaymeot 0 0.0 0 0 0 Net credit to gov’t II 16.380 1.6 5,677 -364 -3,702 Of which: NBT 13,176 1.3 5,599 -235 -2.5 I5 l,oM) 1.~ 0 0 -1,442 -1,442 37,361 34,977 10,168 -7,785 0 0 3.1 2.9 0.8 -0.6 0.0 0.0 32,473 22,376 10,097 0 169 1,407 2.4 1.7 0.7 0.0 0.0 0.1 12,700 26,772 0 -14,072 0 0 0 25,013 0 16,839 0 10.380 0 -9,03 I -I,000 0 -i,ooo 0 1.8 31,760 1.8 1.2 38.715 2.2 0.8 14,360 0.8 -0.7 -21,315 -1.2 0.0 0 0.0 0.0 0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.5 0.0 -5 27 0 0 -7,860 -0.7 22 0.0 217 -5 27 0 0 1,140 0.1 22 0.0 0 0 0 0 0 -9,000 -0.8 0 0.0 0 1,659 4333 2,243 202 6,205 0.5 8,436 0.6 i.m . . . . . . . . -3,700 300 -4,000 1500 . . . Net domestic nonbank financing 126 Of which: Treasury bills 126 Repayment to Tajik rail 0 Ptivatization proceds 5.200 0 1,200 0.1 -5,460 -0.3 0 u@J 0.1 2.540 0.1 0 0 0.0 -8,000 -0.5 0 6,CJOO 0.4 12,500 0.7 0 0.0 41% -2.6 . . . 0 0.0 7300 0.4 Augmented fiscal balance: costs of bank nsbucturing 0 Source: Ministry of Finance; and Ftmd staff estimates. II Diffetences between these nutnbcrs and the net credit to governmen t in tbe accounts of tbe NBT rcflcct the revaluation of foreign exchange loans extended by the NBT. I w c I Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 4. Tajikistm: Acxounts of the National Bank of Tajikistm l! (lnmiJliwof~erld-of-J!aid~ualRlu~tpkiJied) l99a 1999 2006 Lkc. Mu. J Jum Sep. SKI Sep. ou ou Ad. Aa~AaF+m&&AerMou Nov. NW Doe. Dec. Jm. Mar. P&r. Ap Dec. Lkc AaRiaAc& Au Pmg.RiorAa Rw.targ. Frog. Rm.mg.R.w.tps. Pro&plDj.Rw.~ -=,boJ -J- -33,003 45,296 67,797 53,642 100,799 *NJ -m -25,223 99,079 115,108 4115 al+304 -IQ036 -81,987 -72Joa -turn 4436 -54922 -WI -28,146 M.289 -S2,316 2,726 -1q12 -63.11s -87.304 -82.036 -81.987 -72.ma -72,SO3 U,Sl6 -56,922 -56,481 -28,146 45,260 -52316 2,726 -14,612 42383 9.4% 63,763 63.797 69,502 69.633 123999 au= 111577 153.274 ll9.la8 12~5,076 208,328 190386 105396 145,800 l45,800 145,783 142.210 142,136 168,515 IlUlO 168.058 181,419 164.468 177,392 205,600 205,tm 9402s Jos$oa 92,227 98,545 am 35,929 6546 mm 0 0 2.819 2,819 -5,924 -1o,oo2 -6.446 -9,867 -3,934 -3334 -4512 -758 0 -5.175 0 0 51,943 59,037 26,619 31,640 3,200 5,616 22.m 21.782 -41.6% -39.208 mfl 92,227 28.786 6-6 2.6,; -5.924 -35,209 -3,934 -31,275 0 -l,ooo 72,447 26.707 17,646 28.094 -39,208 131,JKl 103,065 98,643 92,227 37,071 28,786 67,582 w 0 0 2,819 2.819 4,628 -5,924 -4,843 -15,902 -4,016 -3,934 -7% -11,968 -71 0 -295 4,~ 70,176 69,949 26,141 25.209 22.416 17.6-l.S 21.619 27.094 -32.501 -39308 ~~ 96.150 32,699 66348 2818 -5.617 -14,txM -3.977 -Jo,ssa -71 -Z&JO 86.515 33,826 24.019 28,670 -29.640 164Jrn I%+690 120,315 l2q3lS 32,699 32.699 91,650 91,650 0 2,619 zs,: 4853 -6,853 -19,613 -18,515 -4,909 4,909 -14.607 -13,607 -96 0 -2,170 -5,170 101.580 %.060 38.172 36,522 2b$62 26359 36,746 33,179 -35,842 -36,lW 156,973 149,673 l49@S 116.797 120.315 117,887 32,699 32.699 32.719 91.767 91.650 91.810 ,*I: zs,: Z8li -10.488 4853 -9,462 -18,177 -IS&515 -1n,1n -4309 -4309 -rgos -13,171 -13,607 -13.171 -96 0 -96 -3.046 -6.131 4373 99.529 90,005 wm 35.668 37,885 35J2o 26.170 IS>46 19,378 37,690 33,674 37*63l -38,129 -36,ooo -38,260 121* 137415 Ill,351 118,873 26,766 31.257 92,062 91.650 261: 4.316 -2o,So7 -VW -18p8 0 -5.534 69.461 20391 22,976 xm -39208 -6,853 -18,SlS +- -13,607 0 -8,131 8Ll89 36,449 123-Q 3Z438 -36,lWJ 1wfJ5 I 18,873 31,257 91,650 0 2,819 4,653 -l8,5lS 4309 -13,607 0 -8,631 79,178 36,u9 10,291 32.438 -36,ooo a= 63JlO sqou 67,200 72,660 73,133 76966 74e3 7cgea 7&966 n,io2 77lo47 7apsj 78#4 48,455 47.890 49395 52,034 57.125 56,660 56,680 IO.921 10344 9,639 8.585 10,734 10,551 12373 . . 3.832 3.848 3.772 3,599 4.2o9 3,053 3>42 . . . 3372 3.296 . . . 3,067 2559 2,559 . . 460 552 . . 532 . . . 494 683 . . . 7,089 6.4% 5,867 4,986 6,525 7,498 9,131 . . 3,524 2.282 . . . 337 . . . 3,239 3,239 . . . 3566 4,214 . . 1,719 . . . 4359 5,692 . . 3,649 4,976 w@-J 6,581 5,000 sgoz 7,912 . . . 543 I.=4 WJO 1,081 I.ooo 659 659 . . . 3,106 3.722 4poo 5JOl 4.ooo 5,243 7,253 . . . 59.330 . . . 61,915 II.774 . . . Ii.594 3,120 . . . 3345 2,465 . . . f-37 634 . . . 638 6,654 . . . 9,249 2.885 . . . 3.166 5,769 . . . 6.084 3.882 . . . 25% 366 . . . 914 3,516 . . . I.679 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . -31.8 -43.6 -24.3 -61.6 -29.1 -60.6 -60.8 -57. I -57. I -50.6 -505 -31.0 41.0 -39.3 65.3 51.7 71.2 33.6 81.8 40.7 40.7 44.4 44.4 48.4 48.S 86.4 58.0 77.7 97.1 95.3 95.5 95.3 110.9 101.5 101.5 101.5 101.5 99.0 99.0 Ill.4 99.0 Ill.0 1.5 1.3 1.7 0.8 1.9 1.0 1.0 I.2 I.1 1.2 1.2 2.0 1.4 1.7 lo8 85 115 52 II7 58 76 65 85 90 90 161 lo6 142 1,038 1,036 1,038 1,038 1,038 1,038 1,436 I.436 I.436 1,436 IW 1,436 I.436 1.436 106@04 12s$J67 I*183 87Yn ll7,3Sl I 18,873 I 17873 II7351 =G= 29,257 28,257 26,766 92,062 9l,6So 91,6SO 92~2 0 u-m0 Loo0 2,619 2.819 2.8819 :z 4316 -6,853 -6,653 -6316 -14.259 -11.416 -11.416 -22304 0 -VW 0 -14.2s9 :gi -6w -Q3M 0 0 0 0 -5334 -9.43 I -9,431 -9.684 47,6S4 63.041 75.157 41+817 15,816 30.077 42193 23.621 12,924 $983 5983 0 18914 25.982 m.982 l8,1% -39$2&8 -RW@ -wx@ -39,208 -mm m,m snaas 9o;)oo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . -19.6 -31.5 IO7 63.0 126 114.5 2.3 1.8 IS0 I49 I.436 1,436 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . -36.4 1.9 87.1 145. I 123.5 143.2 1.9 3.2 149 230 I.436 I.436 106512 II8273 29257 91,6so :li 6,653 -27.78s 430 -23.285 0 -9,131 sqs90 42,193 0 18397 -36,ooo 9JW . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . -102 133.0 143.2 29 206 1,436 I Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public. Table 5. TaJikistan: Monetary Snrvey l/ @I millions of TR; end-of-period stock unless otherwise specified) 1998 Dec. Act Mar. Act. 1999 2000 Jun. Sep. Sep. Sep. Dec. Jan Mar. APT JWlC Sept. Dec. Act. prog- Act. Act. Rev.targ. Rev.targ. Rev.&g. Rev.targ. Rev.targ. Rev.targ. Rev. targ. May-99 1038 1436 1436 1436 1436 1436 1436 1436 1436 Net Foreign Assets (NFA) -110,808 -117,197 -120363 -60578 -116,116 -160,628 -108$52 -97,782 -72,221 -86493 -75,149 -72,277 -28,684 The National Bank -33,003 45,298 -63,980 -30206 -63.115 -87,304 -58,922 -56,48 1 -45,280 -52,3 16 -40,972 -38,100 -14,612 The commerc ial banks -77,806 -71,900 -56,383 -30,172 -53,001 -73,324 -49,630 -41,301 -26,94 1 -34,177 -34,177 -34,177 - 14,073 Net Domestic Assets 18lb83 1-777 196,813 142J57 195,619 247,083 198$94 188,824 168,063 183,345 18lJO9 180,677 Net credit to general government 88,242 94,639 94,609 88,242 91,221 115,386 114,794 114,792 114,792 114,792 114,792 114,792 EU counterpart fund (-) -3,934 -3,934 4,016 -3,934 -3,977 -4,909 4.909 4,909 -4,909 -4,909 -4,909 -4,909 IDA counterpart fUnd (-) -2,5 12 -758 -756 -11,968 -10,558 -14,607 -13,607 -13,607 -6,508 -6,508 -6.508 -26,612 ADB counteqwt fund (-) 0 -5,175 -71 0 -71 -98 0 0 0 0 -11,488 -4,308 r’rivatization fund (-) 0 0 -295 -4,000 -2,170 -2,170 -8,131 -8,63 1 -9,43 1 -9.43 1 -9.43 1 -9,43 1 Credit to the private sector 146,398 147,157 164$212 120,629 179,167 22 1,424 178,703 169,036 141,976 157J58 166,610 179,002 Credit to the economy 78,738 86,008 93329 90,877 109,995 132,296 126,911 126,435 115,889 96,994 97,782 111,610 special cotton financing 67,660 61,149 70,683 31,451 69,172 89,128 51,792 42,601 26,087 @vH 68,828 67,392 other items net -46,611 -45,153 -56,871 46,611 -57,994 -67,944 -67,857 -67,857 -67,857 -67,857 -67,857 -67,857 Broad money 70,775 69380 76p50 81,979 79302 86y455 90,442 91,042 95,842 96,852 104060 108,400 Ruble Broad Money 55,600 53,451 57,906 63,940 61,214 61,214 65,000 65,600 70,400 71,410 81,860 84,600 Currency outside banks 46,622 44,533 49,026 53,918 52.876 52,876 55,860 55,900 55,900 56,600 63,500 66,000 Deposits 8,978 8,918 8,880 10,022 8,337 8,337 9,140 9,700 14,500 14,810 18,360 18,600 Foreign cunency deposit-6 15,175 16.128 18,544 18,039 18,289 25,242 25,442 25,442 25,442 25,442 24,200 23,800 138984 114,792 -4,500 -23,285 0 -9,131 128,966 102,289 26,677 -67,857 I 11OJOo 2 87,300 ' 67,000 20,300 23,000 Memorandum items: Average velocity 2/ 21.1 20.8 20.4 20.3 21.4 21.4 23.0 22.9 22.8 22.9 22.7 22.5 22.4 Accounting exchange rate (TRAJSS 1,038 1,038 1,038 1,038 1,038 1.436 1,436 1,436 1,436 1,436 1,436 1,436 1,436 Sources: National Bank of Tajikistan; and Fund stafTestimates. ll A new chart of accounts was adopted December 1998. The balance sheet based on the new chart is not strictly comparable to previous data. 2/ Annual GDP divided by average ruble broad money over the last year. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 34 - Table 6. Tajikistan: Balance of Payments, 1998-2000 (In milllau of us dollm) 1998 Ql Q2 Q3 Q ISJ Ql W Q3 Q moo Pmj. Proj. Roj. Fmj. Pmj. Pmj. Proj. hj. -107 -23 -36 5 2s -29 -5 -20 -20 1 -44 -145 -32 -33 -3 I7 -52 -12 -2s -24 3 -65 -fob 566 145 166 I76 155 641 180 185 IS9 I92 715 A’ 234 71 56 100 53 260 81 81 81 81 324 cutmn5ber 112 23 28 10 52 113 37 23 6 49 II6 Ek&icity I03 29 49 30 I6 123 29 49 40 27 144 odlu 137 22 33 35 3s I25 33 33 30 35 131 Impa(s, bb 731 178 199 I79 I38 694 192 210 184 Ip4 780 AhmiM II0 27 26 43 23 II9 36 36 36 36 143 F'ebukummdlvMllgnr II4 29 19 23 26 97 35 29 24 31 II9 E*ctrLiry II7 41 53 26 I6 136 47 36 23 37 143 Gr8hondaour 41 6 9 II 5 32 6 9 II 7 33 otbsr 350 74 93 75 68 310 68 IO1 90 64 343 s'- -MdiwQlm 37 IO -3 6 6 23 7 5 6 3 21 suvlccs I8 4 -5 1 3 3 I 0 0 I 2 lnarmc -38 4 -II -7 -9 -3s -a -6 -a -12 -3s Tmufen 57 I4 I4 I4 I4 SJ I4 I4 I4 I4 55 chpital and fto8ll&l aTaunt capihl-t Flmmdal Iceoant Public samr (net) Diebmemmb a7 II 18 -3 -6 20 24 7.5 -I 6 54 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 7 67 II I6 -3 -6 20 24 25 -I -I 47 28 7 2 20 -2 27 8 23 10 -3 38 51 13 6 26 4 51 18 24 II 6 61 23 6 6 6 6 24 IO I 1 II 22 24 4 5 6 6 21 6 6 6 6 24 72 -4 -10 -2 -16 -32 -14 9 0 -14 -19 I4 I2 4 -4 0 I3 I9 -13 -17 IO -I -51 -8 17 -24 6 -9 5 0 0 0 5 OvasJl b8hlcx -20 -I2 I4 -2 0 0 0 -2 0 0 0 0 0 52 1.3 . . . -18 1 19 -17 -2 -2 0 3 0 0 0 0 I 0 56 1.4 . . . . . . -9 19 5 -20 7 IO cbsnge In gross mswve8 (- tom) -36 18 -7 7 -2s -12 -20 -18 -7s 56 64 64 0 -13 0 9 -a 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 34 0.8 ,.. . . . 6 6 9 3 0 0 0 -I 0 0 2 6 6 40 II 65 4 I5 6 IS 6 U 9 18 9 I8 9 54 5 3 3 3 3 IO -2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 20 0 20 0 0 0 0 0 0 -I -79 0 0 -3 -62 I m 0 0 3 73 0 0 0 5 5 IO In miuicol of us dolh 65 hmmtbIofiqats2i 1.5 58 83 1.4 1.8 Exdudhgtmsfm -12.7 lncldinguula~ -6.3 41 1.0 . . . . . -8. I . . . -2.6 .*. 95 2.1 . . . .,. 115 2.5 . . . . . . I33 2.9 . . . . . . I33 2.9 -8.1 -3.6 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-35- Table 7. Tajikistan: Medium-Term Balance of Payments, 1998-2010 (hi millhs of us dollars) 1999 Proj. 2ooo Proj. 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 -107 -29 -44 -76 -as -90 -86 -85 -84 -83 -79 -81 -75 -145 -52 -65 -97 -105 -107 -99 -9s -90 -a2 -74 -63 -50 586 641 715 781 834 a96 970 1,Mo 1,136 I,UI lJ33 1.445 I.5566 234 280 324 348 377 402 429 464 501 541 585 632 682 112 II3 116 144 149 164 187 206 227 250 275 303 333 103 123 144 151 158 166 174 182 191 200 210 220 230 137 I25 131 139 LSO 163 180 198 218 240 264 WI 320 731 694 110 119 114 97 II7 136 41 32 350 310 878 939 I.003 1,069 1.145 1.226 1,313 1,407 1,508 1,616 154 167 178 190 205 221 239 258 279 302 113 114 no 125 I33 140 149 Isa 167 177 ISI Isa 166 174 182 191 200 210 220 230 35 38 40 41 42 43 45 46 47 49 425 462 500 540 3a3 630 681 735 794 858 37 23 21 21 20 17 14 10 5 0 -6 -la -25 18 3 2 -2 4 d -8 -1 I -14 -la -21 -32 -37 -38 -3s -3s -32 -32 -32 -33 -34 -36 -38 -39 -41 43 57 55 55 55 55 55 55 55 55 55 55 55 55 87 20 54 76 77 74 76 a2 83 85 86 aa 90 0 0 7 7 7 7 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 a7 20 47 69 70 67 69 a2 a3 85 86 88 90 a 27 38 37 34 27 24 31 25 20 13 6 -3 51 51 61 63 77 72 72 72 72 72 72 72 72 23 24 22 26 43 4s 48 41 47 52 59 66 74 24 21 24 32 36 41 46 51 58 65 73 82 92 72 -32 -19 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 14 13 -1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 -51 -9 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 -20 -9 IO 1 4 -16 -3 2 6 7 15 -36 7 -7s -32 .I2 56 2 65 64 4 44 64 9 54 0 5 10 -13 -2 0 0 0 20 9 0 0 -8 -1 -a2 3 1 73 0 0 10 31 20 5 -10 Ia 0 13 10 0 0 0 0 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26 30 -10 2s -5 0 5 0 -9 -10 19 -11 0 II 0 . . . . . . .1. 30 1% 3.0 -7.7 4.7 -14 17 -18 0 18 0 -1 -13 15 -2s 0 25 0 -10 -17 8 10 -27 -25 0 0 27 25 0 0 -21 -31 14 16 -16 -9 0 0 16 9 0 0 . . . . . . . . 30 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35 ..’ 40 . . . . . . . . 35 . . . . . . 3s . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30 25 65 58 133 165 I.5 1.4 2.9 3.2 177 3.2 - 186 3.1 210 224 3.0 3.0 -6.8 -6.0 4.1 -3.7 234 250 2.9 2.9 -12.7 -a. I -a. I -10.1 -9.7 -8.9 -8.3 -2.8 -3.6 -5.9 -5.9 -5.5 -5.3 -4.6 -3.2 -2.7 271 302 2.9 3.0 -4.2 -3.5 -2.5 -2.0 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-36- Table 8. Tajikistan: Debt service capacity, 1998-2010 (In millions of U.S. dollus) 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 1.culTaltalxamtminusintmst -78 4 -11 -43 -53 -58 -53 -53 -51 -49 45 -47 40 Tmdebahce -145 -52 -65 -97 -105 -107 -99 -95 -90 -82 -74 -63 -50 L3fxvicos 18 3 2 -2 -4 -6 -8 -11 -14 -18 -21 -32 -37 Income, excluding interest due -8 -2 -3 0 I 0 -1 -2 -3 -4 -5 -7 -9 Tliulsfas 57 55 55 55 55 55 55 55 55 55 55 5s 55 11. Financh~ and capital account minus principrl capimltmMfa8 Public sector dihrscments FDI Othor not capital 110 44 77 102 120 120 12s 123 130 137 145 154 164 0 0 7 7 7 7 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 51 51 61 63 77 72 72 72 72 72 72 72 72 24 21 24 32 36 41 46 51 58 65 73 82 92 35 -29 -15 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 III. Financing items 56 2 65 31 20 25 19 15 8 14 16 88 49 130 90 87 87 91 93 96 V. Cbmgo gms rcscrvcs (- increase) -36 7 -75 -32 -12 -10 -10 -13 -10 Non fhancial public actor Rivatesootcr National bnnk of T~jikii (IMF) IJrhcip8l Non financial public sector -53 -57 -55 -58 -76 -78 -81 -30 -33 -32 -33 -32 -32 -33 -11 -8 -16 -16 -16 -17 -17 -18 -23 -15 -15 -15 -15 -15 -2 -2 -2 -1 -1 -1 -1 -23 -24 -22 -26 -43 -45 48 -23 -24 -22 -26 -43 45 -48 -80 -86 -33 -34 -18 -18 -15 -15 0 0 -47 -52 -47 -52 VII. Total usw (V+VI) -88 -49 -130 -90 -87 -87 -91 17 88 -14 -74 -33 -17 -15 -1 -41 41 -88 -93 -96 IO 110 -17 -93 -34 -19 -I5 0 -59 -59 -110 121 139 -21 -31 -100 -108 -34 -34 -19 -19 -15 -15 0 0 -66 -74 -66 -74 -121 -139 ~OLUWL: Data provide by the Tajlk 81hrities; and Fund ataffwt&atc$. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-37- Table 9. Tajikistan: Capacity to Repay the Fund (In units indicated) 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 Existing and prospective Fund credit I/ In millions of SDRS In millions of US dollars In percent of exports 21 In percent of cxtcmal debt In percent of gross reserves In petrent of quota Rcpurchaws and charges due from existing and prospective drawings In millions of SDRs In millions of US dollars In pcrc4mt of exports 21 In percent of external debt In percent of gross reserves In percent of quota Memorandum items: Gmss rcsclves Net reserves Quota (in SDRs) cimss rcscrvcs Net rcscrves 70.3 73.2 105.7 109.7 102.2 98.5 90.4 77.0 58.3 38.2 20.0 8.0 1.3 94.9 98.8 142.7 148.0 137.9 132.9 122.1 104.0 78.7 51.6 27.0 10.8 1.8 23.1 22.7 29.7 27.9 24.4 21.8 18.3 14.4 10.0 6.0 2.9 1.1 0.2 8.1 9.3 12.1 11.9 IO.6 9.8 8.7 7.2 5.3 3.4 1.8 0.7 0.1 145.2 170.7 107.3 89.7 78.0 71.4 62.3 49.5 35.2 22.1 IO.8 4.0 0.6 117.2 84.2 121.5 126.0 117.4 113.2 103.9 88.5 67.0 43.9 23.0 9.2 1.5 1.2 5.1 8.8 10.4 8.3 4.2 8.5 13.8 19.1 20.3 18.4 12.1 6.7 1.7 6.9 11.8 14.1 11.1 5.7 11.5 18.7 25.7 27.4 24.8 16.3 9.0 0.4 1.6 2.5 2.7 2.0 0.9 1.7 2.6 3.3 3.2 2.7 1.6 0.8 0.1 0.6 1.0 1.1 0.9 0.4 0.8 1.3 1.7 1.8 1.6 1.0 0.6 2.5 12.0 8.9 8.5 6.3 3.0 5.9 8.9 11.5 11.7 9.9 6.0 3.0 2.0 5.9 10.1 12.0 9.5 4.8 9.8 15.9 21.9 23.3 21.2 13.9 7.7 65 -32 60 (In millions of US dollars) 58 133 165 177 186 196 210 224 234 250 271 -41 -10 17 39 53 74 106 145 182 223 260 87 87 87 87 87 87 87 87 87 87 87 302 300 87 (In months of imports) 1.5 1.4 2.9 3.2 3.2 3.1 3.0 3.0 3.0 2.9 2.9 2.9 3.0 -0.7 -1.0 -0.2 0.3 0.7 0.9 I.1 1.5 1.9 2.3 2.6 2.8 3.0 Sources: Data provided by the Tajik authorities; and staff estimates. I/ End of period. 21 Exports of goods and services less alumina imports and electricity exports. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 10. Tajikistan: Indicators of the Sustainability of Public and Publicly Guaranteed Debt Nominal debt at end 1999 Net I’mmt Value ofDebt at aad 1999 Debtswioein2000 lnmillions Inpercent Inmillion In- InPercent Inpmmt Inpefcont Inperrmlof 0fU.S. of GDP Inmilliomlnpaoent Inpearmt inpercent of U.S. ofnominal of of ofiiwal hi&r fiscal 0fU.S. of 2000 of 2000 offiscal dollars dollam debt GDP export0 rewme 11 revme dollala GDP expts revenuel! Total public end publicly guarsntccd 776 75 578 74 56 83 443 372 . . . ... ... .” Public sector 711 69 512 72 50 73 393 33q 49.9 4.1 7.1 32.4 Non-M public se&u 612 59 437 138 42 62 335 282 38.3 3.2 5.5 24.9 Bil&A 377 36 302 80 29 43 232 195 15.3 1.3 2.2 10.0 Multilaielal3/ 235 23 135 57 13 19 103 87 22.9 1.9 3.3 14.9 IMP 99 10 75 76 7 11 58 48 11.7 1.0 1.7 7.6 Privatese&f,,4/ 65 6 65 loo 6 9 50 42 . . . . . . . . . . . . . l/Excluding gnmts. 2/ Asswing fiscal revenue of 15 percent of GDP. 3/ In nd present value calculalion, capital tmnsfkm of the European Unim to help finanw amottkation have been t&en into account 4/AstbedebtservicepaStemOfthiSdebtiswt~~ithasbeen essumedthatthenet~valueisequaltothen~value. I w 03 . Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-39- Table 11. Tajikistan: Implementation of Main Structural Measures Under the Second Annual PRGF Arrangement (As of September 30, 1999) Measure and timing Structural Performance Criteria Status 1. Issue all gross NBT credit via Not observed. The NBT directed about 50 percent of credit auctions during the program the gross credit during the second quarter to the period (continuous). cotton sector in compensation for the sector’s shortfall in foreign financing. These credits were collected back and reissued through credit auctions to banks in mid-August. In addition, a TR 2.5 billion credit was was issued to Tajik Rail in the third quarter. 2. No arrears on government Not observed. Government wages were delayed in wages, pensions, and social benefits June, as was a small amount of pension payments. (continuous). These arrears were cleared in early July. 3. Sign sale contracts for all Observed. Bids for the 12 remaining ginneries cotton ginneries tendered for June 28, accepted as of June 30. Approvals of individual bids 1999 (criterion for end-June 1999). were confirmed by both parties’ signatures. Structural Benchmarks By end-June 1999 1. Complete the process of Done with delay. 702 medium- and large-scale incorporation of at least 700 medium- enterprises were registered as joint stock companies and large-scale enterprises at end-July. (cumulative since January 1998). 2. Convert at least 20 state and Done. The Land Reform Committee issued 53 land collective farms into private farms by use and 15,948 land share certificates to private issuing marketable land use and land farmers in 20 state and collective farms during the share certificates to private farmers second quarter. during the second quarter of 1999. 3. Complete the issuance of Done. At end-June, over 11,000 enterprises had Taxpayer Identification Numbers for received their TIN implying a virtual completion of enterprises. the VAT payer registration process at enterprise level, Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public“40- By end-September 1999 1. Complete privatization (i.e., full payment received for at least 75 percent of shares) of all remaining cotton ginneries. 2. Sign sale contracts for at least 150 medium- and large-scale enterprises, with full payments received for at least 120 of them (cumulative since January 1998). 3. Convert at least 60 state and collective farms into private farms by issuing marketable land use and land share certificates to private farmers (cumulative since April 1, 1999). 4. Privatize at least 200 small- scale enterprises since May 1, 1999. 5. Submit to Parliament a new Law on Foreign Debt and Government Guarantees as agreed with the Fund staff Not done. Payments for 19 ginneries lagged seriously behind the agreed deadlines. The sale agreements of these ginneries were cancelled in October and the enterprises were put up for sale again in the fourth and fifth international tenders. Done. 154 sale contracts were signed and 120 enterprises were fully paid for. Done. More than 30,800 land share certificates were issued to private farmers in 186 dekhan farms since April 1, 1999. Done. Over 3 10 small-scale enterprises were sold through auctions, of which 296 were fully paid for. Done. The draft law was revised with the assistance of a LEG mission in September and resubmitted to Parliament in October 1999. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-41- Table 12. Tajikistan: Revised Review and Phasing of Disbursements Under the Remainder of the Second-Year and Third-Year PRGF Arrangements (In millions of SDRs) Date of Disbursement collditions Disbursement Upon Board approval (July 2, Board approval of second annual ESAF 1999) arrangement On or afler November 15,1999 Completion of first and second reviews by the Board; end-September 1999 performance criteria On or after March 15,1999 Completion of the third quarterly review by the Board; end-January 2000 performance criteria On or after June 15,200O Completion of the fourth quarterly review by the Board; end-April 2000 performance criteria; Board review of the third-year program On or a&x July 3,200O Board approval of the third annual PRGF arrangement (lapse-of-time basis) On or after August 15,200O Completion of the first quarterly review by the Board; end-June 2000 performance criteria On or after November 15,200O Completion of the second quarterly review by the Board; end-September 2000 performance criteria On or after February 15,200l Completion of the third qnarterly review by the Board; end-December 2000 performance criteria On or after May 15,200l Completion of final review by the Board; end- March 200 1 performance criteria 6.66 13.32 6.66 3.33 3.33 6.66 6.66 6.66 6.66 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicI. II. III. IV. V. VI. I- 42 - Tajikistan: Fund Relations (As of October 31,1999) Membership Status: Joined: 04/27/1993; Article XIV General Resources Account: SDR Million Quota 87.00 Fund Holdings of Currency 115.13 Reserve position in Fund 0.00 SDR Department: Holdings SDR Million 0.26 Outstanding Purchases and Loans; Stand-by arrangements ESAF arrangements First Credit Tranche SDR Million 13.13 46.96 15.00 Financial Arrangements; APPENDIX I TvDe ESAF Stand-by Approval Date 06/24/l 998 05/08/l 996 Expiration Date 06/23/200 1 12/07/1996 Amount Approved @DR Million) 100.30 15.00 Percent of Ouota 100.0 132.3 0.0 % Allocation N/A Percent of Ouota 15.1 54.0 17.2 Amount Drawn (SDR Million) 46.96 15.00 Projected Obligations to Fund:(SDR Million; based on existing use of resources and present holdings of SDRs): Principal Overdue 10/3 l/l999 0 Forthcoming 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 1.9 7.5 9.4 7.5 3.7 Charges/Interest A 04 . A 13 - 09 - 05 03 d Total 0 2.3 8.8 10.3 8.0 4.0 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-43 - APPENDIX I VII. Exchange Rate Arrangements The currency of Tajikistan is the Tajik ruble. The National Bank of Tajikistan quotes twice a week an official representative exchange rate for the Tajik ruble, based on the selling rates for the Tajik ruble against the U. S. dollar in the Tajikistan Interbank Foreign Currency Exchange (TICEX). The official exchange rate is used for revaluation of the National Bank’s foreign currency reserves, for the calculation of customs duties, and for the National Bank’s foreign exchange transactions. On October 3 1, 1999, the official exchange rate was TR 1,436 per U.S. dollar. VIII. Article IV Consultation The 1998 Article IV consultation was held during October 19-November 3, 1998. The 1998 Article IV report, dated December 3, 1998 was considered by the Executive Board on December 17, 1998. Ix. Resident Representative: Mi-. Lorie, Senior Resident Representative of the Fund, starred his assignment in Dushanbe in September 1999. X. Resident Advisor: A fiscal resident advisor in the area of macro-fiscal management was assigned for 15 months beginning August 1998. A general policy adviser to the National Bank of Tajikistan started his one-year assignment in April 1999. A treasury advisor was assigned for 12 months beginning in April 1999. As part of Swiss-Funded Tajikistan Tax Administration Reform Project, a general tax administration advisor, a VAT administration advisor, and a computer systems advisor started their peripatetic assignments in September 1999. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 44 - APPENDIX II Tajikistan: Relations with the World Bank Tajikistan became a member of the IBRD and IDA on June 4, 1993 and of the IFC in 1994. To date, World Bank Group assistance has consisted of policy advice, an IFC investment in Zarafshan Gold Company, and ten IDA op’erations. A World Bank mission in August 1992 initiated an assessment of the economic situation, prospects and progress in reforms. A mission visited Dushanbe in October 1993 to prepare the first Country Economic Memorandum (CEM). Following further discussions with the authorities in Dushanbe during May 1994, ,the report was issued in August 1994. At the government’s request, the World Bank organized the first Consultative Group (CG) meeting for Tajikistan in Tokyo on October 3 1,1996, followed by a second CG meeting in Paris on May 20, 1998. Two Country Assistance Strategies were discussed by the Board of Directors of IDA in May 1996 and July 1998. The World Bank approved an Institutional Development Fund (IDF) grant in August 1994 to help the Government manage and make effective use of external assistance. In August 1997, the Bank provided another IDF grant to Tajikistan to finance an external debt advisor to strengthen the Ministry of Finance’s capacity for external debt management. As of November 30, 1999 IDA has committed $180.4 million for 11 operations in Tajikistan: (i) First Institutional Building Technical Assistance (lBTA1) Credit for US$5 million, approved May 1996; (ii) Agricultural Recovery and Social Protection (ARSP) Credit for US$50 million, approved September 1996; (iii) Pilot Poverty Alleviation Project (PPAP) for US$l2 million, approved April 1997; (iv) Post-Conflict Rehabilitation Credit (PCRC) for US$ 10 million, approved December 1997; (v) Post-Conflict Emergency Reconstruction Credit (PCERC) for US$l 0 million, approved January 1998; (vi) First Structural Adjustment Credit (SACl) for US$50 million, approved July 1998; (vii) a supplemental SAC credit for $6.7 million, approved May 1999; (viii) Emergency Flood Assistance Project (EFAP) for US$5 million approved, August 1998; (ix) Farm Privatization Support Project (FPSP) for US$20 million, approved June 1999; (x) Education LIL for US$5 million approved May 1999; and (xi) Second Institution Building Technical Assistance (IBTA2) Credit for US$6.7 million approved June 1999. Projects in rural infrastructure, poverty alleviation and health are also being prepared. In August 1998, the first tranche of SDR14.84 million (US$20 million) for SAC1 (SDR37.1 million / US$50 million) was disbursed. In July 1999, the Development Credit Agreement of SAC1 was restructured to support the Government’s efforts to deal with unexpected export price shocks and spillover effects of the Russian crisis, which have delayed the implementation of some elements of the structural reform program. After the amendment, the remaining tranche of SDR22.26 million (US$30 million) was restructured into two successive tranches of SDR17 million (US%23 million), already disbursed, and SDR10.26 million (US$l3.7 million), expected to be disbursed after completion of the third tranche conditions of the restructured SAC 1. The latter includes the supplemental Credit of SDR5 million approved by the World Bank Executive Directors on May 17, 1999. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-45 - APPENDIX III Tajikistan: Relations with the Asian Development Bank Tajikistan became a member of the ADB on April 20, 1998. The ADB participated in the Consultative Group Meeting for Tajikistan in Paris on May 20, 1998 and has taken steps to enable its operations to commence in Tajikistan: ARer conducting a Contact cum Economic Mission in June 1998, the ADB staff completed an Economic Report and Interim Operational Strategy which details the economic structure and recent economic developments in the country, and identifies areas in which ADB assistance would have the greatest development impact. The report was approved by the ADB’s Board of Directors in October 1998. The Board also approved Tajikistan’s country classification which provides the basis for Tajikistan’s access to concessional resources. In view of Tajikistan’s urgent need for assistance, the ADB Board approved a Post Conflict Infrastructure Program Loan (US$20 million) following the adoption of the interim operational strategy and counry classification. The first tranche of this loan (US$lO million) was disbursed in January 1999 upon meeting the loan effective conditions. In October 1999, the ADB’s Board approved a Social Sector Rehabilitation Project Loan (US$20 million) to address the serious deterioration in living standards and strengthen the delivery of essential social services. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-46- APPENDIX IV Tajikistan: Fund Technical Assistance, 1992-99 (As of October 31,1999) Department Dates Purpose FAD February 1992 February 1994 April/May 1995 July 1995 September/October 1995 January 1996 August 1996 September 1997 April 1998 June/July 1998 INS LEG MAE September 1999 October 1995 September/November 1998 September 1999 November 1993 January/February 1995 April 1995 September 1995 November 1995 Tax policy and tax administration social safety net, intergovernmental financial relationships, and public expenditure management Tax policy, social safety net, and public expenditure management Public expenditure management and treasury operations Tax policy and tax administration Social safety net Modemization of the State Tax Inspectorate, implementation of a large taxpayer monitoring unit and collection of tax arrears. Implementation of a large taxpayer unit Modemization of the State Tax Inspectorate; Implementation of a large taxpayer unit Tax policy and administration Implementation of Tax Identification Numbers Tax administration Macroeconomic and financial policy seminar Tax Code drafting Law on Foreign Debt and Government Guarantees, Tax Code amendments Monetary operations and money market development, banking supervision, foreign exchange operations and management, the payments system, and central bank legislation Introduction of the national currency, monetary policy and banking supervision Foreign exchange operations and introduction of the national currency Central banking operations Central bank legislation, exchange market operations and banking supervision Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 47 - APPENDIX IV Department Dates Purpose STA TRE November 1996 February 1998 April 1998 August 1998 April 1999 Multi-topic February/March 1994 January/February 1995 April/May 1995 July 1995 September/October 1995 November/December 1995 September 1996 November 1996 October/November 1997 April 1998 April 1999 October 1995 Multi-topic Multi-topic Treasury bill auctions, bank restructuring, and banking supervision Multi-topic Government finance, money and banking, balance of payments, and national account and price statistics Money and banking statistics National accounts and price statistics Money and banking statistics Price statistics Balance of payments statistics Money and banking statistics National accounts statistics Balance of payments statistics Money and banking statistics Money and banking statistics Accounting of Fund transactions Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-48 - APPENDIX V Tajikistan: Enhanced Bank-Fund Collaboration Background 1. In August 1998, the Tajik authorities indicated their interest in participating in the pilot project for enhanced Bank-Fund collaboration in view of the close linkages between macroeconomic and structural policies in Tajikistan. Subsequently, in the context of the 1998 Article IV consultation, they endorsed the key areas of special focus as suggested by the Bank and the Fund staffs. 2. Three areas were targeted for enhanced collaboration: (i) accelerating public enterprise and financial sector reforms; (ii) identifying the social agenda and addressing potential adverse social consequences of adjustment; and (iii) assessing medium-term investment needs and related capacity to attract and absorb external financing, including from the private sector. Recent Progress 3. The Bank and Fund staff teams have continued to coordinate their work programs and missions to ensure effective tripartite discussions. In October 1999, the Fund staf?? participated in the annual retreat of the Bank country team. The practice of mutual participation in planning and program review meetings has continued. Since the Fund Resident Representative started his assignment in September 1999, collaboration in the field has also strengthened. The Fund mission for the PRGF review and the 1999 Article IV consultation was in parallel with the Bank’s Structural Adjustment Credit supervision mission. 4. The two country teams have worked closely with the authorities to address the problems in enterprise privatization, particularly the weak collection of sale proceeds and the lack of transparency in the auction process. Privatization targets under the PRGF and SAC supported programs were established to reinforce implementation and ensure continued monitoring. With Bank and Fund staff advice, the authorities cancelled the sale contracts of the cotton ginneries that fell seriously behind agreed payment schedule and offered them for sale again through international tenders, 5. On the social agenda, with Bank staff assistance, the authorities completed the data collection for a poverty survey in July 1999. Since then, the Bank and Fund staff have discussed the analysis of the survey data. The two country teams are now exchanging views on reform of the social safety net based on the preliminary survey results, as well as the required technical assistance for their implementation in 2000. 6. Both the Fund and Bank stafI’ viewed the preparation of a Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP) as an opportunity to intensify the tripartite collaboration and to mobilize broad support for the difficult task of economic reform and transition. Staff missions have explained the participatory approach to the authorities, including involvement of the civil society. In line with the understanding with the authorities, the two st& teams are planning Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-49- APPENDIX V parallel or joint missions early next year to support the authorities in developing an interim PRSP. 7. The Bank and Fund country teams are working with the authorities to prepare a detailed Public Investment Program for the prospective Consultative Group meeting in the spring of 2000. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 50- APPENDIXVI Tajikistan: Statistical Issues Data Weaknesses The authorities have sought to improve economic statistics but their efforts have been hampered by tight budgetary constraint and very limited international assistance. The latter has not been forthcoming despite improvements in the domestic security situation. Weaknesses in coverage, quality, frequency, and timeliness of the data remain serious and continue to affect authorities’ ability to formulate and implement macroeconomic policies. National Accounts Statistics The compilation of national accounts remains at a preliminary stage. Annual GDP estimates are derived from the production side by supplementing net material product data with rough estimates for the nonmaterial sectors. There are no reliable data on the expenditure breakdown of GDP. The quality of data is undermined by coverage and valuation problems. The coverage is unbalanced because of the under-representation of the nonstate sector. The value of production is also distorted because enterprises often report accounting or wholesale prices instead of actual transaction prices, which tend to be higher. Moreover, changes in inventory valuation are not appropriately accounted for. Quarterly GDP at constant prices is compiled from estimated indices of sectoral output based on a limited sample of enterprises. This method provides reliable quarterly estimates if there is a strong correlation between output and value added. In Tajikistan this does not appear to be tha case, however. The quarterly GDP figures display a marked seasonal pattern, with output increasing strongly at the time of harvest. Price Statistics Since January 1994, Tajikistan’s State Statistical Committee compiles two main price indices: the consumer price index (CPI), which replaced the retail price index formerly compiled, and the wholesale price index (WPI), which closely corresponds to a producer price index. Both are modified Laspeyres indices and as such avoid problems associated with Sauerbeck indices traditionally compiled in Tajikistan. However, the CPI calculation has not been updated despite the change in household expenditure pattern. The WPI suffers from a number of shortcomings including inadequate coverage of private sector activities. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-5l- APPENDIX VI Government Finance Statistics The classification of fiscal accounts in 1998 essentially followed the former U.S.S.R. accounting system. The system does not clearly identify financing items; revenue and financing items are mixed together above-the-line. Also, the needed distinction between interest and principal payments is lacking, with the result that amortization payments are recorded above-the-line. The weaknesses inherent in the accounting system were made worse by the poor quality of data on expenditure arrears. With FAD technical assistance, progress has been made recently. The authorities have prepared and submitted to Parliament the 2000 budget based on GFS standards. Statistics on state budget operations are available about two weeks after the end of the reference period. Data on the Social Protection Fund and Road Fund are also available, but detailed information is difficult to obtain making it difficult to compile data on the general government. Monetary and Banking Statistics A money and banking statistics mission visited the National Bank of Tajikistan (NBT) during April-May 1999. The mission found that the authorities have made significant progress in introducing the new chart of accounts and timely reporting of recent monetary developments. The mission also assisted the authorities to prepare a Tajikistan page in International Financial Statistics (IFS). Complete monthly balance sheets of the NBT are typically available with a few days lag. The NBT balance sheets available on a daily basis are incomplete and sometimes inaccurate. Further work will be needed to improve the reporting from NBT branches to the headquarters. Efforts should also be made to collect additional disaggregated data in the balance sheets of the NTB and commercial banks to improve the sectorization of the accounts in monetary statistics. Balance of Payments Statistics In April 1997, the NBT established a division responsible for the preparation of balance of payments data. However, the coverage of state enterprises and other private sector enterprises in the balance of payments continues to be inadequate, primarily as a result of the poor response from surveys of these enterprises, the incomplete coverage of transactions settled through the commercial banks, and the underutilization of available data sources. The cooperation among the various agencies has been improving. The 1997 STA mission recommended adjustments to the customs trade data, improvements in the foreign exchange record, and steps to ensure a significant improvement in the response rate to surveys covering joint venture enterprises and other enterprises in the private sector. While much work has been done, a great deal of work remains to make the official balance of payments data meaningtil and usable. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTajikistan: Core Statistical Indicators (As of October 1, 1999) Date of Latest Observation Date Received Frequency of Data Frequency of Reporting Source of Update Mode of Reporting Confidentiality Frequency of Publication 1 Central Overall External Intema- Bank Reserve/ Consumer Current Govem- Debt/ Exchange tiOMl Balance Base Broad Interest Price Exports/ Account ment GDP/ Debt Rates Reserves Sheet money Money Rates Index Imports Balance Balance GNP Service 9130199 9128199 9127199 9128199 8199 10/l/99 10/l/99 10/l/99 10/l/99 9/10/99 W W w I w M W W W W M A A A A A B B B B B W W W W M 9199 819 QI99 QI99 10/l/99 917199 8/l O/99 8110199 M M Q Q V M V V A A A A C C C C B B B B V/M/VIV QII99 QII99 QI99 917199 8/l 5199 8/l 5199 M Q Q M V V A A A C C C B B B M V V Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 53 - ATTACHMENT I December 30, 1999 Mr. Michel Camdessus Managing Director International Monetary Fund Washington, D.C. 2043 1 Dear Mr. Camdessus: After the Executive Board of the IMF approved the second annual PRGF arrangement on July 2, 1999, Tajikistan’s macroeconomic stability deteriorated. Inflation accelerated sharply and several performance criteria for end-June and end-September were not observed. As a result, the first review under the arrangement could not be completed as originally scheduled. The government has been fully aware of the urgency of restoring monetary stability and has implemented strong corrective actions. As a result, consumer prices and the exchange rate have now stabilized. In the attached Supplementary Memorandum of Economic Policies (SMEP), we have updated our second year economic program, with a view to consolidate the recent stabilization gains. We are also undertaking further structural and institutional reforms so as to make the program implementation sustainable. In view of the strong corrective actions, we request a waiver for the non-observance of those performance criteria that were not met at end-June and end-September. In support of this request, several prior actions have been agreed with the Fund staff to be implemented before Board consideration of the first and second reviews under the second annual ESAF arrangement. We are convinced that the completion of these reviews, and the related loan disbursements, will significantly strengthen the credibility of our stabilization and reform efforts. The government believes that the policies described in the attached memorandum are adequate to broadly achieve the original objectives of our program. However, we stand ready to take any additional measures which are deemed necessary to keep the program on track. We will consult with the Fund on these matters regularly in accordance with the policies of the IMF on such consultations. We are also willing to make our policies known to the international public and would be grateful if the Fund would make the Supplementary Memorandum of Economic Policies available on its Internet site. Very truly yours, llsll Emomali Rakhmonov President of the Republic of Tajikistan Attachment Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 54- ATTACHMENT II THE REPUBLIC OF TAJIKISTAN Supplementary Memorandum of Economic Policies I. INTRODUCTION 1. Tajikistan’s second annual PRGF arrangement was approved by the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) on July 2, 1999. The first review of this arrangement could not be completed because several performance criteria for end-June 1999 were not observed, and macroeconomic stability weakened sharply in July-August. In the third quarter, the key performance criteria, in particular for the fiscal deficit, central bank credit expansion, and the build-up of international reserves were not observed. While external factors played a significant role, we recognize that the deterioration of price stability was also due to deviations from the program’s fiscal and monetary policy targets. In continuation of the discussions started during the August staff mission, the Tajik delegation at the &IF-World Bank Annual Meetings in September agreed with the IMF staff on a Memorandum of Understanding @IOU), which specified a short-term policy agenda to start bringing the stabilization and reform program back on track. 2. We held further discussions with the IMF staff in Dushanbe in late October, in the context of the second review of the second annual PRGF arrangement and annual Article IV consultation. Based on a thorough review of recent macroeconomic developments and progress in the implementation of market reforms, we have updated our economic program for end- 1999 and 2000, with a view to consolidate our efforts to bring the program back on track. The over-arching framework of our policies remains as developed in the Memorandum of Economic Policies of June 17, 1999. We also propose performance criteria and structural benchmarks for end-January and end-April 2000 to ensure continuing progress in our reform policies. Achieving these targets will provide the basis for the third annual ESAF arrangement to be negotiated with the IMF staff in the spring of 2000. 3. Our macroeconomic indicators dete.riorated sharply in the summer of 1999. Inflation accelerated, reaching 16 percent in August, or 64 percent when measured cumulatively from August 1998. In September-October, however, the consumer price level declined by 3.4 percent suggesting that part of the summer price hike reflected temporary factors such as supply shortages of wheat and gasoline. While we expect inflation to remain low in the remainder of the year, the 12-month inflation through December 1999 is likely to reach 35 percent, significantly higher than projected at the time of the approval of the second year ESAF arrangement. Overall, while this weakening in price stability largely reflected rising import prices and a delayed adjustment of the exchange rate to external disturbances, it also owed to expansionary financial policies in the summer months. In the third quarter of 1999, economic growth slowed down, largely owing to the decline in agricultural production due to inclement weather conditions and weaker yields. Taking into account the strong seasonality in economic activity, however, we believe that the growth of real GDP for the year as a whole will reach 3.5 percent, about 2 percentage points less than projected earlier, Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 55 - ATTACHMENT II 4. In the third quarter of 1999, our policy performance also deteriorated. The fiscal deficit was larger than allowed for by the program, the central bank’s (NBT) domestic assets and net credit to government exceeded the program ceilings, and official net international reserves fell far below the program floor. As new NBT loans were directed to domestic borrowers outside the credit auction mechanism, the related structural performance criterion was also violated. On the other hand, the combined tax collection by the State Tax Committee and State Customs Committee exceeded the program target, external debt service payments were made on time, wage and social benefit arrears did not occur, and the government did not contract or guarantee any non-concessional loans. 5. Progress in structural reforms has been somewhat uneven. The land reform has proceeded well, small-scale privatization exceeded the program targets, and the issuance of tax identification numbers to enterprises was completed on time. Meanwhile, operational restructuring of the major banks slowed down and large scale privatization, in particular the privatization of cotton ginneries, continued to be hampered by weak payment collection. Overall, however, of the eight structural benchmarks of the program for end-June and end- September 1998, six were observed, one was met with delay, and one was missed. The latter related to the privatization of cotton ginneries. 6. More recently, our policy performance has improved and the financial targets agreed in the above-mentioned MOU for end-October were initially met. During October, the NE3T’s net domestic assets declined by an equivalent of nearly 10 percent of reserve money, official foreign exchange reserves increased, and the general government budget was broadly balanced for the second consecutive month. This tightening of policies underlines our determination to return to the programmed path in policy implementation. 7. The government realizes, however, that bringing the program on a sustainable basis will require not only a tightening of financial policies, but also progress in strengthening our institutional capacity. To this effect, a presidential decree was issued on October 22 to implement the institutional measures as agreed in the MOU. These measures included the closure of all non-bank enterprise accounts at the NBT, an explicit prohibition of any directed NBT lending, and tightening of expenditure control by the Ministry of Finance. An Economic Program Monitoring Group was established, with the Fund resident representative as an observer. 8. In further support of our request for a waiver for the non-observance of the missed performance criteria at end-June and end-September (Annex I), we will take the following measures as prior actions for the completion of the first and second reviews under the second annual ESAF arrangement: 0 We will implement a virtually balanced budget in the fourth quarter of 1999 with a cumulative cash surplus of the general government of TR 0.2 billion in October-December; Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-56- ATTACHMENT II a We will reduce the level of the NBT’s NDA from TR 164.3 billion by end-September to TR 149.7 billion to end-November and fi.uther to TR 137.4 billion by end-December; and increase the level of the NBT’s NIR from negative US%60.8 million at end-September to negative US$50.6 million by end-November and tirther to negative US$41 .O million by end-Decemberl999. Net credit of the NBT to the government will be reduced fiom TR 120.3 billion at end-September 1999 to TR 118.9 billion at end-December 1999; 0 We will submit to Parliament the relevant legislation to empower the Large Taxpayer Inspectorate (LTI) with the same authority as local tax offices. The tax offices in Dushanbe and Khujand will be informed by December 15, 1999 that large taxpayers will submit tax declarations and balance sheets directly to the LTI. Large taxpayers in Dushanbe and Khujand will be notified by December 3 1, 1999 that, effective February 1,2000, their responsible tax office will be the LTI; 0 We will close all extra-budgetary foreign exchange accounts of the budgetary organizations and consolidate them in the single treasury account by December 3 1, 1999; 0 We will complete the privatization (i.e., full payment received for at least 75 percent of shares) of all remaining cotton ginneries by December 3 1, 1999; 0 We will sign sale contracts for at least 180 medium- and large-scale enterprises and collect full payment for at least 140 such enterprises (cumulative since January 1, 1998) by December 3 1, 1999; We will privatize at least 400 small-scale enterprises (cumulative since May 1, 1999) ;y December 3 1, 1999; ; We will reach the target of privatizing at least 110 state and collective farms cumulative since April 1,1999) by issuing freely marketable land share and land use certificates for private farmers by December 3 1, 1999; l Finally, we recognize that approval by parliament of the 2000 general government budget, as agreed with the St&of the IMF, will be a prior action for the completion of the first and second reviews of the second annual ESAF arrangement. 9. With these prior actions, and the forceful implementation of the presidential decree of October 22, 1999 to strengthen our institutional capacity, we believe that the program will be brought back on track by the time of Board consideration of the reviews under the second annual ESAF arrangement. To ensure that the consolidation of stabilization gains will continue, we have set the quantitative performance targets under the program for end- January 1999 and end-April 2000 as specified in Annex I. Progress with our structural reforms will be assessed relative to the structural performance criteria and benchmarks specified in Annex II. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 57- ATTACHMENT II 10. In light of the recent price developments, we have revised the program’s inflation and growth targets for 2000. Inflation is now targeted at 13 percent during the year and real GDP is projected to increase by 5 percent in 2000. Achieving these targets requires continued monetary stability and good progress in structured reforms. These policies for the remainder of the program period are covered below. A. Fiscal Policy 11. The general government budget aims at reducing the overall fiscal deficit (excluding foreign financed capital expenditures) from 3.0 percent of GDP in 1999 to 2.2 percent of GDP in 2000. This target is ambitious because the growth of our traditional sources of revenue (cotton and aluminum sales taxes) will slow down reflecting the necessary reduction in the sales tax rates, and our external debt service will increase sharply. Improved performance in revenue collection from other taxes and greater control on expenditures will thus be critical to achieving this overall fiscal objective. Specifically, we will further strengthen tax and customs administration through: ti; the full implementation of the LTI and VAT reforms according to the time schedule outlined in Annex III; (ii) enforcing the presidential resolution of February 8, 1999 forbidding tax offsets; and (iii) starting weekly reporting of the revenue collection by the State Tax Committee, the State Customs Committee, and the Social Protection Fund (SPF) to the Ministry of Finance and the President’s office. We will also enact several revenue enhancing measures, effective January 1, 2000, including: (i) increasing the specific land tax per hectare by 40 percent to reflect the increase in the value of land due to inflation; (ii) limiting the VAT exemptions on imported inputs of TADAZ; (iii) introducing in the budget law the requirement that the local authorities implement the recently introduced retail sales tax at the rate of at least 4 percent (and up to 5 percent maximum). In compensation for Tajik Rail’s servicing of Tajikistan’s external debt to Uzbekistan, TR 8 billion will be allocated from the budget to Tajik Rail as debt repayment. In turn Tajik rail will start paying taxes in cash and repaying its debt to the NBT. Finally, with a view to achieving greater transparency in payment of taxes, tax settlement accounts in banks for all taxpayers under the LTI will be eliminated by March 3 1, 2000. 13. Greater control on expenditure will be essential. A key objective is to bring extrabudgetary operations within the purview of the Ministry of Finance, and to centralize fiscal management within this ministry. Specifically, the budget execution will be improved by enforcing the recently issued decree which prohibits any government agency from contracting the acquisition of goods and services without a signed confirmation by the Ministry of Finance. Without such confirmation, no payment will be made by the Treasury. Furthermore, we will strictly adhere to the targets for reforming the Treasury system as specified in Annex IV. The draft 2000 budget has been based on GFS accounting standards, and quarterly reports and forecasts will be conducted on that basis starting in March 2000. 14. Our expenditure policies will seek to improve the efficiency of government outlays without increasing their share in GDP. If needed, we will cut expenditures of the national Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-58- ATTACHMENT II economy programs (mainly outlays on construction, transportation, and agrobusiness) as well as capital expenditures to achieve our fiscal deficit target. We will rationalize the wage bill with a view to improving incentives for skilled workers in public service. To this effect, effective on January 1,2000, the average wage will be increased by no more than 15 percent with larger increases for key government employees. 15. In close cooperation with the World Bank and IMP staffs, we will overhaul the current social safety net in Tajikistan. Expenditures on the social safety net will be increased to 2.2 percent of GDP, up from 1.9 percent of GDP in 1999, based on the analysis and policy recommendations derived from the recent household survey. These reforms will be specified by end-April 2000, and the budget includes a reserve of TR 6 billion for their financing during 2000. Apart from those new measures, the existing cash compensation program will be abolished and replaced by a program providing social assistance to the needy, e.g., to large families with children through services provided by schools. In addition, all pensions below the minimum pension will be raised to TR2,OOO per month in the course of the year 2000. To improve the financial sustainability of the pension system in the longer term, working pensioners’ benefits will be frozen and early retirement provisions will be tightened. We have also submitted to parliament an amendment to the pension law to increase the minimum pension age by six months as of January 1, 2000. 16. On other expenditure, with assistance from the World Bank, we will review and further develop our Public Investment Program for the medium-term, with a view of presenting it to the prospective Consultative Group meeting in the spring of 2000. B. Monetary and Exchange Rate Policies 17. Monetary policy needs to be tight to strengthen the balance of payments and contain inflation by rolling back central bank credits, in particular to the cotton sector. Such an adjustment is facilitated by the foreign exchange inflow generated by the new cotton harvest. We will ensure that a significant part of this inflow is directed to build up the official international reserves of the NBT. At the same time, the balance of the cotton credits extended by Credit Suisse First Boston Inc.(CSFB), and guaranteed by the government, will be reduced so that the outstanding debt does not exceed US$27.5 million at end- December 1999, US$13.7 million at end-March, and US$10.8 million at end-April 2000. ’ Although the debt cannot be fully settled by the end of 1999, the existing government guarantee will not be extended. While honoring these debt ceilings may not prevent CSFB from calling the guarantee, CSFB has assured us that it would not make the calling of the guarantee effective for early repayment as long as the debt repayment scheme proceeds as agreed. Accordingly, out monetary program takes into account the need to reduce this balance as indicated above. In the event the guarantee is effectively called, the government and the NBT will, in order to ensure repaym.ent without undermining the 2000 budget, take ’ This remaining balance will be settled from the 2000 harvest in October-November. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public. - 59 - ATTACHMENT II immediate action to acquire legal rights to the cotton harvests of those exporters who have failed to meet their obligations to CSFB. The government will not provide any guarantees for the cotton sector’s external borrowing in 2000 as required by the relevant performance criterion of the program. 18. With the implementation of the presidential decree of October 22, 1999, the NBT will no longer finance any quasi-fiscal activities by providing directed credits, including to the cotton sector. All credits from the NBT will be channeled through credit auctions at market determined interest rates and the NBT’s indirect exposure to the cotton sector will be strictly limited. Neither will the central bank finance the budget in 2000 except for temporary (maximum one month) liquidity management purposes. The stock of the NBT’s loans to the private sector will be reduced by at least TR 20.4 billion during the fourth quarter of 1999, mainly through loan recovery from Naftrason, State Committee on Contracts, Tajik Rail, commercial banks, as well as from the cotton sector (at least TR 14.3 billion). 19. The tight credit policy will support the stability of the exchange rate and help reach the program’s NIR target. The NBT will allow the TICEX exchange rate to be determined by market forces and ensure free availability of foreign exchange cash in order to narrow the spread between the TICEX rate and the cash market rate to below the estimated transaction cost of 7 percent. To further increase competition in the foreign exchange market and credit auctions, free access to these markets will be ensured for all solvent commercial banks acting on behalf of their clients. The functioning of these markets will be reviewed with the forthcoming MAE mission in February 2000 with the view to encourage the development of inter-bank markets for foreign exchange and domestic credits. The NBT will ensure that the exchange rate at the TICEX and the interest rate at the credit auctions are not subject to moral suasion, collusion or any other indirect influence by market participants. 20. To achieve greater transparency and accountability of the key policy institutions, the financial relations between the NBT and the Ministry of Finance will be regularized. Starting January 1,2000, the government will pay interest at market rates on any borrowing from the NBT. As of the same date, the NBT and government will convert the stock of foreign currency and Tajik ruble debt to the NBT outstanding at end-December 1999 into Tajik ruble denominated long term bonds. TR 2 billion of this stock will be converted into short- term treasury bills. The NBT will pay market interest rates on government deposits at the NBT and the NBT will transfer part of its profits to the budget. A working group consisting of the representatives of the NBT, the Ministry of Finance, and the President’s Office, with the IMF Resident Representative as an observer, will be appointed immediately and it will submit its specific proposal on the implementation of the scheme outlined above for government and NBT Board approval by December 15, 1999. C. Trade and External Debt Policies 21. To facilitate the balance of payments adjustment, the government is committed to maintain an open trade system. As Tajikistan joined the customs union with Russia, Belams, Kazakhstan, and Kyrgyz Republic in early 1999, import tariffs on shipments from member Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 60 - ATTACHMENT II countries of the customs union are planned to be abolished. Several tariffs on imports fi-om other countries have been raised, however, so as to bring them closer to the external tariffs stipulated by the customs union treaty, thereby raising the average tariff rate from 5 to about 7.8 percent. Since our ultimate objective remains to integrate with the world economy, we have initiated the application process for membership in the World Trade Organization (WTO). During the WTO accession process, possible tariff adjustments will be in line with the WTO policy goals. 22. Our external debt service is expected to increase sharply as a proportion to government revenues, as the grace period of a number of rescheduling agreements ends. We therefore will keep tight control on government debt guarantees and borrowing,2 and continue our efforts to regularize our external debt obligations, in particular with Turkmenistan Kazakhstan, and Uzbekistan. In this endeavor, the authorities would appreciate the assistance of the IMF in using its good offices to bring parties together to help settle the debt discrepancies. An agreement has been reached with the Russian government on further reduction of our debt and it is expected to become effective in early 2000. Documents are being prepared to sign the agreement with Pakistan. Negotiations with the EU are expected to be finalized soon. With China and India, debt rescheduling discussions are still ongoing. D. Structural Policies 23. The main emphasis of our structural reforms will continue to be in privatization, land reform, energy pricing, and bank restructuring. On privatization, we will focus on increasing the success rate at the auctions of enterprises in terms of sales contracts and accelerating the collection of payments from new owners of privatized enterprises. We will also continue to strive at increasing transparency, openness, and competition in the privatization process. To reach our targets for medium- and large-scale privatization for the remainder of the second- year program, the State Property Committee (SPC) will conduct at least 2 auctions per month, offering at least 20 enterprises for sale at each auction. It will refrain from applying any arbitrary coefficients in setting the auction starting prices. Moreover, to accelerate enterprise sales and strengthen payment collection, the SPC will use the Dutch auction method for those enterprises which fail to attract sale contracts in English auctions, or when payment has fallen short of the contracted amount. With good progress already made during the second-year program, the government intends to complete the privatization of small-scale enterprises by end-1999. To this end, more than 300 items will be offered for sale in auctions in the fourth quarter 1999. 24. The government recognizes that the privatization of cotton ginneries is an important step in increasing efficiency in the cotton sector, but so far the process has been plagued by 2 The new draft Law on Foreign Debt and Government Guarantees, prepared with assistance from the IMF’s Legal Department, is currently before Parliament. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-61 - ATTACHMENT II delays in receiving full payment for assets sold. In addition, the existence of de facto minimum prices has contributed to the slow pace of privatization. Despite five international tenders so far this year, of the 23 enterprises for sale, four ginneries have been fully paid for and for another three 30-50 percent of payment has been collected. At present, eight ginneries are under privatization contracts, and the remaining ginneries will be re-offered for sale in late December. To speed up the process, the SPC will enforce payment collection of the existing contracts. In close consultation with the World Bank staff, the tender process will be streamlined to ensure transparency. The government will not set any minimum prices and will allow the highest bid to win. 25. Significant progress has already been made in land reform. As of end- September 1999, more than half of state and collective farms have been dismantled and nearly 45 percent of the arable land is now in private hands. For the remainder of the second- year program, the Land Reform Committee wiII continue to convert at least 50 state and collective farms per quarter into private dekhan farms through the issuance of marketable land use and land share certificates to private farmers. With assistance from the World Bank, we are also improving the current land registry and making further progress in land mapping, surveying, and title registration in order the facilitate the development of land use rights/lease markets. To encourage more efficient use of water resources, irrigation tariffs will be raised to cover at least 20 percent of the cost as soon as cost calculations are finalized, but no later than March 1,200O. 26. In the energy sector, notwithstanding the increase in the electricity tariffs for households in April 1999, the recent exchange rate depreciation has eroded the cost recovery of the electricity company, Barki Tojik. To improve the basis for prudent pricing policies, Barki Tojik is currently conducting a review of the cost recovery calculations with technical assistance from the Asian Development Bank (ADB). In the coming months, we are committed to (i) seek ADB’s support for an audit of Barki Tojik according to international accounting standards, with the aim to complete the audit by end-March 2000; (ii) remove, effective March 2000, the privileges for free usage of electric power by certain groups except for war veterans, invalids, and Chernobyl victims; and (iii) raise households electricity tariffs, by end-March 2000, to cover 50 percent of the costs based on the ADB-supported study. Government agencies at all levels will not be allowed to interfere with Barki Tojik’s and Tajik Communal Service’s policy of cutting off service to delinquent customers. To protect the poorest segments of the population from the effects of price increases, a special compensation scheme will be designed with assistance from the ADB. 27. With regard to TADAZ, progress has been made in the separation of non-aluminum activities from this enterprise. Work on a specific restructuring plan, which was started in April 1999 with the help of the International Finance Corporation (IFC), will be completed by February 2000. 28. On bank restructuring, some progress has been made in the liquidation of Tajikbankbusiness, particularly in the repayment of deposits. Operational restructuring of the Savings Bank and Agroinvestbank, however, has been slow, with little progress in staff Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-. 62 - ATTACHMENT II reduction and loan recovery. Both banks have now been audited by PricewaterhouseCoopers according to International Accounting Standards. The achievements of the restructuring program will now be assessed in light of these audit reports, and we believe that further steps are needed in the areas of loan recovery, loan loss provisioning, risk assessment procedures, and loan monitoring practices. These further steps will be defined during the February Fund mission. The TR 7.3 billion recapitalization of the Agroinvestbank will be completed shortly as recommended by the auditors and earlier agreed with the World Bank and Fund staffs. The government recapitalization of other banks will be considered in light of the international audit results, in consultation with the staffs of the World Bank and the IMF. At present, out of the total of 16 active banks, three are not in compliance with NBT prudential standards. The NBT will revoke the licenses of those banks that have systematically failed to meet prudential standards, and start the liquidation process in accordance with the NBT and Banking Laws. The NBT will also issue a Guide on Collateral, where the purpose of collateral and risks associated with different type of collaterals will be explained. A registry will be established for collaterals so that the same asset cannot be used as collateral for other loans or sold to a third party. 29. Improving the business climate in Tajikistan is essential in order to attract domestic and foreign investors. We are aware that private businesses are too often harassed by public officials from various levels of government, The Interior Ministry, Prosecutor General, and local authorities will be prohibited from interfering with the activities of banks and enterprises and inspections by the State Tax and Customs Committees will strictly comply with the limits assigned to them by law. A record keeping mechanism about the interference of government agencies in enterprises operations will be established and reviewed periodically with quarterly reports sent to the President, starting in March 2000. 30. We are keenly aware of the urgent need to strengthen our statistical data base in order to meet the increasing demand of a market economy. Our priorities at present include national accounts, price indices, and balance of payment statistics. In addition, we need help in sampling techniques, analysis of statistical data, computerization, and software. We hope that the Fund could take the lead in providing technical assistance in all these areas. 31. The Government welcomes the initi,ative to prepare a Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP) to enhance the social safety net and employment opportunities. We hope that in the context of this process, we will be assisted in the design of the program by staffs of the World Bank and the IMF, other international supporters of the Tajik development process and in consultation with the civil society. We will prepare an outline of the PRSP by mid- February for discussion with the IMF and World Bank staffs. We aim at completing an interim PRSP by end-May 2000 so that the principles of an efficient poverty reduction strategy can be introduced in the context of the prospective third annual ESAF arrangement. A full-fledged PRSP would be completed in early 2001. 32. With the policies specified in this SMEP and other measures to which we committed ourselves in the Memorandum of Economic Policies and Policy Framework Paper dated June 1999, we believe that our performance in implementing stabilization policies and Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public. - 63 - ATTACHMENT II . structural reforms will improve on a sustained basis. We will maintain continuous contacts with the Fund staff on monitoring program implementation, and in the event of any slippages from the programmed track, we will stand ready to take immediate policy action to reverse such deviations. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicAnnex I. T+kistan: Quantitative Ptrformsnce Criteria and Indhtive Targets Under the Second Ammal PRGF Arrangement (In stocks, unless othawise indicated) 1999 2ooo JUOC sep-fJ= octoba1999 Novr.mba- Jmupy A@ Program Actual m Actual MOU Actual Priorbim Acbml Plio?action Ros- Rok 1. Qluostativc Parfamalnx Tycb Ceihgon&dmmicaseisoftheNBT ccniogonNB~sDctcfcdittogalcnip- ceiliogooclmNiativcovcnll~baiaoccdarbqt dXPrognmpcriod Gcncral govcmmat wage, and ltonworldtlg pcosioscc?‘palsioolrmn raxcnucctioaofthcsrc8ndd Floor on total net imcmatiooai rcsavra cciiing on comoiativc amouat of Nmdonaiioanscoohactod or8Itaraotccd.5/ !3lbdbp: Withmauuitksoflto5yam With maturities of kss iban 1 yew 2. IadkaUveTvgcb Reservemwcy’ Mcmoraodom item: 99.6 131.2 110.9 lM.6 98.6 92.2 -10.0 -9.1 -21.0 0 19.0 -10.0 IO 10 0 0 64.0 I.038 5.0 0.0 32.2 39.7 61.6 -36.6 0 10.0 0 0 0.1 10.0 0.0 0.0 67.2 12.9 I.038 1,038 (i3lnlioos of n&s) 136.2 156.1 96.1 1203 -25.6 -1.2 0.0 0.0 56.0 da (Miiiona of dollars) 60.8 -57.1 0.0 10.0 0.0 0.0 . . . 0.0 10.0 10.0 0.0 10.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 .., 0.0 . . . 0.0 . . . 0.0 10.0 10.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 73.1 14.7 75.0 77.0 Il.1 78.5 78.4 83.9 1.038 1,436 1,436 1,436 1.436 1,436 1.436 I.436 157.0 116.8 31 -1.3 31 0.0 da 149.7 149.6 137.4 134.9 136.2 120.3 117.9 116.9 118.9 117.9 da . . . 0.2 u -26.6 -34.9 0.0 . . . 0.0 0.0 0.0 da . . . da 91.3 113.7 -57.1 -50.6 -50.5 -41.0 -39.3 -36.4 i I . . Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 65 - ANNEXII Structural Performance Criteria and Benchmarks Continuous performance criteria: 1. Issue all NBT credit via credit auctions during the program period. Structural benchmarks Continuous 1. Ensure free availability of foreign exchange cash so that the spread between the exchange rates in the deposit foreign exchange market (TICEX) and the cash market does not exceed 7 percent. For end-December 1999 1. Sign sale contracts for at least 180 medium- and large-scale enterprises with full payment received for at least 140 sold enterprises (cumulative since January 1, 1998). 2. Convert at least 110 state and collective farms into private farms by issuing marketable land use and land share certificates to private farmers (cumulative since April 1, 1999). 3. Privatize at least 400 small-scale enterprises cumulatively since May 1, 1999. For end-March 2000 1. Sign sale contracts for at least 210 medium- and large-scale enterprises with full payment received for at least 170 enterprises (cumulative since January 1, 1998). 2. Convert at least 160 state and collective farms into private farms by issuing marketable land use and land share certificates to private farmers (cumulative since April 1, 1999). 3. Increase households electricity tariffs to cover 50 percent of operating costs. 4. Complete audit of the NBT’s IAS-based 1999 accounts by an internationally reputable firm. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public, ANNEX III TARGETS FOR TAX ADMINISTRATION REFORM Action Responsibility Date 1. Propose legislation to empower the Large Taxpayer Inspectorate (LTI) with the same authority as a local tax office. Government/STC November 5, 1999 2. Notify Dushanbe and Khujand tax offices that large taxpayers will submit tax declarations, and balance sheets directly to the LTI STC December 15, 1999 3. Notify large taxpayers in Dushanbe and Khujand STC that effective February 1,200O their responsible tax office will be the LTI. January 2,200O 4. Revise the VAT declaration form to provide for the following entries: (i) VAT charged on imports, (ii) value of purchases that are tax exempt, and (iii) value of sales that are tax exempt. MinFin/STC January 3 1,200O 5. Establish a mechanism ensuring availability of VAT invoices. MinFin December 3 1, 1999 6. Print VAT invoices and deliver invoices to local STC tax offices for distribution to taxpayers. February 20,200O 7. Establish procedures for making VAT refunds as MinFin December 3 1, required by Article 206 of the Tax Code. 1999 8. Recruit 8 people with basic computer skills to STC implement the computerization component of the Swiss-funded Tax Administration Reform Project and take measures to retain the staff for a minimum of three years January 15,200O Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 67 - ANNEX IV TARGETS FOR TREASURY SYSTEM REFORM Action Responsibility Date 1. Restructure the c.entral treasury in clearly defined payment, revenue, and internal control divisions; abolish the cash implementation division. 2. Expand treasury coverage to bring all revenues under the treasury system: l Customs committee collections of VAT, excise and customs duties outside Dushanbe; l Revenues of sale of state property. 3. Expand treasury coverage to include all central government and regional government expenditures: l Close all extra-budgetary foreign exchange accounts of the budgetary organizations; l Bring central budget transactions occurring outside Dushanbe under treasury control; l Set up regional treasuries in the remaining 7 rayons subject to banking facilities being available. 4. Establish internal audit mechanism at the Treasury 5. Complete preparation of the treasury instruction manual. 6. Submit to Parliament the Treasury Law. MinPin December 3 1, 1999 MinPin January 1,200O January 1,200O MinPin December 3 1, 1999 March 3 1,200O July 1,200O MinPin MinFin MinFin January 1,200O September 30,200O September 30,200O Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public