DOCUMENT OF INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY FOR AGENDA EBS/04/3 1 CONFIDENTIAL February 23,2004 To: Members of the Executive Board From: The Secretary Subject: Philippines-Staff Report for the 2003 Article IV Consultation and Post-Program Monitoring Discussions Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staff report for the 2003 Article IV consultation with the Philippines and post-program monitoring discussions, which is tentatively scheduled discussion on Friday, March 5,2004. At the time of circulation of this paper to the Board, the Secretary’s Department has not received a communication from the authorities of the Philippines whether or not they consent to the Fund’s publication of this paper; such communication may be received after the authorities have had an opportunity to read the paper. Questions may be referred to Mr. Gordon (ext. 37557) and Mr. Cerisola (ext. 383 14) in APD. Unless the Documents Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the WTO Secretariat on Tuesday, March 2,2004; and to the Asian Development Bank and the European Investment Bank, following its consideration by the Executive Board. This document will shortly be posted on the extranet, a secure website for Executive Directors and member country authorities. Att: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicCONFIDENTIAL INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND PHILIPPINES Staff Report for the 2003 Article IV Consultation and Post-Program Monitoring Discussions Prepared by the Asia and Pacific Department (In consultation with other departments) Approved by Masahiko Takeda and Michael Hadjimichael February 20,2004 . Discussions were held in Manila during December 4-17,2003. The team met with Finance Secretary Amatong, Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas Governor Buenaventura, Budget Secretary Boncodin, Planning Secretary Neri, Energy Secretary Perez, and other senior officials; academics; private sector and financial market participants; and World Bank and Asian Development Bank staff. . The team comprised Messrs. Takeda (Head), Cordon, Cerisola, Baqir, and Ishi (all APD), Schellekens (MFD), Fletcher (FAD), Burgess (PDR) and Haksar (Resident Representative). Ms. Amador (OED) participated in the meetings. Mr. Burton visited Manila during the mission and met with President Arroyo and senior officials. . The Philippines’ 33-month stand-by arrangement expired on December 3,2000, without purchase of the final tranche, mainly because the fiscal deficit was off track. Outstanding obligations to the Fund at end-December 2003 amounted to SDR 806 million (91.2 percent of quota), of which SDR 3 19 million falls due during 2004. . At the conclusion of the previous Article IV Consultation on September 11,2002, Directors noted that while the Philippines had made substantial efforts over the past 15 years to create a modern competitive economy, some long-standing problems remained, in particular in the fiscal and banking sectors. Directors observed that these problems, if left unattended could trigger a decline in investors’ confidence and an adverse market reaction that would affect the country’s growth prospects. . The Philippines has agreed to remain under post-program monitoring. Even though outstanding borrowing from the Fund has fallen below 100 percent of quota, the authorities see benefits from continuing PPM until the fiscal position strengthens. The next post-program mission is expected to take place in mid-2004. . The Philippines has accepted the obligations under Article VIII, maintaining an exchange system free of restrictions on payments and transfers for current international transactions. . The authorities have recently participated in a data ROSC, and an update of the fiscal ROSC was prepared during this Article IV Consultation. While considerable efforts have been to improve data quality, the Philippines’ statistical base has major weaknesses, notably with respect to the balance of payments and national income accounts. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2- Contents Page Executive Summary . . . 5 I. Introduction.. . 6 II. Recent Developments . . . . . . . . 7 III. Outlook and Risks .................................................................................................... 9 A. Short Term ....................................................................................................... 9 B. Medium Term ................................................................................................ 10 IV. Policy Discussions.. ................................................................................................ 11 A. Fiscal Policy .................................................................................................. 11 B. Monetary Policy and the Exchange Rate ........................................................ 13 C. Structural Policies.. ........................................................................................ 13 V. Staff Appraisal., . _, . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17 Boxes 1. Recent Export Performance .................................................................................... 2 1 2. Status of Implementation of Key FSSA Recommendations ..................................... 22 3. The FCDU Book: Risks and Prudential Measures ................................................... 23 Figures 1. External Developments, 1997-2004 ........................................................................ 24 2. Domestic Developments, 1997-2004 ...................................................................... 25 3. Fiscal Sector, 1997-2004 ........................................................................................ 26 4. Banking Sector, 1997-2003 ..................................................................................... 27 Tables 1. Selected Economic Indicators, 1999-2004 .............................................................. 28 2. National Government Cash Budget, 1999-2004 ...................................................... 29 3. Monetary Survey, 1999-2003.. ................................................................................ 30 4. Balance of Payments, 1999-2004 ............................................................................ 3 1 5. Banking Sector Indicators, 1997- 2003 ................................................................... 32 6. Macroprudential Indicators of the Banking System, September 2003 ...................... 33 7. Indicators of External Vulnerability, 1999-2003 ..................................................... 34 8. Medium-Term Outlook, 200 l-09 (Baseline Scenario). ............................................ 3 5 9. Medium-Term Balance of Payments, 2004-09 (Baseline Scenario) ......................... 36 10. Medium-Term Outlook, 200 l-09 (Reform Scenario) .............................................. 37 11. Indicators of Financial Obligations to the Fund, 2002-09 ........................................ 38 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3- Annexes I. Debt Sustainability Analysis ................................................................................... 39 II Progress on Structural Reform Agenda ................................................................... 42 III. Fund Relations.. ...................................................................................................... 46 IV. Relations with the World Bank Group .................................................................... 49 V. Relations with the Asian Development Bank .......................................................... 5 1 VI. Statistical Issues ..................................................................................................... 52 VII. Social and Demographic Indicators ......................................................................... 57 VIII. Public Information Notice ....................................................................................... 58 Glossary of Abbreviations and Terms . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4- GLOSSARY OF ABBREVIATIONS AND TERMS AML ................... Anti-Money Laundering AsDB .................. Asian Development Bank BIR ..................... Bureau of Internal Revenue BSP ..................... Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas CB-BOL .............. Central Bank Board of Liquidators DBM ................... Department of Budget and Management DST ..................... Documentary Stamp Tax FIE ...................... Fixed Income Exchange GRT .................... Gross Receipts Tax GSIS ................... Government Social Insurance System EPIRA ................. Electric Power Industry Reform Act ERC .................... Energy Regulatory Commission FATF .................. Financial Action Task Force FCDU .................. Foreign Currency Depository Unit FSSA ................... Financial System Stability Assessment LGUs .................. Local Government Units Meralco ............... Manila Electric Company NFPS ................... Nonfinancial Public Sector NG ...................... National Government NPA .................... Nonperforming Assets NPL. .................... Nonperforming Loans NPC .................... National Power Corporation PCA .................... Prompt Corrective Action PDIC ................... Philippine Deposit Insurance Corporation ROPOA., ............. Real and Other Property Owned and Acquired SARS .................. Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome SPV ..................... Special Purpose Vehicle Transco ............... National Transmission Corporation TLP ..................... Total Loan Portfolio yly ....................... Year-on-year Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-5- Executive Summary High public debt and large financing requirements make the Philippines highly vulnerable to adverse shocks, particularly a sudden loss of confidence. Political uncertainty ahead of the May 2004 presidential elections has weakened market sentiment and the peso has fallen to new lows against the dollar. The peso’s weakness is likely to continue at least until the election uncertainties are resolved. Despite the financial market and political turbulence, economic growth was 4% percent in 2003, while inflation was contained at 3 percent. In 2003, the national government reduced its fiscal deficit, but mounting losses at the National Power Corporation (NPC) worsened the nonfinancial public sector deficit to 6% percent of GDP. Some progress was made with banking sector reform, but important areas of weakness remain. To reduce vulnerabilities and support economic growth, comprehensive policy reforms are needed to tackle long-standing problems in the fiscal, power, and banking sectors: a Tax policy measures are needed to bring public finances and debt to a more sustainable path. a Power rates need to be raised to improve the financial condition of NPC, while privatization is essential to ensure investment and avoid future supply shortages. 0 Restoring the health of the banking system requires that banks raise capital and supervisors are empowered to deal with distressed institutions. Given the political constraints, the authorities judge the prospects for implementing a comprehensive set of policy measures before the election to be bleak. At a minimum, it will be important that policy slippages be avoided in the pre-election period. While outstanding borrowing from the Fund fell below 100 percent of quota in November 2003, the authorities have agreed that Post-Program Monitoring should continue. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-6- 1. INTRODUCTION 1. Growth has been fairly strong in recent years, hut fiscal imbalances have mounted and progress with reforms has been uneven. Over the past three years, GDP growth has averaged almost 4 percent per annum, or about 2 NATIONAL GOVEFtNMFNT BUDGET l/ 22 1 ‘/z percent in per capita terms. -on Moreover, although poverty has 0 - 20 declined, over 40 percent of the -2 - Bohnce --..-- Revenue (RHS) - 18 population continues to subsist on - Expend~iure (RHS) less than US$2 per day. As -4- - lb recognized in the government’s Philippines Economic Plan, -6 - 14 promoting sustainable development and poverty alleviation requires -8 I 1997 1998 1999 2OW ZOOL 2w2 2003 l2 stable macroeconomic fundamentals I/ Eased on IMF definition, which excludes privatization proceeds from revenue, and and progress with structural reforms. mcludes the operatum of the Central Bank Board of Liiuidators. However, declining revenue led to a sharp increase in the national government deficit in 2002, and although this was partially reversed in 2003, the deficit remains high and necessitates large recourse to external commercial borrowing. In addition, while important reforms have been undertaken in the power and banking sectors, major structural weaknesses persist in both sectors. With attention increasingly focused on the May 2004 presidential elections, major reforms are unlikely in the near term. 2. The Philippines encountered recurrent episodes of market turbulence in 2003. Financial markets were unsettled in the first quarter by fears of huther fiscal slippage, concerns about the looming war in Iraq, and the prospect of 900 900 international sanctions due to BOND SPR@DS deficiencies in Philippine anti- (In basis points) . . . . . . . . ..A.... ,JjMBIC ph, : money laundering (AML) + EMBI+ G/o&l - 750 legislation. Against this backdrop, sovereign bond spreads widened, domestic treasury bill rates rose, and the peso fell, despite significant intervention by the authorities. Monetary policy was tightened in March, and with amendments made to the AML legislation, and the 2003 budget beginning to overperform, sentiment turned around in the second quarter. 2004 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-7- 3. Adverse events have created I I renewed financial market pressures. A 58 Fomxwticx.4~~~~ti military mutiny in late July was quickly T-BILLFUTjCS contained, but jolted confidence. This was ,.............., peso/l/.s.$ &ff,y) 56 - 91-Day T-bill rate (FLW) followed by legal challenges against central bank officials, a failed attempt to impeach the Supreme Court Chief Justice, 54 and the resignation of the Finance Secretary. By November, the peso had fallen to a record low. At the same time, 52 -6 uncertainties were growing about the likely effects on policies of the May 2004 %N L.. I ,5 elections. Market pressure subsided in APR JUL OCT JAN 2003 2004 December, assisted by reassurances from the authorities that pre-election spending would be resisted. However, in late-January, Moody’s downgraded the Philippines’ sovereign rating, rumors surfaced of another possible coup, and the peso resumed its decline. The authorities tightened monetary policy again in early February, but markets will remain on edge until election uncertainties are resolved. II. RECENT DEVELOPMENTS 4. The economy showed resilience to the shocks experienced in 2003. Activity slowed in the first half of the year as a result of SARS and Iraq-related uncertainties and the dry spell associated with El Nina. To offset the drought, the government extended support to farmers including through the distribution of hybrid seeds, and once the weather improved, agriculture rebounded strongly. GDP growth picked up from the third quarter and was 4% percent in 2003 as a whole. On the demand side, consumption supported growth, buoyed by remittances from overseas Filipino workers.’ By contrast, investment growth was weighed down by declining public sector construction, while exports responded anemically to the upturn in the global economy. Weak export growth is consistent with the fall in investment in the electronics sector that has occurred since the mid-1990s (Box 1). 5. The budget deficit was reduced in 2003. As a result of tight control over spending, the national government achieved its deficit target of 5 percent of GDP in 2003, compared to the 2002 outturn of 5% percent of GDP.’ Substantial efforts to strengthen tax administration offset the drag on revenue growth arising from non-indexation of specific excises and the skewing of tax holidays to dynamic sectors. As a result, the ratio of tax revenue to GDP stabilized aRer five years of decline. However, given the failure to adopt major revenue- boosting tax measures, and the need to accommodate higher interest expenditure, the i Chapter I of the Selected Issues Paper analyzes the role played by remittances in the Philippine economy. ’ The staffs definition of the fiscal balance includes the operations of the Central Bank Board of Liquidators and excludes privatization proceeds from revenues. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-8- improvement in the deficit required sharp reductions in maintenance and capital spending. The wage bill was also contained with most civil servants receiving no nominal wage increase. 6. Mounting losses by the National Power Corporation (NPC), however, caused the public sector deficit to increase. The deterioration in NPC’s finances reflected pro- consumer tariff decisions, and soaring interest and power purchase costs. Large separation payments were also made to facilitate the downsizing of employment. Despite NPC cutting capital spending sharply, consolidated power sector losses are estimated to have climbed to 1% percent of GDP in 2003, compared to % percent of GDP in 2002, necessitating large external commercial borrowing. As a result, the nonfinancial public sector deficit is estimated to have increased to 6% percent of GDP in 2003 from 6 percent of GDP in 2002, pushing nonfinancial public sector debt to 108 percent of GDP. 7. Monetary policy attempted to dampen exchange market volatility so as to limit the potential pass-through to inflation. Favorable cost factors and globally benign inflation held the annual average inflation to 3.0 percent in 2003, well below the official inflation target of 4.5-5.5 percent. When the peso came under pressure in the first quarter of 2003, the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP) absorbed liquidity by increasing the liquidity reserve ratio from 7 to 8 percent and abolishing the tiering system.3 With market pressures subsiding, tiering was reintroduced in June and the policy rate was lowered by 25 basis points in July. In response to further peso instability in August, the BSP abolished tiering again, and strengthened restrictions on foreign exchange purchases by residents. Inflation picked up modestly to 3.4 percent (y/y) in January, and with the peso yet again under pressure, the BSP raised the liquidity reserve requirement from 8 to 10 percent in early February. 8. Bank lending staged a modest recovery, but asset quality remained weak. The contraction in commercial bank lending ended in late 2002. Growth in lending (y/y) rose through the first half of 2003- supported by increased lending to the services sector-but has since leveled off. Ample liquidity in the banking system kept domestic interest rates relatively low. Bank profitability rose slightly on the back of growing lending and fee and ‘* REAL GDP AN@ cOMMERCL&L BANK LOAN GROWl’H 12 LO y/y percent $ange, 2-quatie: moving average) 10 1 ---;-. Real GDP (Lagged 2 quarters) 8 3 In order to encourage banks to lend idle funds, the BSP periodically uses a tiering system, under which overnight funds placed with the BSP beyond certain limits attract progressively lower interest rates. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-9- commission based income, but the banks’ NPA ratio (staff basis) remained high at about 28 percent.4 9. Large public sector borrowing supported foreign reserves. The weakness in exports worsened the trade balance in 2003, and although remittances grew by 6% percent in dollar terms, the current account surplus declined to an estimated 2.1 percent of GDP from 5.4 percent of GDP in 2002.5 The surplus on the capital and financial accounts remained broadly unchanged, with a decline in foreign direct investment (to zero on a net basis) offset by higher portfolio and other investment inflows. The latter was largely the result of increased external borrowing by the public sector, especially during the second half of the year. As a result, the BSP was able to intervene to replenish its foreign exchange reserves and to unwind its forward position by end-2003. More recently, the BSP has been intervening to support the peso, albeit in limited amounts to date. Gross reserves, adjusted to exclude pledged assets, were US$14.0 billion (or about 120 percent of short-term debt by residual maturity) at end-January 2004, about the same level as at end-2002. m. OUTLOOK AND R.EXS A. Short Term 10. Macroeconomic performance should remain relatively strong in 2004. Due to the slow export recovery and the continued compression of public capital expenditure, real GDP growth is expected to remain at about 4% percent. Inflation should edge up in 2004 on account of higher import tariffs and utility prices, but is projected to remain close to the BSP’s targeted range of 4-5 percent for 2004. With the current account surplus expected to decline further in 2004, and only a modest pick-up expected in FDI, adjusted gross reserves are projected to decline to US$13 billion by year-end. 11. In the short-term, the central risk to the outlook is a major deterioration in sentiment. Vulnerabilities remain high given external financing requirements projected by staff of about US$lO billion in 2004, including US$4 billion in external commercial borrowing by the public sector. The government’s gross domestic borrowing requirement is also very substantial (20 percent of GDP in 2004) and there are large contingent liabilities associated with the high level of nonperforming assets in the banking system. Considerable downside risks to the outlook arise from the possibility of tirther adverse political events and heightened concerns about policy continuity after the election, which could precipitate substantial capital flight and trigger a marked increase in domestic interest rates. Other 4 Table 5 shows BSP estimates of the NPA ratio, which are lower on account of including inter-bank lending in the denominator. 5 The decline in the trade and current account balances also reflects a sharp fall in errors and omissions, which may be linked to ongoing improvements in the Balance of Payments methodology (see EBS/03/107, Box 3 and Annex VI in this staff report). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- lo- possible negative shocks include a sharp increase in global risk aversion or an upward spike in world interest rates. B. Medium Term 12. Without substantial policy changes, growth will slow and debt levels will climb over the medium term. Under current policies, which constitute a slow-reform scenario, GDP growth is projected to trend down towards 3% percent over the medium term and reductions in poverty will continue to be gradual.6 Moreover, nonfinancial public sector debt will remain on an unsustainable path, rising from 108 percent of GDP in 2003 to 119 percent of GDP by 2009. At the same time, external current account deficits are projected to emerge by 2007 and external debt will rise. Alternatively, if the government undertakes structural reforms and is successful in balancing the budget by 2009, debt dynamics would be more favorable, with debt falling to about 94 percent of GDP. If structural reforms boost investment and exports, external debt would also begin to decline (see Annex I). 13. There are other clouds on the horizon. The trend decline in foreign direct investment reflects competition from countries in the region, as well as the difficult business environment in the Philippines. Notwithstanding the - Phibppines --..-- Thhorlond depreciation of the exchange rate in - - - Korea - Indonesia real effective terms, competitiveness may have deteriorated during recent years, especially relative to other countries in the region. A recent AsDB/World Bank study attributes the poor investment climate in the Philippines to a variety of factors including unreliable power supply, inadequate transport infrastructure, and c Source: IMF INS database. Without fiscal reform, this situation may worsen, given that the government’s ability to invest in infrastructure is hampered by the large fiscal deficit. Moreover, the lack of investment in the power sector brings considerable risks of power shortages and higher power rates in the years ahead. A comprehensive package of reforms that improves the 6 The World Bank estimates that the proportion of the population living on less than US$l per day fell from 12.1 percent in 1997 to 10.8 percent in 2003. The headcount ratio using a poverty line of US$2 per day declined from 45.2 percent to 43.5 percent over this period. In the World Bank’s view, achievement of the Millennium Development Goals with regard to malnutrition and maternal mortality is not assured in the Philippines. 7 The Philippines ranked 36 out of 55 countries in the World Economic Forum growth competitiveness index in 2000, but fell to 66 out of 102 countries in 2003, and was overtaken by China, India and Vietnam. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- ll- investment climate is therefore essential to support economic growth in the Philippines over the medium term. Given the intense regional competition in manufacturing, there is a particular need for agrarian reform so as to increase growth in agriculture. The services sector could also grow rapidly as a result of rising foreign demand for outsourcing. IV. POLICY DISCUSSIONS 14. The constraints imposed by the elections figured prominently in the discussions. The staff conveyed its concerns about the risks to the outlook and argued for a bold package of fiscal and structural measures. However, the authorities saw limited scope for major reforms before the elections due to the difficulties in obtaining Congressional approval. In the past, the authorities have pointed to persistent difficulties in gathering political support for reforms, partly as a result of the economy’s success in withstanding episodes of financial market pressure without serious disruption. This has tended to reduce the sense of urgency in Congress about the need for reform and has made it difficult to advance the reform agenda. However, the authorities recognized the current vulnerabilities, and in order to minimize the risks of financial market instability in the run-up to the elections, they indicated that they would resist pressure for pre-election spending; contain the losses of NPC; and maintain positive interest differentials so as to support the foreign reserves position. Even though the Philippines’ outstanding Fund Policy Advice In 2002-03 Status 1 Bring budget back under . NG deficit reduced, but control in 2003 and preserve public sector deficit has credibility of medium-term risen. Date to balance framework. NG budget moved from 2006 to 2009. n Strengthen tax . Tax administration administration and introduce improved, but no major new tax measures. revenue-boosting reforms. m Strengthen AML legislation. . AML law amended to correct deficiencies. n Improve PCA framework, . Second tier capital compel banks to raise raised. Otherwise, little capital, and strengthen legal progress made. protection for supervisors. n Depoliticize electricity pricing and limit NPC’s external borrowing. . Tariff increases continue to encounter obstacles. NPC borrowing has increased sharply. borrowing from the Fund fell below 100 percent of quota in November, they also agreed that Post Program Monitoring should continue. The authorities were hope&l that bold measures would be possible after the elections. A. Fiscal Policy 15. Absent major tax reforms, tight control of the budget was essential to maintain market confidence. The draft 2004 budget envisaged a l/2 percent of GDP reduction in the national government deficit,* partly fUnded by increasing and indexing alcohol and tobacco ’ Congress has adjourned without passing the 2004 budget. Until a new budget is passed, the government will operate on a re-enacted 2003 budget; this should not have a large impact on aggregate spending, since total discretionary spending is broadly similar in both budgets. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12- excises. However, this tax measure was unlikely to pass before the election, and staying on fiscal course in the first half of 2004 would require strict limits on spending. It would also be necessary to further improve tax administration, including through efforts to address the VAT stopfiling problem and improve debt collection. In this context, staff welcomed the ongoing review of past Bureau of Internal Revenue (SIR) rulings, including on tax incentives. However, staff urged the authorities to strongly resist current proposals for new tax amnesties, which had been tried before in the Philippines and were likely to harm taxpayer compliance. 16. The authorities argued that progress with tax reform should not be downplayed. Important tax reforms had been passed in 2003 such as the restructuring of the excise tax system on automobiles and the re-imposition of Gross Receipts Tax to replace the VAT on financial transactions. One other measure-the rationalization of the Documentary Stamp Tax-had been passed by Congress, but had subsequently encountered obstacles that was delaying it being sent to the President for signature. Government agencies had also recently concluded a review of the fees that they charged and this was expected to boost non-tax revenues. The staff welcomed these reforms, but cautioned that their revenue impact was not large and additional steps would be required. 17. The authorities were confident that the line could be held on the budget in the first half of 2004. Steps had already been taken to improve expenditure control, including through newly-implemented procurement regulations. A circular had been issued to address overruns on foreign-financed capital spending. Moreover, to avoid the impression of electioneering, the authorities had no intention of frontloading budget expenditures in 2004. This would enable spending to be reduced in the event of revenue shortfalls, particularly given the new system of sharing information between fiscal agencies, which allowed the Department of Budget and Management (DBM) to monitor the cash balance of the Treasury on a daily basis and to calibrate expenditures accordingly. The authorities were shortly to receive a windfall of US$683 million (0.8 percent of GDP) from the Marcos estate, of which about $250 million was included in the draft budget for 2004. These funds would be released as needed from a special account in the Treasury to fund nonrecurrent expenditure obligations, such as agrarian reform. 18. Staff argued for a more forceful fiscal effort after the elections. The deficit target for 2004 should be more ambitious than the 4% percent of GDP envisioned in the draft budget. Front-loaded consolidation would more quickly address the adverse debt dynamics and would enhance the credibility of the government’s commitment to balancing the budget by 2009. In addition to raising alcohol and tobacco excises, other revenue measures would be required, such as increasing petroleum excises; increasing the VAT rate; repealing various VAT exemptions; and repealing the zero-rating of services paid in foreign currency.’ If adopted rapidly after the elections, so that the measures were in place for half the year, such a package could result in an additional deficit reduction of % percent of GDP in 2004, and set the stage for a tirther reduction in the deficit in 2005 of another 3/4 percent of GDP. Over the medium term, additional measures such as rationalizing tax incentives and streamlining the 9 Options for raising revenue are considered in Chapter II of the Selected Issues Paper. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13 - civil service could lead to further reductions in the deficit of l-2 percentage points of GDP. Full implementation of these measures, together with continued improvements in tax administration, would balance the budget, while creating room for additional priority spending. B. Monetary Policy and the Exchange Rate 19. There was agreement that monetary policy should remain vigilant. Given the political uncertainties during the pre-election period, attractive interest differentials would be needed to support foreign reserves. Staff argued that rates should be adjusted upwards in the event that world interest rates began to rise. However, the authorities noted that interest differentials were currently sizable, a consequence of the BSP not having fully followed foreign rates down. At least initially, interest rates would not therefore need to respond to increases abroad. Moreover, inflation remained well below the inflation target and this increased the authorities’ tolerance for peso depreciation. lo Of course, if the exchange rate were to come under sustained pressure, the authorities stood ready to tighten monetary policy. While the authorities would prefer to limit the impact on the real economy as far as possible, interest rates would be raised if necessary. 20. The authorities were satisfied with the inflation targeting framework. The BSP informed staff that the target range for annual average inflation would be maintained at 4-5 percent for 2005. While projecting inflation that was consistent with these targets, staff noted that the credibility of the monetary framework would be enhanced by an early and determined move towards fiscal consolidation. In addition, while the BSP was communicating its inflation targeting framework clearly and transparently to the public, staff observed that the inflation target range was narrow compared to the band adopted in other countries. Consideration might be given in the medium term to revisit this design aspect of the inflation targeting framework. However, given the success of inflation targeting to date, the authorities were not convinced of the need for changes to the framework at the current juncture. C. Structural Policies Power sector 21. The authorities recognized that the power sector was a major concern. NpC’s escalating losses were confounding attempts to reduce the public sector deficit and were clearly not sustainable. Moreover, from 2006-2008, electricity demand was expected to exceed currently-installed supply capacity, raising serious concerns about a recurrence of the power crisis that the Philippines suffered in the early 1990s. Adverse pricing decisions had contributed to NPC losses, and although electricity prices were already high by regional standards, staff were encouraged by recent ERC tariff decisions which seemed to strike a lo Chapter III of the Selected Issues Paper analyzes recent developments in inflation. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14- better balance between the interests of consumers and producers. l1 The Electric Power Industry Reform Act (EPIRA) envisaged dealing with the large sunk losses of the power sector in part by transferring P 200 billion of NPC’s debts to the government, and by raising power rates in the form of a universal charge to cover the high cost of guaranteed power purchase contracts. Neither of these key measures have been implemented. 22. Privatization is critical for investment in the power sector. The authorities shared staff concerns about the lack of investment in the power sector, which given the long gestation periods, carried the risk of future supply shortages. However, the newly liberalized framework established under EPIRA did not permit NPC to make further investments, and the private sector was expected instead to invest in new capacity. The priority was therefore to expedite privatization, for which the authorities had made substantial preparations, including by downsizing employment, spinning off Transco (the transmission company), and creating groups of generating assets that could be offered up for sale starting in 2004. However, Transco’s privatization had been held up by Congress’ unwillingness to pass the franchise bill, and other methods of placing the assets in private hands were being explored. ‘* The authorities were hopeful that some generating assets could be sold even before the election. Banking Sector 23. Efforts had been made to strengthen the financial system, but important problems remained. The Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) Act became effective in April 2003 and provides for tax and other incentives over a two-year period as a means of resolving the NPA problem. Other important steps taken in 2003 included the movement towards consolidated and risk-based supervision, the amendments made to AML legislation, and the recent regulation concerning large exposures and credit risk concentrations (Box 2). However, some long-standing problems-such as the need to strengthen the Prompt Corrective Action (PCA) framework and the inadequate legal protection enjoyed by bank supervisors-seemed less tractable, and in these areas the discussions covered ground that has been well-traveled in previous Article IV consultations. l1 In late 2003, the Energy Regulatory Commission (ERC) awarded provisional tariff increases to NPC and Meralco, the largest power distributor in the Philippines. For Meralco, the tariff increase was 12 centavos per kilowatt hour, which was about a 15 percent increase in the distribution charge. However, in mid-January, the Supreme Court suspended the increase pending its hearing of a petition filed by consumers. ‘* The Transco franchise bill is unlikely to pass unless Congress is granted final approval of the concessionaire. However, such a provision is likely to reduce investor interest because Congressional approval may take time and may be conditional on changes to the original agreement, An alternative being explored is that a management contract for Transco be offered to private parties. However, this would yield less revenue than privatization. The model under discussion also includes a clause whereby if Congress decides not to grant the franchise to the investor, the investor could undo the deal. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 15- 24. The SPV strategy had thus far not achieved its intended goals. Staff noted that no major SPV transactions had taken place, apparently because banks had been reluctant to accept large haircuts, which would become gradually reflected in their regulatory capital. To put pressure on banks to engage in SPV deals, staff stressed the importance of assets being fully provisioned against appraised value, and of undercapitalized banks being put under greater pressure to raise Tier 1 capital. l3 The authorities pointed out that the SPV framework was still at an early stage and were hopeful that it would soon yield results. The new Asset Securitization Bill (passed in January 2004) might help in this regard by improving the availability of financing to buyers of NPAs. l4 25. The discussion turned to whether public money might be needed to jump-start NPA resolution. While the SPV strategy still held promise, the authorities were concerned that the pricing gap between banks and investors might at some stage need to be bridged through the use of public money to provide additional incentives to banks. The authorities observed that such a strategy had been successful in other countries. However, the market- based approach embodied in the SPV strategy reflected their limited ability to provide resources, given the already high level of public debt. While recognizing that the authorities would only use public funds in NPA resolution as a fall back position, staff cautioned that any such strategy should be accompanied by strong corrective action and adequate burden sharing by existing shareholders. 26. Financial support being provided to banks was creating contingent government liabilities and potential moral hazard. Staff noted that outstanding lending to the banking system, particularly through the Philippine Deposit Insurance Corporation (PDIC), had increased substantially in recent years. While such lending decisions were being made in conjunction with the fiscal authorities- the Finance Secretary chairs the PDIC Board-staff voiced concerns about the large contingent liabilities being created. Moreover, although there was agreement that safeguards were in place for the BSP’s liquidity support operations, the staff remained concerned about possible moral hazard arising from the more substantial amounts being lent through PDIC to rehabilitated banks in an environment without strong corrective action. 27. Staff repeated its long-standing call for BSP and PDIC powers to be strengthened. To better enable the BSP to enforce its prompt corrective action framework, staff reiterated the need to ensure adequate legal protection for supervisors and that the decisions they made were final. The authorities responded that Congress had repeatedly rejected these suggestions. As an alternative, the authorities had been considering the adoption of litigation insurance for supervisors and the strengthening of the documentation of l3 Chapter IV of the Selected Issues Paper finds that weak bank balance sheets tend to constrain lending in the Philippines. l4 Market-based restructuring of NPAs has tended to be most successful in the region when debtor-creditor relationships function well, thus increasing the importance of the Philippine authorities expediting the new bankruptcy law (see Annex II). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 16- supervisory actions (including by adding forensic teams to onsite visits of problem banks). Staff welcomed these ideas, but cautioned that they might not be sufficient to fully empower supervisors. Staff also repeated its call for the PDIC charter to be amended to allow the institution to commence resolution actions immediately, as soon as banks are taken into receivership. l5 28. The authorities intended to strengthen prudential oversight with respect to foreign currency deposit units (FCDUs) and banks’ holdings of high-risk instruments. The staff expressed concern about potential risks arising from the FCDUs (see Box 3) and with regard to bank holdings of derivatives such as credit-linked notes and credit default swaps. In response, the authorities described their intention to strengthen supervision of FCDUs, and to redesign bank reporting requirements so as to better account for, and more closely monitor, high-risk instruments. In January 2004, the BSP issued a circular to clarify the capital treatment of banks’ investments in credit-linked notes. 29. The authorities expressed hope that the Philippines would soon no longer be catalogued as noncooperative with regard to its AML framework. The authorities noted that the AML framework, as amended in March 2003, was now consistent with international standards. The Financial Action Task Force would soon re-evaluate the framework, and the authorities hoped that this would lead to the Philippines being removed from the noncooperative country list. Trade Policy and Other Issues 30. The government has announced significant tariff increases effective in 2004. The tariff increases are selective rather than across the board, and affect a range of industrial finished products that compete with local products. Staff questioned whether the tariff increases represented a reversal of the authorities’ trade liberalization program. l6 The authorities explained that Average Tariff Rates of Selected Asian Countries (In percent) 1994 1997 2000 2003 Philippines 21.6 13.4 8.0 5.1 Indonesia 19.4 13.0 6.8 7.3 Malaysia 14.3 10.2 9.2 9.2 Thailand 23.3 17.0 17.1 14.7 Vietnam 12.8 18.0 16.2 16.5 China 36.3 17.6 14.4 12.4 Korea 9.2 13.3 13.8 12.5 Sources: IMF Trade Restrictiveness Database; and Philippine authorities. l5 At the beginning of February, Congress approved amendments to the PDIC charter, which increase the maximum deposit insurance cover to P 250,000, reinstate the PDIC’s authority to conduct bank examinations, strengthen the legal protection of its staff and restrict the use of frivolous temporary restraining orders. l6 The Philippines’ rating on the Fund’ trade restrictiveness index is 4 (on a scale ranging from 1 to 10, with 1 being the least restrictive). While average tariff rates are low, tariff rates on agricultural products are among the highest in the region. The Philippines also maintains a number of non-tariff barriers, including quantitative restrictions on rice imports and special tax incentives for the automobile industry. The new tariff increases will increase the average (continued) Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17- the increases were temporary, but necessary to provide breathing space to domestic producers, who were facing difficulties because the Philippines had been moving too aggressively in reducing tariffs, particularly when compared to regional partners. They also noted that the revised tariff structure was fully consistent with the Philippines’ WTO obligations. 31. While remaining committed to the multilateral trading system, the authorities intend to pursue regional and bilateral trade agreements where appropriate. To date, the authorities considered that negotiations under the Doha Round had done little to address inherent disadvantages facing developing countries. Negotiations on a free trade agreement with Japan were likely to start in 2004, while negotiations with China and India would take place through the ASEAN framework. Discussions with the United States and European Union were less advanced. 32. Significant work has been done over the past year to address statistical deficiencies. As a result of the authorities’ efforts, the measurement of imports has been significantly strengthened. Nonetheless, serious balance of payments data deficiencies remained, including large errors and omissions. A data ROSC was conducted in 2003, and the preliminary findings confirm that the balance of payments data suffer from gaps in reporting coverage and compilation of statistics. Improvements are also needed in fiscal transparency, as recommended by the 2002 fiscal ROSC (an update accompanies this report), including more thorough and timely information on broader public sector outturns, tax expenditures, and reconciling debt stocks and fiscal flows. 33. The authorities intend to include collective action clauses in their future international bond issues. v. STAFF &‘PRAISAL 34. The government has undertaken important economic reforms in recent years, but fundamental areas of weakness remain. Recent achievements include the successful introduction of inflation targeting, the initiation of bold deregulation of the power sector, the creation of a framework to resolve the banks’ large NPAs, and important reforms to government procurement procedures. However, some of these initiatives are yet to yield the intended results, and there remains an urgent need to strengthen the power and banking sectors, while the investment climate remains difficult despite recent gains in external competitiveness from the reduction in the real effective exchange rate. Moreover, the national government’s fiscal problems have been contained rather than solved and NPC’s financial position has worsened sharply. 35. GDP growth has averaged 4 percent, but this is unsustainable in the absence of comprehensive reform. High public sector deficits necessitate large external commercial borrowing, which make the economy highly vulnerable to adverse shocks, particularly a tariff rate to about 6% percent, and the proportion of product lines subject to tariff rates of lo- 15 percent from about one tenth to one quarter. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 18- sudden deterioration in foreign investor sentiment. Such a shock that cuts access to international capital markets would knock the economy off its current growth path. Alternatively, a lack of reforms will cause growth to slow gradually over time, with the already difficult business environment leading to declining investment and faltering exports, which may be aggravated by possible shortages of power. Against this background, a comprehensive package of reforms is clearly essential to reduce vulnerabilities and support economic growth, but such a package cannot be expected to be adopted until after the elections. In the meantime, the political uncertainties contribute to the risks. 36. Changes in the monetary stance in 2003 were timely and helped to stabilize financial markets. Looking forward, attractive interest differentials should be maintained tc support the level of foreign exchange reserves, particularly in the pre-election period when foreign borrowing opportunities may be limited. Staff welcome the authorities’ readiness to tighten monetary policy should the exchange rate come under sustained pressure and inflation threatens to rise. 37. Despite creditable efforts to improve tax administration, the public sector deficit and debt remain at unsustainable levels. The authorities avoided a repeat in 2003 of the large fiscal slippage that occurred in 2002. However, the national government deficit remains high, and at a level similar to that inherited from the previous administration. The target for balancing the budget has also been pushed out to 2009. Of more immediate concern is that the improvement in the national government deficit in 2003 was insufficient to offset the deterioration in NPC’s fiscal position. As a result, the public sector deficit is estimated to have risen. 38. Fiscal consolidation will require fundamental tax-policy changes. At the national government level, the fiscal problem is primarily a revenue problem. Nonindexation of taxes and generous incentives to fast-growing sectors exert a negative drag on the revenue-GDP ratio, which has fallen precipitously since the mid-1990s. Some reduction in the deficit can be achieved through strengthening tax administration and compressing expenditures-the tactics used successfully in 2003-but these measures have limits. One consequence of continued pressures on expenditures is reduced government capital spending, which risks degrading infrastructure and worsening the investment climate. Further reductions in the deficit will require fundamental tax measures such as increasing excises and VAT. New tax amnesties should be avoided because of the likely negative effect on tax compliance. 39. The reduction in the deficit should be front loaded. Fundamental tax changes appear unlikely before the election, but at a minimum, tight control over the budget should be maintained in the pre-election period. Once the election is over, the government should advance tax reform as a matter of urgency. Swift passage of measures will allow the deficit to be reduced more aggressively in 2004 than envisaged in the draft budget, thereby establishing the government’s fiscal credentials, and reducing the Philippines’ vulnerabilities to changes in investor sentiment. Strong revenue measures would also create room for targeted spending increases in high priority areas such as poverty alleviation. 40. A revenue effort is also necessary in the power sector. The real value of power tariffs has declined over time, with NPC unable to pass on the extra costs it has incurred as a Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 19- result of the peso’s depreciation. Power rates need to be raised to stem NPC’s losses and the universal charge should be implemented as quickly as possible. The government should assume NPC’s legacy debts as envisaged in EPIRA. Steps should also be taken to harden NPC’s budget constraint including by the government setting limits on the amount of external borrowing it will guarantee or conduct on NPC’s behalf 41. Privatization of the power sector is an imperative. If future supply shortages are to be avoided, it is essential to encourage private investment in the sector. While much of the preparatory work has been done for privatization, Congress’s unwillingness to pass the Franchise Bill is delaying the privatization of Transco. The authorities plan to quickly sell some generating assets in 2004, but there is a concern that ERC decisions are not truly independent and that the continued difficulty of raising tariffs will increase power sector losses and deter private entry. 42. The long-standing problems in the banking sector need to be resolved. Greater efforts are needed to strengthen the banking system so as to support economic growth and reduce systemic vulnerabilities. In recent months, the authorities have taken important steps to strengthen guidelines on connected lending and large credit exposures, and on bank holdings of high-risk instruments. Nonetheless, staff repeats its call for early adoption of legislation to strengthen bank supervision and the prompt corrective action framework. The high level of support being extended by PDIC to problem banks is also a concern, and there is a need to ensure an adequate quid pro quo in terms of bank rehabilitation. 43. The success of the SPV framework depends on banks being ready to recognize past losses. The SPV framework is a welcome step forward, but no deals have been struck to date. In order to make them more willing participants in SPV deals, the banks should be put under pressure to recognize losses upfront by Mly provisioning against appraised value. Banks should also be required to raise Tier 1 capital through time-bound recapitalization requirements so as to be able to absorb the losses from correctly valuing assets. If, at some point, the authorities attempt to use public funds to improve incentives, staff considers it imperative that this be accompanied by strong corrective actions, as well as adequate burden sharing by bank shareholders. 44. Increasing trade protection should be avoided. Staff recognize that the Philippines has been liberalizing tariffs at a relatively rapid pace, but the recent increases in tariffs potentially raise costs for both consumers and businesses and are no substitute for the structural reforms that are needed to improve external competitiveness. Staff therefore urge the authorities to reverse the recent increases in import tariff within an announced short period of time. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 20 - 45. Bold reform measures should be taken as soon as possible. A comprehensive package of reforms should be adopted with urgency after the election. Failing that, economic performance is likely to continue to stutter, financial market instability will persist, and the Philippine economy will lack sufficient momentum to significantly raise living standards and reduce poverty. 46. It is recommended that the next Article IV Consultation with the Philippines be held on the standard la-month cycle. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2l- Box 1. Philippines: Recent Export Performance Philippine export growth has been among the weakest in Asia over the past year. Most of this weakness can be attributed to the electronics sector, which accounts for more than half of total exports. While other countries in the region have benefited from a turnaround in the global electronics market, Philippine electronic exports only rose by 3 percent (year-on-year) in the fourth quarter of 2003. Exports to the United States, traditionally the main market for Philippines electronics exporters, have been notably sluggish despite the recent revival in U.S. demand for advanced technology products. Regional patterns of production have shifted. While the Philippines ’ share of the U.S. semiconductor market has actually increased in recent years, the size of this market has fallen precipitously as U.S. electronics companies have outsourced more of their production activities leading to a decline in the intermediate demand for semiconductors within the United States. China has emerged as one of the main beneficiaries of this outsourcing as well as a growing source of final demand in its own right. Exports from the Philippines to China (and Hong Kong S.A.R.) have grown rapidly in recent years, helping to offset the weakness in exports to the United States. (3.month moving average, where Jan ZOO%lOO) 35 r- 3 PHILIPPINE ELECTRONICS INDUSTRY (In US% billions) But strong demand from China has not been enough to prevent the overall decline in electronics exports. This is partly explained by the Philippines’ specialization in the assembly and testing of semiconductors, which is among the slowest growing and lowest valued-added segment of the global electronics market. But even within this segment, there are signs of deeper underlying structural problems, Some existing players within the Philippines have elected to expand their production capacities at the margin elsewhere in the region (including in China) and investment in the sector has tailed off sharply in recent years. Other sectors have yet to take up the slack left by the decline in electronics exports. There are tentative signs of increased investment in some internationally tradable service activities, such as call centers, where the Philippines’ relatively well-educated and largely English-speaking labor force offers some natural advantages. Against this, the garments and textile sector (which accounts for about 8 percent of total exports) is likely to come under increased pressure when the Multi-Fiber Agreement ends in 2005. And the overall level of investment in the Philippines continues to suffer from concerns about the quality of infrastructure, peace and order, and political instability. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 22 - Box 2. Status of Implementation of Key FSSA Recommendations FSSA Recommendations Actions Taken Strengthen supervisory and regulatory framework by overhauling prudential framework to better underpin consolidated supervision Progress has been made with respect to implementing consolidated supervision, including new guidelines on managing large exposures and credit risk concentrations. Strengthen Prompt Corrective Action (PCA) No significant progress made. The BSP is still working on framework to allow more timely amendments to the PCA framework, which needs to more implementation of enforcement actions explicitly define the graduated supervisory actions to be taken as capital levels or other measures fall below identified benchmarks. Ensure supervisors have sufficient powers to take full control of a bank once key PCA benchmarks are breached Some progress made with respect to receivership, the final stage of the PCA framework. Amendments to the PDIC Charter being finalized will reinstate PDIC supervision authority, better describe its receivership powers, and tightly circumscribe the use of temporary restraining orders to slow down bank resolution. No significant progress made with respect to earlier stages of the PCA framework; depends to a degree on legal protection issues. Inability to deal promptly with problem banks increases the potential contingent fiscal liability. Replace strategy of forbearance and liquidity Supervisors continue to rely on forbearance and liquidity support with a more defined and explicit support due to weak enforcement capabilities. Supervisors PCA framework also express concern that full application of regulatory powers could create systemic instability. Relaxation of Deposit Secrecy Law to allow supervisors access to review accounts AML amendments contained provision to allow supervisors access to deposit account information, but only under specific limited circumstances. Provide adequate legal protection for supervisors Accelerate capital and debt market Amendments to the PDIC Charter are being finalized which will strengthen legal protection for PDIC supervisors, including by exempting them from legal action against activities conducted in good faith. No significant progress made with respect to legal protection for BSP supervisors. However, the BSP may seek to eliminate the extraordinary diligence requirement and is considering the possibility of litigation insurance for supervisors. developments to diversify risk away from the Progress has been made toward establishment of the Fixed banking sector Income Exchange (FIE). BSP has approved a private sector-led company to act as custodian of government securities for the general public. PSE has approved conversion of its 32-percent stake in the Philippine Central Depository to shares in the FIE. In addition, the passing of the Securitization Act will facilitate the sale of assets like loans, mortgages, receivables, and other debt instruments as new securities to raise capital. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 23 - Box 3. Philippines: The FCDU Book-Risks and Prudential Measures Deposit dollarization has declined in the Philippines since the Asian crisis, but remains significant. Having peaked at around US$l7 billion in 1997, foreign currency deposits have been declining since the Asian crisis, mainly reflecting a fall in non-resident deposits. With the weakening of the peso in recent years, the ratio of resident FX deposits to total deposits has increased from its recent low to roughly 30 percent. While dollar deposits provide depositors with protection against currency risk, they give rise to various challenges. In particular, the FCDU book is exposed to the following risks: Liquidity risk. FCDUs are required to maintain 30-percent liquid asset cover, which mitigates the risk from sudden deposit withdrawals. Liquidity risk has also been reduced since the Asian crisis by changes in the asset profile of the FCDU book, towards relatively r more holdings of marketable securities and less foreign-currency lending. Should these market sources of liquidity not suffice, official reserves could be used to provide additional support. While reserves are low by regional standards, they remain above foreign currency deposits (unlike more highly dollarized economies such as Argentina and Uruguay prior to their recent crises). But they are insufficient to cover both FX deposits and short-term external debt. Reserve Ratios U Phihpp&S Argedina -‘WY f%- ad-2001 end-2M)l (= per-d 4 short term debt Z 123.6 40.1 37.1 Foreign Cunemy Deposita 1027 33.0 24.5 Jab 56 1 18 1 14.8 I/ Gross reserves less pledged ass* for Philippim Gross resavea for otkrs ZAtremainirgmatunty Currency risk for banks. The direct exposure of the banking system to currency risk is limited due to a lOO- percent foreign asset cover requirement. Banks’ indirect exposure, through currency-induced credit risk, is more difficult to ascertain due to data limitations. On the one hand, even though the relative exposure to private sector borrowers without a natural hedge has remained significant [30-70 percent], absolute exposures have likely decreased due to an across-the-board decline in FX lending to $3.6 billion, a third of the 1997 figure. On the other hand, FCDU holdings of local securities-primarily sovereign bonds-has risen to almost $5 billion. Credit, concentration, and market risks. Exposure to plain credit risk (i.e., not induced by changes the currency) remains a cause for concern. As of end-June 2003, the NPL ratio for the FX loan portfolio rose to about 20 percent, an increase of 7.5 percentage points compared to the year before. However, given the recent reduction in FX lending as discussed above, the NPA ratio remained at a relatively low level of 5 percent, As noted, the FCDU book is significantly concentrated in Philippine government papers. In addition, banks are indirectly exposed through investments in popular credit derivatives such as credit-linked notes (CLNs) and credit default swaps. In recognition that these derivative products warrant careful monitoring, the BSP has taken a number of steps, including by clarifying the capital treatment for CLNs and adjusting reporting requirements. ‘Market analysts argue that these large onshore holdings of Republic of Philippines’ bonds serve to limit the reaction of sovereign bond spreads to adverse events. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 24 - FIGURE 1: PHILIPPINES EXTERNAL DEVELOPMENTS, 1997-2004 Despite the global recovery in 2003, exports have been slow to pick up... 45 MERCHANDISli TRADE 45 j ,997 ,998 ,999 2orm 2”OI 2002 2003 2004 The BSP’s net forward position rose to over $1 billion in early 2003 but subsequently declined sharply. . ..but gross reserves have remained broadly constant. ” GROSS RESEhVES, 2000-2003 (In billions of $L/S) I8 -aG ross m&s as mtm to .dor!~rerm debt 2000 200, 2002 2003 Philippine spreads are now above the global EMBI average. l..~..~..~~.~~.~~~~~:~.~~~~~~~~..”~’..~~.~.I 209UL OCT IAN APR JUL OCT JAN APR ,"L OCT JAN APR ILJL OCT IAN 2"" 2000 2"" I 2002 2003 2004 Thepeso has continued to depreciate... 60 55 5?AN JUL IAN JUL JAN IUL IAN JUL JAN IUL IAN IUL JAN IUL IAN 60 1997 ,998 ,999 2000 2OOl 2002 2003 2004 Source: Data provided by the Philippine authorities; and CEIC database. I I I..I..I..I..I..I..I..I..I..I..I..I..(.~I..I..1. 209~~~~~~~~ OCTIANAPR JUL OCTIANAPRIULOCTIANAPR IUL ~CTIAN 200 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 The external debt burden remains high, but most is of medium- and long-term maturity. 100 100 EXTERNAL DEBT II (In billions of %US, unless noted) 20 20 0 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003Ql-3 ANNUAL Q”ARTERLY 1/ Includes private sector intercompany accounts, loans wlthout BSP approval, and obligations under capital lease. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 25 - FIGURE 2: PHILIPPINES DOMESTIC DEVELOPMENTS, 1997-2004 GDP growth reboundedfrom the third quarter although industrial production trended down of 2003, following higher agricultural yields... in 2003. I 1 1 ,997 ,998 1Yn 2”“” 2001 2002 2003 2004 Positive private sector credit growth has resumed... 6” 6” PRIVATE SECTOR CREDIT GROWTH Inflation stabilized around 3 percent in 2003, well below the official target... 16 16 .OVERALL INFLATION ,j -(In percent change, y/y) - 14 12 - - 12 4- 2- is7 ,998 1999 2”“” 2001 2”“2 2003 2004 4” INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION & CAR SALES, 1999-2003 (In percent change, y/y) ; 4” . ..accompanied by an improved assessment of corporate sectorprospects. *vu” STOCK MARKET INDEX 3”“” . ..which has allowed the central bank to keep interest rates low. Source: Data provided by the Philippine authorities; and CEIC Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 26 - FIGURE 3: PHILIPPINES FISCAL SECTOR, 1997-2004 (In percent of GDP) The national government dejicit improved in 2003 . . . .Y NATIONAL GOVERNMENT DEFICIT P&s I -4 I- / -I -6 0’ I I I I I I , 1997 1998 ,999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 . ..although the compression of non-interest spending continued. 14 14 NATIONAL GOVERNMENT EXPENDITURE Pmj. I2 - ‘. 6- 0 1 I I I I I t ~"' L 0 1997 1998 1999 200” 2001 2002 2003 2004 . ..as the trend decline in revenue was arrested... Public sector debt rose, rejlecting the continued high Public sector debt rose, rejlecting the continued high deficit and NPC’s deterioratingfinancial condition. deficit and NPC’s deterioratingfinancial condition. IL” NONFINANCIAL PUBLIC SECTOR DEBT Source: Data provided by the Philippine authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- ZJ - FIGURE 4: PHILIPPINES BANKING SECTOR, 1997-2003 Reported capital adequacy remains high... . ..and non-performing assets have stabilized. -_ I CAPITALADEQUACY-COMMERCIACBANKS I I I ,.> (In percent) 1” I” 5 5 0 1997 1998 1999 2""" 200, 2002 20003.QI-Q3 0 ANN”4 Bankprofitability has improved... QMRTERLY , l- 14 12 IO 8 0 0 I I 1997 ,998 1999 2""" 2001 2002 2003 Q3 Banks have responded by increasing credit. 40 MONEYANDC$EDITGROWTy I 4" I (In percent change, y/y) I I 1997 ,998 ,999 2""" 2001 2002 2003 2004 '"INON-PERFORMINGASSETSAF@ 1 8" # 1997 1998 ,999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 . ..helped by higher intermediation spreads. 2511NTEREs~~~ks I I 25 1997 1998 1999 2""O 200, 2002 2003 2"O.l However, substantive supportfrom PDIC in the banking system suggests that areas of weakness remain. 100 I (In billions of pesos): I 8” - I I , - Lqurdrty supptrtfrom BP 6” - supporrfrom P#IC , I I l’i ,,i2” Ol 111 I 111 I 111 I 111 I III I 111 I 111 I ” 1997 1998 ,999 2"O" 2001 2""2 2003 2004 Source: Data provided by the Philippine authorities; and CEIC Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 28 - Table 1. Philippines: Selected Economic Indicators, 1999-2004 Nominal GNP (2002): $83.1 billion Population (2002, est.): 8 1.8 million GNP per capita (2002): $1,016 IMF quota: SDR 879.9 million 1999 2000 200 1 2002 2003 2004 GDP and prices (percentage change) Real GDP Nominal GDP (in billions of pesos) CPI (annual average) CPI (end year) Investment and saving (percent of GDP) Gross investment National saving Public finances (percent of GDP) National government balance li Total revenue Total expenditure and net lending Nonfinancial public sector balance 21 Nonfinancial public sector debt Domestic Foreign Monetary sector (percentage change, end of period) Broad money (M3) Base money Interest rate (91-day Treasury bill, end of period, in percent) Credit to the private sector External Sector Export value (percent change) Import value (percent change) Current account (percent of GDP) Financial account (US$ billions, excluding errors and omissions and trade credit) Foreign direct investment (net) Other Errors and omissions and trade credit (USS billions) Overall balance (US$ billions) Monitored external debt (percent of GDP) 6/ Debt-service ratio (percent of exports) Reserves, adjusted (US$ billions) 7/ Reserves / Short-term liabilities, adjusted 9/ Exchange rate (period averages) Pesos per U.S. dollar Nominal effective exchange rate (Jan 2,2003 =lOO) Real effective exchange rate (Jan 2, 2003 =lOO) 3.4 4.4 3.0 4.4 4.5 4.5 2,977 3,355 3,674 4,023 4,359 4,73 1 6.7 4.3 6.1 3.1 3.0 3.9 4.3 6.6 4.1 2.6 3.1 4.0 18.8 21.2 20.6 19.3 18.7 18.8 28.3 29.4 22.5 24.7 20.8 20.4 -4.4 16.4 20.7 -3.5 19.3 31 4.6 31 6.8 9.5 3.3 31.6 3/ -4.5 31 3.1 6.4 6.1 41 8.9 12.9 8.9 5.2 6.5 -1.2 8.1 -3.0 1.2 1.4 16.0 9.0 -16.2 10.1 1.8 5.9 -1.0 14.5 -4.5 6.2 6.6 6.9 9.5 8.2 1.8 5.4 2.1 1.6 4.1 3.0 1.7 0.8 0.6 0.0 1.8 1.5 1.1 1.0 0.0 0.5 2.3 1.6 0.6 -0.2 0.6 -0.5 -7.7 -9.8 -3.2 -4.4 -2.2 -2.9 3.6 -0.5 -0.2 0.7 0.1 -1.6 76.5 75.7 80.3 76.1 75.8 73.6 17.0 14.7 19.1 19.9 21.9 22.5 13.8 13.4 13.3 14.3 14.7 13.8 8/ 132.7 132.8 122.0 128.4 128.9 109.4 39.1 44.2 51.0 51.6 54.2 56.2 51 125.6 108.8 109.0 100.1 95.1 86.3 lo/ 120.4 112.2 106.7 107.0 95.6 86.8 lO/ -4.6 -4.5 15.5 15.5 20.0 20.0 -5.0 -4.7 96.1 54.6 41.5 -5.5 -4.9 -4.5 14.2 14.4 14.4 19.7 19.3 18.9 -6.0 -6.2 -6.7 103.5 108.2 108.9 58.9 58.1 59.1 44.6 50.1 49.8 6.4 51 . . . Sources: Philippine authorities; Fund staff projections; and IMF Information Notice System. l/ Excludes privatization receipts from revenue and includes the operations of the Central Bank-Board of Liquidators. 21 Excludes privatization receipts from revenue. 3/ Adjusted for the estimated effects of Y2K. For base money only, adjusted for changes in reserve requirements. 4/ As of November, 2003. 51 As of February 19,2004. 6/ Monitored external liabilities are defined as external debt plus liabilities of foreign banks in the Philippines to their headquarters, branches and agencies, some external debt not registered with the central bank and private capital lease arrangements. 7/ Gross reserves less gold and securities pledged as collateral against short-term liabilities. 8/ As of February 11,2004. 9/ Reserves as a percent of short-term debt (including medium and long-term debt due in the following year). Both reserves and debt were adjusted for pledged assets. lo/As ofFebruary 18,2004. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 29 - Table 2. Philippines: National Government Cash Budget, 1999-2004 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 AUth. Proposed Staff Prog. Prel. Budget Proj Revenue and grants Tax revenue Bureau of Internal Revenue Bureau of Customs Other offices Nontax revenue and grants Central Bank-Board of Liquidators Other Expenditure and net lending Current expenditure Personnel services Maintenance and operations Interest payments National gave-nt Central Bank-Board of Liquidators Subsidies Allotments to local government units Capital and equity expenditure Net lending l/ Balance Balance including purchase of NPC Securities On the authorities’ presentation 2/ Financing Net external financing Net domestic financing Revenue and grants Tax revenue Bureau of Internal Revenue Bureau of Customs Other offIces Nontaxrevenue Expenditure and net lending Cuent expenditures Interest Noninterest Capital and equity expenditure Net lending l/ Balance Balance including purchase of NPC Securities On the authorities’ presentation 2/ Memorandum Items: Expenditure less interest and transfers to LGUs Nonfinancial public sector balance 3/ Consolidated public sector balance 3/ Primary national government balance National government debt 4/ (percent of NG revenues) Nonfinancial public sector debt (percent of NFPS revenues) National government gross financing requirements Of which: Domestic Foreign (in billions of US dollars) Meditilong term debt service (in billions of pesos) Of which: Domestic (inbillions of pesos) Foreign (in billions of US dollars) Medium/long term debt service (percent of NG revenues) End-year stock of accounts payable (billions ofpesos) 487.1 518.4 431.7 460.0 341.3 360.8 86.5 95.0 3.9 4.2 55.4 58.4 12.8 8.3 42.6 50.1 628.8 674.4 681.1 537.4 601.4 579.4 425.4 488.6 454.9 106.1 105.2 118.1 5.9 7.5 6.4 91.5 73.1 101.7 2.8 4.3 4.3 88.7 68.8 97.5 617.5 671.1 498.6 558.7 202.7 225.2 70.8 80.0 133.7 163.0 106.3 140.9 27.4 22.1 12.8 10.3 78.7 80.1 115.7 109.8 3.2 2.6 -130.5 -152.7 -130.5 -152.7 -111.7 -134.2 (In billions of pesos) 569.1 569.7 588.1 489.9 496.4 530.8 388.7 394.5 424.0 96.2 96.3 100.1 4.9 5.6 6.7 79.2 73.3 57.3 6.5 3.1 5.0 72.7 70.2 52.3 735.5 792.7 807.6 626.5 665.5 717.6 238.9 266.0 265.7 88.0 83.4 77.0 199.6 200.7 252.2 174.8 185.9 230.7 24.7 14.9 21.5 7.8 5.6 6.5 92.2 109.8 116.1 105.1 124.6 84.5 3.9 2.6 5.5 -166.5 -223.1 -219.5 -178.6 -261.7 -219.5 -147.0 -210.7 -202.0 841.9 887.4 894.0 724.6 779.4 781.4 276.3 279.0 286.1 78.4 86.9 78.0 241.8 289.9 290.8 226.4 271.5 272.5 15.4 18.4 18.4 12.3 7.9 10.0 115.8 115.6 116.4 111.7 102.5 106.5 5.6 5.5 6.1 -213.1 -212.9 -2 12.9 -237.7 -212.9 -274.9 -199.9 -197.8 -197.8 130.5 152.7 82.8 84.4 47.7 68.3 166.5 223.1 219.5 22.9 109.1 95.3 143.5 113.9 124.2 213.1 212.9 2 12.9 143.9 21.2 83.2 69.2 191.7 129.7 (In percent of GDP) 16.4 15.5 14.5 13.7 11.5 10.8 2.9 2.8 0.1 0.1 1.9 1.7 14.4 12.3 9.8 2.4 0.1 2.1 20.7 20.0 16.8 16.7 4.5 4.9 12.3 11.8 3.9 3.3 0.1 0.1 15.5 14.2 13.5 13.3 12.3 12.2 10.6 9.8 9.7 2.6 2.4 2.3 0.1 0.1 0.2 2.2 1.8 1.3 20.0 19.7 18.5 17.1 16.5 16.5 5.4 5.0 5.8 11.6 11.6 10.7 2.9 3.1 1.9 0.1 0.1 0.1 19.3 16.6 5.5 11.1 2.6 0.1 14.3 12.7 10.3 2.2 0.2 1.5 18.8 16.5 6.1 10.3 2.2 0.1 14.4 12.2 9.6 2.5 0.1 2.1 18.9 16.5 6.1 10.4 2.3 0.1 -4.4 -4.6 -4.5 -5.5 -5.0 -4.9 -4.5 -4.5 -4.4 -4.6 -4.9 -6.5 -5.0 -5.5 -4.5 -5.8 -3.8 -4.0 -4.0 -5.2 -4.6 -4.6 -4.2 -4.2 13.0 12.2 -3.5 -5.0 -3.5 -4.9 0.1 0.3 59.6 64.6 364.5 417.9 . 23.7 22.2 19.6 18.5 3.1 2.8 265.9 290.8 169.7 179.9 2.5 2.5 54.6 56.1 135.5 178.4 11.5 11.3 9.4 -4.7 -6.0 -4.6 -5.8 0.9 -0.6 0.8 64.9 70.0 . 419.1 494.2 . 96.1 103.5 422.0 503.2 21.2 22.9 19.3 17.9 . 1.3 3.9 343.3 433.1 . 2 10.7 261.3 2.6 3.3 60.3 76.0 151.7 131.6 10.4 -6.2 -6.1 0.7 77.0 533.9 108.2 525.2 23.4 17.9 4.4 619.2 428.6 3.5 98.5 9.6 -6.7 -6.5 1.6 78.6 546.1 108.9 540.7 23.5 19.7 3.2 629.7 411.7 3.9 92.4 9.5 1.6 . . Sources: Philippine authorities; and Fund staff projections. I/ Excludes purchase of NPC securities. 2/ Includes privatizationreceipts as revenue and excludes the operations of the Central Bank-Board of Liquidators (CB-BOL). 3/ Excludes privatization receipts fromrevenue. 4/ Excludes contingent/guaranteed debt. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 30 - Table 3. Philippines: Monetary Survey, 1999-2003 1999 2000 200 I Dec. Dec. Dec. Mar. 2002 2003 JUn. Sep. Dec. Mar. JUII. Sep. Dec. Net foreign assets 329 343 405 514 501 515 541 522 591 608 663 Central bank 367 430 449 558 535 521 538 512 519 552 626 Net international reserves 418 567 586 702 681 661 684 658 660 691 771 Medium and long-term foreign liabilities 111 138 136 143 145 140 146 146 141 139 145 Deposit money banks -38 -87 -44 -44 -34 -6 4 10 72 56 37 Net domestic assets 1,609 1,737 1,760 1,664 1,695 1,706 1,810 1,811 1,172 1,774 1,811 Net domestic credit 1,923 2,088 2,106 2,024 2,039 2,090 2,207 2,222 2,183 2,252 2,307 Public sector credit 529 581 645 608 627 669 727 732 719 794 807 National Government 401 426 532 504 525 553 590 583 567 616 620 Credits 544 575 690 695 750 710 749 735 725 179 807 Foreign exchange receivables 13 13 12 12 12 12 7 7 7 7 7 Treasury IMF Accounts -39 -41 -50 -50 -50 -50 -50 -50 -58 -58 -58 Deposits -117 -121 -120 -153 -187 -118 -117 -110 -107 -112 -137 Local government and others 16 104 97 91 96 110 132 144 147 174 184 Claims on CB-BOL li 52 51 15 7 I 6 6 5 4 4 4 Private sector credit 1,394 1,507 1,462 1,416 1,411 1,421 1,480 1,490 1,464 1,458 1,500 Other Items net -315 -351 -347 -360 -343 -385 -397 -410 -412 -478 -496 Total liquidity 1,938 2,079 2,165 2,179 M4 1,887 2,013 2,111 2,119 M3 (peso liquidity) 1,365 1,421 1,525 1,563 Foreign currency deposits, residents 522 586 586 555 Other liabilities 51 66 54 60 2,197 2,22 1 2,351 2,136 2,171 2,298 1,555 1,587 1,670 581 584 628 61 50 53 (12.month percent change) 2,334 2,363 2,382 2,474 2,279 2,300 2,3 10 2,401 1,635 1,647 1,641 1,724 645 652 669 676 54 63 12 73 Net foreign assets 134.1 4.2 18.3 58.9 32.7 51.4 33.5 1.5 17.8 18.1 22.4 Net domestic assets 4.5 8.0 1.3 -4.6 -3.9 -4.3 2.8 8.8 4.5 4.0 0.1 Net domestic credit 2.8 8.6 0.9 -2.9 -2.9 -0.3 4.8 9.8 7.1 7.1 4.5 Public sector 15.0 9.9 10.9 -2. I -1.1 3.7 12.9 20.3 14.6 18.7 11.0 ldem. adjusted 2/ 13.3 4.4 10.7 -2.9 0.0 4.1 11.5 18.7 13.1 17.3 10.0 Private sector -1.2 8.1 -3.0 -3.3 -3.7 -2.1 1.2 5.2 3.8 2.6 1.4 Idem. adjusted 2/ -2.2 2.4 -3.5 -4.0 -2.9 -1.9 0.6 4.4 2.8 2.1 1.2 M4 16.3 6.7 4.9 5.5 2.4 5.8 8.9 7.6 7.7 6.4 4.5 M3 19.3 4.6 6.8 8.6 5.1 9.0 9.5 4.6 5.9 3.4 3.3 Memorandum items: (In billions of pesos) Gross domestic credit from commercial banks 1,713 1,999 2,085 2,026 Private sector 1,380 1,492 1,451 1,406 (K-month percent change) -1.1 8.1 -2.7 -3.0 Public sector 392 507 634 620 (In percent of total gross credit) 22 25 30 31 o/w in dollars 136 200 228 234 2,069 2,042 2,151 1,402 1,412 1,470 -3.5 -2.0 1.3 667 630 681 32 31 32 252 244 253 (In billions of US dollars) 2,165 2,131 2,220 2,316 1,480 1,454 1,449 1,491 5.3 3.7 2.6 1.4 685 682 771 824 32 32 35 36 273 263 319 357 Net foreign assets Central bank Deposit money banks Foreign currency deposits residents Dollar-denominated credit to residents Pubhc sector Private sector 8.2 9.1 -0.9 6.9 7.9 8.6 8.7 -1.7 -0.9 11.7 11.4 10.8 10.2 4.0 4.4 6.8 5.8 10.1 10.9 -0.9 12.9 10.9 11.4 3.4 8.0 10.0 4.6 5.4 9.9 9.8 10.2 10.6 9.9 10.1 -0.7 -0.1 0.1 11.5 11.1 11.8 10.4 10.0 9.9 5.0 4.1 4.8 5.4 5.3 5.2 (In percent) 9.8 9.6 0.2 12.0 10.2 5.1 5.1 11.0 11.1 9.7 10.0 1.3 1.0 12.1 12.2 8.9 9.4 4.9 5.8 4.0 3.6 11.9 11.3 0.7 12.2 9.7 6.4 3.3 Dollar denominated credit/dollar deposits 88.0 92.0 89.4 91.9 90.4 89.4 84.0 84.7 73.4 77.1 79.9 34.1 38.8 42.2 43.5 41.8 40.3 42.3 40.3 41.7 52.8 Dollar denominated credit to public sector/dollar deposits 26. I (In billions of pesos) Source: Philippine authorities. l/ The Central Bank-Board of Liquidators was established in 1993 to absorb the debts of the old central bank. 21 Adjusted for exchange rate valuation effects. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 31 - Table 4. Philippines: Balance of Payments, 1999-2004 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 Est. Proj. (In billions of U.S. dollars) CURRENT ACCOUNT BALANCE 7.2 6.3 1.3 4.2 I.7 1.3 Trade Balance 5.0 3.8 -0.7 0.4 -1.2 -1.6 Exports, f.o.b., of which: 34.2 37.3 31.2 34.4 35.0 37.1 Electronic exports 22.0 22.9 17.0 18.9 18.8 19.7 Imports, f.o.b., of which: 29.3 33.5 32.0 34.0 36.2 38.7 Electronic imports 1.6 15.3 15.0 16.9 16.7 17.5 Services (net) -2.7 -2.4 -2.1 -1.3 -1.7 -1.7 Receipts 4.8 4.0 3.1 3.1 2.8 3.2 Payments 7.5 6.4 5.2 4.3 4.5 4.9 Income Receipts, of which: Workers remittances Payments 4.5 4.4 3.7 4.6 4.0 4.1 8.1 7.8 7.2 7.9 8.3 8.4 6.8 6.1 6.0 1.2 7.6 7.8 3.6 3.4 3.5 3.4 4.2 4.3 Transfers (net) 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.5 0.6 Receipts 0.6 0.6 0.5 0.6 0.6 0.7 Payments 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 CAPITAL AND FINANCIAL ACCOUNT 4.1 3.0 1.7 0.8 0.6 0.0 Capital Account 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Financial Account Direct Investment Portfolio Investment Equity Bonds Other Investment (excluding trade credit) Currency and deposits Loans and other, of which: Loans Other 4.1 3.0 1.7 0.8 0.6 0.0 1.8 1.5 1.1 1.0 0.0 0.5 6.9 0.2 1.1 1.9 3.1 2.6 1.4 -0.2 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.2 5.5 0.4 0.7 1.5 2.7 2.5 -4.5 1.3 -0.5 -2.1 -2.5 -3.1 -1.3 -0.2 -0.6 -0.7 -0.7 0.0 -3.2 1.5 0.1 -1.4 -1.8 -3.1 -0.1 0.6 0.8 -1.1 -1.4 -2.0 -3.2 0.9 -0.7 -0.2 -0.4 -1.1 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS (inch trade credi -7.1 -9.8 -3.2 -4.4 -2.2 -2.9 OVERALL BALANCE 3.6 -0.5 -0.2 0.7 0.1 -1.6 OVERALL FINANCING -3.6 0.5 0.2 -0.7 0.0 1.6 Monetisation of gold and revaluation Change in Net international reserves (increase : BSP Gross Reserves (increase =-) Fund credit (net) Change in other BSP liabilities 0.0 0.0 0.2 0.9 1.0 0.3 -3.6 0.5 0.0 -1.6 -1.0 1.3 -4.2 0.1 -0.6 -0.5 -0.7 1.8 0.3 0.3 0.0 -0.4 -0.5 -0.4 0.3 0.1 0.7 -0.7 0.2 0.0 Memorandum items: Current account/GDP Short-term debt (original maturity) Short-term debt (residual maturity) Gross reserves Adjusted gross reserves li (in percent of St. debt by res. maturity) 2/ Net international reserves Monitored external debt (in billions) 3/ (in percent of GDP) Debt service ratio 4/ Export value (percent change) Import value (percent change) GDP (in billions) 9.5 8.2 1.8 5.4 2.1 1.6 8.7 8.0 8.3 7.4 7.7 8.1 11.7 11.7 13.3 13.0 13.6 14.0 15.1 15.0 15.7 16.2 16.9 15.1 13.8 13.4 13.3 14.3 14.7 13.0 132.7 132.8 122.0 128.4 128.9 109.4 11.8 11.3 11.4 13.0 14.0 12.6 58.0 57.4 57.8 59.3 60.9 61.8 16.5 75.7 80.3 76.1 75.8 73.6 17.0 14.7 19.1 19.9 21.9 22.5 16.0 9.0 -16.2 10.1 1.8 5.9 -1.0 14.5 -4.5 6.2 6.6 6.9 75.8 75.9 72.0 78.0 80.4 84.0 Sources: Philippine authorities and Fund staff projections l/ Gross reserves less gold and securities pledged as collateral against short term liabilities. 2/ As a percent of short-term debt excluding pledged assets of the central bank. 31 Monitored external liabilities are defined as external debt plus liabilities of foreign banks in the Philippines to their headquarters, branches and agencies, some external debt not registered with the central bank and private capital lease arrangements. 41 In percent of goods and non-factor services. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 32 - Table 5. Philippines: Banking Sector Indicators, 1997-2003 (End of year; unless otherwise indicated) 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 Sep. 2003 Capital adequacy (in percent) li Total banking system 16.0 17.7 17.5 16.2 15.8 16.7 16.1 7.6 16.6 21.4 25.1 28.4 28.3 28.0 . . . 21.7 27.4 . . . . 24.3 23.9 23.7 23.2 5.4 11.0 12.7 14.9 16.9 15.4 15.2 14.6 14.3 42.1 36.4 45.4 43.7 45.3 53.2 52.2 50.2 48.9 . . . 46.4 43.9 6.0 5.1 4.5 3.9 3.8 4.2 3.8 1.7 0.8 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.8 1.0 13.0 5.9 2.9 2.6 3.2 5.8 1.6 12.6 11.6 11.2 28.8 29.9 32.3 30.9 1.2 35.9 8.7 11.4 13.7 13.7 12.6 12.3 39.1 32.8 33.6 31.1 29.1 30.8 Distressed assets / (TLP + ROPOA) - old definition 2/ Total banking system Distressed assets TLP + ROPOA - new deftition 21 Total banking system Nonperfotming assets TLP + ROPOA - old deftition 3/ Total banking system Nonperforming assets TLP + ROPOA - new deftition 3/ Total banking system Nonperforming loans(NPLs)/total loans (in percent) - old deftition Total banking system Nonperforming loans(NPLs)/total loans (in percent) - new definition Total banking system Loan loss reserves/NPLs (in percent) - old deftition Total banking system Loan loss reserves/NPLs (in percent) - new deftition Total banking system Specific loan loss reserves/NPLs (in percent) Total banking system Net interest income margin/Earning assets (in percent) Total banking system Return on average assets (after tax; in percent) 41 Total banking system Return on average equity (after tax; in percent) 4/ Total banking system Liquid assets/total assets Total banking system As a percent of total banking deposits Market share held by foreign banks Share of foreign currency deposits Note: Assets/Capital accounts are adjusted to reflect as qualified capital allowable component of the net of the “Due to / Due from Head Office/Branches/Agencies” accounts of foreign banks. Source: SRSO-Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas. l/ Based on the old framework under Section 22 of the General Banking Act. 2/ Distressed assets are nonperforming loans (NPL) + gross real and other properties owned and acquired (ROPOA) + current restructured loans TLP is Total Loan Portfolio. 3/ Nonperforming assets are NPLs + gross ROPOA. 4/ Annualized. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 33 - Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 34 - Table 7. Philippines: Indicators of External Vulnerability, 1999-2003 (In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated) 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 Latest Date Financial indicators Nonfmancial public sector debt (end of period) Broad money (percent change, 12.month basis) Private sector credit (percent change, IZmonth basis) Overnight BSP borrowingrate ( period average, in percent) 19.3 4.6 -1.2 8.1 9.4 10.4 96. I 103.5 105.0 Sep-03 6.8 9.5 3.3 Dec.03 -3.0 1.2 1.4 Dec.03 8.8 7.0 6.8 Dec.03 Balance of payments indicators Exports (percent change, 12 month basis in US$) Imports (percent change, 12 month basis in USS) Current account balance Capital and fmancial account balance 2/ Overall balance 16.0 9.0 -16.2 10.1 0.2 11 Sep.03 -1.0 14.5 -4.5 6.2 5.3 l/ Sep.03 9.5 8.2 1.8 5.4 3.4 11 Sep-03 5.4 4.0 2.4 1.0 -2.1 I/ Sep-03 4.1 -0.7 -0.3 0.8 -1.4 I/ Sep-03 Reserves indicators Adjusted gross official reserves (US$ billions, end of period) 3/ 13.8 13.4 13.3 14.3 14.7 NW-03 Adjusted gross officialreserves to short-term debt 132.7 132.8 122.0 128.4 132.6 41 Nov-03 Adjusted reserves (months of following year’s impotis) 4.1 4.3 4.2 4.2 4.1 41 Nov.03 Broad money to adjusted reserves 1.9 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.1 41 Nov-03 External debt indicators Monitored external debt (end of period, in billions of US dollars) In percent of GNP In percent of exports External interest payments as percent of exports External amortization payments as percent of exports Short-term debt ( end of period, residual maturity basis) (in billions of US dollars) (in percent of monitored external debt) Short-term foreign currency liabilities of the central bank (US$ billions) 5/ Short-term foreign liabilities of commercial banks (USS billions) 5/ 15.4 15.4 18.4 16.7 16.7 Sep-03 11.7 11.7 13.3 13.0 13.2 Sep-03 20.2 20.4 22.9 21.9 21.5 Sep-03 3.2 3.7 4.2 3.3 3.1 Sep-03 5.9 5.0 4.7 4.6 4.0 Sep-03 Net foreign liabilities of commercial banks (US$ billions) Foreign assets of commercial banks (US% billions) Foreign liabilities of commercial banks (uS$ billions) 1.3 10.1 11.4 Foreign currency-denominated liabilities of commercial banks (US$ billions) 26.8 Foreign currency-denominated liabilities of corporations OJS$ billions) 22.9 Foreign currency denominated liab. of comm. banks and carp. (US$ billions) 61 49.7 Financial market indicators Exchange rate (per U.S. dollar, average) REER appreciation (12-month basis, average) Stockmarket index (end of period) 39.1 44.2 51.0 51.6 54.2 Dec.03 8.6 -6.8 -4.9 0.3 -10.7 Dee-03 2,143 1,495 1,146 1,009 1,442 Dee-03 58.0 51.4 57.8 59.3 61.5 Sep-03 76.5 75.7 80.3 76.1 77.5 Sep-03 148.8 139.2 168.1 158.5 164.5 Sep.03 6.2 7.3 8.3 6.1 6.8 Sep-03 9.8 1.4 10.7 13.2 13.3 Sep.03 1.9 1.9 1.2 1.1 act-03 8.2 7.5 a.1 1.6 Ott-03 10.1 9.4 9.3 8.7 act-03 24.3 23.3 23.5 23.2 act-03 23.0 23.6 22.5 21.4 Ott-03 47.3 46.9 46.0 44.6 Ott-03 Sources: Philippine authorities; and Fund staff estimates. I/ January to September 2003. 21 Excluding trade credits. 3/ Gross reserves less gold and securities pledged as collateral against short term liabilities. 4/Adjusted reserves in November 2003; debt, imports, and foreign currency deposits in September 2003. 51 Monetary survey basis. 61 The total is less than the sum of the parts, due to the exclusion of foreign currency loans from banks to corporations. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 35 - Table 8. Philippines: Medium-Term Outlook, 2001-2009 (Baseline scenario) 2001 2002 2003 Est. 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 Proj. GNP and prices Real GDP CPI (year average) Investment and saving Gross investment National saving Foreign saving Public finances National government balance li Total revenue Total expenditure and net lending National government debt 2/ 18.4 84.7 93.3 94.7 95.0 96.0 97.3 98.9 101.0 Nonfmancial public sector debt 96.1 103.5 108.2 108.9 109.9 111.7 113.8 116.4 119.4 External sector Export value (percent change) Import value (percent change) Trade balance Current account FDI (net, US$ billions) Reserves, adjusted (US$ billions) 3/ Reserves / Short-term liabilities, adjusted 4/ Monitored external debt 5/ Debt service ratio (in percent of exports of G&S) 3.0 4.4 6.1 3.1 20.6 19.3 18.7 18.8 18.8 18.7 18.6 18.5 18.4 22.5 24.7 20.8 20.4 19.6 18.9 18.1 17.3 16.5 1.8 5.4 2.1 1.6 0.8 0.2 -0.5 -1.2 -1.9 -4.5 15.5 20.0 -16.2 10.1 1.8 5.9 6.3 6.3 6.3 6.1 6.0 -4.5 6.2 6.6 6.9 7.4 7.3 7.2 7.1 7.0 -1.0 0.5 -1.5 -2.0 -2.5 -3.0 -3.4 -3.9 -4.4 1.8 5.4 2.1 1.6 0.8 0.2 -0.5 -1.2 -1.9 1.1 1.0 0.0 0.5 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 13.3 14.3 14.7 13.0 13.2 12.9 13.4 14.0 14.3 122.0 128.4 128.9 109.4 100.9 101.7 97.4 96.6 0.0 80.3 16.1 75.8 73.6 73.4 72.8 73.5 74.9 76.8 19.1 19.9 21.9 22.5 21.7 22.4 19.7 20.4 20.2 (Percentage change) 4.5 4.5 4.2 4.1 3.9 3.0 3.9 4.0 4.0 4.0 (In percent of GDP;unless otherwise indicated ) 3.6 3.4 4.0 4.0 -5.5 -4.9 -4.5 -4.9 -5.4 -5.7 -6.1 -6.5 14.2 14.4 14.4 14.5 14.3 14.3 14.3 14.2 19.7 19.3 18.9 19.3 19.8 20.0 20.4 20.7 Sources: Philippine authorities and Fund staff projections l/ Excludes privatization receipts from revenue and includes the operations of the Central Bank-Board of Liquidators. 2/ Includes contingent/guaranteed debt. 3/ Gross reserves less gold and securities pledged as collateral against short-term liabilities. 4/ Reserves as a percent of short-term debt (including medium and long-term debt due in the following year). Both reserves and debt were adjusted for gold -backed loans. 5/ Monitored external liabilities are defined as external debt plus liabilities of foreign banks in the Philippines to their headquarters, branches and agencies, some external debt not registered with the central bank and private capital lease arrangements. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 36 - Table 9. Philippines: Medium-Term Balance of Payments, 2004-2009 (Baseline scenario) 2004 2005 2006 Proj 2007 2008 2009 (In billions of U.S. dollars) CURRENT ACCOUNT BALANCE 1.3 0.7 0.2 -0.4 -1.2 -2.1 Trade Balance -1.6 -2.2 -2.8 -3.3 -4.0 -4.8 Exports, f.o.b., of which: 37.1 39.4 41.8 44.5 47.2 50.1 Electronic exports 19.7 20.7 21.8 22.9 24.1 25.3 Imports, f.o.b., ofwhich: 38.7 41.6 44.6 47.8 51.2 54.8 Electronic imports 17.5 18.4 19.4 20.4 21.4 22.5 Services (net) -1.7 -1.9 -2.1 -2.3 -2.5 -2.8 Receipts 3.2 3.4 3.6 3.8 4.0 4.3 Payments 4.9 5.3 5.7 6.1 6.6 7.1 Income Receipts, of which: Workers remittances Payments 4.1 4.2 4.4 4.6 4.6 4.8 8.4 8.7 9.2 9.6 10.1 10.5 7.8 8.1 8.4 8.9 9.3 9.7 4.3 4.6 4.8 5.0 5.4 5.8 Transfers (net) 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.7 0.7 Receipts 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.8 0.8 0.8 Payments 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 CAPITAL AND FINANCIAL ACCOUNT 0.0 2.5 2.4 3.8 4.4 5.0 Capital Account 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Financial Account Direct Investment Portfolio Investment Equity Bonds Other Investment (excluding trade credit) Currency and deposits Loans and other, of which: Loans Other 0.0 2.6 2.4 3.9 4.5 5.1 0.5 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 2.6 3.8 3.1 2.9 2.9 2.1 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 2.5 3.7 3.1 2.8 2.8 2.0 -3.1 -1.8 -1.4 0.4 1.0 2.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 -3.1 -1.8 -1.4 0.4 1.0 2.4 -2.0 -1.2 -1.0 0.6 1.2 2.6 -1.1 -0.6 -0.4 -0.2 -0.2 -0.2 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS (incl. trade credi -2.9 -2.9 -2.9 -2.9 -2.9 -2.9 OVERALL BALANCE -1.6 0.3 -0.4 0.5 0.3 0.1 OVERALL FINANCING 1.6 -0.3 0.4 -0.5 -0.3 -0.1 Monetisation of gold and revaluation Change in Net international reserves (increase : BSP Gross Reserves (increase =-) Fund credit (net) Change in other BSP liabilities 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.3 1.3 -0.6 0.1 -0.7 -0.6 -0.3 1.8 -0.3 0.3 -0.6 -0.5 -0.3 -0.4 -0.3 -0.2 -0.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Memorandum items: Current account/GDP Short-term debt (original maturity) Short-term debt (residual maturity) Gross reserves Adjusted gross reserves li (in percent of st. debt by res. matarity) 21 Net international reserves Monitored external debt (in billions) 31 (in percent of GDP) Debt service ratio 41 Export value (percent change) Import value (percent change) 1.6 0.8 0.2 -0.5 -1.2 -1.9 8.1 8.5 9.0 9.5 10.0 10.5 14.0 15.2 14.8 15.9 16.6 17.2 15.1 15.3 15.0 15.6 16.1 16.5 13.0 13.2 12.9 13.4 14.0 14.3 109.4 100.9 101.7 97.4 96.6 94.9 12.6 13.2 13.0 13.7 14.3 14.6 61.8 65.0 68.0 72.3 77.3 83.0 73.6 73.4 72.8 73.5 74.9 76.8 22.5 21.7 22.4 19.7 20.4 20.2 5.9 6.3 6.3 6.3 6.1 6.0 6.9 7.4 7.3 7.2 7.1 7.0 Sources: Philippine authorities and Fund staff projections Ii Gross reserves less gold and securities pledged as collateral against short term liabilities. 2/ As a percent of short-term debt excluding pledged assets of the central bank. 31 Monitored external liabilities are defined as external debt plus liabilities of foreign banks in the Philippines to their headquarters, branches and agencies, some external debt not registered with the central bank and private capital lease arrangements. 41 In percent of goods and non-factor services. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 37 - Table 10. Philippines: Medium-Term Outlook, 2001-2009 (Reform scenario) 2001 2002 2003 Est. 2004 2005 2006 Proj. 2007 2008 2009 GNP and prices Real GDP CPI (year average) Investment and saving Gross investment National saving Foreign saving Public finances National government balance l/ Total revenue Total expenditure and net lending National government debt 2/ 78.4 84.7 93.3 92.0 90.0 86.9 83.5 79.9 75.8 Nonfinancial public sector debt 96.1 103.5 108.2 107.5 106.5 104.1 101.2 98.1 94.4 External sector Export value (percent change) Import value (percent change) Trade balance Current account FDI (net, US$ billions) Reserves, adjusted (US$ billions) 3/ Reserves / Short-term liabilities, adjusted 4/ Monitored external debt 5/ Debt service ratio (in percent of exports of G&S) 3.0 4.4 6.1 3.1 20.6 19.3 18.7 18.8 19.0 20.0 21.0 23.0 23.0 22.5 24.7 20.8 20.4 20.1 20.8 21.6 23.3 23.0 1.8 5.4 2.1 1.6 1.1 0.8 0.6 0.3 0.0 -4.5 -5.5 -4.9 -3.6 -2.6 -1.5 -1.2 -0.9 -0.3 15.5 14.2 14.4 15.1 16.2 16.2 16.5 16.8 17.2 20.0 19.7 19.3 18.7 18.8 17.7 17.6 17.7 17.5 -16.2 10.1 1.8 6.2 7.5 7.6 7.6 7.7 7.7 -4.5 6.2 6.6 7.2 8.0 8.0 8.0 8.1 8.0 -1.0 0.5 -1.5 -2.0 -2.2 -2.4 -2.6 -2.8 -3.0 1.8 5.4 2.1 1.6 1.1 0.8 0.6 0.3 0.0 1.1 1.0 0.0 0.5 0.9 1.1 1.1 1.1 1.2 13.3 14.3 14.7 13.0 13.3 13.4 14.4 15.3 16.1 122.0 128.4 128.9 109.8 102.1 105.9 109.7 112.2 113.0 80.3 76.1 75.8 73.5 71.4 68.6 66.8 65.1 63.3 19.1 19.9 21.9 22.4 21.4 21.7 18.4 17.0 16.0 (Percentage change) 4.5 4.5 4.6 4.8 5.0 3.0 3.9 4.0 4.0 4.0 (In percent of GDP;unless otherwise indicated ) 5.2 5.4 4.0 4.0 Sources: Philippine authorities and Fund staff projections. l/ Excludes privatization receipts from revenue and includes the operations of the Central Bank-Board of Liquidators. 2/ Includes contingent/guaranteed debt. 3/Grass reserves less gold and securities pledged as collateral against short-term liabilities. 41 Reserves as a percent of short-term debt (including medium and long-term debt due in the following year). Both reserves and debt were adjusted for gold- backed loans. 5/ Monitored external liabilities are defined as external debt plus liabilities of foreign banks in the Philippines to their headquarters, branches and agencies, SOI external debt not registered with the central bank and private capital lease arrangements. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 38 - Table 11. Philippines: Indicators of Financial Obligations to the Fund, 2002-2009 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 Fund repurchases and charges In millions of U.S. dollars In percent of exports of goods and services In percent of total debt service due In percent of quota In percent of adjusted gross official reserves 461.8 564.6 471.1 315.2 185.2 178.6 31.4 0.0 1.2 1.5 1.2 0.7 0.4 0.4 0.1 0.0 6.2 6.8 5.2 3.4 1.8 1.9 0.3 0.0 40.5 46.2 38.6 25.9 15.2 14.7 2.6 0.0 3.2 3.8 3.6 2.4 1.4 1.3 0.2 0.0 Fund credit outstanding In millions of U.S. dollars In percent of quota In percent of GNP In percent of total external debt 1686.0 140.9 2.0 2.8 1119.4 675.8 376.5 202.2 28.3 0.0 0.0 91.6 55.3 30.9 16.6 2.3 0.0 0.0 1.3 0.7 0.4 0.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 1.8 1.1 0.6 0.3 0.0 0.0 0.0 Source: Fund staff projections. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-39- ANNEX1 PHILIPPINES: DEBT SUSTAINABILITY ANALYSIS Under a baseline scenario of no major reforms, NFPS debt will continue to rise from its already high level (Table Al). A combination of sustained high deficits and rising interest rates (due to higher world interest rates and rising risk premia) is projected to bring NFPS debt from 108 percent of GDP at end-2003 to 119 percent of GDP by 2009 (Table Al). The debt profile for the next few years is somewhat flatter when using consensus market forecasts for key macroeconomic variables (Alternative Scenario 4) since these forecasts predict the peso to depreciate by less than 1 percent per year in 2004-05. Future adverse shocks would further compromise debt sustainability. A country-specific shock could lead to significant capital flight, a 25 percent depreciation of the exchange rate and inflation rising to 10 percent (Alternative Scenario 3). This would force the central bank to raise interest rates, slowing growth to 2% percent in 2005. Once financial pressure abates, a lack of fiscal measures and a weaker peso would leave NFPS debt on an unsustainable path, rising to roughly 125 percent of GDP by 2009. Similar susceptibilities to negative shocks are seen in the Bound Tests. One such shock simulates the effect of a sharp jump in the public sector debt stock as might occur were severe problems in the banking sector to cause contingent liabilities to fall upon the government. Debt dynamics would improve markedly were the budget to be balanced by 2009 (Alternative Scenario 2). By 2009, NFPS debt would decline to about 94 percent of GDP and be falling at a rate of over 3 percentage points of GDP per year. However, this path would require significant tax policy measures. The external debt burden is highly sensitive to an exchange rate depreciation, underscoring the importance of reforms. Under a baseline scenario, the external debt burden would increase slightly to 77 percent of GDP by 2009 (Table A2). However, in the event of adverse shocks involving a depreciation of the peso (as outlined above), external debt would rise initially to 86 percent of GDP before falling back to 80 percent of GDP by 2009. The profile of external debt would also significantly worsen under most of the bounds tests (Bound Tests 3, 5, and 6) particularly the ones involving a depreciation of the peso. A reform scenario, involving major fiscal reforms (Alternative Scenario 2) would strengthen external debt dynamics. Lower interest payments, a recovery in nondebt creating capital inflows, and an increase in export growth would enable the government to reduce its external borrowing somewhat while still maintaining an adequate level of international reserves. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 40 - Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 41 - Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 42 - ANNEX II Philippines: Progress on Structural Reform Agenda Main Objectives (Established in EBS/98/50) Recent Progress Banking Sector . Strengthen measures to address money l laundering activities . . . Strengthen banks by raising capital and l encouraging consolidation. . . . Tighten provisioning requirements and l regulatory oversight. . . Level the playing field between foreign l currency and peso intermediation. . Deal effectively with problem banks, . The Anti-Money Laundering Law was approved in September 200 1. The AMLC has been created and IRRs were signed in April 2002. The law amending the Anti-Money Laundering Act (AMLA) was signed on 7 March 2003. The amendments, which seek to strengthen the existing anti-money laundering regime and align them with international best practice, include the following: (i) lowering the threshold for covered transactions from P 4.0 million to P 500,000; (ii) authorizing the BSP to inquire or examine deposits or investment with any banking institution without court order in the course of a periodic or special examination; and (iii) removing the provision prohibiting the retroactivity of the law. With the approval of the law incorporating the amendments to the AMLA, the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) sanctions on noncomplying countries were not imposed on the Philippines. However, the Philippines remained on the list of noncooperative countries and territories (NCCT), pending the implementation of the AMLA. The authorities have submitted an implementation plan to the FATP Review Group in January 2004. BSP began implementing BIS capital standards in July 200 1. BSP required banks to report their accounts on a consolidated basis starting September 200 1, but weaknesses in the reporting framework complicate supervision on a consolidated basis. The BSP has not yet released consolidated CAR ratios. BSP guidelines on the adoption of the risk-based capital adequacy framework was amended to incorporate market risk. This framework is now also required for quasi-banks. Banks required to reappraise their foreclosed assets every two years beginning January 2002. However, provisioning levels remain inadequate. New guidelines approved to clarify the capital treatment of local banks’ investments in credit-linked notes (CLNs) for the purposes of monitoring compliance with risk-based capital adequacy requirements. Increased withholding tax on foreign currency deposits proposed in pending legislation. Some regulatory loopholes were closed in late 2000. The General Banking Act of 2000 increased the Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-43 - ANNEX II Philippines: Progress on Structural Reform Agenda Main Objectives (Established in EBS/98/50) Recent Progress BSP’s capacity to take prompt corrective action, but . Provide legal framework to encourage banks to sell nonperforming assets to third parties. Fiscal and Governance Reforms . Improve operations of the Bureau of Internal Revenue (BIR). . Rationalize fiscal incentives. . Reform financial sector taxation. . Improve expenditure management. . Move forward the Government Re- engineering Program, including reductions in staff, abolition of agencies, and devolution of activities to local governments. the BSP and PDIC still lack the authority and legal protection to deal effectively with distressed banks. Rehabilitation of the Philippine National Bank (PNB) has made significant progress. PNB has returned to profitability and has professionalized its management. The Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) Act was passed on 10 Janw 2003. The new law provides for tax breaks and other incentives to banks and other financial institutions to encourage them to clear their books of bad loans and acquired assets through special purpose vehicles or asset management companies. On 19 March 2003, the implementing rules and regulations (IRR) of the SPV Act were approved. Large taxpayer control improved and computerization program reinvigorated. BIR has introduced several measures: (i) monitoring compliance to revenue regulations; (ii) stepped up tax compliance verification (or “tax mapping”); (iii) strengthening audit and related programs; and (iv) intensifying third-party information. Other programs are being implemented to improve BIR’s information technology. Several legislation proposals are under discussion in Congress. None of the bills pending in the Senate reflects the recommendations made by the Tax Study Group. A resolution is unlikely. The Documentary Stamp Tax @ST) Bill rationalizes the taxation of debt and equity has been ratified by Congress. The bill is to be sent to the President for final approval and enactment. Several steps have been taken, including making procurement rules more transparent, moving toward medium-term budgeting, imposing a 15 percent budgetary reserve, and prioritizing expenditures in the context of revenue shortfalls. An electronic system has been established to better synchronize cash authorizations among collecting agencies. A revised version of the re-engineering bill, the Public Sector Institutional Strengthening Act, is being worked out by the DBM. The bill intends to create a Commission of Government Re-engineering, which would conduct studies and review policies, programs and models relevant to the Government. The bill also seeks to provide retirement or separation benefits for those who will be affected by re-engineering. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 44 - ANNEX II Philippines: Progress on Structural Reform Agenda Main Objectives (Established in EBS/98/50) Recent Progress Electric Power Sector Reform . Restructure electric power sector. . Trade Liberalization . Reduce average tariffs to about 9 percent in 2000. . . Power sector reform bill enacted in June 200 1, which aims to resolve the precarious financial situation of the National Power Corporation (NIT) by privatizing the NPC, eliminating its monopoly in generation, and creating open access in transmission rules and distribution systems. Implementing regulations to pave the way for privatization and deregulation have been approved. Power Sector Assets and Liabilities Management Corporation (PSALM) created to oversee privatization of NPC. PSALM has developed a privatization plan for transmission and generation assets. Energy Regulatory Commission (ERC) established, to replace the Energy Regulatory Board. New price- setting mechanisms, particularly regarding exchange rate changes, have been established. Average tariffs were further reduced from 8.1 percent at end-2000 to 7.7 percent in 2001, to 6.1 percent in 2002, and to 5.1 percent in 2003. However, average tariff rates are expected to increase to 6.5 percent in 2004 as a result of recent increases in several product lines. Current rating on the Fund’s index of trade restrictiveness remains 4, on a scale of l-10 (with 1 the most liberal, and 10 the most restrictive). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 45 - ANNEXII Philippines: Progress on Structural Reform Agenda Main Objectives (Established in EBS/98/50) Enhance the Corporate Sector Regulatory Framework’ Recent Progress . Strengthen Securities and Exchange . Commission (SEC) policies and procedures for debt restructuring. . . Prepare new bankruptcy law. . . Improve governance of Philippine Stock l Exchange. . The Supreme Court issued Interim Rules of Procedure on Corporate Rehabilitation, effective December 2000. With its quasi-judicial powers having been shifted to the courts, the SEC is taking steps to minimize debt restructuring incidents by: (i) imposing more stringent financial disclosure requirements, including bringing accounting rules up to international standards; (ii) regulating external auditors more closely; and (iii) implementing the Code of Corporate Governance, which applies to all corporations (domestic and foreign) whose securities are registered or listed. The Code requires these corporations to formulate and adopt their own governance rules and principles, make these available to directors and subject to inspection by stockholders, and adhere to them under penalty of law. A corporate recovery law has been submitted to Congress, to strengthen creditor rights and smooth the foreclosure process. The law (Corporate Recovery Act) is being reviewed by the House Committee on Economic Affairs. Steps are being taken to improve its compliance enforcement and surveillance capabilities. Demutualization was completed in August 200 1, transforming the PSE into a publicly-held corporation with a diverse ownership, governed by a majority of nonbrokers, and managed by an independent and professional group. The public listing and offering of the PSE took effect in December 2003. The PSE was directed by the SEC to observe immediately the limitations set by the Securities Regulation Code restricting any industry from owning more than 20 percent of the PSE’s outstanding capital stock. ’ Established in EBS/98/172, October 1998. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicI. II. III. IV. V. Membership Status: Joined: December 27, 1945; Article VIII General Resources Account: SDR Million Quota % Quota 879.90 100.0 Fund holdings of currency 1598.32 181.65 Reserve position in Fund 87.36 9.93 SDR Department: SDR Million % Allocation Net cumulative allocation 116.60 100.00 Holdings 1.19 1.02 Outstanding Purchases and Loans: SDR Million % Quota Stand-by arrangements 526.67 59.86 Extended arrangements 279.10 31.72 Financial Arrangements: Approval Expiration IYE Date Date Stand-by 04/01/1998 12/3 l/2000 1,020.79 783.23 EFF 0612411994 03/3 l/1998 791.20 791.20 Stand-by 02/20/l 99 1 03/3 l/1993 334.20 334.20 VI. Projected Obligations to Fund: SDR Million; based on existing use of resources and present holdings of SDRs: Principal Charges/Interest Total 2004 318.84 16.22 335.06 VII Exchange Arrangement: - 46 - PHwwIws: FUND RELATIONS (As of December 3 1,2003) Amount Approved Amount Drawn (SDR Million) (SDR Million) Forthcoming 2005 2006 2007 2008 214.87 125.78 125.78 20.50 10.07 6.40 3.70 2.01 224.95 132.18 129.48 22.50 The value of the Philippine peso is determined in the interbank foreign exchange market; the Bangko Sentral participates in the market in order to limit fluctuations in the exchange rate. From November 1995 to June 1997 the peso was effectively fixed at around P 26.2- P 26.4 per U.S. dollar. On July 11, 1997, the peso depreciated to P 29.45 per U.S. dollar following an announcement by the central bank that the peso would be allowed to find its own level. Since then, it has gradually depreciated; during the last few months, it has fluctuated around P 52-56 per U.S. dollar. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 47 - ANNEX III VIII. Article IV Consultation: The Philippines is on the standard 12-month cycle. The 2002 Article IV Consultation was discussed by the Executive Board on September 11, 2002, (W/02/148). At that time, Directors noted that while the Philippines had made substantial efforts over the past 15 years to create a modern, competitive economy, some long-standing problems remained, in particular in the fiscal and banking sectors. Directors observed that these problems, if left unattended, could trigger a decline in investors’ confidence and an adverse market reaction that would affect the country’s growth prospects. They, therefore, strongly endorsed the authorities’ strategy of eliminating the budget deficit by 2006, addressing the banking sector problems, and pursuing structural reforms to increase productivity and growth. IX. FSAP and ROSC Participation: MAE: The Philippines’ FSAP was conducted during the fourth quarter of 2001; FSAP missions visited Manila in October and November-December 2001, The final version of the report was discussed with the authorities in June 2002. The associated FSSA was discussed by the Executive Board together with the Article IV staff report in September 2002. FAD: Discussions on fiscal transparency were held in Manila in September 2001. The ROSC report was discussed by the Executive Board in September 2002 together with the Article IV staff report, and published in October 2002. STA: ROSC Data Module mission was conducted in September 2003 and draft report was submitted to the authorities for their comments in January 2004. X. Technical Assistance: An MAE mission visited the country in May-June 1999 to review money and banking statistics. In April 1999, MAE missions on banking reform and payments systems reform visited Manila. MAE also provided assistance in banking reforms during missions in September 1999, and April, June, October, and December 2000. A resident banking supervision advisor was stationed in Manila in May 2003, to assist the BSP in the implementation of a new supervisory model. STA missions in May-June 1999 and November 2000 reviewed money and banking statistics. A PDR/STA mission in April 1999 worked on improving short-term debt monitoring systems. In November 2000, an STA mission conducted follow-up work on external debt and balance of payments statistics. An STA staff member participated in the October 2000 mission, assisting in real sector and balance of payments issues, and a follow- up mission took place in January 2002. In February 2002, an STA mission reviewed monetary and financial statistics. An STA peripatetic mission visited Manila in July-August 2003 and January-February 2004 to provide technical assistance in balance of payments and Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 48 - ANNEX III international investment position statistics and in implementing the recommendations made by the ROSC Data Module mission. An FAD mission visited Manila in December 1999 to provide assistance on computerization of tax administration with further follow-up missions in April and September 2000. In April 1999, an FAD mission provided advice on expenditure control and budget system reform, with a follow-up mission in September 2001. A mission to provide a briefing to the new tax commissioner took place in April-May 2001. An FAD mission reviewed VAT and excise administration in December 2001. In November 1999, LEG assisted in reviewing draft Securities and Exchange Commission rules. In October 2000, LEG provided comments on a draR insolvency law pending before congress. A legal expert visited Manila to discuss anti-money laundering initiatives in March 2002. A BCS mission visited Manila in December 1998 to assess the current status of information technology (IT) development and requirements for additional technical assistance relating to implementation of an economic time series database system (followed up by placement of a resident advisor to the BSP who completed his term in early 2000). XI. Resident Representative: A Resident Representative has been stationed in Manila since January 1984. Mr. Vikram Haskar assumed the post of Resident Representative in September 2002. XII. Fourth Amendment to the Articles of Agreement: The authorities have formally communicated to the Fund their acceptance of the Fourth Amendment, which was ratified by the Upper House of Parliament (Senate) in August 2001. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 49 - ANNEX IV PHIL~=PINES:RELATIONSWITHTHE WORLDBANK A. World Bank Lending As of December 3 1,2003, the current Philippines portfolio consisted of 24 projects, amounting to $1.4 billion (net of cancellations), of which $682 million has been disbursed. Since the Bank started operations in the Philippines, it has committed $9.5 billion under IBRD loans and $239 million under IDA credits (less cancellations). Based on net commitments and by sector, infrastructure projects constitute the largest share (39 percent) of the current portfolio, followed by human development projects (32 percent), rural development (28 percent), and others (1 percent). The World Bank’s Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for the Philippines focuses on accelerating growth and empowering the poor to participate more fully in development. The CAS sets forth a base case lending program of about $1.1 billion for the FY03-05 period. During FY03, the World Bank approved 3 loans for a total of $184 million: Kalahi Community Development Project ($100 million), Second Agrarian Reform Communities Development Project ($50 million), and the ARMM Social Fund ($34 million). As of the end of the second quarter of FY04, three projects had been approved: the Judicial Reform Project ($22 million), Rural Power Project ($10 million) and the Laguna de Bay Institutional Strengthening and Community Participation Project or LISCOP ($5 million). The World Bank has also been involved in nonlending activities. These activities focus on four themes emphasized by the Bank’s current assistance strategy: ensuring effective delivery of public services; strengthening the environment for private sector development; building human resources; and managing natural resources, rural development, and regional concerns. Recent examples of nonlending outputs include a Decentralization and Service Delivery Report; an Investment Climate Assessment; a Human Development Study for the Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao; and a Natural Resource Management Study. In addition to analytical work, the Bank also provides technical assistance to the Philippines, frequently supported by trust funds such as the Institutional Development Fund (IDF) and the World Bank-managed ASEM Trust Fund’. Technical assistance is being provided in such areas as pension reform, strengthening various institutions for good governance, international competitiveness, strengthening public financial management capacity, city development strategies, and poverty mapping. Also, technical assistance funded by the Policy and Human Resource Development (PHRD) Grant Facility helps the client prepare lending operations, such as the preparation of the Rural Power, Women’s Health and Safe Motherhood (2), and Laguna de Bay projects. A $9 million grant from the Global Environment Facility (GEF) for the Rural Power Project and a $5 million grant from the Netherlands government for the LISCOP were recently provided in tandem with the loans for these projects. The World Bank has an extensive outreach program in the Philippines to promote knowledge sharing. Currently there are six Knowledge for Development Centers (KDCs) around the country that ’ Asia-Europe Meeting-The European Union’s Asian crisis response tind, created in April 1998; intended to help eligible East Asian countries, including the Philippines, to recover from the regional financial crisis. The trust fund supports activities both in the financial, corporate and social sectors, as well as in the area of governance. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 50- ANNEX IV make available Bank publications and development literature either through on-line access or through hard copies. The Bank has also partnered with the Asian Institute of Management (AIM) to create a Global Distance Learning Network that offers distance learning sessions for a broad national, regional, and international audience. In addition, the Bank also maintains an external country website (www.worldbank.org.uh). Table 1, Philippines: Board Approvals for Loans between July 1, 2000 and December 3 1, 2003 (In millions of U.S. dollars) Name IBRD Amount Land Administration Management Project (LIL) 4.79 Metro Manila Urban Integration Project 60.00 LGU Finance and Development 2 30.00 Social Expenditure Management-2 100.00 Kalahi Community Development Project 100.00 Second Agrarian Reform Communities Project 50.00 ARMM Social Fund 33.60 Judicial Reform 21.90 Rural Power 10.00 Laguna de Bay Institutional Strengthening & 5.00 Community Participation Sources: B. Aid Consultative Group Effective Date l/9/01 12/6/O 1 5116102 12/l l/O2 12/16/02 614103 5/19/03 12/04/03 Not yet effective Not yet effective The World Bank continues to be actively involved in donor coordination in the Philippines, as lead convener, co-convener with Government, or as a participant in donor meetings/dialogues. The most recent aid coordination event was the 25’h meeting of the Consultative Group (CG) held on November 7-8, 2003 in Cebu, Philippines where the World Bank co-chaired the meeting with the Department of Finance. The theme of the Consultative Group Meeting was “Securing Peace and Sustaining Development”. Approximately 130 participants attended the meeting including Government representatives and twenty-four delegations from multilateral and bilateral agencies from the official development assistance (ODA) community. C. Financial Relations LBRD/IDA lending operations as of December 3 1,2003 Total disbursed l/ (In millions of U.S. dollars) IBRD 8,703 Total commitments l/ 91502 Total undisbursed 810 Total repaid 5,347 IFC Investments as of September 30,2003 (In millions of U.S. dollars) Total commitments held by IFC and participants 636.0 Total commitments held by lFC alone 408.5 IDA Total 244 8,947 239 9,742 0 810 38 5,385 Approval pending commitments IFC Participants Sources: l/ Net of cancellations. 0 0 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-51- ANNEXV PHILIPPINES: RELATIONS WITH THE ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK Since joining the Asian Development Bank (AsDB) in 1966, the Philippines has received 186 loans for a total of $8.03 billion, and $126.6 million in 292 technical assistance grants. More than 50 percent of the loans were for projects in the energy and agriculture sectors. One loan of $40 million was approved in 2002 for the Electricity Market and Transmission Development. AsDB also provided a partial credit guarantee in 2002 to support a public bond issue of $500 million equivalent in the Yen market to assist power sector reform. Twelve technical assistance grants totaling $6.6 million and two grants (Japan Fund for Poverty Reduction) totaling $4.6 million were approved in 2002. AsDB’s private sector operations, which are made without government guarantee, amounted to $3 19.2 million, including 14 loans of $282.3 million and 18 equity investments of $32.8 million. The Philippines is one of the largest clients for such activities. Table 1. Philippines: Cumulative AsDB Lending to the Philippines l! (As of December 3 1,2002) Sector Number of Amount of Loans Loans (In millions of U.S. dollars) Percent Energy 25 2,221.l 27.7 Agriculture and natural resources 62 1,915.7 23.8 Social infrastructure 37 1,365.6 17.0 Transport and communications 23 996.9 12.4 Finance 16 673.0 8.4 Others 3 296.0 3.7 Multisector 6 283.7 3.5 Private sector 14 282.3 3.5 Total 186 8,034.3 100.0 ’ Includes loans to private sector without government guarantee, but excludes 18 private equity investments of $32.8 million. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 52- ANNEX VI PHILIPPINES:STATISTICALISSUES Although data are generally published on a timely basis, weaknesses in the Philippines’ statistical base continue to hamper macroeconomic analysis. The recent mission that visited Manila to prepare the data module of the Report on the Observance of Standards and Codes (ROSC) noted that the most serious deficiencies relate to the national accounts and balance of payments statistics. The Philippines has subscribed to the Special Data Dissemination Standards (SDDS) and its metadata are posted on the Dissemination Standards Bulletin Board (DSBB). A. National Accounts Despite the authorities’ efforts to improve its quality, there are serious weaknesses in the national accounts. The problems are shown by large discrepancies between GDP estimated from the expenditure side and GDP from the production side (the official GDP estimates). The authorities try to minimize the discrepancies at less than 5 percent of GDP, but the discrepancies often exceed this limit. The growth of GDP often shows contradictory movements between the expenditure and production sides, with the difference of the growth rates about 3 percent on average over the last two years. The ROSC identified a number of causes for these problems’. l Deaths and births of establishments are not adequately measured, a gap of growing importance given the rapid structural change in the economy in recent years. Annual surveys are designed to pick up these changes but the latest data are from the 1998 National Statistical Office (NSO) annual survey of establishments. This implies that a large number of new establishments, in particular in the electronics and information technology industry, are not covered in the national accounts. l The compilation relies on an outdated benchmark year and fixed input-output ratios. The estimates are derived by extrapolation of the 1988 benchmark year using fixed input-output ratios at 1985 prices. For example, GDP statistics for the electronic sector suggest that value added remained at 10 percent of exports over the past years in spite of industry evidence that the domestic component of exports has been rising sharply.* ’ Currently, the authorities are compiling new national accounts series based on the 1993 SNA guidelines. The new series are expected to be available by the second half of 2004. * Industry representatives indicate that the domestic component has increased significantly, to around 30 percent in recent years Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 53 - ANNEXVI l Statistical techniques in estimating GDP at constant prices are inadequate. For most activities, not all components of the production accounts are compiled. Instead, only value added at current prices is estimated, with the corresponding value added at constant prices estimated using a price deflator. For example, the national accounts constant price estimates for merchandise exports and imports are constructed at 1985 unit values (per kilo) multiplied with quantity data (in kilos) from the foreign trade statistics. Because of this inappropriate method, implicit deflators for electric machinery products are running suspiciously high compared with developments in world market prices. B. Balance of Payments Steps have been taken to improve the quality of the balance of payments accounts although significant weaknesses remain. The Fund has remained actively engaged in attempts to address this issue, with several balance of payments statistics technical assistance missions to the Philippines since 1995. There has been important progress over the past year, with a significant improvement in the measurement of imports to correct an underestimation of imports of electronic goods on a consignment basis. Nevertheless, errors and omissions remain sizable as a result of remaining reporting gaps and misclassifications, which make the data very difficult to interpret.3 Data for external debt and reserves, on the other hand, are generally of good quality, although the data ROSC mission identified some weaknesses in these accounts. Recent revisions to imports have narrowed the gap between national trade data and those of partner countries on a net basis. An interagency task force on import statistics was established in July 2002 to improve the measurement of activity in the electronics sector, which accounts for about 43 percent of trade flows. Results of surveys covering electronics sector raw material imports confirmed that imports were being routine1 Import figures have therefore been revised substantially, back to 2000. P underestimated. As a result, the estimated trade balance for 2001 changed from a surplus of 3.8 percent of GDP to a deficit of 1 percent of GDP. A comparison of the revised figures with trade data of partner countries suggests that the revised trade balances of 2001-02 are being reasonably well measured. However, there remain substantial differences with partner country data on gross flows of exports and imports, with the latter about 15 percent higher than the corresponding national data. 3 Errors and omissions and “trade credits” accounted for balance of payments outflows of US$4.4 billion (5.6 percent of GDP) in 2002. Trade credit data in the Philippines, which are calculated as the difference between export receivables (export shipments less export receipts) and import payables (import arrivals less import payments), are unreliable, as indicated by the continued accumulation of trade credit balances. They are therefore grouped with errors and omissions in the IMF presentation of the Philippines balance of payments accounts. 4 Data from 1996-1999 have not been revised and remain underestimated. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 54- ANNEXVI The ROSC data module confirmed that significant problems remain, both in terms of gaps in coverage and compilation of statistics: l Since deregulation in the early 199Os, international transactions have increasingly flowed through non-traditional channels that are not adequately covered by the statistical reporting system. The major gap relates to Foreign Currency Deposit Units (FCDUs), which account for about 70-75 percent of foreign exchange settlements, where because of strict secrecy rules banks are not mandated to report information. A number of steps are being taken to measure cross-border transactions that skirt the domestic banking system, such as flows through inter-company accounts.5 A number of enterprise surveys, for example, have been introduced. However, these are conducted on a voluntary basis and will take time to implement fully. If the secrecy rules associated with FCDU accounts are not modified to facilitate the collection of data for statistical purposes, the quality of the balance of payments is likely to remain poor for some time. l These problems have been compounded by a lack of resources devoted to the compilation of balance of payments statistics. The time that compilers (at the BSP) can devote to making full use of readily available data, or developing improved sources and methods, has been squeezed by non-compilation related tasks. As a result, progress in implementing the recommendations of various IMF technical assistance missions has been slow. With these concerns in mind, the periodicity of the release of balance of payments statistics has been switched from monthly to quarterly (effective with the release of third quarter data for 2003 in December 2003) and a decision made to establish a separate Department of Economic Statistics within the BSP. The authorities are being assisted in their efforts to implement key recommendations outlined in the data ROSC through a further peripatetic technical assistance in early 2004. 5 According to recent household surveys, typically about 30 percent of remittances of Overseas Filipino Workers were not channeled through the banking system, suggesting that remittances may have been underestimated by about US$3 billion (3.8 percent of GDP) in 2002. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 55 - ANNEX VI C. Monetary Accounts While the framework underlying the compilation of the monetary statistics largely conforms to the Fund’s methodology, major structural changes in the financial system following liberalization have affected data for the central bank, commercial banks, and nonbank financial intermediaries. The ROSC identified a few shortcomings in coverage and quality of the monetary aggregates. In terms of coverage, the growth in activities of rural and thrift banks, as well as non-bank financial intermediaries have so far not been captured in the monetary aggregates6 In addition, except for commercial banks and thrift banks, source data for monetary statistics lack adequate sectorization and classification. To improve the quality of the statistics, the treatment of non-operational banks, valuation of securities and foreign currency denominated accounts, and treatment of accrued interest in monetary statistics aggregates need to be brought into line with international norms. D. Fiscal Data While the Philippines meets the requirements of fiscal transparency in many important respects, the recent fiscal and data ROSCs found areas that require strengthening. An important problem is that the budget is presented on an obligations basis, while the deficit is reported on a cash basis, complicating comparisons of budgets and outcomes. In addition, for levels of the public sector beyond the budgetary central (national) government, consolidated fiscal outturns for items other than the fiscal balance are generally available. Stock and flow information is also not generally well-reconciled. 6 Efforts are underway to expand coverage of depository corporations, which is expected to be done by end-2003. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 56 - ANNEX VI 0 w n n Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 57 - ANNEX VII PHILIPPINES: SOCIAL AND DEMOGRAPHIC INDICATORS 20-30 Years Ago Most Recent Estimate General Surface area (sq. km.) GDP per capita (1995 U.S. dollars) Poverty incidence (percent) Income distribution (percent) Lowest 20 percent Highest 20 percent Demographic Population (million) 42 Growth rate (percent) 2.6 Population density (per sq. km.) 144 Urban population (percent of total) 36 Life expectancy (years) 59.1 Crude birth rate (per ‘000 population) 36.6 Crude death rate (per ‘000 population) 9.7 Labor force Total labor force (million) Agriculture (percent of total) Industry (percent of total) Education Adult illiteracy (percent) Pupil/teacher ratio: primary school Enrollment (percent of age group, gross) Primary Secondary Tertiary Health Infant mortality (per ‘000 live births) 54.0 38.0 Population per physician 9,100 8,130 Population per nurse 2,691 2,392 Access to safe water (percent of population) 50 86 300,000 300,000 971 1,165 52 43.5 5 4.4 56 55 16 34 53.3 37.0 16.1 15.6 16.7 4.9 29 35 108 113 46 77 24 31 80 2.4 266.3 59 69.5 26.2 5.6 Sources: World Bank; and data provided by the Philippine authorities. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicInternational Monetary Fund 700 lgth Street, NW Washington, D. C. 20431 USA Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 04/xX FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE March _, 2004 IMF Concludes 2003 Article IV Consultation with the Philippines On March 5, 2004, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded the Article IV consultation with the Philippines.’ Background The Philippine economy encountered recurrent episodes of market turbulence in 2003. Early in the year, financial markets were unsettled by concerns about worsening public finances, the potential impact of the looming war in Iraq, and the threat of international sanctions due to deficiencies in the Philippine anti-money laundering law. As a result, the peso fell to near-record lows against the U.S. dollar, domestic treasury bill rates rose, and sovereign bond spreads widened. Swift policy response by the authorities and a quick resolution of the Iraq conflict diffused the pressure. However, adverse events set off renewed instability in the second half of the year. An unsuccessful military mutiny in July, legal challenges against central bank officials, a failed attempt to impeach the Supreme Court Chief Justice, and the resignation of the Finance Secretary, all contributed to renewed market pressure. The peso fell to all time lows in November, and then again in late January on account of a ratings downgrade by Moody’s and heightened uncertainty ahead of the May 2004 election. Despite the volatility in the financial markets the economy grew a healthy 4% percent in 2003. GDP growth was supported by rising agriculture production and remittances by overseas Filipinos helped sustain consumption growth. By contrast, export performance, particularly of the electronics sector, has been weak and contributed to the narrowing of the current account l Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial information, and discusses with officials the country’s economic developments and policies. On return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the country’s authorities. This PIN summarizes the views of the Executive Board as expressed during the March 5, 2004 Executive Board discussion based on the staff report. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 59- ANNEX VIII surplus. Reflecting in part increased public sector borrowing, gross reserves rose to $16.9 billion by year end, well above short-term debt. The national government’s fiscal performance improved during 2003. As a result of tight control over spending and improved tax administration, the national government achieved its deficit target of 5 percent of GDP in 2003, compared to a deficit of 5% percent of GDP in 2002.’ However, losses of the National Power Corporation (NPC) increased to an estimated 1 W percent of GDP in 2003-an increase of 1 percentage point of GDP over 2002. As a result, the nonfinancial public sector deficit is estimated to have risen from 6 percent in 2002 to 6% percent of GDP in 2003, while nonfinancial public sector debt rose to about 108 percent of GDP. Monetary policy was conducted in the context of the BSP’s inflation targeting framework. Inflation remained subdued at an average of 3 percent in 2003, well below the BSP’s target range of 4.5-5.5 percent. In this environment, the BSP aimed to maintain monetary conditions supportive of activity, but tightened policy in periods of market pressure to dampen exchange market volatility and stem the potential pass through to inflation. When the peso came under sustained pressure in the first quarter of 2003, the BSP absorbed liquidity by increasing the liquidity reserve ratio from 7 to 8 percent and abolishing the tiering system. With market pressure subsiding, tiering was reintroduced in June and the policy rate was lowered by 25 basis points in July. In response to further peso instability in August, the BSP abolished tiering again, and strengthened restrictions on foreign exchange purchases by residents. The peso came under renewed pressure in early 2004. In response, the BSP raised the liquidity reserve ratio to 10 percent to limit the possible inflationary impact. The economic outlook for the Philippines is likely to remain subject to considerable uncertainty in the period ahead. Economic growth should continue to be favorable, owing to the recovery in the global economy. However, the uncertain political environment ahead of the elections brings downside risks to the outlook. The staff expects growth of around 4% percent in 2004. Inflation is likely to edge up, partly reflecting higher import tariffs, but should remain below, or within, the official target range of 4-5 percent for 2004. Executive Board Assessment <Begin Typing Here> Public lnformafion Notices (PINS) are issued, (i) at the request of a member country, following the conclusion of the Article IV consultation for countries seeking to make known the views of the IMF to the public. This action is intended to strengthen IMF surveillance over the economic policies of member countries by increasing the transparency of the IMF’s assessment of these policies; and (ii) following policy discussions in the Executive Board at the decision of the Board. * The figures correspond to the IMF’s definition, which excludes privatization receipts from revenues and includes the operations of the Central Bank-Board of Liquidators. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public