DOCUMENT OF INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND NOT FOR PUBLIC USE ARCHIVES ROOM HQ C-532 0451 AGENDA EBS/00/134 CONFIDENTIAL July 11, 2000 To: Members of the Executive Board From: The Secretary Subject: Zambia-Staff Report for the 2000 Article IV Consultation, Review of the Annual Program, and Request for Second Annual Program Under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staffreport for the 2000 Article IV consultation with Zambia, review of the first annual program, and Zambia’s request for the second annual program under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility. A draft decision appears on pages 26-29. This subject, together with the preliminary document for the enhanced HIPC Iitiative for Zambia, the assessment of the Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper, and the Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper for Zambia (to be issued shortly), is tentatively scheduled for discussion on Wednesday, July 26, 2000. Mr. Sharer (ext. 36515) and Mr. S. Hossain (ext. 36861) are available to answer technical or factual questions relating to this paper prior to the Board discussion. Unless the Documents Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the WTO Secretariat on Wednesday, July 19, 2000; and to the African Development Bank, the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa, and the European Commission, following its consideration by the Executive Board. -.- Att: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public. CONFIDENTIAL INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND ZAMBIA Staff Report for the 2000 Article IV Consultation, Review of the First Annual Program and the Request for the Second Annual Program Under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility Prepared by the African Department (In consultation with the Fiscal Affairs, Legal, Monetary and Exchange AfI?airs, Policy Development and Review, Statistics, and Treasurer’s Departments) Approved by A. Basu and G. Russell Kincaid July 11, 2000 Contents Page Acronyms.. . . . . . _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . _. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . _ . . _. .3 Executive Summary . . . . . . . . . . . .._. . . . . . . . ._.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ._. . . . ._........... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 I. Introduction ...................................................................................................................... .5 II. Background and Economic Developments in 1999 .......................................................... .6 III. Report on the Discussions .............................................................................................. 10 A. Review of Developments in the First Quarter of 2000 ......................................... 10 B. The Medium-Term Setting and the Program for 2000 ......................................... 13 C. Poverty Reduction and Social Policies ................................................................. 19 D. Governance Issues ............................................................................................. .21 E. Technical Assistance and Data Issues.. ............................................................... .22 IV. Medium-Term Financing and Capacity to Repay the Fund . . . . . . _. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . __. . . .23 V. Program Monitoring. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23 VI. Staff Appraisal . . . . . . .., . . .._..._........ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ._. ._. . . . . . . . . . . . ._... . . . . . . . . . . 23 _. Text Boxes 1. Expenditure Management ................................................................................................ .8 2. Banking Supervision and Banking Crisis.. ........................................................................ 12 3. Human Development Indicators and Poverty and Social Policies .................................... .20 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2- Text Tables . 1. Indicators of Fund Credit, 1999-2009 ............................................................................. .30 2. Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 1998-2002 ................................................ .3 1 3. Central Government Operations (in billions of kwacha), 1998-2002 ............................... .32 4. Central Government Operations (in percent of GDP), 1998-2002.. ................................. .33 5. Monetary Survey, 1998-2000 ......................................................................................... .34 6. Assets and Liabilities of the Bank of Zambia, 1998-2000 ................................................ 35 7. Balance of Payments, 1998-2002.. .................................................................................. .36 8. Schedule of Disbursements under the PRGF Arrangement, 1999-2003 ........................... .37 Text Figures 1. Selected Fiscal Indicators, 1995-2000 ............................................................................ .38 2. Selected Monetary Indicators, January 1995-March 2000 ............................................... .39 3. Selected Exchange Rate Indicators, January 1995;February 2000 ................................... .40 Appendices I. Letter of Intent.. ............................................................................................................. 41 II. Relations with the Fund ................................................................................................ .53 III. Relations with the World Bank Group ........................................................................... 56 IV Statistical Issues.. ......................................................................................................... .57 V. Social and Demographic Indicators ............................................................................... 60 .- .- Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3- BIS BOP BoZ ZOMESA DSA ESAF EU FAD SDP GRZ HIPC 1FMIS l-PRSP LO1 MOFED NGOs OAU PAC PRGF PSPF RAMCOZ SADC SAF SSA STA TA USAID VAT ZAMTEL ZCCM ZESCO ZNCB ZNOC ZPA ZlL4 Acronyms Bank of International Settlements Balance of Payments Bank of Zambia Common Market for Eastern and Southern African Countries Debt Sustainability Analysis Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility European Union Fiscal Affairs Department Gross Domestic Product Government of the Republic of Zambia Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Integrated Financial Management Information System Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper Letter of Intent Ministry of Finance and Economic Development Non Government Organization Organization of African Unity Public Accounts Committee Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility Public Service Pension Fund Roan Antelope Mining Company of Zambia Southern African Development Community Structural Adjustment Facility Sub-Saharan Africa Statistics Department Technical Assistance United States Agency for International Development Value-added Tax Zambia Telecommunications Company Zambia Consolidated Cooper Mines Zambia Electricity Supply Company Zambia National Commercial Bank Zambia National Oil Company Zambia Privatization Agency Zambia Revenue Authority Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4- EXECUTIVE SUMMARY Background 0 Zambia’s performance under the 1999 PRGF program was weak. Real GDP expanded by only 2.4 percent mainly due to good performance in agricultural production and despite a decline in metal production. The 12 month rate of inflation declined to 2 1 percent. l The 1999 financial performance was weaker than programmed. Most quantitative and structural performance criteria were not observed; privatization of ZCCM was delayed until March 2000. The overall fiscal balance (cash basis) recorded a deficit of 4 percent of GDP compared with the target of 3.2 percent of GDP, despite delays in ZCCM related payments. Monetary policy also weakened considerably. The program for 2000 0 The program for 2000, developed in the context of the strategy outlined in the authorities’ I-PRSP, aims at achieving real GDP growth of 4 percent, reducing end-period inflation to 19 percent, and strengthening gross international reserves to the equivalent of 1.3 months of imports. 0 Financial policies will be geared towards inflation and growth objectives while allowing for adequate investment in the social sectors and infrastructure. Despite efforts to strengthen expenditure control, the domestic fiscal balance is programmed to increase by 2.7 percent of GDP, mainly reflecting large net lending to ZCCM (4.3 percent of GDP). l Key structural reforms in 2000 include: submission of proposals for Cabinet decision on modalities for privatization of ZESCO and ZNCB; abstention from granting any new tax reductions or exemptions; measures to improve expenditure control; effective deregulation of the pricing of petroleum products, and measures to address the weakness of the financial sector. Staff position l In view of Zambia’s relatively poor record of performance under Fund-supported programs, effective implementation of the program is critical to establish a credible track record, and improve economic performance and welfare. 0 Implementation of expenditure monitoring and control measures and the program for privatization and deregulation need to be underpinned by strong political commitment l In view of Zambia’s unsustainably high debt burden, debt relief available under the enhanced HIPC initiative will be essential. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicI. INTRODUCTION 1. The 2000 Article IV consultation discussions with Zambia were held in Lusaka during May 1 l-25,2000. Discussions with the Zambian authorities on the first review of the first annual program and on a second annual program for 2000 under the PRGF were initiated in Lusaka in September, continued in December 1999 and March 2000, and in Washington in January and April 2000, and were completed during the May 11-25 mission.’ The Zambian representatives included the Hon. Dr. Kalumba, Minister of Finance and Economic Development; Dr. Mwanza, Governor of the Bank of Zambia; Mr. Mtonga, Secretary to the Treasury; Professor Mweene, Deputy Secretary to the Cabinet; and other senior government officials. The mission also met with representatives of commercial banks and the private sector, members of the diplomatic and donor community, NGOs, and the trade unions. 2. In the attached letter to the Managing Director dated June 30,200O (Appendix I), the Minister of Finance reviews the performance under the 1999 program and describes the objectives and policies under the 2000 program to be supported by the second annual program under the PRGF. In view of the delay in the completion of the first review, the government of Zambia also requests, in the same letter, a one-year extension of the PRGF arrangement through March 2003.2 3. The last Article IV consultation was concluded on March 25, 1999. On that occasion Executive Directors emphasized the need for the authorities to restore macroeconomic stability and deepen their program of structural reform, notably the privatization of the main assets of the state-owned ZCCM. They underscored the importance of strong fiscal adjustment and called for an improvement in expenditure control. Also on that occasion, the three-year arrangement under the PRGF was approved (in an amount equivalent to SDR 254.5 million or 52 percent of quota) and the first disbursement under the arrangement of SDR 10 million was made on March 30, 1999. The first review was scheduled to be concluded on the basis of end-June 1999 performance criteria. However, several quantitative performance criteria, structural performance criteria, and structural benchmarks were not observed (Appendix I, Table 1). Protracted discussions ensued to bring the program back on track, delaying the completion of the first review; no further disbursements have been made. ’ The staff representatives for the May 2000 mission included Mr. Sharer (head), Mr. Hossain, Mr. Zeuner (EP) (all AFR), Mr. Powell (PDR), Mr. Kell (FAD), Ms. Williams- Smith (Assistant-AFR), and Ms. Mendoza, an MAE expert on banking sector issues. Mr. Meyers, the Resident Representative, participated in the discussions. A parallel World Bank mission also visited Lusaka to finalize a credit to improve fiscal management, and to participate in the I-PRSP and Preliminary HIPC discussions. ’ The proposed rephasing of disbursements is shown in Tables land8. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-6- 4. An I-PRSP document has been prepared by the authorities and discussed with the Bank and Fund staff, including the authorities’ plans for developing a full PRSP. Zambia meets the eligibility criteria for consideration of debt relief under the enhanced HIPC Initiative. In this regard, the staffs of the Fund, World Bank, and Zambian authorities also produced an updated DSA. A preliminary HIPC Initiative document will be issued to the Fund Board for discussion with this staff report. 5. Zambia maintains an exchange system that is free of restrictions on payments and transfers for current international transactions.3 Zambia’s core economic database is adequate for the program monitoring. However, the delays in the compilation of monetary statistics, and weaknesses in the reconciliation of monetary and fiscal data, are problems requiring substantial efforts. The timeliness and quality of monetary data need to be enhanced, Fiscal data also needs to be strengthened, particularly regarding domestic payments arrears. Quarterly data are often subject to revisions later in the year. BOP statistics suffer from incomplete coverage and methodological problems, notably on trade and services data, external debt service, and public investment projects.’ 6. Summaries of Zambia’s relations with the Fund and the World Bank are contained in Appendices II and III, respectively. Statistical issues are discussed in Appendix IV, and social and demographic indicators are provided in Appendix V. II. BACKGROUNDANDECONOMICDEVELOPMENTSIN 1999 7. During 1999, Zambia’s macroeconomic performance was adversely affected by continuing large operating losses of ZCCM and lax fiscal control. The large financial losses of ZCCM stemmed from continued delays in the privatization of the company’s main assets. Even though favorable weather conditions contributed to an increase in agricultural output and exports, overall economic activity remained subdued, as metal production declined further, and growth in manufacturing stagnated, partly reflecting the mining sector weakness, and the impact from civil conflict in neighboring countries. The economic difficulties were aggravated by a rise in the cost of petroleum products and disruption resulting from the destruction by fire of the state-owned oil refinery in May 1999. It is 3 In April 1999, a mission comprising experts from LEG and MAE determined that Zambia has one of the most liberal exchange rate systems in Africa. However, existence of some external payment arrears (obligations of some private commercial and individual entities), which were accumulated prior to October 1985, arising from the limitations on the availability of foreign exchange, constituted an exchange restriction under Article VIII,--- Section 2(a). 4 A STA mission to improve balance of payments statistics overlapped with the mission in Lusaka. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-7- estimated that real GDP expanded by only 2.4 percent in 1999 representing, a modest decline in per capita terms, compared with the envisaged 4 percent (Table 2). Notwithstanding weak domestic demand, upward pressures on domestic prices remained during 1999, reflecting the impact of the increase in import prices in late 1998, the rapid expansion of credit to the public sector stemming from an expansionary fiscal stance, and inflationary expectations. Thus, inflation declined by less than programmed, with the twelve-month rate of consumer price inflation falling from 30.6 percent at end-1998 to 20.6 percent at end-1999, compared with 15 percent envisaged under the program. 8. In 1999, fiscal performance was worse than programmed, owing to a shortfall in tax revenue and continued accumulation of domestic payments arrears that resulted from weak expenditure control. Sluggish economic growth and the buildup of tax arrears by public enterprises led to a significant shortfall in tax revenue (9 percent below the program target), especially in trade taxes, excise duties and VAT. The domestic fiscal balance (cash basis) recorded a surplus of 0.4 percent of GDP in 1999, the same as in 1998 compared with a deficit of 0.5 percent of GDP targeted under the program (Tables 3 and 4), although this reflected mainly delays in net lending to ZCCM (1.9 percent of GDP). The overall fiscal balance (cash basis) recorded a deficit of 4.0 percent of GDP (4.3 percent in 1998), compared with the target of 3.2 percent. Budget implementation was also undermined by weaknesses in expenditure management, as evidenced by an accumulation of payments arrears by line ministries. The stock of arrears rose from K23 billion at end-l 998 to K147 billion at end-l 999, despite K121 billion spent during the year to clear existing arrears. In addition to lax expenditure control this also reflected improved auditing which uncovered additional arrears outstanding. Expenditure management issues are discussed in Box 1. 9. Monetary developments were characterized by a higher-than-targeted expansion in the money supply and a rapid expansion of the credit to the public sector. During the year, broad money growth accelerated to 29 percent, compared with the program target of 20 percent, mainly as a consequence of the rapid expansion of credit to the parastatal sector (109 percent), in particular to ZCCM and ZNOC. Since early 1999, interest rates on treasury bills and commercial bank lending rates rose gradually by about 2 to 3 percentage points, but with the deceleration in inflation, real interest rates rose markedly. 10. Despite slippages in fiscal policy, the external current account deficit fell modestly in 1999 largely due to a 10 percent decline in the value of imports, reflecting mainly weak activity in the mining sector (Table 7). 5 Export performance was also weak The terms of trade deteriorated further, as world copper prices declined by 3 percent, reaching a 12-year low. Combined with the further delays in privatization of ZCCM, this esulted in about a 10 percent decline in the value of metal exports. Non-traditional exports, - 5 Under the PRGF program approved in March 1999, the current account deficit was , projected to widen by over 4 percent of GDP, reflecting the projected boost in imports resulting from the assumed privatization of ZCCM. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-8- Box 1. Expenditure Management Public expenditure management (PEM) in Zambia has been under stress for many years. The most sbvious manifestation of this is the buildup of payments arrears, to K152 billion, equivalent to 1.5 percent of GDP, at end-March 2000. Other symptoms include: interruptions to capital projects; Frequent resort to off-budget financing and supplementary budgets; unpredictable and non- mtransparent cash allocations to and within line ministries; and a structure of government :xpenditure skewed away from the social sectors. The underlying causes of these difftculties can be considered under three broad headings: Budget preparation: certain expenditure categories are routinely underbudgeted and/or inaccurately costed, and there has been a reluctance to implement the underlying policy reforms necessary to bring the budget into line with stated government intentions (in particular, to reduce spending on civil service wages and increase allocations for recurrent non-labor expenditures in the social sectors). More generally, there is the lack of a medium- term perspective in budget preparation. Budget execution: since 1993, Zambia has operated a strict cash rationing system, whereby monthly allocations to line ministries are restricted to revenues accruing within the month. While this has facilitated a substantial reduction in the fiscal deficit, the cash allocation process has been non-transparent, resulting in (a) highly variable releases to line ministries, often bearing little relation to the ofticial budget, and (b) underfunding of expenditures which cannot be reduced at short notice, such as food for prisoners or contractual obligations on capital projects, which has generated arrears. Lack of discipline and accountability: many line ministries, and particularly the politically powerful ones, enter into commitments which are inconsistent with budgeted allocations and/or available cash resources. At the same time, financial reporting and information systems within ministries and at the Ministry of Finance are weak, and there has been a lack of political will to sanction ministries which make excessive commitments and expenditures. Furthermore, ministries and spending agencies have been allowed to open accounts in commercial banks without proper monitoring. This has made it difficult to keep track of the government’s financial position, and has resulted in large unremunerated balances accumulating in these accounts. During 1999 and the first half of 2000 the authorities have introduced a number of measures to address the shortcomings in PEM: (a) with the assistance of a resident IMF advisor, reporting systems for arrears, commitments and expenditures have been improved (including the establishment of a Commitment Monitoring Unit in the Ministry of Finance), supported by extensive training of line ministry accountants and controlling officers; (b) instructions have been issued to freeze new contracts by the Ministry of Works and Supply, which has been the largest source of arrears; (c) the Minister of Finance has written to all Controlling Officers (responsible for spending by each ministry) setting out their responsibilities for controlling expenditures, and indicating the disciplinary steps that will be taken if arrears continue to accumulate; and (d) each Controlling Officer has consolidated their commercial bank accounts into a single account at each bank, facilitating improved monitoring and reconciliation of government funds. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-9- which have grown by an average of over 14 percent per annum over the decade, declined by 3 percent in 1999. They have been adversely affected by military conflict and political uncertainties in three neighboring countries. 11. In April 1999, Paris Club creditors agreed to a rescheduling of about $1 billion in accumulated arrears and payments falling due through March 2002. As a result of this agreement, total debt service paid in 1999 was $136 million, or about 16 percent of estimated exports of goods and services. During the year, weak program implementation led to substantial delays and lower-than-expected disbursement of BOP support. Gross official reserves at end-1999 fell to US$46 million, equivalent to only about 2 weeks of import cover.6 Severe external pressures and some erosion of market confidence also led to about 12 percent depreciation of the kwacha-US dollar exchange rate during 1999. The weakening of Zambia’s currency occurred against the backdrop of a sharp depreciation of the several other currencies in the region, including the South African rand. Zambia’s real effective exchange rate depreciated by only about 2 percent in 1999. Performance under the program 12. Most quantitative performance criteria for end-June 1999 were not observed, except for the domestic fiscal surplus, and the ceilings on nonconcessional borrowing (Appendix I, Table 1). The government also faced considerable challenges in its privatization effort and missed the structural performance criteria on the privatization of ZCCM and ZAMTEL (Appendix I, Table 2). 13. With a view to bringing the program back on track, the government committed itself to stepping up the structural adjustment effort, and agreed with Fund staff on revised indicative targets for end-December, taking into account a sizable shortfall in donor financing caused by delays in the privatization of ZCCM and changes in the ZCCM financing plan.’ Implementation of these indicative targets was mixed. While most targets for end-December were achieved,’ progress in the implementation of the structural reforms has 6 The definition of gross official reserves includes balances held in an escrow account at the BIS, which can be used for payments to Paris Club creditors. The account was established in accordance with the April 1999 Paris Club agreement. ’ The original end-December 1999 quantitative indicative targets were revised in the light of sizeable shortfalls in donor assistance, changes in the ZCCM financing plan, and the need to make provision for clearance of new domestic payment arrears. 8 The target on civil service retrenchment at end-December was missed, but a sizable retrenchment in January 2000 resulted in a net reduction in the number of public employees of 11,674, compared to a target of 7,000 for end-December. The outstanding stock of domestic payments arrears at end-December 1999 (K 147 billion) also exceeded the indicative target. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- IO- been slow.’ Late payment to external creditors meant that the continuous performance criteria concerning new external payment arrears was missed at end-December 1999. III. REPORT ON THE DISCUSSIONS A. Review of Developments in the First Quarter of 2000 14. While positive developments in the agricultural and mining sectors are expected to support attainment of increased growth in real GDP, other economic developments during the first quarter of 2000 have not been favorable. A steep increase in food prices in February and March and higher import prices raised the 12-month inflation rate to nearly 24 percent in end-March, from 21 percent at end-December. Gross official reserves fell by US$37 million in the first quarter of 2000 to only US$9 million at end-March, equivalent to less than one week’s imports, reflecting mainly delayed BOP disbursements by donors, and depressed mining sector exports. After a 5 percent depreciation during the first two months of the year, the kwacha-U.S. dollar exchange rate came under renewed pressure at end- February reflecting an erosion in market confidence in the face of a continuing delay in the privatization of ZCCM. The Bank of Zambia responded with a foreign exchange sale of about US$l2 million (borrowed against a forward receipts from a local commercial bank), which helped in the short run to prevent a further depreciation. Shortly after the privatization of ZCCM at end-March, there was a BOP disbursement of US$63 million by the World Bank which contributed to the increase in gross official reserves to US$57 million at end-April. 15. The end-March 2000 domestic fiscal deficit on a cash basis was consistent with indicative targets discussed in December 1999. However, this outturn significantly understates fiscal pressures. While tax receipts from the private sector were slightly above target, this was more than offset by a significant buildup of tax arrears from parastatals, notably from the oil and electricity companies (ZESCO and ZNOC). There were also significant overruns in domestically financed capital expenditure (mainly related to rural road projects) and unbudgeted expenditure of around K35 billion was incurred.” These overruns were offset by constraint and deferrals in other areas of domestic current expenditure and net 9 At end-October, an actuarial report on the PSPF and recommendations on an actuarially sound civil service pension system were presented to the President; a 20 percent share and management rights in the telecommunications company (ZAMTEL) were offered for sale in January 2000, and most important the transfer of ZCCM’s main assets to a private company finally took place on March 3 1,200O. to The latter was related, inter alia, to regional peace-keeping activities, court awards against the government, and payments to parliamentarians. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-ll- lending.’ ’ Preliminary data indcate that cash releases for social sector expenditure are as envisaged in the budget. However, despite cash releases to reduce payments arrears, the overall stock of domestic arrears increased, albeit modestly, to K152 billion at end-March, equivalent to about 1.5 percent of GDP. 16. During the first quarter of 2000 growth in broad money met the indicative target, as a higher than targeted increase in net domestic assets was offset by the higher than targeted decline in net foreign assets (Tables 5). However, credit to the private sector was lower than envisaged which was offset by increased credit to parastatals reflecting mainly the delay in privatization of ZCCM. Problems with parastatals underlie severe weakness at the state-owned ZNCB. The commercial banking sector continued to suffer from weaknesses. As of end-March 2000,4 out of the 16 commercial banks did not meet minimum capital requirements, including the largest bank, ZNCB (see Box 2). The share of banks’ non- performing loans has increased in recent periods and amounted to about one-third of the total loan portfolio, mainly reflecting the deteriorating position of the ZNCB on account of its non-performing loans to ZNOC and a private mining company. These financial sector weaknesses threaten public sector finances and the stability of the banking system. 17. With the impact of the HIV/AIDS crisis mounting (see I-PRSP, paragraph 15) and given the poverty and social welfare needs, domestic pressure has been steadily building for the government to adjust budget priorities to more effectively address these social concerns. Governance issues also remain an important concern of donors, and will figure importantly in the ongoing dialogue with the government, including in the Consultative Group meeting scheduled for mid-July. 18. On the political front, activities ahead of presidential and parliamentary elections in Zambia have begun in earnest. The elections scheduled to take place in 2001 are likely to have an impact on future policy directions and support from the international community. With President Chiluba having publicly committed to retire at the end of his current term, and with the retirement of former-President Kaunda, an open selection process for presidential elections is underway. Three of Zambia’s neighbors- Angola, Congo, and Zimbabwe-have been affected by military and social conflict. Zambia has not escaped the consequences of these confrontations; there are currently over 220,000 refugees from Angola and the Congo sheltered in Zambia. Zambia has also strengthened its forces along its borders in order to maintain territorial integrity. ‘r Agreement on the 2000 budget was delayed by protracted discussions on the wage issue with the public sector trade unions. The government had announced a near doubling of the minimum civil service wage to K200,OOO per month (about $66). This would have implied a wage bill equivalent to 6.1 percent of GDP compared with the K484 billion (5 percent of GDP) provided in the budget for 2000. In view of the resource constraints, the government has agreed to a phased increase in the level of minimum wage. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12 - Box 2. Banking Supervision and Banking Crisis Financial system Tbe financial system of Zambia includes the Bank of Zambia (BoZ), 16 commercial banks (4 of which are foreign owned), and a number of fmance banks, development finance institutions, and insurance companies. At end-l 999, the banking system’s liabilities were equivalent to 12 percent of GDP. Foreign currency deposits account for one third of the total deposit base. Prudential regulation and banking supervision Prudential regulation and guidelines fol bank supervision are consistent With international standards, although their implementation has been weak. The Banking and Financial Services Act, 1994 provide the framework of bank supervision and regulation. An amendment to the law is proposed to provide sufficient autonomy and authority to tbe BoZ in licensing and liquidating banks. With respect to capital and capital adequacy ratios, the minimum capital is set at K2 billion in 1996. Commercial banks are required to maintain core capital above 15 percent of risk-weighted assets, while Tier I and Tier II capital requirements are set at 5 percent and 10 percent of risk-weighted assets, respectively. Banks are also subject to liquid reserve ratio, which has two components: minimum cash reserve requirement is 8 percent of deposit liabilities applicable to both local and foreign currency deposits and minimum liquid asset ratio is 25 percent of deposit liabilities applicable to only local currency deposits. Eligible liquid assets include notes and coins, government treasury bills, balances with BoZ and term deposits. The limit on credit exposure to one borrower or a group of borrowers is set at 25 percent of the regulatory capital while the limit on insider lending is set at 5 percent of the regulatory capital. In addition investment in fixed asset investment is limited to no more than 100 percent of regulatory capital. With respect to foreign exchange exposures, the maximum limit on net open foreign exchange position is 25 percent of regulatory capital, higher than 15 percent generally recommended by the Fund. With regard to classification of assets and provisioning, the classification requirement is at par with international standards: an asset is considered “substandard” when payments (principal and/or interest) remain outstandiig for 90-120 days; “doubtful” when payments remain outstanding for more than 120 days but less than 180 days; and a “loss” when payments remain outstanding for more than 180 days. The required minimum level of provisions are 20,50 and 100 percent for substandard, doubtful, and loss loans. Banking crisis From 1995 through 1999 there were nine bank failures, the largest being Meridian Bank with total assets of K86 billion at closure. In early 2000, it came to light that the largest commercial bank, ZNCB (state owned) is insolvent. At end-April, approximately 70 percent of the bank’s loan portfolio are non-performing, with 60 percent of the loan portfolio concentrated in two borrowers, one of which is a state-owned entity. The bank holds about 25 percent of industry deposits with private sector and government accounting for 60 percent and 35 percent of its deposit base, respectively. The present crisis is the result of ineffIcient operations, unsound banking practices and indiscriminate government interventions. Recently BoZ increased its directions of bank’s specific activities to halt tier deterioration of its asset position. A smaller bank, Commerce Bank, was recently placed under curatorship after more than two years of poor operations, capital insolvency and failure to repay debt to the BoZ. In the absence of a deposit insurance scheme, BoZ will assume a limited liability to pay for the deposits up to a certain amount. Two other smaller banks, Union Bank and Invest Trust Merchant Bank, are undercapitalized and the former is technically insolvent. In spite of BoZ’s direction, neither banks have been able to raise capital. ;- Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13- B. The Medium-Term Setting and the Program for 2000 Medium-term setting 19. The key policy challenges facing Zambia are to establish sound financial and economic policies that will engender increased incentives to productive activity and investment, and revitalize economic growth while reducing poverty and making sure that benefits from growth reach all sections of the public. The government’s medium- term macroeconomic framework’and targets outlined in their I-PRSP, which is being issued to the Board with this staff report, recognize that maintenance of macroeconomic stability and pursuit of deregulation and privatization of the economy are critical to achieving these objectives. 20. With the pickup in copper production and improvement in external environment in the medium-term, Zambia’s exports are projected to grow by about 20 percent per annum during 2000-2002, while imports are projected to grow by almost 15 percent per annum, reflecting a revival in mining and other activities over the next three years. As a result, the current account deficit (excluding official grants) is projected to decline from 15.8 percent of GDP in 1999 to 12.4 percent of GDP in 2002. Part of this deficit will be financed by private capital inflow to the mining sector, while the remainder will need to be covered by BOP assistance including debt relief and grants. 21. To enhance domestic resource mobilization for key social and development objectives and consistent with the objective of reducing inflation to single digits, fiscal policy in the medium-term will aim at moving to a more sustainable position. In 2000, the domestic fiscal deficit, (cash basis) will rise to 2.3 percent of GDP because of the large net lending to ZCCM (4.3 percent of GDP) following the completion of its privatization. Thereafter the domestic fiscal balance will improve and reach a surplus of 0.2 percent of GDP in 2002, (Tables 3 and 4). The financing gap for 200 l-2 is expected to be covered by grants and concessional financing from donors. l2 The composition of expenditure will be improved by maintaining control of the wage bill and redirecting expenditure to infrastructure and social services. The program for 2000 22. The main objectives of the financial program for 2000 are to further reduce inflation and restore economic growth. Real GDP is conservatively projected to grow by l2 Much of the improvement in the fiscal position between 2000 and 2002 reflects a fall in net lending to ZCCM. However, domestic revenue, abstracting-from the one-off payments by ZESCO to clear its tax arrears in 2000, is programmed to increase from 16.9 percent to GDP in 2000 to 18.0 percent of GDP in 2002 (see Table 4). The program also allows for a significant increase in domestic expenditure on health, education and capital projects. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14- 4 percent based on a strong recovery of the mining sector, its spillover effects to the manufacturing and trade sectors, and continued growth in agricultural production (Table 2). Key elements of the program are fiscal constraint, improved expenditure control on the demand management side, and an acceleration of the privatization of remaining key state enterprises on the structural side. Given the fiscal stance, a relatively tight monetary policy will be pursued to achieve the target for inflation of 19 percent by end-2000. Higher metal exports and an increase in donor inflows are anticipated to allow a strengthening of gross reserves by US$ 100 million to US$146 million at the end of 2000, equivalent to 1.3 months of import cover. The government also intends to step up efforts to reduce poverty and reform the economy, including through a strengthening of expenditure controls and the delivery of social services, the privatization of state-owned enterprises in the nonmining sector. In addition to improving the effectiveness of traditional social sector intervention programs that strive to reduce poverty, Zambia will need to pursue targeted interventions, including expansion of the Social Recovery Fund Program which is partly funded and managed by communities themselves. Fiscal policy 23. The main objectives of fiscal policy in 2000 are to reduce inflation and to invest in the social sectors and infrastructure development. The budget for 2000 strives to strike a difficult balance between the maintenance of basic government operations, already committed capital spending, and additional resources to social spending in support of poverty alleviation, while meeting obligations for payment of ZCCM liabilities which had to be assumed by the government as part of the privatization. The budget for 2000 includes an allocation of K423 billion to ZCCM, equivalent to 4.3 percent of GDP (Tables 3 and 4).13 Despite efforts to strengthen the revenue base and expenditure control (discussed below), the domestic fiscal deficit on a cash basis is programmed to increase to 2.3 percent of GDP in 2000. 24. Significant improvement in the collection of taxes from ZESCO and ZNOC is fundamental to meeting the revenue targets for 2000. A number of measures, including raising of petroleum products and electricity prices,14 should ensure tax compliance by these parastatals. In addition, the ZRA is now authorized to collect all taxes due on oil imports at l3 The delays and poor handling of the privatization process of ZCCM have cost Zambia dearly. There is strong evidence that had Zambia accepted an earlier bid for the sale of ZCCM in 1998, the country could not only have avoided wastage of public funds at a far earlier stage, but could have sold the assets on far better terms. It may be noted that government provided substantial tax concessions to the new owner of ZCCM under the terms of its privatization. l4 Outlined in paragraph 10 of the Letter of Intent. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-15- the point of entry.” The non-accumulation of new tax arrears by ZESCO and ZNOC from June 1,200O constitutes a quantitative performance criterion under the program. More generally, to maintain the integrity of the tax system, under the program the government is committed to refrain from introducing any tax reductions, new exemptions, rebates, or any other preferential tax treatment during the remainder of 2000. 25. Expenditure outlays for 2000 amount to 30.8 percent of GDP. The budget includes a contingency reserve of K164 billion (1.7 percent of GDP), to be utilized to cover clearance of arrears, unanticipated statutory outlays that could not be foreseen at the time of budget preparation, such as domestic interest payments higher than budgeted, legally mandated and unavoidable outlays, and the fiscal cost of drought and other natural disasters. No unbudgeted expenditures will be covered from the contingency provision without a thorough review and approval by the Ministry of Finance. For the period April-December, an amount of K109 billion remained in the contingency, of which K69 billion is to be used for arrears clearance.‘6 In May 2000, the government reached agreement with the public sector trade unions on civil service wage increases for 2000. l7 These increases will raise the total wage bill for 2000 to K5 16 billion or 5.2 percent of GDP. During the discussions, while recognizing the importance of moving to the government’s commitment of a minimum wage of K200,OOO per month, the staff raised serious concerns about the impact of a wage increase on the wage bill, particularly the impact on budgetary priorities and the impact of wage compression on the incentive structure in the civil service. The authorities concurred with the mission’s views and indicated that they are committed to limiting the overall wage bill for I5 Furthermore, ZRA has the mandate to collect tax payments due from ZNOC directly from the oil marketing companies, if necessary. I6 For 2000 as a whole, the program allocates K113 billion for the clearance of arrears: K44 billion allocated in the GRZ Budget for 2000, plus K69 billion earmarked from the Contingency Reserve for the period April-December (see Table 3). In the first quarter of 2000, the Ministry of Finance released K16 billion to clear arrears; despite this, the stock of arrears increased from K147 billion at end-l 999 to K152 billion at end-March 2000 (see Table 3, Appendix 1). Thus, the K113 billion total allocation for arrears clearance corresponds to K16 billion released in the first quarter, plus an allocation of K97 billion between April and December to reduce the stock of arrears from K152 billion to K55 billion “See paragraph 27 below”. I7 Under the agreement, with effect from April 1, wages for unionized civil servants were increased by K28,OOO per month across the board (23 percent), to bring the minimum wage to K150,OOO per month (17 percent); management grade civil servants’ salaries were increased by 10 percent. With effect from October 1, salaries are to be further increased to bring the minimum to K175,OOO per month with a further 6 percent increase for management grades. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 16- 2001 to no more than 5.4 percent of GDP,18 while raising the minimum salary to K200,OOO per month, with effect from January 1, 2001. The authorities also indicated their determination to reduce the share of the wage bill in domestic noninterest expenditures over the medium term by containing wage increases and reducing staffing. 26. Under the program the authorities are also committed to ensure that at least 36 percent of domestically financed discretionary expenditure is allocated to social sectors.‘g This will be achieved through budgeted allocations for spending on the social sectors, along with improvements in the cash allocation mechanism. It will be monitored through the regular publication of cash releases from the Ministry of Finance to line ministries. Notwithstanding, the- large allocation for net lending to ZCCM in 2000 effectively reduced the domestic resources available for health and education spending in the 2000 budget, resulting in a fall in allocation to these two sectors to 4.1 percent of GDP, from 4.7 percent of GDP in 1999. With regard to capital expenditure, the authorities have identified basic infrastructure, education and health as the priority areas. Capital expenditure in 2000 is programmed at 10.7 percent of GDP, of which domestically-funded capital outlays will be limited to only 1.7 percent of GDP. 27. The settlement of domestic arrears is an important component in Zambia’s efforts to strengthen the public finances. The authorities will conduct a complete inventory of outstanding arrears and formulate, in consultation with the staff a plan to reduce the stock to K55 billion by end-2000. While progress has been made in the recording and reporting of commitments, the process of actually controlling commitments has yet to begin. Thus, addressing persistent accumulation of domestic arrears is important, and a fimdamental element of the authorities’ program will be the strengthening of budget management underpinned by strong political commitment. To this end, the government will implement a I8 This objective is complicated by a court ruling on a trade union appeal of the 1998 wage increase. The supreme court ruled against the government and mandated an additional backdated wage increase which will need to be factored into the 2001 wage negotiations. lg Social sector expenditure is defined as current and capital expenditure on health, education, social safety net, water and sanitation, and disaster relief. Domestically financed discretionary expenditure is defined as total expenditure, less foreign-funded expenditure, domestic interest payments, the allocation for arrears clearance, the civil service wage adjustment, the contingency reserve, civil service retrenchment costs, payments to the Public Service Pension Fund, net lending to ZCCM, and court awards made against the government. These definitions have been agreed between the government and the World Bank, who will monitor social sector spending in the context of their Fiscal Sustainability Credit. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17- number of measures (outlined in Box 1 and Letter of Intent paragraph 8) to improve the accountability and transparency of the cash management system.*’ Monetary policy and financial sector issues 28. The program for 2000 aims at a relatively tight monetary stance, while allowing a healthy growth in private sector credit to support real growth. Monetary restraint will continue to be used as the primary tool for fighting inflation. Money supply growth is targeted to decline from 29 percent in 1999 to 25 percent in 2000 (compared with nominal GDP growth of 3 1 percent), consistent with limiting the 12-month rate of inflation to no more than 19 percent (Table 5). In view of the precariously low official reserves, the BoZ has given high priority to a strengthening of its net foreign asset position, which is programmed to improve by K132 billion (Table 6). Credit to public enterprises, which went up by K3 1 billion (12 percent) during the first quarter because of the financial disruption at ZCCM, is programmed to decline by K62 billion by the end of 2000 on account of repayment of outstanding loans and a strict limit placed on the growth of the loan portfolio of ZNCB, which has been a major source of credit to the parastatal sector. Thus the banking system could increase its credit to the private sector by 33 percent, after accommodating K36 billion (0.3 percent of GDP) for budget financing. In support of the policy, and with a view to limiting credit to the public enterprise sector, neither the government nor BoZ will provide any new loans or guarantees to the public enterprises, including ZESCO and ZNOC. In addition, BoZ will carry out open-market operations (primarily sales of its holdings of treasury bills) to meet the reserve money target. 29. The exchange rate will continue to be determined by market forces and BoZ will take measures to deepen the interbank foreign exchange market.*’ BoZ’s intervention policy in the market will be guided by its objective to meet the program target for net international reserves, and to smooth short-term fluctuations but without any attempt to influence the underlying market trend. To achieve its international reserve targets, the BoZ will undertake monetary policy measures, as necessary, and will refrain from entering into foreign exchange transactions that will expose it to undue risk. _” 30. In view of the significant weakness of the banking system, the program provides for specific measures, in the context of developing a medium-term plan, to strengthen the financial sector. The state-owned ZNCB is illiquid and undercapitalized (see Box 2). Under the program and following recommendations of an MAE banking expert (see *’ An FAD technical assistance mission visited Zambia during March 2000 to prepare recommendations on expenditure management and control. *I The real effective exchange rate has shown a slight depreciation since 1995 (Figure 3). The authorities do not consider that it presents competitiveness problems for non-traditional exports. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 18- paragraph 13 of the Letter of Intent), BoZ has undertaken measures to increase its directions of ZNCB’s specific activities. These policies should limit the potential medium-term financial burden to government. In addition, the government intends to send a legislative proposal to parliament in late 2000, proposing an amendment to the Banking and Financial Services Act of 1994 to enhance the legal position and powers of BoZ in licensing and liquidating banks. The measures should be viewed in the light of the efforts to develop a medium-term action plan which include: devising a loan collection strategy on all stagnant loans of ZNCB, hiving off unprofitable branches of ZNCB from the potentially profitable branches, searching a strategic partner for the privatization of ZNCB, developing a clear policy for processing banks that will be placed in curatorship, receivership, or liquidation, placing Union Bank of Zambia into receivership and placing formal supervisory action on .. Invest Trust Merchant Bank. External outlook and financing 31. Zambia’s external position is projected to improve in 2000 on the strength of a recovery in exports and resumption of donor support. The privatization of ZCCM is expected to revitalize the metal sector by enhancing efficiency and attracting new investment. Projections made by the BoZ indicate that as a result of a rebound in both copper prices and volumes, metal exports will rise by over 30 percent in 2000, while non-traditional exports will increase by about 13 percent (Table 7). These higher exports are expected to more than offset a projected 16 percent increase in imports. As a result, the external current account balance (excluding grants) is projected to improve by 2 percent of GDP to a deficit of 13.5 percent of GDP in 2000. The projected amounts of external BOP support on highly concessional terms, and private capital flow, mainly foreign direct investment in the mining sector, would allow an accumulation of gross official reserves by about $100 million to the equivalent of 1.3 months of imports by end-2000. 32. Projected external financing in 2000 includes project grants and loans of about US%334 million and additional BOP support of US!6242 million, about half of which will be in the form of grants. The largest providers of BOP support are expected to be the World Bank (US$lOS million), the EU (US$76 million), and the United Kingdom (US$33 million). Total projected external financing of US$576 million in 2000 compares to projected cash debt service after assumed rescheduling of about US$167 million, or 16 percent of exports of goods and services comparable to the debt service ratio in 1999. The Paris Club agreement of April 1999 provided for rescheduling on Naples terms of payments falling due to March 2002 in three annual tranches, but the implementation of the second tranche covering payments falling due through March 2001 has been delayed because of the delay in the completion of the first review of the PRGF supported program. Assuming that the Paris Club implements the second tranche of the April 1999 agreement, the program for 2000 is --- expected to be fully financed. The projected financing gaps for 2001 and 2002 will require commitment of further BOP support from donors and additional debt relief. 33. Zambia has steadily and progressively liberalized its trade regime in the 1990’s and no longer has any significant non-tariff barriers. It currently has 4 import tariff Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 19- bands, with a maximum tariff of 25 percent and a simple average rate of 13.6 percent. As a result, Zambia is rated a 2 (open) on the IMF’s index of trade restrictiveness. Zambia has, however, provided discretionary exemptions from the payments of import duties, both in the context of mining sector privatization and on a recent hotel project. It is an active participant in regional trade initiatives under COMESA and SADC. Privatization and structural reforms 34. As a cornerstone of the program structural policies will focus on privatization of the key remaining state enterprises, notably ZESCO and ZNCB and the privatisation of the oil sector. With the privatization of ZCCM, the main focus of the privatization has shifted to large utilities and state monopolies. For ZESCO, a study of the modalities of privatization, and sectoral reform is already underway with technical assistance from USAID. This will be followed by a review by ZPA and submission of a proposal regarding the privatization options for Cabinet decision by end-December 2000. Similarly, a study of the modalities for privatizing ZNCB has been initiated and will also be reviewed by ZPA and submitted to Cabinet for decision by end-December 2000. These actions constitute structural performance criteria of the program. The government is also committed to effectively privatize the state-owned oil sector entities with the state retaining the responsibility of maintaining storage facilities and strategic petroleum products reserve. Moreover, in addition the government will tender the granting of concessions for the railway system in 2000. In addition, substantial shares of state-owned telecom company ZAMTEL (which no longer has a domestic monopoly) will also be offered for sale to a strategic partner. The World Bank will be closely involved in the program for privatization as part of its FSC (adjustment credit) and other sector specific project assistance. Cabinet approval of the ZESCO privatization strategy and implementation plan, Cabinet approval of the concessioning of Zambia Railways including its staff rationalization plan, privatization of majority controlling interest of the Indeni refinery, TAZAMA pipeline and NDOLA oil terminal are included as conditions of Board presentation and tranche releases under the FSC. 35. The government is committed to full deregulation of the petroleum sector. Imports and marketing of petroleum products have been fully liberalized. On petroleum product pricing, pump prices for petroleum products have been fully deregulated in accordance with the existing law and do not require ex-ante approval of the Energy Regulation Board. Oil companies are free to set prices subject to taxes and review of prices by the Energy Regulation Board will be strictly on an ex-post basis. Deregulation of the oil sector and liberalization of marketing and prices are also fully supported by the World Bank current lending operations (FSC). ._ C. Poverty Reduction and Social Policies 36. Zambia’s human development indicators and poverty reduction and social policies are described more fully in the I-PRSP and summarized in Box 3. With an estimated per-capita GNP of US$370 in 1998, it is among the poorest countries in SSA. A national household survey conducted in 1998 estimated that about 73 percent of Zambians were living in Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 20 - Box 3. Human Development Indicators and Poverty and Social Policies Poverty profile and human development indicators Zambia’s poverty line is estimated based on the cost of acquiring a basket of goods (food and non-food) deemed necessary for maintaining the wellbeing of an individual.’ The Human Development Indicators Table presented below indicate that the not only has per-capita income level gone down, but the incidence of poverty increased in 1990’s even though extreme poverty fell somewhat. Other indicators of human development also do not indicate any marked improvement during the decade. Human Development Indicators 1990 1998 Zambia Sub-Sahara Zambia Sub-Sahara avg. avg. GNP capita (US$) per 440 520 370 500 Incidence of poverty (in %) 70 n.a. 73 n.a. Incidence of extreme poverty (in %) 62 n.a. 58 n.a. Life expectancy (years) 51 51 44 52 Infant mortality (in thousands) 107 100 109 90 Urban population (in % of total) 40 28 38 32 Population with access to clean water (%) 50 n.a. 50 45 Child malnutrition (% children under 5) 39 n.a. 53 n.a. Illiteracy (% pop. aged 15 and higher) 37 53 38 43 Primary net enrollment rate 68 68 Sources: SDA Priority Survey (1991) and LCMS (1998); African flka;elopment Indicators (1998/99). n.a. A number of factors including high inflation, poor macroeconomic management, decline of the mining sector, existence of price distortions, lack of adequate and targeted spending in social sectors, lack of social safety net and most importantly the spread of HIV/AIDS contributed to the failure to reduce the level of poverty in Zambia. The government has prepared an Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (I-PRSP) which discusses the dimensions of poverty and provides an outline of the strategy and programs already in place to reduce poverty. Poverty reduction and social policies The main elements of government’s current strategy to reduce poverty are: pursuing sound macroeconomic policies, encouraging development of the private sector through privatization and deregulation of the economy, allocating progressively higher levels of public resources for social sectors, and a series of intervention programs to support social sectors and related activities of the NGOs. The intervention programs include, Basic Education Sub Sector Investment Program (BESSIP), Health Sector Investment Program, Agricultural Sector Investment Program (ASIP), Environmental Support Program (ESP), Social Action Program (SAP) which are supported by bilateral and multilateral donors. In 1998 government also prepared a National Poverty Reduction Strategy Framework (NPRSF) with assistance from the UNDP. The framework provides an elaboration of the strategies of poverty reduction, namely: (i) achieving broad based economic growth through agriculture and rural development; (ii) providing public physical infrastructure; (iii) increasing productivity of urban micro enterprises and informal sector; (iv) developing human resources; (v) coordinating, monitoring and evaluating poverty reduction programs and activities. In order to translate these broad objectives into programs, in late 1998 a draft National Poverty Reduction Action Plan (NPRAP) was prepared in consultation with the civil society and donor agencies. However, NPRAP contains a very ambitious 33 sector wide programs whose implementation is planned to be done in three phases, with an estimated cost of US$4.9 billion. ’ In 1998, households with monthly adult equivalent expenditure of less than K47,184 were considered poor. Households with monthly adult equivalent expenditure of less than K32,861 were considered extremeiy poor. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-21- poverty, 53 percent of children are chronically undernourished, only about 50 percent of the population have access to safe water and life expectancy is only 44 years, much lower than the average for SSA. Years of economic decline have contributed to a weakening in many other social indicators in the 1990’s. High rates of HIV prevalence that have emerged, amongst the highest in the world, pose enormous additional threats. An outline of the current government strategies and policies to reduce poverty and intervention in social sectors is provided in the I-PRSP (Section III). Clearly Zambia does not have sufficient resources to address these problems. The sustained and substantial support of the international community will remain essential for many years. 37. The World Bank is providing assistance to Zambia in developing its poverty reduction strategies, including necessary diagnostic work for poverty assessment and monitoring. In collaboration with the Zambian authorities, the World Bank is conducting a joint review of its public expenditure program, which among other things will assess the impact of education and health expenditures, develop indicators of effectiveness of social expenditures and provide input to the PRSP process. It will also be 1inke.d to the preparation of the annual budget and is expected to recommend a move towards a medium-term budgetary framework with a view to better address the social sector issues. Section VI of the I-PRSP provides more details for the process for managing preparation of the full PRSP. D. Governance Issues 38. Governance issues addressed under the program include consolidation of numerous government accounts, an audit to investigate the discrepancy between the realized export prices of ZCCM cobalt sales in 1998-99 and world market prices (Appendix I, Letter of Intent, paragraph 16) and other developments that occurred in the past.** 39. The numerous government accounts in commercial banks have given rise to not only problems of expenditure control but also of governance as these de osits and represent an important liquidity support to the recipient banks. p3 do not earn interest By end June, the bank accounts (excluding the donor controlled accounts) operated by each controlling officer were merged into no more than one account in each commercial bank. The next step, which will be ** These included: (i) possible illegal sale of ZCCM’s non-core assets; (ii) the movement of funds from the now liquidated Meridian Bank outside the country; and (iii) the sale of mining assets (Luanshya division of ZCCM) to a company not offering the highest bid. The Minister of Finance responded to the staffs’ concerns on these issues and provided detailed background information and an explanation of the government’s position in each of these cases. 23 The government has conducted an audit of the accounts held by Lusaka based ministries and reduced the number of accounts from over 1,100 in end 1999 to less than 600 by end- April 2000. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 22 - completed in December, will involve the consolidation of each controlling officer’s account in a single commercial bank. As indicated earlier, actions are also being taken to improve governance related to public expenditure management. Such actions include clarifying responsibilities of controlling officers, publications of both actual and projected cash releases, and imposing sanctions to offending ministries (by withholding their cash releases). 40. With regard to the audit of cobalt sales by end-June, the authorities prepared a terms of reference of an audit, launched the tender, and awarded the contract to an accounting firm. The study, which is being undertaken with financial assistance from EU, is expected to be completed by shortly. 41. More generally, the authorities indicated that in future the government policy of deregulation and privatization of the economy will effectively eliminate some of the major sources of governance problems in Zambia. 42. Zambia’s credit rating is low, testifying the weak governance and macroeconomic management. Zambia’s rating in the September 1999 Znstitutional Investor survey was poor, with a rank of 120 out of 13 5 countries. E. Technical Assistance and Data Issues 43. Zambia has received extensive TA in public expenditure management and in the areas of monetary and BOP statistics. The staff conducted technical consultations with the authorities. The authorities noted that TA provided by FAD had been very useful in a number of areas, specifically: providing training to the MOFED staff in expenditure management; establishing a Commitment Monitoring Unit in the MOFED towards the end of 1999; and the introduction of regular quarterly audits of the stock of outstanding arrears. Despite these positive gains, the staff assess that implementation has been mixed. Data has shown a steady increase in the stock of arrears, despite large-scale cash releases to line ministries specifically to clear arrears. In addition, little progress has been made in sanctioning the Controlling Officers of ministries that have persistently accumulated arrears and/or failed to report on an accurate and timely basis to the MOFED. These and other related issues are being addressed under the program. The government also noted that the recommendations of the STA TA mission in improving BOP and monetary statistics have led to a number of improvements in compilation of the statistics but recognized that some key recommendations of the mission are yet to be implemented, in part due to lack of capacity and resources. The staff has urged the authorities to fully implement the recommendations of the past STA mission through provision of adequate resources and training of the staff (Appendix IV). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public23 - IV. MEDIUM-TERM FINANCING AND CAPACITY TO REPAY THE FUND 44. With a continued strong macroeconomic performance and debt relief under the enhanced HIPC Initiative, Zambia should be able to achieve a sustainable BOP position over the medium term.24 The updated DSA shows the present value of debt to export ratio at about 400 percent in 1999 after traditional debt relief mechanism; it is not projected to fall below 200 percent until 2008. In the absence of any further debt relief, the debt service ratio is projected to increase to about 3 1 percent in 200 1, when repayments of the SAF/ESAF loans begin. Cash debt service would more than double from US$l69 million in 2000 to about US$387 million in 2001. The debt service obligations to the Fund, on the other hand, will increase from about 4 percent of total debt service in 2000 to more than 50 percent of the total in 2001 and in 2002. Preliminary estimates suggest, however, that after enhanced-HIPC assistance, assumed to commence in 2001, Zambia’s debt service ratio would peak at about 20 percent in 2001 falling to 17 percent in 2002 and 9 percent in 2004. Accordingly, Zambia’s capacity to repay the Fund is highly dependent on its ability to continue its adjustment effort and to obtain early debt relief. V. PROGRAM MONITORING 45. Policy implementation, will be monitored on the basis of the quantitative and structural performance criteria and benchmarks shown in Appendix I, Tables 3 and 4. The second review of the PRGF will be conducted based on the performance through end- December 2000, which will include an assessment of progress in structural reform and a macroeconomic framework for 2001. VI. STAFF APPRAISAL 46. Zambia’s track record of performance under Fund-supported programs has been relatively poor, including the first annual PRGF-supported program. Strong and effective implementation of the program is therefore critical in establishing a credible track record, restore investor confidence, and generally improve economic performance and welfare. The long-delayed privatization of ZCCM has imposed substantial costs on the economy. However, its completion has greatly improved economic prospects and provides momentum for moving forward with reforms. In this regard, the Zambian authorities clearly recognize the need to take advantage of this window of opportunity. To this end, the program aims at substantially strengthening the public finances and Zambia’s external position, and also accelerating the privatization of key public enterprises. 24 Details of Zambia’s debt sustainability and external viability are provided in the Preliminary HIPC document. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 24 - 47. With regard to the fiscal policy, there is need to move to a sustainable fiscal position over the medium term. The proposed program should enable Zambia to establish control over public finances. This would allow fiscal policies to be coherent with effective demand management geared toward lowering the rate of inflation to single digits as rapidly as feasible and directing resources to productive activities and essential social goals. In order to mobilize domestic resources, the authorities’ program includes actions to improve parastatal finances and ensure the full and prompt payment of their tax liabilities. 48. On the expenditure side, political support at the highest level will need to underpin the various measures to improve the efficiency and transparency of the budget and to enhance financial management and control. This will enable the authorities to ensure the strict adherence to agreed spending priorities in favor of social sectors and infrastructure. Looking further ahead, the implementation of the IFMIS should address the technical problems of budget design, implementation and monitoring. In the immediate future, a substantial reduction in the stock of domestic payments arrears will be a critical indication of enhanced fiscal discipline. 49. In the structural area, in addition to improved public expenditure management, it will also be essential to proceed as expeditiously as feasible with the privatization of the remaining major state-owned enterprises. The poor performance of these enterprises could undermine the competitiveness of the economy and has been a substantial drain on public finances. Disengaging from production activities is also necessary to focus on the government’s core responsibilities. Zambia’s privatization law and procedures provide an appropriate framework and the authorities rightly plan to proceed as expeditiously as possible within this framework. 50. Decisive actions are necessary to address the weaknesses of the banking system. The current weakness of the state-owned ZNCB poses a threat to the stability of the financial system and, if not handled properly, may give rise to a large financial burden for the government. The problem will be addressed through a restructuring of the bank and its privatization. The revocation of licenses of insolvent banks, the denial of bailout, limiting deposit protection and strong loan recovery efforts are needed to establish market discipline and limit moral hazard. Improving the capability of the supervising agencies through changes in the law and provision of incentives and training to supervisors are also necessary. 51. Improving transparency and fighting corruption are indispensable to improve resource allocation and stimulate investment. There is a growing realization in the country that a government that espouses and adopts good governance practices in an open and transparent manner engenders public and investor confidence. In this regard, some recent efforts by the government to address a number of governance issues is encouraging. However, decisive and visible actions must be taken to make people accountable for their actions under the law. The program addresses governance issues, both directly and through greater transparency in government financial management and privatization of key enterprises. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public25 - 52. Zambia’s external debt burden is unsustainably high. Despite the anticipated improvement in external performance and the programmed increase in reserves, Zambia’s external position, including capacity to repay the Fund, will be fragile for years to come. The Enhanced HIPC Initiative presents a unique opportunity for debt relief that would reduce the country’s debt burden to sustainable levels. But first, Zambia must establish a track record of good performance to move rapidly to a HIPC decision point. The authorities also need to use this opportunity to prepare a realistic strategy for poverty reduction that addresses the minimum needs of the population. 53. There are a number of risks associated with the program. First, expenditure pressures, including those associated with the elections in 200 1, if unchecked, could undermine the attainment of program targets. Second, poor expenditure control and budget management pose a threat to effective budget implementation. In the past, the authorities failed to impose effective sanctions to offenders and made only limited progress in controlling of expenditure commitments. Third, governance issues continue to threaten to erode the confidence of the public and the donor community alike and thwart progress in stabilizing the economy. The authorities must move quickly to implement their structural reform agenda, particularly privatization and restructuring of the banking system. Moreover, the authorities will need to show a clear commitment to address existing weaknesses in the statistical system in order to facilitate program monitoring and policy design. Despite these risks, the authorities’ program for 2000 represents a credible effort, which has been buttressed by recent actions, particularly the privatization of ZCCM. If the Zambian authorities make a determined effort to improve policy coordination and implementation, the program will substantially improve economic performance and provide a solid foundation for poverty reduction. The staff recommends approval of the second annual program under the PRGF. 54. It is recommended that Zambia remain on the 12-month consultation cycle. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 26 - VIL PROPOSED DECISION The following draft decision, which may be adopted by a majority of votes cast, is proposed for adoption by the Executive Board: 1. Zambia has consulted with the Fund in accordance with paragraph 2(e) of the three- year arrangement for Zambia under the PRGF (EBS/99/35, Supplement 1) and paragraph 3 of the letter dated March 10, 1999, from the MOFED of Zambia, in order to review program implementation and reach understandings regarding the phasing and conditions for disbursements during the second year of the arrangement. Zambia has also requested that the undisbursed amounts during the first year of the arrangement in an amount equivalent to SDR30 million be rephased over the remaining period of the arrangement. 2. The letter from the MOFED of Zambia dated June 30,2000, is attached to the three- year PRGF arrangement for Zambia, and the letter dated March 10, 1999, from the MOFED of Zambia shall be read as supplemented by the letter dated June 30,200O. 3. Accordingly, the PRGF arrangement for Zambia shall be supplemented as follows: (4 the following shall be added as a new paragraph l(cc): “During the second year of this arrangement: Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-27- (i) the third disbursement under the arrangement, in an amount equivalent to SDRlO million, will be available on November 15, 2000, at the request of Zambia and subject to paragraph 2 below; and (ii) the fourth disbursement, in an amount equivalent to SDRIO million, will be available on February 15,2001, at the request of Zambia and subject to paragraph 2 below.” (b) the following shall be added as a new paragraph l(dd): “The phasing of, and conditions for, disbursements during the third year of this arrangement shall be established during the second review contemplated in paragraph. 2(ee) below.” w the following shall be added as new paragraphs 2(aa), 2(bb), 2(dd) and 2(ee): “(aa) Zambia will not request the third disbursement referred to in paragraph l(c)(i) above if the Managing Director of the Trustee finds that the data as of September 30,2000, indicate that any of the ceilings and floors referred to in paragraphs 2(a)(i) to 2(a)(vi) of this arrangement, as specified in Table 3 of the letter from the MOFED of Zambia dated June 30,2000, was not observed. Zambia will not request the fourth disbursement referred to in paragraph I(cc)(ii) above if the Managing Director of the Trustee finds that the data as of December 3 1,2000, Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 28 - indicate that any of the ceilings and floors referred to in paragraphs 2(a)(i) to 2(a)(vi) of this arrangement, as specified in Table 3 of the letter from the MOFED of Zambia dated June 30,2000, was not observed. “(bb) Zambia will not request the third and fourth disbursements referred to in paragraph l(c) above if the Managing Director of the Trustee finds that Zambia has not carried out its intentions with respect to the structural performance criteria specified in Table 4 of the letter from the MOFED of Zambia dated June 30, 2000.” “(dd) Zambia will not request the third and fourth disbursements referred to in paragraph l(c) above if it has taken any of the actions specified in paragraph 2(c) and (d) above, or if 6) the central government or the BoZ collaterizes or guarantees at any time any new loans for ZESCO or ZNOC; or (ii) new tax arrears by ZESCO or ZNOC to the central government accumulate at any time.” “(ee) Zambia will not request the fourth disbursement specified in paragraph l(c)(ii) above until the Trustee has determined that the second review referred to in paragraph 21 of the letter from the MOFED Zambia dated June 30,2000, has been completed.” Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 29 - 4. The three year commitment period of the PRGF arrangement for Zambia is extended to March 28,2003. 5. The Fund decides that the first review contemplated in paragraph 2(e) of the PRGF arrangement for Zambia has been completed and that no further understandings are necessary in order for Zambia to request the second disbursement specified in paragraph l(c)(ii) of the arrangement. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 1. Zambia: Indicators of Fund Credit, 1999-2009 (In millions of SDRs, unless otherwise indicated) 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 Beyond Outstanding Fund credit (beginning of period 843.4 853.4 873.4 806.4 738.3 594.7 Of which : PRGF 843.4 853.4 873.4 806.4 738.3 594.7 PRGF loan disbursements l/ 10.0 20.0 99.6 99.6 24.9 0.0 Total debt service to the Fund 6.6 5.8 174.0 174.7 175.2 175.4 175.6 17.2 Repayments 0.0 0.0 166.7 167.7 168.7 169.7 170.7 13.0 Charges 6.6 5.8 7.3 7.0 6.5 5.7 4.9 4.2 Outstanding Fund credit (end of period) 846.8 873.4 806.4 738.3 594.5 425.1 Fund credit outstanding (end of period) in percent of quota Memoramdum item: IMF (net): before HIPC 173.1 178.6 164.9 3.4 14.2 -74.4 150.9 -75.1 121.5 86.9 -150.3 -175.4 425.1 254.1 241.1 209.2 425.1 254.1 241.1 209.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 254.4 241.1 52.0 49.3 -175.6 -17.2 36.0 52.3 31.9 48.3 4.1 4.0 209.2 160.9 42.8 32.9 -36.0 -52.3 160.9 111.1 160.9 111.1 0.0 0.0 53.5 114.9 49.8 111.1 3.7 3.8 111.1 0.0 22.7 0.0 ,: 0 1 -53.5 -114.9 Sources: IMF Treasurer’s Department; and staff estimates and projections. l/ Indicates proposed rephasing of disbursement under the PRGF arrangement. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 31 - Table 2 Zambia: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators. 1998-2002 199C 1999 1999 2OQO 2001 2002 Act. Pr0g. Est. Pm& Proj. Proj. (Annual percentage change, unless otherwise indicated) National mcome and prices Real GDP GDP deflator Consumer prices (annual average) Consumer prices (cod of period) Nom&l GDP (in billions of kwacha) Copper production (in thousands of metric tons) -1.9 4.0 19.6 20.8 24.5 21.6 30.6 15.0 6.033 7,839 256 2.4 4.0 5.0 5.0 21.7 25.9 IO.5 9.2 26.8 22.3 10.8 8.3 20.6 19.0 10.0 7.0 - 7,522 9,853 11.431 13,108 240 280 310 340 External sector U.S. dollar value of exports of goods and services Of which : copper U.S. dollar value of imports of goods and senwes Exponvolun~ Import volume copper export volume Copper exports (in thousan& of metic tons) Copper cxpcvt prices (average. LJSS per metric ton) Nominal effective exchat~ge rate Real ctTectivc exchange rate Average official cxchaqe rate (kwacha pw U.S. dollar) Terms of trade -26.S 8.3 -7.5 24. I -35 s 4.9 -10.2 31.0 -8.1 13.8 -10.3 IS.8 -8.8 II.8 -3.9 10.4 -1.6 13.2 -12.1 16 7 -41.3 15.7 1.8 27.5 256 300 240 280 1,427 1,507 1,385 1.692 -24. I -21.5 -8.7 -2.3 1.862 2.388 2.388 -13.7 -5.1 -5.7 13.3 20.7 14.1 24.9 14.7 15.7 12.4 16.7 10.3 12.3 11.3 24.0 16.1 310 340 1.8% 2.006 0.4 2s Money and credit Net foreign assets Net domestic assets Net domestic credit Net claims on government Claims on “ongovcmment Broad money Velocity I/ Official bank rate (in percent; end of period) Treasury bill rate (in percent; end of period) -100.2 I I.1 -7.2 65.8 -0.8 14.4 95.4 -2.4 33.0 375.0 -19.6 19.4 20.6 IS.0 47.4 22.6 20.3 29.2 6.5 6.3 6.2 43.6 46.2 34.3 36.2 8.2 4.2 9.8 5.1 13.9 25.2 6.2 29.3 40.6 -9.3 -10.6 -6.6 -7.7 8.4 -3.4 -18.5 -12.2 IS.5 12.4 5.9 6.0 Central government budget Revenue (cxcludin8 grants) Grants Expenditure and net lending Current expenditure Capital expenditure 10.6 29.2 14.7 39.7 9.7 16.6 52.8 80.3 51.0 31.5 -28.4 9.9 33.4 39.3 18.4 46.3 10.9 9.2 15.6 7.2 5.5 33.0 24.6 10.3 74.7 22.8 15.8 33.8 21.4 12.9 (In percent ofGDP) Investment and savings Gross national savings 2/ Cross domestic investment Ofwhich: public investment 4.5 8.8 8.1 14.3 16.1 17.0 14.9 17.6 14.4 16.5 19.3 20.7 11.1 0.0 10.5 10.7 Il.2 II.1 Ceotml govcmment budget Revenue and grants Grants Expenditures (excluding interest) 31 Interest due 4/ Overall balance, cab basis Overall balance, cub basis, excluding grants 24.5 27.8 6.4 9.1 24.8 28.4 3.3 2.3 -4.3 -3.2 -10.8 -12.3 25.5 26.7 22.7 7.9 8.0 24.7 28.2 26.5 2.8 3.7 4.7 4.0 -5.6 -9.0 -11.9 -13.6 -13.9 22.8 26.1 3.8 -7.5 -12 2 Extcmal sector Current account balance -17.8 -19.8 -15.8 -13.5 -13.1 -12.4 (In percent of exports of goods and services) External debt External debt service S/6/ External program assistance 16.0 16.0 16.2 16.3 0.0 28.8 21.1 23.4 31.2 38.1 - (In millions of U.S. dollars, tmlcss otherwise indicated) Currtnt account balance -576 -632 -498 -460 -458 -468 Overall balance of payments -453 -463 -348 -407 -255 -201 Chss official t’cservcs (end of period) 44 I65 46 I46 267 380 In months of impotts of goods and services 0.4 1.4 0.5 1.3 2.1 2.6 In pcmmt of broad money 9.2 28.1 8.5 28. I 42.8 57.3 Sources: Zambia authorities: and Fund staff estimates and projections. I/ GDPkxnge broad money. U Gross national disposable income minus consumption. 31 Including contingency rercrvc (1999-2001). 41 After debt relief. 51 External debt pertains to public and publicly guaranteed debt. 61 Reflecting 1999 Paris Club agreement with consolidation period ending March 2002. Includes scheduled payments to IMF. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 32 - Table 3. Zambia: Central Government Operations, 1998-2002 (In billions of kwacha) 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 Prog. OUthUll Prog. Proj. Proj. Revenue and grants 1,529 2,177 1,921 2,635 2,590 2,983 Revenue 1,131 1,4@J 1,324 1,849 2,028 2,366 Tax revenue 1,094 WfJ 1,289 1,820 1,986 2.3 I I Income taxes 398 480 483 594 729 854 Company income tax 90 II7 91 123 151 181 Personal income tax 291 352 377 470 575 669 Pay-as-you-earn (PAYE) 249 303 323 402 495 578 Withholding tax 42 49 55 68 80 92 Exnaction royalty I7 II I4 2 3 4 Excise taxes 211 262 222 241 309 369 Value-added tax (VAT) 200 270 248 330 41 I 471 Trade taxes 285 388 337 464 538 617 VAT on imports 103 165 181 248 288 330 Import tariffs 155 223 154 216 251 287 Import declaration fee 26 0 I 0 0 0 Clearance of ZESCO tax arrears 0 0 0 191 0 0 Nontax revenue 38 60 34 29 42 55 Fees and charges 17 28 17 23 28 36 Privatixation receipts 1 10 7 -6 0 0 Other receipts 20 22 IO 12 I4 19 GrCUlt.5 398 717 597 786 562 618 Ofwhich: project grants 398 457 457 468 562 618 Expenditures and net lending 1,725 2,257 2,074 3,034 3,366 3,676 Current expenditures 1,045 1,120 1,132 1,554 1,876 2,070 Wages and salaries 327 395 402 516 617 681 Public service retrenchment 77 80 51 74 50 57 Recurrent departmental charges 161 187 192 250 304 393 Transfers and pensions 149 192 181 21 I 269 328 AgricuItural expenditure I5 I7 I7 13 I5 17 Interest on public debt 203 177 212 369 535 494 Domestic debt 80 70 105 142 127 II2 External debt I/ 123 107 107 227 408 382 Other current expenditures I12 72 78 122 86 99 Awards and compensations 6 5 a 4 5 5 Presidential pledges 22 I2 12 9 II 13 Zambia Revenue Authority 49 52 54 60 70 80 other 35 3 4 49 0 I Capital expenditures 680 836 789 1,056 1,283 1,449 Domestically financed 113 170 124 172 211 256 @which: counterpart funds 25 100 61 94 I61 179 Foreign financed 567 666 666 884 1,072 1,192 Of which: Lending to ZCCM (foreign financed) 0 151 152 82 99 57 Other net lending to ZCCM 0 151 0 423 207 157 Contingency Qfwhich: payments of domestic arrears 0 147 0 109 203 237 0 0 0 69 0 0 Change in balances and other 2/ 3/ 46 0 -24 0 0 0 Payments of domestic arrears -I I7 -23 -I21 -44 -55 0 Overall balance (cash basis) -267 -250 -297 -552 -1,033 -928 Ojwhichr domestic balance (cash basis) 4/ 25 -44 31 -227 -115 27 Financing 267 250 297 552 -25 I -89 Domestic financing 220 -109 72 39 -171 -92 Banking system 224 -109 35 36 -171 -92 Nonbank financing -3 0 37 3 0 0 External financing 47 360 226 514 -80 3 Program loans 0 452 266 319 0 0 Project loans 169 209 209 416 510 574 Amortization due I! -123 -301 -249 -22 I -590 -571 Financing gap 0 Memorandum item: Stock of domestic arrears at end-year 23 0 147 0 55 1,285 0 1.017 0 Sources: Zambian authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections. I! After Paris Club debt relief up to Ql 2002; before Paris Club after Ql 2002; excludes HIPC relief U Float resulting from changes in deposits of line ministries at the Bank of Zambia. 3/ Includes difference between budget data and monetary data on net claims on the government. 41 Excludes foreign grants, external interest payments, and foreign-financed capital expenditure and net lending. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 33 - Table 4. Zambia: Central Government Operations, 1998-2002 (In percent of GDP) 1998 1999 2000 200 I 2002 hog. Outturn Prog. Prog. Proj. Revenue and grants 24.9 27.8 25.5 26.7 22.7 22.8 Revenue ta.4 18.6 17.6 la.8 17.i la.0 Tax revenue 17.8 17.9 17.1 la.5 17.4 17.6 Income taxes 6.5 6.1 6.4 6.0 6.4 6.5 Company income tax 1.5 I.5 1.2 I.2 1.3 1.4 Personal income tax 4.7 4.5 5.0 4.8 5.0 5.1 Extraction royalty 0.3 0.1 0.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 Excise taxes 3.4 3.3 2.9 2.4 2.7 2.8 Value-added tax (VAT) 3.3 3.4 3.3 3.3 3.6 3.6 Trade taxes 4.6 4.9 4.5 4.7 4.7 4.7 Clearance of ZESCO tax arrears 0.0 0.0 0.0 1.9 0.0 0.0 Nontax revenue 0.6 0.8 0.5 0.3 0.4 0.4 Grants 6.5 9.1 7.9 8.0 4.9 4.1 Ofwhich: project grants 6.5 5.8 6.1 4.8 4.9 4.7 Expenditures and net lending Current expenditures Wages and salaries Public service retrenchment Recurrent departmental charges Transfers and pensions Agrtcultural expenditure Interest on public debt Domestrc debt External debt Ii Other current expenditures Capital expenditures Domestically financed Ofwhich: counterpart funds Foreign-financed Net lending for ZCCM retrenchment (foreign financed) Other net lending to ZCCM 28.1 17.0 5.3 1.3 2.6 2.4 0.2 3.3 1.3 2.0 1.8 Il.1 1.8 0.4 9.2 0.0 0.0 28.8 21.6 30.8 29.4 28.0 14.3 15.1 15.8 16.4 is.8 5.0 5.3 5.2 5.4 5.2 1.0 0.7 0.8 0.4 0.4 2.4 2.5 2.5 2.7 3.0 2.5 2.4 2.1 2.4 2.5 0.2 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.1 2.3 2.8 3.7 4.7 3.8 0.9 I .4 1.4 I.1 0.9 I.4 I .4 2.3 3.6 2.9 0.9 1.0 1.2 0.8 0.8 10.7 10.5 10.7 11.2 11.1 2.2 1.6 1.7 1.8 2.0 I.3 0.8 I.0 I.4 1.4 8.5 8.8 9.0 9.4 9.1 I .9 2.0 0.8 0.9 0.4 1.9 0.0 4.3 1.8 1.2 Change in balances and other 2/3/ 0.7 0.0 -0.3 0.0 Payments of domestic arrears -1.9 -0.3 -1.6 -0.4 Overall balance (cash basis) Of which: domestic balance (cash basis) 41 -4.3 -3.2 0.4 -0.5 -5.6 -2.3 Financmg Domestic financing Banking system Nonbank financing External financing Program loans Prolect loans Amomzation due I/ 4.3 3.2 3.6 -1.4 3.6 -1.4 -0.1 0.0 0.8 4.6 0.0 5.8 2.8 2.7 -2.0 -3.8 -4.0 0.4 4.0 1.0 0.5 0.5 3.0 3.5 2.8 -3.3 0.0 5.6 0.4 0.4 0.0 5.2 3.2 4.2 -2.2 Financing gap Memorandum items: Overall balance, cash basis, excluding grants Domestic fiscal balance, cash basis, excluding ZCCM financing 51 Stock of domestic arrears at end-year Defense expenditures Domesttcally financed health and education expenditures 0.0 0.0 -10.8 -12.3 -11.9 -13.6 -14.0 -I 1.8 0.4 I.3 0.4 0.1 0.8 1.4 0.4 0.0 2.0 0.6 0.0 0.0 1.6 0.8 0.9 0.9 0.9 0.9 4.2 4.3 4.7 4.1 4.5 5.0 I.9 0.0 0.0 I.1 0.0 1.8 1.8 0.0 0.0 -0.5 0.0 -9.0 -7. I -1.0 0.2 -2.2 -0.7 -1.5 -0.7 -1.5 -0.7 0.0 0.0 -0.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 4.5 4.4 -5.2 -4.4 11.2 7.8 Sources: Zambian authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections. I/ After Paris Club debt rehef up to Ql 2002; before Paris Club after Ql 2002; excludes HIPC relief 2/ Float resulting from changes in deposits of line mimstries at the Bank of Zambia. 31 Includes difference between budget data and monetary data on net claims on the government. 4/ Excludes foreign grants, external interest payments, and foreign-financed capital expenditure and net lending. 5/ Net ZCCM financing in 2000 is K423bn less Kl9lbn clearance of ZESCO tax arrears Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- ?Ir - Table 5. Zambia: Monetary Survey, 1998-2000 (End of period) 1998 1999 1999 DCC. Dec. Dec. Act. Prog. Est. 2000 Mar. Jun. Sep. DCC. Est. Rag. (In billions of kwacha) Net foreign assets II -2,261 -2,010 .-2,424 -2,565 -2,534 -2,395 -2,227 Bank of Zambia -2.677 -2,508 -2,893 -2,987 -2,983 -2.867 -2,161 Assets 159 441 266 168 165 314 451 Liabilities -2,835 -2,949 -3,159 -3,155 -3,149 -3,180 -3,212 Ofwhich : IMF -2,75 1 -2,882 -3,083 -3,083 -3,082 -3,119 -3,155 Commercial banks 415 498 469 422 450 472 534 Assets 457 540 530 466 494 516 578 Liabilities -42 -42 -61 -44 -44 -44 -44 Net domestic assets 3,366 Net domestic credit 1,132 Net claims on government 581 Claims on government I/ 868 Government deposits -287 Claims on nongovernment 551 Claims on private sector 421 0 Claims on public enterprises 124 Other items (net) 2,235 Broad money 1,105 1,330 1,428 1,459 I.592 1,667 I ,787 Narrow money 398 478 504 466 562 588 631 Quasi money 708 852 924 993 1,030 1,079 1,157 Ofwhich : foreign exchange deposits 394 474 534 575 595 623 668 Net foreign assets -100.2 Net domestic assets 65.8 Net domestic credit 95.4 Net claims on government 375.0 Claims on nongovernment 20.6 Claims on private sector 2.9 Claims on public enterprises 194.7 Other items (net) 54.0 Broad money 22.6 Narrow money II.9 Quasi money 29.6 o/which : foreign exchange deposits 90.0 Net foreign assets -125.6 Net domestic assets 148.2 Net domestic credit 61.3 Net claims on government 50.9 Claims on nongovernment 10.4 Claims on private sector 1.3 Claims on public enterprises 9.1 Other items (net) 86.9 Broad money 22.6 Foreign exchange deposits (in percent-of broad money) Money multiplier U Currency (in percent of kwachs deposits) Velocity (GDP/aversge broad money) Exchange rate (kwachs per U.S. dollar) 3,340 I.079 448 711 -263 632 2,261 3.852 4,024 4,126 4.06 1 4,014 1.505 1,735 1,778 1,714 1,667 693 860 894 ai9 729 1,073 1,417 1,451 1,376 1,286 -380 -557 -557 -55-l -557 812 a75 884 895 938 555 587 632 667 143 257 288 252 228 195 2,346 2,289 2,348 2.348 2,348 (Twelve-month percentage change) 11.1 -0.8 -2.4 -19.6 15.0 0.0 20.3 20.3 20.3 20.3 -7.2 -11.5 -9.3 -6.9 a.2 14.4 18.9 18.6 16.1 4.2 33.0 31.7 36.0 29.9 10.7 19.4 36.1 52.5 43.0 5.1 47.4 27. I 22.6 19.9 15.5 30.2 is.8 20.9 25.2 33.8 106.5 58.8 27. I 6.7 -24.0 5.0 10.7 a.1 7.7 0.0 29.2 34.6 37.3 32.4 25.2 26.8 28.6 49.9 39.2 25.2 30.6 37.6 31.2 29.0 25.2 35.4 49.1 31.7 35.2 25.2 (Change in percent of beginning-of-year broad money) 22.1 -2.4 -2.4 -9.9 7.5 0.0 20.3 -14.7 -9.8 -7.6 2.1 13.9 43.9 12.0 19.1 14.6 11.3 33.8 16.1 19.1 14.6 11.3 10.2 11.7 14.0 8.8 2.5 23.6 4.4 5.1 5.8 8.8 11.7 2.2 5.4 7.8 13.1 12.0 2.2 -0.3 -2.0 -4.3 10.1 -4.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 29.2 2.2 II.5 16.7 25.2 35.7 35.6 37.4 39.4 37.4 37.4 37.4 3.8 3.9 4.2 4.6 4.2 4.2 4.2 36.2 36.5 37.0 32.2 37.1 37.2 37.3 6.5 6.3 6.2 6.3 6.3 6.3 6.2 2.317.2 # 2.3 17.0 2,653.0 2.632.0 2.632.0 2,632.0 2,632.0 Sources: Zsmbian authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections. l/ For 1999, net foreign assets and the foreign exchange bridge loan from the BoZ to the government are calculated at the actual exchange rate (the official BoZ selling rate). For 2000, NFA and forex bridge loan from the BoZ to the govt. are calculated at the program exchange rate of USS I=K 2,632 (the official BoZ mid-rate at end-December 1999). 2/ Ratio of broad money to reserve money. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 35 - Table 6. Zambia: Assets and liabilities of the Bank of Zambia, 1998-2000 (End of period) 1998 1999 1999 Dec. Dec. Dec. Act. Prog. Est. Mar. Est. 2000 Jun. Sep. Dec. Program (In billions of kwacha) Net foreign assets I/ -2,677 -2,508 -2,893 -2,987 -2,983 -2,867 -276 1 Assets 159 441 266 168 165 314 451 Liabilities -2,835 -2,949 -3.159 -3,155 -3,149 -3,180 -3,212 Ofwhich : IMF (net) -2,751 -2,882 -3,083 -3,083 -3,082 -3,119 -3,155 Net domestic assets Net domestic credit Net claims on government Claims on government Government deposits Claims on nongovernment Ofwhich : claims on banks Other items (net) Ofwhich : foreign exchange valuation accounts Reserve money 288 341 338 320 Currency in circulation 196 236 251 221 Required reserves (kwacha deposits) 36 44 48 52 Required reserves (foreign exchange deposits) 27 32 34 35 Current accounts 29 29 4 10 Nongovemment deposits I 1 2 2 Memorandum items: Twelve-month growth of net domestic assets 91.6 -3.9 9.0 12.6 13.3 14.0 -1.6 Twelve-month growth of reserve money 35.7 18.2 17.3 26.3 29.4 30.8 24.6 Exchange rate (kwacha per U.S. dollar) 2,3 11.2 2.317.0 2,653.0 2,632.0 2,632.0 2,632.0 2,632.0 2,965 2,849 3,23 I 3,307 687 568 766 837 491 345 606 711 691 551 849 1,097 -199 -206 -243 -386 196 223 160 126 161 189 121 85 2,278 2,280 2,465 2,469 1,431 1,451 1,659 1,942 3,360 893 752 1,138 -386 141 101 2,461 1,942 376 280 53 38 4 2 (In percent) 3,260 3,182 793 716 645 543 1,030 929 -386 -386 149 172 109 .133 2,467 2,467 1,942 1,942 394 421 293 314 56 60 40 42 4 4 2 2 Sources: Zambian authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections. l/ For 1999, net foreign assets and the foreign exchange bridge loan from the BoZ to the government are calculated on the basis of the actual exchange rate. For 2000, they are calculated on the basis of the program exchange rate of US$=K 2,632. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 36 - Table 7. Zambia: Balance of Payments, 19982002 (In millions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise indicated) 1998 1999 1999 2000 2001 2002 Act. hog./ I Est. hog. Proj Proj Current account balance -576 -632 -498 -460 -458 -468 Trade balance -155 -233 -116 -71 -35 -20 Exports, f.o.b. 816 940 755 937 1,131 1291 Metal sector 520 623 46-t 612 764 876. Nonmetal 296 317 288 325 367 415 Imports, f.o.b. -971 -1,173 -871 1,008 -1,166 -1311 Metal sector -22 I -330 -121 -170 -213 -223 Nonmetal -750 -843 -750 -838 -954 -1088 Services (net) -179 -166 -211 -226 -279 -316 Receipts 103 125 87 99 110 122 Payments -282 -291 -298 -325 -388 -438 Income (net) -215 -217 -156 -144 -124 -I IO Of which: interest payments -219 -199 -166 -162 -155 -145 Current Transfers (net) -27 -16 -16 -18 -20 -23 Capita1 Account 21 203 229 153 I78 182 185 Financial Account Official loan disbursement (net) Project loans Amortization (-) Change in net foreign assets of commercial banks Private foreign direct investment II8 128 169 58 121 183 -45 -86 4 -68 -60 -46 91 116 166 158 165 172 -136 -202 -162 -226 -224 -217 -35 -36 2 -25 -20 -22 198 250 163 150 200 250 Errors and omissions, short term capital -198 -188 -172 -183 -100 -100 Overall balance -453 -463 -348 -407 -255 -201 Financing 453 234 348 407 -97 -257 Change in net international reserves of Bank of Zambia (- incr) 3/ Gross oflicial reserves of BoZ BoZ liabilities IMF (net) Debt rescheduling 4/ Net change in arrears (+ incr) BOP support grants BOP support loans 5/ Multilateral Bilateral 246 -129 -35 -80 -229 -221 194 -122 -2 -100 -120 -113 52 -7 -33 20 -108 -108 0 56 14 27 -93 -96 122 0 443 229 225 60 85 0 -251 -10 0 0 0 II2 61 121 0 0 0 195 117 121 0 0 0 195 117 121 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Financing gap (+) 0 219 0 0 353 458 Memorandum items: Current account balance (percent of GDP) Export volume (percentage change) Import volume (percentage change) Terms of trade (percentage change) Copper volume (MT.‘OW) Copper price (USS/lb) Gross official Reserves 6/ (In months of imports) Debt service (SUSm) 7/ (in percent of exports) -17.8 -8.8 -1.6 -13.7 256 0.72 44 0.4 147.3 16.0 -19.8 II.8 13.2 -5.1 300 0.68 165 1.4 -15.8 -13.6 -13.3 -12.8 -3.9 10.4 16.7 10.3 -12.1 16.7 12.3 11.3 -5.7 13.3 0.4 2.5 240 280 310 340 0.70 0.82 0.86 0.91 46 146 267 380 0.5 1.3 2.1 2.6 136.4 168.6 387.1 538.3 16.2 16.3 31.2 38.1 Sources: Bank of Zambia; and Fund staff estimates and projections. I/ BOP 5th manual presentation. The original program for 1999 (EBS/99/35) followed BOP 4th manual pnsentation. 21 Includes project grants. 31 Rcfleets freeing of 530 million of central bank assets held as collatoral at end-1999. 41 Reflects the I999 Paris Club rescheduling agreement, and comparable treatment from non Paris Club bilateral creditors as well as the May 1997 restmcmring of Camdcx’s (a foreign debt-trading company) claim on the Bank of Zambia. 5/ Projections for program grants and loans reflect existing commitments and preliminary indications for 2000. 61 Gross reserves include balances in the special Bank of International Settlements account established in accordance with the 1999 Paris Club accords. 7/Reflecting 1999 Paris Club agreement with consolidation period ending March 2002. Includes scheduled payments to IMF. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public. - 37 .- Table 8. Zambia: Schedule of Disbursements Under the PRGF Arrangement, 1999-2003 Amount (in millions of SDRs‘) Availability Date Conditions Necessary for Disbursement 10.00 March 29, 1999 l/ 10.00 July 27,200O 10.00 November 15,200O 24.94 February 15,2001 24.94 24.94 May 15,200l 21 August 15,200l 2/ 24.94 November 15,200 1 2/ 24.94 February 15,2002 21 24.94 24.94 May 15,2002 2/ August 15,2002 21 24.94 November 15,2002 2/ 24.94 February 15,2003 2/ Board approval of the three-year arrangement and endorsement of the annual program. Completion of the review of the first annual program and endorsement of the second annual program for 2000 Observance of ‘the September 30,200O performance criteria. Observance of the December 3 I,2000 performance criteria and completion of the second review. Observance of the March 3 1,200 1 performance criteria. Observance of the June 30,200l performance criteria and completion of the third review. Observance of the September 30,200l performance criteria. Observance of the December 3 1,200l performance criteria and completion of the fourth review. Observance of the March 3 1,2002 performance criteria Observance of the June 30,2002 performance criteria. and completion of the fifth review. Observance of the September 30,2002 performance criteria. Observance of the December 3 1,2002 performance criteria and completion of the sixth review. 11 Already disbursed. - _ 2/ The number and timing of the disbursement for the period March 2001 onwards will be determined at a later date. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 38 - Figure 1. Zambia: Selected Fiscal Indicators, 19952000 l/ 23 21 19 17 15 55 45 35 25 15 5 Domestic revenue and Expenditure (In percent of GDP) expenditure * - . 1995 19% 1997 1998 1999 2000 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 23 21 19 17 15 :In percent of noninterest jomestic expenditure) Wages and salanes -gj 45 16 12 25 8 Domestically financed capital expenditure *-. 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 15 10 5 0 -5 i, Domestic se -----.-_ . .- * _ l?nce iscal Balance (In percent of GDP; cash basis) \- Plimaly balance 15 10 5 0 -5 1 ?O \ Total I Sources: Zambia authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections. l! Shaded area indicates projections. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 39 - Figure 2. Zambia: Selected Monetary Indicators, January 1995March 2000 70 60 50 40 30 20 10 Treasury Bill Rates and Prices Annualized rate; in percent) *., * 28day bills _,’ 70 70 60 50 40 30 20 Commercial Bank Interest Rates (Annualized rate; in percent) ‘0 ’ 10 - 10 01 1995 1996 1997 1998 ! 999 2000 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 80 60 40 20 0 -20 Money and Prices (Twelve-month growth rate; in percent) I. 81 . , , Comprehensive M2 :‘.,. .I’ 80 55 Components of Broad Money (In percent of total broad money) n 1 Kwacha 60 45 deoosits 55 20 25 25 0 15 I deposits J\/ -20 5 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 1995 Sources: Bank of Zambia; and Ministry of Finance. 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 70 60 50 , 40 30 20 10 0 - . Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public80 60 - *-. - 40 - Figure 3. Zambia: Selected Exchange rate Indicators, January 1995Februray 2000 Cwacha-U.S. dollar Rate 140 120 100 80 60 40 Cffective Exchange Rates l/ 1995=100) --’ -\ ,* , , . .- a \ c--4 ,* Real effective ‘x \ exchange rate * .’ -w- -.Ca’ -. . .-- . ,’ -. , r--d’ -- - \ I . . ’ . , ., 3000 2500 2000 1500 1000 500 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 Sources: IMF, Information Notice System; and Fund staff estimates. l/ Weighted by total trade. A rise in the index indicates a real appreciation of the kwacha. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public. -41- APPENDIX I Lusaka, June 30,200O Mr. Horst Kohler Managing Director International Monetary Fund Washington, D.C. 2043 1 Dear Mr. Kohler, 1. In this letter, we assess the recent performance of the Zambian economy and describe the government’s key economic and financial policies for the remainder of 2000. The first review of the three-year PRGF arrangement was delayed mainly due to difficulties in the privatization of the copper parastatal ZCCM. During the second half of 1999, we revised our program for the remainder of the year to take into account the fundamental change in the macroeconomic outlook. During discussions with Fund staff in December 1999 and in January and March 2000, we agreed on an outline of the budget for 2000. This letter outlines our program for 2000. In view of the delay in completion of the first review, we are requesting a one year extension of the PRGF program period through March 2003. I. RECENTECONOMICDEVELOPMENTS Background and recent performance 2. During 1999, the economy continued to be hampered by the difficulties of ZCCM and the delays in its privatization. Despite a recovery of agricultural production, real GDP rose by only 2.4 percent. The twelve-month rate of inflation was 21 percent. While lower than the previous year, inflation was higher than programmed, reflecting high inflationary expectations, a rapid expansion of domestic credit, and higher import prices. l Fiscal performance was undermined by an increase in the stock of payments arrears by line ministries of K122 billion, or 1.6 percent of GDP. The overall fiscal deficit (excluding grants) deteriorated by about 0.7 percent of GDP to 11.4 percent. Social sector spending, however, met the target of 36 percent of domestic discretionary expenditure. 0 The 12 month growth of broad money accelerated to 29 percent, reflecting mainly rapid expansion in bank lending to parastatals, particularly ZCCM and the Zambia National Oil Company (ZNOC), including the Y2K problem. Weak export --- performance and a shortfall in donor support exerted pressure on gross international reserves which fell to US$45 million, equivalent to less than 3 weeks of imports. 0 Continued delays in the privatization of ZCCM affected the economic outlook and market sentiment during the first quarter of 2000. At end-March, inflation reached Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 42 - APPENDIX I 24 percent, and debt service payments combined with lack of donor support reduced free reserves to only $9 million. Following a 5 percent depreciation during the first two months of the year, the kwacha/dollar exchange rate has remained stable. l At end-March the ZCCM privatization was finally completed, which contributed to improved market sentiment. This provides a window of opportunity for increased focus on program implementation leading to a revival in economic activity and addressing our development and social objectives. II.. PROGRAMIMPLEMENTATION 3. Most of the quantitative performance criteria for end-June 1999 were not observed, except for the domestic fiscal surplus, and the ceilings on nonconcessional borrowing (Table 1). The nonobservance of the performance criteria for net domestic assets, net claims on the government, and net international reserves was largely related to delays in disbursement of the World Bank’s adjustment credit. The end-June performance criterion on net external payments arrears was met in July 1999. The performance criterion on the size of the civil service was not observed because of problems with the identification of civil servants eligible for voluntary separation. As regards budget management, there was a further accumulation of domestic payments arrears. 4. The Government faced considerable challenges in meeting the structural performance criteria, (Table 2). In particular, the privatization of ZCCM was delayed until March 3 1, 2000, and let-l the government with gross debt obligations totaling some US$770 million. Moreover the government resolved to take further actions to strengthen the banking system, particularly regarding the state-owned Zambia National Commercial Bank (ZNCB) in order to safeguard financial stability and government finances. III. THEPROGRAMFOR 2000 5. The government’s medium-term macroeconomic framework and targets are outlined in our Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP). For 2000 our key objectives will be to restore economic growth and to further reduce inflation. We intend to step up our efforts to reduce poverty and reform the economy through, inter alia, strengthening expenditure controls, improving the delivery of social services, and continue privatizing state-owned enterprises. Real GDP is projected to grow by 4 percent in 2000, reflecting a strong recovery of mining and continued improvement in agricultural production. Improved economic conditions, coupled with tightened monetary policies, are expected to limit inflation to 19 percent by end-2000. Higher exports and an increase in donor inflows will allow us to strengthen gross reserves by at least US$lOO million. To reduce our external debt service burden, implementation of the PRGF program will be strengthened to ensure that we reach the HIPC decision point by early 2001 and thus begin to benefit from bilateral and multilateral debt relief in 2001 and beyond. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 43 - APPENDIX I The budget for 2000 6. The main objectives of fiscal policy will be to contain inflation, raise national savings, promote sustainable growth, and support social sector expenditure. Despite efforts to strengthen the revenue effort and expenditure control, the domestic fiscal deficit on a cash basis is programmed to increase by 0.7 percent of GDP to 2.3 percent of GDP in 2000.’ In view of the continued weaknesses in budget management, the budget includes a contingency reserve which will be utilized for the clearance of arrears, unanticipated statutory outlays that could not be forseen at the time of budget. preparation ( such as domestic interest payments higher than budgeted), legally mandated unavoidable outlays, and the fiscal cost of droughts and other natural disasters. 7. The budget for 2000 reflects a difficult balance between the maintenance of basic government operations, already committed capital spending, including payment of ZCCM liabilities, and a recognized need to shift additiona resources to social spending in support of poverty alleviation. In this regard, recently completed labor negotiations will limit the government wage bill to 5.2 percent of GDP while significantly raising the minimum wage, to K150,OOO per month on April 1,200O and tirther to K175,OOO on October 1. Over the medium term our policy is to reduce the share of the wage bill in domestic noninterest expenditures. Budgeted allocations for spending on the social sectors, along with improvements in the fi.mding mechanism, will ensure that at least 36 percent of domestically financed discretionary expenditures go to these sectors. 2 Given this, domestically-f?mded capital outlays will be limited to K172 billion. In addition we have decided to free additional resources for priority uses by introducing broad based cost-cutting measures, including spending on foreign missions. 8. Preliminary data on the first quarter fiscal outturn indicates an increase in the stock of domestic payments arrears by KS billion to K152 billion, a level equivalent to 1.5 percent of GDP. In addition, at end-April there were parastatal tax arrears of K133 billion, of which K69 billion have accumulated during January-April 2000 mainly on account of ZESCO (K32 billion) and ZNOC (K19 billion). To achieve the budgetary targets, we will improve tax -. _ collections from parastatals, as noted below. In order to substantially reinforce efforts to improve expenditure controls and budgetary discipline, we have i) established a commitment ’ Lending to ZCCM of 4.3 percent of GDP will result in an increase in the overall fiscal deficit (excluding grants) to 13.6 percent of GDP in 2000 from 11.4 percent in 1999. 2 Social sector expenditure is defined as current and capital expenditure on health, education, social safety net, water and sanitation, and disaster relief. Domestically financed discretionary expenditure is defined as total expenditure, less foreign funded expenditure, domestic interest payments, the allocation for arrears clearance, the civil service wage adjustment, the contingency reserve, civil service retrenchment costs, payments to the Public Service Pension Fund, net lending to ZCCM, and court awards made against the government. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 44 - APPENDIX I monitoring unit in the Ministry of Finance, with technical assistance from the IMF, which is responsible for coordinating the monitoring and control of commitments and arrears; ii) issued instructions to put a freeze on new contracts by Ministry of Works and Supply (effective April 1,200O); iii) enforced the regulation requiring controlling officers to inform the Ministry of Finance in writing when they receive a directive to commit resources which exceed budgetary provision or cash allocations (effective April 1); iv) written to all controlling officers setting out their responsibility for monitoring and controlling expenditure, and indicating the disciplinary steps that will be taken against controlling offtcers who continue to accumulate arrears; v) line ministries that violate the 10 percent rule3 or fail to report commitments will be sanctioned by withholding cash releases. In the longer term, a key part of the solution to the problems of budget management is the implementation of an-integrated financial management information system (IFMIS). To this end we have prepared a draft feasibility study and secured donor funding for the appointment of a project manager to coordinate the implementation of an IFMIS. Moreover we will conduct a complete inventory of the arrears and formulate a plan to eliminate them which will be discussed and agreed with the Fund staff. 9. A related issue concerns the operation of the cash budget. While the adjustment of monthly cash allocations in line with actual monthly revenues has helped us to constrain fiscal deficits in recent years, a lack of transparency and predictability in the allocation and amount of cash releases, at the aggregate level and within line ministries, has severely impaired budget execution. Therefore, we intend to (i) provide controlling officers in Ministries at the beginning of each quarter, starting in July 2000, a projection of their monthly allocations during the quarter, and (ii) publish on a monthly basis the monthly allocations made to Ministries, beginning July 2000 (including for the period January-June, 2000). 10. Action to address the financial performance of the parastatals, particularly the state- owned electricity and oil companies, ZESCO and ZNOC, is fiurdamental to our reform efforts. In the medium term, these difficulties will be addressed through eliminating government majority ownership and control of existing state enterprises. In the interim, with regard to ZESCO, electricity prices were raised by 25 percent in April and measures to cut costs and improve efficiency, agreed with the World Bank, have been introduced. These measures, together with the resumption of full and prompt payments by the privatized mining companies, will enable ZESCO to meet fully its tax obligations from June 1, 2000 and to clear its outstanding tax arrears by the end of 2000. With regard to ZNOC, the price of petroleum products was raised by about 20 percent in December 1999 and a further 20 percent in April 2000. Moreover, imports of petroleum products have been fully liberalized, and review of prices by the Energy Regulation Board will henceforth be strictly 3 Outstanding commitments at any time must not exceed 10 percent of the annual spending warrant limit. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-45 - APPENDIX I on an ex-post basis in accordance with the law.4 In addition, I have directed the commissioner-general of the Zambia Revenue Authority (ZRA) that henceforth all taxes due on oil imports should be collected at the point of entry and that, if necessary, ZRA should collect tax payments due from ZNOC directly from the oil marketing companies. To reinforce the integrity of the tax system, we will refrain from introducing any tax reductions, new exemptions, rebates, or any other preferential tax treatment without consultation with the Fund staff during the remainder of 2000. 11. The numerous government accounts in commercial banks has given rise to additional problems in expenditure control and monitoring of the financial position of the government, and thus financial management. It also raises the questions of prudent and transparent financial management. We have conducted an audit of the accounts and reduced the number significantly. At end-May the bank accounts (excluding donor controlled accounts) operated by each controlling officer were merged into one account in each commercial bank. The next step, which will be completed by end-December, will involve the consolidation of each controlling officer’s accounts into a single account in a single commercial bank. As a final step, and subject to the recommendations of a study we have commissioned with assistance from the EU to work out the modalities, all government balances held in commercial bank accounts will be transferred to the Bank of Zambia (BoZ) and appropriate “mirror accounts” (zero balance transit accounts)5 in the commercial banks will be established. Monetary and exchange rate policy 12. Consistent with the inflation objective, the growth of broad money during 2000 will be limited to about 25 percent compared with a 3 1 percent increase in nominal GDP. In meeting its broad money objectives, the BoZ will target reserve money through the use of open market operations. To enhance the effectiveness of these operations, the BoZ will improve the functioning of the market for treasury bills, notably by setting up a repurchase agreement and by improving the auction system. 13. To further strengthen the banking system and oversight role of the BoZ over financial institutions, a proposal that has already been approved by the Cabinet will be submitted to Parliament to amend the Banking and Financial Services Act, 1994. In particular, this 4 The role of the ERB in environmental and safety issues, and in reviewing ex-post prices will continue. 5 These transit accounts could operate as follows: checks issued by spending ministries would be cleared by the banks for a fee and the banks would be reimbursed from the government’s main account at the BoZ at the end of each business day. The consolidation and transfer of donor funded project accounts will be conducted in consultation with the donors, and there should be adequate reporting of composition of balances (domestic and foreign currency). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 46 - APPENDIX I amendment will enhance the legal authority of the BoZ in licensing and liquidating banks. Meanwhile, the BoZ has already placed one bank in curatorship, and proceeding with the privatization of the state-owned ZNCB. Consistent with existing law and cabinet directives already issued, the Zambia Privatization Agency (ZPA) will be instructed to prepare a study of the options for privatizing the bank through eliminating the government’s majority share ownership and control. ZPA will submit the study by end-December 2000, for the Cabinet’s consideration. Pending completion of the privatization, the BoZ will increase its direction of- . ZNCB’s specific activities to halt further deterioration of the bank, consistent with the * provisions of the Banking and Financial Services Act, 1994. This direction will be in the form of a written directive from the BoZ to ZNCB outlining specific activities or -* prohibitions. This should aid in halting further deterioration of the condition of the bank. The directive will include the following key elements: a) place ZNOC and all other non-performing loans on a non-accrual accounting basis, retroactive to December 3 1, 1999, and establish loan loss provisions consistent with BoZ guidelines; b) no new funds (including capitalization of interest) to any non-performing credits or loans classified by the BoZ Financial System Supervision Department; cl limit the growth of ZNCB’s assets, and its deposit and borrowing growth; 4 prohibit loans in excess of K500 million. The BoZ will provide liquidity support only on a fully secured basis. Any bank that is unable to repay its liquidity advance or requests an increase in liquidity advances will be subject to immediate on-site examination to confirm that it is solvent. The BoZ will exercise its full legal authority to deal with any bank found to be insolvent. Moreover, the BoZ will not guarantee any loans to ZNCB from other institutions. 14. The exchange rate will continue to be determined by market forces, with the BoZ limiting its intervention to smoothing short-term fluctuations and without trying to influence the underlying trend. To meet the program target for net international reserves, the BoZ will undertake such measures as are necessary, and will refrain from entering into foreign exchange arrangements that will expose it to undue risk. .- 15. Zambia’s current account deficit is expected to decline from 15.8 percent of GDP in 1999 to 13.5 percent of GDP in 2000, partly reflecting a strong recovery of exports. Zambia’s external financing gap is expected to be covered by the concessional assistance from donors. Zambia will strive to maintain a sustainable debt service ratio by strictly adhering to a moratorium on nev+llonconcessional borrowing. On that basis, the external debt service, after rescheduling, is projected to remain at about 16 percent of exports in 2000. For the purpose of timely honoring of Zambia’s payments to the Fund, we request that disbursements under the PRGF arrangement be made to the SDR account of Zambia, which is an integral part of our gross reserves. Zambia does not intend to convert the SDR amounts into foreign currencies for other purposes. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 47 - APPENDIX I 16. In the course of the privatization of ZCCM, it came to the government’s attention that there was a significant discrepancy between the world market price and the realized export price of ZCCM cobalt sales. An initial ZCCM internal study suggested that forward transactions and sales of lower grade cobalt concentrate account for the discrepancy. However, we believe that other measures are necessary to fully resolve the issue. We have thus submitted terms of reference for further action which will be initiated shortly with financial assistance from the EU. Structural reform and poverty reduction strategy 17. The government will deepen structural reforms to restore confidence and promote investment, building on the momentum gained by the privatization of ZCCM. The structural reform program will include actions to improve budget management, to accelerate privatization and deregulation of the economy, and to strengthen the banking system. 18. Privatization is fundamental to Zambia’s adjustment program. In addition to measures proposed on ZNCB, we regard the elimination of government majority ownership and control of ZESCO and the oil sector as critical objectives. For ZESCO, a study of the modalities of privatization has already been initiated with technical assistance from USAID. This will be followed by a review by ZPA and submission by end-December 2000 of a proposal regarding the privatization options for Cabinet’s consideration. The government will select the preferred option and refer the privatization back to ZPA for implementation. Regarding the oil sector, the government will implement a program of action in the context of the policies envisaged in the World Bank’s Fiscal Sustainability Credit. This involves effectively privatizing the sector, with government retaining responsibility for maintainin storage facilities and a strategic petroleum reserve. 19. The structural performance criteria and benchmarks of the program are shown in Table 4. In addition to the actions above which have already been taken, by July 1 we wil .l implement the following actions: (i)follow up action on cobalt sales; (ii) each controlling officer’s accounts in each commercial bank will be merged into a single account. The accountant general will provide a list of such accounts with balances to Fund staff; (iii) issuance of a directive to the Commissioner-General of the ZRA to collect the full amount of excise, customs duty, import VAT, and road levy from all oil importers, including ZNOC, at the point of entry, and instruction to ERB to review prices only on an ex-post basis; (iv) issuance of instructions to ZNCB to place ZNOC on a non-accrual accounting basis retroactive to December 3 1, 1999, and to re-file the December 1999 and March 2000 prudential returns. Furthermore, in view of the insolvency of the Public Service Pension Fund, the government will commission a study to establish the modalities for moving to a “pay as you go” system consistent with the recommendations of the World Bank, and with reference to the recent actuarial study of the pension fund. It is intended that draft legislation will be submitted to Parliament by end-2000. 20. In May 1998, the government adopted a Poverty Reduction Strategy Framework (PRSF) as the umbrella for its sector investment programs (SIPS) and other poverty Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-48- APPENDIX I reduction policies. Building on this framework, the government of Zambia has started preparation of a PRSP, which will be developed in a participatory and open consultative process involving civil society in Zambia. The poverty reduction strategy will aim to integrate our macroeconomic, structural, and social policies, as well as setting clear and monitorable goals for poverty reduction. Consistent with the long-term goal, the Government has also prepared a drawl of its interim PRSP and held discussions on this issue with the IMF and World Bank staff. The interim PRSP includes an outline of our poverty reduction strategy, a work plan to prepare a full PRSP, an outline of the institutional framework to conduct a broad consultative process with civil society and other shareholders, and a three year macroeconomic framework and policy matrix, including objectives and intermediate targets. IV. PROGRAMMONITORING 21. The program supported by the second annual ,PRGF arrangement will be monitored on the basis of the following quantitative performance criteria and benchmarks for 2000 (Table 3): (i) net domestic assets of the BoZ; (ii) net bank claims on the government; (iii) the domestic fiscal balance of the government; (iv) domestic payment arrears of the government; (v) net international reserves of the BoZ; (vi) the stock of external short-term debt of the government, BoZ and the public enterprises; (vii) external payment arrears; (viii) new nonconcessional external medium- and long-term loans; (ix) ceilings on loans collateralized or guaranteed by the government or BoZ for ZESCO and ZNOC; (x) the accumulation of new tax arrears by ZESCO and ZNOC. The second review of the PRGF will be conducted based on performance through end-December 2000, which will include an assessment of progress in structural reform and a macro-economic framework for 2001. Yours faithfully, ISI Dr. Katele Kalumba, Minister of Finance and Economic Development Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 49 - APPENDIX I Table 1. Zambia: Quantitative Performance Critecia and Benchmarks During the First Year of the Three-Year Arrangement Under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility, January I.1999 - December 31.1999 1996 Dec. Act. 1999 Performance criteria Indicative targets End-Mar. End&n. End-Sep. End-Dec. l-0. Act l-0. Act. PW. Act. Prog. Ad. Ceilmg on the increase in net domestic assets of the Bank of Zambia l/2/ Ceiling on the increase in net bank claims on government 2i 3141 Floor on the domestic budget balance of me government 51 Ceiling on the outstanding stock of domestic arrears of me government Floor on net intematkmal reserves of the Bank of Zambia 6/ Ceiling on new external payments arrears 7/ Ceiling on new medium- and long-term nonconcessional loans 6/ Ceiling on the stock of short-term debt 9/ Change In the we of the public service 10/ Memorandum item Programmed balance of payments assistance (In billions of kwacha; cumulative from January 1. 1999) 2.965 111 -103 -17 -73 -1 -131 -104 561 111 -1 50 90 11 -43 -7 6 32 -115 60 -81 33 23 20 97 13 111 (In millions of U.S. dollars) 6 101 -1,160 19 -1,125 -1.166 -1.131 -1,179 -1,104 -1,160 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 165 165 59 165 75 165 (Numbers of emplOyees; cumulative from January 1.1999) 113.653 111 -1,750 -1,492 -3,500 -1,416 -5.250 -1.155 (In millions of U.S. dollars: cumultivefrom January 1.1999) 0 116.5 65.6 161.3 104.5 267.1 162.0 -116 -109 44 0 .1,107 0 0 0 -7.000 307.1 -6 37 30 147 -1.165 10 0 00 -2.409 175.3 l/Net domestic assets are equivalent to reserve money minus net foreign assets. calculated at the end-December 1996 U.S. dollar-kwacha exchange rate (USSl=K 2.317). 2l In case of a shortfall in balance of payments assistance, the ceilings on the increase in net domestic assets and net bank claims on the government will be adjusted upward by the amount of the shor#all with a maximum of USS30 million. The kwacha value of the cumulative shortfall will be calculated at the end-December 1996 U.S. dollar-kwacha exchange rate (UStl=K 2.317). 3/ Net bank claims include the U.S. dollardenominated foreign exchange bridge loan of the Bank of Zambia to the government. The balance of the loan is calcutated at the end-December 1996 U.S. dollar-kwacha exchange rate (USfl=K 2.317). 41 Under the program adopted in August 1999. the ceiling on the increase in net bank claims on the government would be adjusted downward by the difference between the budgetary provision of K 151 billion and the actual payments made by the government for the settlement of ZCCM’s short-term debt and arrears, which was expected in the fourth quarter of 1999. This adjuster is not applicable to the revised target for end-December. Y Under me program adopted in August 1999. the floor on me domestic budget balance of the govennent would be raised by the difference between the budgetary provision of K 151 billion and the actual payments made by the government for me settlement of ZCCM’s short-term debt and arrears. which was expected in the fourth quarter of 1999. Thii adjuster is not applicable to the revised target 6/ Foreign assets of the Bank of Zambia include the balance in the special Bank for International Sefflemenk account established in accordance with the April 1999 Paris Club accord. In case of a shotiall in balance of payments assistance, the floor on net international reserves will be adjusted downward by the amount of the shortfall with a maximum of USS30 million. Net international reserves exclude a USS25 million deposit in Meridien Bank, which is under liquidation. 71 The injunction against new external payments arrears is continuous. 61 Loans conbacted or guaranteed by the central government or the Bank of Zambia with grant elements of less than 35 percent. 91 Includes debt cmbacted or guaranteed by the central government and Bank of Zambia witi an original maturity of not more than one year, but excluding normal bade credits for imports. lo/ Measured on the basis of the payroll data of the Minisby of Finance. 1 l/ Stocks at end-1996. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 50 - Table 2. Zambia: Structural Performance Criteria and Benchmarks During the First Annual Program Under the Poverty Reduction and Growtb Facility, January 1,1999-December 3 1, 1999 APPENDIX I The transfer of ownership of the major asset packages of the ZCCM (the Nchanga and Nkana Divisions, and the Konkola deep mining project). l! March 31, 1999 Not observed (completed in March 2000) The submisssion to the President of recommendations on the establishment of an actuarially sound civil service pension system. l/ April 30,1999 Not observed (completed in October 1999) The offering for sale of a minority share and management rights in the telecommunications company (ZAMTEL). l/ September 30, 1999 Not observed (completed in January 2000) The maintenance of positive real interest rates on treasury bills, as measured by the difference between the three-month moving average of the 28-day treasury biR rate and the annual rate of increase in the consumer price index. 21 End of each quarter Observed The abstention from new tax reductions, exemptions, rebates, or any other preferential tax treatment, with the exception of the suspension of import duties on agricultural machinery and equipment, and the tax concessions agreed in the context of the privatization of the ZCCM. l/ I/ Performance criterion. 21 Benchmark. Continuous Not observed . Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 51 - APPENDIX I Table 3. Zambia: Quantitative Performance:Criteria and Benchmarks During the Second Year of the Three-Year Arrangement Under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility, January I, 2000 - December 31.2000 1999 Act. End-Dec. Est. End-Mar. 2000 Ind. Tar. Performance criteria End-June End-Sep. End-Dec. Ceiling on the increase in net domestic assets of the Bank of Zambia I/ 2/ Ceiling on the increase in net bank claims on government 2/ 3/ Floor on the domestic budget balance of the government Ceiling on the outstanding stock of domestic arrears of the government Floor on net international reserves of the Bank of Zambia 4/ Ceiling on new external payments arrears 5/ Ceiling on new medium- and long-term nonconcessional loans 6/ Ceiling on the stock of external short-term debt 7/ Ceiling on new loans collateralized or guaranteed by the central government or the Bank of Zambia for ZESCO and ZNOC Ceiling on the accumulation of new tax arrears from ZESCO and ZNOC to the central government 3,233 76 127 26 -50 693 167 201 126 36 . . . -89 -184 -217 -227 147 152 142 100 55 -1.155 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . -1,190 -1,159 -1.114 -1,074 15 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 23 0 0 0 . . . 0 0 0 . . . 0 0 0 Memorandum item: Programmed balance of payments assistance . . 1.5 74.7 149.2 241.7 II Net domestic assets are equivalent to reserve money minus net foreign assets, calculated at the end-December 1999 U.S. dollar-kwacha exchange rate (US$ l=K 2,632). 2/ In case of a shortfall in balance of payments assistance, the ceilings on the increase in net domestic assets and net bank claims on the government will be adjusted upward by the amount of the shortfall with a maximum of US$45 million. The kwacha value of the cumulative shortfall will be calculated at the end-December 1999 U.S. dollar-kwacha exchange rate (US$l=K 2,632). 31 Net bank claims include the U.S. dollar-denominated foreign exchange bridge loan of the Bank of Zambia to the government. The balance of the loan is calculated at the end-December 1999 U.S. dollar-kwacha exchange rate (US$l=K 2,632). 4/ Foreign assets of the Bank of Zambia include the balance in the special Bank for International Settlements account established in accordance with the April 1999 Paris Club accord. In case of a shortfall in balance of payments assistance, the floor on net international reserves will be adjusted downward by the amount of the shortfall with a maximum of USS45 million. Net international reserves exclude a US$25 million deposit in Meridien Bank, which is under liquidation. Until end-March, it also excludes a US$30 million deposit held as collateral in KBC, Belgium. Net international reserves are defined otherwise, consistent with the definition of the special data dissemination standard (SDDS) template, as external assets readily available to, or controlled by, the Bank of Zambia net of external liabiliiies of the Bank of Zambia. Pledged or otherwise encumbered reserve assets in&ding but mot limited to reserve assets used as collateral or guarantee for third party external liability are to be exduded. 5/ The injunction against new external payments arrears is continuous. 6/ Loans contracted or guaranteed by the central government or the Bank of Zambia with grant elements of less than 35 percent. Excludes debts contracted in the context of rescheduling agreements; includes financial leases and other instruments giving rise to external liabilities, contingent or otherwise. on nonconcessional terms. 7/ Includes debt contracted or guaranteed by the central government and Bank of Zambia or public enterprises with an original maturity of not more than one year, but excludes normal trade credits for imports. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 52 - - APPENDIX I - Table 4. Zambia: Structural Performance Criteria and Benchmarks During the Second Annual Promam under the PRGF. Januarv 1.2000-December 3 1.2000 Publication of monthly cash allocations to each of the line ministries in Ministry of Finance’s Monthly Macroeconomic Indicators. 21 Continuous The abstention from new tax reductions, exemptions, rebates or any Continuous other preferential tax treatment. L/ Appointment of a project manager to implement the Integrated Financial Management Information System @MIS). 2/ September 30,200O Issuance of a supervisory directive fi-om BoZ to ZNCB. 11 September 30,200O Implement a program of action that effectively privatizes the petroleum sector, with the government retaining responsibility for maintaining a strategic petroleum reserve. 2/ December 3 1,200O Each controlling officer to consolidate their commercial bank accounts into a single account at one bank only. L/ December 3 1,200O Submission to Cabinet by the Zambia Privatization Agency (ZPA) on modalities for the privatization of the electricity company ZESCO, and the Zambia National Commercial Bank (ZNCB). I/ December 3 1,200O J./ Performance Criterion 2/ Benchmark Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 53 - APPENDIX II Zambia: Relations with the Fund (As of May 31,200O) I. Membership Status: Joined g/23/65; Article XIV II. General Resources Account: SDR million Quota % Quota 489.10 100.0 Fund holdings of currency 489.10 100.0 Reserve position in Fund 0.02 0.0 III. SDR Department: Net cumulative allocation Holdings SDR million 68.30 0.01 % Allocation 100.0 0.0 IV. Outstanding Purchases and Loans: SDR million % Quota Structural Adjustment Facility (SAF) arrangements 181.75 -37.2 , . Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility (ESAF) arrangements 671.68 137.3 V. Financial Arrangements: TYDe ESAF/PRGF ESAF SAF Amount Approval Expiration Anproved Drawn Date Date (SDR million) (SDR million) 0312511999 03/24/2002 254.45 10.00 12/06/1999 12/05/1998 701.68 661.68 12/06/1995 12/05/1996 181.75 181.75 VI. Projected Obligations to the Fund: (SDR million; based on existing use of resources and present holdings of SDRs): Overdue Forthcomiw 04/30/2000 m 2001 2002 2003 2004 Principal 0.0 0.0 166.7 167.7 168.7 169.7 Charges/interest 0.0 5.8 7.0 6.2 5.3 4.5--- Total 0.0 5.8 173.7 174.0 173.9 174.2 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public. - 54 - I APPENDIX II VII. Exchange Rate Arrangement: The currency of Zambia is the kwacha, which is market determined. The official exchange rate quoted by the central bank is calculated as the weighted-average exchange rate quoted by commercial banks through the Bank of Zambia’s dealing window. The Bank of Zambia conducts daily foreign exchange dealing sessions at which it invites bids and offers from authorized dealers (i.e., registered commercial banks). On the basis of the bids and offers received, as well as other considerations, the Bank of Zambia determines the amount of foreign exchange to be sold to, or purchased from, the market. On May 3 1,2000, the Bank of Zambia midrate was K 2,900 per U.S. dollar. VIII. Article IV Consultations: Zambia is on the standard 12-month Article IV consultation cycle; the last Article IV consultation was concluded by the Executive Board on March 25, 1999. IX. Technical Assistance: Resident advisors Department Dates MAE 1990-1992 1991-1993 1991-1994 1993-1998 1993-1994 1994 1994-1996 1994- 1998 1998- 1999 FAD 1992-1993 1994 1997- 2000 Advisor on Budget Management 1998- 1999 Advisor on Monetary Operations Position Operations Advisor Head of Banking Supervision Research Department Advisor Banking Supervision Advisor Accounting Department Advisor Advisor on Foreign Exchange Operations Monetary Policy Advisor Senior Operations Advisor Monetary Advisory on Monetary Policies and Investments Advisor on Tax Administration Advisor on Macroeconomic and Fiscal Training Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 55 - APPENDIX II Technical assistance missions Department Dates Purpose MAE September 1992 March 1993 March 1995 October 1995 Banking legislation Monetary and debt management Capacity building at the Bank of Zambia Training in financial programming STA May 1993 October 1994 March 1995 March 1996 June 1997 Balance of payments Monetary survey Bank of Zambia balance sheet Multisector statistics Monetary survey (combined STA/AFR mission) November 1997 Balance of payments March 1998 Monetary survey May 2000 Balance of payments FAD January 1994 August 1994 February 1995 November 1996 March 2000 Introduction of value-added tax (VAT) Introduction of value-added tax (VAT) Introduction of value-added tax (VAT) Budget management Budget management X. Resident Representative: A Fund Resident Representative first took up the position in Lusaka in June 1990. Since August 1998, the Resident Representative has been Mr. Kenneth Meyers. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 56 - APPENDIX III Zambia: Relations with the World Bank Group The World Bank Group has provided 87 loans and credits to Zambia since 1953, with total commitments amounting to US$2.6 billion, of which about US$2.3 billion had been disbursed by end-April 2000. World Bank operations have supported all the main sectors in the economy. The main elements of the Bank’s strategy are to support efforts to achieve macroeconomic stability and sustainable and equitable growth; ensure sufficient access to imports, and an adequate reserve cushion through maintenance of an appropriate exchange rate and other measures to encourage exports; improve the climate for private sector development through deregulation, provision of infrastructure, and privatization of parastatals; strengthen human resource capacity by rehabilitating the education and health infrastructure and improving the quality of education and health services; implement an effective environmental strategy; and mobilize external resources to support the country’s adjustment program. A summary of the Bank Group’s recent financial relations with Zambia is presented below. Zambia: Status of Recent Bank Group Operations (As of April 30,200O) Project ID. Fiscal Year Purpose Principal Undisbursed Closing Date (In millions of U.S. dollars, less cancellations) C24060-ZAM 1992 C24220-ZAM 1993 PO03258 I994 PO03252 1994 PO03239 1995 PO03218 1995 PO0324 1 1995 PO032 10 1995 PO40642 1996 PO44324 1997 PO03253 1997 PO03230 1998 PO35076 1998 PO03249 1999 PO50400 2000 PO63584 2000 Summary Statement of Loans and IDA Credits PIRC Technical Assistance 10.0 0.9 Marketing and Processing 33.0 9.4 Financial and Legal MA 18.0 1.6 Petroleum Rehabilitation 30.0 18.5 Health Sector 56.0 27.3 Agriculture Sector I 60.0 20.3 Urban Restructuring and Water 33.0 6.5 Social Recovery II 30.0 0.5 ERIPTA 23.0 4.5 Enterprise Development 45.0 37.4 Environmental Support Program 12.8 10.4 National Roads 70.0 48.9 Power Rehabilitation 75.0 70.5 Basic Education Sector Inv. Prog. 40.0 32.6 Public Sector Reform E.P. P S 28.0 27.4 Social Investment Fund (ZAMSIF) 64.7 63.3 Statement of Recent IFC Investments (in millions of U.S. dollars) 11 m Equity Particinants - Total Held bv IFC 09/30/99 06/30/99 06/30/99 12/3 l/O1 I 213 1 /OO 1213 l/99 12/31/O] 12/31/00 12/31/O] 06/30/02 12/31/03 0313 1103 1213 1 IO2 12/31/01 1213 II00 1213 1 IO2 12.23 7.03 24.53 43.79 16.8 11 Includes investments after 199 1. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 57 - APPENDIX IV Zambia: Statistical Issues Institutional organization The present arrangements for the compilation of macroeconomic statistics involve duplication of effort and insufficient coordination among the Bank of Zambia (BoZ), the Ministry of Finance, and the Central Statistical Office (CSO). To a large extent, this situation has arisen because of organizational problems within the CSO that have affected its ability to produce economic statistics on a timely basis. Real sector There remain weaknesses in Zambia’s statistical system that undermine the authorities’ ability to monitor economic developments and formulate policies. Recently, national accounts data for the period 1998-99 have been revised on the basis of survey of industrial production. However, low response rates to these surveys have raised doubts about the reliability of the national accounts data. Consumer, wholesale, and building materials price indices are calculated in conformity with international standards. A consumer price index based on the 1993-94 household survey was released in 1996, calculated back to 1985. However, owing to lack of resources, the CSO has not been able to replace the wholesale price index currently based on 1966 weights, with a producer price index or to revise the price index for building materials. Monthly trade statistics from customs records have not been reported for publication in International Financial Statistics (IFS) on a timely and consistent basis, owing to the delays in transmitting customs documents to the CSO. The delays in publication of trade data forced the BoZ to start compiling trade statistics independently. To improve the information flow from customs posts, the CSO plans to start using the distribution system of the Zambian Revenue Authority. Government finance Zambia has resumed compilation of government finance statistics (GFS) data, and it appears that the quality of the reported data has improved; Zambia’s GFS data have been updated to 1998 for final data and to 1999 for forecast data. However, the coverage of the data for 1989- 99 is limited to budgetary central government. The authorities report monthly budget data for the Fund’s operational use in a timely manner. However, data are often subject to substantial revisions later in the year. No monthly or quarterly fiscal data are reported for publication in IFS. Local government fiscal data are not available. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 58 - Monetary accounts APPENDIX IV I There has been progress made in the compilation and reporting of monetary statistics, and the monetary survey is published-on a monthly basis. The BoZ has also eliminated discrepancies. between its own records of IMF accounts and data from the Treasurer’s Department of the IMF. In particular, the BoZ needs to reconcile its data on credit to commercial banks with those reported by banks. Also, further improvements in accounting procedures and computerization are desirable to ensure that transactions and balances in foreign currencies are properly valued. Balance of payments The data currently provided suffer from incomplete coverage and methodological problems. There remain serious gaps in data collection and the general quality of the balance of payments is poor. In particular, customs-based trade data continues to be compiled by the Central Statistical Office with long delays; coverage of metal exports and other transactions abroad of the Zambian Consolidated Copper Mines has been reduced with the privatization of this enterprise in early 2000; government debt service is recorded when paid rather that when due, despite the availability of due for payment data; and there are numerous gaps in the recording of services, income and private financial flows. For some of these transactions there are administrative records that have not been consulted, for others, there are surveys made but with incomplete coverage, for others basic sources of data need to be developed. Despite the authorities’ decision to assign the responsibility to compile balance of payments data to the BoZ, little progress has been achieved in the compilation of Zambia’s balance of payments data. An STA technical assistance mission undertaken in May 2000 concluded that this lack of progress was mainly owing to the lack of priority and therefore commitment of resources given to the compilation of basic data needed for the balance of payments (trade database, surveys, and banking reports), and the lack of a system for the compilation of the balance of payments statistics in the BOZ (poor utilization of data readily available in administrative records, lack of documentation of the sources and methodology used, and lack a of a schedule for the regular production of the balance of payments). The STA mission’s recommendations to improve balance of payments statistics included: (a) making better use of available information for services, transfers, and official debt service; (b) introducing changes in existing basic sources of data to improve the coverage of trade data, communications and insurance services; (c) developing additional surveys to fill major gaps in’the compilation system for private financial and income related flows, transportation flows, transactions of foreign embassies, and travel transactions; and (d) modifying the bank reporting system in the long-term so as to cover some remaining gaps in balance of payments information after the surveys have been implemented. . No balance of payments data are reported to STA for publication. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicZambia: Survey of Reporting of Main Statistical Indicators (As of end-May, 2000) . Date of latest observation Date received Frequency of data 11 Frequency of reporting l/ Source of data 21 Mode of reporting 31 41 5100 5100 5100 5100 5100 5100 3100 3100 3100 3100 5100 5100 4100 4100 12199 12199 12199 12199 3100 3100 1999 1999 12199 12199 6/l 2100 6/l 2100 6/I 2100 6/I 2100 6/I 2100 6/I 2100 5100 5100 5100 5100 6/l 2100 6/l 2100 5100 5100 3100 3100 3100 3100 5100 5100 5100 5100 3100 3100 0 0 D D W W M M M M W W M M Q Q A A M M A A W W 0 0 D D W W M M M M W W M M 0 0 A A M M A A W W A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C Central Treasury External Reserve/ Bank Bills Consumer Current Overall Debt/ Exchange International Base Balance Broad Interest Price Exports/ Account Rates Reserves Money Sheet Money Rates Index Imports Balance G”;;a;;;nt GDP/GNP Debt’ Servrce 11 D - Daily; W - Weekly; M - Monthly; Cl - Quarterly; and A - Annual. 21 A - Direct report by the authorities. 3/ C - Cable or facsimile. 41 C - Unrestricted use. I ul \D I Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 60 - APPENDIX V Zambia: Social and Demographic Indicators Area (thousand sq. km) 753 Population (1998) Population characteristics (1998) Health Population density (per sq. km) 13 Urban population (percent of total) 39 Rural population density (per sq. km of arable land (1997) 109 Population age structure (percent) (1995) 0- 14 years 46.8 15-64 years 53.0 65 and above 0.2 Income distribution (1993) GDP per capita (in US dollars) (1998) 321 Percent of national income Highest quintile Lowest 20 percent Population below the poverty line 50.4 5.6 86 Access to safe water (percent of population) (1994) 47 Labor force Female (percent) (1995) Agriculture (percent) (1990) Industry (percent) ( 1990) Education Nutrition (199 l-94) Per capita calorie intake per day 2,083 Total (million) 10.0 Annual rate of growth (percent) 2.3 Life expectancy at birth (in years) (1998) 44 Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births) (1998) 109 Population (per physician) (1993) 10,917 Population (per nursing person) (1993) 4,937 Percent of age group (1997) - - i Primary school enrollment 68 Secondary school enrollment 42 Illiteracy-male (percent of people 15 16 and above) (1998) Illiteracy-female (percent of people 15 3 1 and above) (1998) Sources: World Bank, World Develoument Report, 1997, and 2000; and Fund staff estimates. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public