DOCUMENT OF INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND NOT FOR PUBLIC USE FOR r AGENDA EBS/O1/178 CONFIDENTIAL October 24,200l To: Members of the Executive Board From: The Secretary Subject: Zambia-Staff Report for the 2001 Article IV Consultation and Third Review Under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staff report for the 2001 Article IV consultation with Zambia and the third review for Zambia under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility. A draft decision appears on pages 25 and 26. This subject, together with the poverty reduction strategy paper preparation status report for Zambia (EBD/O l/93, 1 O/24/0 1) and the associated joint staff assessment (EBD/O l/94, 1 O/24/0 l), is tentatively scheduled for discussion on Wednesday, November 7,200l. At the time of circulation of this paper to the Board, the Secretary’s Department has received a communication from the authorities of Zambia indicating that they consent to the Fund’s publication of the letter of intent only. Questions may be referred to Mr. Sharer (ext. 365 15), Mr. Thugge (ext. 383 17), and Mr. Hossain (ext. 36861). Unless the Documents Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the WTO Secretariat on November 1,200 1; and to the African Development Bank, the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa, and the European Commission, following its consideration by the Executive Board. Att: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicCONFIDENTIAL INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND ZAMBIA Staff Report for the 2001 Article IV Consultation and the Third Review of The Program Under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility Prepared by the African Department (In consultation with the Fiscal Affairs, Legal, Monetary and Exchange Affairs, Policy Development and Review, Statistics, and Treasurer’s Departments) Approved by Jose Fajgenbaum and Mark Allen October 22,200l Contents Page Executive Summary.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . .3 I. Introduction.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .4 II. Performance Under the Program and Recent Economic Developments . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . 5 III. Report on the Discussions.. ..................................................................................... .8 A. Medium-Term Framework .......................................................................... .9 B. The Program for the Remainder of 200 1 .................................................. .12 Fiscal policy ................................................................................... 12 Monetary policy.. .......................................................................... .14 Exchange rate policy and the external sector ................................ .15 C. Structural Reforms, Public Expenditure Management, and Governance ..................................................................................... .16 D. Enhanced HIPC Initiative Resources, Expenditures, and Tracking ......... .20 E. Technical Assistance, Data Issues, and Safeguard Assessment ............... .2 1 Iv. Medium-Term Financing and Capacity to Repay the Fund.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .2 1 V. Staff Appraisal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2- Text Boxes 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. Sources of Growth-Past Problems and Future Prospects .................................... 10 The PRGF-Supported Program and the Government’s Strategy for Poverty Reduction.. .............................................................................. 11 Structural Conditionality.. ..................................................................................... .13 Paris Club Rescheduling Agreement with Zambia .............................................. .17 Soundness of the Financial Sector ........................................................................ .18 Figures 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. Regional Comparison of Real GDP and Per Capita Real GDP, 1990-2001..........2 7 Regional Inflation (in percent; 12-month inflation), January 1990-June 2001 ... ..2 8 Selected Fiscal Indicators, 1998-2003 .................................................................. .29 Selected Monetary Indicators, January 1995-July 2001 ....................................... .30 Selected Exchange Rate Indicators, January 1995-June 2001 .............................. .31 Tables 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. Indicators of Fund Credit, 1999-20 10 ................................................................... .32 Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 1998-2003.. ................................... .33 Central Government Overall Operations, 1998-2003 (In billions of kwacha) ..... .34 Central Government Overall Operations, 1998-2003 (In percent of GDP). ........ .35 Monetary Survey, 1999-200 1 ............................................................................... .36 Assets and Liabilities of the Bank of Zambia, 1999-2001..................................... 37 Balance of Payments, 1998-2003 ......................................................................... .38 External Financing Requirements and Sources, 1999-2003 ................................. .39 Schedule of Disbursements Under the PRGF Arrangement, 1999-2003 ............ ..4 0 Appendices I. II. III. Iv. V. VI. Letter of Intent ..................................................................................................... .41 Annex 1: Improving Budget Preparation and Expenditure Control ................ .53 Relations with the Fund ........................................................................................ .54 Relations with the World Bank Group .................................................................. .58 Statistical Issues .................................................................................................... .59 Social and Demographic Indicators ...................................................................... .62 Draft Public Information Notice (PIN) ................................................................. .63 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3- Executive Summary Background 0 Building on the gains of 2000, Zambia’s economic performance continued to improve during the first half of 2001. The economy has experienced a recovery of the mining, manufacturing and service sectors, and despite weak agricultural production, real GDP growth of 5 percent for 2001 is attainable. Inflation continued to decline and the 12-month inflation rate through August fell to 17 percent compared with the indicative target of 21 percent. At the same time, the kwacha-U.S. dollar exchange rate appreciated by 18 percent in real terms reflecting tight financial policies. 0 All quantitative performance criteria for end-March and end-June were observed, except the ceilings on domestic arrears and on end-March net domestic assets of the BoZ, which was missed by a very small margin. The program’s structural performance criteria and benchmarks were observed. The fiscal and monetary policy stance was in line with the program. However, balance of payments developments were mixed. Outlook for the remainder of 2001 0 The main macroeconomic objectives for 2001 of achieving a significant increase in GDP per capita while sharply reducing inflation remain achievable. However, the gross international reserves target has been revised downward from 2 months to1.5 months of imports cover, mainly because of a significant shortfall in donor support. 0 Financial policies will be consistent with the inflation and growth objectives while reorienting public expenditures toward social sectors and poverty reduction. Despite a strong revenue performance, the overall fiscal deficit in 2001 is projected to be about 7.4 percent of GDP (about 2.5 percent higher than programmed) owing to a substantial shortfall (2.3 percent of GDP) in donor budgetary support. The domestic deficit is projected to exceed the program target by about 0.5 percent of GDP, mainly reflecting an overrun in the wage bill. 0 Structural reforms are geared towards improving economic efficiency and growth while freeing resources for social and poverty related outlays. The program includes: privatization of a controlling interest in the ZNCB, completing the deregulation and liberalization of the petroleum sector, strengthening expenditure control and improved monitoring and control of domestic payment arrears, and improving governance. Staff position 0 In spite of the recent improvement, Zambia’s economic situation remains fragile and subject to a number of risks including, expenditure pressures, potential financial costs of delaying reforms, and a deterioration of the global environment which may adversely affect Zambia’s external position. However, the authorities have demonstrated their commitment to the program and their efforts justify continued Fund support. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 4 - I. INTRODUCTION 1. Discussions with the Zambian authorities on the 2001 Article IV consultation and on the third review of the program supported by a Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF) arrangement were initiated in Lusaka during June 12-28,200l and concluded during September 5-l 5.’ The Zambian representatives included the Hon. Dr. Kalumba, Minister of Finance and Economic Development (MoFED); Dr. Mwanza, Governor of the Bank of Zambia (BoZ); Mr. Mtonga, Secretary to the Treasury of Zambia; and other senior government officials. The missions also met with representatives of the private sector, members of the diplomatic and donor community, and nongovernmental organizations. The discussions took place against a background of imminent presidential and parliamentary elections.2 2. In the attached letter of intent (LOI) to the Managing Director dated October 15,200l (Appendix I), the Minister of Finance reviews performance under the 2001 program and describes the objectives and policies for the remainder of the program year. While the economic program is broadly on track, the performance criteria on the stock of domestic arrears for end-March and end-June 2001, as well as on the net domestic assets of the BoZ for end-March, were not observed, and the authorities are requesting waivers. Access under the PRGF arrangement is equivalent to SDR 255 million (52 percent of quota), of which SDR 55 million has been disbursed thus far. Upon completion of the third review, Zambia would be eligible to draw SDR 50 million related to end-March and end-June performance. The subsequent schedule of disbursements and the conditions necessary for such disbursements are shown in Table 9. 3. The most recent Article IV consultation was concluded on July 26,200O. At that time, Directors stressed the need to pursue macroeconomic stability by strengthening public finances and tightening monetary policy. They underscored the need to reduce external ’ The staff representatives for both missions were Mr. Sharer (head), Mr. Thugge, Mr. Hossain (all AFR), Mr. Monroe (PDR), and Mr. Mathai (FAD). The June mission overlapped with missions from MAE and from the World Bank. Ms. Scott (AFR) and Mr. Meyers (AFR), the former Resident Representative, participated in the June mission, while Mr. Ellyne, the new Resident Representative, Ms. Sgherri (AFR), and Ms. Mjandana (AFR) participated in the September mission. 2 Presidential and legislative elections are expected to be held around end-2001. The constitution permits the elections to be held as late as March 2002, but all indications suggest an earlier date. The electoral process continues to be marked by uncertainty in the aftermath of President Chiluba’s failed bid to amend the constitution and seek reelection for a third term. The ruling Movement for Multiparty Democracy has named its candidate, Mr. Levy Mwanawasa, a lawyer and a former Vice President who has not been involved in national politics for several years. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-5- imbalances, and to accelerate structural reforms, especially the privatization of key parastatals, in order to achieve high and sustainable economic growth and a durable reduction in poverty. More recently, in approving the third annual program, Executive Directors emphasized the importance of strengthening monitoring and control mechanisms to ensure that budgetary resources released by debt relief under the enhanced Initiative for Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC Initiative) are used for poverty reduction and social sector development. Directors also reiterated the importance of privatizing the state-owned Zambia National Commercial Bank (ZNCB), pursuing appropriate financial policies, and improving governance. 4. Zambia maintains an exchange system that is free of restrictions on payments and transfers for current international transactions.3 Zambia’s core economic database is largely adequate for program monitoring, although, as noted below, the timeliness of key fiscal and monetary data should be improved. Zambia’s relations with the Fund and the World Bank are summarized in Appendices II and III, respectively. Statistical issues are described in Appendix IV, and social and demographic indicators are provided in Appendix V. II. PERFORMANCE UNDER THE PROGRAM AND RECENT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS 5. Building on the gains in 2000, Zambia’s economic performance has continued to improve, and, thus far in 2001, growth and inflation are proceeding as envisaged. As indicated in paragraph 8 of the LOI, all quantitative performance criteria for end- March and end-June 2001 were met, except for the ceilings on domestic arrears on both dates, as well as the ceiling on net domestic assets of the BoZ at end-March, which was missed by a very small margin (LOI, Table 1). The program’s structural performance criterion and benchmark were observed (LOI, Table 2). In addition, the end-June 2001 benchmark on improving the treasury bill market was met, albeit with a slight delay in the introduction of the guidelines. 6. Zambia’s economic performance through end-June 2001 continued to improve (Table 2). Despite a lower-than-expected output of maize, the real GDP growth target of 5 percent for 2001 should be achieved on the basis of a strong recovery in mining, wholesale and retail trade, and manufacturing. The 12-month inflation rate through August fell to 17 percent, compared with 2 1 percent in the program, largely on account of prudent financial 3 In April 1999, a mission comprising experts from LEG and MAE determined that Zambia has one of the most liberal exchange rate systems in Africa. However, on the basis of information recently provided by the authorities, LEG has confirmed that the continued existence of private external arrears, accumulated prior to October 1985, evidences an exchange restriction under Article VIII, Section 2(a). The arrears accumulated because the BoZ did not have the foreign exchange to provide to the private sector for payments on their external obligations. The staff will follow-up on how the authorities intend to address this issue. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-6- policies, a deceleration of food prices, reflecting improved supply earlier in the year, and a larger-than-expected appreciation of the kwacha. 7. Fiscal performance during the first half of the year was generally favorable although this was partly because cash releases to social sectors were markedly below budgeted levels. The overall fiscal deficit was significantly smaller than programmed because tax and nontax revenues were stronger than projected, while cash expenditures were held below the program estimates (Tables 3 and 4). However, within this aggregate performance, there were overruns in some areas.4 Also, spending on HIPC-financed programs did not take place as anticipated, largely because confusion about how debt relief would be delivered delayed the setting up of a mechanism to record and disburse HIPC Initiative resources. Finally, mainly reflecting data improvements, the stock of domestic payments arrears at end-June rose to K 375 billion (equivalent to about 3 percent of GDP), compared with K 53 billion at end-2000.5 8. Between end-December 2000 and end-June 2001, broad money contracted by 5 percent (compared with a programmed increase of about 1.5 percent), reflecting the tight monetary conditions following an increase in the cash reserve ratio from 11 percent to 15 percent in January 2001,6 and an increase of the core liquid asset ratio of banks from 25 percent to 35 percent (Table 5 and LOI, paragraph 3). This tightening also caused a considerable appreciation of the kwacha (see below) and a reduction in foreign currency deposits (FCDs) whose share in broad money declined from a high of 47 percent at end- December 2000 to 39 percent at end-June 2001 (Figure 4).7 There also has been some loss of dollar deposits from the banking system following the introduction of foreign exchange measures in early 2001 .8 Interest rates on 91-day treasury bills rose from 34 percent at end- 2000 to about 50 percent in early March, but declined to about 45 percent by end-August 4 For example, the 2001 budget for the Ministry of Defense was 1 percent of GDP, but cash releases to this Ministry through August 2001 amounted to 1.3 percent of GDP. ’ The increase since December reflected the verification of old arrears on previously contracted road works, the impact of the exchange rate on dollar-denominated arrears, and a buildup of penalties on outstanding arrears. It also reflected the accumulation of new arrears, which we estimate to amount to about K 40 billion. By comparison, over the same period, net credit to government was K 218 billion less than programmed (LOI, Table 1). 6 The minimum cash reserve ratio was subsequently lowered to 10 percent in March and raised again to 12.5 percent in late June. The frequent use of the reserve ratio highlighted the absence of other effective indirect monetary policy instruments. 7 If FCDs were to be valued at the program exchange rate, broad money would have remained broadly unchanged through end-June 2001. ’ See Box 2, EBS/O1/47. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-7- 2001. However, real interest rates have risen substantially as the sharp reduction in inflation during the second quarter was not accompanied by a similar reduction in nominal rates. 9. Between end-December 2000 and end-August 2001, the kwacha appreciated against the U.S. dollar by 13 percent in local currency terms, and by 18 percent in real terms, owing to tight financial policies (Figure 5). Most of the appreciation took place during the first half of the year, as the ksvacha has been broadly stable since end-June. Under the foreign exchange auction system introduced in early 2001, the large suppliers of foreign exchange (US$lOO,OOO or more per week) are required to sell their foreign exchange at daily auctions organized by the BoZ. Foreign exchange is then allocated to all successful bidders at the cut-off (marginal) rate. 10. Balance of payments developments during the first half of 2001 were mixed with both exports and imports growing significantly. The privatization of the copper mines led to a 32 percent increase in copper export receipts over the same period in 2000. However, growth of nontraditional exports was lower than programmed, mainly because of political turmoil in regional trading-partner countries. There was a substantial increase in imports owing to the appreciation of the kwacha and the pick up in economic activity. External balance of payments support through end-June was about US$56 million lower than programmed as a result of delays in aid disbursements. However, after adjusting for this delay and the shortfall in Fund disbursements, the program’s targets on gross international reserves were met. 11. Substantial progress was made in implementing structural reforms. At end- March 2001, the government issued instructions to the Zambia Privatization Agency (ZPA) to proceed with technical work on the divestiture of the government’s interests in the ZNCB, consistent with commitments under the PRGF and HIPC Initiative. The work has subsequently proceeded in accordance with the timetable prepared by the ZPA. In the meantime, the financial position of the bank has stabilized following payments by the government on guarantees to the ZNCB on its loans to Zambia National Oil Company (ZNOC) and, to a lesser extent, by Roan Antelope Mining Company of Zambia (RAMCOZ). In further efforts to strengthen the banking system, the BoZ issued instructions to inject new capital into Investrust Merchant Bank-an action that was completed by end-June 200 1. At the same time, two other banks have been put under liquidation. 12. In the petroleum sector, where the operations of ZNOC have undermined public sector finances and the soundness of the banking system, pro ress in implementing the reform program agreed with the World Bank has been slow. F However, as detailed in the LO1 (paragraph 7), in recent months, the authorities have implemented measures to effectively deregulate oil prices and to liberalize oil imports. The cabinet approved the privatization option for ZESCO and directed ZPA to proceed with the selection of consultants to assist in the concessioning process. 9 See paragraph 3 1, Appendix II, EBS/O1/47 for details. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-8- 13. The authorities have made progress in developing an Integrated Financial Management Information System (IFMIS), as described in paragraph 27 of the LOI, and expect to meet the end-October benchmark for approval by the Steering Committee of user requirements and a timetable for implementation. Other initiatives to improve the quality and control of public expenditure are proceeding. The participatory Public Expenditure Review (PER), conducted jointly with the World Bank, is expected to be completed in October 2001. Although work has not yet begun on a Medium-Term Expenditure Framework, the authorities plan to develop such a document, based on priorities outlined in the PRSP and the PER. Four ministries piloted an activity-based budgeting system in 2001, and additional ministries will be added next year. Work is also continuing to merge the payroll and establishment register, and to seek ways to simplify the system of government accounts at the central bank. 14. Regarding the report on ZCCM cobalt sales, the government took steps prior to end-June 2001 to ensure that the consultants received all the relevant information necessary to finalize the report. However, finalization and publication of the report have been delayed by legal action instituted by the Metal Resource Group (MRG), to whom the cobalt was sold (LOI, paragraph 30). 15. The government has made significant progress toward the preparation of a full PRSP.” Eight sector and cross-sector working groups prepared their reports to feed into the synthesis document, a first draft of which has recently been completed. One national workshop for government officials, civil society groups, and the media has been held to discuss this draft. This participatory process builds on consultations earlier in the year with civil society groups and local government officials in the provinces. Civil society groups have been actively engaged in the process, and have prepared their own PRSP proposals, which are expected to be reflected in the full PRSP. The authorities’ poverty reduction strategy and the castings of associated programs will be elaborated in the full PRSP. III. REPORT ON THE DISCUSSIONS 16. The discussions with the authorities focused on the need to consolidate the recent gains in macroeconomic stability in order to strengthen the basis for sustained economic growth over the medium term. The authorities and staff concurred that the positive performance of the past 18 months needed to be sustained and strengthened, if the trend of declining income per capita and increased poverty over the past several decades was to be reversed. A sustained improvement in economic performance would also reduce the fragility of the economy stemming from Zambia’s heavy reliance on donor support for the recurrent and capital budget, and for meeting external commitments, including debt-service obligations. Thus, it will be necessary to ensure a stable macroeconomic environment, maintain a liberal trade and exchange system, and continue to lo A PRSP Preparation Status Report and a Joint Staff Assessment of the Report are being issued with this staff report. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-9- deepen structural reforms to promote efficiency. While recognizing the importance of growth to sustained poverty reduction, the discussions also emphasized the need to reorient government expenditures toward pro-poor programs. In this context, the authorities reiterated their intention to make sure that interim relief under the enhanced HIPC Initiative was channeled into antipoverty programs, and to maintain a transparent accounting of relief received and disbursed. A. Medium-Term Framework 17. Over the past several decades, Zambia’s real GDP has stagnated, representing a decline of about 3 percent a year in per capita terms and a significantly weaker performance than selected countries in the region (Figure 1). This stagnation has been the major cause of the increase in poverty and the deterioration in social indicators (Appendix V). The authorities’ main objectives for the medium term is to achieve a sustainable noninflationary GDP growth of about 5-6 percent a year in the context of relative price stability, and to ensure that this growth benefits all Zambians (Boxes 1 and 2). They noted that these objectives were feasible, notwithstanding the heavy economic costs to Zambia arising from the HIV/AIDS pandemic.” While the main source of growth is likely to come primarily from the mining sector, following the privatization of the ZCCM in early 2000, it is also essential to reverse the weak performance of nontraditional exports. On the basis of ongoing investments, mining output is projected to grow by about 7 percent annually during 2001-03, compared with an average decline of 7 percent a year over the past ten years. In addition, agricultural output is expected to increase at an average rate of 4.5 percent a year based on the planned improvements in infrastructure and in supply of inputs. The authorities also recognize that, despite recent gains, inflation remains high and needs to be brought down to low single digits over the medium term (Figure 2). 18. The staff stressed that the key medium-term fiscal objectives should be to enhance domestic resource mobilization’2 and to contain nonpriority expenditure so that social and poverty reduction programs and investment in infrastructure could be pursued within an appropriate fiscal framework (Figure 3). In this context, the staff noted-and the authorities agreed-that cautious assumptions would need to be made in preparing the 2002 l1 See “The Implication of HIV/AIDS for the Zambian Economy,” which is being issued with this staff report as a selected issues paper. The paper indicates that the average annual growth of 5 percent is achievable in the medium term despite the economic costs imposed by the HIV/AIDS pandemic. l2 An FAD tax policy mission visited Zambia recently and offered several recommendations, including eliminating zero-rating of nonexport commodities under the VAT, raising the VAT threshold (which would improve tax administration by reducing the number of small tax payers), resisting further erosion of the mining tax base, improving the equity of the personal income tax, and effectively taxing small businesses. Implementation of these proposals will be discussed with the authorities during the upcoming budget discussions. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-lO- Box 1. Sources of Growth-Past Problems and Future Prospects During the last two decades, Zambia’s growth record has been disappointing, and the country has became poorer. During the 199Os, real GDP fell by an average of 0.1 percent per year, a decline of about 3 percent per annum in per capita terms (see Figure 1). The reasons for Zambia’s poor growth record include, inter alia, (i) the poor performance of the copper sector as a result of poor management of the ZCCM; (ii) adverse terms of trade shocks; (iii) macroeconomic instability, resulting in high inflation and high interest rates that deterred private investments; and (iv) the lack of timely structural reforms which contributed to the high cost of public utilities and the weak financial sector. Mining sector output declined by about two-thirds in the 1990s. However, growth was also weak in agriculture and in other nonmining sectors. Thus, the slowdown was broad based. On the expenditure side, the decline in growth can be attributed to a stagnation in private consumption (which increased at an annual rate of only 0.8 percent) and to a decline in private sector investment of about 0.3 percent per year. Recently, Zambia has made significant progress in reforming the economy. Compared with the early 199Os, Zambia today has a much more open economy, as tariffs are low and there are few nontariff barriers, prices are market determined, and all but a few of the public enterprises have been privatized, including the privatization in early 2000 of the ZCCM. A key obstacle to future rapid economic growth in Zambia is the spread of the HIV/AIDS pandemic. The impact of the disease on the skilled labor supply, savings and investment, and financial intermediation could have a significant effect on potential growth over the medium term. However, it should be feasible to raise GDP growth to about 5-6 percent per annum over the medium term if the current momentum of reform is maintained by pursuing macroeconomic stability and the deregulation and privatization of the economy, with active support provided by its development partners. Recovery of the mining sector will provide much of the impetus to growth in the next few years, but a sustainable growth strategy must also rely on nontraditional exports, which should benefit from lower tariffs on Zambia’s exports to South Africa under the SADC and from enlarged access to the U.S. market under the Africa Growth and Opportunity Act. Improvements in rural infrastructure and other supporting policies will also help achieve growth of 4-5 percent per year in agricultural output. To achieve the medium-term growth target, gross investment is projected to increase from 19.5 percent of GDP in 2000 to about 22.5 percent of GDP in 2003. Achieving this target will depend on enhancing the competitiveness of the economy by sustaining an appropriate macroeconomic incentive environment, implementing appropriate structural policies and better-focused public expenditure policies, and making other efforts to improve the environment for productive activity and investment. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-ll- Box 2. The PRGF-Supported Program and the Government’s Strategy for Poverty Reduction Over recent decades, Zambia has suffered from weak macroeconomic performance and high inflation. As a result, poverty is high, and many social indicators have declined or stagnated. This situation is worsened by the high HIV/AIDS rates. The government’s medium-term strategy, as outlined in the interim PRSP and to be further developed for the full PRSP, aims to achieve sustained economic growth with low inflation, a substantial strengthening of the external sector, and a reduction of poverty. The PRGF arrangement supports the government’s strategy by fostering broad-based economic growth and reducing inflation, which are necessary, although not sufficient, conditions for poverty reduction. The fiscal strategy aims to enhance domestic resource mobilization, strengthen expenditure control, and reduce pressures on the budget, so as to free up resources for poverty spending. In particular, it aims to ensure that outlays to the social sectors are maintained. The program also incorporates improvements in public expenditure management, including through development of an IFMIS. The authorities have committed themselves to restraining the overall government wage bill, while raising allowances for its poorest-paid employees, particularly in rural areas. Use of HIPC Initiative resources. A key feature of the program has been to ensure that the resources freed up by HIPC Initiative debt relief are directed toward poverty reduction. The last staff report (EBS/O1/47; 3/30/01) detailed discussions on the identification of the programs that will benefit from these resources, and the establishment of an effective and transparent system for tracking the expenditures. The revised priority list is broadly in line with the original list and focuses on rural development, education, and health. Privatization of the ZNCB will improve the soundness of the banking system, thereby improving the institutional environment for employment-creating investment and reducing possible contingent demands on the budget. However, the process raises concerns about the fate of unprofitable rural branches. Thirteen of the 43 ZNCB branches are unprofitable. They are located in towns with populations of between 15,000 to 150,000 and serve villages within a radius of up to 200 miles through rural sub-agencies and mobile units. These branches are mainly used for small deposits and transfer payments, rather than for loans, and in many areas the ZNCB is the sole reputable provider of these services. The government has set up a special committee to look into options to avoid closure, among them the establishment of a separate institution more geared to local needs, possibly merged with the National Savings and Credit Bank. The government intends to approach donors for assistance. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12- budget, particularly in light of the uncertain outlook for donor program assistance, potential costs related to the privatization of ZNCB, and the need to start clearing the stock of domestic arrears. Given the importance of public accountability in the use of HIPC Initiative resources, the government has established an interim system to track and report on HIPC Initiative-related expenditures (see paragraphs 35-37). 19. External sector performance is expected to improve over the medium term, owing to increased efficiency in the mining sector, as well as some recovery in export prices and in growth of nontraditional exports (Table 7). Total exports are projected to grow by an average of 20 percent annually during 200 l-03 (6 percent excluding mineral exports), while imports are projected to grow by an average of about 10 percent annually. As a result, the external current account deficit should narrow from 18.5 percent of GDP in 2001 to about 13 percent of GDP by 2003. External assistance sustained at recent levels is consistent with the import volumes that are needed to support poverty reduction and growth- oriented investment, while allowing for the rebuilding of official reserves to more comfortable levels. The staff noted that the robust outlook for copper output and exports could be threatened if world copper prices continued to fall, especially given copper’s growing share of exports. B. The Program for the Remainder of 2001 20. As noted in paragraph 10 of the LOI, the authorities’ key macroeconomic objectives for the 2001 program remain unchanged, except that gross international reserves are now targeted to increase to the equivalent of 1.5 months of imports, rather than the 2 months previously targeted, because of the significant shortfall in donor support. Achieving these objectives will require continued appropriate macroeconomic policies. The scope of structural conditionality is discussed in Box 3. Fiscal policy 21. The overall fiscal deficit (before grants) in 2001 is expected to be lower than programmed by about 1 percent of GDP because of higher-than-programmed revenues and lower overall expenditures (Table 4). Revenue is expected to exceed the program target by 0.6 percent of GDP (LOI, paragraph 11). The collection of import VAT is projected to largely offset a shortfall in domestic VAT .13 External program grants are projected to be significantly lower than programmed owing to the shortfall in EU disbursements (paragraph 27). 22. Although total expenditures are expected to be lower than programmed, pressures for additional spending remain strong, partly linked to the elections slated for late 2001, and partly to the June 2001 wage agreements between government and civil service unions; the latter will increase the wage bill by 0.6 percent of GDP over the l3 The impact of the Import VAT Deferment Scheme has been much smaller than expected, and the Indeni refinery has been offline longer than expected. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13- Box 3. Structural Conditionality 1. Coverage of Structural Conditionality in the Current Program The third annual program under the current PRGF arrangement covers calendar-year 2001. The structural performance criteria and benchmarks (Appendix I, Table 2) focus on areas that are critical for achieving the program’s macroeconomic objectives. They include the following: . privatization-the divestiture of the ZNCB; . discretionary exemptions-the abstention from new tax reductions, exemptions, rebates or any other preferential tax treatment; . public expenditure management-including (i) preparation and approval of a timetable for implementation of the IFMIS; (ii) improvement in the monitoring and control of domestic payments arrears; and (iii) regulation to be introduced in the 2002 budget to strengthen budget preparation and management (Annex I of Appendix I); . budgetary disciplin+nonaccumulation of tax arrears by ZESCO and ZNOC, the two major public enterprises; . governance and transparency-preparation of the 2000 audited government accounts as required by law, finalization of the study on cobalt sales, and production of a quarterly report as part of an interim framework to track HIPC Initiative-related expenditure; and . monetary operations-improvement of the operation of the treasury bill market, including by reintroducing multiple price auctions and issuing revised auction guidelines. 2. Status of Structural Conditionality from Earlier Programs The status of structural performance criteria and benchmarks for the 2000 annual program was presented in Table 2 of Appendix I (EBS/O1/47,3/30/01). All the structural performance criteria and all but one structural benchmark for 2000 were met. The missed structural benchmark relates to the effective privatization of the petroleum sector. 3. Structural Areas Covered by World Bank Lending and Conditionality At present, IDA structural conditionalities pertain to its Fiscal Sustainability Credit, an adjustment credit equivalent to US$140 million, which has three tranches, including one floating tranche. The first tranche of US$45 million was released in July 2000 and the second tranche of US$45 million was released in September 2001. The World Bank’s program focuses on policy reforms in three priority areas: . Privatization and state enterprise reforms. In the railways sector, agreement will be reached on a regulatory framework and restructuring or winding-up plan. In the electricity sector, the adjustment of electricity tariffs, settlement of ZESCO debt, and approval of the privatization plan for ZESCO will be effected. In the oil sector, the domestic prices of petroleum products will be deregulated, the import of crude oil will be liberalized, the role of the state-owned oil company, ZNOC, will be limited to the task of maintaining strategic reserves, and the oil sector entities will be effectively privatized. Oil sector reform is a condition for the release of the floating tranche. . Budget management. Reforms include a series of measures to improve cash releases, with a view to improving predictability of funding to ministries and ensuring a minimum level of cash releases to social sectors (36 percent of total discretionary expenditure). . Pension reform. The newly introduced National Pension Scheme (NPS) will be reformed to ensure sound contribution and benefit parameters and to establish a sound governance structure for the NPS Authority by streamlining its administration. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14- program target.14 In addition, there have been significant overruns in recurrent departmental charges (RDCs) and domestically financed capital expenditure but nonsocial sector RDCs are expected to be contained during the rest of the year. However, HIPC-financed expenditures are expected to be less than programmed because of the delay in establishing the mechanism for accounting for and channeling these monies (paragraph 36). Transfers to ZCCM trade creditors are also likely to fall short of target, partly in light of recent audit results calling into question some of the creditors’ claims. Finally, the government has, through August, spent 0.4 percent of GDP to cover a guarantee on a loan from the ZNCB to ZNOC. An amount of 0.3 percent of GDP remains outstanding on the guarantee, and this will be paid in the context of concluding the privatization of the ZNCB (LOI, paragraph 12). 23. As noted in paragraph 14 of the LOI, there has been a substantial shortfall (2.6 percent of GDP less than programmed) in donor budgetary support. Much of this shortfall has occurred late in the year making significant net repayments of bank financing difficult. Thus, bank financing is now estimated at 1.9 percent of GDP, rather than the programmed net deposits of 0.8 percent of GDP. This, in turn, will be reflected in a smaller build-up of gross international reserves and thus have little impact on money supply and the targeted rate of inflation. The staff urged the authorities to take all possible actions (particularly timely implementation of oil sector reforms as agreed with the World Bank) to sustain the level of donor support. Monetary policy 24. Monetary policy during the second half of 2001 aims to achieve the program’s target on growth, inflation and international reserves. In line with these objectives, the growth in money supply will be limited to about 13 percent in 2001 as a result of the recent progress in improving the operation of the treasury bill market, and by the introduction of repurchase agreements in early August 2001 (LOI, paragraph 19). The staff urged the BoZ to adhere strictly to the new treasury bill auction guidelines in order to ensure a more efficient functioning of the market and to allow movements in interest rates to reflect market conditions.15 The authorities observed that it was sometimes necessary to reject some bids that were speculative and that had no relation to the underlying market fundamentals. The staff noted the authorities’ concerns but observed that the exercise of the right to reject bids should not be misused to hold down interest rates at unrealistic levels as occurred in the second half of 2000. Moreover, the pursuit of an approximately tight fiscal policy while taking every step possible to facilitate the disbursements of external financing will help lower interest rates. l4 Some details of the agreements are provided in paragraph 12 of the LOI. I5 The BoZ introduced the “Dutch auction” system in March 200 1 for treasury bills. Accordingly, successful bidders pay their own bid price, while bids at the cut-off price are prorated so that each participant bidding at that price gets a proportionate amount of treasury bills. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 15- Exchange rate policy and the external sector 25. The authorities agreed that the exchange rate would continue to be determined by the market, and that central bank intervention in the foreign exchange market would be guided by the objective of meeting the international reserves target, and smoothing short-term fluctuations, without attempting to influence the underlying market trends. They felt that the level of the exchange rate was broadly appropriate and did not pose a competitiveness problem for exports. They noted that the recent real appreciation of the kwacha reversed the sharp real depreciation that had taken place in the fourth quarter of 2000, which they considered to have been excessive and out of line with the prevailing economic fundamentals. The staff stressed the importance of a good performance in nontraditional exports and in moving toward a sustainable external current account deficit and noted that a further real appreciation of the kwacha could jeopardize achieving these objectives. Thus, the staff urged the authorities to closely monitor exchange rate developments. On the positive side, the staff noted the recent reduction by South Africa of the duty on textile and other imports in the context of the Southern African Development Community (SADC) trade protocol, as well as the potential for higher textiles exports stemming from the increase in access to the U.S. market under the Africa Growth and Opportunity Act. 26. For 2001, Zambia’s export receipts are projected to increase by 14 percent, compared with the program target of 24 percent, largely because of lower-than- expected copper export prices and lower nontraditional exports. However, reflecting the improvement in the services account and the lower-than-programmed growth of imports, the external current account deficit (at 18.5 percent of GDP in 2001) is expected to be smaller than programmed. 27. Disbursements from the World Bank (US$95 million) are expected to be in line with the program. Those from the EU, however, are estimated to be about US$68 million less than programmed, owing to the complex conditionality, the recent commencement of an audit of the use of EU funds since the mid-1990s, and broad governance concerns. The projected total disbursements (including for projects and from the Fund) amounts to US$570 million, compared with the estimated total cash debt service after the HIPC Initiative of about US$l58 million (equivalent to about 16 percent of exports of goods and nonfactor services). Available external financing, together with debt relief under the HIPC Initiative should permit a buildup of gross international reserves of US$74 million. 28. Although there were some delays during the first half of the year in the delivery of HIPC Initiative assistance, total debt relief under the HIPC Initiative for the year is projected to be broadly in line with the program. It is assumed that Paris Club creditors will agree to a flow rescheduling of Zambia’s debt and debt service on Cologne terms Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 16- (Box 4).16 Thus far, key multilaterals (including the Fund, World Bank/IDA, and the A&an Development Bank) have provided interim HIPC assistance as envisaged. Other multilaterals, however, have yet to determine how they will provide their interim relief.i7 Zambia has also made some progress in negotiations with non-Paris Club bilateral creditors and has executed a debt buyback from the Czech and Slovak Republics at a rice of 11 cents to the dollar. Romania sold its claims on Zambia to a private U.S. company. P, Zambia is also making efforts to reconcile debts with other non-Paris Club bilateral creditors and to agree on the modalities for relief. 29. The staff commended Zambia for maintaining a liberal trade and exchange regime. l9 The trade regime has three nonzero tariff bands (5, 15, and 25 percent), a simple average of 13.6 percent, and no significant nontariff barriers.20 It is classified as a “2” on the “10” point- scale of the Fund’s index of overall external restrictiveness. The tariff on imported petroleum, which had been raised from 5 to 25 percent in June 2001, will be reversed and the lower rate will become effective before end-December 200 1. Regarding regional integration, the authorities pointed to the potential benefits of expanded trade under regional trading arrangements (RTAs), including, as noted above, the recent reduction of duties by South Africa. However, they also argued that imperfect enforcement of rules-of- origin had resulted in a neighboring country exporting goods to Zambia from outside the COMESA region without payment of duty. The authorities agreed with the staffs’ view of the need to rationalize the array of overlapping RTAs in East and Southern Africa. C. Structural Reforms, Public Expenditure Management, and Governance 30. The staff commended the authorities for the positive steps towards improving the ZNCB’s financial position, but noted that the bank’s continuing weakness is a potential source of instability for the financial system (Box 5). The authorities agreed that l6 Zambia concluded a bilateral agreement with Russia under the 1999 Paris Club agreement. Under the agreement, Zambia is expected to pay US$l million in 2001 compared to the original program projection of US$l3 million. l7 These include the Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa (BADEA), the European Development Fund, the European Investment Bank, the European Union, and the OPEC Fund. l8 The company (Debt Advisory International) buying Romania’s claims has not yet pursued litigation against Zambia, but has requested a settlement on terms exceeding those under the HIPC Initiative. i9 An exchange measure that had earlier raised some concern-the requirement that at least 75 percent of export proceeds be repatriated within 180 days-was never implemented. 2o The temporary ban on the export of maize, following widespread shortages, will be removed once conditions return to normal. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17- Box 4. Paris Club Rescheduling Agreement with Zambia As at end-September 2001, Paris Club creditors had not yet agreed to formally reschedule Zambia’s debt and debt service falling due even though Zambia had reached the decision point in December 2000. Based on a draft Agreed Minute dated May 16,200l and provided to Zambia in July 2001, Zambia and nine official bilateral creditors’ were to agree on a flow rescheduling on Cologne terms (involving a 90 percent reduction in net present value terms), which would supersede the April 1999 agreement on Naples terms. The draft agreement covers arrears as of January 1,200l and maturities falling due during the consolidation period (January 1,200l to March 3 1,2002) on the following non-official development assistance (ODA) and ODA debt contracted before the cutoff date (January 1, 1983): (i) debt not previously rescheduled; (ii) debt previously rescheduled on nonconcessional terms; and (iii) debt rescheduled on Toronto, London, and Naples terms, where the concessional element was topped up to Cologne terms. The draft agreement provides one option (debt reduction), with rescheduling expected to be over 23 years, a 6-year grace period, and graduated payments. ODA debt is expected to be rescheduled over 40 years, with 16 years of grace and at interest rates at least as favorable as the concessional rate applying to those loans. The de minimis threshold is SDR 100,000. The deadline for signing bilateral agreements was set at October 3 1,2001, though this is now unrealistic. The provisions of the agreement will continue to apply, provided that Zambia continues to have an appropriate arrangement with the Fund and has made on due dates the payments referred to in the agreement. Zambia also undertook to negotiate debt-reduction arrangements promptly with its other external creditors on terms at least comparable to those granted by Paris Club creditors. The draft agreement includes a goodwill clause for participating countries to meet at the completion point of the enhanced HIPC Initiative to examine Zambia’s outstanding stock of debt and to make the necessary effort to reach the debt sustainability objective in the context of an equitable burden sharing among creditors, provided that Zambia (i) maintains satisfactory relations with the participating creditor counties, fully implements agreements signed with them, and maintains a sound adjustment record; and (ii) the Boards of the IMF and the World Bank decide that Zambia has reached its completion point under the enhanced HIPC Initiative. ‘Austria, Brazil, Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the United Kingdom, and the United States. These countries account for about 81 percent of bilateral debt. Observer countries were Australia, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, the Netherlands, Norway, the Russian Federation (accounting for about 13 percent of bilateral debt), Spain, Sweden, and Switzerland. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 18- Box 5. Soundness of the Financial Sector The overall condition of Zambia’s banking system can be described as fair, with a financially weak, state-owned ZNCB continuing to pose a threat to the banking system. Currently, ZNCB holds about 20 percent of the banking system’s assets and 23 percent of its deposits. On April 30,2001, the risk-weighted capital ratio of the banking system was 22 percent; this represents a significant improvement since October 2000 and largely reflects the impact of reduced loan-loss provisioning over the period. Currently, only the ZNCB is not meeting the 10 percent minimum risk-weighted capital requirement. Nonperforming loans comprise 22 percent of total loans in the system, an improvement over the 3 1 percent recorded in October 2000. Such loans are concentrated mainly in the ZNCB, where the share of nonperforming loans in the total loan portfolio is as high as 78 percent and includes a large exposure to ZNOC. One other Zambian bank also has significant exposure to ZNOC that is not currently reflected in its reporting to the BoZ. Unreconciled inter-branch accounts (assets) remain a problem in the system, though they have decreased significantly during the last six months. Net income for the banks improved during 2000, partly due to unwarranted exemption provided to the ZNCB from the loan-loss provisioning requirement, but has dropped dramatically in 200 1. This fall is largely due to realized losses from foreign exchange activity and unrealized losses from the revaluation of foreign exchange-denominated assets. The appreciation of the kwacha during the first quarter of 200 1 adversely affected the banks during that period. The bank’s liquidity position remains generally satisfactory, owing to large balances of cash and securities at hand. All banks are in compliance with the regulatory requirements of the Financial Systems Supervision Department, although concern continues to be expressed about the ZNCB. The recently completed full-scope inspection confirms that the ZNCB has a large regulatory capital deficiency, over three-fourths of its loan portfolio is nonperforming, and the bank’s board of directors is not sufficiently involved in the oversight of the bank’s operations. In spite of some progress in the recovery of loans during the first half of 2001, the bank continues to make large operating losses, is dependent on new deposits and borrowing to meet its operating costs, and, therefore, faces difficult prospects. The bank’s problems are being addressed through privatization of the government’s controlling interest and interim measures to stabilize its financial position. The BoZ has conducted two self-assessments of Zambia’s compliance with the Base1 Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision, one in 2000 and another in May 2001. A recent MAE mission found the 2001 self-assessment to be less comprehensive and too focused on laws and regulations, as opposed to actual practices. The 2000 assessment was more critical and included proposals to address the weaknesses found by the study. In this context, a Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) mission from the Fund and the World Bank is scheduled to conduct a comprehensive external assessment of the financial system in 2002. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 19- addressing the bank’s financial weakness should be a core element of Zambia’s financial sector reforms, particularly given that the bank accounts for 20 percent of total assets of the banking sector and about 23 percent of total deposits. Moreover, they concurred with the staffs assessment that the bank’s long-term financial health could only be effectively restored through the planned privatization, as endorsed by the Cabinet’s approval of the divestiture of ZNCB. 31. The authorities explained that the ZPA had hired a consulting firm, with donor financial assistance, to conduct a due diligence study of the ZNCB, which was expected to be completed in October 2001. As indicated in paragraph 23 of the LOI, the consultants would assess the current financial situation of the ZNCB, conduct an independent valuation of the bank, and prepare international tender documents. The ZPA board will then meet and consider the privatization proposal, and it is expected that by end-November 2001 the ZPA will invite international bids for the sale of a majority controlling interest to a strategic partner. The latter is a performance criterion for end-December under the program. The authorities indicated their intention to be flexible in negotiations with potential buyers to assure bidders that they would have full control of the bank. Technical and financial assistance from donors, including the World Bank, will be sought for the creation and operation of the new rural bank by hiving off the rural branches. The authorities agreed that the BoZ should continue to monitor closely the ZNCB, in order to ensure that it adhered to prudential regulations and was being managed well; the BoZ will conduct a targeted inspection of the ZNCB by end-October 200 1. 32. Despite the delays in undertaking the measures agreed for end-April 2001, the government reiterated its commitment to fully liberalize and privatize the petroleum sector in 2001. As indicated in paragraph 25 of the LOI, by end-December 2001, the government will take steps to effectively privatize through offers for sale or long-term concessions the oil sector entities, including the Indeni refinery, the Ndola storage tank, and TAZAMA pipeline. In addition, the government is also committed to restructuring ZNOC by end-December, so as to limit its role to that of maintaining the strategic stock of petroleum reserves. These reforms are the key conditions for further disbursements from the World Bank during 2001; timely implementation is, therefore, essential. 33. The authorities recognize the importance of controlling commitments and preventing the accumulation of budgetary domestic arrears. They have, therefore, introduced a series of measures designed to improve the reporting system of ministries and its monitoring and control by the Ministry of Finance, as well as budget preparation, execution, and expenditure management generally (LOI, paragraph 26 and Annex I).*’ In addition, as indicated in paragraph 27 of the LOI, they are continuing to make progress in developing the IFMIS. 21 A recent HIPC assessment and fiscal ROSC mission that visited Zambia found significant weaknesses in public expenditure management, some of which will be addressed by the measures in the LOI. Also, there is a need for the Auditor General’s examination of the (continued) Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 20 - 34. Governance issues addressed under the program include measures to enhance transparency and accountability in the management of public resources. In this context, the Financial Report for 2000, prepared by the Accountant General and [verified by the Auditor General], was tabled in parliament in September 2001, and the Auditor General’s report on the overall outturn should be completed by December 2001-all as envisaged under Zambian law and the PRGF-supported program. This represents a substantial improvement over the recent past, when financial reports were delayed by as much as four years. As indicated in paragraph 30 of the LOI, the government is committed to publishing the final report on cobalt sales and to taking the necessary follow-up actions once the legal situation has been clarified. D. Enhanced HIPC Initiative Resources, Expenditures, and Tracking 35. The staff expressed concern regarding the delay in HIPC-tinanced expenditures, which had been programmed to commence during the second quarter. However, the authorities explained that this delay had been caused by technical problems involving the accounting of HIPC Initiative assistance and confusion about the mode of delivery of debt relief. Some of the confusion had centered on whether the debt relief would be provided in the form of new disbursements or lower debt-service payments. With the resolution of these technical problems, the authorities deposited in July US$42 million in estimated HIPC Initiative debt relief for the period January-June 2001 into the HIPC Initiative account at the BoZ; they also agreed to subsequently make monthly deposits of US$l2 million in estimated debt relief into the account (LOI, paragraph 16). By end-August, total deposits into the account had amounted to US$66 million. 36. Following the availability to line ministries of HIPC resources in July 2001, HIPC-financed expenditures have increased substantially and are estimated to have amounted to K 132 billion about (US$35 million) by end-September 2001, compared with about K 2 billion by end-June. However, given the delays in the second quarter, the authorities have indicated that they would be unable to spend the full program amount of HIPC-financed expenditures without significant inefficiencies and waste. Thus, following discussions at end-July 2001 between the line ministries and the MoFED, a new priority list to be funded by HIPC Initiative resources was agreed. On the basis of the new list, the government plans to disburse to line ministries an average of K 46 billion per month for the period July-December 2001, bringing total HIPC-financed expenditures for 200 1 to K 280 billion, compared with the original program target of K 352 billion. 37. The system for tracking the use of HIPC funds seems to be working well, and the authorities published the first quarterly HIPC report in early September, thereby meeting the benchmark under the program. A new budget code has been created, and the Accountant General has held two workshops to train line ministry accountants on how to Ministry of Works and Supply to be expanded into a comprehensive assessment of the entire stock of government arrears. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2l- handle HIPC-related transactions. Although this system will enable the government to track the receipt and use of HIPC Initiative resources, the government has requested technical assistance from FAD in improving the current budget classification to help judge whether overall spending has taken on a more pro-poor orientation. E. Technical Assistance, Data Issues, and Safeguard Assessment 38. Zambia continues to receive extensive technical assistance (TA) in a number of areas, including tax policy, public expenditure management, banking supervision, and balance of payments and monetary statistics. Further assistance from the Fund and other development partners will be required in the areas of public expenditure management, taxation of the mining sector, monetary operations, and the simplification and streamlining of government accounts with the banking system. While this TA has led to improvements in a number of areas, implementation has been mixed. The authorities recognize that efforts should be intensified to implement the recommendations of the TA missions. 39. Zambia’s capacity to generate macroeconomic data has displayed increasing weakness in recent months. The long delay in compiling monetary statistics requires immediate and substantial efforts. Regarding national accounts, methodological weaknesses related to the use of outdated weights, long delays in compiling sectoral data and completing the basic surveys, and frequent revision in estimates impair the government’s ability to monitor economic development and formulate policies on a timely basis. The authorities intend to intensify their efforts to address the weaknesses in these areas. 40. Under its current arrangement with the Fund, Zambia is subject to the transitional procedures governing safeguards assessments. The BoZ cooperated fully in providing Fund staff with the required documentation. The staff has reviewed the documentation provided and has noted that the BoZ publishes in the annual report its financial statements, which are audited in accordance with internationally accepted standards. Based on the review, the staff has concluded that the BoZ’s external audit mechanism is adequate. The staff recommends, however, that the external auditors be given the opportunity to review the annual report of the BoZ before its publication. IV. MEDIUM-TERM FINANCING AND CAPACITY To REPAY THE FUND 41. Zambia’s external debt is expected to be sustainable, given that it has reached the decision point under the enhanced HIPC Initiative,22 and provided that the government maintains sound macroeconomic policies and proceeds with structural reforms. Zambia’s external debt service should fall from 18 percent of exports in 2000 to 11 percent in 2003. With the Fund providing interim assistance, payments to the Fund will be reduced from an annual average of US$226 million in 2001-03 to US$70 million, or 6 percent of exports of goods and services. In addition, assuming that the current PRGF-supported program remains on track, Fund’s disbursements to Zambia would amount to US$130 million annually in 22 See EBS/00/233. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 22 - 200 l-02. Under the assumptions of the program, and in particular with respect to debt relief under the HIPC Initiative, Zambia should be able to meet its obligations to the Fund. At the same time, given Zambia’s fragile external situation, it is essential that its programs with the Fund and World Bank, and thus the provision of interim relief, remain on track if Zambia is to avoid falling back into arrears. V. STAFF APPRAISAL 42. Zambia’s economic performance during 2001 has continued to improve, building on the gains made in 2000. Notwithstanding weak agricultural output, real GDP growth is expected to be in line with the program target, which would result in increased per capita income for a second consecutive year. Moreover, all indications are that the 12-month inflation rate will be reduced in line with the program target. Program implementation through end-June was good, and, with the exception of domestic arrears and a very small excess in the end-March net domestic assets of the BoZ, all the program’s quantitative and structural performance criteria for end-March and end-June 200 1 were observed, as were the structural benchmarks. The favorable economic developments are in marked contrast to Zambia’s record over the past several decades. Nevertheless, Zambia’s economic circumstances remain very fragile. 43. On the fiscal side, the staff welcomes the generally favorable performance and notes that the overall fiscal deficit (before grants) is expected to be smaller than programmed. The staff is encouraged by the strong performance of revenues, with collections expected to significantly exceed the program target despite the impact of the appreciation of the kwacha on trade taxes. In addition, expenditures have been largely contained, despite pressures arising from the hosting of the OAU summit, and the forthcoming presidential and parliamentary elections. However, this overall good performance was marred by overruns in some areas, notably wages and recurrent departmental charges, and there have been delays in initiating HIPC-financed expenditures, In this context, the staff supports the recent acceleration of HIPC-financed expenditures as well as the reorientation of non-HIPC resources towards the social sectors. The staff also welcomes the completion of the first quarterly HIPC report which indicates that the interim system for tracking poverty-reducing expenditures is functioning well. It is, however, important that progress be made in the area of budget classification in order to determine whether overall spending, and not just HIPC-financed spending, is taking on a more pro-poor orientation. Looking ahead, it will be essential that the government exercise caution in formulating its budget plans for 2002, taking into account the uncertain outlook for donor budgetary support, the costs associated with the privatization of the ZNCB, and the need to reduce the large stock of domestic arrears. 44. The staff is concerned about the recent accumulation of domestic payments arrears, and urges the authorities to improve budget formulation and expenditure management and control. Although most of the increase in the outstanding stock of arrears is related to the verification of old arrears and the impact of exchange rate changes and penalties, it also reflects the accumulation of new arrears, contrary to the program objectives. The staff welcomes the measures being taken by the authorities to strengthen the internal Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- zs - reporting and verification systems and to revise budgetary regulations in order to strengthen expenditure management and control. Improved financial systems are critical to both strengthening economic management and achieving the objective of increased effectiveness of government spending. In this context, it is essential that work on developing the IFMIS remains on track, and that the authorities meet the program benchmark on approving the user requirements and adhering to the timetable for implementation of the IFMIS . 45. Although the tightening of monetary policy at the beginning of the year may have been excessive and the authorities had relied unduly on changes in the reserve requirement, the staff supports the authorities overall monetary policy stance, and notes that this has helped to stabilize the exchange rate and ease pressures on prices. The staff strongly supports the introduction by the Bank of Zambia of repurchase agreements and the issuance of revised guidelines for the auction of treasury bills. These actions should bolster the BoZ’s capacity to conduct monetary policy and reduce use of legal reserve requirements as a monetary policy instrument. Real interest rates remain very high in Zambia, but stable and lower interest rates require the re-establishment of confidence based on the sustained implementation of sound macroeconomic policies, and measures to make the banking system more efficient. Regarding the exchange and trade system, the staff commends the authorities’ commitment to continue to maintain an open system, and to have the exchange rate determined by market forces; BoZ intervention in the foreign exchange market should be guided by the objective of achieving the international reserves targets, and smoothing short-term fluctuations. 46. With respect to structural reforms, while welcoming the recent improvement in the stability of the financial sector, the staff remains concerned about the ZNCB’s continuing financial difficulties. It is critical, therefore, that the privatization of the bank proceeds as rapidly as possible, including the offer for the sale of a majority controlling interest to a strategic partner by end-December 2001. In the meantime, it is essential that the BoZ closely monitor the ZNCB to ensure prudent financial management practices are followed and to protect the banks’ assets. The other critical area of structural reform concerns the oil sector, which has imposed a substantial cost on the public finances and the banking system. The staff urges that actions agreed with the World Bank staff to liberalize the sector be implemented on a timely basis. 47. It is important that the government forge ahead with improving governance and enhancing transparency and accountability in the management of public resources. Thus, the staff endorses the government’s commitment to finalize and publish the report on cobalt sales, as well as the intention to finalize the government accounts for 2000. The latter should facilitate submission of the audited government accounts to parliament within the 12 months from the end of the fiscal year, as required by law. 48. The staff is encouraged by the progress made in preparing a first draft of the full PRSP, which has benefited from a wide participatory process involving a cross-section of Zambian society. The final full PRSP document has been delayed beyond the original target date of October 2001 in order to incorporate feedback from a national stakeholders’ Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 24 - workshop in mid-October, and to obtain a clearer view of resource availability. Nonetheless, the staff is of the view that the draft PRSP will provide useful guidance for setting out the priorities for poverty reduction in framing the 2002 budget. 49. The quality and timeliness of Zambia’s data in areas such as monetary, fiscal, and balance of payments need to be improved. The staff urges a concerted effort to ensure effective implementation of past technical assistance recommendations, and notes that further technical assistance from the Fund and other donors will continue to be needed for some time. 50. In sum, notwithstanding the marked improvement in performance, Zambia’s economic situation remains fragile. The program therefore remains subject to a number of risks, which are compounded by the deteriorating global economic environment that could further weaken Zambia’s balance of payments position. Despite these risks, the program for 2001 is reasonably ambitious, and the authorities have, thus far, demonstrated their commitment to achieve the program’s major objectives. Indeed, they intend to monitor developments closely and adopt any corrective actions that may be necessary. The staff, therefore, recommends completion of the third review and approval of waivers for the nonobservance of the performance criteria for end-March and end-June. 51. Regarding the Article VIII restrictions evidenced by the existence of private external arrears, the staff urges the authorities to develop a plan to settle these arrears. The staff recommends that the next Article IV consultation with Zambia be held on the standard 12- month consultation cycle. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-25 - VI. PROPOSED DECISION The following draft decision, which may be adopted by a majority of votes cast, is proposed for adoption by the Executive Board: 1. Zambia has consulted with the Fund in accordance with paragraph 2(eee) of the three- year arrangement for Zambia (‘arrangement’) under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF) (EBS/99/35, Supplement 1) and paragraph 36 of the letter dated March 29,200l from the Minister of Finance and Economic Development of Zambia, in order to review program implementation. 2. The letter from the Minister of Finance and Economic Development of Zambia dated October 15, 2001 (‘October 2001 letter’) shall be attached to the arrangement, and the letter dated March 10, 1999 from the Minister of Finance and Economic Development of Zambia, as supplemented by the Minister’s letters of June 30,200O and March 29, 2001, shall be read as supplemented by the October 200 1 letter. 3. Accordingly, the arrangement shall be amended as follows: (a> a new paragraph l(ccc)(iv) is added: “(iv) the eighth disbursement under the arrangement, in an amount equivalent to SDR 24.94 million, will be available on February 15,2002, at the request of Zambia and subject to paragraph 2(f) below;” (b) paragraph l(dd) is modified: “The phasing of, and conditions for, disbursements during the remaining period of this arrangement shall be established during the fourth review contemplated in paragraph 2(f) below.” (4 the following new paragraphs 2(aaaa), 2(bbbb), and 2(f) are added: Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 26 - “(aaaa) Zambia will not request the eighth disbursement referred to in paragraph 1 (ccc)(iv) above if the Managing Director of the Trustee finds that the data as of December 3 1,200 1, indicate that any of the ceilings and floors referred to in paragraphs 2(a)(i), (ii), (iv), and (v), and 2(b)(iv) of this arrangement, as specified in Table 1 of the October 2001 letter and as defined in Section II of the Technical Memorandum of Understanding (TMU) dated March 29,200 1, was not observed. “(bbbb) Zambia will not request the eighth disbursement referred to in paragraph 1 (ccc)(iv) above if: (9 it has taken any of the actions specified in paragraph 2(c) and (d) above; or (ii) the Managing Director of the Trustee finds that Zambia has not carried out its intentions with respect to the structural performance criteria specified in Table 2 of the October 2001 letter or with respect to the abstention from new tax reductions, exemptions, rebates, or any other preferential tax treatment; or (iii) the central government or the Bank of Zambia collaterizes or guarantees at any time any new loans for ZESCO or ZNOC. “@I Zambia will not request the eighth disbursement specified in paragraph 1 (ccc)(iv) above until the Trustee has determined that the fourth review referred to in paragraph 32 of the October 2001 letter has been completed.” 4. The Fund decides to complete the third review contemplated in paragraph 2(eee) of the arrangement. Zambia may request the fifth and sixth disbursements specified in paragraph 1 (ccc)(i) and (ii) of the arrangement, notwithstanding the nonobservance of the performance criteria specified in paragraphs 2(a)(i) and (iv) of the arrangement, and on the condition that the information provided by Zambia on performance under those criteria is accurate. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 27 - 160 190 160 Figure 1. Zambia: Regional Comparison of Real GDP and Per Capita Real GDP, 1990-2001 l/ (1990=100) / Uganda / ’ 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 Index of Cumulative Per Capita Real GDP Zambia 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 160 160 Sources: Zambian authorities; IMF World Economic Outlook; and Fund staff estimates. l/ Shaded area indicates projections. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public260 240 220 200 Gambia 180 160 140 120 100 \ ; : I 1 , s ’ : 1 . , I 80 1 1 I’ 8’ i,, Malawi 60 40 20 0 i I 51 . , 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 - 28 - Figure 2. Zambia: Regional Inflation (in percent; 12-month inflation), January 1990- June 2001 Sources: Zambian authorities; IMF World Economic Outlook; and Fund staff estimates. 260 240 220 200 180 160 140 120 100 80 60 40 20 0 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 29 - Figure 3. Zambia: Selected Fiscal Indicators, 1998-2003 l/ 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 1998 1999 2000 200 1 2002 2003 W ’ f (In percent of noninteres expenditure) 2/ 7 - 61 Wages and salaries 5 - 23 2 0 21 -2 19 -4 17 -6 15 -8 1998 1999 2000 200 1 2002 2003 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 Fiscal Balance (Cash basis; in percent Sources: Zambian authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections. l! Shaded area indicates projections. 21 The figures for 2001-03 include some HIPC Initiative-funded expenditures on broadly defined poverty- related activities that may not be included in the “social sectors” as traditionally defined. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 30 - Figure 4. Zambia: Selected Monetary Indicators, January 199%July 2001 70 60 Treasury Bill Rates and Prices (Annualized rate; in percent) c 182-day bills *\ ‘\ ; : ’ -, 28-day bills :’ 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 80 60 40 20 0 -20 Money and Prices (Twelve-month growth rate; in percent) : II I. 1, II II . I II I Comprehensive M2 Kwacha M2 70 70 Commercial Bank Interest Rates (Annualized rate; in percent) 60 60 50 50 40 40 30 30 20 20 10 I” ” 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 80 100 90 60 80 70 10 60 50 20 40 30 3 20 10 -20 0 Components of Broad Money (In percent of total broad money) Kwacha deposits 60 80 60 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 Sources: Bank of Zambia; and Ministry of Finance. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 31 - 4500 2500 2000 1500 1000 500 160 140 120 100 80 60 40 20 Figure 5. Zambia: Selected Exchange Rate Indicators, January 1995 - June 200 Kwacha-U.S. Dollar Rate l! 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 lffective Exchange Rates 21 1995=100) Real effective ’ \I -me--. exchange rate ’ I , , : ,’ \ ,- - - , Nominal effective exchange rate 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 Sources: IMF, Information Notice System; and Fund staff estimates. 2000 2001 4500 2500 2000 1500 1000 500 140 20 00 80 60 40 20 l/A rise in the kwacha-U.S. dollar rate indicates depreciation of the kwacha with respect to the U.S. dollar. 21 Weighted by total trade. A rise in the index indicates a real appreciation of the kwacha. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 32 - Wo\t-OWW -+ 3’ r.j d + N’ mm m Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 33 - Table 2 Zambia Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 1998.2003 1998 1999 2000 2001 2001 2002 2003 Act. Est. Est P10g. Pm. II Proj Proj Natmnal mcome and prices Real GDP GDP deflator Consumer prices (annual average) Consumer prices (end of period) -1.9 2.4 36 50 50 50 5.5 19.6 21.7 27 9 24 9 23 3 14.7 11.5 24 5 26 8 26.1 22 6 21 3 13.7 10.4 30 6 20 6 30.1 17.5 175 120 90 External sector U.S dollar value of exports of goods and sawces Of which copper U S dollar value of imports of goods and serwces Export volume Import volume Copper export volume Copper export prices (average, U.S dollars per pound) Nominal effective exchange rate Real effective exchange rate Terns of trade -26.5 -8.3 2.1 -35.5 -10.0 62 -8.1 -2.6 8.0 -8.7 -3.6 -6 4 -1 6 -6.9 45 -41 3 -6 3 -2 4 0 72 0 70 0.82 -24.1 -23.3 -35 5 -8.7 -2.3 -14 3 -13.8 -5.6 44 20.8 166 27 8 17.7 17.2 166 12 8 20 4 14 4 22 5 11 8 22.2 0 87 0.78 16.0 26.5 74 13 3 69 17 8 0.85 5.x 16.4 21.6 62 15 1 37 199 0.88 3.4 -1.8 1.1 Money and credit Net foragn assets Net domestic assets Net domestic credit Net claims on government Clamls on nongovemment Broad money Velocity Treasury bdl rate (m percent, end of period) .100.2 -7.2 37.6 65.X 14.4 3.X 95.4 33.0 17.7 375 0 194 37.3 20.6 47.4 50 3 22 6 29.2 74 1 65 5.9 51 34 3 36.2 34.1 145 0.6 04 65 11 23 1 -7 7 184 10 2 170 17.1 128 5.0 49 Central government budget Revenue (excluding gmnts) Grants Expendltues 21 Domestic expenditures 2/ 31 106 170 47.5 175 21.1 20 0 17 8 53 1 50 0 -3.6 1133 31.7 20.1 96 35 2 192 42.2 33 5 31 4 14.0 14 1 15.4 169 76 9 18.9 25 3 16.9 16.1 (In percent of GDP) Investment and savings Gross natmml savings 41 Gross foragn savings 5/ Gross domestic investment Of whzch: pubhc investment 3.5 6.0 6.7 10.0 7.9 11.4 15.0 11.4 8.4 12.8 10 5 126 106 75 149 14.4 19.5 20 5 20.5 22 0 22 5 11.1 105 10.1 12.6 11.4 11.6 11 1 Central government budget Revenue and grants Revenue (excludmg prants) Expenditures (excludmg mterest) 21 Interest due 61 Domestic expenditures 2131 Overall balance, cash basis Domestic balance, cash basis 71 24 9 25 5 25.7 26 9 23 9 23 8 23 5 18.4 176 19.8 175 18 1 18.1 18 1 26.7 26 4 28 6 29.x 2x.9 27.9 27 1 3.3 2.X 31 2.1 26 1.9 1.8 18.0 17.2 23.2 20.8 21.9 22.0 21.1 -4.3 -4.0 -7 2 -4.9 -7.4 -5.9 -5.4 0.4 0.4 -3 4 -3.3 -3.x -3.3 -3.0 External sector Current account balance -17.7 -16.9 -18.3 -19 9 -18.5 -16.3 -13 2 (In percent of exports of goods and services) External debt External debt service 81 160 162 18.3 16.3 157 13 0 External program assistance 0.0 21 1 21.6 20.0 13.8 10.1 109 (In millions of U.S dollars, unless otherwise indicated) Current account balance -574 -532 -583 -633 -668 -613 -552 Overall balance of payments -453 -348 -373 -414 -434 -403 -323 Gross ofticlal reserves (end of period) 44 46 114 249 1x7 257 327 In months of imports of goods and services 04 05 1.0 1.9 15 1.9 2.2 (Annual percentage change, unless othawse mdicated) Sources. Zambian authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections l/Based on the latest available informatmn and asssessment made by Fund staff in September 2001 2/ Jncludmg contingency resene and payments of domestic arrears. 3/ Excludes external interest payments and fore&-financed capital expenditure. 4/ Gross national disposable mcome nunus consumption. 5/ Current account balance, includmg grants For 2002.03, level of annual grants 1s assumed to be the same as in 2001. 6/After debt relief. 7/Excludes foreign grants, external mterest payments, and foreign-financed capital expenditure. X/Refers to officnl and prwate sector external debt sew~ce Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 34 - Table 3 Zambia: Central Government Overall Operations, 1998-2003 (In btions of kwacha) 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 Pr0g. Proj Proj. Proj I Revenue and grants 1,529 1,921 2,528 3,521 3,122 3,746 4,337 1 Revenue 1,131 1,324 1,953 2,294 2,365 2,837 3,341 Tax revenue 1,094 1,289 1,931 2,257 2,325 2,788 3,284 Income taxes 398 483 634 743 881 1,061 1,258 Excise taxes 211 222 278 362 358 447 510 Value-added tax (VAT) 303 429 575 797 739 901 1,080 Domeshc VAT 200 248 230 491 282 340 413 Import VAT 103 181 345 306 457 561 668 Custom duty 182 156 252 318 309 379 436 Clearance of ZESCO tax arrears 0 0 191 37 37 0 0 Nontax revenue 38 34 22 37 40 49 57 2 Grants 398 597 575 1,228 757 909 996 PIOgWl 0 140 100 404 107 146 156 Project 11 398 457 476 823 650 763 840 II. Expemhtures 1,842 2,195 3,122 4,168 4,103 1 Current expenditures 1,162 1,253 1,701 2,341 2,489 Wages and salaries 327 402 538 741 825 Pubhc service retrenchment 77 51 74 20 20 RecluTent departmental charges 161 192 300 635 719 Arrears clearance 2/ 0 0 0 53 75 2001 electxms 0 0 0 86 86 OAIJ summit 0 0 0 64 72 HIPC-fmanced 0 0 0 93 69 other RDCS 161 192 300 339 417 Transfers and pensions 149 181 219 424 429 of whxh HIPC-linanced 0 0 0 165 146 Domestic interest 80 105 140 169 195 External mterest (pad) 123 107 167 Ill 139 other current expendalres 127 95 88 192 162 of which. fkx&al restmchxing 31 0 0 0 98 53 Conhngency 0 0 82 50 0 Payments of domestic arrears 2/ 117 121 92 0 0 2 Capal expenmhue 680 789 1,009 1,649 1,483 Domestically financed 113 124 228 337 419 of whch. HIPC-linanced 0 0 0 94 65 Foreign fmanced 567 666 781 1,312 1,064 3 Net transfers to ZCCM 41 0 152 413 177 131 4,679 2,721 975 24 725 50 5 0 503 507 208 99 132 0 50 0 1,824 593 1,231 134 5,338 3,146 1,141 40 836 50 0 0 591 601 216 106 155 0 50 0 2,042 697 1,345 150 Change in balances and statistical discrepancy 51 46 -24 -114 0 13 0 0 III. Overall balance 61 -267 -297 -708 -646 -968 -933 -1,001 Overa.ll balance excluding grants 61 -665 -894 -1,283 -1,873 1,726 1,842 -1,998 Domestic balance 6171 25 31 -335 -428 -501 -512 -546 IV Financmg 267 297 708 646 968 1 Domestic 220 72 177 -75 273 Bank 224 35 139 -100 252 Nonbank -3 31 38 25 21 2 External 47 226 531 722 696 Program loans 0 266 479 447 406 Project loans 169 209 289 513 436 Amorhzation (pad) -123 -249 -237 -238 -146 . . . . Memorandum items: Mdhy expen&ture Xi Socd outlays 91 of whxh non-HIPC-financed Total HIPC expenmhues 94 130 146 292 399 449 292 399 449 0 0 0 130 171 819 747 957 1,143 601 600 723 850 352 280 501 585 Sources Zambian authorihes; and Fund staff estimates and projections. li Figure for 2001 mcludes grants of K 24 billion used for electmns and domestic lmnsfers, rather than capital expenditure 21 From 2001 onward?., anears clearance has been classified under recurrent departmental charges. 31 Figures for 2002 and 2003 exclude costs related to ZNCB privatuahon and BoZ recapltalizatmn. 41 Figure for 1999 was foreign financed and thus was not counted toward the domestic balance. 51 Includes changes in balances of government commercial bank accounts, as well as any statlshcal discrepancy. 61 Cash bans (with interest on a commitment bus III 2001) 71 Excludes foreign grants, external debt setice, and foreign-financed capital (and other) expenditure. 8/ Figure for 2001 reflects cash releases through August only 91 Excludes poverty-related outlays (some linanced by HIPC resources) outside the social sector Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 35 - Table 4 Zambiti Cenkal Government Overall Operations, 1998.2003 (In percent of GDP) 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 Prog Proj PrOJ. PrOJ 1 Revenue and grants 24 9 25.5 25.7 26.9 23 9 23.8 23.5 1 Revenue 18.4 17.6 19.8 17.5 18.1 18.1 18.1 Tax revenue 17.8 17.1 19.6 17.3 17.8 17 8 17.8 Income taxes 6.5 64 6.4 5.7 6.8 6.8 68 Excise taxes 3.4 29 2.8 2.8 27 2.8 2.8 Value-added tax (VAT) 5.0 57 5.8 61 57 5.7 58 Domesbc VAT 3.3 33 23 3.8 2.2 22 22 Import VAT 1.7 24 3.5 2.3 3.5 36 36 Customs duty 2.9 21 2.6 2.4 2.4 2.4 24 Clearance ofZESC0 tax arrears 00 0.0 1.9 0.3 0.3 0.0 0.0 Nontax revenue 06 0.5 0.2 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 2 Grants 65 79 5.8 9.4 5.8 58 5.4 Pr0gWIl 00 1.9 1.0 3.1 0.8 0.9 0.8 ProJect I/ 65 6.1 4.8 6.3 50 4.9 4.5 II Expenmtures 30.0 29 2 31.7 319 31.5 1 Current expend~hxes 18.9 16 7 173 17 9 19 1 Wages and salanes 5.3 53 55 57 63 Pubhc service retrenchment 13 07 08 02 0.2 Recurrent departmental charges 26 2.5 3.0 4.9 5.5 Arrears clearance 2/ 0.0 00 00 0.4 0.6 2001 elections 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.7 0.7 OAU sumnut 0.0 00 00 05 0.5 HlPC-financed 0.0 00 00 07 0.5 Other RDCs 2.6 2.5 30 26 32 Transfers and pensions 2.4 24 22 32 3.3 of whxh: HIPC-financed 00 0.0 00 13 1.1 Domestic mterest 13 14 14 1.3 1.5 External interest (paid) 2.0 14 17 0.8 1.1 Other current expenditures 2.0 12 09 1.5 1.2 of which fmancial restructuring 31 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.7 0.4 Conhngency 0.0 00 OX 0.4 0.0 Payments of domestic arrears 2/ 1.9 16 09 0.0 0.0 2 Capital expenkture 11.1 10.5 10.2 12.6 11.4 Domestically financed 1.8 1.6 2.3 2.6 3.2 of which: HIPC-financed 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.7 0.5 Foreign financed 9.2 88 79 10.0 8.2 3 Net transfers to ZCCM 41 00 20 4.2 14 1.0 29.8 28.9 17.3 17 0 6.2 62 0.2 02 4.6 4.5 0.3 0.3 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 3.2 32 3.2 33 1.3 0.6 0.8 0.0 03 00 11 6 3.8 7.8 0.9 12 06 0.8 00 0.3 0.0 11 1 3.8 73 0.8 Change KI balances and statishcal discrepancy 5/ 0.7 -0 3 -1 2 00 0.1 0.0 00 III Overall balance 61 -4.3 -4.0 -7.2 -4.9 -7.4 -5.9 -5 4 Overall balance excluding grants 61 10.8 -11.9 -13.0 -14.3 -13 2 -11.7 -10.8 Domestic balance 6171 0.4 0.4 -3.4 -3.3 -3 8 -3.3 -3.0 IV Fmancmg 4.3 40 7.2 49 7.4 1 Domestic 3.5 10 18 -0 6 21 Bank 3.6 05 14 -0 8 19 Nonbank -0.1 05 04 0.2 02 2. External 0.8 30 5.4 55 5.3 Program loans 0.0 3.5 4.9 3.4 3.1 Project loans 2.8 2.8 2.9 3.9 3.3 Amortization (paid) -2.0 -3.3 -2.4 -1.8 -1.1 . . . . . . . Memorandum Items: Militay expenditure 81 Social outlays 91 ofwhxh non-HIPC-financed Total HIPC expenditures 1.6 1.7 1.5 1.0 1.3 . . . 48 5.3 4.6 6.3 57 6.1 6.2 48 5.3 4.6 46 46 4.6 4.6 00 0.0 00 27 2.1 32 32 Sources Zambmn authorities; and Fund staff esbmates and projections I/ Figure for 2001 includes grants of 0.2 percent of GDP used for elechons and domestic transfers, rather than cap&l expenditure 21 From 2001 onwards, arrears clearance has been classified under recurrent depatmental charges 31 Figures far 2002 and 2003 exclude costs related to ZNCB privatization and BoZ recapitalization 41 Figure for 1999 was foreign financed and thus was not counted toward the domestic balance. Ji Includes changes in balances of government commercial bank accounts, as well as any statistical discrepancy. 61 Cash baa (with interest on a comnutment basis in 2001). 71 Excludes foreign grants, external debt servxe, and foreign-financed capital (and other) expenditure. 8, Figure for 2001 reflects cash releases through August only 9, Excludes poverty-related outlays (some financed by HIPC resources) outside the socml sector Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 36 - Table 5. Zambia: Monetary Survey, 1999-2001 (End of period) 1999 2000 2000 2001 DCC. DCC. Dec. March March June June Sep. Dec. Act. Act. l/21 Prog. base Ii 21 Prog. 11 Act. Prog. ll Act. Prog. li Prog. li (In billions of kwacha) Net foreign assets 3/ -2,424 -1,512 -2,693 -2,803 -2,893 -2,664 -2,930 -2,733 -2,709 Bank of Zambia (BaZ) -2,893 -2,440 -3,592 -3,718 -3,740 -3,595 -3,728 -3,547 -3,539 Assets 266 772 1,220 1,090 1,065 1,023 757 939 883 Liabilities -3,159 -3,212 -4,811 -4,807 -4,805 -4,618 -4,486 -4,486 -4,422 Commercial banks 469 927 899 914 847 930 798 814 829 Assets 530 996 965 981 957 996 947 963 978 Liabilities -61 -68 -66 -66 -110 -66 -149 -149 -149 Net domestic assets 3,852 3,998 Net domestic credit 1,505 1,772 Net claims on govemment 4/ 51 693 952 Claims on government 1,073 1,460 Government deposits -380 -508 HlPC Account (IMF) 0 -40 1 Claims on nongovernment 812 1,221 Claims on private sector 555 862 Claims on public enterprises 257 359 Other items (net) 2,346 2,226 Broad money 1,428 2,486 Narrow money 504 761 Quasi money 924 1,725 Of which : foreign exchange deposits 534 1,171 Other 391 554 Net foreign assets -14.7 63.9 -4.4 -8.1 1.1 -9.6 -1.6 -0.7 Net domestic assets 43.9 10.2 -4.9 -7.5 0.4 4.8 10.2 13.4 Net domestic credit 33.8 18.7 8.0 1.0 8.5 7.4 14.2 18.1 Net claims on government 10.2 18.1 7.8 5.7 8.2 6.6 10.9 10.1 Claims on nongovernment 23.6 28.6 0.2 -4.3 0.3 1.3 3.6 8.4 Claims on private sector 11.7 21.5 2.3 -2.4 4.5 0.8 3.3 6.7 Claims on public enterprises 12.0 7.1 -2.1 -1.9 -4.2 0.5 0.4 1.7 Other items (net) 10.1 -8.5 -12.8 -8.5 -8.1 -2.7 -4.0 -4.7 Broad money 29.2 74.1 -9.3 -15.6 1.5 -4.8 8.5 12.8 Memorandum items: Program exchange rates Kwacha-U.S. dollar Kwacha-SDR 5,178 5,057 4,99 1 5,188 1,953 2,151 1,978 2,165 1,365 1,559 1,507 1,569 1,874 1,957 -508 -450 -634 -634 -643 -634 1,221 1,225 1,114 1,229 862 918 802 974 359 307 312 255 3,225 2,906 3,013 3,023 5,297 5,43 1 2,138 2,306 1,528 1,637 2,015 -486 -643 -643 1,252 1,3 11 881 943 371 368 3,159 3,125 5,513 2,403 1,617 -643 1,429 1,029 400 3,109 2,486 2,254 761 1,725 1,171 554 2,098 2,524 2,366 2,698 774 862 1,324 1,504 782 934 542 570 2,803 (Change in percent of beginning-of-year broad money) 2,632 4,158 4,158 4,158 4,158 4,158 4,158 4,158 3,612 5,405 5,405 5,405 5,405 5,405 5,405 5,405 Sources: Zambian authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections. li Revised to reflect actual end-December 2000 (program base) data and, far end-December 2001, changes in some macroeconomic assumptions 21 The difference between the end-December 2000 columns for “Actual” and “Program base” is that the former wes the 2000 program exchange rate of USS l=K 2,632, whereas the latter uses the actual end-December 2000 exchange rate of US% l=K 4,158. 31 For 2000, net foreign assets and the foreign exchange bridge loan from the BoZ to the govemment are calculated at the program exchange rate of US$l=K 2,632. For 200 1, net foreign assets of the banking system will be calculated using the program exchange rate of US$ l=K 4,158 (the &cial BoZ mid-rate at end-December 2000). 41 Includes bonds issued to BoZ for BoZ loans to ex-parastatals (K 12.8 billion) and for BoZ recapitalization (K 30 billion; of which K 10 billion was issued in April 2000). 51 The foreign exchange bridge loan from the BoZ to the government will be calculated using the current exchange rate. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 37 - Table 6. Zambia: Assets and Liabilities of the Bank of Zambia, 1999-200 1 (In billions of kwacha, unless otherwise indicated; end of period) 1999 2000 2000 2001 Dec. Dec. DEC. Mar. Mar. June Jlme Sep. Dec. Act. Act. l/ 21 Prog. base l/ 21 Prog. li Act. Prog. 11 Act. Prog. 11 Prog. l/ Net foreign assets 31 -2,893 -2,440 -3,592 -3,718 -3,740 -3,595 -3,128 -3,547 -3,539 Assets 266 772 1,220 1,090 1,065 1,023 757 939 883 Liabilities -3,159 -3,212 -4,811 -4,807 -4,805 -4,618 -4,486 -4,486 -4,422 Net domestic assets 3,23 1 2,995 4,147 4,322 4,304 4,274 Net domestic credit 751 424 605 199 749 809 Net claims on govemment 4151 597 638 1,05 1 1,245 1,203 1,255 Claims on government 841 1,100 1,516 0 1,638 Government deposits -243 -463 -465 0 -435 HlPC Account (IMYF) 0 -401 -634 -634 -643 -634 Claims on nongovernment 160 187 187 187 189 187 Of whrch : claims on banks 121 82 82 0 13 Other items (net) 2,414 2,571 3,542 3,523 3,555 3,465 Reserve money 338 556 556 604 564 Currency in circulation 251 331 331 298 Required reserves (kwacha deposits) 48 88 88 72 Required reserves (foreign exchange deposits) 34 101 101 80 current accounts 4 34 34 112 Nongovernment deposits 2 2 2 2 Memorandum items: Multiplier Twelve-month growth of reserve money (percent) Exchange rate (kwacha per U.S. dollar) 4.2 17 2,653 4.5 4.5 3.7 3.7 3.7 76 4,158 4,158 4,158 4,158 4,158 680 4,373 4,282 753 897 1,133 1,242 1,594 -460 -643 -643 263 298 104 104 3,620 3,385 645 135 342 107 99 94 2 3.7 3.7 3.1 71 84 37 4,158 4,158 4,158 4,302 893 1,222 -643 314 104 3,409 164 Sources: Zambian authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections. li Revised to reflect actual end-December 2000 (program base) and, for end-December 2001 changes in some macroeconomic assumptions. 21 The difference between the end-December 2000 columns for “Actual” and “Program base” is that the former uses the 2000 program exchange rate of US$ l=K 2,632, whereas the latter uses the actual end-December 2000 exchange rate of USS l=K 4,158. 31 For 2001, net foreign assets are calculated on the basis of the program exchange rate of US$ l=K 4,158. 41 Includes bonds issued to BoZ for BoZ loans to ex-parastatals (K 12.8 billion) and for BoZ recapitalization (K 30 billion; of which K 10 billion was issued in April 2000). 51 The foreign exchange bridge loan from the BoZ to the government will be calculated using the current exchange rate. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 38 - Table 7. Zambia: Balance of Payments, 1998-2003 (ln millions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise indicated) 1998 1999 2000 2001 Est. Est. - Prog. Proj. l/ Current account balance Trade balance Exports, f.o.b. Metal sector Nonmetal Imports, f.o.b. Metal sector Nonmetal Goods procured in port by carriers Services (net) Receipts Payments home (net) Ofwhich: interest paynlents Current transfers (net) Project grants (capital) Financial account Official loan disbursement (net) Project loans A”mtizati0” (-) Change in n.f.a. of commercial banks Private foreign direct investment Errors and omissions, short-term capital Overall balance Financing Change in net international reserves of BoZ (- increase) 21 Gross offkial reserves of BoZ BoZ liabilities lMF (net) Other foreign ass&s of the BoZ Debt relief (non-HIPC) 31 Debt relief (HIPC, including IMF) Of which : IMF Net change in arrears (+ increase) Balance of payments support grants Balance of payments support loans Financing gap (+) Memorandum items: Current account balance @ercent of GDP) Export volume (percentage change) Import volume (percentage change) Terms of trade (percentage change) Copper volume (thousand metric tonnes) Copper price (U.S. dollars per pound) Gross official reserves 41 (in months of imports) Scheduled official debt service (USSm) 5/ Debt-setice cash payments (US%m) 61 (in percent of exports) Of which : official debt service 71 -574 -532 -583 -633 -153 -149 -221 -216 816 756 746 927 520 468 497 635 296 288 249 291 -971 -922 -978 1,161 -221 -121 -177 -205 -750 -801 -801 -956 2 17 11 18 -179 -211 -224 -270 103 87 115 113 -282 -298 -339 -383 -215 -156 -120 -127 -219 -166 -166 -158 -27 -16 -18 -20 203 153 153 201 118 169 -160 18 -45 4 -197 -107 91 166 93 125 -136 -162 -290 -232 -35 2 -89 -15 198 163 126 140 -200 -124 217 0 -453 -334 -373 -414 453 334 373 415 246 -35 194 -2 52 -47 0 14 122 443 85 -251 0 61 0 117 -49 -68 -7 26 30 217 -230 -135 -7 -87 -10 32 154 170 267 151 0 99 109 0 0 0 0 -17.7 -16.9 -8.7 -3.6 -1.6 -6.9 -13.9 -5.9 256 240 0.72 0.70 44 46 0.4 0.5 147 16.0 120 136 16.2 126 -18.3 -19.9 -6.4 12.8 4.5 14.4 3.9 3.4 234 268 0.82 0.87 114 249 1.0 1.9 169 158 158 169 18.4 16.3 148 160 -668 -294 851 585 266 -1,157 -223 -934 12 -226 153 -379 -126 -157 -22 -613 -203 1,018 740 278 1,233 -256 -977 12 -268 147 -416 -115 -149 -27 27 -123 112 -235 0 150 -403 180 183 46 -111 121 -232 17 140 9 0 -434 434 403 -167 -74 -7 -87 170 170 292 281 151 153 0 0 31 30 108 88 0 0 -16.3 13.3 6.9 5.8 337 0.85 257 1.9 148 158 156 _. 15.7 13.0 145 148 -165 -70 -7 -88 -18.5 20.4 22.5 -1.8 286 0.78 187 1.5 158 2002 2003 Proj. Proj. -552 -82 1,197 900 297 -1,291 -296 -996 13 -301 159 -460 -137 -133 -33 188 41 -119 113 -232 0 160 0 -323 173 -264 -70 -7 -187 154 283 154 0 0 0 150 -13.2 15.1 3.7 1.1 404 0.88 327 2.2 151 162 10.9 151 Sources: Bank of Zambia (BoZ); and IMF staff estimates. li Assumes a shortfall in balance of payments support of US$68.6 million on donor disbursements. 2/ In 2000, reflects freeing of LJS$30 million of central bank assets held as collateral at end-l 999 3/ Reflects 1999 Pam Club rescheduling comparable treatment from non-Paris Club bilaterals and the 1997 restructuring of Camdex claim on the BoZ. From 2000, reflects stock-of-debt operation under Naples terms, simulated at end-l 999 41 Includes balances in the special Bank for International Settlements account established in accordance with the 1999 Paris Club accords 5/ Corresponds to Table 14 (revised) in Zambia’s decision point document (EBWOO1233). 6/includes official and private debt service. 7/ In 2000, total debt service actually paid was below scheduled official debt ser.we because of delays in bringing bilateral agreements into effect and because (making use of grace periods) some payments due in December 2000 were pad m January 2001 Differences between scheduled official debt sexxce and the ofGal component of debt-service cash payments for 2001 reflect updated exchange rate projections Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 39 - Table 8. External Financing Requirements and Sources, 1999-2003 (In millions of U.S. dollars) Actual Projection 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 Gross financing requirements -65 1 External current account deficit (excl. official transfers) -532 Debt amortization on medium- and long-term debt l/ -118 Public sector -108 Of which : multilateral 2/ Private sector -10 Gross reserves (-, increase) -2 IMF repurchases and repayments 0 Available financing 651 Foreign direct investment (net) Official creditors 3/ Multilateral 2/ Of which: balance of payments financing 41 World Bank ADB/ADF Bilateral to public sector Of which: balance of payments financing 41 IMF (PRGF) Other flows 5/ Ofwhich: IMF interim assistance under enhanced HIPC Of which : Interim HIPC assistance from other creditors Financing gap Memorandum item: Total balance of payments financing 41 163 497 284 117 110 8 213 61 14 -22 0 178 185 139 123 0 -743 -1,030 -967 -901 - -583 -668 -613 -552 -92 -71 -66 -60 -82 -58 -52 -52 -54 -23 -17 -15 -10 -13 -14 -8 -68 -74 -70 -70 0 -217 -218 -219 743 126 431 289 154 140 13 142 32 26 160 0 1030 967 751 140 440 275 108 95 13 165 31 130 321 151 116 0 150 160 418 301 246 161 88 0 80 0 8 0 172 140 35 0 130 32 270 257 153 154 114 116 0 150 Sources: Bank of Zambia (BoZ); and IMF staff estimates and projections. l/ On a cash basis. 2/ Excluding the IMF. 3/ Includes both loans and grants. 4/ Includes those transactions that are undertaken for the purpose of financing a balance of payments deficit or an increase in reserves. 5/ Includes all other net financial flows, and errors and omissions. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 40 - Table 9. Zambia: Schedule of Disbursements Under the PRGF Arrangement, 1999-2003 Amount (In millions of SDRs) Availability Date Conditions Necessary for Disbursement 10.00 March 29, 1999 l/ 10.00 July 27,200O 1/ 10.00 November 15,200O 1/ 24.94 February 15,200l l/ 24.94 May 15, 2001 2/ 24.94 August 152001 2/ 24.94 November 15,200l 24.94 February 15,2002 3/ 24.94 May 15, 2002 3/ 24.94 August 15,2002 3/ 24.94 November 15,2002 3/ 24.94 February 15,2003 3/ Board approval of the three-year arrangement and endorsement of the annual program Completion of the review of the first annual program and endorsement of the second annual program for 2000. Observance of the September 30, 2000 performance criteria. Observance of the December 3 1, 2000 performance criteria and completion of the second review. Observance of the March 3 1, 2001 performance criteria. Observance of the June 30, 2001 performance criteria and completion of the third review. Observance of the September 30, 2001 performance criteria. Observance of the December 3 1, 200 1 performance criteria and completion of the fourth review. Observance of the March 3 1, 2002 performance criteria. Observance of the June 30, 2002 performance criteria and completion of the fifth review. Observance of the September 30, 2002 performance criteria. Observance of the December 3 1, 2002 performance criteria and completion of the sixth review. 11 Already disbursed. 2/ Disbursement will be made after completion of the third review. 3/ The number and timing of the disbursements for the period February 2002 onward will be determined at a later date. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4l- APPENDIX I October 15,200l Mr. Horst Kohler Managing Director International Monetary Fund Washington, D.C. Dear Mr. Kohler, 1. In this letter, we discuss progress in implementing the 2001 program supported by the PRGF arrangement, and describe the government’s key economic and financial policies for the rest of 2001. The letter also requests completion of the third review of the PRGF arrangement and the disbursements related to the end-March and end-June performance criteria. As the performance criteria were not observed on domestic arrears for end-March and end-June, and on the net domestic assets of the Bank of Zambia (BoZ) for end-March (by less than Kl billion), the government is requesting waivers for their nonobservance. The government has agreed to implement a comprehensive framework to deal with domestic arrears. The attached Tables report on developments with regard to performance criteria and benchmarks through end-December 2001. I. RECENT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS 2. Zambia’s economic performance during the first half of 2001 continued to improve. Although growth in agriculture is projected to decline moderately, the targeted real GDP growth of 5 percent for 2001 should be achieved on the basis of a strong performance by the mining, manufacturing, and services sectors. In addition, the 12-month inflation rate through August was markedly lower than the indicative target, largely on account of tight financial policies and a greater-than-expected appreciation of the kwacha, and it is expected that the end-December target of at most 17.5 percent will be met. 3. Following a substantial tightening of monetary policy in January 2001, broad money declined by 15.6 percent through end-March compared to the outstanding stock at end-December 2000. Over the same period, the kwacha appreciated by 27 percent in local currency terms. Towards end-March, the BoZ eased monetary policy by lowering the minimum reserve ratio from 15 percent to 10 percent. Mainly as a result of this relaxation of the monetary stance, the exchange rate depreciated by 22 percent between end-March and end-June, and largely in response to this rapid depreciation, the BoZ again raised the cash reserve ratio to 12.5 percent. Through end-June, broad money declined by about 5 percent compared to the targeted increase of about 1.5 percent. In line with monetary developments, the yield on 91-day treasury bills rose from 34 percent at end-December 2000 to 53 percent in March 200 1. However, with the moderation in inflationary pressures and larger-than-expected public sector net deposits, the yield declined to 43 percent by end-June. Thus, real interest rates have remained very high, notwithstanding the deceleration of inflation. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 42 - APPENDIX I 4. Fiscal performance through end-June was generally favorable. In particular, revenue exceeded the program target by over 9 percent, despite the unexpected appreciation of the kwacha, mainly because of the strong performance of income tax and the VAT. Total government cash expenditures fell short of the program target by some 13 percent as overruns in domestic capital outlays and in RDCs were more than offset by lower-than-programmed expenditures on HIPC-related programs, elections, transfers to Zambia Consolidated Copper Mines (ZCCM), and contingency outlays. Consequently, net borrowing from the banking system was much lower than anticipated despite a significant shortfall in external program support. At the same time, domestic arrears at end-March and end-June were substantially higher than programmed. In addition, at end-June, cash releases for social sector outlays were below budgeted levels, and there was a delay of one quarter in commencing with HIPC Initiative financed expenditures. 5. Balance of payments developments during the first half of 2001 were mixed. Despite lower-than-expected copper and cobalt prices, exports receipts of these two products rose substantially on account of greater-than-expected volume increases from the newly privatized mines. However, growth of nontraditional exports was substantially lower-than- programmed largely because of the continuing civil strife in Zambia’s key regional export markets. Nonfactor service receipts rose significantly, but external assistance fell short of the program target by US$56 million reflecting a substantial shortfall in disbursements from the World Bank and the European Union (EU). Nonetheless, the program’s gross international reserves targets for end-March and end-June were met after taking account of the program adjustor for shortfalls in balance of payments support net of debt service and Fund disbursements. 6. Regarding structural reforms, the government issued instructions in March 2001 to the Zambia Privatization Agency (ZPA) to proceed with the sale of a majority controlling interest in ZNCB, consistent with Zambia’s commitments under the PRGF and the HIPC documents. A full-scope inspection of the bank for the period ending December 2000 revealed that its financial position remains unsatisfactory. However, its position has been stabilized mainly as a result of repayments by RAMCOZ and by government on guarantees on loans to ZNOC. Going beyond ZNCB, the stability of the banking system has improved. Of the three problem banks, two have been put under liquidation and the third is now fully capitalized. Some members of the management of the fourth bank were found to be pursuing improper financial practices and this resulted in the bank being closed temporarily. The bank has since reopened under a new management team approved by the Bank of Zambia. 7. Actions to liberalize the oil sector have been delayed. However, we have been working closely with the World Bank and have taken the following measures: (i) issued a written notification that the private sector is free to import crude oil; (ii) amended the Energy Regulatory Board (ERB) license conditions to abolish the requirement for ex-ante price adjustment request; to monitor pump prices ex-post; to require display of pump prices; and to maintain a minimum stock of products; and (iii) began the process of forming a private consortium for importation of feedstock. Moreover, the Government has agreed that the Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-43 - APPENDIX I import tariff on petroleum products will be lowered from 25 percent to 5 percent, by end- December 200 1. II. FR~GR~~MIMPLEMENT.~TI~N 8. All quantitative performance criteria for end-March, and end-June 2001 were met’ except that the domestic arrears ceiling was breached on both dates, 2 and the end- March ceiling on the net domestic assets of the BoZ of K 193 billion was missed by less than K 1 billion (Table 1). Given that the verified stock of domestic arrears at end-June is now much larger than programmed, the performance criterion for end-September is unrealistic. 9. The program’s structural performance criterion on the abstention from new tax reductions was observed, as was the benchmark on the nonaccumulation of new tax arrears by ZESCO and ZNOC. The benchmark for end-June for the BoZ to improve the treasury bill market was also observed, albeit with some delay on the issuance of auction guidelines. III. THEPROGRAMFORTHEREMAINDEROF~OO~ A. Macroeconomic Policies 10. The key macroeconomic objectives for 2001 remain to achieve GDP growth of 5 percent and limit the 12-month rate of inflation to at most 17.5 percent by year-end, within a financial framework that targets a substantial increase in gross international reserves while reducing poverty. Achieving these objectives will require implementing appropriate fiscal and monetary policies, strengthening structural reforms, and re-orienting government expenditures towards the social sectors and poverty reduction. B. Fiscal Policies, External Resources, HIPC, and PRSP 11. Notwithstanding the more appreciated exchange rate, total revenue is projected to exceed the program target by 0.6 percent of GDP. The shortfall in domestic VAT will be largely offset by the VAT on imports as the impact of the Import VAT Deferment Scheme ’ After applying the adjustor for the shortfall in balance of payments assistance net of debt service payments (US$42.6 million), the delay in Fund disbursements (SDR 24.94 million) related to the end-March performance criteria, and the reduction in the cash reserve ratio to 10 percent in March and the subsequent increase to 12.5 percent in June. 2 The increase since December reflected the verification of old arrears on previously contracted road works, the impact of the exchange rate on dollar denominated arrears, and a build-up of penalties on outstanding arrears. It also reflected the accumulation of new arrears, which we estimate to amount to about K 40 billion. By comparison, over the same period, net credit to government was K 218 billion less than programmed. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 44 - APPENDIX I has been much smaller than expected, and as the delay in the operation of the Indeni refinery has required continued imports of refined petroleum. Income taxes are projected to perform strongly, reflecting increased activity in the mines. We will continue to abstain from new tax reductions, exemptions, rebates or any other preferential tax treatment, including for the mining sector, pending a thorough review of mining taxation policy in consultation with Fund staff. 12. Expenditure pressures during the rest of the year are likely to remain strong, particularly in view of the upcoming elections. The government recently concluded the lengthy process of reaching wage agreements with the civil service and public workers unions. The major agreement covers the period July 2001 to December 2002 with no retroactive increases for January-June 2001. The wage bill is now projected to reach 6.3 percent of GDP compared with the program estimate of 5.7 percent. There have also been overruns in recurrent departmental charges and in domestically financed capital expenditures. To offset these overruns, outlays for financial restructuring will be curtailed by agreeing on an appropriate repayment schedule with ZNCB for the remaining payments on the government guarantee on its loan to ZNOC. In any event these payments will need to be made in the context of concluding the privatization of the bank. No new financial commitments will be made on account of ZNOC by the government or BoZ other than those for which they are legally liable. Transfers to the former ZCCM’s creditors will continue, but will be less than budgeted partly on account of an audit which has questioned the validity of some of these claims. Taking account of increased revenues, the domestic budget balance will be limited to 3.8 percent of GDP or 0.5 percentage points above the program target. 13. While maintaining control on overall expenditures, the government will re-orient expenditures toward the social sectors. Following the government’s reestablishment of the “80 percent rule” in April, and the move to a “100 percent rule” in July for social sector ministries,3 the cumulative share of social sector spending in discretionary expenditures during January-July (38 percent) is now broadly in line with targets agreed with the World Bank. In addition, since setting up the mechanism for channeling HIPC Initiative debt relief toward pro-poor activities, HIPC-financed spending has increased substantially as noted below. 14. A significant problem for public finances that has emerged is the likelihood of a substantial shortfall in donor balance of payments support in 2001. The 2001 budget was based on disbursements of US$79 million grants from the EU. However, it appears likely that actual disbursements will amount to only US$lO million because of complex conditionality, and a recently instituted historical audit of the use of EU funds since the mid-1990s. The budget also envisages highly concessional loans of US$95 million from the World Bank comprising two tranches. We believe that the policies and actions underlying the first of these tranches have been implemented. The last tranche is related to the reform of the oil sector. 3 These rules require the Budget office to make cash releases to line ministries consistent with their budget appropriations. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 45 - APPENDIX I Substantial progress has already been made as noted above and we envisage taking all necessary remaining actions by end-December 2001. The government will continue to cooperate closely with its development partners. 15. Total public sector debt service (including to the Fund) for 2001 is currently estimated at US$145 million, compared with the programmed US$160 million,4 mainly reflecting lower payments to Russia. Paris Club creditors are expected to agree to a flow rescheduling on Cologne terms shortly, and key multilateral institutions, including the Fund, World Bank, and the African Development Bank, are providing interim relief as envisaged. The government is also making best efforts to reach agreement with non-Paris Club bilateral and commercial creditors on terms comparable to those provided by Paris Club creditors. 16. HIPC Initiative financed expenditures have been delayed by uncertainties about the timing and level of relief and how to set up a mechanism to register the inflows. These issues have been resolved, and each month, estimated debt relief received (excluding from the Fund) will be credited to a HIPC account (account 49) from which disbursements will be made to the relevant projects.5 The government deposited US$42 million to the HIPC account in June and an additional US$12 million per month will be deposited for the period July-December 2001. The government will inform the Fund staff of the monthly payments into account 49 and the cash releases to ministries. Given the delay in starting HIPC-financed poverty-reducing programs, spending the full amount programmed for the year would involve inefficiencies. In collaboration with line ministries, a revised disbursement profile was agreed which is expected to bring total HIPC-financed expenditures for the year to K 280 billion. Thus 80 percent of the original programmed K 352 billion will be spent during July- December. The Accountant General has drawn up guidelines for tracking and reporting on the disbursement of funds from the HIPC account, and issued them to Controlling Officers. The first summary report on HlPC resources and expenditures, which covered the first and second quarters, has been published in the newspapers. The second report will be published by end- November. The World Bank, UK, and others are planning to fund a public expenditure tracking survey in the education sector, and we will cooperate with donors in this regard. 4 Pending agreement with the Paris Club on interim relief, Zambia has stopped paying to Paris Club creditors debt service that was expected to be subjected to interim relief under the HIPC initiative, to allow the resources freed by relief to be directed towards poverty-reducing expenditures rather than towards debt service. Once the Paris Club agreement is finalized, we hope to recoup the overpayments made to Paris Club creditors during January-August 2001. 5 Each month, the kwacha bridge loan will be debited for the kwacha equivalent of US$12 million and funds will flow first to account 99 and then to account 49. At the time of disbursement, funds will flow back through account 99 briefly so as to utilize current government cash release procedures. As for the amount of debt service remaining due after debt relief, the foreign exchange bridge loan will be debited for this amount, as payments fall due, and funds will be transferred to account 99 and then to account 63 before being paid. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 46 - APPENDIX I 17. The system outlined above will enable the government to track the receipt and use of HIPC resources. At the same time, the current system of budget classification makes it difficult to judge whether overall spending has taken on a more “pro-poor” orientation. As such, government has set up a committee charged with establishing an agreed set of anti- poverty expenditure items in the budget and, in this manner, hopes to be able to define an expenditure baseline for 2000 against which to compare the outtums for 2001 and beyond. Government intends to request technical assistance from the Fund in this regard. 18. Regarding the PRSP, considerable progress has been made and a draft final document has been prepared, which has benefited from a country-wide participatory process involving local government officials, civil society groups, and local communities. The government will hold a National Summit in mid-October involving all stakeholders, in order to reach a broad consensus on the PRSP. C. Monetary Policies 19. Monetary policy during the second half of 2001 will aim to achieve the program’s targets on growth, inflation and international reserves. In line with these objectives, growth of broad money will be targeted at about 13 percent during 2001 compared with 16.5 percent in the program. The BoZ has made substantial progress in improving the operations of the treasury bill market, including the issuance of the new auction guidelines, and the modification of the book entry system to enable the reintroduction of the multiple pricing format for treasury bills and the prorating of the marginal bids. The BoZ will adhere strictly to the new auction guidelines so that interest rates will reflect the prevailing market conditions. The recent introduction of repurchase agreements will enhance the BoZ’s capacity to implement monetary policy. The government recognizes the need to recapitalize the BoZ in order to strengthen monetary policy implementation. D. External Sector and Exchange Rate Policies 20. Zambia’s external current account deficit (excluding grants) is projected to be 18.5 percent of GDP in 2001, as a larger trade deficit is partially offset by a substantial improvement in the services account. Total exports receipts are projected to increase by 14 percent, compared with the programmed 24 percent, reflecting lower copper and cobalt prices and lower-than-expected nonmetal exports. Total imports are envisaged to rise by 18 percent linked to higher project financing, foreign direct investment, and maize imports. The better-than-expected performance in services largely reflects increased tourist receipts, partly on account of the OAU conference and the solar eclipse. Reflecting mainly the shortfall in balance of payments assistance from the EU, gross international reserves are projected to increase by US$74 million to 1.5 months of imports, compared with the programmed increase of US$135 million to 1.9 months of imports. 21. Since end-June 2001, the exchange rate has remained relatively stable. The exchange rate will continue to be market-determined, with central bank intervention limited to meeting the international reserves target and to smoothing short-term fluctuations. Zambia continues to maintain a liberal trade regime, and as noted earlier, the government has agreed Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 47 - APPENDIX I that the import tariff on petroleum products will be lowered to 5 percent by end-December 2001. The government will lift the recently imposed ban on the export of maize as soon as conditions return to normal. E. Structural Reforms, Public Expenditure Management, and Governance Structural Reforms 22. Completing the privatization of ZNCB remains the government’s top priority. The recent full scope inspection of the Bank confirmed weaknesses in its financial condition. To address some of these weaknesses, the BoZ has issued instructions for ZNCB to properly account for the unrealized trading losses/gains on its foreign exchange holdings, and to write off all unreconciled inter-branch items of more than 90 days. A targeted inspection to review compliance with the instructions will be completed by end-October 2001. 23. Following Cabinet approval of the proposal to privatize ZNCB, consultants began a due diligence study which is scheduled to be completed by October. The study will assess the bank’s current financial situation and valuation, and prepare international tender documents. The consultant will also identify options for privatization, including hiving off the nonviable rural branches of ZNCB and possibly combining them with the National Savings and Credit Bank as part of developing a rural financial entity that will provide services in small towns and rural areas. In any event the rural branches will be fully separated from the sale of the bank as a commercial undertaking, and the final decision on those branches will not delay the offer for sale of the bank. It is expected that the ZPA board will approve the privatization proposal and tender document, and appoint a negotiating team, and we intend to issue the tender documents for sale of a majority controlling interest in the bank by end-November. In the interim, the government will strengthen oversight by appointing ZPA to the Board of ZNCB. 24. The BoZ has taken steps to strengthen the banking system and, in May 2001, it conducted a self assessment of Zambia’s compliance with the Base1 Core Principles. The assessment, however, focused more on laws and regulations as opposed to actual practice. In this context, the Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) mission from the Fund and the World Bank planned for 2002 to conduct a comprehensive external assessment of the financial system will be useful. 25. The government is moving as rapidly as feasible to implement the remaining actions agreed with the World Bank on the oil sector. In this regard by end-December, government will (i) offer for sale its share in Indeni refinery in order to reduce its equity stake to below 50 percent; (ii) offer for sale or long-term concession the Ndola storage tank and TAZAMA pipeline to a private sector operator through a competitive bidding process; and (iii) restructure ZNOC to limit its role to that of maintenance of strategic stock of petroleum products. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-48 - APPENDIX I Public Expenditure Management 26. Public expenditure management requires further strengthening, as evidenced by the sharp increase in domestic payments arrears during the first half of the year. Recognizing the critical importance of improvements in this area, government has devised an action plan to deal with this problem. First, the Controller, Internal Audit has conducted an audit of arrears at end-June and the reasons for the large increase. Controlling officers will be required to sign off on these results, certifying that no other bills corresponding to this period will be unearthed at a later date. The line ministries should take the results of the internal audit as the base for reporting the monthly expenditure returns from September onwards. To verify the accuracy of the data for the Ministry of Works and Supplies, which accounts for 45 percent of total arrears, the Auditor General has commenced an independent audit of the ministry’s arrears with its major contractors. The audit will be completed by end-November. At the same time we are taking urgent steps to strengthen the monthly reports from controlling officers that must form the basis of long-term improvement in financial management and control. In particular, we intend to modify the existing system of computerized monthly reporting to include information on commitment and arrears. Until then, the system of manual monthly reporting should continue and be strengthened. Once this system is more reliable, the quarterly reports of the Controller, Internal Audit could fulfill the normal function of quality control. In addition, we are taking a number of steps, as detailed in Annex I, to improve budget preparation and expenditure control. 27. With regard to the IFMIS, in September 2001 an EU-funded consultant, produced a “roadmap” of the development and implementation of the system, which has served as a useful input for the internal project management team in analyzing existing weaknesses and preparing user requirements for the IFMIS. The members of this team have recently been freed from their other duties in government to allow sufficient time for IFMIS. A World Bank-funded consultant is currently reviewing the work of the project management team. Government anticipates that the user requirements and timetable for implementation will be submitted to the IFMIS steering committee by end-October. The next steps will be clarified in the team’s report, but it appears unlikely that a consultant for designing hardware and software requirements will be in place by December 2001, as initially envisaged. 28. The accounts of government at the Bank of Zambia are being streamlined to improve information availability for monitoring government finances. The government has requested technical assistance from the Fund to simplify the system of government accounts at the BoZ. In the meantime, the government plans to close all dormant accounts and will review the foreign exchange bridge loan account at the Bank of Zambia. Government is moving to a system in which the general revenue account receives all inflows, including the kwacha value of external support, and is used to pay all outflows, including debt service, in order to strengthen the management of public finances. Credit to government would be provided by treasury bills and by a single ways and means account on which government would pay an appropriate rate of interest. The government will issue rules governing the terms and conditions for commercial bank accounts of all government agencies. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 49 - APPENDIX I Governance 29. Given the importance for good governance and transparency of publishing the audited government accounts in a timely fashion, the Financial Report for 2000, prepared by the Accountant General and verified by the Auditor General, was tabled in Parliament in September, and the Auditor General’s report on the overall outturn should be completed by December, all as required under Zambian law. This represents a substantial improvement over recent years, when Financial Reports have been delayed by up to four years. 30. In June 2001, the government completed the provision of all information and documents requested by the auditors as necessary to finalize the report on cobalt sales. However, the Metal Resource Group (MRG), the apparent beneficiary of the below-market- price sales, questioned the findings of the draft report and has initiated legal action for libel against the auditors and the government. This has delayed the auditor’s completion of the report, but we expect it to be finalised shortly. The report will be referred to Cabinet for appropriate follow-up actions under the law, and if feasible the government will publish the document. IV. TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE AND DATA ISSUES 31. Zambia continues to require technical assistance in the areas of public expenditure management, monetary operations and liquidity management, and simplification of government accounts with the banking system. More critically, this year there has been a considerable delay in producing monetary statistics, particularly the monetary survey.6 BoZ is making concerted efforts to ensure that this problem is resolved as soon as possible. Regarding national accounts, methodological weaknesses relating to the use of outdated weights, long delays, and frequent revision in the estimates undermine government’s ability to monitor economic developments and formulate policies. The BoZ will also seek to improve the tourism and foreign direct investment statistics in the balance of payments. To address these weaknesses, the government will request technical assistance from the Fund and other donors. V. PROGRAM MONITORING 32. For end-December 2001, the implementation of the program will be monitored on the basis of the quantitative and structural performance criteria and benchmarks indicated in Tables 1 and 2. Owing to difficulties in measuring and monitoring domestic arrears, the quantitative performance criterion on domestic arrears has been replaced by a structural performance criterion and benchmarks involving progress towards improving the monitoring and control of these arrears. The fourth review of the PRGF-supported program will be 6 The BoZ has been having problems introducing a new accounting software package and has temporarily reverted to its previous software for generating monetary data. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 50 - APPENDIX I conducted based on performance through end-December 2001, and will include agreement on an appropriate macroeconomic and financial framework for 2002. Yours faithfully, IS/ Dr. Katele Kalumba, MP Minister of Finance and Economic Development Attachments Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 51 - Table 1 Zambia- Quantitative Performance Criteria Dunng the Thxd Year of the Three-Year Arrangement Under the Povelty Reduction and Growth Facility 11 (In billions of Kwacha unless otherwise indicated) 2000 End-Dec. Prog. base 2001 Performance criteria End-March End-June End-Sept. End-Dee Prog Est. Prog Est. Prog Proj. Prog Cedmg on the cumulative mcrea~e in net domestlc assets (NDA) of the Bank of Zambia 2/3/4/51 AdJusted (NDA) 4,781 Ceiling on the cumulative increase in net bank claims on govemment (NCG)3/ AdJusted (NCG) 1,365 Cedmg on the outstanding stock of domestic arrears of the govemment 53 Floor on gross mtematmnal reserves (GIR) of the Bank of Zambia (In mdlions of U S dollars) 3/ Adjusted GIR 114 Celling on new external payments arrears (In U.S. dollars) 61 Ceding on the stock of short-term debt and new medium- and long term nonconcess~onal debt (In U S. dollars) 71 Ceiling on new loans collateralized or guaranteed by the central government or the Bank of Zambia for ZESCO and ZNOC Memorandum item Cumubatlve net balance of payments support (In millions of U S dollars) Balance of payments assistance Debt service obhgatxms (excluding IMF) Shortfall (-)/Excess (+) net BOP support 55.2 -19.2 185.2 114 -130 -30 6 174 193 194 237 40 83 73 194 142 117 79 -29.5 -29 5 -103 127 239 183 314 207 204 163 257 381 281 27 37s 13 142 83 137 67 99 22 7 -19 9 76 4 20 6 -53 7 -40.5 -42.6 28 5 1002 -71 7 144 164 272 252 123 187 22 7 68 0 76 0 1390 -53 3 -71 0 -5 8 -54.7 1 / The defmitions of the quantitative performance criteria and benchmarks are contained in the Technical Memorandum of Understanding (TMU) 21 I‘;et domestic assets are equivalent to reserve money minus net foreign assets, calculated at the end-December 2000 U S dollar-kwacha exchange rate (US$ 1 =K 4,158) 31 In case of a shortfall III balance of payments assistance net of programmed debt service, the ceilings and floors for March June and September will be adJusted by the amount of the shortfall wth a maxll~lum of USS45 million The kwacha value of the cumulative shortfall ~11 be calculated at the end-December 2000 U.S dollar-kwacha exchange rate (US$I =K 4,158). The floor on gross lntemational resenw ~111 be adJusted downward/upward for any shortfall/excess III the U S dollar value of disbursements from the IMF under the PRGF arrangement 41 Excludes HPC debt relief ti-om the IMF 51 The ceilmg ~111 be adlusted for changes m the legal reserve reqwements. 61 The ~Ju"CtiOIl against new external payments anears 1s continuous. 71 Nonconcess~onal loans are defmed as having a grant element of less than 40 percent (see TMU for further details includmg on the defimtlon of short-term debti. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 52 - Table 2. Zambia: Structural Performance Criteria and Benchmarks During the Third Year of the Three-Year Arrangement under the PRGF l/ Implementation of the Cabinet decision regarding divestiture of government’s interest in ZNCB consistent with Zambia’s commitments under the PRGF and HIPC decision point documents li Timing December 200 1 status ongoing The IFMIS steering committee will approve the user requirements and timetable for implementation of the IFMIS, proposed by internal management team. 2/ October 200 1 Ongoing Produce the first quarterly HIPC report as part of the interim framework to track HIPC-related expenditures. 2/ September 200 1 Observed Improve the operation of the treasury bill market by issuing revised auction guidelines announcing the reintroduction of the multiple price auction system and the policy to prorate the size of the marginal bid. The Central Bank will adhere strictly to all auction guidelines. 2/ June, 200 1 Observed with a slight delay in issuing guidelines Accountant General to submit to the Office of the Auditor General, accounts for 2000, to facilitate timely preparation of final audited accounts as required by law. 2/ The abstention from new tax reductions, exemptions, rebates or any other preferential tax treatment. l/3/ No accumulation of new tax arrears by ZESCO and ZNOC to the Central Government. 21 September 200 1 Continuous To improve monitoring and control of domestic payments arrears: - Progress in improving the quality of the monthly expenditure returns of controlling officers 2/ - Actions to improve budget preparation and public expenditure control as outlined in Annex I 2/ - Complete the Auditor General’s review of arrears to major contractors to the Ministry of Works and Supplies li December 200 1 December 200 1 December 200 1 Observed Observed Observed l/ Performance Criterion. 21 Benchmark. 31 Including for the mining sector, but excluding temporary provision for hotel accomodation in the Livingstone area will be zero-rated for VAT until end-2002. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 53 - APPENDIX I ANNEX I Improving Budget Preparation and Expenditure Control Government efforts to strengthen public expenditure management focus both on budget preparation and on expenditure control. Regarding the former, if ministries are expected to carry out a certain set of programs but given unrealistic budget appropriations, the accumulation of arrears is inevitable. As such, government intends to narrow the scope of expenditure so as to allow an increase in budget allocations for key priorities. In particular, circulars have been issued to curtail motor vehicle allowances for government servants and education and housing allowances for foreign diplomats: savings from these two initiatives will be redirected toward road works and other areas in which arrears have typically arisen as a result of low budget allocations. Government is also committed to ending the practice of entering projects and programs in the budget with only a token provision (usually one kwacha). This practice, intended to obtain parliamentary authority for items for which funding sources may emerge in the future, has often led to spending pressures from line ministries even in the absence of funding. Government will ensure that no item will be recorded in the Yellow Book without an adequate appropriation. In terms of expenditure control, the procedures of the Zambia National Tender Board will be tightened. Current regulations state that a contract can only be approved if the project appears in the Yellow Book and if there are adequate funds, but in practice, it is difficult for the Tender Board to assess whether funds are, indeed, available. As such, it is proposed that endorsement of the Minister of Finance should be required for any project above K 500 million. To eliminate any possible uncertainty regarding permissible virement, the 2002 Yellow Book will clarify budget regulations to state clearly that, without prior Treasury authority, a controlling officer may not apply funds released for a certain subhead toward expenditure under a different subhead. For instance, variations between grants and RDCs would be forbidden, as would variations between drugs and allowances within RDCs. To reinforce financial discipline, permanent secretaries shall be made contractual employees. Terms of their contracts would include compliance with all financial regulations (including those governing virement and aggregate commitments), and any malfeasance would be regarded as grounds for sanctions, up to and including dismissal. Finally, as a further boost to expenditure control, the personal responsibility of heads of accounting units shall be enhanced. Although it is recognized that the controlling officer bears ultimate financial responsibility for an expenditure head, chief accountants will be subject to disciplinary action by the Accountant General should they fail to report on all instances in which they have been requested to process transactions inconsistent with the Financial Regulations. Similarly, the responsibility of internal audit will be reiterated in a treasury circular. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 54 - APPENDIX II Zambia: Relations with the Fund (As of August 31,200l) I. II. III. IV. V. VI. Membership Status: Joined: 09/23/1965; Article XIV General Resources Account: Quota Fund Holdings of Currency Reserve position in Fund SDR Million 489.10 489.10 c .02 SDR Department: Net cumulative allocation Holdings SDR Million %Allocation 68.30 100.0 30.54 44.7 Outstanding Purchases and Loans: SAF arrangements ESAF/PRGF arrangements SDR Million 163.57 651.45 Latest Financial Arranpements: Approval Expiration Amount Approved --lb!.E Date Date (SDR Million) ESAF/PRGF 0312511999 03/28/2003 254.45 ESAF 12/06/1995 12/05/1998 701.68 SAF 12/06/1995 12/05/1996 181.75 %Quota 100.0 100.0 .O %Quota 33.4 133.2 Amount Drawn (SDR Million) 54.94 661.68 181.75 Proiected Obligations to Fund: Under the Repurchase Expectations Assumptions (SDR Million; based on existing use of resources and present holdings of SDRs): Overdue Forthcoming 0813 l/2001 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 Principal 83.3 167.7 168.7 169.7 170.7 Charges/Interest 24 85.7 47 172.4 L 39 L 30 L 22 Total 172.6 172.7 172.9 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 55 - APPENDIX II VII. Implementation of HIPC Initiative: Commitment of HIPC assistance Decision point date’ Assistance committed (1999 NPV terms)2 Total assistance (US$ million) Of which: Fund assistance (SDR million) Completion point date Delivery of Fund assistance (SDR million) Amount disbursed Interim assistance Completion point Amount applied against member’s obligations (cumulative) Enhanced framework 12/01/2000 2,499 468.8 Floating 117.2 117.2 . . . 75.4 VIII. Safeguard Assessments: Under the Fund’s safeguard assessment policy, the Bank of Zambia is subject to transitional procedures with respect to the ESAF/PRGF arrangement approved on 3/25/1999, which is scheduled to expire on 3/28/2003. The transitional procedure require a review of only the Bank of Zambia’s external audit mechanism. This assessment determines whether the Bank of Zambia publishes annual financial statements that are independently audited in accordance with internationally accepted standards. The External Audit assessment was completed in June, 2001. The assessment concluded that Bank of Zambia publishes its financial statements in the annual report and that they are in accordance with internationally accepted standards. However, it is recommended that the external auditors be given an opportunity to review the annual report of the Bank of Zambia before its publication. ’ Decision was approved in principle by the Fund. 2 NPV terms at the decisions point under the enhanced framework. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 56 - APPENDIX II lx. Exchange Rate Arrangement: The currency of Zambia is the kwacha, which is market determined. The official exchange rate quoted by the central bank is the marginal rate determined by auction at the Bank of Zambia’s wholesale foreign exchange window. Since end-March 2001, business entities selling foreign exchange amounting to US$lOO,OO or more per week are required to transact through the Bank of Zambia’s dealing window. On the basis of the bids and offers received, as well as other considerations, the Bank of Zambia determines the amount of foreign exchange to be sold to, or purchased from, the market. On August 3 1,2001, the Bank of Zambia midrate was K 3,618 per U.S. dollar. X. Article IV Consultations: Zambia is on the standard 12-month Article IV consultation cycle; the last Article IV consultation was concluded by the Executive Board on July 26,200O. XI. FSAP Participation and ROSC: Zambia has agreed to participate in FSAP and the FSAP mission from the Fund and the World Bank is planned for 2002 to conduct a comprehensive external assessment of the financial system. The Zambian authorities have agreed to the preparation of a fiscal transparency module of a ROSC assessing compliance with the IMF’s Code of Good Practices on Fiscal Transparency- Declaration ofPrinciples. A mission visited Zambia during May 23-June 5, 2001 to prepare the fiscal module of the ROSC, which is expected to be finalized soon. XII. Technical Assistance: Resident advisors Department MAE Dates 1990-1992 Operations Advisor 1991-1993 Head of Banking Supervision 1991-1994 Research Department Advisor 1993-1998 Banking Supervision Advisor 1993-1994 Accounting Department Advisor 1994 Advisor on Foreign Exchange Operations 1994-1996 Monetary Policy Advisor 1994- 1998 Senior Operations Advisor Position Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 57 - APPENDIX II FAD 1992-1993 1994 STA FAD 1998- 1999 1998- 1999 1997- 2001 Technical assistance missions Department Dates MAE September 1992 March 1993 March 1995 October 1995 November 2000 June 2001 May 1993 October 1994 March 1995 March 1996 June 1997 November 1997 March 1998 May 2000 January 1994 August 1994 February 1995 November 1996 March 2000 January 2001 August 200 1 XIII. Resident Representative: Monetary Advisory on Monetary Policies and Investments Advisor on Monetary Operations Advisor on Tax Administration Advisor on Macroeconomic and Fiscal Training Advisor on Budget Management Purpose Banking legislation Monetary and debt management Capacity building at the Bank of Zambia Training in financial programming Bank supervision Bank supervision Balance of payments Monetary survey Bank of Zambia balance sheet Multisector statistics Monetary survey (combined STA/AFR mission) Balance of payments Monetary survey Balance of payments Introduction of value-added tax (VAT) Introduction of value-added tax (VAT) Introduction of value-added tax (VAT) Budget management Budget management Public expenditure management Tax policy issues A Fund Resident Representative first took up the position in Lusaka in June 1990. Since September 2001, the Resident Representative has been Mr. Mark Ellyne. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-58 - APPENDIX III Zambia: Relations with the World Bank Group The World Bank Group has provided 98 loans and credits to Zambia since 1953, with total commitments amounting to US$3.2 billion, of which about US$2.6 billion had been disbursed by mid-September, 2001. Currently disbursing are 18 active IDA projects (see table below). World Bank operations have supported all the main sectors in the economy. The main elements of the Banks strategy are to support efforts to achieve macroeconomic stability and sustainable and equitable growth; ensure sufficient access to imports, and an adequate reserve cushion through maintenance of an appropriate exchange rate and other measures to encourage exports; improve the climate for private sector development through deregulation, provision of infrastructure, and privatization of parastatals; strengthen human resource capacity by rehabilitating the education and health infrastructure and improving the quality of education and health services; implement an effective environmental strategy; and mobilize external resources to support the country’s adjustment program. A summary of the Bank Group’s recent financial relations with Zambia is presented below. Zambia: Status of Recent Bank Group Operations a) Statement of active IDA credits (as of September 20, 2001, in original currency) Project ID Project Name Currency Principal, m Undisbursed, m Disbursed, m Closing Date PO032 18 AGRICULTURE SECTOR I SDR 41.20 2.41 38.73 31-Dee-01 PO03227 RAILWAYS RESTRUCTURING PROJECT SDR 21.00 13.85 7.15 30-Jun-04 PO03236 NATIONAL ROAD SDR 51.50 16.53 34.97 3 1 -Mar-03 PO03239 HEALTH SECTOR SDR 38.70 12.31 22.39 30-Jun-02 PO03241 URBAN RESTRCT &WATER SDR 21.30 1.75 19.55 31-Dee-01 PO03248 HIV/AIDS USD 0.44 0.36 0.08 30-Sep-01 PO03249 BASIC ED SEC INV PRG SDR 28.50 19.06 9.44 30-Jun.02 PO03253 ENVIRONMENTAL SUPPORT PROGRAM SDR 9.30 6.61 2.69 3 1 -Dee-03 PO35076 POWER REHAB SDR 55.10 48.35 6.15 3 1-Dee-02 PO39016 FISCAL SUSTAINABILlTYCREDlT I SDR 105.50 71.60 33.90 31-Dee-01 PO40642 ERlFTA SDR 16.00 1.98 14.02 31-Dee-01 PO44324 ENTERPRISE DEVELPMNT SDR 32.60 21.12 11.48 30-Jun-02 PO50400 PUB svc CAP (PSCAP) SDR 20.40 18.13 2.27 31-Dee-03 PO57167 TEVET USD 0.59 0.33 0.26 31-act-01 PO63584 SOCIAL INVESTMENT FUND (ZAMSIF) SDR 48.30 41.90 6.40 3 1 -Dee-05 PO64064 MINE TOWNSHIP SERVICES PROJECT SDR 28.20 24.34 3.86 3 1 -Dee-04 PO70122 REGIONAL TRADE FAC. PROJ. USD 0.19 0.00 0.19 31-act-01 PO70962 COPPERBELT ENVIRONMENT USD 0.60 0.35 0.25 l-Jan-02 b) Statement of Recent IFC Investments (as of December 3,2000, in millions of U.S. dollars) l/ Loans Eauity Particiuants Total Held by IFC 12.23 7.03 24.53 43.79 16.8 I/ Includes investments after 199 1. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 59 - APPENDIX IV Zambia: Statistical Issues Institutional organization The present arrangements for the compilation of macroeconomic statistics involve duplication of effort and insufficient coordination among the Bank of Zambia (BoZ), the Ministry of Finance, and the Central Statistical Office (CSO). To a large extent, this situation has arisen because of the resource constraints and organizational weakness within the CSO that have affected its ability to produce economic statistics on a timely basis. Real sector With regard to national accounts, methodological weaknesses relating to the use of outdated weights, long delays, and frequent revision in the estimates undermine the authorities’ ability to monitor economic developments and formulate policies. Recently, national accounts data for the period 1994-98 have been revised on the basis of the 1994 survey of industrial production. The CSO also carries out other surveys including agricultural surveys to estimate crop production. However, low response rates to these surveys have raised doubts about the reliability of the national accounts data. Consumer, wholesale, and building materials price indices are calculated in conformity with international standards. A new consumer price index based on the 1993-94 household survey was released in 1996, calculated back to 1985. However, owing to lack of resources, the CSO has not been able to replace the wholesale price index currently based on 1966 weights, with a producer price index or to revise the price index for building materials. As a consequence the estimates of sectoral GDP deflators suffers from serious methodological weakness. Monthly trade statistics from customs records have not been reported for publication in Znternational Financial Statistics (1Fs) on a timely and consistent basis, owing to the delays in transmitting customs documents to the CSO. The delays in publication of trade data forced the BoZ to start compiling trade statistics independently. To improve the information flow from customs posts, the CSO has started using the data provided by the Zambian Revenue Authority. Government finance Zambia has resumed compilation of government finance statistics (GFS) data, and it appears that the quality of the reported data has improved; Zambia’s GFS data have been updated to 1997 for final data and to 1998 for forecast data. However, the coverage of the data for 1989-98 is limited to budgetary central government. The authorities report monthly budget data for the Fund’s operational use in a timely manner. However, data are often subject to substantial revisions later in the year. No Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 60 - APPENDIX IV monthly or quarterly fiscal data are reported for publication in IFS. Local government fiscal data are not available. Monetary accounts There has been progress made in the compilation of monetary statistics, and the monetary survey is published on a monthly basis. The BoZ has also eliminated discrepancies between its own records of IMF accounts and data from the Treasurer’s Department of the IMF. Nonetheless, additional work is needed on monetary statistics. In particular, the BoZ needs to reconcile its data on government deposits and credit to government reported by banks with the information received by the Accountant General. Also, further improvements in accounting procedures and computerization are desirable to ensure that transactions and balances in foreign currencies are properly valued. The lag in the compilation of monetary statistics has increased due to technical problems in the BoZ computer system. Although the BoZ authorities have indicated that they were addressing the problem; the last data reported to STA correspond to the month of December 2000. Balance of payments In November 1997, a STA technical assistance mission found that the CSO, which is officially responsible for balance of payments compilation, is unable to do so now or in the foreseeable future. The mission made several specific recommendations for improvements in data collection, especially with regard to external debt, and urged the Bank of Zambia to make a more substantial and longer-term commitment to balance of payments compilation. The latter step was considered necessary to permit the introduction of balance of payments surveys and improve reporting of foreign exchange transactions made through the banking system. In May, 2000 a follow-up STA mission found compilation of data imports, exports, and foreign direct investment to be inadequate and made a number of recommendations to improve the coverage of the data. Since then, the authorities have prepared a work plan to implement the recommendations of the mission and some improvements have been made in the coverage of the customs data and methodology of compiling some components of balance of payments. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-6l- APPENDIX IV c E n Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 62 - APPENDIX V Zambia: Social and Demographic Indicators Area (thousand sq. km) 753 Population characteristics (1998) Poverty and inequality (1996) Population density (per sq. km.) 13 Percent of national income Highest 20 percent Lowest 20 percent Gini coefficient 0.50 Health (1998) Population below the poverty line Rural poverty (percent of rural population) Labor force (1998) Total participation rate Percent employed in agriculture Percent in manufacturing Percent in mining Education (1997) HIV/AIDS prevalence rate 19 Gross enrollment rates Primary Secondary Tertiary Illiteracy (percent of adult population) Total Men Women Total Population 10.2 Annual rate of growth (percent) 1980-1998 Urban population 55 (percent of total) 4 Proportion in capital city (percent of urban population) 69 82 Life expectancy at birth (years) 43 Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births) 114 Under five mortality (per 1,000) 192 Maternal mortality (per 1,000 live births) 650 62 Child immunization rate 70 (under 12 months) 4 2 Child malnutrition (1997) (under five years) Percent underweight Percent stunted Access to safe water (1998) 89 27 Percent of total population 3 Urban population Rural population 38 16 31 2.9 39 37 70 24 42 43 64 27 Sources: World Bank, World Development Indicators, 2000; for employment data, Zambia Central Statistical Office, Living Conditions in Zambia (1998). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 63 - APPENDIX VI DRAFT Public Information Notice (PIN) No. Ol/xx FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE International Monetary Fund 700 lgth Street, NW Washington, D. C. 20431 USA IMF Concludes 2001 Article IV Consultation with Zambia On [Month, dd, yyyy], the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded the Article IV consultation with Zambia.’ Background Zambia embarked on its structural adjustment and reform program in late 1991, with a view to transforming a state-led, stagnating economy into a growing market economy. Comprehensive reforms were implemented, including far-reaching trade and exchange liberalization, a liberalization of agricultural policies and an ambitious privatization program. While limited success has been achieved in attaining macroeconomic stability, Zambia has made substantial progress with structural reforms in many sectors over the decade of the 1990’s. In contrast to early 1990’s, Zambia today has an open economy where prices are largely market determined and a greater part of the previously state-owned enterprises has been restructured and divested to the private sector including the all-important copper company. Nonetheless, these accomplishments have been overshadowed by limited success in significantly reducing the incidence of poverty. Available indicators of economic activity suggest that Zambia’s economic performance through end-June 2001 continued to improve. Despite the lower-than-expected output of maize, the targeted real GDP growth of 5 percent for 2001 should be achieved on the basis of a strong recovery in mining, wholesale and retail trade, and manufacturing. The 12-month inflation rate through August fell to about 17 percent compared with 21 percent in the * Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial information, and discusses with officials the country’s economic developments and policies. On return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the country’s authorities. This PIN summarizes the views of the Executive Board as expressed during the [Month, dd, yyyy] Executive Board discussion based on the staff report. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 64 - APPENDIX VI program, largely on account of prudent financial policies, deceleration of food prices reflecting improved supply earlier in the year, and a larger-than-expected appreciation of the kwacha. Fiscal performance during the first half of the year was generally favorable. The overall fiscal deficit was significantly smaller than programmed because of an overperformance in tax and nontax revenues while cash expenditures were held below the program estimates. However, within this aggregate performance, there were overruns in some areas while cash releases to social sectors were markedly below budgeted levels. Also, the start of spending on HIPC-financed programs was delayed by one quarter, but debt relief has now been transferred to a special account, from which disbursements have begun. The stock of domestic payments arrears at end-June was substantially higher than programmed and amounted to about 3 percent of GDP. Between end-December 2000 and end-June 2001, broad money contracted by 5 percent (compared to a programmed increase of about 1.5 percent), reflecting the tight monetary conditions following an increase in the cash reserve ratio from 11 percent to 15 percent,* and an increase of the core liquid asset ratio of banks from 25 percent to 35 percent. This tightening also caused a considerable appreciation of the kwacha (see below) and a reduction in foreign currency deposits (FCDs) whose share in broad money declined from a high of 47 percent at end-December 2000 to 39 percent at end-June 2001. There also has been some loss of dollar deposits from the banking system following the introduction of foreign exchange measures in early 2001. The tightened monetary conditions led to a drop in March in the net foreign assets of the banking system. Interest rates on 91-day treasury bills rose from 34 percent at end-2000 to about 50 percent in early March, but have declined to about 45 percent by end-August. However, real interest rates have risen substantially as the sharp reduction in inflation during the second quarter was not accompanied by a similar reduction in nominal rates. Between end-December 2000 and end-August 2001, the kwacha had appreciated against the U.S. dollar by 13 percent in local currency terms, and by 18 percent in real terms, owing to tight financial policies. Most of the appreciation took place during the first half of the year, as the kwacha has been broadly stable since end-June. Balance of payments developments during the first-half of 2001 were mixed. The privatization of the copper mines led to a 32 percent increase in copper export receipts over the same period in 2000. However, growth of non-traditional exports was lower than programmed, mainly because of political turmoil in regional trading partners countries. The increase in total exports was offset by a substantial increase in imports; the latter was partly related to the appreciation of the kwacha and to the pickup in economic activity. External balance of payments support through end-June was about US$56 million short of program * The minimum cash reserve ratio was subsequently lowered to 10 percent in March and raised again to 12.5 percent in late June. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 65 - APPENDIX VI as a result of delays in aid disbursements. However, the program’s targets on gross international reserves, for end-March and end-June, were met after adjusting for the net shortfall in balance of payments support and in Fund disbursements. Substantial progress was made in implementing structural reforms. At end-March 2001 the government issued instructions to the Zambia Privatization Agency (ZPA) to proceed with technical work on the divestiture of government’s interests in the ZNCB, consistent with commitments under the PRGF and HIPC Initiative. The work has subsequently proceeded in accordance with the timetable prepared by ZPA. In the meantime, the financial position of the bank has improved somewhat following the payments by government on guarantees to ZNCB on its loans to Zambia National Oil Company (ZNOC) and to a lesser extent by Roan Antelope Mining Company of Zambia. In further efforts to strengthen the banking system, the BoZ issued instructions to inject new capital to Investrust Merchant Bank, and this was completed by end-June, 2001. In addition, two other banks have been put under liquidation. In the petroleum sector, where the operations of ZNOC have substantially undermined public sector finances and the soundness of the banking system, progress in implementing the reform program agreed with the World Bank has been slow. However, in recent months, the authorities have implemented measures to effectively deregulate oil prices and to liberalize oil imports. The Cabinet approved the privatization option for ZESCO and directed ZPA to proceed with the selection of consultants to assist in the concessioning process. Executive Board Assessment <Begin Typing Here> 1 Public lnformafion Notices (PINS) are issued, (i) at the request of a member country, following the conclusion of the Article IV consultation for countries seeking to make known the views of the IMF to the public. This action is intended to strengthen IMF surveillance over the economic policies of member countries by increasing the transparency of the IMF’s assessment of these policies; and (ii) following policy discussions in the Executive Board at the decision of the Board. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-66 - APPENDIX VI Zambia: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 1998-2001 1998 1999 2000 2001 Act. Est. Est. Proj. 11 (Annual percentage change, unless otherwise indicated) National income and prices Real GDP GDP deflator Consumer prices (annual average) Consumer prices (end of period) Average exchange rate (kwachaAJ.S. dollar) Real effective exchange rate Terms of trade Money and credit Broad money Treasury bill rate (in percent; end of period) Investment and savings Gross national savings 2/ Gross foreign savings 3/ Gross domestic investment Ofwhich: public investment Central government budget Revenue and grants Revenue (excluding grants) Expenditures (excluding interest) Interest due 41 Overall balance, cash basis External sector Current account balance -1.9 2.4 3.6 19.6 21.7 27.9 24.5 26.8 26.1 30.6 20.6 30.1 1,862 2,388 3,111 -8.7 -2.3 -14.3 -13.8 -5.6 4.4 22.6 34.3 3.5 6.0 6.7 7.9 11.4 8.4 12.8 12.6 14.9 14.4 19.5 20.5 11.1 10.5 10.2 11.4 24.9 25.5 25.7 23.9 18.4 17.6 19.8 18.1 26.7 26.4 28.6 28.9 3.3 2.8 3.1 2.6 -4.3 -4.0 -7.2 -7.4 -17.7 -16.9 -18.3 -18.5 29.2 36.2 (In percent of GDP) 74.1 34.1 5.0 23.3 21.3 17.5 -1.8 External debt External debt service 61 External assistance program (In percent of exports of goods and services) 16.0 16.2 18.3 15.7 0.0 21.1 21.6 13.8 (In millions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise indicated) Current account balance -574 -532 -583 -668 Overall balance of payments -453 -348 -373 -434 Gross official reserves (end of period) 44 46 114 187 In months of imports of goods and services 0.4 0.5 1.0 1.5 Source: Zambian authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections, l/ IMF staff estimate and projection. 2/ Gross national disposable income minus consumption. 3/ Current account balance including grants. 4/ After debt relief. 51 Refers to official and private sector external debt service. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public