DOCUMENT OF INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND NOT FOR PUBLIC USE FOR r-----Y AGENDA EBS/01/162 CONFIDENTIAL September 13, 2001 To: Members of the Executive Board From: The Secretary Subject: Lebanon-Staff Report for the 2001 Article IV Consultation Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staff report for the 2001 Article IV consultation with Lebanon, which is tentatively scheduled for discussion on Monday, October 15,200l. At the time of circulation of this paper to the Board, the Secretary’s Department has not received a communication from the authorities of Lebanon indicating whether or not they consent to the Fund’s publication of this paper; such communication may be received the authorities have had an opportunity to read the paper. Questions may be referred to Mr. Furtado (ext. 38423), Mr. Erickson von Allmen (ext. 34764), and Ms. Choueiri (ext. 34450). Unless the Documents Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board with the appropriate deletions, to the European Commission and the Islamic Development Bank, following its consideration by the Executive Board. Att: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicCONFIDENTIAL INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND LEBANON Staff Report for the 2001 Article IV Consultation Prepared by the Middle Eastern and Policy Development and Review Departments (In consultation with other departments) Approved by P. Dhonte and S. Kashiwagi September 13,200l Contents Page Executive Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 I. Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 II. Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 III. Macroeconomic Developments in 1999-2001 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5 IV. Policy Discussions ........................................................................................................... 10 A. Outlook and Policies for 2001 ............................................................................. 11 B. Medium-Term Strategy ....................................................................................... .15 C. Structural Policies ............................................................................................... .16 D. Statistical Issues .................................................................................................. .18 V. Staff Appraisal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19 Text Boxes 1. The Public Debt ............................................................................................................. 7 2. Interest Rate Policy and Treasury Bill Auctions ............................................................ 8 3. Financial System Stability Assessment Update ........................................................... 10 4. Exchange-Rate Based Approach.. ............................................................................... .12 Figures/Charts 1. Budgetary Expenditure and Deficit.. ........................................................................... .30 2. Selected Indicators ....................................................................................................... 30 3. Twelve-Month Growth Rates of Liquidity .................................................................. 31 4. Central Bank Claims on Government and Foreign Exchange Reserves ...................... 3 1 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2- Figures/Charts Cont’d 5. Real Effective Exchange Rate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32 6. Overall and Primary Fiscal Balance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .32 Tables 1. Summary of the Macroeconomic Framework, 1998-2006.. ....................................... .22 2. Central Government Operations, 1998-2003 .............................................................. 23 3. Public Debt, 1998-2003.. ............................................................................................ .24 4. Monetary Survey, 1998-2001 ..................................................................................... .25 5. Consolidated Balance Sheet of the Commercial Banks, 1998-200 1 ......................... ..2 6 6. Balance Sheet of the Banque du Liban, 1998-2001 .................................................... 27 7. Indicators of Financial Vulnerability, 1998-200 1 ...................................................... .28 8. Summary Balance of Payments, 1998-2003 ................................................................ 29 Appendices I. Fund Relations ............................................................................................................... 33 II. Relations with the World Bank .................................................................................... .34 III. Statistical Issues ........................................................................................................... .35 IV. Public Information Notice (PIN). ................................................................................. .36 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3- Executive Summary Background-Very large fiscal deficits and a soaring debt are placing considerable strains on the Lebanese economy. Together with a loss in competitiveness, these macroeconomic imbalances and the uncertainty they create contributed to economic stagnation in 1999-2000. Fiscal policy in 2000-After some fiscal consolidation in 1998-99, the overall deficit rose to 24.5 percent of GDP in 2000, mostly because of a sharp rise in current expenditures. Gross public debt reached 153 percent of GDP at the end of 2000. Fiscal policy in 2001-03- For 2001, despite some measures to curb spending, the deficit is expected to be roughly the same as in 2000, and the government is instead preparing for a major fiscal effort starting in 2002. The objective is to turn the primary deficit of 5% percent of GDP in 2001 into a surplus of 1 percent of GDP in 2002 and 4 percent in 2003, and reduce the overall deficit to 15 percent of GDP by 2003. The main measures are the introduction of a VAT and expenditure cuts. The staff welcomes this ambitious fiscal adjustment plan, but notes that, even if fully implemented and assuming that economic growth resumes and privatization receipts materialize, the debt ratio would remain extremely high at 175 percent of GDP. Staff regrets the lack of a more upfront adjustment effort and urges the authorities to consider an immediate tightening of fiscal policy. Monetary developments-Growth in broad money, while much stronger than growth in nominal GDP, has decelerated recently, while dollarization has risen. These developments have hampered commercial bank financing of the government, which has increasingly had to rely on central bank financing. In the context of unchanged interest rates and a fixed exchange rate, monetization of the deficit and rising dollarization contributed to a fall in international reserves by US$2.4 billion in 2000, and further by US$1.7 billion in the first seven months of 200 1. Lebanon’s credit ratings have worsened, with negative outlooks. Exchange regime and structural reform-The staff noted that a devaluation, if supported by appropriate fiscal and monetary policies, could help improve competitiveness, spur growth, and reduce the real burden of the debt. The authorities thought it would be very disruptive and undermine the prospects for fiscal reform. They would rather rely on structural reforms to restore competitiveness and growth. Key priorities are privatization, tariff reductions, and improvements in the business environment more generally. The staff noted that the effect of these reforms on competitiveness may not be sufficient. Financial system assessment-Lebanon’s banking system, despite recent monetary trends, remains fairly well capitalized (contingent on zero risk weight for LL government debt, which represented 25 percent of banks’ assets at end-2000) and highly liquid. Profitability is good, though declining, and banks are not directly exposed to a currency risk although they are exposed to interest rate and credit risk. Staff appraisal-In the appraisal, staff emphasizes that (i) an enormous fiscal effort is needed to stabilize the public debt; (ii) the fiscal adjustment will only be credible if all measures are clearly identified and include important upfront actions; (iii) even a massive fiscal adjustment would still leave the debt at a very high level; (iv) structural reforms and an active exchange rate policy are crucial to improve competitiveness and growth prospects; and (v) better data are needed for comprehensive economic analysis. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4- 1. INTRODUCTION 1. Discussions for the 2001 Article IV consultation were held in Beirut from June 27 to July 11.’ Staff met with the Prime Minister; Minister of Finance; the Governor of the Banque du Liban (BdL); the Minister of Economy, Trade, and Industry; the Minister of Telecommunications; the Minister of Labor and Social Affairs; and other senior officials and representatives of the private sector. The last Article IV consultation was concluded on September 8, 1999, on which occasion Directors noted Lebanon’s difficult economic conditions, marked by weak economic growth and deteriorating public debt dynamics, and concluded that Lebanon would have to intensify its fiscal consolidation efforts and accelerate the implementation of broad-based structural reforms.2 Article IV discussions had originally been due in 2000 but were postponed because general elections were held in August/September of that year, leading to the formation of a new government in October. The 1999 Article IV consultation was supplemented by a Financial Sector Stability Assessment (FSSA), which has been updated in the context of the present consultation. 2. Lebanon maintains a convertible currency and has never made use of Fund resources. It accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4 in 1993 and maintains an exchange system free of restrictions on the making of payments and transfers for current international transactions; restrictions on capital account transactions are minor. In recent years, Lebanon has received Fund technical assistance in central banking (most recently, concerning the development of the payments system and vulnerability and macroprudential indicators); fiscal operations (most recently, on the planned introduction of a VAT, reform of the revenue administration, and public expenditure management); and statistics (primarily price and balance of payments statistics).3 II. BACKGROUNDS 3. In the aftermath of the civil war (1975-1989), government expenditure far in excess of revenue led to the accumulation of a large public debt (Chart 1). The surge in expenditure was aimed, inter alia, at rebuilding or rehabilitating damaged infrastructure, and ’ The team comprised Messrs. Dhonte (head), Furtado, and Hardy; Mses. Bhattacharya, Choueiri, and Browne (assistant) (all MED); Mr. Mottu (FAD); and Ms. Psalida (PDR). The mission was preceded by two rounds of preliminary discussions in Washington during the spring. The staff have worked closely with the staff of the World Bank, both at headquarters and in Beirut. ’ The staff report is SM/99/200. 3 Fund relations are summarized in Appendix I, and World Bank relations in Appendix II. 4 Economic developments since 1999 are discussed in more detail in the accompanying recent economic developments report. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-5- ensuring implementation of the security arrangements required under the peace accord. Given the delicate social balance and the precarious state of the governmental institutions after the war, the fiscal system lacked the mechanisms to mobilize revenues commensurate with the rise in public expenditure, which led to a substantial accumulation of public debt. As a result, interest costs quickly became a major burden, and the fiscal deficit continued to widen, peaking at 28 percent of GDP in 1997. In addition, a substantial real appreciation of the Lebanese pound undermined competitiveness, as shown in a decline in recorded merchandise exports as a share of GDP to 4 percent in 2000 from 23 percent in 1986-89. The policy environment has been further complicated by the generally subdued economic performance in the region in recent years, and a host of long-standing security issues, including notably the Israeli occupation, until mid-2000, of about 10 percent of Lebanese territory. 4. The banking system expanded vigorously in the postwar years. This was based on its ability to attract sizable deposits, including from the Lebanese diaspora and the Arab world on the basis of its reputation from its resilience during the war years, liberal capital account regulations, an open banking system without disclosure requirements and the attractive yields on deposits (made possible by high yields on government paper). The larger share of deposits and almost all lending to the private sector has been in U.S. dollars; deposits in Lebanese pounds (LL) have for the most part been invested in treasury bills. Over the years, the increase in deposits has been a major source of financing for the government and, together with other large private capital inflows, of the external current account deficit. III. MACROECONOMICDEVELOPMENTSIN 1999-2001 5. Economic conditions have deteriorated. Economic growth has been slow, while the fiscal deficit has remained extremely high and the public debt stock has continued to rise alarmingly. Real economic growth slowed down further in 1999 (a trend that started in 199.5) and the economy was flat in 2000 (Table l).’ The slowdown reflected a fall in residential investment and a reduction in reconstruction spending by the government, as well as Lebanon’s large macroeconomic imbalances, lack of competitiveness, political factors, and structural and administrative impediments. Inflation has been low or negative, in part because of the weak economy, and in part due to the depreciation of other major currencies against the U.S. dollar to which the Lebanese pound (LL) is pegged. Available indicators suggest a modest pick up in economic activity in the first part of 2001 .6 6. During most of 1999-2000, progress on structural reforms was limited. Although a framework privatization law was passed in May 2000, no privatizations were carried out, 5 Economic analysis is hampered by the poor quality of much of the available statistics, especially in the area of national accounts and balance of payments statistics (see Section 1V.D below). ’ Economic developments are discussed in more detail in the Recent Economic Developments document. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-6- nor were major loss-making public enterprises (primarily the electricity company, EdL, and the airline, MEA) rehabilitated. Some preparations were made for the introduction of a VAT, but a firm decision to go ahead met strong political opposition, as did proposals to reform the civil service, which is considered overstaffed yet poorly paid. 7. Following an improvement in 1998 and 1999, the overall deficit of the central government widened again in 2000. Efforts at fiscal consolidation during 1999 led to an improvement in the primary balance of 3% percentage points to -1% percent of GDP, but the high interest bill limited the improvement in the overall balance (Table 2). The improvement continued in the first half of 2000, but the deficit widened sharply in the second half, owing mainly to an end-year surge in expenditure.7 For 2000 as a whole, the primary deficit rose to 7% percent of GDP, and the overall deficit to 24% percent of GDP. Part of this deterioration was associated with exceptional factors, such as the transfer of revenues owed to municipalities from past years and exceptional transfers to EdL. However, some of the increase in the fiscal deficit reflected a passive fiscal stance in the face of adverse trends; for example, the government continued to subsidize EdL rather than requiring it to implement measures to offset the increase in oil import prices, and government wages continued to rise relative to GDP. 8. The budget for 2001, which was passed in late June, only provides for a small improvement in the overall balance, by about 1 percentage point of GDP. Expenditure would increase somewhat, but this would be more than offset by an increase in government revenue that would reflect the introduction of a business tax and the implementation of a tax regularization scheme. The fiscal outcome through June showed an improvement of 2% percent of GDP relative to the corresponding period in 2000. Some of the improvement was due to the late approval of the budget, which delayed capital expenditure and transfers, and may be reversed. On the revenue side, a strong performance of direct tax revenue compensated for the losses in customs revenue, which declined following the December 2000 tariff cut. 9. The high fiscal deficits and slow GDP growth have led to a further rise in the public debt ratio. It has now reached one of the highest levels witnessed in any country (Box 1). Total gross public debt rose by 40 percent of GDP since end-1998 to reach an estimated LL 40 trillion (160 percent of GDP) at end-June 2001 (Table 3). Of this stock, 66 percent is made up of domestic currency treasury bills with an average maturity of one year, and carrying an average yield of 14 percent; most of these are held by domestic banks. Much of the rest consists of Eurobonds, with an average coupon of 10.2 percent, which, however, are also largely held by domestic commercial banks, Official multilateral and ’ A large volume of checks issued at the end of 2000 could not be cleared until early 200 1. This gave rise to a much larger than usual discrepancy between the deficit measured from the government accounts and its financing. Clearance of these payments resulted in higher financing requirements in early 2001. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-7- Box 1. Lebanon: The Public Debt Lebanon’s public debt, exceeding LL 40 trillion, is one of the highest in the world in terms of GDP (about 160 percent). It consists principally of treasury bills in LL (66 percent), with maturities of 3 to 24 months, and of Eurobonds (24 percent), mostly dollar denominated, with maturities of 4 to 15 years. Treasury bills carry an interest rate of 14 percent (but in recent swap operations designed to extend the maturity structure, the central bank effectively raised the yield to 16 percent, thereby incurring quasi fiscal losses). The latest Eurobond issued in July, with a maturity of seven years and amounting to US$750 million, was placed at 10.125 percent. The greatest part of the debt is in the books of domestic commercial banks as of end-June 2001. These hold about LL 15 trillion in treasury bills and LL 7 trillion equivalent in Eurobonds, representing respectively 94 percent and 20 percent of their LL and foreign exchange deposit liabilities. Starting in mid-2000, bank holdings of government paper have shifted away from treasury bills toward Eurobonds. Other major domestic holders of LL treasury bills include the national social security system (CNSS), the deposit insurance agency, and the central bank. Direct purchases of treasury bills or Eurobonds by the nonbank public are relatively small, as are purchases by nonresident financial institutions. An important aspect of the government’s debt management in recent months has been an effort to reach out beyond the Lebanese banks’ traditional markets. In April 200 1, a US$400 million Eurobond issue was specifically targeted to nontraditional markets and carried an interest rate of 11.625 percent. The funding of debt through the intermediation of the banking system allows the government to access the deposit base of the Lebanese banks, which extends well beyond Lebanon’s borders. From a financing perspective, therefore, as distinct from solvency considerations, the relevant debt ratio in the 1990s was debt/M3 rather than debt/GDP (Chart 2). This explains the otherwise surprising ability of the debt build up to continue, as well as the surprisingly low spreads compared to other emerging economies of similar sovereign rating. Nevertheless, the debt accumulation may be approaching a limit, even with reference to M3. As noted elsewhere, M3 growth is no longer keeping pace with the financing needs of the government. Bank exposure to government paper has already risen appreciably in recent years (by 35 and 20 percent in 1998 and 1999, respectively) and prudential concerns eventually will lead banks to limit their net purchases of such paper. bilateral credit is relatively small and comes mostly from the World Bank and Arab financial institutions. 10. M3 growth eased and there was a further increase in dollarization. In 1999-2000, broad money growth averaged 10 percent (Chart 3), resulting in a further decline in the velocity of M3 to just 0.5. At an annual rate, M3 grew at 7 percent during the first half of 2001. However, in the context of constant domestic interest rates (Box 2), LL money declined by 3% percent during 2000 and 11% percent in the first six months of 2001. As a result, the share of foreign currency deposits in broad money rose from 55 percent at end- 1999 to 66 percent in June 200 1 (Table 4). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-8- Lebanon: Broad Money and Government Financing, 1998-200 1 (In trillions of Lebanese pounds) 1998 1999 2000 Jan.-Jun. 2001 Change in M3 Of which: In Lebanese pounds In foreign currency 5.6 4.5 4.3 1.7 2.0 3.7 -0.7 -2.3 3.6 0.8 5.0 4.0 Government financing Commercial banks In Lebanese pounds In foreign currency Central Bank Other 4.6 4.1 5.4 2.3 2.6 2.5 -0.5 -2.1 2.1 1.5 1.8 1.2 -0.5 -1.5 3.6 2.5 0.4 1.6 0.5 0.7 Sources: Data provided by the Lebanese authorities; and Fund staff estimates. Box 2. Lebanon: Interest Rate Policy and Treasury Bill Auctions The increase in net BdL credit to government in 2000-01 took the form of both a run down in government deposits at the BdL and an increase in BdL purchases of LL treasury bills. The latter was needed because the authorities have held marginal interest rates on LL bills constant (at 14.14 percent for the 24-month bills, the main category issued). Hence, to provide the government with adequate liquidity, the BdL had to purchase LL 1.6 trillion in treasury bills in 2000, and an additional LL 2.5 trillion in January-June 2001. The BdL determines the amounts of treasury bills to be offered in each auction, based on the government’s fmancing needs (including the amounts to be rolled over and upcoming coupon payments) and the government’s debt management strategy. Formerly the auctions were based on competitive price tenders by banks. Since October 1999, however, the cut-off prices have been kept unchanged and all banks have been bidding at those prices, with total bids usually falling below the overall amount offered by the BdL. The BdL has been buying bills at the average yield as needed to bridge the gap between the total bids and the total amount on offer. 11. These monetary trends have hampered commercial bank financing of the government, and the fiscal deficit has increasingly been financed by the central bank. The decline in LL deposits has reduced the banks’ ability to hold LL treasury bills, and, at the same time, banks have reduced their holdings of treasury bills in relation to LL deposits. Meanwhile Eurobond issues have not accelerated commensurately. Thus, commercial banks provided only 24 percent of the deficit financing in 2000, compared to 98 percent in 1999 and 88 percent on average over the period 199 l-98. During January-June 2001, commercial bank net credit to government declined by LL 797 billion (Table 5). The gap was covered by the Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-9- BdL, whose claims on government have risen sharply (Table 6 and Box 2): the increase in net BdL credit to government amounted to LL 3.6 trillion in 2000 (equivalent to 14 percent of GDP) and to LL 2.5 trillion during January-June 2001 (10 percent of annual GDP). 12. The monetization of the fiscal deficit has contributed to an erosion of official foreign exchange reserves (Chart 4). The adverse impact of dollarization on the BdL’s reserves is mitigated when the government taps the increase in foreign currency deposits through the issuance of Eurobonds to the domestic banks. Issuance activity in 2000, however, did not keep up with the pace of dollarization; instead, the BdL took in foreign exchange deposits by the commercial banks to replenish its gross international reserves. Accordingly, international reserves (net of commercial bank foreign currency deposits at the BdL and excluding gold) declined by US$2.4 billion in 2000, and further by US$1.6 billion in the first half of 2001. Lebanon’s credit ratings by key agencies have followed a downward trend, with negative outlooks. Most recently (on July 30), Moody’s downgraded Lebanon’s foreign currency rating to B2 from B 1 and the domestic currency rating to B3 from B 1, referring to the serious deterioration in debt dynamics. 13. Lebanon’s banking system, nevertheless, remains well capitalized and highly liquid. Profitability is good, though declining, and banks are not directly exposed to significant currency risk although they are exposed to interest rate and credit risk (Box 3). The interest rate risk imposes a constraint on monetary policy and debt management, as a sudden and prolonged rise in rates could imperil this vital sector of the economy. 14. Available data suggest that Lebanon’s large external current account deficit narrowed in 1999-2000 but is widening again in 2001. Imports, which are much larger than recorded exports, declined in 1999 and remained broadly unchanged in 2000 (Table 8). Imports rose sharply in early 2001 and are expected to remain strong for the remainder of the year. The overall balance of payments recorded a temporary surplus in 1999 but returned to a deficit in 2000, which is believed to reflect a weakening of the private capital account. 15. The real effective exchange rate is estimated to have appreciated by about 15 percent since December 1998, largely on account of the rise of the dollar against other major currencies (Chart 5). This has compounded the loss of competitiveness resulting from the substantial increase in unit labor costs (by about 29 percent) during 1994- 98. Data on the industrial sector suggest that real wage growth has continued to outpace productivity growth since 1999. Cost competitiveness is further impeded by high utility prices and high real interest rates. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- lo- Box 3. Lebanon: Financial System Stability Assessment Update An update of the 1999 Financial Sector Stability Assessment (FSSA) was initiated in February 200 1 and completed during the Article IV discussions in July. It suggests that the banking system remains profitable, liquid, and well-capitalized-although this result is contingent on the zero-risk weight assigned to LL claims on the Lebanese government. (Lebanese government LL bonds represented 25 percent of banks’ assets at end- 2000). Stress tests of individual bank portfolios suggested that broad resilience to credit risks has generally improved and that direct exposure of banks to foreign exchange risk remains limited. However, given that almost 90 percent of credit to the private sector is denominated in foreign currency, exchange rate movements affect banks’ credit risk. Moreover, the recession has adversely affected banks, with most indicators of financial strength declining since the 1999 assessment: capital adequacy ratios have declined from 18.7 percent in 1998 to 16.9 percent in 2000 (Table 7); asset quality has deteriorated, with nonperforming loans increasing from 12.4 percent in mid-1999 to 20.5 percent in March 2001; and returns on both assets and equity are now lower than they were at the time of the initial assessment. Furthermore, vulnerability to interest rate risk has increased substantially due to the large and growing maturity mismatch between bank assets and liabilities-a mismatch that has been aggravated by increased foreign currency lending to government through Eurobonds with longer maturities; thus, even if the risk of a restructuring of government debt is ignored entirely, banks’ exposure to government poses a potential hazard. Following the 1999 assessment of compliance with the Base1 Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision, and the concerns raised by the Financial Action Task Force and the Financial Stability Forum in 2000, the authorities moved quickly to reinforce their regulatory and supervisory framework. Compliance with the Core Principles has improved considerably and supervisory procedures strengthened in the context of a comprehensive program that improved the structure and activities of the Banking Control Commission. An Anti- Money Laundering law was passed in April 200 1, implementing regulations were issued in May, and a Higher Commission was constituted to decide on lifting bank secrecy in cases of alleged money laundering. An assessment of banks’ systems to detect money laundering is now an integral part of the examination reports. Moreover, the authorities have repealed the law enabling the BdL to license offshore entities. IV. POLICY DISCUSSIONS 16. The focus of the discussions was the authorities’ strategy to revive economic growth, curb the fiscal deficit, and reduce the debt burden. The objectives of the government led by Prime Minister Hariri, which took office in October 2000, are to raise the growth rate of real GDP, maintain a low core inflation rate and exchange rate stability, rebuild net official foreign exchange reserves, and reverse the trend of the public debt ratio. The immediate priority was to restore growth, through a series of deregulation and liberalization measures. Early policy actions included tariff reductions, open sky policy, trade facilitation, extensions of the subsidy program for loans to small and medium sized enterprises, and work on proposals for a vast privatization program. The budget stance was not tightened in the 2001 budget, however, since such an action was perceived as harmful to the efforts to restore growth. By the summer of 200 1, the public debt had increased further, gross and net reserves of the BdL had fallen and dollarization risen, but there had been a modest pick up of activity. During the consultation discussions, the authorities repeatedly underscored that their objectives would continue to be pursued, while protecting the integrity Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 11 - of the banking system and preserving the full convertibility of the currency. To this end, they intend to advance further with structural reforms that facilitate investment and promote competitiveness, notably deregulation and privatizations, and said they would undertake all efforts to achieve an ambitious and front-loaded fiscal adjustment effort, beginning with the 2002 budget. Privatization proceeds would be allocated to reducing the public debt. The government is seeking international support for its medium-term economic program. The requested external support would serve, inter alia, to replace expensive short-term debt by debt of longer maturity on better financing terms. The staff argued for an upfront fiscal effort, and regretted the lack of adjustment in 200 1. The reduction in customs duties implemented at end-2000, which may have been useful from a competitiveness perspective, should have been deferred in favor of the more urgent task of reducing the fiscal imbalance. More generally, the budget for 2001 should have been the first installment of the major adjustment effort that lies ahead. 17. The authorities reaffirmed their commitment to the exchange rate peg. The staff asked whether the authorities were considering an exchange rate adjustment, which, if supported by appropriate financial policies, would help kick start growth and would reduce the real burden of the debt (Box 4).’ The authorities viewed any change in the exchange rate as so traumatic that the necessary supporting policies, especially fiscal policies, could not be implemented; moreover, interest rates might rise, further complicating fiscal, financial sector, and debt issues. Rather, they would rely on structural reforms to restore the competitiveness of the economy. The mission recognized that supportive fiscal and monetary policies were key and that the increasing dollarization of the debt gradually reduced the scope for exchange rate action to reduce the debt stock. However, an exchange rate adjustment supported by appropriate fiscal and monetary policies that aimed at ensuring the competitiveness of the economy would be useful for promoting growth, despite the fairly high pass-through effect to prices. A. Outlook and Policies for 2001 18. The authorities emphasized the importance of restarting the growth of economic activity. They thought it critical for that purpose that they should project a clear image of their policies to support private sector development (as summarized in section C below). The available indicators showed signs of some return to positive growth but sentiment in the private sector remained cautious. The staff estimated that real GDP might grow by l- 1% percent in 200 1, with zero inflation. The authorities and representatives of the private sector highlighted the importance of reducing the conflict level in the region in improving the prospects for growth. * A new nominal anchor for monetary policy and a new exchange rate regime will, of course, also have to be adopted. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12- Box 4. Lebanon: Exchange-Rate Based Approach The staff has examined the potential for a controlled depreciation of the Lebanese pound to address the debt overhang issue and the associated risks. One possible scenario would involve floating the exchange rate, with the aim of sharply cutting the domestic debt burden through depreciation. Velocity would rise slightly, and the exchange rate would stabilize, after a period of overshooting, at a level at which depositors would judge that government solvency had been restored. To limit the increase in velocity and the initial overshooting, interest rates would almost certainly need to rise substantially in the short term. A fiscal adjustment effort comparable to that in the reference scenario (described in Section IV. B.) would be required, and allowance would have to be made for the cost of restoring banks’ capital, which would be eroded by the higher deposit interest rates. The debt ratio would decline substantially but would still remain above 100 percent of GDP over the medium term; the outcome is sensitive to the projection of inflation associated with the depreciation. This scenario, however, is not without risks. The initial interest rate increase would reduce the favorable impact of the depreciation on the debt burden and cause an erosion in the capital of banks. But it might not succeed in forestalling an abrupt shift away from Lebanese assets by residents and nonresidents; the resulting capital outflow would put strong pressures on interest rates and the exchange rate. Shifts away from domestic currency deposits could lead to hyperinflation. Moreover, a depreciation might have adverse implications for income distribution and poverty; hence it will be important to ensure adequate social expenditures. The extent and timing of the supply response is uncertain. Years of overvaluation have diminished the size of the tradables sector, and restoring and maintaining a competitive exchange rate is important for medium-term external viability. Supply might not respond strongly in the short run, and because of the small size of the tradable sector, output might even fall in the short run as a result of lower real wages and reduced public investment. Over time, however, the output response would be stronger given Lebanon’s external sector protential and its dynamic business community, but it depends critically on the extent of pass-through to higher prices. Assessment-The chance of success of an exchange-rate based strategy would hinge critically on the strength of the supporting policies. In particular, a fiscal adjustment comparable to that envisaged by the authorities would have to be combined with an agile monetary policy, and care would need to be taken to mitigate the stress on the banking system. In the absence of strong supporting policies, the strategy would be likely to veer out of control, resulting in hyperinflation. In this case, the burden of domestic currency denominated debt would have been largely eliminated but substantial fiscal adjustment would still be needed to ensure a viable fiscal position and bring the inflation/depreciation spiral to a halt. 19. The fiscal deficit in 2001 is expected to be about the same as in 2000. The authorities explained that attempting a major fiscal adjustment in the context of economic stagnation would not produce, in their view, the desired results. Nevertheless, in recent months, spending ministries have been requested to find expenditure savings; benefits for civilian and military government employees have been cut; and the operations of the loss- making state television station have been sharply scaled back. Moreover, preparation for the introduction of VAT had been steadfastly pursued, and the key decisions-e.g., the rate and coverage-had been made. All of these formed a good base for vigorously addressing the fiscal deficit issue in 2002. Altogether, the 2001 deficit (on a checks issued basis) is projected Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13 - at 22.8 percent of GDP against 24.5 percent in 2000. Measured from the financing side, the deficit is projected at LL 6.3 trillion, 25.0 percent of GDP; it will surpass the level of 2000 (2 1.7 percent of GDP) because, as noted above, it includes financing associated with the 2000 budget execution. The gross public debt is projected to increase from 153 percent of GDP at end-2000 to 176 percent of GDP at end-2001 .9 20. The authorities are seeking to contain the debt burden. In this context, they have kept unchanged the yields on treasury bills, even though this has contributed to dollarization and official reserves losses. In addition, as the loanable foreign currency resources of the domestic commercial banks have expanded (while those in LL have contracted), the authorities have taken the opportunity to issue additional Eurobonds, at nominal interest rates lower than those on treasury bills. The net issue of Eurobonds in January-July 2001 amounted to US$2 billion (12 percent of GDP), up from the annual level of US$l.3 billion (8 percent of GDP) in 1999-2000. Finally, the authorities aim to make inroads into the international capital market; they reckoned that a series of substantial issues in that market would enable them to reduce the pressure on traditional markets, allowing interest rates to fall. However, moral support from International Financial Institutions was seen as necessary for successful issues of that nature. 21. The authorities argued that, provided confidence was maintained, financing would be available to the government, M3 growth could continue at a sustained pace, and international reserves would be adequate. In the authorities’ view, inflows of capital and remittances in Lebanon are largely driven by import needs, which are stable. The inflows could be reflected in direct investment flows, particularly for the financing of construction, or in portfolio inflows, in which case M3 would be buoyant. Either way, the net external position of the banking system as a whole was likely to remain adequate. The authorities also suggested that an interpretation of M3 in the usual terms of velocity is of limited relevance in the case of Lebanon: their analysis is that M3 represents the Lebanese banks’ share of several niche markets, and that this market share will be driven by confidence, yield differentials and income growth of Lebanese expatriates. Accordingly, they feel that M3 has the potential to keep growing at a trend of between 5 and 10 percent per year, notwithstanding its already very high level in relation to GDP. They emphasized that great efforts went into maintaining the credibility of the banking system, which made it realistic to expect that considerable resources would continue to be attracted. Meanwhile, the success of recent Eurobond issues testified to the commercial banks’ continued appetite for foreign currency government paper, even as the international market for emerging market debt weakened. Therefore, in constructing the reference scenario the staff based the monetary projections on the pace of 9 These projections assume full implementation of the business tax and the tax regularization law during the second half of the year. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14- M3 growth of about 7 percent per annum recorded in the first half, and assumed continued heavy issuance of Eurobonds. 22. The authorities did not see scope for an interest rate defense of the pound. They were mindful that such a policy would be fiscally costly and could threaten bank profitability. They also appreciated that the gradual substitution of dollar Eurobonds for LL treasury bills, which was the counterpart of the dollarization of bank liabilities, resulted in a significant reduction in the average cost of funding of the government. The staff note that the shift from domestic currency debt to foreign currency debt may further complicate the resolution of the debt problem, and recommended that floating interest rate debt instruments be introduced by the government to reduce the constraints on interest rate flexibility. 23. The staff noted that the banking system will be under heavy pressure from the imbalances on the fiscal side. On the above assumption for M3, the flow of deposits to the banking system would fall well short of the financing requirement of the government, resulting in a decline in the net foreign assets of the banking system; given the dollarization observed in the first half, the net reserve position of the BdL could moreover become very weak by the end of the year (at about US$600 million). lo The staff, moreover, cautioned the authorities that the projected financing requirement in the second half of the year, at about LL 4.2 trillion (16.8 percent of annual GDP), would be about twice as much as in the first half, resulting in a sharp intensification of financing pressures. 24. The staff underscored the short-term risks and urged the authorities to consider immediate adjustment and confidence-building measures. The staff noted that the fiscal pressures and associated further decline in reserves during the remainder of this year was a source of grave concern, and urged the authorities to seek to minimize the extreme vulnerability of the economy in the short term. This should comprise strengthening the fiscal stance promptly through expenditure containment; expediting actions (such as the approval of the VAT and telecom laws) that signal an unequivocal commitment to adjustment and structural reform; and, most importantly, an early preparation and announcement of a very strong budget proposal for 2002. The authorities acknowledged these risks and reiterated their commitment to take strong action. They accepted that unless public debt dynamics were convincingly brought under control soon, it would be difficult to maintain confidence in the banking system. The authorities underscored the importance of Fund endorsement of their strategy and international financial support to shore up confidence. lo The projection for the BdL depends importantly on the assumption that the demand for LL money would stabilize at the end-May level. This assumption held in June (LL money even rose by LL 5 1 billion in that month) but preliminary data for July suggest some decline in LL deposits. If such a decline persists, the net reserve position of the BdL may turn out to be substantially lower. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 15 - B. Medium-Term Strategy 25. The discussions on the medium term were based on a “reference scenario” for 2002-06, that broadly represents the authorities’ approach. The scenario identifies the minimum conditions to stabilize the debt ratio. The authorities emphasized that they would not be satisfied with a mere stabilization of the ratio, and that it was an essential part of their strategy to implement policies to address the stock of debt issue, some of which are still being developed. Most notably, they felt that the potential impact of the privatization program on the debt stock is not fully reflected in the reference scenario. 26. The scenario assumes that implementation of the authorities’ structural and financial policies will lead to a gradual but steady recovery of growth. Despite the fiscal restraint (described below), real GDP growth would increase to 2.5 percent in 2002 and to 4.5 percent by 2004 (see Table 1). Furthermore, the staff underscored the extent to which the reference scenario was sensitive to confidence factors and the assumptions regarding the response of economic growth to the structural reforms in the absence of exchange rate flexibility and continued high debt levels. 27. A key feature of the authorities’ strategy is to undertake a fiscal adjustment strong enough to regain control of the debt dynamics. It was agreed during the discussions that this adjustment, although extremely challenging, must be upfront. Accordingly, the government envisages shifting from a primary fiscal deficit estimated at 5% percent of GDP in 2001 to a primary surplus of 4 percent of GDP by 2003, an improvement of 9l% points in two years, of which 6% points in 2002 (Chart 6). Of these 9% points, 4 would come from the - introduction of a VAT and another 3 l/2 percent of GDP from already identified measures, the most important being the elimination of the EdL subsidy.” The staff noted the importance of an early identification of further fiscal measures yielding the remaining 2 percentage points of GDP.” This initial adjustment would set the stage for a further improvement in the primary balance to 6 percent of GDP by 2006. Under the assumption of a decline in marginal interest rates over the projection period, the overall fiscal deficit would fall to about 10 percent of GDP by 2006. The projected financing of the fiscal deficit-and the stabilization of the debt ratio-assumes that additional resources equal to about LL 4 trillion (US$2.7 billion) over 2002-06 are secured by nondebt-creating inflows, including privatization proceeds. The staff lo Elimination of the EdL subsidy over 2002-03 would be enabled by gains in operating efficiency under a new management, to be arranged in preparation for the subsequent attempt to privatize the company. Other measures that the authorities have identified, and which are under consideration, include: increasing gasoline, vehicle registration, and departure taxes; broadening the income tax base; and implementing a nominal freeze on government wages and salaries (except for promotions). ” Measures suggested by the staff included a higher VAT rate, a temporary uniform import surcharge, and a bank debit tax. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 16- noted that these figures were substantial and uncertain, but the authorities were confident that privatization proceeds would well exceed that amount. 28. Continued growth of M3 is assumed from 2002. The assumption in the reference scenario, 6 percent, is close to the lower bound of the authorities’ medium-term range (5- 10 percent). At this pace of liquidity expansion, and despite the sharp primary fiscal adjustment, the growth of credit to the private sector is constrained and the buildup of net international reserves by the BdL over the end-2001 level would amount to only about US$l billion by 2006. The authorities emphasized that success in implementing structural reforms and the ambitious fiscal plan in the context of political and regional stability should represent a major boost to confidence, and could be reflected in a higher path for M3, thereby providing room for larger credit to the private sector and a stronger reserve position for the BdL. 29. The authorities and the staff concurred that the projected stabilization of the debt ratio in the reference scenario was not ground for complacency. Under these policies, the debt to GDP ratio would stabilize, but at a very high level. Specifically, during 2002-06, the public debt ratio would remain within the range of 173-l 76 percent, essentially unchanged from the 2001 level of 176 percent. Under even slightly more pessimistic assumptions, the outcome would be significantly more precarious. l2 The authorities noted that these results did not fully reflect their own expectations and objectives, and they were confident that their policies, in particular higher net privatization receipts, would lead to a significant decline in the debt ratio. C. Structural Policies 30. The authorities emphasized the importance of structural reforms. They believe that the combination of their actions in this area will significantly increase competitiveness and contribute to a resumption in growth.13 Key elements are: l2 Staff project that, if real growth were 1 percentage point lower in each year during 2002206, the debt ratio would end the period 12 percent higher than in the reference scenario, and the overall fiscal balance would be 1% percent of GDP worse (assuming that LL treasury bills are the marginal source of financing). If, over the same period, the interest rate on LL treasury bills were consistently 1 percentage point higher, the debt ratio would rise by 4 percentage points, and the overall fiscal balance would eventually deteriorate by 1 percent of GDP. l3 A quantification of the estimated impact of these actions was not available. The authorities felt that the critical contribution of their approach did not lie in any single measure but, rather, in the clear articulation of an economic strategy based on liberalization, promoting Lebanon as a business center, and developing investment and exports. Structural reforms, as listed below, were in their view the best way to improve competitiveness. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17- 0 A reform of the social security system, which is aimed at improving governance and reducing labor costs. In April 200 1, contribution rates to the National Social Security Fund were cut to 23.5 percent (a 40 percent reduction), resulting in a 10 percent reduction in nominal labor costs. The authorities expect improved compliance to offset much of the cost of this reduction and, taking into account other components of the reform (which are under review), that the whole reform would be broadly neutral financially. A sharp reduction in customs tariffs in December 2000, lowering the weighted average rate to an estimated 16 percent in 2001 from 21% percent in 2000 (a 25 percent reduction). A new customs law that became operational in April 2001 is meant to streamline administrative procedures in conformity with WTO recommendations; this should contribute to reduce production and investment costs. A program to modernize the operations of the port of Beirut and reduce port fees; implementation of this program appears to have run into difficulties, however. Additional reductions in transportation costs will result from infrastructure work, including recent agreements to rehabilitate rail links with Syria. 0 An “open skies” policy to promote Beirut airport and reduce airfares; this policy was announced after the new government’s very first meeting, as a signal of its policy orientation. 0 The relaxation of restrictions on real estate investment by foreigners and the lowering of the related administrative costs; the Investment Development Authority has been reorganized and strengthened to encourage foreign investment in Lebanon. l Substantial progress toward membership in the World Trade Organization and an Association Agreement with the European Union, which signals further trade liberalization and openness over the medium term; the authorities expect finalization of an Association Agreement in late 200 1, after remaining issues related to rules of origin and access of Lebanese agricultural products to the EU markets have been resolved. 0 The introduction of a 10 percent VAT in January 2002; administrative preparations are on track, with assistance from the Fund and the EU. The tax will be collected from businesses with a turnover of more than LL 500 million (US$330,000). It is expected that a large part of the proceeds will come from the taxation of imports, which is comparatively easier to administer; accordingly, the authorities estimate that the tax could yield up to LL 1,100 trillion (about 4 percent of GDP) in the first full year of implementation. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 18- 31. The authorities have stated their strong commitment to the privatization program, which focuses primarily on the telecommunications and power sectors. A telecommunications law has been approved by cabinet and is now before parliament; based on this law, a telecommunications regulator will be established, mobile telephone licenses would be auctioned,” and the land-lines operator prepared for privatization (auctioning of two cellular phone licenses is targeted for January 2002). The authorities envisage establishing Liban Telecom based on the existing fixed lines operator later this year, and privatizing it in the second half of 2002. A financial advisor has been retained to prepare a strategy for improving EdL operations (e.g., through introducing private management), and a power regulation law is currently being prepared. The authorities expected that these operations would bring about economic benefits in the form of greater efficiency, as well as substantial financing for their debt reduction policy. The staff expressed reservations on the latter point, given the adverse condition in the global telecom market and the generally protracted nature of these operations. Based on a preliminary World Bank analysis of the privatization program, staff emphasized that the eventual yield from the telecommunications sector will be highly contingent on the transparency of the tender process and the establishment of an effective regulatory framework. Furthermore, substantial net yields from privatizing other sectors cannot be relied on, as there may be large restructuring costs; the main fiscal benefit may take the form of reduced subsidies. At any rate, no privatization receipts are expected in 2001. Finally, the staff underscored the importance of ensuring a transparent and competitive privatization process. D. Statistical Issues 32. Economic analysis in Lebanon is severely hampered by the paucity of data on national accounts and balance of payments statistics.16 This deficiency is attributable to the collapse of administrative capacity during the war; since then the allocation of resources to data compilation has been extremely limited. The mission noted the authorities’ efforts to make active use of websites to disseminate fiscal and monetary data, and welcomed the ongoing administrative rehabilitation of the Central Administration of Statistics (ACS) that is being carried out in the context of the broader EU-supported reform of the public administration. The mission reiterated to ACS that the Fund stands ready to provide technical assistance in the area of national accounts, and strongly encouraged its management to send an early request for such assistance to the Fund’s Statistics Department.17 The mission l5 In mid-200 1, in anticipation of the auction, the government cancelled its build-operate-transfer contracts with two cellular operators. I6 Statistical issues are detailed in Appendix III. See also SM/99/200, Box 1. l7 Technical assistance has been recently provided in the balance of payments area. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 19- requested that the authorities provide the Fund regularly with high-frequency data on money and international reserves. 33. Significant progress has been made in increasing fiscal transparency. Central government budget figures and the monthly budget outcome are published regularly, albeit not according to the economic classification. Major shortfalls remain, however, regarding the quasi-fiscal activities of public enterprises, in particular in the energy, transportation, and telecommunications sectors, and their financial relations with the central government budget or with the central bank. In addition, little information is available on local governments despite considerable transfers from the central budget. V. STAFF APPRAISAL 34. Lebanon is facing a formidable economic challenge in a context of severe fiscal imbalances and a particularly difficult external environment. Over the past few years, the economic situation has deteriorated markedly. Real GDP growth has slowed in the context of an erosion in external competitiveness and high real interest rates and business costs, the government deficit has soared, and the public debt ratio has risen to a level exceptional by both international and historical standards. This situation has clouded the prospects for employment. Moreover, despite the banking system’s remarkable success in attracting a continuing inflow of deposits, the magnitude of the deposit base in itself creates great vulnerability to the risk of an acute financial crisis in the case of a loss or even a mere erosion of confidence. Over recent years, Fund staff, management, and the Board have warned that the authorities’ expansionary policies ran high risks and that a strategy of fiscal consolidation and return to greater competitiveness was in order. 35. During the consultations, the authorities have appropriately highlighted the necessity to reaccelerate growth at the same time as they lay the groundwork for fiscal adjustment. They have proposed a wide-ranging series of steps to develop the private sector and reduce the cost of doing business. The staff stresses the urgency of these reforms in view of the deteriorating competitiveness of the economy, and welcomes that a start has been made in implementing them. In the privatization area, an appropriate regulatory framework for each of the targeted sectors is essential before large-scale privatizations can proceed, and important enterprises such as EdL will have to be thoroughly rehabilitated. These enabling steps should be undertaken expeditiously. It is also essential to ensure good governance and transparency in the privatization process itself. In the trade area, important progress has been made on regional trade agreements and an association agreement with the European Union. Initial steps, moreover, are being taken toward reforming the National Social Security Fund; in this regard, it is important to ensure that the recent reduction in contribution rates does not place an excessive burden on the fund’s financial position. While all these steps are welcome, the staff must note that there is a clear risk that economic activity may not strongly pick up in response to the new policy environment, because of the drag placed on it by the overvaluation of the currency, the high levels of real interest rates, and the uncertainties created by the unsustainable public debt dynamics. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 20 - 36. The ambitious, although delayed, fiscal adjustment the authorities plan for 2002-03, as described in the reference scenario, is essential, but there are serious risks in the authorities’ overall medium-term strategy, including its implementation and the response of the economy. On the one hand, if growth does not pick up, additional measures will be required; the fiscal contraction in itself will dampen domestic demand. On the other hand, the magnitude of the fiscal adjustment will require an extraordinary degree of political determination over a prolonged period. The staff notes that much of the initial deficit reduction will come from the introduction of the VAT, which has been well designed, and for which important preparatory work has been undertaken. The staff welcomes that the authorities have shown a strong determination to introduce the VAT in January 2002 as planned with a minimum of exemptions. However, any delay in passing the VAT law, now before parliament, could jeopardize its implementation schedule, would worsen the fiscal position and raise doubt about the determination of the political establishment to tackle the difficult economic situation. Although modern approaches to revenue administration are being implemented with the VAT, a broader strengthening of the revenue administration will also be necessary to improve collections from income, property, and other taxes. Early steps to restructure the management of the electricity company are also of critical importance. Determined implementation would provide the best way to ensure a positive response from the economy; however, as noted earlier, the eventual outcome is subject to uncertainty. 37. If fully implemented, the envisaged fiscal adjustment would stabilize the debt ratio, but still at an extremely high level. A more manageable ratio is expected to be achieved mainly through the realization of uncertain privatization proceeds. However, the staff is of the view that, unless more prompt action is taken, the high debt burden will continue to hamper economic growth and fiscal adjustment. Staff thus urges the authorities to consider all available means to supplement their fiscal effort in this direction, and to develop as rapidly as possible a convincing strategy to this end. 38. While confidence in the banking system remains strong, it will be in jeopardy unless strong action on the fiscal side gives reason to expect that public debt dynamics will be brought under control. The continuing growth of M3 rewards the emphasis of the authorities on the soundness and credibility of the banking system, especially as the resilience of the financial system in the face of large fiscal deficits depends directly on the banks’ ability to attract an ever growing pool of deposits. However, the high level of M3 also creates a standing vulnerability. The FSSA update earlier this year established that previously identified issues in supervision have been effectively addressed, and that the banks are relatively well capitalized, liquid, and profitable. Moreover, strong steps have been taken to reform the provisions of bank secrecy and address concerns about the scope for money laundering. Nonetheless, the banking system remains vulnerable, especially to interest rate risk, so long as fundamental macroeconomic imbalances are not addressed. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2l- 39. The government has not yet, however, appropriately addressed the vulnerability of the economy in the short term. For example, the reduction in customs duties implemented at end-2000, which may have been useful from a competitiveness perspective, should have been deferred in favor of the more urgent task of reducing the fiscal imbalance. More generally, the budget for 2001 should have been the first installment of the major adjustment effort that lies ahead. The staff urges the authorities to consider an immediate tightening of the fiscal policy stance, especially given the large financing needs of the budget in the second half of 200 1, and the pressures that they may be expected to place on the reserve position of the central bank. 40. The authorities’ immediate challenge is to build the confidence that is essential to the effectiveness of their strategy. A key assumption of the strategy is that strong implementation of the fiscal adjustment and reform agenda will sustain depositors’ confidence so that M3 will continue growing at a robust pace, despite the high debt ratio and continued low international reserves of the central bank. The next few months will present a unique opportunity to validate that assumption by moving the government’s program from design to reality. Accordingly, the staff looks forward to early approval of the VAT and telecom laws; visible progress toward privatizing the telecom and power sectors; and specification of the measures that remain to be identified for shifting to a primary surplus in 2002 and their incorporation in a strong budget proposal later this year. 41. The paucity of national accounts data and balance of payments statistics seriously hinder Fund surveillance. Accordingly, the staff welcomes the ongoing administrative rehabilitation of the Central Administration of Statistics, and stands ready to provide additional technical assistance, particularly in the area of national accounts. 42. It is proposed that the next Article IV consultation with Lebanon will be conducted on the standard twelve-month cycle. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 22 - Table 1. Lebanon: Summary of Macroeconomic Framework, 1998-2006 Prel. Proj Reference Scenario 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 Real GDP at 1990 market prices 3.0 1.0 GDP deflator = CPI (annual average) 4.5 0.2 Nominal GDP 7.7 1.2 GDP deflator at market prices 4.5 0.2 M3 16.1 11.1 Government operations Revenue and grants Expenditure l/ Overall balance after grants Of which: primary balance Gross government debt External sector Current account balance Of which: exports, f.o.b. Of which.. imports, f.o.b. Net foreign assets of the banking system 9,742 9,815 Balance of payments surplus (+) or deficit (-) -488 261 Gross official reserves (excluding gold) 6,507 7,727 Net mtemational reserves (excluding gold) 3,504 5,137 M3 Change in M3 Overall fiscal balance (after grants) Nominal GDP Memorandum items Marginal interest rates (in percent per annum): 2/ LL treasury bills Eurobonds Eurobonds issues outside the domestic banking sector Domestic nonbanks External Nondebt financing (including privatization receipts) 18.3 19.6 18.7 20.1 24.8 25.8 26.1 25.9 25.8 36.8 35.7 43.2 43.0 42.5 40.3 39.0 36.9 35.5 -18.5 -16.1 -24.5 -22.8 -17.7 -14.6 -12.9 -11.1 -9.7 -4.9 -1.6 -7.6 -5.5 1.0 4.0 5.0 5.5 6.0 118.6 138.4 153.2 176.1 174.5 175.4 175.7 173.9 173.5 -27.1 -20.0 4.1 4.2 -40.5 -34.9 40,509 44,993 49,294 52,745 55,910 59,264 62,820 66,589 70,585 5,612 4,483 4,302 3,451 3,165 3,355 3,556 3,769 3,995 -4,559 -4,026 -6,082 -5,755 -4,787 -4,196 -3,933 -3,614 -3,347 24,639 24,945 24,856 25,189 27,110 28,758 30,503 32,672 34,655 0 0 (Annual percentage changes) 0.0 1.3 2.5 4.0 4.5 4.5 4.5 -0.4 0.0 5.0 2.0 1.5 2.5 1.5 -0.4 1.3 7.6 6.1 6.1 7.1 6.1 -0.4 0.0 5.0 2.0 1.5 2.5 1.5 9.6 7.0 6.0 6.0 6.0 6.0 6.0 (In percent of GDP) -18.6 -23.8 -17.7 -15.5 -14.6 -13.4 -11.9 4.3 4.8 6.6 8.0 8.8 9.1 9.6 -35.1 -39.2 -35.0 -34.4 -34.8 -35.0 -35.5 (In millions of U.S. dollars) 9,298 8,094 8,397 8,680 8,990 9,355 9,779 -289 -1,205 304 283 310 365 424 5,895 4,730 5,183 5,590 6,021 6,478 6,963 2,754 585 855 1,003 1,158 1,324 1,499 (In billions of Lebanese pounds) . . . . 14.0 13.0 12.0 11.0 10.0 . . . 11.0 10.5 10.0 9.5 9.0 (In millions of U.S. dollars) 250 150 150 150 150 150 718 350 350 310 280 260 0 0 1,224 700 512 260 25 Sources: Data provided by the Lebanese authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections. li Cash expenditure adjusted for accumulation of domestic arrears. 21 Average rate on new issues. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-23 - Table 2. Lebanon: Central Government Operations, 1998-2003 1998 1999 Prel 2001 Reference Scenario 2000 Budget Jan.-Jun. Proj 2002 2003 (In billions of Lebanese pounds) Revenue and grants Revenue Tax revenue Nontax revenue Additional revenue measures l/ Grants Expenditure Current expenditure Of which: interest payments Capital expenditure Overall balance (checks issued basis) Of which: primary balance Float and statistical discrepancy 2/ Overall balance Financing Banking system BdL Commercial banks Other domestic financing External Other financing 3/ Revenue and grants Revenue Tax revenue Nontax revenue Additional revenue measures l/ Grants Expenditure Current expenditure Of which: interest payments Capital expenditure Overall balance (checks issued basis) Of which: primary balance Float and statistical discrepancy 2/ Overall balance Memorandum items: Total public debt In local currency In foreign currency 4,503 4,884 4,448 4,872 3,314 3,536 1,135 1,337 -- -- 55 12 9,062 8,910 6,909 7,357 3,352 3,624 2,153 1,553 -4,559 -4,026 -1,207 -402 -4 -86 -4,563 -4,112 4,563 4,112 4,137 2,519 -541 -1,499 4,617 4,018 68 559 358 1,034 0 0 4,652 4,552 3,062 1,490 __ 100 10,734 9,524 4,197 1,210 -6,082 -1,885 682 -5,401 5,401 4,878 3,562 1,316 0.3 522 0 5,250 2,254 5,050 2,254 3,447 1,429 1,603 824 __ __ 200 0 11,150 4,013 9,512 3,972 4,300 2,126 1,638 41 -5,900 -1,759 -1,600 367 __ -552 -5,900 -2,312 -5,900 2,312 1,605 2,535 -930 114 593 0 0 (In percent of GDP) 18.3 19.6 18.1 19.5 13.4 14.2 4.6 5.4 __ -- 0.2 0.0 36.8 35.7 28.0 29.5 13.6 14.5 8.7 6.2 -18.5 -16.1 -4.9 -1.6 0.0 -0.3 -18.5 -16.5 18.7 18.3 12.3 6.0 __ 0.4 43.2 38.3 16.9 4.9 -24.5 -7.6 2.7 -21.7 20.8 20.0 13.7 6.4 __ 0.8 44.3 37.8 17.1 6.5 -23.4 -6.4 __ -23.4 8.9 20.1 24.8 25.8 8.9 19.4 24.1 25.1 5.7 12.5 16.8 17.6 3.3 6.8 5.6 5.0 __ 0.0 1.7 2.5 0.0 0.8 0.7 0.7 15.9 43.0 42.5 40.3 15.8 38.2 37.3 35.3 8.4 17.4 18.7 18.6 0.2 4.8 5.2 5.0 -7.0 -22.8 -17.7 -14.6 1.5 -5.5 1.0 4.0 -2.2 -2.1 0.0 0.0 -9.2 -25.0 -17.7 -14.6 118.6 138.4 153.2 174.6 160.2 93.1 102.9 107.3 108.1 25.5 35.5 45.9 52.1 5,075 4,875 3,153 1,721 0 200 10,830 9,620 4,373 1,210 -5,755 -1,382 -537 -6,292 6,292 4,446 2,742 1,704 453 1,392 0 6,735 7,407 6,535 7,207 4,543 5,054 1,530 1,443 462 710 200 200 11,522 11,603 10,122 10,154 5,058 5,346 1,400 1,449 -4,787 -4,196 271 1,150 0 0 -4,787 -4,196 4,787 4,196 1,689 1,887 -104 0 1,793 1,887 226 226 1,028 1.028 1,845 1,055 176.1 174.5 175.4 110.5 104.2 100.1 65.6 70.3 75.3 Sources: Data provided by the Lebanese authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections. l/ Measures to be identified. 21 Difference between the overall balance measured by the financing requirement and that measured on a checks issued basis. 31 Assumed to be covered by nondebt creating inflows, including privatization receipts. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 24 - Table 3. Lebanon: Public Debt, 1998-2003 Prel. 2001 Reference Scenario 1998 1999 2000 Jun. Proj. 2002 2003 (In billions of Lebanese pounds) l/ Gross public debt Gross domestic currency public debt By instrument Treasury bills and bonds Loans By holder BdL 29,2 11 34,53 1 38,076 40,344 44,361 47,303 50,444 21,686 24,911 26,293 26,888 27,508 27,916 28,445 21,436 24,642 26,096 26,689 26,565 27,077 27,606 250 269 197 200 943 839 839 Treasury bills and bonds Other Commercial banks Treasury bills and bonds Other Nonbank (treasury bills and bonds) Gross foreign currency public debt 21 Sovereign bonds (Eurobonds) Of which: commercial banks Foreign currency bonds for arrears repayment Of which: commercial banks Other foreign currency debt Government arrears to the private sector Public sector deposits Of which: commercial banks Net public debt 31 281 115 178 3 104 112 16,133 18,658 15,987 18,501 146 157 5,272 6,137 6,283 3,915 3,008 2,369 1,242 2,142 346 8,85 1 5,746 4,204 472 307 2,633 770 4,006 702 27,069 30,525 4,356 4,356 3,602 3,602 755 755 16,911 17,440 16,827 17,356 84 84 6,648 6,648 19,055 21,666 14,661 16,773 10,256 11,614 910 910 741 741 3,484 3,984 333 333 2,461 2,461 516 516 44,842 47,983 Gross public debt Domestic currency Foreign currency Government arrears to the private sector Public Sector deposits Net public debt 3/ Memorandum item 118.6 88.0 25.5 5.0 8.7 138.4 99.9 35.5 3.1 16.1 109.9 122.4 1,726 4,265 4,460 1,612 4,150 3,602 114 115 859 18,051 15,926 16,399 17,968 15,842 16,315 83 84 84 6,516 6,697 6,648 11,409 13,123 16,520 7,867 9,577 12,627 5,675 6,803 8,975 868 910 910 685 753 741 2,674 2,637 2,984 374 333 333 2,63 1 2,479 2,461 721 516 516 35,445 37,865 41,900 (In percent of GDP) l/ 153.2 160.2 176.1 105.8 106.7 109.2 45.9 52.1 65.6 1.5 1.3 1.3 10.6 9.8 9.8 142.6 150.3 166.3 174.5 175.4 103.0 98.9 70.3 75.3 1.2 1.2 9.1 8.6 165.4 166.9 Treasury bills (in percent of gross public debt) 73.4 71.4 68.5 66.2 59.9 57.2 54.7 Sources: Data provided by the Lebanese authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections. l/ End of period. 21 Valued at the end-of-period exchange rate. 3/ Gross public debt minus public sector deposits with the banking systems. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 25 - Table 4. Lebanon: Monetary Survey, 1998-2001 Actual PKIJ 1998 1999 2000 2001 2001 Dec. Dec. Dec. Jun. DtX Net foreign assets Banque du Liban Banks Net domestic assets Net claims on public sector Ofwhich: claims on government Central bank Commercial banks Claims on private sector Other items (net ) Total liquidity (M3) Total LL liquidity (M2) Deposits in foreign currency Net foreign assets Net domestic assets Net claims on public sector Ofwhich: claims on government Central bank Commercial banks Claims on private sector Other items (net ) Total liquidity (M3) Total LL liquidity (M2) Deposits in foreign currency (Stocks in billions of Lebanese pounds) 14,691 14,796 14,017 13,283 13,622 15,522 12,556 10,083 1,069 -726 1,461 3,200 25,819 30,197 35,277 31,694 17,094 19,388 24,421 26,405 17,087 19,492 24,175 25,883 -709 -2,008 1,671 4,177 17,796 21,499 22,503 21,706 18,902 21,210 22,488 22,816 -10,177 -10,402 -11,638 -11,527 40,509 44,993 49,294 50,976 16,554 20,240 19,493 17,218 23,955 24,753 29,802 33,759 (Flows in billions of Lebanese pounds) li -1,058 105 -779 -735 6,670 4,378 5,080 2,417 4,412 2,294 5,039 1,978 4,536 2,405 4,683 1,708 -135 -1,299 3,679 2,505 4,671 3,703 1,004 -797 3,329 2,309 1,278 328 -1,070 -225 -1,236 111 5,612 4,483 4,302 1,682 2,024 3,685 -747 -2,275 3,587 798 5,049 3,957 Net foreign assets Net domestic assets Net claims on public sector Ofwhich: claims on government Central bank Commercial banks Claims on private sector Other items (net ) Total liquidity (M3) Total LL liquidity (M2) Deposits in foreign currency (Flows in percent of beginning-of-period broad money) 1, -3.0 0.3 -1.7 -1.5 -3.7 19.1 10.8 11.3 4.9 10.7 12.6 5.7 11.2 4.0 9.4 13.0 5.9 10.4 3.5 9.0 -0.7 -3.5 9.0 5.1 5.6 13.4 9.1 2.2 -1.6 3.5 9.5 5.7 2.8 0.7 1.0 -3.1 -0.6 -2.7 0.2 0.3 16.1 11.1 9.6 3.4 7.0 5.8 9.1 -1.7 4.6 -4.7 10.3 2.0 11.2 8.0 117 Memorandum items: Net foreign assets (in millions of U.S. dollars) Change in NFA (in millions of U.S. dollars) Foreign currency assets/foreign currency liabilities (percent) Velocity of M2 (ratio) Velocity of M3 (ratio) Foreign currency deposits/M3 (in percent) GDP/credit to the private sector (ratio) Sources: Data provided by the Lebanese authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections. li Refers to flows measured from January 1 of each year. 9,745 9,815 9,298 8,811 8,094 -569 70 -517 -487 -1,205 60.4 60.0 52.3 48.5 43.6 1.496 1.238 1.272 1.463 1.467 0.611 0.557 0.503 0.494 0 478 59.1 55.0 60.5 66.2 67.5 1.28 1.16 1.08 1.10 1.10 12,201 9,912 2,289 40,544 29,084 28,622 4,413 24,208 22,965 -11,505 52,745 17,167 35,578 -1,816 5,267 4,657 4,447 2,742 1,705 417 133 3,45 1 -2,326 5.776 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 26 - Table 5, Lebanon: Consolidated Balance Sheet of the Commercial Banks, 1998-2001 1998 Dec. 1999 Dec. 2000 Dec. Actual 2001 Jun. Proj. 2001 Dec. Net foreign assets 1,069 -726 1,461 3,200 2,289 Of which: deposits of nonresidents -7,288 -7,856 -9,148 -8,883 -8,915 Foreign assets 9,984 8,910 12,300 13,931 13,128 Foreign liabilities 8,915 9,637 10,839 10,732 10,839 Net domestic assets 38,127 44,198 46,181 46,302 49,006 Net claims on public sector 17,596 21,139 22,550 22,074 24,256 Of which: bills and bonds 14,788 17,294 16,829 14,835 15,176 Of which: eurobonds 3,008 4,205 5,675 6,871 9,032 Claims on Bank of Lebanon 6,513 6,827 7,331 7,925 8,351 Claims on private sector 18,682 20,994 22,243 22,622 22,769 Of which: in LL 2,074 2,474 2,890 2,990 2,978 Of which: in FX 16,608 18,521 19,354 19,633 19,791 Other items net -4,664 -4,762 -5,944 -6,319 -6,369 Liabilities to private sector 39,196 43,471 47,642 49,502 51,295 In Lebanese pounds 15,250 18,794 17,938 15,840 15,817 In foreign currency 23,946 24,677 29,703 33,661 35,478 Net foreign assets -1,571 -1,795 2,187 1,739 828 Net domestic assets 7,132 6,071 1,983 121 2,826 Net claims on public sector 4,578 3,543 1,411 -477 1,705 Of which: bills and bonds 2,580 2,506 -466 -1,994 -1,652 Of which: eurobonds 2,091 1,197 1,469 1,196 3,357 Claims on Bank of Lebanon 289 313 504 594 1,020 Claims on private sector 3,230 2,3 13 1,249 379 526 Other items net -965 -99 -1,181 -375 -425 Liabilities to private sector In Lebanese pounds In foreign currency (Stocks in billions of Lebanese pounds) (Flows in billions of Lebanese pounds) 1/ 5,561 4,275 4,170 1,860 3,654 1,973 3,544 -856 -2,098 -2,121 3,589 731 5,026 3,958 5,775 Sources: Data provided by the Lebanese authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections. l/ Refers to flows measured from January 1 of each year. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 27 - Table 6. Lebanon: Balance Sheet of the Banque du Liban, 1998-2001 1998 DCC. 1999 DiX. 2000 DCC. Actual Proj 2001 2001 Jun. Dec. Net foreign assets Net domestic assets Claims on public sector (net) Net claims on government Nonfinancial public institutions Claims on private sector (net) Claims on commercial banks Claims on nonfinancial institutions (net) Other items net Reserve money Currency in circulation Commercial bank deposits In LL In foreign currency Net foreign assets \Tet domestic assets Claims on public sector (net) Ofwhich: net claims on government Claims on private sector (net) Claims on commercial banks Claims on nonfinancial institutions (net) Other items net Reserve money Currency in circulation Commercial bank deposits (Stocks in billions of Lebanese pounds) 13,622 15,522 12,556 10,083 -5,729 -7,190 -3,733 -77 1 -502 -1,751 1,877 4,33 1 -709 -2,008 1,671 4,177 207 257 205 155 189 166 169 176 346 406 735 720 -41 -102 -154 -123 -5,722 -5,909 -6,359 -5,875 7,892 8,332 8,824 9,312 1,353 1,515 1,622 1,476 6,540 6,817 7,202 7,836 2,019 2,988 2,566 2,002 4,521 3,829 4,636 5,835 (Flows in billions of Lebanese pounds) li 513 1,901 -2,966 -2,473 -991 -1,461 3,457 2,962 -167 -1,249 3,628 2,478 -135 -1,299 3,679 2,505 91 -24 3 7 249 60 329 -15 -12 -60 -52 30 -1,153 -187 -451 485 -478 440 491 488 28 163 106 -146 -506 277 385 634 9,912 -272 4,566 4,413 152 174 810 -118 -5,702 9,640 1,421 8,219 2,064 6,155 -2,644 3,461 2,712 2,742 5 75 35 657 817 -200 1,017 (Flows in percent of beginning-of-period reserve money) l! Net foreign assets 6.1 24.1 -35.6 -28.0 -30.0 Net domestic assets -11.8 -18.5 41.5 33.6 39.2 Ofwhich: net claims on government -1.6 -16.5 44.2 28.4 31.1 Reserve money -5.7 5.6 5.9 5.5 9.3 (In millions of U.S. dollars) Memorandum items: Net foreign assets 9,036 10,297 8,329 6,688 6,575 Gross official reserves Including gold 9,159 10,405 8,420 7,576 7,185 Excluding gold 6,507 7,727 5,895 5,086 4,730 Commercial bank deposits 2,999 2,540 3,076 3,870 4,083 Net official reserves Including gold 6,155 7,815 5,279 3,642 3,040 Excluding gold 3,504 5,137 2,754 1,152 585 Change in NFA 451 1,261 -1,967 -1,641 -1,754 LL deposit reserve ratio 0.132 0.159 0.143 0.126 0.130 Foreign currency deposit reserve ratio 0.192 0.156 0.156 0.174 0.173 Sources: Data provided by the Lebanese authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections. l/ Refers to flows measured from January 1 of each year. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 28 - Table 7. Lebanon: Indicators of Financial Vulnerability, 1998-200 1 (End of period, unless otherwise noted) 1998 1999 Prel. 2000 Proj 2001 Monetary and financial indicators Gross domestic currency public debt Public sector domestic currency borrowing requirement Broad money (annual percentage change) In current prices In constant prices Domestic currency broad liquidity (M2) In percent of broad money In percent of domestic currency public debt Private sector credit (annual percentage change) In current prices In constant prices 88.0 8.5 16.1 11.0 40.9 76.3 20.5 15.3 99.9 105.8 7.5 13.7 11.1 9.6 10.9 10.0 45.0 39.5 81.2 74.1 12.2 6.0 12.0 6.4 (In percent) Banking sector indicators Problem loans/capital (percent) Provisions against problem loans/problem loans (percent) Risk-weighted capital adequacy ratio Construction loans/total private sector loans (in percent) Credit to private sector (in percent of GDP) 59.3 70.6 95.5 73.3 63.1 64.6 18.7 15.0 16.9 21.8 22.2 22.4 75.8 84.2 89.5 (Ln millions of U. S. dollars) Foreign currency and external debt indicators Gross foreign currency public debt In percent of GDP Gross external public debt In percent of GDP Short-term external debt l/ Of which: commercial banks 4,167 5,871 7,568 10,959 25.5 35.5 45.9 65.6 2,558 4,033 4,438 5,511 15.7 24.4 26.9 33.0 6,593 7,969 8,709 9,093 5,908 6,393 7,190 7,190 Official reserves indicators Gross official reserves 21 In percent of M2 In percent of short-term external debt Net official reserves 3/ In percent of M2 In percent of short-term external debt 9,159 10,405 8,420 7,185 83.4 77.5 65.1 63.1 138.9 130.6 96.7 79.0 6,155 7,815 5,279 3,040 56.4 58.2 40.8 26.7 93.4 98.1 60.6 33.4 Commercial banks’ net foreign asset position 709 -482 Commercial banks’ net open foreign exchange position 552 739 External current account indicators (annual flows) Merchandise exports, f.o.b. In constant prices (annual percentage change) Merchandise imports, c.i.f. In constant prices (annual percentage change) External current account balance In percent of GDP 668 695 712 798 14.1 11.5 2.4 12.1 7,154 6,283 6,299 7,111 -0.8 -3.2 0.3 12.9 -7,399 -3,317 -3,065 -3,984 -27.1 -20.0 -18.6 -23.8 (In percent of GDP) 969 1,518 819 109.2 4.9 7.0 7.0 32.5 62.1 2.1 2.1 90.2 Sources: Data provided by the Lebanese authorities; Bank for International Settlements; EUF, World Economic Outlook; and Fund staff estimates and projections. I/ Includes short-term public debt (nonresident treasury bill holdings, debt coming due during next 12 months, and foreign liabilities of central bank) and total foreign liabilities of commercial banks. 2/ Including gold. 3/ Excluding foreign currency deposits held by commercial banks with the central bank. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 29 - Table 8. Lebanon: Summary Balance of Payments, 1998-2003 1998 1999 Prel. Proj. Reference Scenario 2000 2001 2002 2003 (In millions of U.S. dollars) Current account -3,317 -3,065 -3,984 -3,182 -2,962 Trade balance Exports f.o.b. Imports f.o.b. -5,086 -5,083 -5,744 -5,108 -5,042 695 712 798 1,190 1,525 -5,780 -5,795 -6,542 -6,298 -6,568 Services 790 996 635 745 840 Unrequited transfers Public Official grants Private 1,181 183 183 998 Capital account -4,399 -5,913 668 -6,581 673 841 101 101 740 3,912 Public sector (net) . . . Disbursements . . . Loans Eurobonds . . . Amortization 979 91 91 888 3,577 192 317 . . . -125 3,386 1,400 130 61 1,795 0 261 1,022 89 89 932 2,776 243 398 173 225 -155 2,533 1,037 -54 -191 1,740 0 1,125 183 183 942 2,779 870 1,041 323 718 -171 3,486 499 682 332 350 -183 1,241 183 183 1,058 3,245 490 682 332 350 -192 Private nonbank sector, including errors and omissions (net) Direct investment Portfolio investment Nonbank short-term capital Errors and omissions Other l! 1,909 1,763 2,055 1,085 1,184 1,293 582 579 762 0 0 0 242 0 0 0 700 Overall balance -289 -1,205 1,224 304 283 Financing Change in the NFA of the BdL Change in the NFA of the commercial banks 488 -261 289 1,205 -304 -283 -479 -1,350 1,706 1,754 -453 -407 966 1,089 -1,417 -549 149 124 Memorandum items: Exports/GDP Imports/GDP Current account balance (in percent of GDP) External public debt (in millions of U.S. dollars) External public debt (in percent of GDP) Debt service (in millions of U.S. dollars) Principal Interest Debt service in percent of current receipts Gross official reserves (including gold) In millions of U.S. dollars In percent of M3 In months of imports of goods and services Gross official reserves (in months of imports of goods) GDP (in millions of U.S. dollars) 4.1 4.2 4.3 4.8 6.6 8.0 40.5 34.9 35.1 39.2 35.0 34.4 -27.1 -20.0 -18.6 -23.8 -17.7 -15.5 2,555 4,001 4,759 5,571 6,253 6,934 15.7 24.2 28.9 33.3 34.8 36.3 417 420 448 526 697 767 80 125 155 171 183 192 337 295 293 355 514 575 12.0 11.4 11.2 15.1 17.4 16.7 9,159 10,405 8,420 7,185 7,638 8,045 34.1 34.9 25.7 20.5 20.6 20.5 13.8 17.6 14.0 11.2 12.4 12.4 16.7 21.6 17.4 13.2 14.6 14.7 16,252 16,545 16,488 16,709 17,983 19,077 Sources: Data provided by the Lebanese authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections. li Assumed to be covered by nondebt creating inflows, including privatization proceeds. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 30 - Chart 1. Lebanon: Budgetary Expenditure and Deficit (In percent of GDP) 25 210 190 J 170 150 130 i 110 d 90 70 50 1 30 - 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 Chart 2. Lebanon: Selected Indicators (In percent) ‘i I 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1991 1998 1999 2000 200 1 Sources: Data provided by the Lebanese authorities, and Fund staff estimates. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3l- Chart 3. Lebanon: Twelve-Month Growth Rates of Liquidity (In percent) -M3 (left-hand axis) - - - - - M2 (right-hand axis) 61 Jan-99 Apr-99 Jul-99 Ott-99 Jan-00 Apr-00 Jul-00 Ott-00 Jan-O 1 Apr-01 Chart 4. Lebanon: Central Bank Claims on Government and Foreign Exchange Reserves 6 ‘ 5 _____ ‘Net FX reserves e: -4 3 2 1 -0 -1 -2 01 -3 Jan-99 Apr-99 Jul-99 Ott-99 Jan-00 Apr-00 Jul-00 Ott-00 Jan-01 Apr-0 1 Sources: Data provided by the Lebanese authorities, and Fund staff estimates. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 32 - 270 Chart 5. Lebanon: Real Effective Exchange Rate (1990=100) 260 250 240 230 220 210 200 190 180 170 Jan-96 Jul-96 Jan-97 Jul-97 Jan-98 Jul-98 Jan-99 Jul-99 Jan-00 Jul-00 Jan-O 1 Chart 6. Lebanon: Overall and Primary Fiscal Balance (In percent of GDP) -8 8 -10 6 -12 4 -14 2 -16 0 -18 -2 -20 -4 -22 -24 -6 -26 -8 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 Sources: Data provided by the Lebanese authorities, and Fund staff estimates. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 33 - APPENDIX I I. II. III. IV. V. VI. VII Lebanon: Fund Relations (As of July 31,200l) Membership Status: Joined 04/14/47; Article VIII (July 1, 1993). General Resources Account: SDR Million % Quota Quota 203 .OO 100.0 Fund holdings of currency 184.17 90.7 Reserve position in Fund 18.83 9.3 SDR Department: SDR Million % Allocation Net cumulative allocation 4.39 100.0 Holdings 18.56 422.5 Outstanding Purchases and Loans: None Financial Arrangements: None Projected Obligations to Fund: None Nonfinancial Relations Exchange Arrangement The Lebanese pound is classified as independently floating. De facto, since October 1999, the Banque du Liban has intervened to keep the pound around a mid-point parity of LL 1,507.5 per US$l, with a bid-ask spread of LL+/-6.5. VIII. Article IV Consultation The 1999 Article IV consultation was concluded by the Executive Board on September 8, 1999 (SM/99/200). Article IV discussions had originally been scheduled for the fall of 2000 but were postponed because general elections were held in August/September of that year, and the new government indicated its preference for having the discussions following an initial time in office. IX. FSAP Participation Lebanon participated in the FSAP in 1999 and the relevant report was presented to the Executive Board at the time of the 1999 Article IV consultation (FO/DIS/99/113). An update was conducted in February 2001 and the relevant report is a companion to the current Article IV consultation. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 34 - APPENDIX I X. Technical Assistance, 1996-2001 Date Department Nov. 16-30,1996 FAD Feb. 24-Mar. 7, 1997 Jul. 30-Aug. 15, 1997 STA FAD Mar. 9-23, 1998 Nov. lo-23,1998 Mar. lo-24,1999 MAE MAE FAD Ott 25-Nov 5,1999 Nov. 8-19, 1999 Feb. 28-Mar lo,2000 July 3-10, 2000 Oct. 23-Nov 3,200O Aug 3-lo,2000 Aug. 9-2 1,200O Mar. 27- Apr. 10, 200 1 June 1 l-22,2001 June 20-July 3,200l June 27-July 6,200l July 2-12, 2001 STA FAD STA FAD STA FAD FAD FAD STA FAD FAD MAE July 9-23,200l MAE Purpose Tax policy implications of Association Agreement with EU Balance of payments statistics Review of the 1995 tariff and excises reforms Payments system development Payments system development Review of public expenditure management and tax policy Price Statistics Development Public Finance Management Balance of Payments Statistics Income Tax Administration Price Statistics Development Public Expenditure Management Tariff Reform Tax Policy and Administration Portfolio Investment and Capital Flows Tax Policy and Administration Public Expenditure Management Development of Macro Prudential Indicators Payments system development XI. Resident Representatives None Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 35 - APPENDIX II Lebanon: Relations with the World Bank During 1993-97 the Bank extended loans to Lebanon for (i) irrigation, (ii) health, ;A.) l.d in so 1 waste and environmental management, (iv) electricity, (v) water and waste water, (vi) roads, (vii) agricultural infrastructure, (viii) revenue enhancement and fiscal management, and (ix) administrative rehabilitation. A Vocational and Technical Education loan (US$63 million) was approved in FY98. No new loans were approved in FY99. Two loans were approved in FYOO: First Municipal Infrastructure (US$80 million) and General Education (US$56.6 million). In FYOl, a Community Development Project (US$20 million) was approved. Lebanon’s disbursed and outstanding debt to the IBRD as of July 3 1,200l amounts to US$340.9 million, and a guarantee of US$lOO million. The undisbursed balance of loans for projects under implementation is US$35 1.5 million as of the same date. 2. The Bank has extended grants under the Population and Human Resources Development Facility, funded by Japan, for the preparation of most of the projects being supported or considered by the Bank. Institutional Development Fund grants were extended for Judicial Reform, Strengthening of Higher Education, Capital Markets Development, Social Security Reform, and Procurement Reform. 3. The last World Bank Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for Lebanon was presented to the Board on November 1997. The CAS envisaged support for (i) infrastructure rehabilitation and expansion, and institutional development; (ii) environmentally sustainable development; and (iii) upgrading the human resource base to support long-term recovery and address poverty. The 1997 CAS expired and the Bank is developing an interim strategy for assistance to Lebanon. 4. The International Finance Corporation has invested US$244 million in 28 projects in Lebanon since 1993, with an additional US$204 million in syndications. The IFC held a Lebanese portfolio at end-2000 of US$l65 million plus another US$lO9 million in B- loans with participant banks (the second largest market for the IFC in the MENA region). IFC has heavily invested in the financial sector, which accounts for three quarters of the portfolio, much of it in credit lines to Lebanese banks. IFC has also invested in the telecom and cement sectors. The corporation is looking for greater diversification for future investments, including in the IT sector, but the slowdown in the economy has resulted in a lower overall deal flow for IFC. The corporation also has a mandate from the government to provide advisory services for the privatization of Middle East Airlines. 5. Lebanon is a member of MIGA. No guarantees nor commitments have been issued yet. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 36 - APPENDIX III Lebanon: Statistical Issues The analysis of developments and prospects in Lebanon continues to be hampered by the paucity of reliable data on major sectors of the economy. At present, only the monetary accounts, financial markets data, public debt statistics, and, to a more limited extent, central government budgetary accounts are available on a regular basis.’ Most other data (national income accounts, prices, employment, nongovernment public sector, and balance of payments) are estimated on the basis of fragmentary information or partial indicators. Real sector-The availability of real sector data remains very limited. Comprehensive official national accounts statistics have not been produced since the closure of the statistical office in the mid- 1970s although preliminary estimates for the major components of GDP at current prices for the years 1994 and 1995 were published in October 1997 (these estimates are very similar to previous staff estimates derived on the basis of GDP assumptions provided by the authorities, and BOP and government finance data). A household income survey was published in 1997, and a household expenditure survey is being finalized. Together with social surveys of households and economic surveys of establishments to be initiated shortly, they will eventually form the basis for a new set of national account statistics. No comprehensive official price statistics exist; some consumer price indices are prepared by private organizations on the basis of a limited basket of goods for the greater Beirut metropolitan area, and by the Ministry of Economy. The Central Administration for Statistics (CAS) has just started publishing its own consumer price index. Two price statistics mission to assist the Central Administration for Statistics in implementing a new quarterly consumer price index were carried in 2000. Government finance-Monthly data on the principal components of the central government budgetary accounts and public debt are published on a regular and timely basis. The authorities provide Fund staff with additional, more detailed information as needed. Data for 1999 - reported in 2000 - are the latest provided for publication in the GFS Yearbook. No sub-annual data are currently reported for publication in IFS. Monetary accounts-The monetary accounts are generally provided on a timely basis and are believed to be in most respects reliable. Data on deposit money banks for March 2001 have not been reported for IFS. For the IFS September 200 1 issue, as an interim solution, STA has bridged this gap by obtaining the missing data from the Banque du Liban’s website. An STA monetary and financial statistics mission to Beirut is planned for the first quarter of 2002. Balance of payments-There are severe problems with various aspect of existing data on the current account: data on exports suffer from undervalued declarations and incomplete recording; and data on private sector services, compensation of employees, and private transfers are virtually absent. However, the main data weaknesses in the balance of payments relate to the capital account. For example, survey-based estimates of real estate transactions and other private foreign direct investment, which are believed to be a major source of capital inflows, are not available, and reliable data on portfolio investment flows are almost non-existent. These shortcomings are reflected in large positive errors and omissions. Some progress in improving the quality and coverage of balance of payments data has been made, including in the areas of merchandise trade and public sector external transactions. The latter, however, suffer from methodological problems as they are defined by the currency of denomination rather than by the residency of the transactor. In addition, the rule of one year as a criterion for determining the residency is not used: the criterion used by the authorities is six months, which does not correspond to internationally accepted standards. ’ The currentness of data on core economic indicators is summarized in Attachment I. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 37 - APPENDIX III Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-38 - APPENDIX IV Public Information Notice (PIN) No. Ol/... FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE International Monetary Fund 700 lgth Street, NW Washington, D. C. 20431 USA IMF Concludes Article IV Consultation with Lebanon On October 15, 2001, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded the Article IV consultation with Lebanon.’ Background Economic conditions have worsened in Lebanon in the past few years. Growth has stagnated, leading to a fall in per capita real GDP. The fall in growth is related to the slowdown in residential housing construction and in the government’s reconstruction program, but it is also attributable to the very large and persistent macroeconomic imbalances, the loss of competitiveness, and structural and administrative impediments. Stubbornly high fiscal deficits in the context of decelerating growth and high interest rates have led to a rapid accumulation of public debt. Competitiveness has been adversely affected by a substantial appreciation of Lebanon’s real effective exchange rate-mainly a consequence of de facto peg of the Lebanese pound to the U.S dollar since late 1998 and the latter’s strength vis-a-vis world currencies-and rapid growth in unit labor costs. The fiscal deficit, after some reduction in 1998 and 1999, widened substantially in 2000 to about 25 percent of GDP. The deficit is expected to remain essentially unchanged in 2001. Gross public debt has risen by almost 20 percentage points a year since the end of 1998 and reached 160 percent of GDP at the end of June 2001. Interest obligations on this debt exceeds 90 percent of government revenue. The bulk of the debt is held by Lebanese banks and is denominated in Lebanese pounds, although the share of foreign currency loans is growing. Banks have been able to finance the deficits because of robust growth in the deposit base. However, since early 2000, growth ’ Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial information, and discusses with officials the country’s economic developments and policies. On return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the country’s authorities. This PIN summarizes the views of the Executive Board as expressed during the October 15, 2001 Executive Board discussion based on the staff report. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 39 - in money demand and the demand for claims on the government have softened and even rolling over some traditional public debt instruments has become more difficult. The government’s financing needs have increasingly been met by the central bank. The expansion in central bank financing of the government, in the context of a fixed exchange rate regime and unchanged interest rates, has resulted in a substantial loss of international reserves of Banque du Liban. Even though Eurobond proceeds and additional deposits have added to international reserves, gross international reserves (excluding gold) were US$5.1 billion at the end of June 2001, down by US$2.6 billion since December 1999. The decline in net international reserves has been steeper, reflecting the trend shift from local currency to dollar deposits, and stood at US$1.2 billion at the end of June 2001, compared with US$5.1 billion at end-1999. An updated Financial Sector Stability Assessment found the banking system to be profitable, liquid, well capitalized, and well-hedged against several important sources of risks, even though the zero risk weight attached to government securities denominated in Lebanese pound overstate the strength of the system. Interest rate risk represents the main risk for banks, relating to the large and growing maturity mis-match between bank assets and liabilities. The government that took office in October 2000 is preparing for a major fiscal effort starting in 2002 to halt the growth in public debt. The objective is to turn the primary deficit of 5% percent of GDP in 2001 into a surplus of 1 percent of GDP in 2002 and 4 percent in 2003, and reduce the overall deficit to 15 percent of GDP by 2003. The main measures are the introduction of a VAT and expenditure cuts. To restore competitiveness and spur economic growth, the authorities rely on structural reforms, and key priorities are privatization, tariff reductions, and improvements in the business environment more generally. Executive Board Assessment Public hformafion Notices (PINS) are issued, (i) at the request of a member country, following the conclusion of the Article IV consultation for countries seeking to make known the views of the IMF to the public. This action is intended to strengthen IMF surveillance over the economic policies of member countries by increasing the transparency of the IMF’s assessment of these policies; and (ii) following policy discussions in the Executive Board at the decision of the Board. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 40 - APPENDIX IV Lebanon: Selected Economic Indicators 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 Domestic economy In percent Change in real GDP Change in consumer prices (period average) I/ External economy Exports, f.o.b. Imports, f.o.b. Current account balance In percent of GDP Capital account balance Overall balance Gross official reserves 2/ Change in real effective exchange rate (in percent) Financial variables Central government balance 31 Gross public debt Of which: in foreign currency Change in broad money 41 Yield on 24-month Lebanese pound treasury bills 4/ 6.5 10.6 0.8 -6.8 -4.7 -41.9 4.9 0.3 8.1 4.0 -18.4 79.8 12.0 16.4 23.4 4.0 4.0 3.0 8.9 7.7 4.5 In billions of U.S. dollars 0.8 -7.0 -4.8 -37.1 5.6 0.8 9.3 12.2 0.6 0.7 -6.9 -6.6 -4.4 -4.4 -29.4 -27.1 4.8 3.9 0.4 -0.5 8.6 9.2 18.1 8.1 In percent of GDP -21.7 -27.6 -18.5 100.0 105.2 118.6 14.5 16.2 25.5 27.8 19.3 16.1 20.5 16.7 16.7 1.0 0.0 0.2 -0.4 0.7 0.7 -5.8 -5.8 -3.3 -3.1 -20.0 -18.6 3.6 1.0 0.3 -0.3 10.4 8.4 1.8 6.2 -16.1 -24.5 138.4 153.2 35.5 45.9 11.1 9.6 14.1 14.1 Sources: Data provided by the Lebanese authorities; and IMF staff estimates. l/ For Beirut and suburbs. 21 Including gold. 31 Overall balance, after grants, on a checks issued basis. 41 In percent, end of period. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public