DOCUMENT OF INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND NOT PUBLIC USE FOR r AGENDA EBS/Ol/l53 CONFIDENTIAL September 4,200l To: Members of the Executive Board From: The Secretary Subject: Tanzania-Staff Report for the 2001 Article IV Consultation and Third Review Under the Three-Year Arrangement Under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staff report for the 2001 Article IV consultation with Tanzania and the third review under the three-year arrangement for Tanzania under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility, which is tentatively scheduled for discussion on Monday, September 24, 2001. A draft decision appears on pages 20-23. At the time of circulation of this paper to the Board, the Secretary’s Department has received a communication from the authorities of Tanzania indicating that they consent to the Fund’s publication of this paper. Questions may be referred to Mr. Reitmaier (ext. 37443), Mr. Snoek (ext. 38823), and Mr. Nassar (ext. 38665). Unless the Documents Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the WTO Secretariat on Wednesday, September 12, 2001; to the African Development Bank, the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa, and the European Commission, following its consideration by the Executive Board. Att: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicCONFIDENTIAL INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND TANZANIA Staff Report for the 2001 Article IV Consultation and Third Review Under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility Prepared by the African Department (In consultation with the Fiscal Affairs, Legal, Monetary and Exchange Affairs, Policy Development and Review, Statistics, and Treasurer’s Departments) Approved by Jose Fajgenbaum and Michael Hadjimichael September 4,200l Contents Page Executive Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..3 I. II. III. IV. V. VI. Introduction ................................................................................................................. .4 Recent Economic Developments .................................................................................. .5 The Poverty Reduction and Growth Strategy.. ............................................................. .7 The Program for 200 l/02.. ............................................................................................ .8 A. Fiscal Policy and Budgetary Transparency.. ........................................................ .9 B. Monetary Policy and Financial Sector Issues .................................................... .l 1 C. Other Structural Reforms, Governance Issues, and Safeguards Assessment .. ..12 D. External Sector Issues and Program Financing ................................................. .15 Medium-Term Balance of Payments Outlook.. .......................................................... .17 Staff Appraisal ............................................................................................................ .18 Boxes 1. Tax Reforms in 2001/02 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10 2. Structural Conditionality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .13 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2- Figures 1. 2. 3. 4. GDP, Savings, and Investment, 1998-2003 ............................................................... .24 Prices and Interest Rates, January 1997-July 200 1 ................................................... ..2 5 Exchange Rates, January 1997-June 200 1 ................................................................. .26 Central Government Finances, 1997/98-2002/03 ...................................................... .27 Tables 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 1998-2002 .......................................... .28 National Accounts, 1998-2003.. ................................................................................. .29 Financial Performance Criteria and Benchmarks Under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility Arrangement, December 2000-June 200 1 ............................. ..3 0 Structural Performance Criteria and Benchmarks Under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility Arrangement, March-July 200 1 .............................................. .3 1 Central Government Operations, 1998/99-2002/03 .................................................. ..3 2 Central Government Revenue and Expenditure, Quarterly, 2001/02 ......................... .34 Central Government Expenditure on Priority Sectors, 1999/2000-2001/02.. ........... ..3 5 Monetary Survey, 1999-2000.. ................................................................................... .36 Medium-Term Balance of Payments, 1999-2005 ...................................................... .37 External Financing Requirements and Sources, 1999-2005 ..................................... ..3 8 Appendices I. II. III. IV. V. VI. Letter of Intent ............................................................................................................ .39 Table 1. Quantitative Performance Criteria and Benchmarks Under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility Arrangement, September 200 l-June 2002 ..... .46 Table 2. Structural Performance Criteria and Benchmarks Under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility Arrangement, August 200 l-March 2002 ........ .47 Attachment: Technical Memorandum of Understanding on Selected Concepts and Definitions Used in the Monitoring of the PRGF-Supported Program ................ .48 Relations with the Fund .............................................................................................. .5 1 Relations with the World Bank Group ......................................................................... 54 Statistical Issues ........................................................................................................... 56 Selected Social and Demographic Development Indicators ........................................ 60 Draft Public Information Notice .................................................................................. 61 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3- EXECUTIVE SUMMARY . Tanzania’s Economic performance under the PRGF-supported program continues to be strong. All the quantitative performance criteria and benchmarks for end-March and end-June 2001 were observed with comfortable margins. A structural performance criterion, relating to the audit of budgetary arrears by end-March 200 1, was not observed, but the action was subsequently completed. Following good rains and a pick up in the mining and tourism sectors, real GDP growth is expected to approach 6 percent in 2001, with inflation falling to near 5 percent. . Fiscal developments during 2000/01 (July-June) exceeded program expectations. Tax revenues were buoyant in most categories, and expenditures were lower than originally programmed mainly on account of lower-than-expected foreign-financed development expenditure. . In face of a rapid monetary expansion and a sharp decline in short-term interest rates, the Bank of Tanzania tightened monetary policy earlier this year and is now placing renewed emphasis on reserve money as the main operating target for monetary policy. . The program for 2001/02 aims at maintaining macroeconomic stability, as well as effecting a significant shift in the distribution of public expenditure toward priority sectors, in line with Tanzania’s poverty reduction strategy paper (PRSP). In this regard, the program allows for a widening of the deficit, which will be fully financed by grants and concessional loans. . Recent trade policy actions included a lowering and streamlining of general tariff rates, but also the introduction of import surcharges on a number of sensitive products and a registration requirement for sugar importers. The exemption of the government from indirect taxes is being eliminated-this year with respect to the value-added tax, and next year with respect to customs and excises duties. . The effectiveness of government expenditures will be enhanced through greater budgetary transparency. The authorities will start publishing quarterly reports on the execution of the government budget, drawn from the Integrated Financial Management System (IFMS). In addition, the government will soon publish a progress report on the implementation of the national anticorruption strategy. . Tanzania’s external financing requirements are expected to be met through disbursements of new grants and concessional loans totaling about US$l . 1 billion and debt relief under the enhanced HIPC Initiative of US$l50 million in each of 200 1 and 2002. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4- 1. INTRODUCTION ' 1. Tanzania’s sound macroeconomic and structural policies are producing creditable results: economic growth of 5-6 percent, low-single-digit inflation, and a comfortable level of foreign exchange reserves. Tanzania is receiving large and steady support from the donor community, and has merited significant debt relief under the enhanced Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Initiative. The country’s overall political situation is stable. Last year’s general election sparked a dispute over the outcome in Zanzibar. Following unrest in Zanzibar in January 200 1, the ruling party and the main opposition party in Zanzibar renounced the use of violence to solve political differences. Reconciliation talks are continuing, and the majority of the some 2,000 people who sought refuge abroad have reportedly returned to Zanzibar. 2. The current three-year arrangement under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF) was approved by the Executive Board on March 3 1,200O for a total amount of SDR 135 million (68 percent of quota), to be disbursed in six semiannual installments of SDR 20 million and a final installment of SDR 15 million. Completion of the present (third) review under the arrangement will entitle Tanzania to the fourth disbursement of SDR 20 million. The government’s letter of intent relating to this review is presented in Appendix I. Other appendices summarize Tanzania’s relations with the Fund and the World Bank Group, discuss statistical issues, and present selected social and demographic indicators. 3. Continued implementation of a PRGF-supported program constitutes an important condition for reaching the completion point under the enhanced HIPC Initiative.2 Other conditions include the satisfactory implementation of a set of “policy reforms for the floating completion point” (Box 3 of the Decision Point Document (EBS/00/54; 3/20/00)), as well as satisfactory implementation of the poverty reduction strategy for at least one year. The ’ Discussions for the 2001 Article IV consultation and the third review under the PRGF arrangement were held in Dar es Salaam during May 3-18,200l by a staff team comprising Mr. Reitmaier (head), Mr. Snoek, Mr. Nassar (all AFR), Ms. Fedelino (FAD), Mr. Hussain (PDR), Mr. Tsikata (Resident Representative), and Mrs. Harvey (Administrative Assistant- PDR). The mission was received by President Mkapa and met with the Minister for Finance (Mr. Mramba), the Minister for Energy and Minerals (Mr. Maokola-Majogo), the Deputy Minister of Industries and Commerce (Mr. Diallo), the Chief Minister of the Government of Zanzibar (Mr. Vuai), the Governor of the Bank of Tanzania (Mr. Ballali), and senior officials from these and other government departments. Mr. Belay, Assistant to the Executive Director for Tanzania, participated in the policy discussions. The mission collaborated closely with World Bank staff. 2 Tanzania reached the decision point under the enhanced HIPC Initiative in April 2000. Its poverty reduction strategy paper (PRSP) was endorsed by the Boards of the IDA and the IMF on November 30 and December 1, 2000, respectively. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-5- authorities have made significant progress in the implementation of the policy reforms- structural reforms and specific measures conducive to poverty reduction-and have recently submitted to the Fund and the World Bank a PRSP progress report for 2000/01. The staffs of the Fund and the World Bank are presently assessing the status of all trigger conditions for the completion point under the enhanced HIPC Initiative. 4. In concluding the last Article IV consultation with Tanzania on August 1,2000, Executive Directors commended Tanzania for the strong implementation of its macroeconomic program and the progress made with structural reforms, notably in the financial, petroleum, and telecommunications sectors. They urged the authorities to continue their efforts to widen the tax base and improve tax administration; they also considered that faster trade liberalization would serve to enhance Tanzania’s attractiveness to investors. II. RECENT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS 5. Economic performance under the program continues to be good. Real GDP grew by 4.9 percent in 2000, slightly lower than expected under the program, reflecting the impact of poor rains on agriculture and the power supply (Figure 1; Tables 1 and 2). With higher rainfall and a normalization of the power supply, there are some indications that real GDP growth picked up in the first half of 200 1. A good supply of food crops contributed to a further reduction in the 12-month rate of inflation from 5.5 percent in December 2000 to 5.1 percent in June 2001 (Figure 2). 6. All quantitative performance criteria and benchmarks for end-March and end- June 2001 were observed with comfortable margins (Table 3). On the structural side, the reconciliation of government accounts at the Bank of Tanzania and at commercial banks- performance criteria for end-March and end-June 2001, respectively-were completed as scheduled. Meanwhile, the verification and audit of budgetary arrears-a structural performance criterion for end-March 2001-were completed only in July because of delays in selecting the auditors; the authorities are requesting that the nonobservance of this performance criterion be waived. Three of the five structural benchmarks linked to the budget for 200 l/O2 (July-June) and the beginning of the new fiscal year were observed on time; one was implemented in part (elimination of government tax exemptions) and one is delayed until September 2001 (startup of large taxpayer unit) (Table 4). 7. Fiscal performance in 2000/01 exceeded program expectations. Government revenue attained the equivalent of 12.2 percent of GDP, compared with 11.8 percent targeted under the program and 11.3 percent in 1999/2000. Income tax revenue was more buoyant than expected and more than compensated for lower-than-expected collections from value-added tax (VAT) and excises on domestically produced goods (Table 5). The largest revenue increases relative to the previous year were in taxes on imports and in nontax items. The total contribution to revenue of the petroleum sector increased significantly (from about T Sh 103 billion in 1999/2000 to over T Sh 190 billion in 2000/01), owing in part to higher Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-6- world prices and the elimination of the exemption from the VAT of government purchases of petroleum products. The growth in nontax revenues reflected higher dividend payments from privatized parastatal enterprises. 8. Government expenditure was lower than originally programmed, mainly on account of lower-than-expected foreign-financed development expenditure. The government’s cautious wage policy was reflected in a decline of the wage bill in relation to GDP from 4.2 percent in 1999/2000 to 4 percent in 2000/01. Expenditure on goods, services, and transfers increased sharply, as had been expected; this was due to greater realism in the initial budget allocation (in particular for utilities and feeding programs that had been susceptible to the accumulation of arrears), as well as better budget execution (especially in the second half of the fiscal year, when priority sectors started receiving quarterly allocations instead of the monthly releases under the cash budget system). The emergence of new expenditure arrears has been avoided since end-2000, and existing arrears were paid down in part. Recurrent expenditure on priority sectors increased from the equivalent of 4.1 percent of GDP in 1999/2000 to 4.6 percent in 2000/01 (Table 7). 9. Owing to these revenue and expenditure developments, the overall budget deficit (before grants) amounted to 4.5 percent of GDP in 2000/01, compared with 5.2 percent under the program and 5.8 percent in 1999/2000 (Table 5). Taking into account lower-than- expected receipts of foreign grants, the overall balance after grants remained in deficit in 2000/O 1 (0.6 percent of GDP), financed largely by higher-than-expected project loans and lower-than-expected amortization obligations. Total domestic financing operations netted out to zero; they included a modest buildup of government deposits at the Bank of Tanzania (BoT) and a smaller-than-expected clearance of domestic arrears because of the delay in completing the audit. 10. Monetary developments during 2000/01 were marked initially by large foreign inflows-to which the BoT responded through (unsterilized) foreign exchange purchases to prevent an undue appreciation of the exchange rate-followed more recently by action to mop up excess liquidity. The latter efforts notwithstanding, broad money including foreign exchange deposits (M3) grew by 17 percent during 2000/01, compared with a program projection of less than 10 percent (Table 8). Until the beginning of 2001, the BoT tolerated this rapid monetary expansion, considering that inflationary pressures and private sector credit demand remained weak. In February 200 1, the BoT recognized the risks inherent in the sharp monetary expansion, when short-term yields on treasury bills declined to 2.9 percent (negative in real terms) and downward pressure on the exchange rate began to build up after relative stability during 2000 (Figures 2 and 3). In this context, the staff welcomed the BoT’s renewed emphasis on reserve money as the main operating target for monetary policy. The more aggressive issuance of liquidity paper (treasury bills issued for monetary control purposes) in recent months, coupled with a repurchase operation in June, brought the 12-month rate of reserve money growth to 9.3 percent by end-June 2001 compared with 14.3 percent anticipated under the program. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-7- 11. Credit to the nongovernment sector was almost 21 percent higher at end-June 2001 than a year earlier, of which more than 8 percentage points was attributable to a switch from foreign to domestic financing of working capital by a foreign-owned company. The weighted-average interest rate on call loans declined from 24 percent to 18 percent over the same period, indicating a small decline in the still large spread vis-a-vis deposit interest rates. The authorities sought to strengthen banking supervision, in face of a nonperforming loans-to-assets ratio for the banking system as a whole of 8 percent in 2000. 12. The external current account deficit (excluding official transfers) fell from the equivalent of 12.1 percent of GDP in I999 to 9.1 percent in 2000-the smallest deficit since 1995-reflecting a rebound in exports and a small decline in imports (Table 9). Exports grew by 18 percent because of a sharp increase in nontraditional exports, particularly gold. Traditional exports declined, mainly on account of a drop in commodity prices and, consequently, the share of traditional exports in total exports fell from 53 percent to 44 percent. Imports were 1.2 percent lower in value terms in 2000 despite higher petroleum product prices, as a 20 percent increase in imports of consumer goods was more than offset by lower imports of machinery, reflecting the completion of major investment projects in the mining sector. The balance on the services account also improved, owing mainly to lower nonfactor payments. During the first half of 200 1, the current account performance continued to improve, due to continued strong growth in nontraditional exports. 13. The large improvement in the current account in 2000 was partly offset by smaller capital inflows, but the overall balance of payments still showed a surplus of over US$lOO million, more than double the amount in 1999. As a result, gross official reserves of the BoT amounted to US$974 million at end-2000, equivalent to almost five months of projected imports of goods and nonfactor services for 200 1. III. THE POVERTY REDUCTION AND GROWTH STRATEGY 14. Tanzania’s poverty reduction and growth strate !? y, as laid out in its full PRSP of October 2000, focuses on actions in four strategic areas. First, the government will continue to maintain sound macroeconomic policies and intensify the implementation of reforms aimed at bolstering market efficiency, notably in agriculture, and raising factor productivity. Second, government resources will be channeled toward programs and services in the key priority areas of education, health, water, agriculture, roads, judiciary, and HIV/AIDS-the share of spending on these areas will rise from 38 percent in 2000/01 to 48 percent in 2001/02 (Table 7). Third, the government will put increased emphasis on reforms aimed at promoting export-oriented expansion and diversification, with a view to enabling the poor to share increasingly in the benefits of globalization. Fourth, efforts will be made to raise steadily investment as a percent of GDP from 15 percent to approximately 3 Tanzania-Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (EBD/00/93; 1 l/13/00), pp. 14-15. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-8- 17 percent, including through initiatives focusing on bolstering private investment in the cultivation of traditional and new crops and in small and medium-sized enterprises4 15. The selected macroeconomic parameters presented in the government’s recent PRSP progress report are broadly consistent with the medium-term macroeconomic framework laid out in Table 2. The PRSP progress report also describes the process in which the expenditure side of the medium-term budget framework was derived from a medium-term expenditure framework (MTEF) exercise involving line ministries in late 2000 and a public expenditure review (PER) consultative meeting in May 200 1. By contrast, the revenue side of the budget framework in the PRSP progress report remains relatively vague, being limited to the expectation that the revenue-to-GDP ratio would increase slightly over the PRSP horizon. Meanwhile, international financial support, including assistance under the enhanced HIPC Initiative, is expected to increase noticeably from the average level of support in recent years. Dependence of government expenditure to one-third on foreign resources will thus continue for some time, but considerations of fiscal and debt sustainability will begin to require a reorientation toward a more determined revenue effort (Figure 4).5 While these issues have yet to be addressed in greater detail, the PRSP progress report nevertheless espouses an important principle of fiscal caution, namely that the government will first complete an inventory of its domestic debt and contingent liabilities to assess the future burden on the budget, before planning new domestic debt for budget financing. This principle is realized in the present PRGF-supported program. IV. THEPROGRAMFOR 2001/02 16. In support of the government’s poverty reduction and growth strategy, the program for 2001/02 aims at maintaining macroeconomic stability and improving the effectiveness of government interventions through greater budgetary transparency. Owing to good rains and positive developments in mining and tourism, real GDP is expected to grow by nearly 6 percent in 200 1, and conditions appear favorable for a continuation of high economic growth in 2002 (Table 2 and Figure 1). The 12-month rate of inflation is targeted to remain near 5 percent for the balance of this year and fall to 4 percent by end- 2002. Prudent financial policies, strong donor support, and important debt relief are expected to enable Tanzania to maintain a comfortable external position, with gross official reserves of some five months of imports of goods and nonfactor services. 4 With a view to enhancing the dialogue with the business community on improving the investment climate, the President of Tanzania inaugurated in April 2001 the Tanzania National Business Council bringing together twenty government and twenty business representatives; academic institutions and labor unions have also been invited to participate. 5 The issue of Tanzania’s heavy reliance on external assistance, including foreign borrowing, will be reviewed in the next debt sustainability analysis. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-9- A. Fiscal Policy and Budgetary Transparency 17. The budget for 2001/02 allows for a widening of the deficit to accommodate a considerable increase in expenditures in the priority areas of the PRSP, but it remains fully financed by grants and concessional loans. The budget deficit, excluding grants and foreign-financed development expenditure, is projected to increase to 3.1 percent of GDP, almost 2 percent of GDP higher than in 2000/O 1 (Table 5). Foreign program grants and loans and interim HIPC debt relief from the IMF, World Bank, and African Development Bank (AfDB) are projected to amount to 4.7 percent of GDP, thus fully financing the deficit, as well as the amortization of the foreign debt. The deposits that were built up in 2000/01 will be used to help settle the domestic arrears of some T Sh 40 billion (0.5 percent of GDP) that were recently confirmed through an audit, and whose settlement by end-December 2001 will constitute a performance criterion under the present program. 18. Revenue is projected at the same level as in 2000/01-12.2 percent of GDP-but this includes 0.7 percentage points in the form of VAT receipts stemming from the elimination of the VAT exemption for the government. Except for a possible net gain from reduced fraud, there will be an offsetting expenditure increase from this measure.6 Several other revenue measures, taken in the context of the ongoing tax reform program (Box l), wil entail revenue losses, such as a further reduction in import tariffs (0.3 percent of GDP) and the elimination of the withholding tax on goods and services for holders of a taxpayer identification number (TIN) (0.2 percent of GDP); in the case of the latter, the projected loss reflects the uncertainties with regard to the ability of the income tax to capture all foregone advance payments, despite the TIN. Modest revenue gains (totaling 0.1 percent of GDP) are expected from the adoption of a new gaming tax on casinos and bingo sales, an increase in excises on beer, cigarettes, and soft drinks, and an increase in the departure tax. 19. Various factors have contributed to the almost 2 percent of GDP increase in expenditure in the 2001/02 budget. The government wage bill is targeted to increase by over 15 percent in nominal terms (0.2 percent of GDP), mainly reflecting an increase in nominal wages as a step toward reducing the large wage differential with the private sector. Expenditure on goods, services, and transfers is expected to increase by 1.8 percent of GDP, owing to the elimination of the VAT exemption for government purchases (0.7 percent of GDP), a sizable transfer to the ailing electricity company (0.3 percent of GDP, see below), and a provision for the costs of restructuring and privatizing parastatal companies (0.2 percent of GDP). These special factors notwithstanding, the distribution of total 6 The authorities had intended to remove all remaining tax exemptions for the government, but lack of experience had prevented adequate preparation by the ministries of tax-inclusive budget estimates. Therefore, only the exemption from the VAT was removed at this time, and the elimination of the import and excise duty exemption postponed until the next budget. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-lO- expenditures is marked by a significant shift toward priority sectors: recurrent and development expenditures in these areas are programmed to increase by 0.7 and 1.8 percent of GDP, respectively (Table 7). L Box 1. Tanzania: Tax Reforms in 2001/02 4 number of measures taken in the context of the 2001/02 budget will contribute to a further rationalization of Ianzania’s tax regime (see paragraph 10 of the government’s letter of intent in Appendix I): . The withholding tax on goods and services-an advance payment of income tax-has been abolished for holders of the taxpayer identification number. . The advance payment of income tax for new businesses has been removed. This obligation was deemed to represent an obstacle to the development of small-scale businesses. . The stamp duty on proceeds from sales of agricultural products has been abolished, in order to facilitate trading of agricultural products. . Taxation of the mining sector-a major engine of growth-has been rationalized to increase revenue from the sector. The additional 15 percent capital allowance on unredeemed expenditure under the 1998 Mining Act and the deferral of payments of royalties, or refund of paid ones in the case of losses, have been repealed for new investors. . The exemption of government purchases from VAT has been removed. While this measure should have minimal impact on the overall budget position, it will help rationalize taxation and reduce the possibility for abuse. At the same time, new VAT exemptions have been introduced on the following goods: computers and related equipment; milk-packaging materials; ground transportation run by tour operators; hospital equipment and drugs; and capital goods for investment in education projects. . Import tariffs have been further rationalized and reduced, and split duties on imports have been removed, but new import surcharges were introduced for a number of sensitive products. . Excises on petroleum products have been increased to offset the impact of the elimination of the 5 percent import duty. . In the area of tax administration, a unified tax appeals mechanism and a large taxpayer unit are expected to start operations in September 200 1. . With a view to harmonizing taxation across local governments, the legal requirement for consultation with the Minister for Finance before amending the legislation on levies and fees of local governments will be enforced. 20. Since the beginning of the new fiscal year, all central government budgetary expenditure has been implemented through the Integrated Financial Management System (IFMS). The regulations under the new Public Finance Act, which became effective on July 1,200 1, are expected to strengthen expenditure control and enforcement of the procedures under the IFMS. The monthly and quarterly allocations under the cash-rationing system will be entered as commitment ceilings in the IFMS, thereby preventing the issuance of local purchase orders beyond the available resources and thus avoiding the emergence of arrears. The authorities stated that, because of capacity constraints, the ministries had not been able to submit monthly cash-flow projections with their budget submissions for Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- ll- 2001/02. Such submissions will now start in October 2001 and will thus help strengthen the cash management system. In order to increase transparency, the government will henceforth publish quarterly budget execution reports; publication of the first such report will constitute a structural performance criterion for end-November 200 1 .7 21. The authorities intend to address fiscal decentralization issues by focusing on increasing harmonization and transparency in the operations of local governments. In addition to enforcing better coordination with the Ministry of Finance with regard to local levies and fees, the government will require local governments to submit quarterly revenue and expenditure reports, which will also be made public. The authorities agreed with the staff on the need to regulate the financial relations between Zanzibar and the union government of Tanzania, including Zanzibar’s sizable arrears to the electricity company. 22. Greater transparency of budget formulation and execution at central and local levels can be expected to improve the targeting of government expenditures to the priority areas of the PRSP. In addition, the regular publication of budget execution reports starting this fiscal year should facilitate the participatory monitoring of the implementation of the poverty reduction strategy, thus contributing further to the effectiveness of the PRSP process. B. Monetary Policy and Financial Sector Issues 23. Monetary policy will continue to aim at keeping inflation in the low single digits. The authorities felt that the high growth in broad money during 2000/01 could be partly explained by a structural change in the demand for money, but they agreed with the staff that the high level of liquidity entailed dangers for a rekindling of inflation. This concern led them to mop up excess liquidity more aggressively toward the end of 2000/O 1. The tighter monetary policy stance is expected to reverse the recent fall in interest rates, restoring them to positive levels in real terms. Reserve money, which has become again the BoT’s main operating target, is expected to increase by about 10 percent during 200 l/02, with quarterly limits retained as benchmarks under the program (Table 8). Treasury bill auctions remain the BoT’s main monetary policy instrument, supplemented by repurchase operations with commercial banks. The monetary program allows for significant growth in credit to the private sector (25 percent), as changes in the provisions of the Land Act planned for later this year are expected to facilitate the use of real estate as collateral for bank lending. 24. Whereas the authorities are concerned about the continuing wide spread between deposit and lending rates, they are of the view that this should gradually narrow as competition and efficiency in the banking system increase and the legal environment for 7 In addition to the quarterly published reports, the IFMS will be used to generate monthly statements of revenues and expenditures, tracing the latter through the different stages of the expenditure process. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12- lending improves. To this effect, the BoT will continue to encourage the banks to establish a credit information bureau and work with the government on changing the provisions under the Land Act. The BoT also intends to strengthen bank supervision by increasing staff and providing training. Finally, the BoT will issue new regulations to tighten corporate governance standards of financial institutions and regulate micro-finance institutions to enable them to play a constructive role in the financial sector. C. Other Structural Reforms, Governance Issues, and Safeguards Assessment * 25. Over the coming months, the authorities intend to address the financial and manage- ment problems of the Tanzania Electric Supply Company (TANESCO). TANESCO’s board was recently reconstituted, and a private company is being selected to strengthen its management from November 200 1 onward. The international arbitration panel that reviewed the dispute between TANESCO and Independent Power Tanzania Limited (IPTL) ruled in favor of TANESCO, resulting in lower capacity payments from TANESCO to IPTL. Such payments will be derived from a notional cost of the IPTL plant of US$l23 million, instead of the figure of US$l50 million claimed by IPTL. Nevertheless, in addition to the establishment of a T Sh 11 billion liquidity facility, TANESCO will have to start making capacity payments of US$2.8 million per month from the date the plant becomes operational, which is expected to be in October 200 1. TANESCO will be allowed to raise electricity tariffs in response, but the cost of electricity is already high in Tanzania, particularly for industrial users. In this situation, and given that TANESCO expects to make only limited use of IPTL’s output for some years to come (but will need to make the capacity payments and fund the liquidity facility), the government has decided on a transfer of T Sh 26 billion to TANESCO in 2001/02, while measures are being taken to improve its efficiency. 26. The long-planned purchase by Tanzania of a new air traffic control system was recently put on hold pending consultations between the concerned parties on Tanzania’s needs in this area and on the issue of fair price. As the case may arise, the Fund staff stands ready to review the concessionality of the financing package in the light of Tanzania’s commitment under the program to refrain from contracting or guaranteeing any external debt on nonconcessional terms. To recall, the financing package envisaged in September 1999 in a total amount of about US$40 million was deemed to have been concessional under the terms of this commitment. 8 A summary of structural reforms and relevant program conditionality is contained in Box 2. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13 - Box 2. Tanzania: Structural Conditionality Coverage of structural conditionality in the current program The structural performance criteria and benchmarks proposed in the context of the third review under the current PRGF arrangement pertain to the core areas of the Fund and address needs of good economic governance and macroeconomic stability (see Table 2 of the letter of intent in Attachment I). They relate to improving . public finances by (i) establishing an inventory ofpublic sector domestic debt as of end-June 2001; (ii) clearing all audited arrears outstanding at end-June 2000 (performance criterion); and (iii) establishing a strategy and timetable for harmonizing local government taxes and levies; . financial transparency and good governance by (i) publishing the amounts and timing of budget transfers to local governments; (ii) requiring local governments to submit quarterly reports of their revenue by source, and expenditure by sector; and (iii) publishing quarterly budget execution reports for the central government starting with the first quarter of 2001102 (performance criterion); . financial sector development by establishing conditions for the use of land as collateral for bank loans; and . statistics by submitting a new statistics law to parliament. Status of structural conditionality under the PRGF-supported program The structural performance criteria and benchmarks set out in the second review (see EBS101126; 2/27/01) were mainly in the areas of public expenditure management and trade liberalization (Table 4). One performance criterion, relating to an audit of budgetary arrears, was not observed on time, but the audit has since been completed. The start-up of a large- taxpayer unit suffered a short delay, and the elimination of tax exemptions for the government will occur in two stages: the exemption from VAT has been lifted, and that from customs and excise duties will follow in next year’s budget. Owing to delays in rolling out the computerized IFMS to all ministries and regions, the proposal under the original PRGF-supported program (see EBS/00/44; 3110100) to begin producing comprehensive monthly “flash” commitment and expenditure reports during 2000101was postponed until 2001/02. Structural areas covered by World Bank lending and conditionality The current programmatic structural adjustment credit (PSAC I), approved in June 2000, consists of one tranche disbursed on effectiveness and four floating tranches, linked in turn to . short-term measures (originally expected to have been completed shortly after effectiveness), including (i) preparing a medium-term expenditure framework (MTEF) for 2000/01-2002103; (ii) issuing regulations to put into effect the new Land Act; (iii) adopting a public enterprise retrenchment policy; and (iv) taking a few specific public enterprise reform measures; . governance-related measures, including (i) using only IFMS as the system for public expenditure management; (ii) carrying out corruption diagnostic surveys in seven named ministries and public administrations; and . (“3 m approving new procurement law and regulations; measures to improve the business environment, including (i) restructuring and restaffing the Tanzania Investment Center (TIC); (“) pp n a roving the commercial court project plan; (iii) submitting new companies legislation to parliament; and (iv) relaxing restrictions on foreign portfolio investment in equity instruments with appropriate safeguards; and . regulatory improvements and privatization, including (i) establishing procompetitive regulatory frameworks in the telecommunications, broadcasting, water, electricity, ports/marine, railways, and aviation sectors; (ii) issuing technical regulations for a liberalized petroleum sector; (iii) approving a strategy for reorganizing TANESCO and restructuring the electricity sector; and (iv) developing and approving options for divesting the remaining cashew nut processing plants, National Ranching Corporation (NARCO) ranches, and National Food Corporation (NAFCO) wheat, rice, and maize farms. Other relevant structural conditions not included in the current program comprise the following: . establishment of a credit information bureau, which is an important aspect of the ongoing financial sector reforms and is expected to be financed by the World Bank; . civil service reform, which the authorities intend to advance through a new public service bill (presentation to parliament expected for October 2001); and . rationalization of the external tariff, where the authorities have recently moved to reduce the number of tariff bands and intend to reduce the top tariff rate in the budget for 2002103. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14- 27. In close cooperation with donors, the government is making progress in its plans to fight corruption and improve governance. The new laws governing public finance and public procurement are expected to improve financial control, and implementation of the ministerial anticorruption plans has started, with a first progress report expected in the near future. With the budget for 2001/02, the government strengthened the mandate of the prevention of corruption bureau, and established a new coordinating unit for good governance. A new public service bill to facilitate performance monitoring and enhance accountability in the civil service is expected to be submitted to parliament in October 2001. As noted, the authorities will henceforth publish quarterly reports on the execution of the government budget and require local governments to submit quarterly revenue and expenditure reports. 28. To address continuing problems in the quality and coverage of the macroeconomic and sociodemographic database, the strengthening of statistics is treated in the budget as a priority item. The preparation of a core set of macroeconomic statistics has now been adequately funded in the budget, as has the preparation of the 2002 population census. The government recently subscribed to the Fund’s General Data Dissemination System (GDDS). 29. Under its current arrangement with the Fund, Tanzania is subject to the transitional procedures of the Fund’s safeguards assessment policy and is required to demonstrate that the BoT publishes annual financial statements that are independently audited in accordance with internationally accepted standards. The BoT cooperated fully in providing Fund staff with the documentation required for this safeguards assessment. The staff found that the BoT’s annual financial statements are audited by an external accounting firm in accordance with Tanzanian auditing standards. While the latter are generally consistent with international auditing standards, the standards for audit report preparation differ. In addition, the published report does not include a complete set of explanatory notes. The staff also found that the same external auditor had been the BoT’s auditor since 1973. For these reasons, the staff has recommended that (i) the BoT’s audit for 2000/O 1 be undertaken in accordance with the International Standards on Auditing; (ii) the BoT rotate its external audit firm periodically; and (iii) the financial statements published in the BoT’s annual report include a complete set of explanatory notes. The BoT saw no problem in meeting recommendations (i) and (iii), starting with their next financial statement, but pointed to a capacity constraint in the Tanzanian auditing profession as limiting the BoT’s ability to put into effect its already existing policy of rotating external auditors. 30. During discussions in Zanzibar, the key concern expressed by officials of the government of Zanzibar was about the poor revenue performance following recent measures to curb tax evasion on imports. These measures had led to a sharp drop in imports channeled through Zanzibar. The officials in Zanzibar expressed the view that the so-called Zanzibar route for tax evasion had been replaced by other routes on the mainland. In subsequent discussions with officials of the union government of Tanzania, the staff recommended that work be undertaken to establish whether in fact tax evaders had simply moved their business from Zanzibar to the mainland. In any case, since curbing tax evasion in general, be it in Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 15- Zanzibar or elsewhere in the country, was to the benefit of the union as a whole, the staff urged the authorities to develop a suitable revenue-sharing mechanism to enable Zanzibar to maintain enforcement of the measures against tax evasion. D. External Sector Issues and Program Financing 31. Tanzania’s external current account deficit (excluding official transfers) is expected to increase to just under 10 percent of GDP in 2001 from 9 percent in 2000 (Table 9). Although traditional exports are expected to grow very little, owing to low international prices for coffee and cashew nuts, overall exports are projected to increase by 13 percent, attributable largely to higher gold exports. Following the start-up of new gold mines, gold exports increased to US$107 million in the first six months of 2001 compared to US$45 million in the same period in 2000. Imports are projected to grow by about 11.6 percent because of recent tariff reductions and other structural factors.’ Higher imports will also be reflected in higher transport costs and an increase in the deficit on the services account. Meanwhile, a decline in foreign direct investment in the mining sector is expected to be offset by flows into other sectors, especially the energy (development of the Songo- Songo gas field) and the banking sector.” 32. The authorities took further steps in tariff reform in the budget for 2001/02. The number of nonzero tariff bands was reduced from four to three,” lowering the average tariff from 16.6 percent to 14.3 percent, and the trade-weighted tariff from 11.3 percent to 9.5 per- cent. In addition, in the context of regional integration, all tariffs on imports from member countries of the East African Community (EAC) were reduced by 80 percent in the 2001/02 9 In early 2001, the government introduced biocoding for petroleum products, which is likely to increase substantially recorded petroleum imports. For the first six months of 2001, these imports were 30 percent higher than in the same period in 2000. lo Regarding the Songo-Songo Gas Development and Power Generation Project, it was determined that the liquidity facility mechanism envisaged under the original agreement could potentially lead to a multiple currency practice. To avoid recourse to the liquidity facility, the authorities have undertaken to the Fund that payments by TANESCO to Songas Limited will be made in U.S. dollars. ” Prior to the budget for 2001/02, the four tariff rates were 5, 10, 20, and 25 percent. In the budget, the 5 percent rate was eliminated, and the 20 percent rate was reduced to 15 percent. As the top import duty rate remained at 25 percent, the authorities agreed with the staff that reducing only the rates for intermediate goods would increase effective protection rates and thus run counter to the government’s longer-term policy of promoting the efficiency of the economy by reducing protection. Nevertheless, they felt that at this point the revenue loss from a simultaneous reduction in the top rate would be unacceptably high, but intend to reduce the top rate in the context of next year’s budget. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 16- budget, and, as a first step, effective November 2001, a zero tariff rate will be applied to about 11 percent of the imports from member countries of the Southern African Development Community (SADC). Although all minimum dutiable values (except for sugar) and all split import duty rates were eliminated, the authorities imposed suspended duties ranging from 10 percent to 50 percent on 12 categories of imports to counter perceived dumping of these goods. l2 In addition, they established registration and licensing require- ments for sugar imports in the first half of 200 1. The staff questioned the motivation of these measures and raised concerns regarding the lack of transparency and predictability of tariff changes and the poverty impact of likely price increases, including for some basic consumption items. The staff asked the authorities to keep the justification for these measures under close review and to remove them as soon as possible. 33. The authorities intend to maintain a flexible exchange rate system, despite a recent phase (August 1999-end-2000) during which the U.S. dollar rate had remained virtually stable. During this period, Tanzania experienced upward pressure on its exchange rate stemming from a stronger-than-expected balance of payments. The BoT intervened to counter this pressure, without however preventing an appreciation in both nominal and real effective terms (Figure 3). The BoT ceased this unsterilized intervention in early 2001 when it tightened its monetary policy. The authorities agreed with the staff that Tanzania should continue to adhere to a flexible exchange rate system. As the conduit for large foreign aid flows, the BoT is necessarily an important actor in the foreign exchange market. It would therefore be desirable for the BoT to develop an intervention policy aimed mainly at smoothing short-term exchange rate fluctuations and to gradually withdraw from smoothing seasonal variations. This might encourage commercial banks to manage themselves more effectively seasonal swings in foreign exchange flows without producing seasonal swings in the exchange rate. 34. The external financing requirements of about USN.3 billion in each of 2001 and 2002 are expected to be fully met by a mix of grants, concessional loans, and debt relief (Table 10). To secure necessary new commitments of donor assistance, the World Bank staff has organized a Consultative Group meeting to be held in Dar es Salaam during September 7-l 1,200l. Debt relief is expected to increase in the context of the forthcoming completion point under the enhanced HIPC Initiative. Gross official reserves are targeted to remain near five months of import cover during 2001/02. 35. Tanzania is current on its external debt obligations, while seeking to conclude the remaining bilateral rescheduling agreements under the April 2000 Paris Club agreement on a flow rescheduling on Cologne terms. Several bilateral creditors have announced full or partial forgiveness of the remaining debt at the forthcoming completion l2 The list includes dairy products, tea, sugar, tobacco products, cement, paints and varnishes, matches, tires, selected textiles, packing sacks and bags, selected steel products, and dry cells and batteries. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17- point under the enhanced HIPC Initiative. In early 2001, the AfDB followed the IMF and the World Bank in approving debt relief under the enhanced HIPC Initiative of US$190.7 million for the period 2000-l 7, of which US$l3.1 million for 2000-O 1. Tanzania is continuing to seek the participation of non-Paris Club and commercial creditors in the HIPC Initiative. So far, among non-Paris Club creditors, China has signed an agreement, and Egypt and Kuwait have indicated their intention to participate in the Initiative. V. MEDIUM-TERMBALANCEOFPAYMENTSOUTLOOK 36. The medium-term balance of payments projections indicate that the current account deficit (excluding grants) will remain near the equivalent of 10 percent of GDP (Table 9). Exports are projected to increase at an average annual rate of 7.5 percent, based on continuing strong growth in gold exports in line with the expected rise in production capacity, as well as a recovery in the price and volume of traditional exports as reforms in the agricultural sector take effect. The growth of imports is projected to converge to real GDP growth over the medium term. The deficit in the services account is projected to decline gradually as a share of GDP, owing to the expected good performance of the tourism sector. 37. The current account deficit and the amortization obligations (before debt relief) indi- cate continuing substantial financing requirements (Table 10). Official foreign assistance is expected to stay roughly unchanged at slightly above US$l billion per year in nominal terms during 2001-05. In addition, Tanzania is expected to receive debt relief under the enhanced HIPC Initiative of about US$l30 million per year throughout the period. More than half of this debt relief will be provided by the World Bank (over US$40 million per year), the IMF (close to US$20 million), and the AfDB (about US$lO million). Tanzania’s financing needs are expected to be fully met during the period 2001-05. 38. The structural reforms and recent real depreciation have at least partly offset the adverse effects on competitiveness stemming from the real appreciation of the Tanzania shilling during 1995-97. The volume of traditional exports has been growing since 2000 after a decline of about 30 percent between 1996 and 1999; the value of manufactured exports has also rebounded. In order to further boost the export sector, and particularly manufactured exports, the authorities need to focus on policies that enhance productivity and reduce costs of doing business. The pursuit of such policies should help maintain external competi- tiveness, even if projected large aid inflows and strong gold exports continue to put upward pressure on the real exchange rate. 39. Tanzania’s international reserve position is projected to remain strong. In addition, its capacity to service its foreign debt has improved considerably as a result of the HIPC Initiative and is expected to be further strengthened by the voluntary bilateral debt cancellations expected in connection with the forthcoming completion point under the HIPC Initiative. These factors suggest that Tanzania will have the capacity to service its repayment obligations to the Fund. The main risks for the medium term derive from Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 18- Tanzania’s heavy dependence on foreign assistance and vulnerability to weather-related agriculture problems; large and persistent shocks in either of these areas could negatively affect the external outlook. VI. STAFF APPRAISAL 40. The Tanzanian authorities are to be commended for the continued pursuit of sound macroeconomic and structural policies. The international donor community has responded with a steady flow of highly concessional assistance and important debt relief. The results in terms of economic growth (5-6 percent a year), inflation (low single digits), and buildup of reserves (to five months of import cover) are convincing and should, if sustained, help Tanzania achieve the poverty reduction outcomes envisaged in the PRSP. 41. Implementation of the PRGF-supported program since the last review has on the whole been strong. A delay in completing the audit of arrears has by now been made up. The authorities reaffirmed their intention to settle the audited arrears by end-2001, and the program contains a performance criterion in this regard. 42. The new Integrated Financial Management System (IFMS) is beginning to pay off, even while efforts to broaden its coverage and train its operators-appropriately-are continuing. The ability to trace government expenditures from commitment to payment in a timely manner should facilitate the planned transition from cash-based expenditure management to one focused on commitment control. The staff welcomes the authorities’ plai to publish quarterly budget execution reports drawn from the IFMS starting in November 200 1. These reports should help answer more comprehensively and transparently questions regarding the allocation of budgetary resources-information that will no doubt feed back into better targeting and implementation of priority sector programs. Meanwhile, the staff recognizes that the presently available information already suggests a significant shift in recurrent expenditure toward the priority sectors of the PRSP. 43. The staff welcomes the government’s program of fiscal decentralization. The near- term plan of increasing public information on local government revenues and expenditures is appropriate and should help in preparing for a later harmonization of local government taxes and switch to a common tiscal year. 44. The government’s recent trade policy record is mixed: on the one hand, it gave in to protectionist pressures by imposing new import surcharges on selected products, thus hampering the transparency and predictability of the tariff system. On the other hand, it lowered one tariff band and eliminated another one altogether, thus reducing the number of nonzero bands to only three. The staff welcomes the latter action and understands the authorities’ cautious approach-motivated by revenue considerations-to lowering the top tariff rate of currently 25 percent. The authorities’ plan to reduce that rate in next year’s budget is all the more welcome. 45. The authorities have adopted a tighter monetary policy stance in recent months- appropriately in the staffs view, given the steep decline in interest rates since mid-2000, Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 19- pressure on the exchange rate in early 200 1, and steady expansion in the commercial banks’ foreign currency deposit and lending operations with residents. Recognizing the authorities’ initial hesitation, the staff welcomes their concurrence to the addition of a reserve money target as a benchmark to the program monitoring system. In seeking to meet this target, the authorities should be prepared to accept a further increase in market interest rates. Limiting foreign exchange intervention to smoothing short-term fluctuations in the exchange rate should also help. In this context, the staff welcomes the authorities’ reassurance that they wish to maintain a flexible exchange rate system. 46. The long-standing financial and management problems of the electricity supply company TANESCO are moving closer to a resolution following the reconstitution of its board, the contracting out of its management, and a relatively favorable international arbitration ruling determining future payments to a private power generator. It will be important for the new TANESCO to exercise authority over electricity tariffs and to enjoy government support in its efforts to collect unpaid electricity bills, including from public sector entities. 47. The authorities are to be commended for several initiatives to improve the economic and social database in Tanzania, including making statistics a priority item in the budget and participating in the GDDS. It is hoped that these initiatives will lead to tangible improvements especially in the areas of national accounts, balance of payments, and government finance statistics, where poor statistics still hamper an accurate and timely analysis of economic and financial developments. 48. The imminent publication of a progress report on the implementation of the national anticorruption strategy will constitute a significant step in the promotion of good governance-all the more important, as Tanzania still ranks low in international public perception in this regard. 49. Based on the authorities’ continued record of good program implementation, the staff expects that the authorities will follow through as envisaged under the proposed program. The staff recommends that the Executive Board grant a waiver for the nonobservance of one structural performance criterion and complete the third review under the current PRGF arrangement. It is proposed that the next Article IV consultation be held on the standard 12-month cycle. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-20 - VII. PROPOSED DECISION 1. Tanzania has consulted with the Fund in accordance with paragraph 2(ee) of the three-year arrangement for Tanzania under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF) (EBS/00/44, Supplement 1,4/6/00) and paragraph 33 of the letter dated February 24, 2001 from the Minister of Finance of Tanzania, in order to review program implementation and reach understandings regarding the phasing and conditions for disbursements during the remainder of the second year of the arrangement. 2. The letter dated August 3 1, 200 1 from the Minister of Finance of Tanzania, together with its Technical Memorandum of Understanding (the “TMU”), shall be attached to the three-year PRGF arrangement for Tanzania, and the letters dated March 9, 2000, July 18, 2000 and February 24, 2001 from the Minister of Finance of Tanzania, together with their respective Technical Memoranda of Understanding, shall be read as supplemented and modified by the letter dated August 3 1, 200 1 from the Minister of Finance of Tanzania, together with its TMU. 3. Accordingly, the following new provisions shall be added to the three-year PRGF arrangement for Tanzania: a. Paragraph l(cc) shall be amended as follows: “(iii) the sixth disbursement under the arrangement, in an amount equivalent to SDR 20 million, will be available on July 3 1,2002 at the request of Tanzania and subject to paragraph 2 below; and” Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2l- b. Paragraph 2(a) shall be amended to read as follows: “Tanzania shall not request the disbursements referred to in paragraph l(cc) above, (4 If the Managing Director of the Trustee finds that with respect to the fourth disbursement the data as of end-March 2001, with respect to the fifth disbursement the data as of end-September 2001, and with respect to the sixth disbursement the data as of end-March 2002 indicate that 0) the ceiling on the net domestic assets of the Bank of Tanzania, or (ii) the ceiling on the net domestic financing of the government of Tanzania, or (iii) the floor on the net international reserves of the Bank of Tanzania, or (iv) the limit on contracting or guaranteeing of external debt on nonconcessional terms, as set out, with respect to the fourth disbursement, in Table 1 of the letter dated February 24, 200 1, and with respect to the fifth and the sixth disbursements, in Table 1 of the letter dated August 3 1,2001, and as further specified in the TMU attached to the letter dated August 3 1,2001, were not observed, or”; Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 22 - C. a new paragraph ~(CCC) shall be added to read as follows: “(ccc) If with respect to the fifth disbursement referred to in paragraph l(cc)(ii) above, the Managing Director of the Trustee finds that Tanzania has not carried out its intentions with regard to (9 clearing all audited arrears outstanding as at end-June 2000 by end-December 200 1; and (ii) starting publishing by end-November 200 1 quarterly budget execution reports drawn from IFMS starting with a report for the first quarter of 2001/02, as set out in Table 2 of the letter dated August 3 1,200 1.” d. Paragraph 2(ee) should be amended to read as follows: “(ee) Until the Trustee has determined that the third, fourth and fifth reviews referred to in paragraph 1 of the letter dated February 24,200 1 and paragraph 2 1 of the letter dated August 3 1,200 1, respectively, have been completed.” 4. The Fund decides that: (4 the third review contemplated in paragraph 2(ee) of the three-year PRGF arrangement for Tanzania is completed; and Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 23 - @I Tanzania may request the disbursement of the fourth loan referred to in paragraph 1 (cc)(i) of the three-year PRGF arrangement for Tanzania, notwithstanding the non-observance of the end-March 2001 structural performance criterion on the completion of the verification and audit of all budgetary arrears as at June 30, 2000 by an external auditor, specified in paragraph 2(cc)(ii) of the arrangement, on the condition that the information provided by Tanzania on the performance under this criterion is accurate. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 24 - Figure 1. Tanzania: GDP, Savings, and Investment, 1998-2003 Real GDP (Annual percent change) 12 , *,/ y. ’ / ‘. 8’ / . ,I Services 0 1 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 10 5 0 -5 Government Saving and Investment Private Saving and Investment (In percent of GDP) (In percent of GDP) 1. 2. , Investment * . -. \ __---- , L. 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 Total Saving and Investment (In percent of GDP) 14 , I National saving 8 I I I 8 - 6 - 4 - 2 - 0 1 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 20 18 16 14 12 IO 8 5 15- J<F - _ 10 - Ia a’ Saving #’ a‘ I’ 0 5 - -5 05 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 20 15 10 5 0 Sources: Tanzanian authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 25 - 25 20 1.5 10 5 0 25 20 15 10 5 0 Figure 2. Tanzania: Prices and Interest Rates, January 1997 - July 2001 Consumer Price Index (Twelve-month change in percent) 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 Interest Rates (In percent) 2-year treasury bonds ‘.\ a’ . I Savings deposits 1 25 20 15 10 5 0 25 20 15 10 5 0 1997 1998 Source: Tanzanian authorities. 1999 2000 2001 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 26 - Figure 3. Tanzania: Exchange Rates, January 1997-June 2001 ( 1990=100; foreign currency per Tanzania shilling) 170 170 160 Effective Exchange Rates - - 160 150 - - 150 140 - - 140 130 - - 130 120 - - 120 110 - - 110 100 - - 100 90 - - 90 80 - - 80 70 - - 70 60 - - 60 50 - - Nominal 50 c---p-c-----~ 40 - -----\ I-------\ L-e-- ---__ - 40 .-------- 2-- 30 - - 30 20 - - 20 IO - - 10 0 ~(~,~~~1111'1111111~,,~'~,,,~,,,,~,'~,~,~,~~~~~"""' 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 O 50 45 40 25 20 Bilateral Nominal Exchange Rates 50 1111111111111111111~~~,~1,~~,~~~’~”’~”” 1997 1998 1999 2000 2dOl' 2o Sources: Tanzanian authorities; and IMF, Information Notice System. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 27 - 25 Revenue and Expenditure 20 Expenditure 15 IO 5 Figure 4. Tanzania: Central Government Finances, 1997/98-2002103 (In percent of GDP) l/ 2s 20 20 15 15 10 10 5 5 0 -5 0 1997198 9X/99 99100 00/o I 01/02 02103 20 I5 Expenditure by Source of Funding Tota Net external financing Revenue and net domestic financing 1997198 98199 99/00 00/o I 01/02 02/03 20 20 15 I5 IO 10 5 5 0 0 Main Components of Revenue Total revenue and grants Grants Taxes on imports Taxes on goods and services Income taxes Other tax and nontax revenue 1997198 98199 99100 OO/Ol 01/02 02/03 Main Components of Expenditure Other current expenditure Interest Wages and salaries 1997198 9X/99 99/00 00/o I 01102 02/03 LU 15 IO 5 0 20 15 IO 5 0 Sources: Tanzanian authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections. li Fiscal years run from July to June; expenditure data excluding statistical discrepancy and recapitalization expenditure. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-28 Table I. Tanzania: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 1998-2002 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 Frog. Est. National mom and prices h’ominal GDP (billions of Tanzania shillings) Real GDP growth Real GDP per cap”a Consumer prices (permd average) Consumer prices (end of permd) External sector Export, f.o.b (m U.S. dollars) Imports, c.1.f. (I” U.S. dollars) Export volume Import volume Terms of trade Nominal effectwe exchange rate (end of period) Real effectwe exchange rate (depreciation -) Public finance I/ Revenue (excluding grants) Total expenditure Current expenditure Development expenditure and “et lending Money and credit Broad money Net foreign assets Net domestic assets Credit to government 21 Credit to “ongovernment sector Velocity of money (GDPfM3; average) Treasury ‘ml1 interest rate (in percent; end of period) 31 Pubhc finance Revenue (excluding grants) Total grants Expenditure Overall balance (includmg grants: checks cleared) DomestIc financing 41 Savings and investment Resource gap Investment Government Nongovrmment Gross domestIc savings Government Nongovernment External sector, public debt, and debt servjce Current account balance (excluding grants) Current account balance (including grants) External debt service due (before debt rehef; in percent of exports of goods and “onfactor services) Balance of payments current account balance (excluding grants; deficit -) Si Overall balance of payments (deficit -) 5/ Gross official reserves 5/ In months of imports of goods and nonfactor serwces 51 5,572 4.0 1.2 12.8 11.3 58X.4 -1,569.0 -3.4 11.3 -1.1 -10.1 -0.7 11.4 12.0 16.2 20.3 10.3 14.1 17.5 29.9 10.7 9.0 24.0 5.1 16.9 21.7 21.2 22.1 25.3 4.3 22.4 49.0 -12.9 -20.5 19.5 10.7 10.8 19.2 5.6 11.8 35.7 5.1 11.8 11.5 4.0 15.0 -0.9 -0.2 -14.4 16.2 2.9 13.3 1.8 0.9 0.9 -13.4 -5.1 39.1 -1,322.6 -1.060.7 -1,377.6 -826.9 -971.9 -1,062.7 -205.5 43.4 -53.0 111.7 -8.0 -73.1 599.0 775.6 853.7 914.4 1,094.3 1,171.2 3.2 4.4 4.2 4.9 5.1 5.1 (Annual percentage change, unless otherwise speuiied) 6,433 7,246 7,227 4.7 5.2 4.9 1.9 2.3 2.2 79 5.6 5.9 7.0 5.0 5.5 8,035 8,895 5.9 6.2 3.0 3.3 5.1 4.4 4.x 4.0 562.7 596.2 663.1 -1,572.7 1.747.9 -1,534.4 -7.7 8.8 21.3 17 3.5 2.1 7.7 -2.2 -2.5 -10.5 9.3 -5.6 12.4 751.0 804.7 1.705.3 .1,820.5 13.5 4.4 11.8 6.6 0.0 2.9 18.6 12.6 14.8 35.6 8.6 49.6 6.6 4.0 -16.2 14.0 2.6 -13.6 25.5 7.1 9.4 5.7 5.2 5.5 15.5 6.9 (I” percent of GDP, unless othenvise Indicated) 13.0 10.7 28.1 6.5 -11.0 20.3 -39.3 14.7 24.1 24.6 5.4 5.3 I I.3 11.7 12.2 12.2 12.5 4.5 5.6 3.8 5.4 5.0 17.1 16.9 16.7 18.8 17.8 -3.3 0.4 -1.2 -1.2 -0.4 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.4 0.0 -12.1 -9.1 -8.5 15.5 16.0 17.1 3.0 4.5 3.1 12.5 11.5 14.7 3.4 6.3 9.2 0.6 0.0 2.8 9.2 -9.8 -10.0 18.2 18.7 3.5 3.6 14.7 15.1 x.4 8.7 -0.6 -1.5 9.0 10.2 -12.1 -15.9 -9.1 -3.7 -6.9 -0.7 34.2 25.3 30.2 -9.8 -10.0 -2.6 -3.4 32.2 26.8 (In millions of U.S dollars, unless otherwise indicated) Sources: Tanzania” authorltxs: and Fund staff estimates and projections. I/ Fiscal years (July-June), beginmng 1” the year indicated in the column header. 21 Including new debt issued for the recapitahzation of banks. 31 WeIghted-average yield of 91-, 1X2-, and 364-day treasury bills. 41 Excludmg new debt issued to recapitahze government-owned banks. 51 In mllions ofU.S. dollars. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 29 - Table 2. Tanzania: National Accounts, 1998-2003 Weights (1992) 1998 1999 2000 Est. 200 I 2002 Projections 2003 Overall GDP Nominal (in billions of Tanzania shillings) Real (percentage change) Deflator (percentage change) 5,571.6 4.0 14.1 (In units as indicated) 6,432.g 7,225.7 4.7 4.9 Il.5 6.9 8,034.S X,895.0 5.9 6.2 5.1 4.4 (Annual percentage change in real terms, unless otherwise speutied) Sectoral components of GDP Agriculture Industry Minmg Manufacturing Electriuty and water ConstNctlon SUVICES Ofwhich Trade, hotels, and restaurants Transport and commumcatlons Financial and business services Pubhc administration and other services Demand components of GDP Consumption Government I/ Other sectors Investment 1.4 Government I/ 22.0 Other sectors -3.7 Foreign balance 2/ Exports Imports National saving and investment Government Saving Ofwhich : own savings 31 Investment Bahce Nongovernment sectors Saving Investment B&“Ce All sectors Saving Ofwhich : domestic saving Investment Foreign savings (-) 41 42.4 1.8 15.1 10.8 1.0 27.4 7.6 8.0 1.4 5.5 5.0 9.9 40.2 3.5 14.8 4.7 4.8 6.2 1.1 2.3 8.6 2.7 13.7 13.9 13.6 90.2 9.8 40.9 3.7 2.7 1.2 1.6 2.5 2.7 0.9 0.6 0.0 -0.6 -1.5 -1.7 2.9 3.0 3.1 3.5 3.6 3.4 0.8 -0.3 -1.9 -2.0 -1.1 -0.7 7.4 9.1 15.8 13.8 12.5 12.0 13.3 12.5 14.7 14.7 15.1 15.7 -5.9 -3.4 1.2 -0.9 -2.6 -3.8 11.1 11.8 17.0 15.4 15.0 14.7 1.8 3.4 9.2 8.4 8.7 9.2 16.2 15.5 17.7 18.2 18.7 19.2 -5.1 -3.8 -0.7 -2.8 -3.7 -4.5 4.2 3.2 5.7 7.0 9.1 13.9 3.6 4.8 3.9 5.0 8.7 8.4 1.8 6.4 6.0 6.5 5.8 6.1 5.1 19.8 3.5 3.6 3.8 0.3 -1.5 5.0 5.1 -0.8 -1.5 7.5 -1.6 17.2 -1.5 4.4 -0.3 -19.9 18.6 18.4 8.7 0.1 (In percent of GDP) 4.6 5.1 4.2 9.6 8.4 10.6 20.0 15.0 18.0 6.0 4.8 7.5 5.3 5.3 7.0 10.9 11.1 11.3 6.3 7.0 7.5 7.0 9.0 9.0 7.0 7.0 7.5 14.8 13.7 27.7 4.0 3.0 3.0 10.6 7.3 7.2 5.1 4.4 3.9 11.9 7.9 7.9 7.7 6.9 6.5 5.1 4.4 3.9 8.6 7.8 7.3 42.1 12.9 10.8 -7.2 3.7 4.0 11.6 8.2 7.4 9,825.g 6.4 3.9 Sources: Tanzanian authonties; and Fund staff estimates and proJectlo”s. l/Average of two fiscal years; projections for the government sector are derwed from the government budget. 21 Figures represent the contribution of the change m the foreign balance to growth. 31 Domestic saving plus net factor income from abroad. 41 External current account, including grants (interest payments on a cash basis). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 30 - Table 3. Tanzania: Financial Performance Criteria and Benchmarks Under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility Arrangement, December 2000-June 2001 (In billions of Tanzania shillings, unless otherwise indicated) 2000 Act. 2001 Mar. June Prog. Act. Prog. Act. Performance criteria l! Net domestic assets of the Bank of Tanzania 2131 Net domestic financing of the government of Tanzania 21314151 Net international reserves of the Bank of Tanzania 3/ 61 Accumulation of external payments arrears 71 Contracting or guaranteeing of external debt on nonconcessional terms 81 Benchmarks Central government recurrent revenue 5191 Increase in extrabudgetary expenditure 21 101 Accumulation of budgetary arrears 51 1 li 155.1 134.9 89.5 193.9 70.0 -15.8 9.2 -18.6 20.7 -2.4 553.1 527.3 585.3 462.1 581.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 462.1 681.0 686.3 897.3 929.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 12.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 li Performance criteria for March 2001; benchmarks for June 2001. 2/ Ceiling. 31 The benchmarks for June 2001 were adjusted for a shortfall in net foreign financing as described in the technical memorandum of understanding. The projected amount of net foreign financing, cumulative from July 2000 to June 2001, was US$l60.4 million; the actual amount was US$137.3 million, The original target of T Sh 173.2 billion for net domestic assets, T Sh 0.0 billion for net domestic financing, and US$485.6 million for net international reserves was adjusted accordingly. 4/Defined as net domestic financing of the budget by the banking system and net sales of government debt to the nonbank public. Excludes privatization proceeds and the recapitalization by issuing government debt of government-owned banks and parastatal companies. 51 Cumulative from July 2000. 61 Floor, in millions of U.S. dollars. 71 Continuous performance criterion. Excludes arrears on external debt-service payments pending the conclusion of debt-rescheduling agreements. 81 The definition of external debt is provided in the technical memorandum of understanding. g/Floor, defined to exclude dividend payments from the Bank of Tanzania in excess of the programmed amount of T Sh 4.5billion in September 2000, and privatization proceeds. 101 Defined as expenditure financed outside the regular budgetary accounts. 1 li Defined as arrears accumulated during the fiscal year, including arrears on wages, to suppliers, and on domestic interest and tax refunds. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3l- Table 4. Tanzania: Structural Performance Criteria and Benchmarks Under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility Arrangement, March-July 200 1 Sector Measure Timing Status Fiscal Complete the verification and auditing of all budgetary End-March arrears by an external auditor ’ 2001 Require all local purchase orders (LPOs) of local spending July 1, 2001 units be generated by the Integrated Financial Management System through their respective subtreasuries Complete the reconciliation of the balances of all government accounts at the Bank of Tanzania as at June 30,200O ’ End-March 2001 Comnlete the reconciliation of the balances of all June 30,200l go;ernment accounts in commercial banks as at June 30, 2000 l Commence operations of the large-taxpayer unit in the Tanzania Revenue Authority July I,2001 Eliminate all remaining tax exemptions for the government (except those constituting contractual obligations) July 1,200l External Statistics Harmonize the split import duty rates for all goods Ensure adequate funding for the preparation of a core set of macroeconomic statistics by the National Bureau of Statistics in the budget for 2001102 July 1,200l July 1,200 1 Completed in June Observed Observed Observed Expected September 2001 Value-added tax (VAT) exemptions eliminated; elimination of other government exemptions from 2002/03 (July-June) Observed Observed l/ Performance criterion. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 32 - Table 5. Tanzania: Central Government Operations, 1998199-2002103 li 1998199 1999/00 2000/01 2001/02 2002/03 Prog. Act. Prog. Proj. Taxes on imports Sales and excise taxes on local goods Income taxes Other taxes Nontax revenue 689.5 772.5 897.4 929.6 1,025.2 l,l63.6 616.5 691.9 805.6 827.8 926.2 1,053.l 218.9 220.5 362.6 363.5 444.0 489.9 161.3 179.5 195.8 188.8 208. I 258.2 162.9 205. I 166.4 194.0 183.1 211.0 73.4 86.9 80.9 81.4 90.9 94.0 73.0 80.5 91.8 101.8 99.0 110.5 Total expenditure 898.8 Recurrent expenditure 657.3 Wages and salaries 220.5 Interest payments 95.9 Domestic 38.2 Foreign (cash basis; World Bank and African Development Bank (AfDB) commitment basis) Goods and services and transfers Development expenditure Domestic financed Foreign financed 57.7 45.6 40.1 50.4 50.3 58.1 340.9 395.3 556.7 550.4 757.1 786.1 247.9 359.9 313.5 286.3 342.1 378.8 18.8 19.4 38.0 35.1 50.2 60.9 229.1 340.5 275.5 251.2 291.9 318.0 Overall balance (excludmg grants and foreign-financed dev. exp.) 19.8 Overall balance before grants -209.3 Grants Program Project HIPC Initiative grant relief (IMF, World Bank, and AfDB) 21 240.4 307.3 426.5 286.3 451.1 464.4 74.6 94.3 172.6 114.0 200.5 187.9 165.8 207.5 195.9 123.6 187.0 206.8 0.0 55 58 1 48.7 63.6 69.7 Overall balance after grants 31.1 Statisrical discrepancy, expenditure carryover (-) 31 -13.1 OveraIl balance (checks cleared) 18.0 Bank and parastatal recapitalizatlon 41 -69.8 Augmented overall balance -51.8 Financmg Foreign (net) Foreign loans Program loans Development project loans Amortization (cash basis; World Bank and AfDB commitment basis) Domestic (net) Bank Nonbank Bank and parastatal recapitalization 4/ Amortization of parastatal debt Privatization Change in arrears 51.8 223.4 -25.7 92.1 102.4 64.1 27.0 105.3 17.0 90.4 99.7 66.9 98.3 191.1 152.2 172.9 233.4 205.8 35.0 58.2 72.6 45.3 128.5 94.6 63.3 133.0 79.6 127.6 104.9 111.2 -71.3 -85.8 -135.2 -82.5 -133.7 -138.9 -10.0 9.1 0.0 -2.5 35.0 -2.8 -1.9 -27.4 0.0 -18.7 35.0 -2.8 -8.1 36.5 0.0 16.2 0.0 0.0 69.8 100.7 6.1 9.8 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 -10.4 0.0 11.5 12.0 24.5 26.7 20.0 0.0 -46.5 -3.7 -73.3 -32.2 -41.9 0.0 Financing gap (+) / contingency (-) 0.0 Memorandum items: Primary balance (after grants) 127.0 (In billions of Tanzania shillings) l,167.6 1,292.1 807.7 978.6 285.3 306.9 127.0 115.1 81.4 75.0 -54.6 -119.2 -395.1 -394.7 -87.8 31.8 -34.9 0.0 -122.7 31.8 -100.7 -6. I -223.4 25.7 0.0 0.0 39.2 146.9 1,272.X lJ78.7 1,692.1 986.6 1,236.5 1,313.3 308.1 356.3 397.7 128.1 123.1 129.4 77.8 72.8 71.3 -92.0 -261.6 -210.5 -343.2 -553.5 -528.5 -56.9 -102.4 -64.1 -25.4 0.0 0.0 -82.3 -102.4 -64.1 -9.8 0.0 0.0 -92.1 -102.4 -64. I 0.0 0.0 0.0 71.2 20.7 65.4 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 33 - Table 5. Tanzania: Central Government Operations, 1998/99-2002/03 l/ (concluded) 1998199 1999/00 2000101 2001/02 2002103 PIO8. Act. PKlg. PIOJ. Total revenue Tax revenue Taxes on imports Sales and excise taxes on local goods Income taxes Other taxes Nontan revenue Total expenditure Recurrent expenditure Wages and salanes Interest payments DomestIc Forqn (cash basis; World Bank and AiDB commitment basis) Goods and ser~,ces and transfers Net lending Development expenditure Domestic tinanced Foretgn financed Overall balance (excludmg grants and foragn-financed dev. exp.) Overall balance before grants Grants Program hOJeCt HIPC lnitiatlve grant relief (IMF, World Bank, and AtDB) 21 Overall balance after grants Sratlstlcal dwepancy, expenditure carryover (-) 31 Overall balance (checks cleared) Bank and parastatal recapitahzatlon 41 Augmented overall balance FlllUKlng Foreign (net) Foreign loans Program loans Development project loans Amortxation (cash baas; World Bank and AfDB commitment basis) Domestlc (net) Bank Nonbank Bank and parastatal recapitalizatlon 41 Amortization of parastatal debt Privatization Change in arrears Fxxmcing gap (+) / contingency (-) Memorandum Items: Primary balance (after grants) Nominal GDP (market prices; in bdlions of Tanzania shdbngs) 11.5 11.3 11.8 12.2 12.2 12.4 10.3 10.1 10.6 10.8 11.0 11.3 3.6 3.2 4.8 4.8 5.3 5.2 2.7 2.6 2.6 2.5 2.5 2.8 2.7 3.0 2.2 2.5 2.2 2.3 1.2 1.3 1.1 I.1 1.1 1.0 1.2 I.2 1.2 1.3 1.2 1.2 15.0 17.1 16.9 16.7 18.8 18.1 11.0 11.8 12.8 12.9 14.7 14.0 3.7 4.2 4.0 4.0 4.2 4.2 1.6 1.9 1.5 1.7 1.5 1.4 0.6 1.2 1.0 1.0 0.9 0.X 1.0 0.7 0.5 0.7 0.6 0.6 5.7 5.8 7.3 7.2 9.0 8.4 -0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 00 0.0 4.1 5.3 4.1 3.8 4.1 4.0 0.3 0.3 0.5 0.5 0.6 0.7 3.8 5.0 3.6 3.3 3.5 3.4 0.3 -0.8 -1.6 -1.2 -3.1 -2.2 -3.5 -5.8 -5.2 -4.5 -6.6 -5.6 4.0 4.5 5.6 3.8 5.4 5.0 1.2 1.4 2.3 1.5 2.4 2.0 2.8 3.0 2.6 1.6 2.2 2.2 0.0 0.1 0.8 0.6 0.8 0.7 0.5 -1.3 0.4 -0.7 -1.2 -0.7 -0.2 -0.5 0.0 -0.3 0.0 0.0 0.3 -1.8 0.4 -1.1 -1.2 -0.7 -1.2 -1.5 -0.1 -0.1 0.0 0.0 -0.9 -3.3 0.3 -1.2 -1.2 -0.7 09 3.3 -0.3 1.2 1.2 0.7 0.5 1.5 0.2 1.2 1.2 0.7 1.6 2.8 2.0 2.3 2.8 2.2 0.6 0.9 1.0 0.6 1.5 1.0 1.1 1.9 1.0 1.7 1.3 1.2 -1.2 -1.3 -1.8 -1.1 -1.6 -1.5 -0.2 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.4 0.0 0.0 -0.4 0.0 -0.2 0.4 0.0 -0. I 0.5 0.0 02 0.0 0.0 1.2 1.5 0.1 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 -0. I 0.0 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.3 0.2 0.0 -0.8 -0.1 -1.0 -0.4 -0.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 2.1 06 1.9 0.9 0.2 0.7 6,002 6,829 7,630 7,630 8,386 9,360 (In percent of GDP, unless othenvise indicated) Sources: Mmlstly of Fmance, and IMF staff projectmns. I/ Fiscal years run from July to June. 2/ Paris Club mterest and amortization payments are on a cash basis. 31 Difference between the overall de!icit on a checks-Issued basis and the total financing, which reflects expenditure based on checks cleared by the Bank of Tanzania (BoT). This difference is due to the change m the check float at the end of the fiscal year and unrecorded revenue or expenditure. 41 Bonds issued to recapitalize government-owned banks and parastatals and the cowerston mto bonds of mterest arrears owed to the BoT. Far program-monitoring purposes, such bonds are excluded from domestic financing. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 34 - Table 6. Tanzania: Central Government Revenue and Expenditure, Quarterly, 2001/02 l/ (Cumulative, in billions of Tanzania shillings) Sep. 2001/02 Dec. March June Total revenue 250.9 503.0 754.4 1,025.2 Tax revenue 226.2 453.5 680.3 926.2 Taxes on imports 115.0 220.9 324.5 444.0 Sales and excise taxes on local goods 50.7 103.7 156.2 208.1 Income taxes 39.4 83.1 133.0 183.1 Other taxes 21.0 45.8 66.5 90.9 Nontax revenue 24.8 49.5 74.1 99.0 Total expenditure Recurrent expenditure Wages and salaries Interest payments Domestic Foreign (cash basis; World Bank, and African Development Bank commitment basis) Goods and services and transfers Net lending Development expenditure Domestic financed Foreign financed Overall balance (before grants) -153.1 -293.2 -433.9 -553.5 404.0 796.2 1,188.3 1,578.7 318.5 625.1 931.7 1,236.5 89.1 178.2 267.2 356.3 32.3 61.6 94.2 123.1 21.3 36.1 56.5 72.8 11.0 25.5 37.8 50.3 197.1 385.4 570.2 757.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 85.5 171.1 256.6 342.1 12.6 25.1 37.7 50.2 73.0 145.9 218.9 291.9 Sources: Ministry of Finance; and IMF staff projections. l/ Fiscal year runs from July to June. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 35 - Table 7. Tanzania: Central Government Expenditure on Priority Sectors, 1999/2000-2001/02 l/ (In billions of Tanzania shillings, unless otherwise indicated) 1999100 2000/o I 2001/02 Act. Prog. Act. Prog. Total expenditure in priority sectors (in percent of GDP) (in percent of total expenditure) Education Health Water Agriculture (research and extension) Lands Roads Judiciary HIV/AIDS Recurrent expenditure in priority sectors (in percent of GDP) (in percent of total recurrent expenditure) Education 158.9 182.1 189.2 238.0 Health 53.9 66.0 70.3 88.6 Water 5.4 7.0 8.1 14.7 Agriculture (research and extension) 13.7 10.2 10.3 15.9 Lands 0.0 4.4 4.2 7.4 Roads 42.2 59.6 60.7 68.3 Judiciary 7.9 9.7 8.8 14.1 HIV/AIDS 0.0 4.8 0.0 7.3 Development expenditure in priority sectors (in percent of GDP) (in percent of total development expenditure) Education Health Water Agriculture (research and extension) Lands Roads Judiciary HIV/AIDS Memorandum items: Total expenditure Recurrent expenditure Development expenditure HIPC Initiative debt relief (in percent of GDP) GDP 282.0 343.8 346.8 454.3 4.1 4.4 4.6 5.3 34.9 34.7 34.0 36.1 I l,l67.5 807.6 359.9 51.6 0.8 6,829.3 491.7 499.7 766.5 6.4 6.5 9.1 38.1 38.2 48.6 247.8 254.9 347.6 96.3 100.7 139.3 17.1 18.3 31.6 18.9 19.1 30.5 5.3 5.1 8.1 91.4 92.5 181.2 10.1 9.2 21.0 4.8 0.0 7.3 147.9 152.4 312.3 I.9 1.9 3.7 46.9 51.4 91.1 65.7 30.4 10.1 8.7 0.9 31.7 0.4 65.7 109.5 30.4 50.7 10.1 16.9 8.7 14.6 0.9 0.7 31.7 112.9 0.4 7.0 . 1,292.l 978.6 313.5 7,630. I 1,307.2 1,578.7 1,021.o 1,236.5 286.3 342.1 141.2 148.5 1.9 1.8 7,630.l 8,3X5.6 Sources: Ministry of Finance; and Fund staff estimates and projections. li Fiscal years run from July to June. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 36 - Table 8. Tanzania: Monetary Survey, 2000-02 (In billions of Tanzania shillings, unless othenvise mdlcated) 1999 2000 2001 2002 Mar. June Sep. Dec. Mar. June Sep. Dec. RW Rev. Projections PEW& Act. Prog Act. Pr0g. Prog. Program Monetary authorities (BoT) Net foreign assets 274.5 451.5 385.9 460.3 357.0 473.8 544.2 610.7 563.5 551.7 611.8 679.2 Net international reserves 318.1 494.9 429.3 503.4 400.4 516.0 586.3 652.9 605.7 593.9 654.0 721.4 (in millions of U.S. dollars) 398.9 616.1 527.3 585.3 485.6 581.1 659.1 733.6 679.3 665.0 731.0 805.0 Medium- and long-term foreign liabilities -43.6 -43.3 -43.3 -43 1 -43.3 -42.2 -42.2 -42.2 -42.2 -42.2 -42.2 -42.2 Net domestic assets 234.2 104.9 134.9 63.0 173.2 33.0 37.9 -3.3 9.9 6.5 29.3 -10.7 Overall credit to government (net) -4.7 -114 3 -83.8 -108 3 -41.4 -117.1 -112.0 -153.0 -139.3 -141.6 -I 17.7 -156.5 Credit to government (net, excl. hquldity paper) 51.1 -62.8 0.0 -27.6 25.8 -15.3 -13.6 -8.4 -1.4 19.7 19.7 15.0 Liquldlty paper (stenlized treasury bills) -55.x -51.5 -83.8 -80.7 -67.2 -101.8 -98.4 -144.6 -137.9 -161.3 -137.4 -171.6 Credit to banks 4.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Other items (net; asset +) 234.7 219.2 218.7 171.4 214.6 150.1 149.9 149.7 149.3 148.1 147.0 145.9 Reserve money Currency outside banks Bank reserves Currency io banks Deposits Required ~eser”es (calculated) I/ Excess reserves (calculated) 508.7 556.4 520.9 523.4 530.3 506.8 582.1 607.4 573.4 558.2 641.1 668.6 384.9 392.4 374 2 35x.7 378.0 375.0 439.5 460.5 422.9 402.5 486.2 509.7 123.8 164.0 146.7 164.6 152.3 131.8 142.6 146.9 150.5 155.7 154.9 158.9 42.6 50.6 35.3 31.8 36.8 31.6 30.0 30.0 30.0 30.0 30.0 30.0 81.2 113.4 111.4 132.8 115.4 100.2 112.6 116.9 120.5 125.7 124.9 128.9 62.0 75.2 79.2 90.8 81.8 94.0 92.6 96.9 100.5 105.7 104.9 108.9 19.3 38.2 32.1 42.1 33.6 6.2 20.0 20.0 20.0 20.0 20.0 20.0 Commercx+l banks (DMBs) Net foreign assets 299.3 406.8 408.9 453.4 414.1 487.8 504.6 488.8 489.7 503.9 491.4 492.2 (in millions of U.S. dollars) 375.4 506.5 502.3 527.2 502.3 549.3 567.3 549.3 549.3 564.3 549.3 549.3 Net domestic assets Bank reserves Llabilltles to BoT Credit to government (net) Credit to nongovernment sector O/which : I” foragn currency (in mdhons of U.S. dollars) Other ,tems (net; assets +) 533.4 598 5 559.6 613.2 587.6 610.1 571.4 630.0 665.4 123.2 172.1 148.4 167.6 152.3 159.8 142.6 146.9 150.5 -5.4 -1.2 0.0 -0.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 309.7 377.7 365.1 267.5 350 6 270.0 266.6 312.8 306 1 311.5 340.6 322.5 366.5 380.4 378.4 414.6 422.8 461.7 108.9 109.1 109.1 109.3 122.6 122.6 122.6 122.6 -205.6 -290.7 -276.4 -188.2 -295.7 -198.1 -252.4 -252.5 -252.9 703.5 707.7 746.6 155.7 154.9 158.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 329.5 305.6 339.8 471.5 525.8 527.0 109.5 109.7 109.9 122.6 122.6 122.6 -253.3 -278.6 -279.0 Deposits Deposits in shillings Demand deposits Savings and time deposits Deposits I” foreign currency (m mdlions of US dollars) Demand deposits Savings and time deposits 832.7 1,005.3 968.5 1,066.7 1,001.7 1,097.Y 1,076.O 1 ,118.g 1,155.l lJO7.4 1.199.1 1,238.8 587.1 701.2 656.5 710.7 685.8 724.0 701.5 744.1 779.7 831.4 822.4 861.5 247.7 302.6 271.5 295.1 290.6 316.2 306.4 325.0 340.6 363.1 359.2 376.3 339.4 398 6 385.0 415.5 395.1 407.8 395.1 419.1 439.2 468 3 463.2 485.2 245.5 304. I 312.0 356.0 315.9 373.9 374.5 374.7 375.3 376.0 376.6 377.3 308.0 378.6 383.2 413.9 383.2 421 .O 421.0 421.0 421.0 421.0 421.0 421.0 173.1 197.3 194.0 210.1 257.3 210.3 2107 210.8 211.1 211.5 211.8 212.2 72.5 106 8 118 0 145.9 125.9 163.6 163.9 163.9 164.2 164.5 164.8 165.1 Monetary survey Net foreign assets Net domestic assets Domestic credit Credit to government (net) Credit to nongovernment sector Other items net (asset: +) O/which : discrepancy between DOT and DMBs 573.8 858.4 794.8 913.7 771.1 961.6 1,048.g 1,099.6 1,053.Z 643.8 539.3 547.8 511.7 608.6 511.3 466.7 479.8 524.8 616.5 604.0 603.8 525.7 689.6 531.3 569.2 582.6 628.4 305.0 263.4 281.3 159.1 309.2 152.9 154.6 159.8 166.8 311.5 340.6 322.5 366.5 380.4 378.4 414.6 422.8 461.7 27.3 -64.7 -56.0 -14.0 -81.1 -20.0 -102.5 -102.8 -103.6 -1.9 6.9 1.7 2.8 0.0 28.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 1.055.6 1,103.Z 1,171.4 554.3 582.1 577.0 659.4 713.7 710.2 187.9 187.9 183.2 471.5 525.8 527.0 -105.1 -131.7 -133.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 M3 Foreign currency deposits M2 Currency in circulation Deposits 1,217.5 1,397.7 1,342.7 1,425.4 11379.7 1.472.9 1.515.5 lJ79.4 1,578.O 1,609.9 1,685.3 1.748.5 245.5 304.1 312.0 3560 315.9 373.9 374.5 374.7 375.3 376.0 376.6 377.3 972.0 1,093.6 1,030.7 1,069.4 1,063.7 1,099.O 1,141.O 1.204.7 1,202.6 1,233.9 1,308.6 1,371.Z 384.9 392 4 374.2 358.7 378 0 375 0 439.5 460.5 422.9 402.5 486.2 509.7 587.1 701.2 656.5 710.7 6X5.8 724.0 701.5 744.1 779.7 831.4 822.4 861.5 Memorandum items: M2 growth (12.month percent change) 15.0 M3 growth (12.month percent change) 18.6 Credit to nongovernment sector (12.month percent change) 25.5 Reserve money (Il-month percent change) 21.5 Currency/M3 (in percent) 31.6 Reserve money multlplier (M3ireserves) 2.4 Velocity of money (M2; average) 7.1 Velocity of money (M3: average) 5.7 12.5 Il.6 15.8 II.2 14.9 II.0 10.2 12.5 14.8 11.6 18.5 9.6 17.0 16.0 13.0 10.7 9.4 9.9 24.8 21.4 20.7 25.3 24.1 26.0 9.4 10.3 10.9 14.3 9.3 9.2 9.2 9.6 28.1 27.9 25.2 27.4 25.5 29.0 29.2 26.8 2.5 2.6 2.7 2.6 2.9 2.6 2.6 2.8 7.0 7.0 5.5 .., 5.4 ,,. 12.3 14.7 13.8 9.3 11.2 10.7 24.6 26.8 24.6 IO.1 IO.1 IO.1 25.0 28.9 29.2 2.9 2.6 2.6 ., 6.9 5.3 Sources: Bank of Tanzania (BoT); and Fund staff estimates and pro]ections. I/ Calculated as ie~erw requirement time banks’ deposits minus half of the bank cash m vault. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 37 - Table 9. Tanzania: Medium-Term Balance of Payments, 1999-2005 (In millions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise indicated) 1999 2000 2001 Est. Prog. 2002 2003 2004 2005 Projections Trade account -788.7 -671.8 -738.6 -779.2 -825.5 -899.5 -938.7 Exports, f.o.b. 562.7 663.1 751.0 804.7 870.4 934.2 1,016.4 Traditional 301.2 292.8 305.3 332.8 361.6 388.1 417.9 Nontraditional 261.5 370.3 445.7 471.9 508.8 546.1 598.4 Imports, f.o.b -1,351.4 -1,334.9 -1,489.6 -1,583.g -1,695.g -1,833.7 -1,955.l Services and factor income (net) -305.9 -189.7 -267.0 -317.4 -351.1 -347.2 -357.7 702.5 726.7 783.4 827.0 869.3 920.3 986.7 646.4 663.7 723.8 765.9 804.0 850.4 911.8 - 1,008.4 -916.4 -1,050.4 -1,144.4 -1,220.4 -1,267.5 -1,344.4 -116.0 -105.8 -109.9 -102.8 -99.1 -95.1 -96.0 -892.4 -8 10.6 -940.5 -1,041.6 -1,121.3 -1,172.4 -1,248.4 -873.3 -759.5 -887.3 -980.9 -1,056.3 -1,104.4 -1,177.0 -19.1 -51.1 -53.2 -60.7 -65.0 -68.1 -71.3 Receipts Ofwhich : nonfactor receipts Payments Interest Other services Nonfactor payments Factor payments (excl. interest) Private transfers (net) Current account (excluding official transfers) Official transfers (net) Project financing Program financing Current account (including official transfers) -324.1 -64.2 -261.3 -363.6 -482.4 -562.0 -594.0 Capital account 377.3 239.1 253.3 290.6 363.7 440.3 479.7 Loan inflow 469.3 319.3 390.4 360.9 369.5 373.1 381.9 Official project linancing 348.7 189.6 235.0 239.5 244.4 246.9 249.4 Official program financing 81.5 68.4 105.0 92.5 105.0 105.0 105.0 Other loans 39.1 61.3 50.4 28.9 20.0 21.2 27.6 Amortization li -275.0 -273.0 -329.8 -270.7 -214.2 -151.7 -132.0 Direct investment 183.0 192.8 192.7 200.4 208.4 218.8 229.8 Errors and omissions -9.8 -63.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Overall balance 43.4 111.7 -8.0 -73.1 -118.7 -121.8 -114.3 Financing Change in net foreign assets (increase -) Bank of Tanzania (BoT) (increase -) Gross reserves Use of Fund credit Purchases Repurchases Other (net) Commercial banks (increase -) Arrears (increase +) 21 Debt relief 3/ Ofwhich: multilateral HIPC lnitiative debt relief 4 -43.4 -111.7 7.9 73.1 118.7 121.7 114.3 -142.6 -348.4 -160.3 -73.1 -17.9 -7.9 -11.7 -127.6 -217.3 -117.5 -73.1 -17.9 -7.9 -11.7 -176.5 -198.8 -119.9 -76.9 -8.9 26.5 31.8 36.3 30.7 15.3 3.8 -9.0 -34.4 -43.5 58.8 53.2 51.2 52.0 21.0 0.0 0.0 -22.5 -22.5 -35.9 -48.2 -30.0 -34.4 -43.5 12.7 -49.2 -12.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 -15.0 -131.1 -42.8 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 -1,163.3 106.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 1,262.5 130.5 168.3 146.2 136.6 129.6 126.0 0.0 43.8 74.2 72.4 67.3 64.9 62.5 Financing gap 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Memorandum items: Gross official reserves (BoT) In months of imports of goods and nonfactor services (following year) Current account deficit (as uercent of GDP) Excluding official transfers Including official transfers 775.6 974.4 4.4 4.9 1,094.3 1,171.2 1,180.l 1,153.6 1,121.9 5.1 5.1 4.8 4.4 4.1 -12.1 -9.1 -9.8 -10.0 -9.9 -9.7 -9.4 -3.7 -0.7 -2.6 -3.4 -4.2 -4.5 -4.4 Debt service due/exports 51 34.2 30.2 32.2 26.8 20.5 15.8 14.1 Debt service paid/exports 5/ 14.3 10.6 9.6 7.1 6.1 6.2 6.4 33.9 34.6 33.7 33.9 33.0 35.5 38.1 -1,060.7 -826.9 -971.9 -1,062.7 -1,143.6 -1,211.2 -1,258.3 736.6 762.7 710.6 699.0 661.2 649.2 664.2 606.2 587.1 538.7 479.6 438.3 422.9 429.4 130.4 175.6 171.9 219.5 222.9 226.3 234.8 Sources: Tanzanian authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections. li Includes amounts due to all creditors (excluding &IF), before debt rescheduling and debt relief. 21 The arrears in 2000 are arrears on commercial debt (US$79.3 million) and export credit (US$26.6 million). With World Bank assistance, the government is pursuing a commercial debt-buyback scheme. 31 Debt relief prior to 2000 is from the January 21, 1997 Paris Club rescheduling agreement, including assumed implementation of a bilateral agreement with Russia in November 1999, involving an up-front discount of 80 percent on all Russian claims and a flow rescheduling on Naples terms. Debt relief for 2000 and beyond includes the April 2000 Paris Club rescheduling agreement on Cologne terms and HIPC Initiative debt relief from the IMF, IDA, and African Development Bank (AfDB). 41 For years 2000-01, it is interim assistance from the Fund, lDA, and AfDB, pending the HLPC lnitiative completion point. 51 ln percent of exports of goods and nonfactor services. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-38- Table 10. Tanzania: External Financing Requirements and Sources, 1999-2005 (In millions of U.S. dollars) 1999 2000 2001 Prog. 2002 2003 2004 Projections 2005 External financing requirements 2,527 1,266 Current account, excluding grants 1,061 827 Amortization 275 273 IMF repayments 22 22 Change in arrears (incrcasc -) 1,163 ~106 Change in reserves (increase +) 177 199 Other capital flows (net; outflow +) li -171 51 Disbursements from existing and new commitments 1,265 1,135 Grants 737 763 Program grants 130 176 European Union 31 12 Bilateral 100 164 Project grants 606 587 LOaIlS 469 319 Program loans Xl 68 World Bank 60 48 African Development Bank 21 21 Bilateral 0 0 Project loans 349 190 IMF disburscmcnts 59 53 Debt rclicf 21 1,263 130 Bilateral creditors 1,263 87 Non-Paris Club 0 0 Multilateral creditors 0 44 Residual financing gap 0 0 1,320 1,258 972 1,063 330 271 36 48 0 0 120 77 -137 -200 1,152 1,112 711 699 172 219 45 127 539 480 390 361 105 93 80 25 0 235 239 51 52 I68 146 94 74 0 0 74 12 0 0 1,188 1,152 1,173 1,144 1,211 1,258 214 152 132 30 34 43 0 0 0 Y -26 -32 -208 -219 -229 1,052 1,022 661 649 223 226 438 423 369 373 105 105 244 247 21 0 1,046 664 235 429 382 I05 249 0 137 130 127 69 65 64 0 0 1 67 65 63 0 0 0 Sources: Tanzanian authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections. l! Foreign direct investments, errors and omissions, and commercial banks. 21 Including debt relief from Paris Club, and interim assistance under the enhanced HIPC Initiative Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 39 - APPENDIX I Dar es Salaam, August 3 1,200l Mr. Horst Kohler Managing Director International Monetary Fund Washington, D.C. 2043 1 U.S.A. Dear Mr. Kiihler, 1. Tanzania is implementing its program for poverty reduction and growth with support from the IMF through a three-year arrangement under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF) extending to March 2003. The second periodic review under this arrangement was concluded by the Executive Board of the IMF on March 14,200 1. The present letter requests completion of the third review under the PRGF arrangement; to this end, it discusses progress in implementing the program since the beginning of 2001 and lays out the government’s policy intentions and targets through mid-2002. I. RECENTECONOMICPERFORMANCEANDPOLICYIMPLEMENTATION 2. Recent macroeconomic developments remained broadly in line with the program objectives and targets. Real GDP growth, at 4.9 percent, was slightly lower than expected for 2000 (5.2 percent), while the 12-month rate of inflation declined as projected to 5.1 percent by June 2001. Gross official reserves amounted to US$983 million at end-June 2001, equivalent to five months of imports of goods and nonfactor services projected for 200 1. The quantitative performance criteria for end-March 2001 for net domestic assets, net international reserves of the Bank of Tanzania (BoT), and net domestic financing of the government were observed with comfortable margins, and government revenue exceeded the respective benchmark. The quantitative benchmarks for end-June 2001 were also observed. The structural performance criteria on the reconciliation of the government’s bank accounts with the BoT by end-March 2001 and with the commercial banks by end-June 2001 were observed, but the one on the completion of an audit of end-June 2000 budgetary arrears by March 2001 was not. This audit has now been completed, and we request a waiver for the nonobservance of this performance criterion. 3. Overall budgetary performance in fiscal year 2000/01 (July-June) was strong. Revenue reached the equivalent of 12.2 percent of GDP, about 0.4 percent higher than programmed, reflecting good performance across most taxes. Recurrent expenditures were 0.1 percent of GDP higher than programmed, largely because of higher interest costs. Meanwhile, allocations to the priority sectors-education, health, water, HIV/AIDS, roads, lands, and the judiciary-exceeded programmed projections for 2000/01 by 0.1 percent of GDP. In addition, funds were allocated to ensure that government ministries, departments, and agencies (MDAs) could clear identified arrears (particularly with respect to utilities) Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 40 - APPENDIX I accumulated earlier in the fiscal year. The budget deficit (excluding grants and foreign- financed development expenditure) declined to 1.2 percent of GDP, compared with the program projection of 1.6 percent of GDP. 4. In recent months, following the abatement of strong upward pressure on the exchange rate, the focus of monetary policy has shifted to absorbing excess liquidity in the interest of holding inflation at a low single-digit level. The BoT effected this tightening of monetary policy in February 200 1, after the 9 1 -day treasury bill rate had declined to only 3 percent, by increasing the weekly tender size of treasury bills and selling foreign exchange. As a result, by June 2001 short-term interest rates had increased to 4.2 percent, and the growth of reserve money had been slowed to below the initial program projection. Nevertheless, the broad money aggregates M2 and M3 grew significantly faster than expected. 5. The deficit on the current account of the balance of payments declined to 9.1 percent of GDP in 2000, well below the program expectation of 15.9 percent, and also below the 12.1 percent realized in 1999. Traditional exports, expressed in U.S. dollar terms, were about 3 percent lower than in 1999, mainly on account of lower international commodity prices. Nontraditional exports, however, increased by more than 40 percent, mainly reflecting the coming on stream of new gold mines and a resumption of fish exports to European Union countries. Imports were slightly lower than in 1999 because of sharp declines in capital goods and food imports-after the completion of major investment projects in the mining sector and recovery from drought, respectively. The deficit on the services account declined because of lower imports and travel payments. Official transfers were larger than in 1999, but not by as much as expected. As a result of these developments, the overall balance of payments showed significant improvement over 1999 and the program for 2000. During the first six months of 2001, the external sector performance continued to improve, with the combined goods and services account recording a further reduction in the deficit compared with the corresponding period in 2000. The good performance of exports is largely explained by an increase in nontraditional exports of almost 50 percent, led by mineral exports, particularly gold. II. POLICIESFOR FISCAL YEAR 2001/02 A. The Poverty Reduction Strategy 6. The policies laid out below have been formulated in line with the poverty reduction strategy paper (PRSP) adopted by the government in August 2000. We have prepared a report on the first year of implementation of the PRSP. In addition to highlighting the implementation record, this progress report includes a description of the new education and agricultural sector strategies, as well as a number of other elements missing from the original PRSP. A rural sector development strategy is under preparation and is expected to be completed before end-2001. The budget for 2001/02 has been formulated in line with the priorities and objectives of the PRSP and the new education and agricultural sector strategies. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4l- APPENDIX I Maintaining macroeconomic stability and promoting private sector activity through structural reforms remain central to our poverty reduction strategy. Many of these reforms are supported by the World Bank and by other donors. B. The Macroeconomic Framework 7. In view of the good rainfall in most areas of the country and the much shorter than expected duration of the power rationing, we have revised the projection for real GDP growth from 5.1 percent to 5.9 percent in 2001, and to 6.2 percent in 2002. Reflecting the impact of the depreciation of the exchange rate during the first half of 200 1, we have revised the end-2001 inflation target from 4.5 percent to 4.8 percent, although we intend to maintain the target for 2002 at 4 percent. Taking into account recent developments and a favorable balance of payments outlook, we have raised the gross official reserves target for end-2001 to 5.1 months of imports of goods and nonfactor services projected for 2002. In view of the delay in completing the audit of budgetary arrears, we have carried over resources for their elimination from the last fiscal year and have set the government’s net domestic financing targets for the remainder of 2001 accordingly. The exchange rate will continue to reflect market conditions, with the BoT intervening mainly to smooth seasonal fluctuations and meet its reserve target. C. Fiscal Policies 8. Fiscal policy will remain geared toward maintaining macroeconomic stability, while raising expenditure allocations to priority sectors. Under the recently approved budget, the budget deficit for 200 l/O2 (excluding grants and foreign-financed development projects) is expected to increase to 3.1 percent of GDP. The revenue-to-GDP ratio is expected to be 12.2 percent, while government expenditure (excluding foreign-financed development expenditure) is budgeted to increase from 13.4 percent of GDP in 2000/O 1 to 15.3 percent in 2001/02. In the context of the medium-term civil service pay reform, we have increased the average wage by about 9 percent, which will allow for professional and senior staff a further reduction in the gap relative to compensation in the private sector. In addition, the total allocation for recurrent expenditures on the priority sectors has been increased by 29 percent. We have also, in the context of the medium-term expenditure framework and the updating of the PRSP, identified further expenditure programs that will be implemented in case additional resources become available. The budget includes a contingency allowance of 0.5 percent of GDP, including for the possible cost of retrenchment of parastatal employees. 9. The deficit is entirely financed by concessional foreign financing, including debt relief under the Initiative for Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC Initiative). Following the completion of an inventory of public sector domestic debt by November 200 1, we intend to start paying down the parastatal debt that was taken over by the government. Privatization receipts-expected to amount to T Sh 20 billion in 2001/02-will be used to cover the costs of parastatal restructuring. We also intend to clear all audited arrears that had been outstanding at end-June 2000 (about T Sh 40 billion) by end-December 2001, an action that will constitute a performance criterion under the PRGF arrangement. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 42 - APPENDIX I 10. In the context of the budget for 2001/02, we made further progress with tax reform. The withholding tax on goods and services-which is deductible from the corporate income tax-was abolished for holders of a taxpayer identification number (TIN); in order to limit the revenue losses, we decided to maintain the tax for taxpayers who have not registered for the TIN. We have also increased excise taxes, introduced a new gaming tax, and eliminated the exemption from the value-added tax (VAT) for government purchases. These measures are expected to offset a revenue loss expected from a further reduction and rationalization of import tariff rates. Nevertheless, out of revenue considerations, we decided to maintain the housing levy and merge it with the vocational education training levy in order to improve compliance. Following the issuance of revised notices in August, control over tax exemptions for nongovernmental, religious, and charitable organizations has been strengthened. The exemption on fuel purchases for the electricity company, TANESCO, will be removed in the context of the rationalization of electricity tariffs currently in preparation. The elimination of the government exemption from customs and excise duties had to be postponed for one more year because spending units were not yet in a position to submit their budget proposal for 2001/02 on a tax-inclusive basis. However, all necessary steps are being taken to ensure that this situation will be rectified in time for the 2002/03 budget. In the area of tax administration, the unified tax appeals mechanism and the large-taxpayer unit are expected to start operations in September 200 1. 11. We also made progress in strengthening expenditure management. Since the beginning of the fiscal year, government-spending units have been basing all their expenditures on local purchase orders (LPOs) generated by MDAs and their respective subtreasuries from the integrated financial management system (IFMS). As a result, all central government budgetary expenditure is now implemented through the system. The regulations under the new Public Finance Act became effective on July 2, 2001, and we have notified the public that the government will not honor any LPOs that are not generated by the IFMS. The budget for 2001/02 provides adequate funding for expenditures that have been a major source of arrears in recent years, including utility bills and expenditure on food (for schoolchildren, hospital patients, soldiers, and prisoners). As is the case with contributions to pension funds and interest costs, these expenditures are now considered first charges under the cash management system to avoid underfunding. These measures, as well as the generation by the IFMS of comprehensive monthly commitment, expenditure, and arrears monitoring reports from the start of the current fiscal year, should assist in preventing new expenditure arrears. The submission by the MDAs of cash-flow plans from October 2001 will further strengthen the cash management system. We intend to begin publishing quarterly budget execution reports drawn from the IFMS, starting with a report for the first quarter of 2001/02. This action will constitute a performance criterion under the PRGF arrangement. 12. With regard to increasing the comprehensiveness of the IFMS, the 12 revenue collection points of the Tanzania Revenue Authority (TRA) in Dar es Salaam were brought on-line during the month of July 200 1. Training for staff operating the computerized system will be stepped up during 2001/02. We have rolled out IFMS to all regions, and all subtreasuries are now operating on the IFMS. We have also introduced commitment control in all spending units, both at the central level and in the regions. Various circulars and Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 43 - APPENDIX I directives have been issued to spending units detailing procedures to be adopted in the procurement of goods and services using the IFMS. All balances in government bank accounts with the Bank of Tanzania and the commercial banks as of end-June 2000 were reconciled, and, since July 2001, large-volume bank accounts at the Bank of Tanzania have been reconciled on a weekly basis. The reconciliation process allowed 169 accounts of the more than 300 bank accounts with the Bank of Tanzania to be closed. 13. Our fiscal decentralization strategy will focus on a number of areas that will help promote increased harmonization and transparency of the operations of local governments. In this regard, we intend to develop a strategy and a timetable for harmonizing local government taxes; we will also review the possibility of having all levels of government adopt the same fiscal year. In order to increase accountability for the use of public funds, we will require local governments to submit quarterly reports of their revenue and expenditure; these will form the basis for a consolidated annual report on their operations, which will be published. In the meantime, we are giving publicity to the amounts and timing of budget transfers to local governments, as well as requiring local authorities to post their quarterly reports in a public location. D. Monetary Policy and Financial Sector Reform 14. Monetary policy will continue to aim at keeping inflation in low single digits. The BoT will limit the growth of reserve money to a rate consistent with this objective. At the same time, the monetary program will allow credit to the private sector to grow commensurate with the expected growth in economic activity and further financial deepening. With a view to improving monetary policy operations, both the BoT and the Ministry of Finance will strengthen their capacity and cooperate closely in refining the framework for liquidity forecasting. 15. With regard to promoting the development of the financial sector, the proposed amendments to the Land Act to facilitate the use of land and real estate as collateral for bank lending will be considered by the government in the near future. In addition, work on establishing a credit information bureau and on modernizing the payment and settlement system is ongoing. We have further strengthened banking supervision by hiring more staff and have completed an up-to-date set of regulations with the issuance of a regulation on corporate governance of financial institutions. Draft regulations governing microfinance institutions are expected to be issued by end-2001 that will provide for their supervision on the basis of international best practices. E. External Sector Issues 16. The budget for 200 l/O2 included a consolidation and reduction in import tariffs, involving a reduction in the number of nonzero bands from four to three. At the same time, all split import duty rates have been eliminated. Effective November 2001, we will start implementing a program of tariff reduction in the context of the Southern African Development Community (SADC) whereby import tariffs on 11 percent of our total trade Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 44 - APPENDIX I with the member countries will be eliminated. Also negotiations leading to an East African Community (EAC) customs union are under way. Meanwhile, we are applying an 80 percent tariff discount on imports from EAC member countries. We expect to gradually reduce the top import tariff rate beginning with next year’s budget, in harmony with our partners in the region. To address suspected dumping, we introduced earlier this year a registration requirement for importers of sugar and imposed suspended duties on selected commodities, in line with the regulations of the World Trade Organization (WTO). The justification for suspended duties on sensitive import items will be kept under review. 17. Tanzania is current on its external debt obligations. We have signed 8 of the 13 bilateral agreements under Paris Club VI and expect to sign the remaining agreements by October 2001. Among non-Paris Club official creditors, China has already signed an agreement, while Egypt and Kuwait have indicated their intention to provide debt relief in line with the HIPC Initiative. Together, these three creditors account for 24 percent of total non-Paris Club debt. We will continue to make efforts to negotiate rescheduling agreements with the remaining creditors. F. Structural Reform 18. TANESCO’s financial problems will be further aggravated by new financial obligations following the completion of the arbitration case concerning the costs of the Independent Power Tanzania Limited (IPTL) power plant. The ruling requires TANESCO to make monthly capacity payments of about US$2.8 million (0.4 percent of GDP on an annual basis), starting when the plant is ready for production, which is expected by October 2001. Under normal circumstances, there will only be limited use of IPTL’s capacity for some years to come and, presently, TANESCO lacks the resources to make these payments, as well as to establish a T Sh 11 billion liquidity facility mandated under the IPTL contract. To address this situation, the government has taken a number of measures. First, it has reconstituted TANESCO’s board and decided to engage a management company to strengthen its management, starting in November 200 1. Second, the government will allow TANESCO to increase the average electricity tariff to accommodate partly the IPTL’s financial requirements and compensate for inflation since the last increase in 1998; at the same time, TANESCO will revise the structure of the tariffs so as to reduce the high industrial rates. Third, TANESCO will strive to reach an agreement with the government of Zanzibar ensuring that henceforth the Zanzibar State Fuel and Power Corporation will pay its current obligations to TANESCO without delay and work toward a solution for its outstanding arrears to TANESCO. The above measures notwithstanding, TANESCO will require T Sh 26 billion in support from the budget during 2001/02. 19. To promote good governance and integrity, the government has prepared 26 ministerial anticorruption plans, based on the National Anti-Corruption Strategy. These plans foresee both “quick-wins” and medium-term actions. The government has started implementing quick-win actions that require little or no additional expenditure, such as effecting greater transparency in procurement practices. For medium-term actions, donor financing has been requested. The government will publish quarterly and annual progress Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-45 - APPENDIX I reports and discuss them with donors and other stakeholders during 200 l/02. The preparation of a new public service bill to facilitate performance monitoring and enhance accountability in the civil service is on track for submission to parliament by October 200 1. The legal sector action plans are being finalized for adoption and implementation before the end of 200 1. 20. We have been strengthening the macroeconomic and sociodemographic database, including by launching the poverty database in May 200 1. Statistics is treated in the budget as a priority item. In this regard, the 200 l/O2 budget has adequately funded the preparation of a core set of macroeconomic statistics and the conduct of the 2002 population census. In addition, preparations are under way to submit a new Statistics Law to parliament by October 2001. The first metadata for Tanzania were recently posted on the IMF’s General Data Dissemination System (GDDS) website. G. Concluding Remarks 21. The government of Tanzania will continue to provide the IMF with such information as the IMF requires to assess Tanzania’s progress in implementing the policies described in this letter. Moreover, we will continue to consult with the IMF on Tanzania’s economic and financial policies in accordance with the IMF’s policies on such consultations. Quantitative and structural performance criteria and benchmarks are set out in the attached Tables 1 and 2. The government requests that the quantitative performance criteria already established for September 2001 with respect to net domestic financing of the government, net domestic assets, and net international reserves of the Bank of Tanzania be modified as shown in Table 1. Compliance with the quantitative performance criteria for end-September 200 1 and with the structural performance criteria for end-2001 will be determined in the context of the fourth review under the PRGF arrangement, to be completed by end-January 2002. Compliance with the quantitative performance criteria for end-March 2002 and with structural performance criteria to be specified at the time of the fourth review will be determined in the context of the fifth review under the PRGF arrangement to be completed by end-July 2002. The technical memorandum of understanding (TMU) of February 24,200l is replaced by the TMU attached to this letter. The government of Tanzania remains fully committed to the implementation of the economic and financial program supported by the PRGF arrangement. Sincerely yours, IS/ Basil Mramba (MP) Minister for Finance Attachment: Technical Memorandum of Understanding Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-46- APPENDIX I Table 1. Tanzania: Quantitative Performance Criteria and Benchmarks Under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF) Arrangement, September2001-June 2002 2001 Sept. Performance criteria Orig. Rev. pw. proi3 Dec. Bench. 2002 Mar. June Perf. Indic. crit. Bench. Net domestic financing of the government of Tanzania (ceiling) I/ 2/ Central government recurrent revenue (floor, benchmark only) 11 Extrabudgetary expenditure (ceiling, benchmark only) li Accumulation of budgetary arrears (ceiling, benchmark only) 11 Net domestic assets of the Bank of Tanzania (ceiling) 2131 Reserve money (ceiling, benchmark only) 3/ (In billions of Tanzanian shillings; end of period) 0 2 7 14 248 251 503 154 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 155 38 -3 10 582 607 573 (In millions of U.S. dollars; end of period) Net international reserves of the Bank of Tanzania (floor) 41 541 659 734 679 Accumulation of external payments arrears (ceiling) 51 0 0 0 0 Contracting or guaranteeing of external debt on nonconcessional terms (ceiling) li 0 0 0 0 Memorandum item: Foreign program assistance (grants and loans) l/ 99 233 273 35 1,025 0 0 7 558 665 0 0 370 Note: For precise definitions of the aggregates shown and details of the adjustment clauses, see the attached technical memorandum of understanding (TMU). li Cumulative from the beginning of the fiscal year (July 1). 21 To be adjusted upward for the Tanzania shilling equivalent of any shortfall in foreign program assistance from the amounts shown in the memorandum item. 3/ To be adjusted downward to the extent that eligible bank reserves fall short of 10 percent of commercial bank deposits. 41 To be adjusted downward for any shortfall in foreign program assistance from the amounts shown in the memorandum item. 51 Continuous performance criterion; excludes arrears on debt-service payments pending the conclusion of debt-rescheduling agreements. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 47 - APPENDIX I Table 2. Tanzania: Structural Performance Criteria and Benchmarks Under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility Arrangement, September 2001-March 2002 Measure Date of Implementation (End of period) Public finances Establish an inventory of public sector domestic debt as of end- June 200 1 Clear all audited arrears outstanding at end-June 2000 (performance criterion; see para. 9) Establish a strategy and timetable for harmonizing local government taxes and levies Financial transparency and good governance Begin publishing the amounts and timing of budget transfers to local governments Require local governments to present quarterly reports of their revenue by source, and expenditure by sector, from the beginning of their next fiscal year Begin publishing quarterly budget execution reports drawn from the IFMS starting with a report for the first quarter of 2001/02 (July-June) (performance criterion; see para. 11) Financial sector Establish conditions for the use of land as collateral for bank loans Statistics Submit new statistics law to parliament November 200 1 December 200 1 March 2002 September 200 I October 2001 November 200 1 December 200 1 October 200 1 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 48 - APPENDIX I ATTACHMENT Technical Memorandum of Understanding on Selected Concepts and Definitions Used in the Monitoring of the PRGF-Supported Program August 31,200l 1. The purpose of this technical memorandum of understanding (TMU) is to describe concepts and definitions that are being used in the monitoring of the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF)-supported program, as laid out in Table 1 of the government’s letter of intent of August 3 1, 2001, to which this TMU is attached. Net international reserves 2. Net international reserves (NIR) of the Bank of Tanzania (BoT) are defined as reserve assets minus reserve liabilities. The BoT’s reserve assets include (i) monetary gold; (ii) holdings of SDRs; (iii) the reserve position at the IMF; (iv) holdings of foreign exchange; and (v) other liquid and marketable assets readily available to the monetary authorities. Reserve assets exclude assets pledged or otherwise encumbered, including but not limited to assets used as collateral or guarantee for a third-party external liability (assets not readily available). The BoT’s reserve liabilities include (i) all short-term foreign exchange liabilities to nonresidents; (ii) all liabilities to the IMF; and (iii) the balance in the account of the European Union (EU) for the clearance of domestic arrears. Reserve liabilities exclude (i) the balances in the accounts of the Multilateral Debt Fund (MDF); (ii) the balances in the accounts of the Poverty Reduction Budget Support Fund (PRBS); and (iii) medium- and long-term foreign liabilities. Net domestic assets and reserve money 3. Net domestic assets (NDA) of the BoT are calculated as the BoT’s reserve money minus its net foreign assets (NFA). Reserve money is defined as the sum of currency issued by the BoT and the deposits of the commercial banks with the BoT. Net foreign assets (NFA) of the BoT consist of its NIR, net other foreign assets, and its medium- and long-term foreign liabilities. For purposes of deriving NDA from reserve money and NFA, the latter are converted into Tanzania shillings at the program exchange rate. Net domestic financing of the government of Tanzania 4. Net domestic financing of the Government of Tanzania (NDF) includes financing by the banking system (BoT and commercial banks) and the nonbank public of the budget of the central (union) government of Tanzania. Financing by the banking system excludes liquidity paper issued by the BoT for monetary policy purposes. For the purposes of the program, NDF excludes privatization proceeds, government debt issued for the recapitalization of the NBC and the NMB, and debt of parastatal companies assumed by the government. NDF is calculated as the cumulative change since the beginning of the fiscal year in the sum of (i) loans and advances to the government by the BoT minus all government deposits with the BoT (including the balances in the accounts of the MDF and the PRBS); (ii) loans and Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 49 - APPENDIX I ATTACHMENT advances to the government by the commercial banks minus all government deposits held with the banks; and (iii) the outstanding stock of domestic debt as identified in the monthly domestic debt report issued by the Ministry of Finance. External payments arrears 5. External payments arrears consist of the total amount of external debt service obligations (interest and principal) of the government and the BoT that have not been paid at the time they are due, excluding arrears on external debt service obligations pending the conclusion of debt-rescheduling arrangements. Under the program, the avoidance of external payments arrears is a continuous performance criterion. Contracting or guaranteeing of external debt on nonconcessional terms 6. The term “debt” will have the meaning set forth in Point 9 of the Guidelines on Performance Criteria with Respect to Foreign Debt adopted on August 24, 2000 (Decision No. 12274-(00/85)). Government debt is outstanding debt owed or guaranteed by the Government of Tanzania or the Bank of Tanzania (but does not include debt of any political subdivision or government-owned entity with separate legal personality that is not otherwise owed or guaranteed by the Government of Tanzania). 7. Government debt is considered nonconcessional if the grant element is lower than 35 percent, calculated using discount rates based on Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) commercial interest rates (CIRR), adjusted as appropriate for different maturities. This performance criterion applies not only to debt as defined in Point 9 of the Guidelines on Performance Criteria with Respect to Foreign Debt adopted on August 24, 2000 (Decision No. 12274-(00/85)), but also to commitments contracted or guaranteed for which value has not been received. Central government recurrent revenue 8. Under the program, central government revenue consists of tax revenue and nontax revenue, cumulative since the start of the fiscal year, excluding privatization proceeds. Tax revenue consists of all revenue collected by the Tanzania Revenue Authority (TRA) minus nontax revenue collected by the TRA, as per the monthly TRA revenue report. Nontax revenue consists of nontax revenue collected by the TRA, dividends, revenue collections by the treasury and the ministries and regions, and appropriations in aid. Extrabudgetary expenditure 9. The avoidance of extrabudgetary expenditure is a continuous benchmark under the program. For the purposes of the program, extrabudgetary expenditure is defined as expenditure paid from accounts outside the regular budgetary (paymaster-general) accounts, including from the accounts of nonbudgetary government entities such as the Presidential Public Sector Reform Commission or the TRA. This benchmark implies that under the program all recorded fiscal transaction by the Government of Tanzania and its agencies, Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 50 - APPENDIX I ATTACHMENT whether authorized in the budget, in any other law, or unauthorized, have to occur within the general framework of accounts that are reported to the IMF on a monthly basis and presented to parliament at least once a year. Budgetary arrears 10. The avoidance of new budgetary arrears constitutes a benchmark under the program. New budgetary arrears are defined as arrears accumulated during the fiscal year on wages, domestic interest, goods and services, and tax refunds. Foreign program assistance 11. Foreign program assistance is defined as grants and loans received by the Ministry of Finance through BoT accounts and is calculated as the cumulative sum, since the beginning of the fiscal year, of the receipts from (i) program loans and (ii) program grants. Adjusters 12. The quantitative targets for the BoT’s net international reserves will be adjusted downward for any shortfall in foreign program assistance. 13. The quantitative limits on the BoT’s net domestic assets will be adjusted upward for any shortfall in foreign program assistance converted into Tanzania shillings at the average quarterly exchange rate. 14. The quantitative limits on the BoT’s net domestic assets and on reserve money will be adjusted downward to the extent that eligible bank reserves fall short of 10 percent of the deposits held by the public with the commercial banks. 15. The quantitative limits on net domestic financing of the Government of Tanzania will be adjusted upward for any shortfall in foreign program assistance converted into Tanzania shillings at the average quarterly exchange rate. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-5l- APPENDIX II I. II. III. IV. V. VI. Tanzania: Relations with the Fund (As of July 31,200l) Membership Status: Joined 09/10/62; Article VIII [date] General Resources Account: Quota Fund holdings of currency Reserve position in Fund SDR Department: Net cumulative allocation Holdings Outstanding Purchases and Loans: Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility (ESAF)/Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF) Financial Arrangements: TVpe PRGF ESAF/PRGF ESAF Approval Expiration g&e &e 03/3 l/2000 04/03/2003 1 l/08/1996 02/07/2000 07/29/1991 0712811994 SDR million % Quota 198.90 100.0 188.93 95.0 9.98 5.0 SDR million % Allocation 31.37 100.0 0.41 1.3 SDR million % Quota 259.78 130.6 Amount approved Amount drawn (SDR million) (SDR million) 135.00 60.00 181.59 181.59 181.90 85.60 Projected Obligations to Fund (SDR million; based on existing use of resources and present holdings of SDRs): Overdue Forthcoming 6/30/200 1 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 Principal 0.0 8.6 17.3 17.4 27.5 38.3 Charges/interest 0.0 1.2 2.3 2.2 2.1 2.0 Total 0.0 9.8 19.6 19.6 29.6 40.3 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 52 - APPENDIX II VII. Implementation of HIPC Initiative: Commitment of HIPC assistance Decision point date Assistance committed (NPV terms) * Total assistance (US$ million) Of which: Fund assistance (SDR million) Completion point date (expected) Delivery of Fund assistance (SDR million) Amount disbursed Interim assistance Completion point 2 Amount applied against member’s obligations (cumulative) Original framework Enhanced framework Total 313 l/2000 2,026 2,026 89 Floating 89 26.7 26.7 26.7 26.7 0 0 19.3 19.3 VIII. Safeguards Assessments: Under the Fund’s safeguards assessment policy, the Bank of Tanzania (BoT) is subject to the transitional procedures with respect to the PRGF arrangement of March 3 1, 2000, which is scheduled to expire on April 3,2003. The transitional procedures require a review of only the BoT’s external audit mechanism. This assessment determines whether the BoT publishes annual financial statements that are independently audited in accordance with internationally accepted standards. The external audit assessment was completed on April 3,200l. The assessment concluded that the BOT’s current external audit mechanism may not be adequate in certain respects, and appropriate recommendations have been made to the authorities, as reported in paragraph [26] of the present staff report. ’ NPV terms at the completion point under the original framework; and NPV terms at the decision point under the enhanced framework. 2 Under the enhanced HIPC Initiative, the nominal amount of assistance disbursed will include an additional amount corresponding to interest on amounts committed but not disbursed during the interim period, calculated using the average return (during the interim period) on the investment of resources held by, or for, the benefit of the PRGF-HIPC Trust. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 53 - APPENDIX II IX. Exchange Arrangements: The currency of Tanzania is the Tanzania shilling. The official exchange rate is determined on the basis of the rate established in the interbank market for foreign exchange. The middle rate in terms of the U.S. dollar, the intervention currency, was Tanzania shilling 892.57 per U.S. dollar as of July 3 1,200 1. The exchange system is free of restrictions on the making of payments and transfers for current international transactions. X. Article IV Consultation: The most recent Article IV consultation was concluded on August 1,200O (EBS/00/147). XI. Technical Assistance, 1999-2001: Departments I Form I Purpose Fiscal Affairs 1998-99 Long-term consultant Expenditure management October 1999 March 200 1 Mission Mission New duty drawback system Fiscal decentralization I May 200 1 Short-term Translation of government consultant accounts and operationalization to the standard classifications 200 l-02 Long-term Strengthening of macro fiscal consultant analysis at the Ministry of Finance IMF Institute March 1999 Mission Financial programming and policy courses Monetary and Since October 1998 Long-term Financial system reform Exchanae Affairs consultant 1 October 2001 1 mission Mission 1 Balance of payments statistics ( Since November 1998 1 Regional 1 Payments systems Statistics June-July 1999 March 200 1 October 2000 advisor Mission Mission Multitopic . . Capital account liberalization Monetary policy operations Macroeconomic statistics XII. Resident Representative: Mr. Tsidi M. Tsikata has been the Resident Representative since October 1998. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 54 - APPENDIX III Tanzania: Relations with the World Bank Group (As of July 31,200l) Relations Tanzania joined the World Bank Group in 1962. Beginning with an IDA credit for education in 1963, a total of 118 credits and 27 World Bank loans, amounting to some US$3.9 billion (US$3.57 billion from IDA and US$361 million from the (IBRD) original principal have so far been approved for Tanzania. Of the 27 loans, 8 loans amounting to US$42.5 million were extended to Tanzania through the East African Community. Total disbursements amounted to nearly US$3.2 billion as of July 31,200l (some US$2,911 million from IDA and US$356 million from the (IBRD). IFC’s committed portfolio of US$45 million (as of December 3 1, 2000) includes investments in tea, leather, agricultural products, tourism, and finance. Consistent with the government’s strategy of poverty reduction through private sector-led growth, rural sector development, and the provision of basic social services, recent Bank lending has emphasized infrastructure (power, ports, railways, telecommunications, urban infrastructure, and roads, including rural roads), small-scale artisanal mining, public sector reform and capacity building (technical assistance to strengthen public services and to improve the environment for private sector development, including financial sector services and support to the government’s privatization efforts), agriculture (policy framework, smallholder irrigation, research, and extension), environment (the regional Lake Victoria project), and social services (health, education, and a social action fund). These projects aim at enhancing environmentally sustainable growth, easing the process of market liberalization, and reducing poverty. IDA has also provided substantial resources as quick-disbursing adjustment lending in support of the reform program through a multisector rehabilitation credit, an industrial and trade adjustment credit, an agricultural adjustment operation and a financial sector adjustment credit, a structural adjustment credit, and more recently, a programmatic structural adjustment credit (PSAC). On April 4, 2000 the Executive Directors of IDA agreed that Tanzania was eligible for debt relief under the enhanced Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Initiative framework; and that the interim poverty reduction strategy paper (I-PRSP) of the government was a satisfactory basis for reaching the decision point. On that basis, interim assistance is being provided, pending reaching of the completion point. The total HIPC Initiative debt-service relief over time is estimated at US$3 billion (US$2.1 billion in net present value (NPV) terms). IDA’s assistance of US$1.2 billion is spread over a period of 20 years, covering 69.1 percent of Tanzania’s debt- service obligations to the Association. Interim relief was provided on a refund basis during April 15- June 30,200O for a total of US$9.5 million. Since July 1,2000, relief has been provided on a reduced-billing basis; this is currently relieving some of the pressure on the cash budget. The fiscal year 2001 IDA relief amounted to US$37.46 million; the fiscal year 2002 relief will amount to US$41.23 million. On November 30,2000, the IDA Board discussed a full poverty reduction strategy paper (PRSP), prepared by the government of Tanzania in consultation and partnership with all key stakeholders; and the joint staff assessment prepared by the Bank and the IMF staff. The Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 55 - APPENDIX III strategic directions indicated in the PRSP are in line with commitments to key international development goals. Furthermore, in keeping with the concerns of stakeholders, and guided by the overarching orientation of the Government’s Vision 2025 and the National Poverty Eradica- tion Strategy, the poverty reduction strategy is aimed at (i) reducing income poverty by creating higher growth and economic opportunities for the poor; (ii) improving human capabilities, survival prospects, and social well-being; and (iii) containing extreme vulnerability among the poor via increased empowerment and improved accountability. The Bank’s Board welcomed the substantial work initiated; the open and participatory process adopted by the government in PRSP preparation; and the strong ownership of the poverty reduction strategy evidenced by Tanzania. However, the Executive Directors noted that completing the ongoing (household and labor market) surveys, in order to allow a precise analysis of poverty trends, its causes, and the impact of economic policies, would be important. They also suggested further strengthening the strategy in the areas of education, agriculture/rural development, and governance, and in the costing of the proposed poverty programs. In pursuance of their poverty reduction strategy and in light of the Board’s recommendations, the government of Tanzania submitted the first progress report on the PRSP for consideration of the IMF and IDA on August 14,200l. Lending program A Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for Tanzania was approved by the Bank’s Board on June 15, 2000. Building on the stable macroeconomic framework to address poverty, strengthening the sources of growth for improved per capita income, and enhancing social services delivery are now central to Tanzania’s development agenda. Reflecting this, the focus of the current CAS is on higher economic growth, poverty reduction, and institutional reforms to improve governance. It conforms with the government’s main strategy of adherence to macroeconomic stability, increased private sector participation in the economy, a renewed emphasis on rural development, and improved delivery of social services. The CAS also supports the government’s desire to enter into new relationships with partners, based on the phased switching from projects to programs for more effective and efficient use of aid resources. In supporting these objectives, the CAS lending program is increasingly geared toward supporting operations with a direct bearing on poverty and strengthening social sector programs, in a shift from the earlier emphasis on infrastructure development. The Bank has recently finished appraising the Tanzania Primary Education Development Program. The objectives of the program include improving education quality, expanding school access, and increasing school retention at the primary level. The project is expected to be presented to the Bank’s Board in fall 2001. The PSAC emphasizes undertaking reforms to improve economic governance and the business environment, in addition to setting up a regulatory framework for utilities and taking further steps toward implementing the government’s privatization program. The conditions prior to release of the floating tranche on economic governance have been fulfilled, and IDA has released SDR 29.85 million associated with it. A move away from traditional project financing toward budget support is also envisaged, with the planned appraisal of a poverty reduction support credit (PRSC) in FY2003. Finally, the IFC will build on the reforms initiated with IDA support to invest in private infrastructure provision, expand and deepen financial markets and institutions, and provide financing and capacity building to Tanzanian small- and medium-sized enterprises. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 56 - APPENDIX IV Tanzania: Statistical Issues Tanzania’s statistical infrastructure and economic database remain weak. Tanzania has received considerable technical assistance to alleviate these difficulties, and progress has been made in some areas. The authorities are fully cooperative in providing data to the Fund, mainly through the resident representative’s office, and available data are provided to the Fund in a timely manner between missions. Tanzania has very few statistical publications and no fully articulated publication policy. The authorities are committed to improving the production and dissemination of macroeconomic and socio-demographic statistics in the framework of the General Data Dissemination System (GDDS). Tanzania is a participant in the GDDS, and its metadata were posted on the DSBB in July 2001. National accounts Historical national accounts data are prepared by the National Bureau of Statistics (NBS) on the basis of data collected by NBS regional offices and by other government agencies and public sector entities. Revised national accounts series for the period 1987-96, reflecting the results of surveys and censuses, were published in May 1997; technical assistance by the Fund and a World Bank-sponsored project were instrumental in permitting completion of this revision. The national accounts data provide a useful basis for assessing movements in output, although many weaknesses remain, particularly with respect to the breakdown by expenditure category, deficiencies in external sector data, and paucity of indicators to extrapolate benchmark production levels. These deficiencies impede the accurate estimation of the savings-investment relationship. Semiannual national accounts data were published for the first time in August 1999. The recent revision of the data for crops and the ongoing household budget survey are all expected to help improve the quality of the national accounts data. Prices Monthly consumer price data are collected by the NBS from 20 cities and regional centers. Since mid-May 1996, data have been published within two weeks of the end of the month. Following the completion of the ongoing household budget survey, the authorities intend to update the consumer price index weights (food currently has a 7 1.2 percent weight), and to collect a wholesale price index series. Government finance statistics The AFR staff is provided with current information on central government revenue, current spending, and financing, with appropriate disaggregation, on a monthly basis, and with a short lag. There are substantial gaps between revenue and expenditure data, on the one hand, and the financing data, on the other. The staff works with the authorities on reconciling these differences. A significant amount of aid-financed capital spending is not captured in the fiscal accounts, because projects are carried out directly by donors. No information is provided on the financial position of provincial governments and parastatals. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 57 - APPENDIX IV Major aggregates on central government operations are reported to STA for publication in International Financial Statistics (IFS). The accuracy of these aggregates, in view of the large entries for adjustments, is questionable. Comprehensive and detailed government finance statistics are no longer reported, and a country page for Tanzania was dropped from the Government Finance Statistics (GFS) Yearbook in 1991. The government is computerizing its accounting system, which is expected to allow resumption of reporting in the GFS Yearbook starting with the fiscal year 2000/01 (July-June). Monetary statistics The GDDS multisector mission (October 1 l-24, 2000) determined that the quality of monetary statistics is compromised by various methodological problems, in particular an arbitrary application of the residency criterion by commercial banks, an inadequate subdivision of the resident sector data, misclassification of certain accounting data between monetary aggregates, a lack of separate identification of restricted deposits of closed banks and nonperforming loans of the banking system, a nontransparent treatment of repurchase agreements, inadequate sectorization in the bank reporting system, and an erroneous coverage of international reserves. To address these problems, the mission recommended that the Bank of Tanzania instruct commercial banks to classify accounts according to the client’s properly determined residency status and use a more detailed scheme for sectorizing resident sector data; reclassify misclassified accounting data to facilitate an accurate construction of monetary aggregates; establish a separate identification of restricted deposits of closed banks and nonperforming assets of the banking system to ensure that the resulting deposit and credit aggregates are meaningful for macroeconomic analysis; treat repurchase agreements with commercial banks as a new financial instrument for providing or taking loans; modify the bank reporting system to emphasize appropriate sectoral distinctions between various accounts; and redefine the coverage of international reserves to include only liquid foreign assets and a market-based value of gold assets. Based on these recommendations, the mission prepared an action plan. The Bank of Tanzania (BoT) is expected to implement the recommended actions by October 200 1. A follow-up mission in money and banking statistics, however, would be required to review the implementation of these recommendations and to assist with the development of a wider financial survey covering activities of all deposit-taking financial institutions. Balance of payments statistics Foreign trade data are prepared by staff missions on the basis of information from the BoT, which is derived from customs data. There is believed to be a significant amount of unrecorded trade. Information on invisible transactions is sparse. Tourism revenue is estimated on the basis of foreign exchange transactions data. Information on official grant and loan receipts is prepared by the staff on the basis of contact with official agencies. Data on private capital flows are very poor. Some information on Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 58 - APPENDIX IV private banking flows can be derived from the monetary survey; other private capital flows are captured only in errors and omissions. Data on the gross and net ofIicia1 reserves of the BoT are provided monthly with a short lag and more frequently on request. Similarly, data on foreign assets and liabilities of the banking system are provided with relatively short lags. Significant progress was made in improving the quality of external debt data as a result of the reconciliation exercise in connection with the HIPC Initiative. At present, multilateral and bilateral Paris Club debts have been fully reconciled. These two categories of debts account for 80 percent of Tanzania’s total external debt. However, little progress has been made in reconciling the rest of the debts owed to non-Paris Club bilateral and commercial creditors. Information on external debt not guaranteed by the public, mostly private sector debt, is also limited and not captured in a timely manner. The recent GDDS multisector statistics mission noted that a number of improvements had been made since the most recent STA mission in 1996. Several recommendations with respect to establishing more detailed and complete coverage of services transactions have been implemented. Efforts to improve the collection, compilation, and analysis of foreign direct investment data are being made through the Private Capital Flow Project, which includes a census of foreign investors in Tanzania conducted in June 2000. Preparation is under way to conduct a joint survey of nonresident travelers and service providers in the tourism sector. With regard to collecting data on private external debt, efforts are being made to enhance the database maintained by the Debt Management Department of the BoT; a BoT circular was issued in September 2000 requesting that commercial banks report information on external debt extended to private and parastatal companies. Building upon these initiatives, the October 2000 GDDS multisector statistics mission recommended that the authorities (i) improve the coverage of trade data by including estimates of unrecorded trade; (ii) improve the measurement of data on services, in particular travel data; (iii) set up a complete database for recording and monitoring all types of grants; and (iv) strengthen the coverage and measurement of direct investment. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-59- APPENDIX IV Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 60 - Tanzania: Selected Social and Demographic Development Indicators APPENDIX V Same Region/ Latest Single Year Income Group 1970-75 1980-85 1993-99 Sub- Low- Saharan income Africa countries Population Total population, midyear (millions) Growth rate (percent annual average) Urban population (percent of population) Total fertility rate (births per woman) Share of labor force in agriculture (percent) Income/consumption distribution Share of income or consumption (percent of income or consumption) Lowest quintile Highest quintile Poverty indicators Percent of population below poverty line Depth li Total poverty gap (billions of U.S. dollars) Social indicators Net primary school enrollment rate (percent of age group) Total Male Female Access to health care (persons) Population per physician Population per nurse Population per hospital bed Access to safe water (percent of population) Total Urban Rural Immunization rate (percent under 12 months) Measles Diphtheria Child malnutrition (percent under 5 years) Life expectancy at birth (years) Total Male Female Mortality Infant (per 1,000 live births) Under 5 (per 1,000 live births) Adult (15-59) Male (per 1,000 population) Female (per 1,000 population) Maternal (per 100,000 live births) 15.9 21.8 32.9 642.8 2,417.1 3.0 3.2 2.7 2.6 1.9 10.1 17.6 31.7 33.8 31.4 6.8 6.5 5.4 5.3 3.7 88.0 85.0 84.0 65.0 67.0 5.0 6.8 53.0 45.5 64.6 50.5 35.8 34.2 1.21 0.31 ,.. 22,540 3,403 48 51 45 47 59 46 49 44 46 58 50 53 46 48 60 118 108 95 92 77 218 176 152 161 116 513 419 56 48 55 48 56 49 28,271 25,000 7,988 768 981 1,316 1,034 54 55 76 80 82 88 42 41 70 66 78 57 67 82 59 31 64 70 451 370 542 499 500 453 530 288 258 Source: World Bank, World Development Indicators, February 1999. I/ Percent of poverty line income required to bring everyone below the poverty line up to it Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-61 - APPENDIX VI Tanzania: Draft Public Information Notice International Monetary Fund 700 lgth Street, NW Washington, D. C. 20431 USA Public Information Notice (PIN) No. FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE [September, 24, 20011 IMF Concludes 2001 Article IV Consultation with Tanzania On [September, 24, 20011, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded the 2001 Article IV consultation with Tanzania.’ Background Recent macroeconomic performance (the first year of the current PRGF-supported program) was strong. In spite of uneven rainfall, which led to poor agricultural output and power shortages, real GDP grew by 4.9 percent; the 12-month inflation rate fell to 5.1 percent at end-June 2001 (the lowest rate in more than 21 years); and gross international reserves rose to almost US$l billion at end-2000 from US$776 million at end-1999, in line with the medium-term target of at least four months of imports of goods and nonfactor services. I Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial information, and discusses with officials the country’s economic developments and policies. On return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the country’s authorities. This PIN summarizes the views of the Executive Board as expressed during the [September, 24, 20011 Executive Board discussion based on the staff report. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 62 - APPENDIX VI Fiscal performance during the 2000/01 fiscal year (July-June) exceeded program expectations and continued to be the key to Tanzania’s macroeconomic stability. Tax revenue was buoyant in most categories, while government expenditures were lower than originally programmed. The overall budget deficit (before grants) amounted to 4.5 percent of GDP, compared with 5.2 percent under the program and 5.8 percent in 1999/2000. The external current account deficit (excluding grants) narrowed from the equivalent of 12.1 percent of GDP in 1999 to 9.1 percent in 2000, owing to an increase in exports and a small decline in imports. Notwithstanding a drop in international prices for Tanzania’s commodity exports, total exports grew, mainly on account of a sharp increase in nontraditional exports, particularly gold. The overall balance of payments at end- December 2000 showed a surplus that was more than double the amount in 1999. This improvement allowed a sizable buildup of net foreign assets. The favorable development in the balance of payments led to an excess supply in the foreign exchange market through most of 2000, which, in turn, put upward pressure on the Tanzania shilling exchange rate. Intervention by the Bank of Tanzania (BoT) caused a buildup of excess liquidity in the banking system and a decline in short-term yields on treasury bills to below 3 percent (less than the rate of inflation) in early 2001. Since then, the focus of monetary policy has shifted to absorbing excess liquidity in the interest of keeping inflation in low single digits. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 63 - APPENDIX VI Tanzania’s poverty reduction and growth strategy, which is described in the country’s poverty reduction strategy paper (PRSP) and which is consistent with the program supported by the IMF under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF), focuses on maintaining macroeconomic stability and intensifying the implementation of reforms aimed at promoting market efficiency, especially in agriculture, and raising factor productivity. While the authorities will continue to implement prudent expenditure policies, special efforts will be made to channel government resources toward programs and services in the key priority areas of education, health, water, agriculture, roads, the judiciary, and HIV/AIDS. Continued implementation of the PRGF-supported program and satisfactory implementation of the poverty reduction strategy (as described in the PRSP) for at least a year are both important conditions for reaching the completion point under the HIPC Initiative. Executive Board Assessment Public information Notices (PINS) are issued, (i) at the request of a member country, following the conclusion of the Article IV consultation for countries seeking to make known the views of the IMF to the public. This action is intended to strengthen IMF surveillance over the economic policies of member countries by increasing the transparency of the IMF’s assessment of these policies; and (ii) following policy discussions in the Executive Board at the decision of the Board. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 64 - APPENDIX VI Tanzania: Selected Economic Indicators, 1999-2000 Domestic economy Real GDP Consumer prices (end of period) 4.7 4.9 7.0 5.5 (In millions of U.S. dollars) I/ External economy Exports, f.o.b. Imports, f.o.b. Current account (excluding official transfers) (in percent of GDP) External assistance 21 Debt service 31 (in percent of exports of goods and nonfactor services) Gross official reserves (in months of imports of goods and nonfactor services) Change in real effective exchange rate (in percent) 41 562.7 663.1 1,351.4 1334.9 -1,060.7 -826.9 -12.1 -9.1 1,265 1,135 163.0 133.0 14.3 10.6 775.6 974.4 4.4 4.9 -5.6 12.4 (In percent of GDP) I/ Financial variables Central government balance (including grants) 51 -1.3 -0.7 Change in broad money (in percent) 18.6 14.8 Change in credit to the nongovernment sector (in percent) 25.5 9.4 Interest rate (in percent) 61 15.3 5.8 1999 2000 (Annual percentage change) Sources: Tanzanian authorities; and IMF staff estimates. I/ Unless otherwise noted. 21 Multilateral and bilateral grants and loans (including IMF disbursements). 3/ After debt rescheduling and debt relief. 4/(+) = appreciation. 51 Fiscal years beginning in July of year shown. 61 Weighted average of 3-, 6-, and 12-month treasury bill rate: end of period. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public