DOCUMENT OF INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND NOT FOR PUBLIC USE ARCHIVES ROOM HQ C-532 0451 EBS/OO/147 CONFIDENTIAL July 18,200O To: Members of the Executive Board From: Subject: The Secretary Tanzania-Staff Report for the 2000 Article IV Consultation and First Review Under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staff report for the 2000 Article IV consultation with Tanzania and the first review for Tanzania under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility, which will be brought to the agenda for discussion on a date to be announced. A draft decision appears on page 23. Mr. G. Johnson (ext. 38779) and Mr Snoek (ext. 38823) are available to answer technical or factual questions relating to this paper prior to the Board discussion. Unless the Documents Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the WTO Secretariat on Wednesday, July 26, 2000; and to the African Development Bank, the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa, and the European Commission, following its consideration by the Executive Board. Att: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicCONFIDENTIAL INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND TANZANIA Staff Report for the 2000 Article IV Consultation and First Review Under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility Prepared by the African Department (In consultation with the Fiscal Affairs, Legal, Monetary and Exchange Affairs, Policy Development and Review, Research, and Statistics Departments) Approved by Anupam Basu and Anthony Boote July 18,200O Content Page Executive Summary.. ................................................................................................................ .3 I. Introduction ............................................................................................................................ 4 II. Recent Macroeconomic Developments.. .............................................................................. .4 III. Policy Discussions .............................................................................................................. .9 A. Macroeconomic and External Policies.. ................................................................... .9 B. The Budget for 2000/01 ......................................................................................... .13 C. Tax Reform and Expenditure Management ........................................................... .14 D. Structural Reform and Governance.. ...................................................................... .16 E. Poverty Reduction and the Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper.. ............................ .18 F. Program Monitoring ............................................................................................... .18 IV. Staff Appraisal.. ................................................................................................................ .20 Box I, Paris Club Rescheduling Agreement with Tanzania, April 2000.. ..................................... .lO Figures 1. Economic and Financial Indicators, 19952000.. ................................................................. .6 2. Prices and Interest Rates, January 1996-May 2000 ............................................................. .7 3. Effective Exchange Rates, January 1991-March 2000 ........................................................ .9 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2- Tables I. Summary of Central Government Operations, 1999/2000 and 2000/01 ............................. 15 2. Budget Allocations to Priority Sector Ministries and Departments, Including Transfers to Regions and Local Government, 1999/2000 and 2000/01 ............................. .19 3. Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 1996-2002 .................................................. ,24 4. Central Government Operations, 1996/97-2002103 ........................................................... .25 5. Monetary Survey, 1995-2000.. ........................................................................................... .27 6. Summary Accounts of the Bank of Tanzania, 1995-2000 ................................................. .28 7. Medium-Term Balance of Payments, 1994/95-2005 ......................................................... .29 I. Letter of Intent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30 Table 1. Financial Performance Criteria and Benchmarks Under the First Annual Program Under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility Arrangement, January-December 2000 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..42 Table 2. Structural Performance Criteria and Benchmarks Under the First Annual Program Under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility, January-December 2000 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43 II. Relations with the Fund . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44 III. Relations with the World Bank Group . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47 IV. Statistical Issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49 V. Income and Social Indicators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3- EXECUTIVE SUMMARY l Macroeconomic developments through May 2000 were largely in line with program objectives, and all quantitative performance criteria and benchmarks for end-March were met with wide margins, except the benchmark for government revenue, which was missed by a small margin. Growth appeared to be accelerating in the beginning of the year, but the spottiness of the recent rains may affect agricultural production. Amid appropriate monetary policies, the end-period inflation rate declined to 6.0 percent in May, In the first quarter, exports rebounded from the low level in 1999. The nominal exchange rate has remained around T Sh 800 per U.S. dollar since August 1999. l The fiscal measures taken to address slippages in late 1999 contributed to higher revenues in the first quarter, although they remained somewhat below target. Despite a small revenue shortfall, the net domestic financing target for end-March was met by a margin of 0.5 percent of GDP, reflecting severe expenditure compression and a buildup of arrears, resulting from continuing weakness in the implementation of the cash management system. l The structural performance criteria and most structural benchmarks to date have been met. The authorities have substantially revised their approach to privatization; the changes will speed up the process but have caused some transitional delays. Policies on parastatal debt and retrenchment were finalized in May. The reform of the petroleum sector has been substantially completed, and, in the financial sector, the sales agreement for NBC (1997) was signed in March. With regard to governance, the government is now developing sectoral anticotruption plans. l Allocations to the social and other priority sectors have again increased substantially in the 2000/01 budget, based on the medium-term expenditure framework. Preparations for the completion of a broad-based poverty reduction strategy paper, to be submitted to the IMP and the World Bank in August 2000, are broadly on track. Tanzania: Macroeconomic Objectives, 1998-2002 Real GDP Inflation (end ofperiod) Money supply (MZ) Fiscal balance (including grants and grant element; checks clcarcd) External current account balance (including grants and grant clement) Gross official reserves 1998 4.0 11.3 11.1 1.2 -3.7 3.4 1999 2000 2001 FYoj. Proi. (Percent change) 4.7 5.2 5.6 7.0 5.0 4.0 is.0 10.5 10.0 (In percent of GDP) 0.6 0.6 -0. I -2.6 -2.8 -3.5 (In month of imports) 4.1 4.2 4.2 2002 FYoj. 6.0 4.0 10.0 0.2 -3.5 4.3 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4- I. INTRODUCTION 1. The discussions for the 2000 Article IV consultation and the first review of the arrangement under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF), which was approved by the Executive Board on March 3 1,2000, were held in Tanzania during April 25-May 12 and June 27-July 4,200O. The mission’ reviewed recent economic developments and policies and reached understandings on policies for the remainder of 2000, on a budget framework for 2000/01 (July-June), and on changes to the quantitative performance criteria and benchmarks for September and December 2000. The Tanzanian representatives included the Hon. D. Yona, Minister for Finance; the Hon. A. Kigoda, Minister for Energy and Minerals; the Hon. W. Masilingi, Minister of State for Good Governance; Mr. D. Ballali, Governor, Bank of Tanzania (BoT); Mr. P. Ngumbullu, Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Finance (MoF); and other senior officials of the governments of Tanzania and Zanzibar. The mission was also received by President Mkapa. 2. The last Article IV consultation with Tanzania was concluded on February 8, 1999. Executive Directors commended the authorities for their steadfast implementation of prudent macroeconomic policies. They looked forward to the further strengthening of budgetary management and called for a more ambitious revenue effort. They highlighted the importance of further strengthening structural reforms, especially in the financial sector. Tanzania accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2(a), 3, and 4, effective July 15, 1996. 3. The letter of intent for the first review is presented in Appendix I. Tanzania’s relations with the Fund and the World Bank Group are summarized in Appendices II and III, and statistical issues are discussed in Appendix IV. Appendix V provides selected income and social indicators. II. RECENTMACROECONOMKDEVELOPMENTS' 4. Developments through end-May 2000 were broadly in line with the objectives of the government’s economic program for 2000, which aims at (i) attaining real GDP growth of ’ The mission consisted of Mr. G.G. Johnson (head), Mr. Snoek, Ms. Elborgh-Woytek, Mr. Wolfson, Mr. Pillay (all AFR), Mr. Thugge @‘DR), and Ms. Hirschhofer (FAD). The mission was closely assisted by Mr. Tsikata, the Fund’s Resident Representative in Tanzania. Members of the World Bank resident mission participated in the policy discussions. ’ The documents for the March 30 Executive Board meeting that approved the PRGF arrangement and HIPC Initiative debt relief for Tanzania provide extensive background on macroeconomic issues and the constraints on growth in Tanzania (EBS/00/44,3/10/00; and EBS/00/54,3/20/00). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-5- 5.2 percent; (ii) further reducing the end-period 12-month inflation rate to 5.0 percent by end- December; (iii) and maintaining average gross official reserves at four months of imports of goods and nonfactor services. The growth rate for 1999 has been revised slightly upward to 4.7 percent, and developments so far in 2000, including sharply higher exports in the first quarter, support the revision. However, the spottiness of the recent rains may have a negative effect on growth in the second half of the year. Amid tight fiscal and monetary policies, the 12-month inflation rate declined to 6.0 percent at end-May (Table 3, and Figures 1 and 2) despite sharp increases in prices of petroleum products. The program’s targets for end- March 2000 for net international reserves and net domestic assets of the Bank of Tanzania (BoT) and for net domestic financing of the government were all met with wide margins. 5. The measures taken in October-November 1999 to address the revenue shortfall continued to contribute to higher revenues in the first quarter of 2000, but the total still fell slightly (T Sh 4 billion) short of the target for end-March.3 Total tax collections were T Sh 10 billion (0.1 percent of GDP) lower than targeted, mainly because of lower consumer goods imports and lower income taxes, and despite one-off collections of arrears and the accumulation of T Sh 3 billion in value-added tax (VAT) refund arrears. A large part of this shortfall was made up by higher nontax revenue, mainly because of dividend receipts. 6. Despite the revenue shortfall, the net domestic financing target for end-March was met by a margin of T Sh 33.6 billion (0.5 percent of GDP), owing to severe expenditure compression. The authorities wanted to reduce the sharp increase in domestic debt in the previous months as soon as possible and establish a safety margin with regard to the net domestic financing target so as to avoid exceeding it inadvertently; in the event, however, the monthly expenditure ceilings under the cash management system were unduly tight. Expenditures on goods and services for the first three quarters of the fiscal year remained 15 percent lower than projected under the program. The priority sectors were not fully protected, and in the first three quarters of the fiscal year the budget accumulated arrears on domestic interest payments (T Sh 3 billion) and to suppliers, mainly the Tanzania Electric Supply Company Ltd. (TANESCO), to which the government incurred arrears of about T Sh 25 billion. (Even including the expenditure arrears, expenditures were five percent below program.) 7. Broad money was above the upper limit of the Bank of Tanzania’s target range in the fourth quarter of 1999 and the first quarter of 2000. Concerned about possible inflationary 3 The fiscal problems that arose at the end of 1998/99 and the beginning of 1999/2000, as well as the measures taken by the government to address these problems, were described in EBS/00/44. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-6- Figure 1, Tanzania: Economic and Financial Indicators, 1995 - 2000 I/ Reel GDP Gmwtb Inflation, Money and Credit (in percent) (end period; in percent) 8 45 Fiscal Performance (in percent of GDP) ,6 External Current Account and Trade Balances (ii percent ofGDP) 11 Fiscal years run from July to June. “i%e figures for Zoo0 are projections. 21 The 1996 figure for credit to the nongovernment sector has been adjusted to exclude the write-off of T Sh 112 billion in non performing loans by the National Bank of Commac and the Cwpcrative and Rum! Development Bank. 31 Grants include the grant clement of concession4 loans. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicFigure 2. Tanzania: Prices and Interest Rates, January 1996 - May 2000 Consumer Price Index 32 r (Annual percentage change) 32 30 - - 30 - 28 - 26 - 24 - 22 - 20 - 18 - 16 14 - - 14 12 - - 12 10 - - 10 8 - - 8 6 - 'L._ 6 4 - ./-\ - 4 2 \ - -- 2 o 1,.,,,,,,,,,.1...,,,.,,,.1..1......1.~.......,,,... o 1996 1991 1998 1999 2000 Interest Fates 45 (In percent) - Posted short-ten Posted short-term -i, -i, 20 - S'\ \. 91-day treasury bill 91-day treasury bill !. yield rate 15 - ,. . . I _. ,.l;--;>) I” r ’ I ~:-, , .. ~., s 4 5 - Savings deposit rate o-“““““““““““““““““““““““““” 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 Source: Tanzanian authorities. 45 40 35 30 25 20 15 10 5 0 li Posted lending rates increasingly exceed average rates, and posted deposit rates are increasingly exceeded byaveragerates. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 8- effects, the BoT increased its sales of liquidity paper4 As a result, interest rates on short-term government debt, which had risen sharply to about 15 percent in July-October 1999 because of the large borrowing needs of the government, remained at that level through March despite the improvement in the fiscal sitnation (Figure 2). The 12-month growth rate of credit to the private sector (excluding write-offs by the National Bank of Commerce (NBC) (1997))’ declined from 45 percent in March 1999 to about 17 percent by March 2000, reportedly reflecting the recessionary impact of fiscal and monetary restraint; large projects, particularly in the mining sector, continue to be financed abroad. 8. Exports in the first quarter of 2000 showed broad-based growth, as increases in the volumes of gold and cashew nut exports led to a sharp rebound from the low level of the previous year. At the same time, imports declined, despite higher petroleum product prices, largely on account of a decline in imports of capital equipment for mining. The resulting improvement in the current account led to net international reserves’ exceeding the end- March target by USS78 million, after the programmed adjustment for a US$41 million shortfall in net foreign financing.6 Because of the strong supply of foreign exchange, the exchange rate remained stable at about T Sh 800 per U.S. dollar. (In contrast to the usual seasonal pattern, there was little need for sales by the BoT to damp large seasonal swings.) Reflecting the sharp nominal depreciation of the Tanzania shilling in June-August 1999, the real effective exchange rate (in terms of relative consumer prices) depreciated by 4.2 percent during the 12 months through March 2000 (Figure 3). 9. In April, the government reached agreement with the Paris Club on a flow rescheduling on Cologne terms (Box 1); several creditors announced that they would forgive some or all of the remaining debt. Progress with the IDA-financed debt buyback was slow, and the tendering and closing dates have been extended from March until September and December 2000, respectively, to allow creditors more time. At the Consultative Group meeting held in Dar es Salaam during May 22-25,2000, donors pledged to at least maintain the present level of program assistance, in addition to the debt relief provided under the enhanced Initiative for Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC Initiative) or on a bilateral basis. In view of the lower multilateral debt-service obligations following the debt relief, a large part of the program grants will henceforth be channeled through a new Poverty 4 Liquidity paper is the BoT’s main short-term monetary policy instrument and consists of 91-day treasury bills. These bills are sold through the auctions as regular treasury bills, but the BoT assumes the liability and pays the interest. ’ In the months up to the signing of the sales agreement and in the context of the continuing restructuring effort, NBC( 1997) wrote off a large amount of nonperforming credit. 6 The shortfall was mainly due to delays in disbursements of program loans and grants; however, total disbursements for the fiscal year were expected to be close to the programmed US$2 17 million. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-9- Figure 3. Tanzania: Effective Exchange rates, January 1991 - March 2000 (period average, 1990=100; foreign currency per Tanzania shilling) 160 160 0 Lo 1991 1992 199, 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 Souru I&F. Information Notice System. Reduction Budget Support Facility, which replaces the Multilateral Debt Facility (paragraph 30 of the letter of intent). III. POLICY DISCUSSIONS A. Macroeconomic and External Policies IO. Macroeconomic developments were broadly in line with the program in the first quarter of 2000. Nevertheless, real interest rates had remained very high, despite rapid growth of money. On the fiscal side, expenditures had been kept well below what was possible under the program. A principal topic for discussion was whether policies should be adjusted to promote the attainment of the program objectives in the rest of the fiscal year ending in June, and in the remainder of 2000. Il. With regard to fiscal policies, following a review in April of the budgetary outlook for the remainder of the fiscal year, the shortfall in net foreign financing was expected to be Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-lO- Box 1. Paris Club Rescheduling Agreement with Tanzania, April 2000 On April 14,2000, an agreement was reached between 13 official bilateral creditors ’ and Tanzania on a three- year flow rescheduling on Cologne terms (debt reduction of 90 percent in net present value terms), covering about US$O.7 billion of arrears on principal, interest and late interest, and current maturities (principal and imerest). The agreement covers arrears as of end-March 2000 and maturities falling due during the consolidation period [April 2000 to March 2003) on the following non-oIXcial development assistance (ODA) debt contracted before the cutoff date (June 30, 1986): (i) debt not previously rescheduled; (ii) debt previously rescheduled on non- xmcessional terms; and (iii) debt rescheduled on Toronto, London, and Naples terms, when the concessional element was topped up to Cologne terms. Exempt were arrears accrued since the end of the previous consolidation period (end-November 1999) of the 1997 rescheduling, which are to be paid by end- November 2000. One creditor agreed to defer, over three years, maturities due under the 1997 rescheduling agreement, owing to delays in signing their bilateral agreement. All participating creditors chose the debt- reduction option (rescheduling over 23 years with a 6,year grace period, with graduated payments). ODA debt was rescheduled over 40 years, with 16 years of grace and graduated payments, at interest rates at least as favorable as the concessional rate applying to those loans. The de minimis threshold is SDR 500,000. The deadline for signing bilateral agreements is November 30,200O. The provisions of the agreement will continue to apply until March 31.2001, provided Tanzania continues to have an appropriate arrangement with the Fund. The provisions will also apply finm April 1,200l up to March 31,2003,provided Tanzania continues to have appropriate arrangements with the Fund and maintains a good payments record under the rescheduling agreement. To facilitate implementation, Tanzania will make monthly deposits of at least SDR 300,000 at the end of each month, starting in May 2000, for debt-service payments into a special account at the Bank of England. Tanzania also undertook to negotiate debt-reorganisation arrangements promptly with its other external creditors on terms at least comparable to those granted by Paris Club creditors. The agreement includes a goodwill clause for participating countries to meet at the completion point of the HIPC Initiative to examine Tanzania’s outstanding stock of debt and to make the necessary effort to reach the objective of debt sustainability in the context of equitable burden sharing among creditors, provided that Tanzania (i) maintains satisfactory relations with the participating creditor countries, including full implementation of all agreements signed with them, and maintains a sound adjushncnt track record; and (ii) the Boards of the IMF and the World Bank decide that Tanzania has reached its completion point under the HIPC Initiative. I Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, Norway, the Russian Federation, the United Kingdom, and the United States. Observer countries comprised Denmark and Spain. largely reversed in the last quarter; however, the shortfall in budget revenues was expected to widen slightly by June, and domestic interest payments were higher than programmed (Table 4). In view of the positive macroeconomic developments, and to help avoid further cuts in expenditures, it was decided that the targeted net repayment of domestic financing by T Sh 8 billion in 1999/2000 could be forgone. The authorities improved the methodology for determining expenditure ceilings by taking into account actual developments in net domestic financing in the previous month and by allowing shortfalls in net foreign financing in the program to be offset by additional domestic financing.’ ’ To simplify its use, the program’s adjuster for deviations between the programmed and actual net foreign financing was changed to allow a full 100 percent adjustment for shortfalls, (continued.. .) Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-ll- 12. The authorities cleared most arrears by end-June 2000 and plan to avoid new arrears in the future; a benchmark to this effect has been included in the program for September and December 2000. With regard to the tax refund arrears, the dependence of the Tanzania Revenue Authority (TRA) on cash allocations from the Ministry of Finance was eliminated as of July 1,200O by allowing the former to use its tax revenue accounts to finance the refunds. The authorities explained that the large arrears owed to TANESCO were partly due to administrative delays in verifying electricity bills, which were paid centrally by the Ministry of Finance. With the start of the new fiscal year on July 1,2000, the new Integrated Financial Management System (IFMS) will permit the monitoring of arrears, thereby eliminating the need for central payment of the bills, and electricity payments will again become the responsibility of individual ministries, thus promoting conservation and allowing TANESCO to suspend supply to individual ministries in case of arrears. The government expects to offset part of the arrears owed to TANESCO against payments made from the budget to service TANESCO’s foreign debt. 13. The staff agreed with the authorities that the persistently high growth of M2 since late 1999, while interest rates remained high, inflation continued to decline, and demand for foreign exchange was weak, could indicate a structurally higher demand for money following the sharp decline in inflation in recent years.’ Starting from the larger base of March 2000, but assuming no further decline in velocity, the BoT revised the monetary target for end- 2000 upward, increasing consistently the program’s ceilings on its net domestic assets for September and December (Tables 5 and 6). Reflecting the new targets, it began to ease monetary policy in April. The staff agreed with the shift in policy, but advised the authorities to proceed gradually since (i) the structural change in velocity, while expected and welcome, remained to be confirmed over time; and (ii) the easing of monetary policy would coincide with increases in government expenditure to more normal levels. In the event, the BoT reduced its outstanding liabilities on 91-day treasury bills and repurchase agreements from T Sh 70 billion at end-March to T Sh 40 billion at end-May-a decline equivalent to 3.2 percent of end-March M2. Meanwhile, short-term interest rates fell rapidly to 7.3 percent up to a maximum amount of US$60 million, which is less than 15 percent of the end-year target for net international reserves. * Foreign currency deposits, and hence M3, continue to grow more rapidly than M2. While most such deposits are thought to be related to external trade, some are related to domestic transactions: after last year’s sharp depreciation, some organizations reliant on external finance have begun to defer conversion of foreign exchange until closer to the time funds are needed for domestic transactions; moreover, some large foreign currency deposits are maintained by direct investors (particularly mining companies) pending their domestic use. The monetary policy discussions thus emphasized the importance of monitoring the behavior of such deposits, even though it was agreed that M2 is currently a more relevant target than M3. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12. in June, with similar declines in longer-term rates, and excess liquidity in the banking system increased. The BoT explained that this sharp movement resulted from the practice of fixing, at the beginning of each month, monthly targets for operations in 91-day treasury bills and repurchase agreements. The staff urged that more short-run flexibility be adopted in future, in keeping with the objective of smoothing sharp fluctuations in interest rates. 14. The monetary program was also adjusted to allow for higher net domestic financing of the government during the second half of 2000. During this period, the budget will have to make sizable outlays in connection with the general and presidential elections in October. Given the importance for the program of making an early start on poverty-alleviating priority expenditures, the revised program allows for T Sh 28.3 billion in domestic financing in the second half of 2000, which will be repaid during the first half of 2001. The increase in govermnent expenditure appears to run little risk of reigniting inflationary pressures, given the scope for slowing the accumulation of international reserves and the sluggish growth of credit to the nongovernment sector. The program provides room for the recovery of the latter to a pace of 28 percent, consistent with both the growth rate of the economy and the continuing recovery of Tanzania’s unusually low ratio of credit to GDP. 15. The signing of the sales agreement of NBC (1997) on March 3 1,200O was an important milestone in the reform of the financial sector9 The microfinance policy was approved by the government in May 2000, only slightly later than the program’s target date of April. The BoT issued seven revised prudential regulations by the end of June, two more than targeted, including core regulations in areas such as capital adequacy, foreign exchange transactions, and credit concentration. The authorities reported that they were continuing to build up bank supervision capacity, intending to increase staff by a further 15 percent this year to be able to carry out annual onsite inspections of all banks. 16. The balance of payments outlook remains broadly in line with the program (Table 7), as higher exports are expected to be offset to a large extent by lower program 10ans.‘~ Over the medium-term, the external current account deficit, excluding official transfers, is projected to narrow substantially, largely as a result of the export of gold. This improvement, together with a strengthening of the capital account, debt relief from bilateral donors, and ‘The government used the receipts from the sale-T Sh 12 billion-and a bond issue of T Sh 28.5 billion to make up for previous losses of the bank. Further payments will be made over the next three years. lo The lower program loan levels reflect a reprofiling of amounts expected to be disbursed by IDA and the African Development Bank from 2000 to 2001-02. Total program aid for 2000 is now projected at US$236 million, and HIPC Initiative interim debt relief adds a further US$42 million, in addition to the debt relief provided by Paris Club rescheduling, comparable treatment by other bilateral creditors, and the donor-financed commercial debt buyback. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13- interim HIPC Initiative assistance from the IMF and the IDA, should permit Tanzania to maintain external reserves equivalent to about four months of imports of goods and nonfactor services. The authorities indicated that the exchange rate of the Tanzania shilling would continue to be market determined, with intervention by the BoT limited to meeting targets for reserves accumulation and smoothing seasonal fluctuations. While they welcomed the small depreciation of the real effective exchange rate during the last 12 months, the authorities suggested that the recent broad-based upsurge in exports, if sustained, appeared to indicate that a large part of the effect on competitiveness of the considerable appreciation during the last tive years might have been offset by increased efficiency and lower costs in the economy resulting from the structural reforms. 17. Developments in external trade policies are set out in paragraphs 26-28 of tbe letter of intent. The staff regretted that the new trade barriers introduced last year, which had detracted from the beneficial effects of customs tariff reductions, had not been addressed more aggressively, hut it acknowledged that progress had been somewhat more rapid that had been indicated in the March 2000 memorandum of economic and financial policies (MEFP).” Developments in policies with respect to external debt, aid mobilization, and the capital account are set out in paragraphs 29-3 1 of the letter of intent. The govemment has contracted to purchase a new radar system for air traffic control and military purposes. Aid financing was not available for tbe equipment because of its military purposes, but repayment is on a stretched-out basis that the authorities indicate meets the concessionality requirement for external borrowing. In the area of capital markets, the regional regulatory authorities and stock exchanges have formed the East African Securities Regulatory Authority. The Tanzanian authorities indicated that Tanzania’s own regulations for companies listed on the stock exchange already meet international disclosure and accounting standards. B. The Budget for 2OOOM)l 18. The macroeconomic framework underlying the government’s budget for 2000/01, which was submitted to parliament on June 15, is in line with the medium-term targets of the program. The budget aims to avoid net domestic financing during 2000/01, but the authorities stated that they intended to use T Sh 15 billion in privatization receipts to help finance the cost of the elections and to protect the priority sectors.‘2 ” Tanzania has a rating of 6 on the 1 O-point scale of trade restrictiveness, based on the virtual absence in the country of nontariff barriers on imports, some restrictions on exports introduced during recent drought conditions, and a simple average tariff of 16.1 percent. Tanzania has four nonzero tariff bands of 5, 10,20, and 25 percent. I2 In several privatized companies, including those listed on the Dar es Salaam Stock Exchange, the government has chosen to keep 30 percent of its share for later sales. The intended sales in 2000/01 will reduce the government’s shareholdings in these companies to 20 percent. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14- 19. Increasing the revenue-to-GDP ratio to make more resources available for poverty reduction remains a major objective of the government.” Following the tax reforms in recent years, additional revenue has to come mainly from improvements in tax administration and from a broadening of the tax base, and the budget includes several measures in this respect. However, because of the difficulties involved in estimating the revenue effect of such measures, and in view of the disappointing perfotmance in 1999/2000, the authorities have projected revenues to increase by only 0.1 percent of GDP (see Table l)14; this includes the impact of an increase in the Road Fund tax on gasoline and diesel fuel of 14 percent to provide more resources for road maintenance and construction. 20. Expenditure policies are summarized in paragraph 16 of the letter of intent. Given the budgetary constraint posed by the cost of elections, it was necessary to defer the further real increases in public service wages that had been planned under the medium-term pay reform program. The poverty-reducing aspects of expenditure policies are discussed in Section E, below. C. Tax Reform and Expenditure Management 21. Following the major changes in recent years, the budget included many of the remaining elements of the ongoing tax reform (letter of intent, paragraph 17) and others are under preparation (letter of intent, paragraph 18). A particularly important measure is the extension of the VAT to petroleum products, and the government took a first step in eliminatin products. IF its own tax exemptions by paying VAT on its own purchases of petroleum Another important step is the completion of the harmonization of tax incentives for investment to eliminate any role for the Tanzania Investment Centre in providing tax breaks; the advent of a transparent (and stable) tax regime should be favorable to investment. 22. Steps to strengthen tax administration are set out in paragraphs 18-20 of the letter of intent. Smuggling remains a major problem for tax collection, In the petroleum sector, smuggling may account for as much as one-third of domestic consumption, and the authorities are implementing a number of measures, particularly the marking of petroleum I3 The decline in the revenue ratios in Table 2 from those in EBSi00W.l reflects both an upward revision in nominal GDP (beginning in 1998) and a slightly more conservative revenue projection, given the estimated outturn for 1999/M). I4 The revenue projections are conservative in that they do not take any account of reductions in petroleum tax evasion through the measures described below. The revenue effect of such evasion is estimated to amount to more than 0.5 percent of GDP. Is Under the program, the elimination of all VAT and customs exemptions for the government is scheduled for July 2001. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 15- 12.4 4.2 \.a 6.8 0.4 1.9 4.5 0.5 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-16- products. The application of VAT on petroleum products is also expected to bring more companies into the tax net. The TRA is also stepping up controls to reduce smuggling through the Zanzibar-Dar es Salaam route; nevertheless, the authorities stated that a satisfactory resolution of this problem required more intensive cooperation between the Union and Zanzibar governments, including agreement on avoiding special exemptions on imports, as were recently provided by Zanzibar for a local trade fair. 23. The implementation of the IFMS is broadly on track (letter of intent, paragraph 21). The IFMS has already become the government’s main accounting system, and the Accountant-General’s Department is being strengthened. The authorities also submitted the Public Finance Management Bill and the Public Audit Bill to parliament in June, a performance criterion under the program. However, they explained that, because of the crowded legal agenda and the short parliamentary session before the elections in October, final passage of the bills was now expected in January-February 2001. Consequently, the issuance of the regulations based on this legislation has been postponed from August 2000 to February 2001, and it is proposed that the new timing be subject to a performance criterion, The TRA was not able to secure the donor funding needed to bring its revenue accounts in line with those of the IFMS by April 2000. However, it is providing the IFMS with detailed weekly reports until the complete integration of the IFMS and the TRA systems, which will now take place within the overall computerization of the TRA under the Tax Administration Project during 2000/01. The Ministry of Finance has requested IMF technical assistance, scheduled for October 2000, to review expenditure management under the new accounting system. The evolution of local government reform is described in paragraph 32 of the letter of intent. D. Structural Reform and Governance 24. With the assistance of the World Bank, the Parastatal Sector Reform Commission (PSRC) has substantially revised the approach to privatization (letter of intent, paragraphs 12 and 33) and prepared a work plan operationalizing the government’s objective to largely complete the divestiture of the remaining entities by end-2003.16 In May, the government decided that retrenched employees of parastatal entities would receive only their statutory benefits, in order to assure equal treatment and protect the budget; with regard to parastatal debt, it was decided to continue the present case-by-case approach. 25. The authorities stated that the change in procedures had caused some transitional delays in the privatization process, and the 13 entities privatized in the first half of 2000 fell short of the program benchmark of 20; however, preparations are continuing and the government expects to reach the target of 40 for the year as a whole. The winning bidder for Tanzania Telecommunications Corporation Limited (TTCL) was selected in June, consistent l6 The World Bank is supporting the general privatization process, and is providing specific assistance in the privatization of the individual utilities and other parastatal monopolies. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17- with the program performance criterion.” The development (in cooperation with the World Bank) of the terms of reference for the external consultants to guide the restructuring of the electricity sector, including a detailed plan for the unbundling of TANESCO, has proved to be more time-consuming than expected, and the consultants are now expected to be appointed by January 2001, rather than June 2000, as specified in the program benchmark. An audit of TANESCO’s performance has been completed, however, and the government intends to take steps to strengthen TANESCO’s management as soon as possible, in consultation with the World Bank. The World Bank is also providing financial support for TANESCO’s presentation of its case to the arbitration tribunal that is considering its power purchase contract dispute with Independent Power Tanzania Limited (IPTL). 26. The oil refinery, which is 50 percent government owned, had suspended operations in October 1999 when the state-owned Tanzania Petroleum Development Corporation (TPDC) was unable to pay for the last shipment of 60,000 metric tons of crude oil. ADDAX, the petroleum supplier and part-owner of the refinery, had asked for a large subsidy to cover the cost of refining the crude oil that it had supplied. The staff noted that because of the rise in world oil prices since the crude was purchased, ADDAX should be able to refine the crude and sell the output at a substantial profit; moreover, the govemment had no obligation to provide financial support for either the TPDC or the refinery. The subsidy was thus capped at the T Sh 1 billion that had been provided to cover the start-up costs of processing the final shipment (letter of intent, paragraph 10). The shipment has now been processed and sold, and the refinery is winding up its operations in preparation for its likely reconfiguration as a storage facility. The gov-ent will not make any further payments to either the supplier or the refinery in connection with the TPDC’s liabilities. As the TPDC no longer plays a role in the importation, refining, and distribution of petroleum products, it is being restructured to focus on oil exploration (letter of intent, paragraph 11), pending decisions to be taken in light of a World Bank-financed study of the regulatory and institutional requirements of the oil and gas sector, to be undertaken in 2001. 27. Despite the transformation of the National Bureau of Statistics (NBS) into a semiautonomous executive agency in March 1999, the quality and timeliness of statistical data remain poor, mostly owing to a lack of capacity. The authorities stated that they had not been able to ensure adequate funding of the NBS in the past, but intended to protect the funding of its core functions from now on. Work on the household budget survey, which is intended to provide data on poverty, as well as allow adjustment of the weights of the consumer price index, started in May, and the authorities also completed the first phase of the preparations for Tanzania’s participation in the General Data Dissemination System (GDDS) (letter of intent, paragraph 34). The Fund will be providing substantial technical assistance in the coming year to help the new agency develop its capacity. ” Because of the change in privatization procedures, which has enabled most of the preparatory work, including due diligence, to be completed before bidding, the negotiations with the winning bidder are expected to be short. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-18- 28. The authorities have continued work on governance issues in areas such as the preparation of sectoral action plans under the National Anti-Corruption Strategy (letter of intent, paragraph 35). The staff noted that the investigation into the possibility of corruption in the awarding of the TANESCO-IPTL power purchase contract did not appear to have moved ahead as vigorously as had been planned; the mandate of the investigation, and the personnel assigned to it, have now been reinforced. Information relating to the alleged corruption has been provided to the arbitration tribunal that is considering the dispute regarding the contract. E. Poverty Reduction and the Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper’* 29. The 2000/01 budget provides further large increases for the social and other priority sectors. The total amount to be provided for priority poverty-reducing expenditures on goods, services, and transfers is to increase by T Sh 43 billion (44 percent), more than the increase in HIPC Initiative debt relief, on top of which there will be some increases in wages and locally-financed development expenditures. (Table 2 provides a breakdown of budget allocations to the ministries or other administrative units that are responsible for the expenditures concerned. Full details of the priority expenditures themselves are not yet available; the authorities are developing a monthly monitoring framework for tracking the expenditures.) 30. At the end of June, the authorities reviewed their progress on the poverty reduction strategy paper (PRSP) withworld Bank and IMF staff. They indicated that preparations for the completion of a broad-based PRSP by July 2000 were on track, with the intention of submitting it to the IMF and the World Bank by August 2000 (letter of intent, paragraph 36). In early May, the 2000/01 public expenditure review, involving a wide range of representatives of civil society and donors and prepared with the assistance of the World Bank, agreed on a revised medium-term expenditure framework (MTEF), focusing on the priority sectors, that will be part of the PRSP; the MTEF’s targets for 2000/01 have already been included in the recent budget. In discussing the preliminary draft PRSP, Fund staff emphasized the importance of taking a broad-based approach to poverty reduction, keeping in mind the fact that robust economic growth was the key prerequisite. F. Program Monitoring 31. Tanzania met all quantitative performance criteria and benchmarks for end- March 2000, with the exception of the benchmark on government revenue, which was missed by a small margin (Appendix I, Table 1). The structural performance criteria were also met, I8 Background on these subjects is provided in EBS/00/44 and EBS/00/54 as well as EBD/OO/lS (3/14/00) and EBD/OORl (3/14/00). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 19- Table 2. Tanzania: Budget Allocations to Priority Sector Ministries and Departments, Including Transfers to Regions and Local Government, 1999/2000 and ZOOO/Ol l/ (In percent of total budgeted domestically financed expenditures, unless otherwise indicated) 199912000 2000101 Bv economic classification Wages Other charges 21 Locally financed development expenditures 22.6 20.5 20.2 25.5 2.4 2.1 45.2 48.1 Total budgeted for priority sectors By functional classification Administrative sector Judiciary Accountant-General’s Office Social services 1.1 . . 1.0 1.9 Ministry of Education Ministry of Health Ministry of Science, Technology, and Higher Education Ministry of Water Regions Local government Economic servlces Ministry of Works Ministry of Lands and Human Settlements Development Ministry of Regional Administration and Local Government Local governments Productive sector 2.1 3.7 4.7 6.7 4.3 5.4 0.8 0.8 1.4 0.9 19.3 19.4 5.6 4.5 0.5 0.6 2.1 1.7 0.3 0.1 Ministry of Agriculture and Co-operatives 2.4 1.4 Memorandum item: Total budgeted domestically financed spending (in billions of Tanzania 748.6 869.3 Source: Tanzanian authorities. l/ Fiscal years from July to June. 21 In the 2000101 fiscal year, about two-~lrds of other charges are targeted toward priority spending in the ministries and other administrative units listed below. as were most structural benchmarks, and preparations for others are generally on track (Appendix I, Table 2). The authorities consider that the recent positive macroeconomic performance, such as the higher-than-targeted level of international reserves, allows for a small increase in the net domestic financing ceiling for June 2000 that is consistent with achievement of the program objectives. For the same reason, the authorities also propose Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2o- revising the quantitative performance criteria for net domestic assets of the BoT and net domestic financing of the government for September and the respective benchmarks for December. Some structural benchmarks have also been revised, and a new structural performance criterion on the issuance of the implementing regulations for the new finance act has been proposed. A framework for monitoring poverty-reducing expenditures through the IFMS is being developed. IV. STAFF APPRAISAL 32. Recent macroeconomic developments have been positive. The authorities’ strong macroeconomic policies are reflected in the rapid reversal of the fiscal problems that emerged in the second half of 1999. 33. The authorities are to be commended for the measures taken to address the revenue shortfall and expenditure overruns in 1999. The TRA’s efforts to increase tax revenues have been broadly successful, although they have fallen somewhat short of the program targets. In view of the positive macroeconomic developments, the staff supports the authorities’ adjustment of the net domestic financing target for June 2000 to offset the revenue shortfall and to avoid further expenditure cuts. Nevertheless, the continuing shortfalls indicate the importance of the TRA’s continuing to strengthen its efforts to widen the tax base and improve tax administration. In this respect, the staff welcomes the recent measures to address smuggling and the plans to address tax evasion in the petroleum sector, as well as the intention to establish a large-taxpayer unit during 2000/01. The revenue effort remains critical to Tanzania’s medium-term fiscal prospects, and its success over the coming year will need to be kept under close review. 34. The staff regrets the unnecessary severity of the expenditure cuts in the early months of 2000, which reflects continuing weaknesses in implementing the cash management system. The authorities have already strengthened management in the Ministry of Finance, and the monthly expenditure ceilings were enhanced in recent months to bring them closer in line with the overall program targets. However, the staff urges the authorities to improve the analytical capacity of the Ministry of Finance, so that fiscal and cash management problems can be identified and corrected at an early stage; the recent approval of foreign financing for technical assistance for this purpose is a positive development. 35. Unfortunately, the tight cash allocations also led to new interest, supplier, and tax refund arrears. These have now been largely cleared, and the staff welcomes the authorities’ new procedures to avoid arrears, which are being supported by full implementation of the IFMS, including the monitoring of expenditure commitments and settlements. The TRA has strengthened its administration to ensure that refund claims are verified and paid on time, and it no longer depends on the Ministry of Finance to provide adequate cash for the refunds. 36. All budgetary votes were included in the IFMS as of July 1,2000, somewhat later than envisaged because of technical difficulties. The staff regrets the further delays in Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-21- approving the new public finance legislation, which is important to the modemization of public finance in Tanzania; the delay is not expected to impede the implementation of the IFMS, however. 37. The 2000/01 budget included substantial further steps in the ongoing tax reform, and preparations for further reforms are under way. The fact that the government will be paying VAT on its consumption of VAT is a particularly welcome first instalhnent of the more general provision for government payment of VAT and customs duties beginning in the next fiscal year; the completion of the harmonization of tax incentives for investment is also very welcome. 38. The authorities are to be commended for the large increase in budgetary allocations for poverty reduction; despite the tight budgetary situation because of the large outlays on elections, these increases exceed the interim debt relief under the HIPC Initiative. The next stage in the adjustment in public sector wages under the public sector wage reform has bad to be postponed for a year, however, although the real value of wages has been protected. Given the tightness of this year’s budget, the staff agrees with the authorities on the appropriateness of using T Sh 15 billion in receipts from the sale of additional shares in privatized companies to ease the constraint. 39. Monetary policy in Tanzania is complicated by uncertainty about the structural character of the higher demand for money during the last half year. In this respect, the staff understands the BoT’s cautious monetary policy stance in the early months of 2000, which kept interest rates high despite the strengthening of the fiscal balance. The subsequent easing of policy also appears to have been appropriate, although in the view of the staff it would have been better to have implemented it somewhat more gradually. 40. The exchange rate for the Tanzanian shilling continues to be determined in the market, with intervention by the BoT limited to smoothing seasonal or other movements in the rate. In recent months, the unusual strength of the current account has meant that there has not been the normal seasonal pressure toward depreciation, and the BoT has quite appropriately refrained from selling into the market, allowing its net international reserves to rise relative to the program floor. Tanzania’s large aid inflows will continue to put upward pressure on the real effective exchange rate, putting a premium on structural reforms that increase the efficiency of the external sector if export-led growth is to continue; the recent strength of exports is encouraging in that regard. 41. The restrictive external trade measures imposed last year detracted from the beneficial effects of the cuts in external tariffs, and the staff welcomes the unwinding of these measures at a somewhat faster pace than had been envisaged when the PRGF arrangement was approved. The staff nonetheless urges the authorities to complete the process as soon as possible and resume the program of reducing external tariffs at an early date. 42. Petroleum sector reforms are a centerpiece of the program. The authorities’ departure from the earlier plans to terminate all subsidies to the refinery by the end of December is Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-22- unfortunate, but the amount was small, and the authorities have indicated that no further departures are envisioned. The new administrative arrangements governing the TPDC provide a further safeguard. 43. The signing of the sales agreement for NBC (1997) and the selection of the winning bidder for the TTCL are other major milestones in the transition to a market economy. The revision in the approach to privatization, while initially causing some delays, may considerably reduce the finalization of negotiations in the future, as will the standardization of retrenchment benefits. 44. The dispute between TANESCO and the IPTL continues to entail considerable risk for Tanzania, and an unfavorable outcome may require a review of the program and the taking of additional measures to preserve fiscal viability. In this regard, the staff supports the government’s intentions to accelerate the strengthening of TANESCO’s management, with a view to improving its financial situation. The slow progress of the government’s investigation of the governance aspects of the IPTL issue is disappointing, and the staff urges the authorities to vigorously pursue the reinforced investigation, wherever it may lead. 45. The quality and timeliness of most macroeconomic data remain poor, particularly in the areas of national accounts, government finance, and balance of payments. These deficiencies complicate accurate and timely analysis of economic and financial developments. The transformation of the National Bureau of Statistics (NBS) into a semi- autonomous executive agency is an important step forward, but much remains to be done. 46. Tanzania’s implementation of its macroeconomic program has been strong, and the authorities have achieved important progress with structural reforms. All quantitative and structural performance criteria to date have been met, as have most benchmarks. The proposed adjustments in the quantitative performance criteria for September and the benchmarks for June and December 2000 appear to be appropriate for achieving program objectives. The 2000/01 budget provides a suitable framework for growth and poverty reduction while maintaining macroeconomic stability, and, with its recent reinforcement, progress towards a favorable resolution of the IPTL arbitration can be considered to be satisfactory. The staff therefore recommends that the Fund complete the first review under the PRGF arrangement, and approve modifications of the quantitative performance criteria for September 2000. 47. It is proposed that the next Article IV consultation with Tanzania be held on the standard 12-month cycle. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-23- V. PROPOSED DECISION The following draft decision, which may be adopted by a majority of votes cast, is proposed for adoption by the Executive Board: 1. Tanzania has consulted with the Fund in accordance with paragraph 2(e) of the three- year arrangement for Tanzania under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF) (EBS/00/44, Supplement I), and paragraph 5 of the letter dated March 9,200O from the Minister of Finance. 2. The letter from the Minister of Finance dated July 18, 2000 shall be attached to the three-year PRGF arrangement for Tanzania, and the letter dated March 9,200O from the Minister of Finance with the attached memorandum, shall be read as supplemented by the letter dated July 18, 2000. 3. Accordingly, the limits for end-September 2000 referred to in paragraph 2(a)(i) to (iv) of the Stand-By Arrangement shall be as indicated in Table 1 attached to the letter from the Minister of Finance dated July 18,200O. 4. The Fund decides (i) that the interim poverty reduction strategy paper set forth in EBD/00/18 (3/14/00) continues to provide a sound basis for Fund concessional assistance to Tanzania, and (ii) that the first review contemplated in paragraph 3(e) of the arrangement and paragraph 5 of the letter of the Minister of Finance dated March 9,2000, is completed. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2d- Table 3. Tanzania: Selected Economic and Fiicial Indicators, 1996-2002 19% 1997 1598 1999 2ml 2001 20002 Pmv. Roj. Roj. pmj. Glmpinpesad,mlmasc~) 3.767.6 4.7033 5.71L.O 6,K!4.4 7,245.5 7,992, 8.106.6 4.5 3.5 4.0 4.7 5.2 5.6 6.0 1.6 0.7 1.2 1.9 2.3 2.7 3.1 21.0 L6.1 12.9 7.9 5.6 4.5 4.0 15.5 15.. 11.3 ‘1.0 5.0 4.0 4.0 768.0 752.6 588.5 Jd1.0 596.2 693.9 854.7 1,408.8 1.269.5 1.570.1 -1.630.6 -1.747.9 -1,949.) -2’6’.5 17.0 -29.0 -3.4 -7.7 8.S ‘3.1 20.9 3.7 Lo.* ‘1.3 1.7 3.3 11,s ‘0.2 -0.2 L4.2 -7.7 7.7 -2.2 2.5 1.2 -3.7 5.0 -10.8 .., 10.0 18.7 -1.3 .., 27.6 8.2 II.4 Lt.5 12.1 ‘4.1 ‘2.8 7.1 19.8 ‘7.3 29.3 8.1 14.9 6.9 11.3 ,.5 15.8 26.3 13.5 II.7 7.3 4.1 79.0 22.4 3,.2 -5.4 24.4 5.9 L3.3 10.8 18.6 L2.6 IO.1 L3.2 7.3 116 a.6 5.7 2.7 5.4 3.9 4.0 4.3 -5.9 3.0 9.1 2.6 -1.5 5.1 7.0 6.2 7.1 7.5 5.1 5.5 5.4 5.2 5.2 11.4 11.8 15.3 (h pmed &GDP, lalou otkwisc hdiukd) Lt.2 11.3 L1.2 II.3 11.8 no 3.1 3.9 4.0 4.8 4.5 4.3 ‘5.2 14.7 16.9 16.3 17.3 16.8 1.7 1.7 0.5 1.1 0.7 0.9 4.4 4.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 6.2 6.4 6.2 6.3 6.5 6.6 1.0 0.9 0.9 0.9 cl.9 0.9 5.2 5.6 5.4 5.3 5.6 5.8 14.7 ‘5.6 15.2 ‘6.0 ‘6.5 17.0 2.9 3.3 3.1 4.3 4.4 4.4 11.8 12.4 ‘2.1 I,., 12.1 12.6 4.5 -9.2 -8.9 -9.7 -10.0 -10.4 -12.0 -14.8 -14.8 -15.4 -15.1 -2.4 -2.7 -2.6 -28 -3.5 37.9 37.3 21.9 25.3 24.0 (Inmillinu of U.S. do”.rs, un,cr Dtbarvhc kdio,,,d) -15.1 -3.5 18.4 -911.9 -841.6 -1.241.3 -I,2993 -3.377.6 -1.482.0 -,,563.5 -169.3 19.3 -99.1 29.5 -53.0 -178.5 .,3*.9 x0.1 460.5 599.0 775.6 853.6 907.6 996.8 1.5 2.8 31 4.1 4.2 4.2 4.3 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 4. Tanzania: Central Govcmment Operations, 1996/97-2002/03 11 768.7 687.6 216.8 180.1 201.3 89.4 81.1 412.6 100.2 -434.1 3949 116.1 221.1 57.7 -39.2 -39.2 -39.2 39.2 83.1 166.9 75.5 91.4 -83.8 -43.8 71.9 -121.7 80.1 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 4. Tanzania: Central Govemment Operations, 1996197~2002/03 (concluded) I/ Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 5. Tanzania: Monetary Suwcy, 1995-Zoo0 ,660 630.8 527.1 279.1 84.J 163.5 103.7 752.9 244.3 369.4 184.0 91.2 94.2 119.2 43.8 26.1 32.4 54.2 -16.7 -8.6 -108 43.3 17.3 -,.a -2.7 2.4 617.4 60.2 643.8 607.7 672.3 700.5 360.8 1.w8 9.3 8.8 ,021 330.9 -28.5 -92.8 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 6. Tanzania: Summary Accounts of the Bank of Tanzania, 1995-2000 (I” Lullions ofnnzanin sllillings. unlcs othm*isc i”dicalcd: end ofpmiad, 12.6 112.1 170.2 202.2 176.4 192.2 346. I 267.9 238.5 *w.3 265.8 238.8 124.8 54.8 20.5 -19.8 4.9 8.6 5.5 5.5 4.6 5.4 5.9 2.6 215.8 207.6 213.4 274 7 266.9 227.7 314.9 335.8 ,649 418.7 398.6 387.5 43.8 44.1 43.9 43.7 43.6 43.6 39.1 6.6 8.7 14 7 10.4 1.9 2.4 21.5 16.7 18.4 10.9 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-z9- Table 7. Tanzania: Medium-Term Balance of Payments. 1994195-2005 (Lo mihm 0fV.S. &Uan. rnlrs ahrnr tiurad, Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 30 - APPENDIX I Dar es Salaam, July 18,200O Mr. Horst Kiihler Managing Director International Monetary Fund Washington, D.C. 2043 1 U.S.A. Dear Mr. Kbhler, 1. Tanzania’s ongoing adjustment and poverty reduction program is being supported by the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF) arrangement for 2000-02 that was approved by the Executive Board.of the IMF on March 3 I, 2000. The program for 2000, the first annual program under the PRGF arrangement, was described in the memorandum of economic and financial policies (MEFP) that was attached to my letter to Mr. Fischer of March 9,200O. It was formulated in conformity with the medium-term policy framework attached to our interim poverty reduction strategy paper (PRSP) of March 14,2000, which was endorsed by the Boards of the IMF (on March 31,200O) and the World Bank (on April 4,200O). This letter discusses progress in implementing the program to date and policy plans for the remainder of 2000, with a particular focus on the budget for 2000/01 (July-June) that was presented to Parliament on June 15,200O; it also requests completion of the first review of the PRGF arrangement and the disbursement thereunder. The attached Tables 1 and 2 report on developments with regard to quantitative performance criteria and benchmarks through March 2000 and structural performance criteria and benchmarks through July 1, 2000; some modifications and revisions for the period ahead are proposed, and Fund approval of modification of the end-September performance criteria is requested. We expect the next review, which will set out the second annual program under the PRGF arrangement, to be completed by January 3 1,200 1. Recent developments 2. Tanzania’s macroeconomic situation has continued to strengthen since the program began. The growth of GDP in 1999 has been revised upward slightly to 4.7 percent, and the recent rains, while spotty in some areas, augur well for achieving the target for 2000 of 5.2 percent. (The rains were particularly spotty in the catchment areas for hydropower reservoirs; to prevent electricity shortages from impeding growth, as they did in 1997, thermal generation began in May.) The 12-month inflation rate has continued its downward course from the 7 percent recorded at the end of 1999, declining to 6 percent in May 2000. The balance of payments has been unexpectedly strong, with little of the usual seasonal demand for sales of foreign exchange by the Bank of Tanzania (BoT). Gross international reserves thus declined only slightly during the first quarter of 2000, even though there were substantial delays in aid disbursements, and the exchange rate remained stable at around T Sh 800 per U. S. dollar. The March performance criterion on the net international reserves Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-31- APPENDIX I of the BoT, as well as those on the BoT’s net domestic assets and the net domestic financing of the government, were met by wide margins. 3. The strengthening of the fiscal position in the first quarter of the year reflected the corrective fiscal measures described in detail in the MEFP. Revenues rebounded, beginning in December, and came close to the program benchmark for the period through March. Severe expenditure restraint was implemented; indeed, through February, continuing problems in implementing the cash management system meant that expenditure ceilings were tighter than necessary. This issue began to be addressed in March, but the cumulative effect through the end of the first quarter was that cash expenditures were kept some T Sh 30 billion below what would have been possible under the program, with adverse consequences for the functioning of the Government, even in the priority sectors, and the incurrence of substantial arrears on tax refunds, interest payments on domestic debt, and payments to suppliers, particularly the utilities. 4. The 12-month growth of money (M2, which excludes foreign currency deposits) declined from 15 percent at end-December 1999 to 12 percent at end-March 2000, slightly above the program target. In the early part of the quarter, the BoT had been concerned about the surge in broad money around the end of 1999; moreover, foreign currency deposits were continuing to grow rapidly, albeit to a substantial extent on account of a few large transactions by foreign investors. The BoT therefore kept a tight rein on its net domestic assets, and interest rates on short-term government debt, which had risen sharply in the second half of 1999 to about 15 percent, declined only gradually. The 12-month growth of credit to the private sector, even after excluding loan write-offs by the National Bank of Commerce (NBC (1997)) in the period leading up to the completion of the sale to Amalgamated Banks of South Africa (ABSA) on March 31, declined to 14 percent, the smallest growth since 1996. 5. Exports in the first quarter of 2000 were almost 50 percent higher than over the same period in 1999, reflecting strong growth in exports of cashew nuts and gold, and the export projection for 2000 has been revised upward by 8 percent. Imports were low, in part because of the fiscal and monetary restraint; they are expected to recover in the rest of the year, in part because of the need to import substantial amounts of fuel for thermal electricity generation. 6. On April 14,2000, we reached an agreement with the Paris Club on a flow rescheduling on Cologne terms (90 percent net present value reduction), with the coverage of debt rescheduled slightly broader than had been assumed.in the program. Moreover, a number of creditors indicated that they would forgive some or all of the remaining debt. With regard to the IDA-financed debt buyback, progress has not been as rapid as we had hoped, as some creditors could not complete the required administrative formalities on time. To increase participation and ensure a satisfactory outcome, we decided, in consultation with the World Bank, to extend the tendering and closing dates for the operation to September and December 2000, respectively. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-32 - APPENDIX I 7. With macroeconomic developments and policies following a somewhat different trajectory than envisaged when the program was developed late in 1999, a number of policy adaptations have recently been implemented, as described below. As for the structural reform agenda, it has moved forward broadly as envisaged when the program was developed late in 1999, but there, too, there has been some evolution in policies and timetables. Recent policy adaptations 8. Following the large overperformance on net domestic financing during the first quarter of 2000, we conducted a comprehensive review of the outlook for the budget for the last months of the fiscal year. Revenue performance in April made it appear likely that the earlier gains, which had relied to some extent on a concerted effort to collect arrears on taxes and other one-off measures, would not be fully sustained, and a shortfall from the program target of some T Sh 9 billion (1 percent) appeared to be in prospect. Nonetheless, there was clearly room to provide more adequate funding to ministries. Operational improvements in the cash management system were implemented so that the monthly calculations of funding ceilings would take account not only of prospective revenues, but also of available financing carried over from the previous month (making sure to keep a cushion to take account of transactions already in process); the new procedures also explicitly took account of the flexibility the program provided in case of shortfalls in net foreign financing. With these improvements, the new interest and tax refund arrears were cleared, priority sectors were provided with the full amounts envisaged in the budget, and the earlier cuts for other sectors were substantially restored. In the case of electricity, T Sh 6.7 billion was cleared through cash payments. The remaining arrears to the Tanzania Electricity Supply Company Ltd. (TANESCO) will be settled before end-2000 by further cash payments or through offsets against payments of TANESCO’s external debt service by the Govenunent. Given the revenue shortfall and the large amount of arrears to be cleared, we decided that the program ceiling on net domestic financing at the end of June should be relaxed by T Sh 8 billion, which would imply no net repayment of domestic financing for 1999/2000. To guard against the recurrence of the overexpenditure problems of early 1999/2000, however, no carryovers of fiscal resources to the new fiscal year were permitted. 9. In view of the positive developments in inflation, the high level of international reserves, and the relatively slow growth in private sector credit, the BoT started to ease monetary policy in March by reducing interventions in the treasury bill auction. As a result, short-term interest rates declined from 14.3 percent in March to 7.3 percent in June. 10. The oil refinery had effectively ceased operations.in October 1999 as the state-owned oil corporation, Tanzania Petroleum Development Corporation (TPDC), was unable to finance the last shipment of crude oil, and the earmarking of some petroleum sector taxes to cover the refining losses was halted as of January 1,2000, marking the completion of the liberalization of the petroleum sector. However, the last shipment of crude, amounting to about 60,000 metric tons, remained stored at the refinery, and in April and May the government transferred T Sh 1 billion to the refinery to cover the start-up costs of processing that final shipment. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-33 - APPENDIX I 11. At the end of June 2000, the TPDC was restructured to enable it to focus on petroleum exploration, and its staffing is being reduced from 105 to around 65. With effect from July 1, this role is being supported through the government budget; to safeguard the corporation’s assets, the TPDC will not engage in any financial transactions unrelated to this role without the express approval of the Ministry of Energy and Minerals. Budgetary support will continue until a decision has been made on whether the TPDC should have a continuing role in gas exploration and production operations in Tanzania, as specified in its establishment order issued under the Public Corporations Act. Whether the TPDC will have any role in the oil and gas sector will be addressed in a study of the sector’s institutional and regulatory requirements, which is scheduled to be undertaken in 2001 under the IDA Songo Songo credit. The government will decide on the TPDC’s future after the study but before commencement of natural gas production, currently scheduled for early 2003. 12. Following a far-reaching reexamination of the modalities of privatization undertaken in consultation with the World Bank, the approach followed by the Parastatal Sector Reform Commission (PSRC) has been substantially revamped. The aim is to have bidders follow a careful prequalification and due diligence process, during which the details of the eventual offer would be developed; thus the bids, once received, would be judged on well-defined criteria, mainly price, obviating the need for extensive negotiations with the winning bidder. Since then, one of the large parastatal monopolies, the container terminal of the Tanzania Harbour Authority, has been removed from government control through a ten-year lease agreement; the agreement was signed in May 2000, and the handover will take place by August. With regard to the Tanzania Telecommunications Corporation Ltd. (TTCL), six entrants completed the due diligence process, out of which three submitted bids in May. The winning bidder, a consortium of Detecomh4S1, was selected in June. The budget for 2000/01 13. The macroeconomic framework underlying the government’s budget for 2000101, which was submitted to Parliament on June 15, is in line with the medium-term targets of the program. Fiscal and monetary policies will be formulated consistent with a further decline in inflation to 4% percent by June 2001, while gross official reserves will be maintained at an average level of at least four months of imports of goods and nonfactor services. To guard against the danger of crowding out the private sector, the government does not intend to make net use of domestic financing over the fiscal year, although there will be a temporary need for financing early in the fiscal year to help meet the costs of the election. 14. The government of Tanzania attaches great importance to increasing the ratio of revenue to GDP, but expects to achieve that objective largely through measures to broaden the tax base and strengthen tax administration, several of which are being implemented this year, as described below. By their nature, it is difficult to estimate the yield of such measures, and the budget submitted to Parliament on June 15 projected the increase in revenues conservatively at 12 percent. The slight increase in terms of GDP comes mainly from the inclusion of all fees, charges, and taxes on petroleum products in revenues for the full fiscal Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 34 - APPENDIX I year, a 5 percent increase in excise tax rates, and an increase in the Road Fund tax from T Sh 70 to T Sh 80 per liter (to increase resources for road maintenance and construction). 15. Taking account of interim debt relief under the enhanced Initiative for Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC Initiative) from the IMF, the World Bank, and Paris Club creditors, as well as aid from donors (as discussed most recently at the May 2000 Consultative Group meeting), net foreign financing of the budget-excluding project financing-is projected to increase from 0.8 percent of GDP in 1999/2000 to 1.2 percent of GDP in 2000/01. The total resource envelope for recurrent and domestically financed development expenditures in the 2000/01 budget thus amounts to 12.5 percent of GDP, up from 12.0 percent of GDP in 199912000. 16. Recurrent expenditures are projected to increase from 12.1 percent of GDP in 1999/2000 to 12.4 percent of GDP in 2000/01. The presidential and parliamentary elections scheduled for October 2000 lay an important claim on the available resources, amounting to 0.4 percent of GDP. Moreover, in light of the HIPC Initiative debt relief, allocations to priority areas have been increased; the increase in nonwage recurrent expenditures is 44 percent. (Although the PRSP is in the final stages of being completed, many of the poverty reduction policies discussed in that paper are already reflected in the budget, which also provides for additional resources to improve the poverty database.) The public service wage reform is an important aspect of the government’s policies to improve the efficiency of the public sector, but, in view of the tight budgetary situation, it has not been possible to provide any real wage increase for 2000/01, apart from a new contribution of 3 percent of the wage bill toward the premium for health insurance. Tax reform and expenditure management 17. Many of the remaining elements of the ongoing tax reform have been implemented with the 2000/01 budget. The value-added tax (VAT) exemption on petroleum products has been repealed, and the petroleum taxes (including the Energy Fund and other levies, but excluding import duties and the Road Fund tax) have been consolidated into VAT and product-specific excises on a revenue-neutral basis. We will not be providing VAT relief for the government on petroleum products. Moreover, the subsidy to the TPDC through levies on petroleum products has been eliminated, with the levies now included in the new petroleum excise taxes. Low-yielding excise taxes on 46 products have been eliminated, with the rates on three other items-beer, cigarettes, and wine and spirits-increased to compensate for past inflation, as well as the small loss of revenue from eliminating the minor items. The withholding taxes on interest earnings, dividends, and royalties for future recipients of certificates of the Tanzania Investment Centre (TIC) were harmonized with those of other taxpayers, completing the harmonization of tax incentives. Thus, the issuance of TIC certificates no longer confers any tax advantages. The VAT and customs exemptions for nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) and religious and charitable organizations will be strictly limited to projects under specific agreements with the government from January 1, 200 1. We will review these remaining exemptions during 2000/O 1, with a view to providing Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-35- APPENDIX I tax relief to the affected organizations through relevant sector ministries and including such relief as budgetary expenditures from 200 l/02. 18. We also continue to make progress in tax administration. In April, the Tanzania Revenue Authority (TRA) implemented a new duty drawback system. In that same month, Parliament approved legislation with regard to taxpayer identification numbers (TINS), and TINS will be issued during 2000/01, paving the way for eliminating the withholding tax on goods and services. The administration of the pay-as-you-earn (PAYE) tax is being computerized, which, in addition to providing more revenue, may allow the elimination of the housing levy in next year’s budget. The TRA will work toward establishing a large- taxpayers’ unit early in 2001. Preparations are on track for the establishment of a unified tax appeals mechanism by August 2000; Parliament is expected to approve a bill in July 2000 providing for the establishment of the unified Revenue Appeals Board and Tribunal and related matters. 19. The application of the VAT to petroleum products is expected to bring additional companies into the tax net, and the fact that the Government will not receive VAT relief should help to promote tax enforcement. The issuance of regulations for the sector in December 1999, which resulted in the withdrawal of the licenses of ten companies, and the requirement, introduced in March, for all imports of petroleum products to be channeled through bonded warehouses have begun to address the problem of large-scale tax evasion in the petroleum sector. The further step of marking petroleum products is expected to substantially resolve the problem. Bids to supply and operate such a system were received in June, and the system is expected to be in place by September. 20. After the introduction of the VAT in Zanzibar in January 1999, virtually all taxes on the islands were harmonized with those on the mainland of Tanzania, with the exception of the levy on imports for preshipment inspection. However, there are complaints that smuggling through the Zanzibar-Dar es Salaam route has continued, not only reducing tax revenues, but also hurting the competitiveness of local producers. The TRA has stepped up controls along the northern borders and the coastline, including increased cooperation with customs authorities in the neighboring countries of Kenya and Uganda, designation of landing sites, specification of vessels allowed to carry certain goods, and strengthening of the customs administration at vulnerable points. 21. The new Integrated Financial Management System (IFMS) is now the government’s main accounting system, and it will produce, starting July 2000, monthly commitment monitoring and expenditure reports, as well as reports on arrears. In support of the system, the Ministry of Finance held a publicity campaign in March 2000 to make suppliers aware that payments will be made only on the basis of purchase orders issued through the IFMS; in addition, the office of the Accountant-General was strengthened and received its own vote in the 2000/01 budget. Draft procurement and public finance bills, which are intended to improve the legal framework for the IFMS, were tabled in the June session of parliament. However, in view of the crowded agenda for this last session before the October elections, final passage of the bills is now envisaged for the January-February 2001 session of the next Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-36- APPENDIX I parliament, with issuance of implementing regulations immediate thereafter (a performance criterion). In December 1999, it was decided to include the State House and the Ministry of Defence, which had remained outside the IFMS, within the system. Their actual inclusion was somewhat delayed because of the need to install the necessary computer equipment and tram staff in the use of the system.lg The State House was brought on-line in April, and the Ministry of Defence was included as of July 2000. Because of a lack of financing, the TRA’s revenue accounts have not yet been included in the system, although the TR4 provides weekly detailed reports on tax collections for inclusion in the IFMS on an off-line basis. Complete integration will take place within the overall computerization project of the TEA, supported under the Tax Administration Project, during 2000/01. 22. With the IFMS in place, it is now possible to track new arrears, which will be reported on a monthly basis. The avoidance of such arrears will be a benchmark under the program. The domestic arrears census will be completed by end-July 2000; we intend to complete the clearance of the stock of arrears outstanding at the end of 1998199 in 2000101, to a large extent with financing from the European Union. Monetary policy and fmancial reform 23. We have revised the financial program for the rest of 2000. The ceilings on net domestic assets of the BoT have been revised upward to accommodate a slightly higher demand for money, which now appears to be growing in real terms. Provision has also been made for the government to use domestic financing of up to T Sh 28.3 billion in the first half of the fiscal year to help deal with the cost of elections. The BoT intends to continue to gradually ease monetary policies within the limits of the program, which envisages an increase in credit to the private sector of close to 30 percent. With regard to monetary policy instruments, the BoT continues to rely on the auctioning of 91&y treasury bills, in addition to repurchase operations with the banks. In order to widen its range of instruments, the BoT is seeking Fund technical assistance for promoting an active secondary market for treasury bills. 24. Preparations for the recapitalization and privatization of the National Microfinance Bank (NMB) are progressing. Following the completion of the business plan in June 2000, the NMB will launch a pilot project for microlending in six branches, which will be increased to 15 in 2001. The privatization strategy for the NMB is expected to be finalized by March 2001, and privatization is now targeted to be completed by mid-2002, after which unrestricted lending operations are expected to resume. Microtinance operations will be guided by the microfinance policy approved by the government in May, slightly later than the program benchmark date of April. The legal, regulatory, and supervisory framework for microfinance institutions is under review by a task force, which is expected to release a draft I9 Inadvertently, the MEFP had indicated that the two entities had become part of the system from January 2000. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-37- APPENDIX I report by November 2000. Studies on two remaining parastatal financial institutions-the Tanzania Postal Bank and the People’s Bank of Zanzibar-will be launched, with World Bank support, in July 2000, in preparation for their restructuring and possible privatization. 25. Seven of the prudential regulations governing commercial banking activity were issued by the end of June, exceeding the program benchmark of five regulations to be issued by that time. Preparations for establishment of the private sector credit information bureau are being coordinated by the Tanzania Bankers’ Association and are expected to begin shortly. Preparations for establishing a national payments system are progressing; the BoT issued a vision and strategic framework document in January 2000, paper instrument standards were also adopted in January 2000, and three electronic clearinghouses are expected to be operational by the end of the year. External sector issues 26. The export duty on scrap metal-the last export tax-was eliminated in the 2000/01 budget. With the passing of the 2000/01 Finance Bill, we also plan to unify the rates for a number of the 25 commodities that had been given split rates last year under GN 241, We intend to unify the rates for the remaining items in the 2001/02 budget. In the meantime, no new items will be added to the existing list. 27. Regarding minimum dutiable values (MDVs), since March we have been using international prices provided by a preshipment inspection company as the basis for calculating import duties on the affected commodities. We are building up our capacity for import valuation, and intend to fully implement World Trade Organization (WTO) valuation methodology by January 2001, eliminating any role for MDVs. In parallel, we are also planning to introduce a law on antidumping and countervailing measures that will be WTO consistent, and will request technical assistance in that respect from the WTO. 28. We are planning to withdraw from the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA) in September 2000 and are concentrating our efforts in regional integration on the East African Community (EAC) and the Southern African Development Community (SADC). Following the signing of the EAC treaty in November 1999, Parliament ratified the treaty in June 2000. The EAC Secretariat has started work on the technical aspects of a regional customs union, and three working groups have been set up to look at various aspects of economic integration. 29. Tanzania is current on its external debt obligations. We have begun bilateral negotiations with Paris Club creditors to implement the recent Paris Club rescheduling agreement of April 2000. In the meantime, we have begun to make the agreed monthly deposits into the special account. We are holding discussions with non-Paris Club creditors to reconcile debts and, once reconciled, to seek concessional rescheduling on terms at least comparable to those agreed with Paris Club creditors. For safety reasons, we have acquired a new radar system to strengthen air traffic control in Tanzania; as the system will also be used for military purposes, we were unable to finance it through bilateral or multilateral aid. We Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 38 - APPENDIX I nonetheless were able to obtain bank and supplier financing of US$35 million on concessional terms that comply with the perfotmance criterion on external borrowing. 30. A large part of program grants have been provided through the Multilateral Debt Fund (MDF) in recent years. These grants have helped the government to free up resources in the budget and have largely succeeded in ensuring tit11 funding of priority sector budgets. However, in light of the prospective lower debt-service payments to multilateral institutions as a result of interim assistance under the enhanced HIPC Initiative, the amount of multilateral debt service remaining would no longer be sufficient to absorb the amounts provided under the MDF. Accordingly, the government and donors have replaced the MDF with a Poverty Reduction Budget Support (PRBS) Facility, although because of existing commitments the MDF may remain in place for some time to come. The main aim of the PRBS is to provide more flexible and better coordinated budget support for poverty reduction strategies of the govemment and help to ensure that adequate resources flow into the priority sectors. As under the MIX, donors will continue to monitor the agreed priority allocations in quarterly review meetings with the govemment; however, the release of funds will not be linked to debt service, but to actual requirements of the budget in the priority areas. 31. The initial phase of establishing a comprehensive framework for monitoring capital flows began in May 2000 with a joint private and public sector workshop, which emphasized the need for the two sectors to exchange information on a regular basis on investor sentiment and the need for an institutional framework to collect and analyze the different types of capital inflows, In early June 2000, the BoT, the TIC, and the National Bureau of Statistics (NBS) launched a census on private investments with a foreign component, and the census report is expected to be completed by December 2000. Also, with Fund technical assistance, we expect to carry out an assessment of the capacity of the financial system to handle capital flows following the further liberalization of the capital account. Structural reforms 32. The first phase of implementation of local government reform started in January 2000. A manual to guide the restructuring of individual local government authorities has been developed and is being used by the zonal reform teams in facilitating restructuring work. Following the amendments that were made to the Local Government Acts in February 1999, preparations for provision of conditional block grants have been completed, and block grants for health, education, roads, water, and agriculture have been allocated in the budget for local governments for 2000/01. In-house training in financial management is being provided to staff of local government authorities to enable them, among other things, to properly manage and control the use of block grants and sector-specific common basket funds. Furthermore, the IFMS software is now also being used in 28 local government authorities. Plans are under way to put in place a more sustainable support mechanism using a core team to be established by the Ministry of Regional Administration and Local Government. This team will provide support services to the councils which are implementing the IFMS. Resources permitting, the system will be extended to the remaining councils in phases. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 39 - APPENDIX I 33. Concerning privatization, the PSRC has, in consultation with the World Bank, adopted a work plan aiming to substantially complete the divestiture of the 212 remaining entities by the end of 2003. The number of entities divested so far in 2000 (13 through the end of June) has fallen short of the program benchmark of 20, but overall activity has been intensive, and we still hope to reach the targeted 40 by the end of the year. The present benchmark does not take any account of the economic significance of the entities divested, and the PSRC, in consultation with the World Bank, is developing data on turnover and employment of the companies being privatized. With the completion of the full database of remaining divestitures in September 2000, it will be possible to develop more meaningful measures of progress. The database will also provide a basis for studying the impact of privatization. To standardize the approach to parastatal staff retrenchment, in May 2000 the Govermnent decided to pay retrenched employees only their statutory benefits. With respect to parastatal debt, it was decided to maintain the existing case-by-case approach. Draft legislation for establishing regulatory agencies for the utility and transport secton will be prepared by September 2000, and the agencies will be operationalized by September 2001. In light of the nonconforming initial bids for the Dar es Salaam Water and Sewerage Authority (DAWASA), the Government, in consultation with the World Bank, has decided to restart the bidding process. External consultants will be engaged by January 2001 to guide the restructuring of the electricity sector, including a detailed plan for the unbundling of TANESCO. We have completed a financial audit for TANESCO and are plating to strengthen its management at an early date to reduce costs, preparing the way for a rationalizing of electricity tariffs and, if necessary, bearing the costs that may arise when the power tariff dispute with Independent Power Tanzania Limited (IPTL) is eventually resolved. If such costs prove to be substantial, the program will have to be reviewed to see what additional measures would be needed to ensure fiscal viability. 34. The effectiveness of the NBS continues to be limited by the lack of adequate funding as well as transitional problems in adapting to its new status as an executive agency. Government funding for the NBS will be protected to enable it to execute its services delivery contracts. The quality of NBS data will be improved by strengthening links with the Statistics Department of the Ministry of Agriculture for agricultural output data. Following the completion of the first phase of the preparation for Tanzania’s participation in the General Data Dissemination System (GDDS), an interministerial committee has been appointed, with the NBS acting as coordinator. To commence the second phase, the preparation of the metadata by this committee will be completed by July 2000. Data collection for the Household Budget Survey (HBS) began in May 2000. Preliminary results from the HBS will be used to revise the weights used in the consumer price index (CPI) calculations from October 2000, and to revise the calculation of the nomnonetary component of GDP starting in January 2001. The BoT has made progress with the reporting of interest rates of commercial banks, as the simple average rates presented in earlier monthly surveys have now been replaced by the weighted-average rates reported by most banks, which better reflect actual developments in interest rates. The new reporting system is expected to be developed further and will provide the BoT with adequate information about market developments. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4o- APPENDIX I 35. There has been considerable progress on governance issues. For example, the newly established commercial court is resolving disputes expeditiously and helping to restore respect for the judiciary. As part of the Government’s campaign against corruption, an anticorruption sensitization scheme has been launched. Most ministries have completed drafts of their sectoral action plans, and a medium-term budget for sector-specific measures is under preparation. In view of the potentially high costs of an unfavorable ruling from the arbitration tribunal examining the issue of the large capacity payments demanded by the IPTL, the government intends to reinforce the investigation into the circumstances surrounding the awarding of the contract between TANESCO and the IPTL. Poverty reduction and the PRSP 36. Early steps in our poverty alleviation efforts mainly focussed on providing additional fiscal resources to the priority sectors and strengthening our statistical base for monitoring progress. Meanwhile, we have continued to develop the PRSP in conjunction with the Tanzania Assistance Strategy, which will describe our overall poverty reduction effort and plans. The Government conducted zonal PRSP workshops with representatives of civil society, including villagers, local councilors, NGOs, and district administrators covering the entire mainland Tanzania, as well as a workshop for members of parliament. Results of these workshops will be reflected in the draft PRSP, which will be discussed at a national technical workshop in July, and subsequently at a policy level workshop for Members of Parliament, government representatives, and regional commissioners, as well as representatives of large NGOs, the business community, and other members of civil society. Results of the technical and policy workshops will be used to improve the draft PRSP, which will be presented to the Government in early August 2000, after which the document is expected to be submitted to the IMF and the World Bank, also in August 2000. Later in the year, the government aims to arrange workshops to discuss preliminary results of the Household Budget Survey and the Labour Force Survey, as well as progress with developing poverty-monitoring indicators. Concluding remarks 37. The government of Tanzania will continue to provide the Fund with such information as the Fund requires to assess Tanzania’s progress in implementing the policies described in this letter, and in the memorandum of economic and financial policies and the policy matrix indicated in paragraph 1. Moreover, Tanzania will continue to consult with the Fund on Tanzania’s economic and financial policies in accordance with the Fund’s policies on such consultations. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-41- APPENDIX I 38. We request the Fund to approve the changes to the quantitative and structural performance criteria as set out in Tables I and 2, and to complete the review of the PRGF arrangement. The government of Tanzania remains fully committed to the implementation of the economic and financial program supported by the PRGF arrangement, and we trust that we can count on the continued support of the Fund. Sincerely yours, IS/ Daniel N. Yona (MP) Minister for Finance Attachments: Table l.Tanzania: Financial Benchmarks and Performance Criteria Under the First Annual Program Under the PRGF, January-December, 2000 Table 2. Tanzania: Structural Benchmarks and Performance Criteria Under the First Annual Program Under the PRGF, January-December 2000 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-42’- Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 43 - ( Table 2. Tanzania: Structural Benchmarks and Performance Criteria for the First Annual Program ( Under the PRGF Arrangement Sector Measure (P-Performance Criterion) Timing status External Fiscal Base minimum dutiable values on international prices (except JolY 2000 Implemented UP) March 2000 Establish new duty drawback system March 2000 Implemented Submit Public Finance Management Bill and Public Audit June 2000 Implemented Bill to Parliament(P) Issue implementing regulations for Public Finance August 2000 Expected Management Act and Public Audit Act February 2001 II Unify the withholding tax on interest earnings, dividends and July I,2000 Implemented royalties for holders and nonholders of TIC certificates (P) Apply VAT to petroleum products at standard rate and July 1.2000 Implemented Poverty Complete primary school mapping in 50 percent of district December Expected on authorities 2000 scbcdule Increase percentage of children under 2 years immonized December Expected on (measles and DPT) f?om 71 percent (1996) to 75 percent 2000 schedule Governance Complete sectoral action plans under the National Anti- December Expected on Corruption Strategy 2000 schedule Statistics Complete household budget survey December Expected April 2000 2001 l/ The benchmark for August 2000 has been revised to a performance criterion for February 2001. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 44 - APPENDIX II Tanzania: Relations with the Fund (As of May 3 1,200O) Membership status Joined 9/10/1962; Article VIII, effective July 15, 1996. General Resources Account Quota Fund holdings of currency Reserve position in the Fund SDR Department Net cumulative allocation Holdings SDR (million) % Quota 198.90 100.0 188.93 95.0 9.98 5.0 SDR (million) % Allocation 31.37 0.13 100.0 0.4 Outstanding purchases and loans SDR (million) % Quota Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF) Arrangement 240.11 120.7 Financial arrangements PRGF Enhanced Strnctnral Adjustment Facility (ESAF)/PRGF ESAF Approval Date 03/3 l/O0 1 l/08/96 0712919 1 Expiration Approved Drawn Date (SDR million) (SDR million) 03/30/03 135.00 20.00 02/07/00 181.59 181.59 07128194 181.90 85.60 Projected obligations to the Fund (SDR million; based on existing use of resources and present holdings of SDRs) Overdue 5/3 l/2000 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 Principal 0.0 11.8 17.1 17.3 17.4 27.5 Charges/interest 0.0 1.9 2.5 2.4 2.3 2.2 Total 0.0 13.7 19.6 19.7 19.7 29.7 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 45 - APPENDIX II Exchange rate arrangement The official exchange rate is determined on the basis of the rate established in the interbank market for foreign exchange. The middle rate in terms of the U.S. dollar, the intervention currency, was T Sh 799.5 per U.S. dollar as of May 3 1,200O. Article IV consultations The last Article IV consultation was concluded by the Executive Board on February 8, 1999 (EBSl9915). Technical assistance A long-term expert from the MAE panel served in Tanzania as an advisor to the Governor of the Bank of Tanzania (BoT), focusing on monetary policy implementation and banking supervision from October 1994 to December 1996. An MAE accounting expert completed his long-term advisory position at the BoT in early 1998. An MAE bank supervision advisor joined the BoT as of April 1997, an advisor on financial system reform in October 1998, and a regional advisor on payment systems in November 1998. Two fiscal advisors under the FAD technical assistance program-focusing on improved tax collections and strengthened expenditure control--completed consecutive six-month assignments at the Ministry of Finance during 1994/95 (July-June). A fiscal advisor on expenditure management joined the Ministry of Finance in August 1998 for an initial one-year assignment, which has been extended for 16 months. Technical assistance missions from six departments of the Fund have in recent years covered a number of topics: . FAD conducted (i) two missions that assisted in the design of a value-added tax (December 1992 and April 1994); (ii) a mission that advised on tax reforms for the 1995/96 budget (March-April 1995); ( iu a mission that advised on emerging issues “) of intergovernmental fiscal arrangements (November 1996); (iv) a mission that advised on strengthening the tax system (March 1997); (v) a mission that reviewed the budget execution, commitment control, and cash management systems (December 1997); (vi) a follow-up public expenditure management mission that laid the ground- work for the introduction of a commitment monitoring and control system, and for the assignment of a resident advisor in this area (May 1998); (vii) two missions that reviewed the import tariff structure (April-May 1998 and September-October 1998); (viii) a mission that advised on improving the current macrofiscal practices (December 1998); (ix) a mission that reviewed the income tax system (December 1998); and (x) a mission to assist with the establishment of the ndw duty drawback system (October 1999). . lNST organized regional financial programming and policy courses with Tanzanian participation in March 1997, April 1998, and March 1999. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 46 - APPENDIX II . LEG staff participated in a visit in January 1994 and followed up on MAE staff visits in March and April 1994 to discuss issues concerning the relationship between the Bank of Tanzania and Zanzibar. . MAE conducted (i) a mission that assisted in the development of monetary policy instruments (May 1993); (ii) a mission that reviewed the operations of the foreign exchange and treasury bill auctions and of the various monetary instruments, bank supervision and payments system issues, the draft of the new Bank of Tanzania Act, and the organizational structure of the Bank of Tanzania (November 1993); (iii) a mission in October 1994 that was concerned principally with the development of a domestic government debt market, and a follow-up to the mission in November 1993. h4AE also organized (iv) three visits by an expert in 1994 to design the interbank foreign exchange market; and (v) a four-week visit by an MAE expert in June 1995 focused on bank restructuring. MAE conducted (vi) a mission, in the first half of February 1996, focused on money market developments and monetary operations, the foreign exchange market, the payments system, and bank supervision and rehabilitation issues; (vii) a follow-up mission in February 1998 reviewed progress in monetary management, supervision, and payment systems; and (viii) a mission on capital account liberalizstion visited Tanzania June 2bJuly 4, 1999. . STA participated in (i) a multitopic mission that reviewed monetary, balance of payments, and price statistics (March 1992); (ii) a mission in August 1994 related to the national accounts; (iii) missions in July 1994 and July 1995 related to monetary statistics; (iv) missions in March 1995 and July 1996 dealing with price statistics; and (v) missions in July 1995 and July 1996 on balance of payments statistics. . BCS conducted missions to assist with computerization at the Bank of Tanzania and the Ministry of Finance in April 1995, April 1996, and November 1996. Resident Representative Mr. Tsidi M. Tsikata succeeded Mr. Festus L. Osnnsade as Resident Representative in October 1998. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 47 - APPENDIX III Tanzania: Relations with the World Bank Group (As of June 30,200O) Relations Tanzania joined the World Bank Group in 1962. Beginning with an IDA credit for education in 1963, a total of 114 credits and 27 Bank loans, amounting to some US$3.9 billion (US$3.5 billion from IDA and US%361 million from IBRD) have so far been approved for Tanzania (original principal). Of the 27 loans, 8 loans amounting to US$42.5 million were extended to Tanzania through the East African Community. Total disbursements amounted to nearly US$3. I billion as of May 3 I, 2000 (some US%2,764 million from IDA and US$356.million from IBRD). IFC’s committed portfolio of USS32.9 million (as of April 30,200O) includes investments in tea, leather, agricultural products, tourism, and finance. Consistent with the government’s strategy of poverty reduction through private-sector-led growth, rural sector development, and provision of basic social services, recent Bank lending has emphasized infrastructure (power, ports, railways, telecommunications, urban infrastructure, and roads, including rural roads), small-scale artisanal mining, public sector reform and capacity building (technical assistance to strengthen public services and to improve the environment for private sector development, including financial sector services and support to government’s privatization efforts), agriculture (policy framework, smallholder irrigation, research, and extension), environment (the regional Lake Victoria project), and social services (health and education). These projects aim at enhancing environmentally sustainable growth, easing the process of market liberalization, and reducing poverty (see attached table for portfolio of projects). IDA has also provided substantial resources as quick-disbursing adjustment lending in support of the reform program through a multisector rehabilitation credit, an industrial and trade adjustment credit, an agricultural adjustment operation, the financial sector adjustment credit, and more recently, a structural adjustment credit. In a meeting of the Board of Executive Directors of IDA, on April 4,2000, to review Tanzania’s interim poverty reduction strategy paper (PRSP), the joint World Bank-IMF staff assessment of the interim PRSP, and the enhanced Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Initiative decision point document, the Directors agreed that Tanzania was eligible for debt relief under the enhanced HIPC framework, that the interim PRSP was a satisfactory basis for reaching the decision point, and on that basis, that interim assistance be provided, pending reaching the completion point. IDA’s assistance of $1.2 billion will be spread over a period of 20 years, covering 69. I percent of Tanzania’s debt-service obligations to the association, Future lending program A new Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for Tanzania was approved by the Bank’s Board on June 15,200O. Building on the stable macroeconomic framework to address poverty and Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 48 - APPENDIX III to strengthen sources of growth for improved per capita income and enhanced social services delivery are now central to Tanzania’s development agenda. Reflecting this, the focus of this CAS is on higher economic growth, the poverty reduction, and institutional reforms to improve governance. It conforms with the government’s main strategic directions- adherence to macroeconomic stability, increased private sector participation in the economy, a renewed emphasis on rural development, and improved delivery of social services. It also supports the government’s desire to enter into new relationships with partners, based on the phased switching from projects to programs for a more effective and efficient use of aid resources. In supporting these objectives, the CAS suggests a lending program that will be increasingly geared toward operations with a direct bearing on poverty and a strengthening of social sector programs, in a shift from the earlier emphasis on intiastructure development. A move away from traditional project financing toward budget support is also envisaged. Finally, the IFC will build on the reforms initiated with IDA support to invest in private infrastructure provision, expand and deepen financial markets and institutions, and provide financing and capacity building to small and medium-sized Tanzanian enterprises. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 49 - APPENDIX IV Tanzania: Statistical Issues The economic database in Tanzania is generally weak, mainly because of the poor statistical infrastructure and difficulties in replacing the reporting mechanisms used in the central planning era with a system more adequately adapted to a free market environment. Tanzania has received considerable technical assistance to alleviate these difticulties, and progress has been made in some areas. The authorities are fully cooperative in providing data to the Fund, mainly through the resident representative’s offlice, and available data are provided to the Fund in a timely manner between missions. Tanzania has very few statistical publications and no fully articulated publication policy. National accounts Historical national accounts data (annual only) are prepared in the National Bureau of Statistics (NBS) in the Planning Commission on the basis of data collected by the NBS regional offices and by other government agencies and public sector entities. Revised national accounts series for the period 1987-96, reflecting the results of surveys and censuses, were published in May 1997; technical assistance by the Fund and a World Bank- sponsored project were instrumental in permitting completion of this revision. The national accounts data provide a useful basis for assessing movements in output, although many weaknesses remain, particularly with respect to the breakdown by expenditure category, deficiencies in external sector data, and unreliable information on aid inflows outside the budget. These deficiencies impede the accurate estimation of the savings/investment relationship. For the first time, semiannual national accounts data were published in August 1999. Prices Monthly consumer price data are collated by the NBS and cover 20 cities and regional centers. Since mid-May 1996, data have been published within two weeks of the end of the month. Following the completion of the ongoing household budget survey, the authorities intend to update the consumer price index weights (food currently has a 7 1.2 percent weight), and to collect wholesale price index series. Government finance statistics The AFR staff is provided with current information on central government revenue, current spending, and financing, with appropriate disaggregation, on a monthly basis, and with a short lag. There are substantial gaps regularly between revenue and expenditure data, on the one hand, and the financing data, on the other. The staff works with the authorities on reconciling these differences. A significant amount of aid-financed capital spending is not captured in the fiscal accounts, because projects are carried out directly by donors. No information is provided on the financial position of provincial governments and parastatals. Major aggregates on central government operations are reported to STA for publication in Infernational Financial Sfatistics (IFS). The accuracy of these aggregates, in view of the Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 50 - APPENDIX IV large entries for adjustments, is questionable. Comprehensive and detailed government finance statistics are no longer reported, and a country page for Tanzania was dropped from the Government Financial Statistics (GFS) Yearbook in 199 1. The government is computerizing its accounting system, which is expected to allow resumption of reporting in the GFS Yearbook starting with the fiscal year 2000/01 (July-June). Monetary statistics The balance sheets of the Bank of Tanzania (BoT) and the commercial banks, as well as the monetary survey, are provided monthly with a relatively short lag. The coverage of the banking system is good, but information is lacking on nonbank financial institutions and on several hundred credit cooperatives that operate mostly in the rural areas. When requested by the staff, the BoT is able to provide daily information with a very short lag on key items from its balance sheet, such as net foreign assets and net bank credit to the government. The BoT also provides detailed and timely data on treasury bill and treasury bond auctions and on transactions in the interbank market for foreign exchange. Monetary data are reported separately to STA, also on a timely basis. The BoT is preparing new report forms to improve its interest rate statistics. Balance of payments statistics Foreign trade data are prepared by staff missions on the basis of information from the BoT, which is derived from customs data. There is believed to be a significant amount of unrecorded trade. Information on invisible transactions is sparse. Tourism revenue is estimated on the basis of foreign exchange transactions data. Information on official grant and loan receipts is prepared by the staff on the basis of contact with official agencies. Data on private capital flows are very poor. Some information on private banking flows can be derived from the monetary survey; other private capital flows are captured only in errors and omissions. Data on the gross and net official reserves of the BoT are provided monthly with a short lag and more frequently on request. Similarly, data on foreign assets and liabilities of the banking system are provided with relatively short lags. Significant progress was made in improving the quality of external debt data as a result of the recent reconciliation exercise, involving mainly Paris Club creditors, in the lead-up to Tanzania’s decision point under the enhanced HIPC Initiative. The quality of debt data for non-Paris Club bilateral and commercial creditors remains poor although substantial efforts are under way to reconcile these debt data as well. Data on private sector external debt are nonexistent. With regard to ofticial external debt, technical measures to improve the debt- reporting system to the Bank are ongoing. Debt contracted on concessional terms is monitored closely by Fund staff through contacts with the authorities and the various multilateral and bilateral agencies. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 51 - APPENDIX IV Following a Statistics Department technical assistance mission in July 1996, some progress was made with respect to establishing more detailed coverage of services transactions and information on partner-country data to supplement customs data. As recommended by the Statistics Department, a survey of direct investors should be introduced. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 52 - APPENDIX III Rwanda: Record Under IDA Adjustment Credits Rwanda: Reforms Supported by IDA Adjustment Credits and Waivers Type Of WCd‘t and 1QQrOVal date Key reforms suQQorted Waivers of conditions St~ctmal Adjustment Credit . (he 7,199<) . Trade and exchange regime, libemlization None of the allocation of foreign exchange Improving the financial performance of Electmgaz; and the restruchuing of public cntcrprises . . Emergency Reintegration and . Recovery Credit (June 25, 1997) . Economic Recovery Credit . (March 30, 1999) . Labor market and implementation of civil service reform Liberalization of the coffee sector and elimination of subsidies for coffee Reconstruction and economic recovery Prioritisation Of public expenditures Not applicable Private sector development Privatisation of public enterprises Enhancing the role of women Prioritizing public expenditures Revival of the coffee and tea sectors Restructuring of Electmgaz, tbe energy/water utility NOllC Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicAPPENDIX V Tanzania: Income and Social Indicators 5.0 53.0 ,.- Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 54 - Press lnformation Notice (PIN) No. 2000/..:. International Monetary Fund FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE Washington, DC. 20431 USA [August 1, ZOOO] IMF Concludes Article IV Consultation with Tanzania The IMF Executive Board on [August 1, 20001 concluded the 2000 Article IV consultation’ and completed the first review of Tanzania’s new PRGF arrangement with Tanzania. Background 1. Tanzania has largely completed its macroeconomic stabilization. Following earlier, limited reforms, the government carried its far-reaching liberalization and reform strategies substantially further under the 1996-99 Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF) arrangement. Macroeconomic performance under the program was generally good, in spite of unfavorable climatic conditions. Although annual economic growth remained below the target of 6 percent, the 4.2 percent attained on average permitted some rise in per capita incomes. Inflation has been brought down from 27 percent in 1995 to 6 percent in May 2000, the lowest rate in more than 20 years. Gross international reserves rose to US$776 million at the end of 1999, in line with the medium-term target of four months of imports of goods and nonfactor services. Developments through end-May 2000 were largely in line with the objectives of the government’s program for 2000, which include real GDP growth of 5.2 percent and an end-period 12-month inflation rate of 5.0 percent by end-December. 2. The progress in macroeconomic stabilization was based on strong fiscal policies, resulting in an overall budget balance, after grants and the grant element of concessional loans, that remained positive throughout the period. The key instrument of fiscal restraint, the cash management system, however, continued to experience weaknesses in its implementation. Revenues have generally fallen short of budget projections, largely because of substantial reductions in external taxes and a failure of corporation taxes to recover from the earlier decline of the parastatal sector of the economy, in addition to excessive tax incentives for new investment. Accordingly, full funding of expenditures in line with the budget was not possible: however, over the period of the PRGF arrangement, the shortfalls declined and expenditures were increasingly protected. In recent months, following fiscal slippages in the second half of 1999, the government successfully implemented measures to address the revenue shotiall and expenditure overrun. In fact, cash expenditures were kept well below program limits, reflecting technical problems in implementation of the budgetary cash management system, and some domestic arrears were accumulated. ’ Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial information, and discusses with officials the country’s economic developments and policies. On return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the country’s authorities. In this PIN, the main features of the Board’s discussion are described. * Formerly Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility (ESAF). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 55 - 3. The government’s repayment of domestic financing (excluding new debt i&sued to recapitalize banks) of 0.4 percent of GDP annually on average has permitted credit to the private sector to recover strongly from the stagnation of the mid-1990s, while interest rates have remained positive in the context of monetary restraint. Balance of payments and exchange rate developments reflected the strong growth of concessional assistance. In the first quarter of 2000, exports rebounded from the low level of last year. The nominal exchange rate has remained stable at around T Sh. 800 per USdollar since August 1999, while, following the sharp depreciation in nominal terms in June- August 1999, the real effective exchange rate depreciated by 4.2 percent during the twelve-month period through March 2000. 4. Tanzania has also made substantial progress with structural reforms, despite some delays. Macroeconomic reforms included major tax reforms, a strengthening of the frameworks for expenditure control, monetary management, and financial sector development, and further liberalization of the external sector. Civil service reform included further rationalization and retrenchment, and the beginning of pay reform. Privatization has also gained momentum and about half the commercial parastatal entities have been removed from government control, with particularly important progress in the banking sector, as the sales agreement for the National Bank of Commerce (NBC) (1997) was signed in March 2000. The petroleum sector has been fully liberalized and subsidies largely eliminated. The government has focused its efforts to improve its governance record and begun to develop sectoral anti-corruption plans. 5. In addition to macroeconomic stabilization and structural reform, the government has intensified its efforts to directly address poverty issues. Following the adoption of the 1997 National Poverty Eradication Strategy, in 1999 the government issued “Poverty and Welfare Monitoring Indicators,” as a basis for assessing poverty eradication programs. Poverty reduction priority areas have been identified in the context of the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF), and are also reflected in the budget. The ongoing preparation of the Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP) is centered around the “Tanzania Assistance Strategy” (TAS) process, a broad-based forum, including the government, civil society and donors. The PRSP will focus on specific policy targets for poverty reduction, social indicators, and institution building. 6. The Board of the IMF approved a new three-year arrangement under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF) on March 31,200O and the Boards of the IMF (on March 31) and the IDA (on April 4) endorsed the government’s interim PRSP, decided that Tanzania had reached the decision point under the enhanced HIPC Initiative, and approved interim debt relief. On April 14, 2000, an agreement was reached between Tanzania and the Paris Club on a three-year flow rescheduling on Cologne terms, providing a reduction of 90 percent in net present value terms and covering about US$O.7 billion of arrears on principal, interest, and current maturities. Executive Board Assessment <Begin Typing Here> Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-56 - . Press lnfomation Nof/ces (P/Ns) are a new series of IMF press notices (see Press Release 97/21). PINS are issued, at the request of a member counby, following the conclusion of the Article IV consultation for countries seeking to make known the views of the IMF to the public. This action is intended to strengthen IMF surveillance over the economic policies of member countries by increasing the transparency of the IMF’s assessment of these policies. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public