DOCUMENT OF INTERNATIONAL MONEXARY FUND AND NOT FOR PUBLIC USE SM/95/320 I CONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION December 29, 1995 To: Members of the Executive Board From: The Acting Secretary Subject: Ukraine - Staff Reuort for the 1995 Article IV Consultation Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staff report for the 1995 Article IV consultation with Ukraine, which is tentatively scheduled for discussion on Friday, January 19, 1996. Mr. Knob1 (ext. 38821) or Mr. Lenain (ext. 34069) is available to answer technical or factual questions relating to this paper prior to the Board discussion. Unless the Documents Preparation Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the European .Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD), the European Commission (EC), and the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), following its consideration by the Executive Board. Att: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicCONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION P INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND UKRAINE Staff ReDort for the 1995 Article IV Consultation . Prepared by the Staff Representatives for the 1995 Consultation with Ukraine Approved by John Odling-Smee and Joaquin Pujol December 28, 1995 Contents I. Introduction II. Developments Since the Last Consultation 1. Macroeconomic developments 2 2. Fiscal policy 4 3. Monetary and exchange rate policies 6 4. External payments arrears 8 5. Compliance with the quantitative targets 9 6. Structural reforms 9 7. Social safety net 11 III. Policies for 1996 1. Macroeconomic stabilization 2. Structural reforms 3. Implementation issues IV. Medium-Term Outlook for the Balance of Payments 1 2 12 12 14 16 17 V. Staff Appraisal 18 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicCharts A. Exchange Rate Developments B. Inflation and Dollar Wages C. Fiscal Indicators D. Monetary Ratios E. NBU Refinancing Rate and Prices F. Auctions at Ukrainian Commodity Exchange Tables 1. Performance Criteria and Financial Benchmarks 21 2. Selected Economic Indicators, 1993-95 22 1 3. Prices and Wages, 1994-95 23 4. Operations of the Consolidated State Budget, 1994-96 24 5. Financing of the Consolidated State Budget, 1993-95 25 6. Monetary Survey, 1994-95 26 7. Accounts of the National Bank of Ukraine, 1994-95 27 8. Key Trade Indicators, 1994-96 28 9. External Financing Needs, 1994-96 29 10. Scheduled External Debt Service, 1994-96 30 11. Medium-Term Balance of Payments, 1994-2004 31 12. Indicators of Fund credit, 1994-2004 32 Annexes I. Implementation of Structural Reforms II. Fund Relations III. Relations with the World Bank 36 IV. Basic Social Indicators F 4a 4b 4c 6a 8a 10a 33 35 1 37 V. Statistical Issues 38 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicI. Introduction Discussions for the 1995 consultation with Ukraine under Article IV and Article XIV were held in Kiev from October 25 to November 10, 1995. L/ Discussions were held, at the same time, on the third review under the stand-by arrangement. The Ukrainian team was headed by the Deputy Prime Minister for the Economy, Mr. Shpek, and included the Governor of the National Bank of Ukraine, Mr. Youshchenko; the Deputy Prime Minister for Economic Reforms, Mr. Pynzenyk; the Deputy Prime Minister for Money and Banking, Mr. Mityukov; the Minister of Finance, Mr. Hermanchuk; the Minister of Economy, Mr. Gurejev; the Minister of Foreign Economic Relations, Mr. Osyka; and senior officials of various government ministries and agencies, and of the National Bank. 2 The 1994 Article IV consultation was completed by the Executive Board on October 26, 1994 (EBS/94/203). A stand-by arrangement providing Ukraine with possible access to Fund resources of SDR 997.3 million (100 percent of quota) and a second drawing under the Systemic Transformation Facility (STF) were approved by the Executive Board on April 7, 1995 (EBS/95/27). Ukraine has so far made three purchases under the stand-by arrangement, for the equivalent of 54 percent of quota. The second review (EBS/95/156) was completed on September 29, 1995, on the basis of letters from the authorities requesting waivers of the nonobservance of performance driteria (Table 1). Concerning the unreported noncompliance with a performance criterion at the time of this Board meeting, the Executive Board waived the nonobservance on a lapse-of-time basis on December 13, 1995, allowing Ukraine to retain the amount of the third purchase under the stand-by arrangement (EBS/95/204). A fourth purchase under the stand-by arrangement, for the equivalent of 23 percent of quota, is subject to, inter alia, compliance with the quantitative performance criteria as of October 1, 1995 and completion of a third Board review. In view of the deviations from the program understandings, including the repeated non-observance of the performance criteria on external payments arrears, serious slippages in the area of privatization, and continuing uncertainties about the budget, it is not proposed to complete the third review at this stage. For the same reason, it is also unlikely that the last purchase under the arrangement, also for u The mission comprised Messrs. Knob1 (Head), Lenain, Cornelius, Dunn, Ghosh, and Ms. Unigovskaya (all EU2), Mr. Fernandez-Ansola (PDR), Mr. Orsmond (FAD), and, as administrative assistant, Ms. Rome (EU2). The mission was assisted by Graeme Justice and Alexander Sundakov of the resident office. u These discussions were pursued during two subsequent staff visits. In particular, Mr. Odling-Smee visited Kiev during December 19-21 and met, in addition to members of the economic team, President Kuchma and Prime Minister Marchuk. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 2 - the equivalent of 23 percent of quota, and subject to compliance with the quantitative performance criteria as of January 1, 1996, will be made as ' scheduled. II. 5 On the occasion of the 1994 Article IV consultation with Ukraine, Directors welcomed the commitment of the authorities to stabilize and reform the Ukrainian economy within the framework of a program supported by the STF. Directors considered the program that the Government had formulated to be comprehensive, coherent, and ambitious. They welcomed, in particular, the structural measures formulated by the Government and encouraged the authorities to continue to liberalize the economy. Directors also welcomed I the measures taken to contain banking system financing to the Government in the closing months of 1994. They underscored the need to reduce further the budget deficit in 1995. Finally, Directors emphasized the importance of significant and lasting progress toward economic stabilization and structural reforms before the authorities would introduce a fixed exchange rate. Since the last consultation, the commitment of the authorities to ambitious reform policies can best be described in three stages. In late 1994 and the first half of 1995, the authorities pursued strong policies aimed at lowering inflation and reforming the economy. In April 1995, they adopted a budget that reduced the role of the state in the economy and at the same time reformed the system of taxation. They sought, and obtained, a rescheduling of their outstanding debt obligations and payments arrears and pledged to service their rescheduled obligations on time. They also introduced a number of steps aimed at speeding up the mass privatization program and at opening up the foreign trade regime. During the following months, the commitment of the Ukrainian authorities to ambitious reforms weakened. In July, the Government renewed various forms of financial support to the enterprise sector, including through direct budgetary lending. External payments arrears were incurred by the Government, both on payments for gas imports and on foreign debt service obligations. Structural reforms lagged behind schedule. In the closing months of 1995, in view of the negative impact of these slippages, in particular on inflation, the authorities tightened their monetary policy. This contributed to reducing inflationary pressures and stabilizing the exchange rate. However, other corrective actions, which would have been required to bring the program back on track, were postponed. 1. Macroeconomic develoDments Although Ukraine's economic statistics remain weak, developments in 1995 can be described as follows: Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 3 - 0 Activitv remained weak during most of 1995 (Table 2). For the whole o,f 1995, both staff and the authorities expect a real GDP decline of 13 per- cent, slightly greater than in the program's initial projection, but significantly less than the decline recorded in 1994 (23 percent). Lower- than-expected agricultural output, following adverse,weather conditions during the summer, contributed to the real GDP decline in 1995. There are signs that private sector activity, which is not fully recorded in the official GDP statistics, continued to benefit from the partial deregulation of the economy, and to expand. 0 EXDOrtS have performed strongly in 1995, particularly exports to non- FSU countries, which are estimated to have increased by about 40 percent over the first nine months of 1995 in dollar terms. 1/ This increase has more than offset the fall in trade with the FSU. The performance of exports underscores the beneficial effects of measures taken early in the year to liberalize foreign trade activity --although much remains to be done for Ukraine to realize its full export potential. Imoorts remained essentially flat during the first nine months of 1995, as a contraction in energy imports offset an increase in other imports. Ukraine's trade deficit has fallen during the first nine months of 1995, and is estimated to reach the equivalent of about 6 percent of GDP for the whole year, compared with 7 percent of GDP in the initial program. In view of the surplus in the balance of nonfactor services generated by the remittance of gas transit fees, the current account deficit is estimated to reach about 4 percent of GDP for the whole of 1995. 0 The exchange rate was relatively stable during much of the first half of the year, as capital inflows contributed to strengthening the balance of payments position (Chart A). However, following the weakening of policy implementation during the summer, the karbovanets depreciated from Krb 144,000 per U.S. dollar in July to Krb 165,000 per U.S. dollar in September, despite large foreign exchange sales by the National Bank. The karbovanets stabilized in October and November at around Krb 180,000 per U.S. dollar, as increases in the National Bank's refinancing rate from 70 percent to 110 percent signalled the willingness of the monetary authorities to tighten policies in order to restore confidence. Ukraine's real exchange rate has appreciated by about 60 percent since December 1994; however, the economy's external competitiveness remains supported by a low level of dollar wages (US$55 per month on average in the national economy) in comparison to Ukraine's main competitors (Chart B). 0 The path of consumer price inflation was marked by a significant slowdown during the first half of 1995, with several months of inflation rates in the range of 5 percent per month (Table 3). Inflation picked up, however, in September and October, in part reflecting administered price adjustments and seasonal factors, but also as a result of a loosening of monetary policy. In response to a subsequent tightening of credit, u This reflects also, however, improved statistical coverage. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4 - inflation slowed down in November. For 1995, staff and the authorities expect consumer price inflation of 180 percent within the year, but t significantly less than the outturn of 400 percent within 1994. 0 Following the repeal of wage controls in January 1995, waees increased by 16 percent in real terms during the first half of the year. Effective from September 1995, the authorities reinstated an incomes policy that is designed to limit wage increases to 80 percent of inflation (after an allowance for increases in productivity). Enterprises which grant larger wage increases must pay an excess wage tax. On average, wages have risen by 20 percent between August and October, while inflation over the corresponding period was almost 25 percent; this is consistent with the operation of the new wage policy. Within 1995, national economy wages are expected to increase by 14 percent in real terms, compared with a decline of 17 percent within the previous year. In the budgetary sphere, the average wage increased by about 50 percent in real terms during the first half and reached the same level as in the enterprise sector. Although this was consistent with the prevailing legislation providing for the equality of wage levels in the two sectors, it also added pressures on the budget. In response, the authorities have submitted to Parliament a bill which would delink budgetary wages from wages in the enterprise sector. This bill has not yet been adopted. 2. Fiscal policy The 1995 consolidated state budget aimed at reducing the cash deficit from 8.6 percent of GDP in 1994 to some 3 percent of GDP (Tables 4 and 5, and Chart C). The achievement of this target was predicated on major cuts in transfers to the production sectors, a sharp reduction in consumer subsidies, and strict control of the wage bill. At the same time, most tax exemptions were eliminated to broaden the tax base, enterprise taxation was reformed, and new excises and royalties were introduced on gas consumption. Revenue reached 42.4 percent of GDP for the first nine months of 1995--slightly in excess of the level expected in the April budget. Profit and personal income tax receipts were strong, the latter reflecting the increase in the average national economy real wage since the start of the year. These gains more than offset under-performance of receipts from the VAT--due to Parliament's failure to pass the revised VAT law that would have decreased the number of exemptions. Revenues from oil and gas taxes were also disappointingly low due to the continuous accumulation of domestic payment arrears. Expenditures reached the equivalent of 46.8 percent of GDP in the first nine months of the year --more than expected in the budget. The overrun in public expenditures reflected the large wage increases granted to government workers during the first half; the subsidies to the coal mine sector in March and July; and the payments of arrears on gas imports incurred earlier in the year. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 4a - CBARTA Exchange Rate Developments Karbovanets per U.S. dollar D (End -month obkrvations) 50000 - 100000 - 150000- J FM AM J J A S 0 N D J FM AM,;95J A SO h 1994 Real auction exchange rate l/ I ’ 0 50000 100000 15DoOO 200000 130 tJ anuary 1994 = 100) 120- 80- 60- 501 I J FM A M J J A S 0 N D J FM A MJ5J A S 0 N 1994 130 120 110 60 50 Sources: Ukrainian authoriiies; ond IMF staff estimates. l/ Deflated by the consumer price index. Declinr indicata real depreciation. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 4b - cE4RTB Inflation and Dollar Wages Inflation 70 WI ; monthly percent change; three-month moving overage) 60 / Ukraine T L I I1 10 I I I I I I oJFMAMJJASONO 1993 70 r 60 50 40 30 20 10 Dollar wages 250 250 Boltics 1/a - 200 - 150 - 100 ‘- 50 01 I,,, I, I I I I I : I, I, I I I I I I I1 f I I f I I I I, lo J F M A hi igi3 A S 0 N D J F M A M ig9J4 A S 0 N D J F hi A ygg; J A S 0 Sources: National authorities: and staff estimates. 1/ Avrroga for Latvia, Lithuonia and Estonia. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 4c - CHART C . UKRAINE Fiscal Indicators l/ 70 60 a Budget revenues mBudget expenditures -Deficit so(ln percent of GDP) 60 50 40 30 2C 1c C Structure of budget expenditures II I- I- I- l- I- I- In percent of GDP) - Vojection ~Notionol economy =Heoith and education m Social protectio oPension fund t?aOther n 1995 esti mate Sourcesz Ukroinian authorities; ond IMF stoff estimates. l/ Expenditures include directed credits; bath revenues ond expenditures include the Pension Fund. 80 f 70 60 50 40 30 20 10 0 60 50 40 30 20 10 0 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 5 - As a result of the overrun in public expenditures, the cash budget deficit reached Krb 137 trillion during the first nine months of 1995 7 (4% percent of GDP for the same period), close to the target for the whole year. Several decisions made in October led to additional slippages in fiscal policy implementation. First, Parliament refused to adopt new revenue measures, as proposed by the Government, which would have contained the deficit during the last months of the year. Second, without consultation with the staff, the authorities decided to provide to the end of 1995 official guarantees on gas imports (see below). This decision forced the budget to assume responsibility for new gas import arrears. In view of these pressures on the budget, staff estimates of the budget deficit, based on the assumption that all external obligations are paid on time, were revised to Krb 190-200 trillion for the whole of 1995 (4 percent of GDP), compared with a target of Krb 148 trillion (3 percent of GDP) under the program. This would still imply, however, a halving of the budget deficit in percent of GDP from 1994. Under the 1995 program, banking system credit to the budget of 4 per- cent of GDP was expected to finance (i) the budget deficit of 3 percent of GDP, and (ii) net foreign financing outflows of 1 percent of GDP. In the event, two factors are projected to contribute to a greater amount of banking system credit to the budget than programmed. First, as noted, assuming that external arrears are paid on time, the budget deficit is expected to reach 4 percent of GDP. Second, while the World Bank disbursed its Import Rehabilitation Loan on time, the disbursement of other foreign credits are expected to fall short of the amount projected in the program. 1/ Consequently, assuming that all foreign obligations are met on time, and taking into account other sources of domestic financing, it is expected that banking system credit to the budget will reach 6 percent of GDP for the whole year, about 2 percent of GDP more than initially projected. If these external obligations are not paid on time, banking system credit will increase by a lower amount, but a corresponding stock of external payments arrears will be outstanding. g Under the program for 1995, it was expected that foreign credits amounting to US$900 million would be provided by the European Union, Japan, the United States, and Canada to support Ukraine's program. However, few of these credits are expected to be drawn in 1995. Administrative difficulties that occurred both on the Ukrainian and the European sides have contributed to postponing the disbursement of the expected loans of ECU 285 million; as a result, a loan of only ECU 85 million is expected to be disbursed in 1995. The credit from the United States --although it has been approved by the Ukrainian Parliament-- is not expected to be disbursed in the near future, in part because this credit can only benefit agricultural enterprises. Delays also occurred in the negotiation of the credit from Japan, in part because of the tied nature of part of this credit. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 6 - 3. Monetarv and exchange rate nolicies The monetary program for 1995 had two main objectives: achieving low rates of inflation in the range of 1-2 percent per month; and replenishing gross international reserves sufficiently to restore confidence in the national currency. Slippages in policy implementation, however, prevented satisfactory achievement of these objectives (Tables 6 and 7, and Chart D). Discussions with the authorities focused on slippages that occurred in base money, banking system credit to the nongovernment, and interest rate policy. a Under the program for 1995, the monetarv aggregates were set to grow in line with the pace of nominal activity. Specifically, broad money expansion was projected to decline from monthly rates of 9 percent during the first quarter to monthly rates of 2 percent during the fourth quarter. Targets for base money and for the net domestic assets of the National Bank were set accordingly. In the event, however, broad money expanded more rapidly than expected under the program both during the second quarter (10 percent a month) and during the third quarter (6 percent). A large part of the overrun in broad money during the first half resulted from unexpected capital inflows. Faced with a sudden change in the pattern of capital flows early in the program, the National Bank decided to intervene on the auction market to prevent an appreciation of the karbovanets. This decision, which was based on the concern that an appreciation of the karbovanets would hurt the economy's external competitiveness, contributed to an overrun in the National Bank's international reserves. As the authorities were unwilling to sterilize this rapid increase in their international reserves--in part because of the fiscal cost of such sterilization measures--the expansion of base money exceeded the program targets at the end of June. The rapid expansion of the monetary aggregates initially corresponded to a stronger demand for money. However, as doubts emerged about the authorities' commitment to the reform program during the summer, the monetary expansion contributed to renewed pressures on the exchange rate in August, and eventually fueled inflationary pressures in September and October. The authorities' response to this situation contributed to a slowdown in the expansion of base money and broad money in the fourth quarter. In September, they sold part of their foreign exchange reserves, thus helping to contain the overrun in base money. In the fourth quarter, they refrained from refinancing commercial banks and from extending new credits to the Government (except for the settlement of foreign debt service obligations). This contributed to the near stability of base money in October, November, and the first half of December. This monetary restraint has helped, during this period, to stabilize the karbovanets and to reduce inflationary pressures. 0 Discussions with the monetary authorities also centered on the overrun in banking: svstem credit to the nongovernment in the second and the third quarters. As noted at the time of the second program review, direct pressures exercised on commercial banks by senior officials, both at the central and local levels, had contributed to an excessive increase in these Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 6a - CEARTD Monetary Ratios Real base money 1/ ,40(End-quarter observations; Dec. 1992 = 100) ;Proj. 140 , 120- loo- w- w- 40- 20 lbvg2 I II III IV I II III IV I II III ’ IV 2o 1993 1994 1995 Real broad money 2/ 80- w- 40- 20- 01 A\2 I II III IV I II III IV I II III 1993 1994 1995 Bose money multiplier 3/ Proj. :I 100 80 60 40 20 IV 0 4.0 (End-quarter obsenations) i Proj. 4.0 3.5- - 3.5 3.0- - 3.0 2.5- -2.5 2.0 - - 2.0 1.57 - 1.5 1.0 42 I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV ‘.O 1993 1994 1995 Source: IMF staff estimates on the basis of information provided by the Ukrainian authorities. l/ Nominol base money deflated by the consumer price index. 2/ Nomlnal broad money deflated by the consumer prlcr Index. Foreign currency deposlts valued at parallel exchange rates through September 1994. 3/ Ratio of karbovanets broad money to base money of the NW. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 7 - credits. During discussions with the Ukrainian authorities, it also emerged that three other factors under the control of the monetary authorities had ' contributed to this situation. First, in early-1995, the National Bank of Ukraine permitted commercial banks to hold up to 100 percent of their required reserves in the form of treasury bills. Second, the monetary authorities permitted commercial banks to reduce their required reserves by a fraction of the loans made to enterprises under various directed credit programs. Finally, the National Bank conducted a number of special refinancing operations targeted to assist specific enterprises. As a result of these various factors, banking system credit to the nongovernment sector exceeded by 8 percent the ceiling established on October 1, 1995, as a financial benchmark under the arrangement. 0 Under the program, it had been agreed that the National Bank would keep the refinancing rate positive in real terms. In early October, the authorities raised the refinancing rate from 70 percent to 95 per- cent--(Chart E) less than inflation, on the grounds that the September inflation figure largely reflected administered price adjustments. 1/ However, in view of the rapid depletion of their international reserves, the authorities decided to raise the refinancing rate again from 95 percent to 110 percent on November 30. In discussions of their exchanee rate uolicv, the authorities clarified that they had been aiming at specific targets throughout 1995--in contradiction with the understanding under the program that the exchange rate would be allowed to float freely. During the first half, their interventions had aimed at preventing an appreciation of the karbovanets in an environment of large capital inflows. In the second half, as the pattern of capital flows changed, their interventions aimed at containing the exchange rate depreciation. Sales of foreign exchange in October, November, and early December-- including direct transfers to allow the Government to make debt service payments --may have reduced net international reserves below the floor established as of January 1, 1996. The authorities underscored that the liberalization of the exchange The unification of exchange system in early-1995 had been successful. rates, the re-opening of the auction exchange market, the authorization of interbank exchange transactions had all improved confidence and improved access to foreign exchange. The authorities remained, however, reluctant to L/ The Ukrainian authorities do not compound monthly figures when they express interest rates in annual terms. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 8 - abolish the surrender requirement of 50 percent of export earnings to the market and to further reduce their exchange restrictions. u f 4. External pavments arrears Arrears to foreign creditors and suppliers have emerged repeatedly throughout the year, especially on the payments for gas imports. During the first quarter, arrears of US$406 million were incurred on gas imports from Russia; these payments arrears were rescheduled over the following six months and eventually fully settled. New gas payments arrears to Russia of US$55 million, which were incurred in April, were settled in the context of the first review under the stand-by arrangement. During the period May l- July 31, arrears of some US$140 million were again incurred toward Gazprom of Russia; these arrears were offset by a counterclaim of Ukraine on the payment of transit fees for the channelling of gas through its territory. After a seasonal pause during the remainder of the summer, external payments arrears increased again rapidly in October with the beginning of the heating season. As a result, the stock of payments due to Gazprom of Russia reached US$240 million on November 1. The Russian supplier agreed to accept the payment of these arrears in two installments, one due on November 30 which was met on time, and the other due on December 31. As a large shipment of Ukrainian goods was received by Gazprom in November, no new gas payments arrears were incurred during that month. Payment arrears were also accumulated during the second half on gas imports from Turkmenistan; and arrears of about US$36 million were outstanding on December 1; the Turkmen authorities agreed to defer payments until the end of December 1995. In letters sent to its Russian and Turkmen suppliers in September and October, Ukraine confirmed that it would not guarantee gas import payments. u However, in view of the negative reactions of these gas suppliers, and the possible risk of disruption in gas supplies, it gave new guarantees until the end of 1995. u In SM/95/313 (12/15/95), the staff indicated that it was in the process of clarifying the status of certain exchange measures. It has been clarified that the correspondent accounts maintained by the National Bank of Ukraine with central banks of the Baltic countries, Russia, and other countries of the former Soviet Union are not presently used to settle current account transactions, nor, in practice, have they been used to hold significant amounts of deposits. The Ukrainian authorities are currently seeking to reach agreement with the other central banks on the settlement of claims arising from the outstanding balances maintained on these accounts. As soon as these agreements are reached, it is desirable that any such claims be settled promptly and the accounts be closed. It has also been clarified that the "lore" accounts of nonresidents are, in practice, not subject to restrictions. The staff is seeking the information necessary to clarify the jurisdictional status of other nonresident accounts in Ukraine. u For a fuller discussion of this issue see EBS/95/156 (g/22/95). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 8a - CEARTE NBU Refinance Rate and Prices I)I\ (In percent per month) 70 60 50 40 30 20 10 0 -CPI (monthly change) hsNBU refinance rate 1/ AN FEBMARAPRMAY JUN JULAUG SEP OCT NOVDEC JAN FEBMARAPRMAY 1Jgugt&JUL AUG SEP OCT NOV 1994 80 7 70 60 50 40 30 20 10 0 Source: Ukrainian authorities. l/ End of month observations. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 9 - Arrears were incurred on the settlement of debt service obligations to various creditors, including to Russia, Turkmenistan and Germany. These ' arrears were generally settled after some delay. The repeated deferral of external payments arrears has contributed to a bunching of payments due by the end of December, when some US$SOO million are due to various creditors, including US$200 million under a debt buyback operation with Gazprom of Russia, the settlement of which is to be in the form of goods. The staff will report on the settlement of these payments before the Board meeting. 5. Compliance with the auantitative targets under the stand-bv arrannement As a result of slippages in policy implementation, the performance criteria related to external payments arrears of the Government established under the program were not observed at the end of the third quarter. Debt service arrears to Russia, Turkmenistan, and Germany caused the level of external payments arrears of the Government to exceed by US$95 million the ceiling established as a performance criterion for October 1, 1995. In addition, the fact that most of these arrears were made also caused the nonobservance of the performance criterion on the continuous avoidance of new external payments arrears. Had the budget discharged these external obligations on time, both banking system credit to the Government and net domestic assets of the National Bank would have exceeded the ceilings established as performance criteria under the program. &/ In addition, as noted, the ceilings on banking system credit to the nongovernment and on base money, which were subject to financial benchmarks under the program on October 1, were both exceeded. Subsequent discussions with the authorities made clear that the observance of some of the January 1, 1996 performance criteria was also in jeopardy. Revised budgetary estimates, based on the Government's decision to settle the new payment arrears on gas imports, indicate that the ceiling on net domestic assets of the National Bank, and the floor on net international reserves, are unlikely to be observed if the authorities pay these arrears; otherwise, the performance criteria on external arrears will not be observed. 6. Structural reforms The program of structural reforms supported by the stand-by arrangement aimed at (i) withdrawing budget transfers to the agricultural sector, (ii) opening the foreign trade regime, and (iii) speeding-up the privatization program. 0 Policies in the agricultural sector changed markedly in 1995. The Government successfully limited its spending on net agricultural procurement 1/ The revised credit ceilings established at the time of the second review took into account the expected shortfalls in net foreign financing to the budget during the third quarter. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 10 - to the amount contained in the budget-- despite strong pressures to provide more funds. Specifically, the net cost to the budget for the procurement of grain in 1995 is expected to be held to the original allocation of Krb 34 trillion (0.7 percent of GDP). In addition, with the liberalization of prices in December 1994, the sales of grain held in the Government's reserves are expected to total around Krb 40 trillion for 1995. These two sources combined are expected to be sufficient to finance the purchase of around 6 million tons of grain in 1995. This represents considerable progress over 1994, when the budget procured 11 million tons of grain at a cost of Krb 71 trillion (6.2 percent of GDP), with virtually no proceeds from the sales of grain procured earlier. As a result, grain procurement-- an activity which has placed enormous strain on monetary policy in recent years --has now only a limited impact on the budget. l Despite their partial liberalization, grain exports, like most other exports, continue to be impeded by administrative restrictions. Grain export quotas and licenses were to be abolished no later than June 30, 1995, as a structural benchmark under the program. In the event, the authorities decided not to abolish the quotas and licenses on grain exports, because they wished to protect the ability of the Government to procure grain from domestic farmers. In August, a decree was issued prohibiting the export of grain until farmers had fulfilled their obligations under state contracts. There was an immediate drop in the volumes traded at the commodity exchange (Chart F). New regulations were introduced in October allowing participation at the commodity exchange of farmers having delivered the pre- paid portion of the state contract. But in December, the customs administration decided to stop registering grain export contracts, on the grounds that these export contracts were based on prices lower than the indicative export prices issued by the Ministry of Foreign Economic Relations. These restrictions, and the continuous uncertainty about the prevailing legislation, contributed to disappointing grain exports, to a large discount of domestic grain prices from world market prices, and to the erosion of farmers' income-- all factors which will undoubtedly retard the realization of Ukraine's immense potential in agricultural production. 1/ 0 More generally, foreign trade nolicy continued to impede exports in 1995. At the onset of the stand-by arrangement, the authorities removed all export quotas, other than (i) on goods subject to voluntary export restraint under international agreements, and (ii) on grain. Also at the onset of the program, the authorities abolished the system of export registration, except for exports carried out under international agreements and to prevent dumping on foreign markets. However, they introduced a system of "indicative export prices" which the authorities presented as not being L/ During the first ten months of 1995, Ukraine produced 29 million tons of grain (excluding maize), far from its production potential that exceeds 50 million tons; of these, 2.5 million tons were exported through the auction market and 4 million tons are expected to be exported through the quota system. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 10a - CEARTF Auctions at Ukrainian Commodity Exchange Auctions of wheat Volume, thous. tons Price per ton, U.S. dollars 140 220 hsVolume auctioned -Auction price -World price l/ - 180 - 160 60 Auctions of feed barley Volume, thous. tons 140 Price per ton, U.S. dollars 180 nsb’olume auctioned 120 -Auction price 160 -World price 2/ 100 140 80 120 60 100 40 80 20 60 0 1724 3 10172431 7142126 5 121926 2 9 162330 7142128 4 152229 6 132027 3 1017 40 FEB MAR APR MAY JUN JUL 111625lP8 AUG OCT NOV 1995 Source: Ukrainian authorities. l/ Price of wheat at US. Mexico Gulf ports, f.o.b. 2/ Price of U.S. #3 bnrley in Duluth. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 11 - mandatory but which, in practice, was used by the customs administration to control exports. Efforts by Fund and World Bank staff to persuade the r authorities to abolish this new system were not fruitful. 0 While the privatization of small enternrises gained momentum in the third quarter--with more than 4,200 enterprises privatized compared with only some 1,000 entities in the first half of the year, the completion of small-scale privatization is now envisaged only for mid-1996. Significant slippages have also occurred under the mass privatization program for medium and large enternrises. Although the Government had targeted the privatization of 8,000 medium and large enterprises in 1995, in only about 1,000 of such enterprises were the majority of shares sold to the private sector during the first nine months of the year. In October, the authorities decided to streamline the procedures to prepare enterprises for privatization (except for agro-industrial enterprises). This decision contributed to a jump in the number of enterprises slated for privatization in October and November. However, the authorities decided to maintain a minimum reservation price at the auctions, and it is thus expected that a large share of enterprises will continue to fail to be privatized. 7. Social safety net Another important structural reform contained in the Government's program in 1995 was to reduce and target better the subsidies on communal services and energy consumption toward the most vulnerable households. This strategy had two planks: first, the Government was determined to increase the tariffs of these goods and services sufficiently to contain budgetary transfers; second, the Government was adamant about introducing a social safety net that would protect the poorest groups of the population against these price increases. Progress has been made on both fronts. The authorities have undertaken, throughout 1995, a number of price adjustments aimed at gradually raising the cost recovery ratios. Prices of communal services and energy products were raised in February, June, and September. Preliminary indications suggest that cost recovery ratios were increased generally in line with the program understandings, although some tariffs failed to reach the level of 60 percent of total cost targeted under the program. u The authorities have decided to correct these slippages and have instructed oblasts to adjust tariffs and prices sufficiently to achieve cost recovery ratios of at least 60 percent on January 1, 1996. l/ In relation to total expenditures (i.e., running costs, taxes, and profit), tariffs and prices are estimated to have been increased as follows between early-1995 and September 1995: housing rents and communal services tariffs from 20 percent to 40 percent of cost; public transportation fares from 20 percent to 60 percent of cost; gas sold to the population from 5 percent to 60 percent of cost; coal sold to the population from 5 percent to 80 percent of cost; and electricity prices from 10 percent to 80 percent of costs . Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12 - The authorities have established, with the support of Fund and US AID staff, a program aimed at protecting the most vulnerable groups of the 7 population against these price increases. This program ensures that no family spends more than 15 percent of its income on housing energy, and communal services. The decree establishing the program was implemented in May 1995; to date, more than 800,000 families have received monthly subsidies. Although the program had a slow start and remains impeded by cumbersome administrative procedures, the number of beneficiaries increased toward the end of the year. III. Policies for 1996 The program of stabilization and structural reforms has brought to Ukraine many economic benefits in 1995. Yet, despite this progress, Ukraine continues to be beset by difficult economic conditions. The policy discussions thus focused on the steps that would need to be taken in early- 1996 to revive the program. Such steps would include: (i) the approval of a 1996 budget based on a conservative deficit target; (ii) a firm decision by the Government to cancel all guarantees on the payments for gas imports; (iii) compliance with the indicative monetary targets that were established for the first quarter of 1996; and (iv) the implementation of measures to speed up the privatization of medium and large enterprises and to liberalize exports. The staff has indicated that, should sufficient progress be made toward these objectives, negotiations would immediately follow on a 1996 program that could be supported by the remaining resources available under the stand-by‘arrangement. 1. Macroeconomic stabilization The discussions covered the economic prospects for 1996 and the appropriate inflation targets to be achieved under a revived stabilization program. The authorities stressed their resolve to lower inflation to about l-2 percent per month in the second half of 1996, and to limit the CPI increase to no more than 34 percent within 1996 (down from 180 percent within 1995). They noted that, while a more ambitious target could be envisaged in principle, it would be difficult to achieve in practice, given the large administered price adjustments scheduled for January and April 1996. Achieving lower inflation would require, most importantly, a strict fiscal oolicv in 1996. The Government, Parliament, and the President of Ukraine have expressed their support for a budget deficit in 1996 of about Krb 160 trillion (2% percent of GDP). The staff has expressed its support for this deficit target, which it felt to be attainable and consistent with the target of lower inflation. However, the staff also pointed out that some items in the authorities' budgetary projections lacked realism. It indicated, in particular, that some revenues had been overestimated, given the underlying trends observed in 1995. It also stressed that expenditures on social protection, education, and health had been underestimated. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13 - Finally, it pointed out that Parliament had shown no intention of approving the new VAT law, which would also reduce fiscal revenues by keeping many t& exemptions in place. The staff pointed to its estimates showing that, in the absence of corrective measures, the budget deficit would be around 6% percent of GDP, much larger than that projected by the authorities. The staff outlined a number of measures that could be taken to offset this deviation; these included the containment of a number of expenditure programs, including budgetary support to the enterprise sector, and maintaining capital outlays at the level observed in 1995 in relation to GDP. None of these recommendations were incorporated in the draft budget submitted to Parliament in December 1995. Discussions with the authorities also covered the main objectives of monetarv oolicv in 1996. These discussions were, by necessity, very preliminary and focused on the broad guidelines that could be adopted, The authorities stressed that they were determined to contain the rate of monetary expansion in line with the projected rate of nominal activity. A tight monetary policy would be facilitated, in their view, by the strict fiscal policy that was envisaged. This would also be buttressed by the intention of the fiscal authorities to finance a growing part of the budget deficit with treasury bills, rather than by direct credit from the National Bank. The authorities also said that they were determined to avoid new overruns in banking system credit to the nongovernment. For this purpose, they decided to take a number of measures aimed at reducing the excess liquidity in the banking system. First, effective December 1, 1995, they have raised the reserve requirement ratio on foreign currency deposits from 2 percent to 6 percent of such deposits; the authorities expect that this measure will freeze a substantial part of the excess reserves of commercial banks. In the view of the National Bank, it will also provide an increased incentive for the public to hold domestic rather than foreign currency. Second, they have decided to reduce to 50 percent, as of October 1, the part of reserve requirements that can be held in the form of treasury bills; they have also decided to prohibit, effective January 1, 1996, commercial banks from holding part of their reserve requirements in this form. Finally, they have decided to stop allowing commercial banks to reduce required reserves when they provide direct credit. The authorities also said that they intended to continue the introduction of market-based monetary policy instruments. This would include (i) reinstating credit auctions open to all commercial banks without administrative restrictions; (ii) requiring collateral for refinancing credit in the form of treasury bills and other good quality securities; and (iii) introducing a short-term Lombard facility to provide commercial banks with a mechanism for covering temporary liquidity shortfalls. The staff agreed with the objectives outlined by the authorities, and urged them to take concrete steps as soon as possible. Understandings were also reached on an indicative monetary program for the first quarter of 1996. The program is consistent with projected inflation of 11 percent during the quarter, a seasonal decline in real activity during the period, Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14 - and a budget deficit of Krb 160 trillion for the year. The staff stressed that compliance with the indicative monetary program would be important to ' set the stage for a future Fund-supported program. In discussions of their exchanee rate oolicy, the authorities indicated that they intended to continue intervening in the exchange market to achieve their targets for the level of the karbovanets. In response, the staff said that interventions should aim primarily at smoothing short-term fluctuations in the exchange rate. Arguing that under present circumstances a flexible exchange rate regime should be maintained, the staff favored a strict monetary policy stance as the nominal anchor for inflationary expectations. Downward pressure on the exchange rate could point to the need to tighten monetary policy. However, because of the importance of reducing inflation, an appreciation of the exchange rate might be the appropriate response to upward pressure on the rate. In view of the slippages that occurred in 1995, the authorities agreed that it would be inappropriate to introduce the Hryvnia in the near future. 2. Structural reforms The staff underscored the importance of accelerating the pace of structural reform in 1996. It pointed to the importance of carrying out ambitious structural reforms to provide an environment conducive to output growth, to stimulate the supply potential of the economy, and to generate efficiency gains. l In the area of privatization, the staff pointed out that at the current pace, it would take close to 15 years to sell the stock of enterprises currently identified as candidates for transfer to private ownership. In full agreement with World Bank staff, the mission suggested lowering or eliminating the minimum reservation prices at the repeat auctions. The staff also urged the authorities to advance to June 1996 the deadline for the collection of privatization certificates by the population. The authorities were reluctant to adopt these recommendations. 0 As noted, the authorities envisage further adjustments of administered prices in 1996. These adjustments, if fully implemented, would increase the cost recovery ratios on communal services, rents, and public transportation to no less than 60 percent of costs (inclusive of taxes) in the first quarter, and to no less than 80 percent of costs (inclusive of taxes) in the second quarter. l In the area of enerzv oolicv, the staff urged the authorities to withdraw budget guarantees on payments for gas imports. The authorities acknowledged that these guarantees had imposed a heavy burden on the budget in 1995, under conditions of extreme moral hazard, and said that they would withdraw the Government from the responsibility of supplying gas to enterprises. They approached their foreign suppliers to cancel the guarantees in 1996, and received positive responses. The role played by the Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 15 - Government in this area would be taken over, under a new scheme, by a number of intermediaries which would compete for providing gas to enterprise I consumers. These intermediaries would be responsible for entering into contractual arrangements with foreign suppliers and for collecting payments, including in goods, from consumers. The scheme would also involve the separation of the activities of providing gas to domestic consumers, and channelling gas to foreign countries; the latter activity would be taken over by a new company. Fund staff welcomed all of these decisions. The authorities, however, subsequently decided to remain involved in the provision of gas to the population and to the communal services sector. They said that, in view of the possible social impact of removing the government support, they would continue to provide budgetary guarantees for the gas consumed by these sectors. They also considered guarantees for the gas consumed by the power generation sector and loss-making state enterprises. l In the area of foreign trade nolicv, the staff underscored the importance of removing administrative obstacles to exports. It stressed that eliminating state interference in export activity was essential for strengthening the balance of payments and generating output growth. While the authorities said that they accepted these principles, they also indicated that the Government was responsible, in their eyes, for regulating a normal supply of goods to the domestic market, and thus for preventing an excessive level of exports. In this connection, they considered it important to maintain controls on the export of grain, which they felt might otherwise be in short supply in the domestic market. Another concern raised by the authorities was the risk that exports would take place at prices below fair market value, which would not only deprive Ukraine of foreign exchange resources, but would also trigger anti-dumping actions by importing countries. Fund and World Bank staff expressed their disagreement with these arguments, and reiterated the importance of freeing exports to ensure that Ukraine fully realized its export potential. l The authorities said that they intended to take steps to address the difficult situation of the banking svstem. They recognized that this would entail, first and foremost, ensuring that the new central bank law, soon to be approved by Parliament, would strengthen the independence and responsibilities of the National Bank. A particularly important task was the strengthening of bank licensing and supervision. In this regard, the authorities said that increasing importance would be attached to on-site inspections. They also agreed that sanctions against commercial banks that are not in compliance with the prudential regulations would need to be applied uniformly. The authorities said that discussions had been initiated on making loan losses tax deductible. Also, they would plan to introduce a deposit insurance scheme. The Fund staff cautioned against a scheme that could result in moral hazard problems and involve budgetary expenditures. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 16 - l The authorities have started to consider reforming their social policies, including retirement benefits and other untargeted welfare I benefits. In this regard they have requested assistance from the Bank and Fund staff. A major poverty study is being completed by the World Bank which will serve as a critical component of this work. A Fund staff mission will also travel to Kiev in late January to provide advice on the social safety net. 3. Imnlementation issues Policy discussions with the authorities centered also on the measures required to improve the implementation of the program. The authorities acknowledged that their administrative capacity was not as strong as required and that much could be done to improve governance. l The staff pointed out that economic policy making had been hampered in 1995 by the lack of reliable statistical indicators, and urged the authorities to make further progress in this area. In response, the authorities said that during 1995, monetary statistics had been improved by the new classification of foreign currency accounts advised by Fund staff; at the same time, however, they acknowledged that specific recommendations designed to improve the accuracy of the international reserves figures reported by the National Bank had not been fully implemented. 'The authorities said that they had fully implemented staff advice on the consumer price index, which had been re-based and was expected to be re- based again toward the end of 1996. The authorities also said that they were in the process of incorporating suggestions for improvements in balance of payments statistics and some money and banking statistics. Finally, the authorities welcomed the presence of a resident statistical advisor and his role in helping to solve daily statistical problems. l The staff also stressed that the repeated delays in the payment of foreign obligations had been very detrimental to Ukraine's reputation. The staff underscored that, despite its earlier commitments, Ukraine has repeatedly incurred arrears on its external obligations, without any signs of major improvement. Attempts by the Government to impose harder budget constraints on gas debtors during the summer appear to have been reversed with the beginning of the heating season. Attempts to make early preparation for the settlement of foreign debt service obligations, in particular by setting aside sufficient resources in a special NBU account, appear to have been implemented only partially. In order to lay the ground for a revival of the program in 1996, the staff urged the authorities to take the decisions required to ensure timely payments of external obligations, including by improving the cash management of such obligations and making preparations well in advance of the due dates. l Finally, the staff urged the authorities to improve their coordination of economic oolicv making in 1996 in order to avoid the issuance of government regulations and decrees, as well as official public statements, that are inconsistent with the program that has been agreed with and Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17 - supported by the Fund. In this respect, the staff urged the authorities to strengthen the Implementation Committee, and encouraged them to fully 7 integrate the resident representatives in the work of this Committee. IV. Medium-Term Outlook for the Balance of Pavments The balance of payments scenario for 1996 assumes that (i) Ukraine resumes the implementation of ambitious stabilization and reform policies; (ii) all debt service obligations scheduled or rescheduled are paid as they fall due; and (iii) Russia and Ukraine implement new contractual arrangements that separate the import and the transit of gas. lJ Under these assumptions, taking into account the need for nonenergy imports if economic restructuring is to proceed, the external financing gap is projected to reach some US$2 billion in 1996 (Tables 9, 10 and 11). Looking beyond 1996, the baseline medium-term scenario suggests that the current account deficit may continue to widen until 1998. With investment falling by as much as 30 percent in real terms in 1994, and with little recovery in capital expenditure during 1995, sustained growth in future years will require a marked increase in capital outlays. This temporary widening of the current account deficit appears to be manageable, as long as it corresponds to increased efficient investments, and provided that Ukraine continues its adjustment efforts. The latter would require two conditions: the budget deficit would need to be maintained, beyond 1996, at around 2 percent of GDP; and measures would need to be taken to mobilize private savings, including by strengthening the banking system and maintaining interest rates positive in real terms. If adjustment efforts are pursued consistently, the debt service ratio would peak in 1999 at around 15 percent of exports of goods and non-factor services, and both the current account deficit and the debt service ratio would decline steadily. A reasonably strong growth of exports and a steady increase in trade credits and direct investment, coupled with some capital reflow, will significantly curtail the country's need for exceptional financing beyond 1999. Ukraine's immediate prospective obligations to the Fund are analyzed in Table 12. Debt service due to the Fund remains modest during most of the period, but shows a bunching of payments at the end of the decade--when the bulk of repurchases to the Fund under the stand-by arrangement will be due. Payments to the Fund decline sharply thereafter. Assuming appropriately strong policies, Ukraine should be able to discharge these obligations to the Fund in a timely manner. I-J Under preliminary arrangements reached for 1996, Ukraine will increase its payments to RAO Gazprom from US$50 to US$SO per thousand cubic meters of imported gas, but will receive higher fees for the transit of Russian gas through its territory. These two changes are meant to offset each other. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 18 - V. Staff Aooraisal In late 1994 and early 1995, Ukraine embarked upon a comprehensive and ambitious stabilization program. During the first half of the year, the achievements under the program were impressive: inflationary pressures abated; the exchange rate stabilized; a limited degree of confidence in the domestic currency was restored; and the decline in output was halted. These achievements were realized notwithstanding the sharp increase in domestic energy prices and the ongoing dismantling of the system of state orders and contracts. In the second half of 1995, slippages in the implementation of the program contributed to a somewhat higher inflation and a weaker balance of payments position. In response to this deteriorating situation, the authorities have begun to tighten their policies in the closing months of the year. Four main areas were affected by slippages. First, the program was affected by deviations that occurred in fiscal policy. The authorities' objective of fiscal conservatism was initially well served by the realism of the 1995 budget adopted by Parliament in early-April. However, several decisions contributed to an increase of the budget deficit beyond the program target. Large wage increases were granted shortly after the inception of the program; in July, it was decided that the budget would pay part of the restructuring cost accumulated in the coal mine sector; and in October, it was decided to guarantee the payment for.gas imports to the end of the year. As a result, the staff estimates that, if the budget pays all of the scheduled foreign debt obligations, the budget deficit will reach about 4 percent of GDP in 1995. While this still implies a halving of the deficit from the previous year, it also reflects a deviation from the understandings under the program. Accordingly, the staff urges the authorities to resume the adjustment of the budget in 1996. In this context, while it fully supports the authorities' target of limiting the deficit to 2% of GDP, the staff stresses that the 1996 budget should be based on realistic revenue and expenditure policies--in contrast to the draft budget submitted to Parliament. The staff also urges the authorities to confirm that the budget will no longer provide guarantees for the payments of gas imports in 1996. Second, the program was weakened by a number of decisions by the monetary authorities which, in effect, contributed to fuelling the expansion of base money, increased the monetary multiplier, and inflated the growth of banking system credit to the nongovernment. These decisions led, in an environment of uncertainty regarding the authorities' commitment to the program to renewed pressures on prices. Faced with these negative trends, I the National Bank took, in the closing months of the year, a number of measures to raise interest rates, absorb excess liquidity in the banking system, and restore confidence. These measures, which the staff fully supports, have already helped to slow down inflation and to stabilize the exchange rate. If they are continued resolutely--and if they are buttressed Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 19 - by a conservative fiscal policy-- these measures will contribute to bringing the monetary program back on track in early-1996. , Third, efforts to undertake structural reforms lagged somewhat behind schedule. The privatization program of the authorities, although it accelerated in late 1995, has fallen short of the objectives established under the stand-by arrangement; some of the foreign trade reforms were reversed; and continuing administrative interferences deferred the inevitable restructuring of ailing enterprises. In the view of the staff, if Ukraine intends to reach its full potential, the authorities must deepen their structural reforms. An important measure is, in the staff's view, the liberalization of all exports, and in particular grain. Under liberalized trade, Ukraine should be a significant participant in the world grain market. Key measures are also pending to re-launch the privatization program which, unlike in neighboring countries, is at present progressing slowly. The Government must also disengage from bailing out ailing enterprises and encourage their restructuring. Fourth, the program was weakened by the Government's inability, and sometimes unwillingness, to adhere fully to the program requirements. Under the authorities' initial Memorandum of Economic Policies, a number of steps were envisaged to ensure that the program be implemented in full. The Government established an Implementation Committee responsible for overseeing follow-through on the reform policies; however, in practice, the Committee rarely met and remained largely ineffective in coordinating the Government's policies with respect to its reform program. The authorities were committed to remaining in close consultation with the Fund staff on the implementation of the program; in practice, however, many important decisions, which were contrary to the program, were taken without prior consultation with the staff. The authorities were also initially committed, in view of the rescheduling obtained from their major creditors, to discharging their obligations on time; in the event, as shown by the occurrence of payments arrears at the time of the Board meeting on the second review, insufficient effort was made to ensure that all obligations be paid on time. Finally, while the authorities were eager to obtain technical assistance from the Fund to improve their administrative capacity, the record of implementation of such assistance is mixed, and much remains to be done to make Fund technical assistance more effective in Ukraine, including in the area of economic statistics. In the view of the staff, the deviations from the program's understandings observed in the second half of 1995 preclude the completion of the third review under the stand-by arrangement at this stage. Nonetheless, taking the whole period since October 1994, when a first drawing under the Systemic Transformation Facility was approved, there have been important achievements. Moreover, the extent of the deviations from the program's targets has not reached a point that would prevent a revival of the program. The staff therefore strongly encourages the authorities to take the steps required to strengthen implementation and pave the way toward renewed Fund support in 1996. The staff believes that these steps can, and Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 20 - should be, enacted in early 1996, and that they would pave the way to economic stability and output growth, as well as to renewed foreign 7 financial support. In the event that Ukraine fails to reinvigorate its commitment to strong policies, the outcome could be very damaging. The limited degree of confidence restored in 1995 would erode rapidly, inflation would accelerate, and the balance of payments would deteriorate. Not only would this outcome preclude the revival of the stand-by arrangement, but it would also postpone the discussions on an arrangement under the Extended Fund Facility. This would also further delay the introduction of the Hryvnia. Thus, the staff urges the authorities to take all necessary action required to prevent such a scenario from becoming the reality of 1996. It is recommended that the next Article IV consultation with Ukraine take place on the standard 12-month cycle. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 21 - Table 1. Ukraine: Quantitative Performance Criteria and Financial Benchmarks under the 1995 Program u Cunulative chanses from January 1. 19% Jan. 1, Apr. 1, Jul. 1, Oct. 1995 1995 1, Jan. 1, 1995 1995 1996 Stocks Target Actual Target Actual Target Actual TargetZ/ Performance criteria (In trillions of karbovanets) Ceiling on net domestic assets of the NBU (122.7) 57.9 Ceiling on net credit of the bank- ing system to general goverwnt (98.9) 2/ 48.5 Floor on net international reserves of the NBU (284) -258 Ceiling on nonconcessional external loans contracted or guaranteed by the Government or the NBU Maturity l-12 years ( ) . . . 100 Of which: maturity l-5 years (...) 100 Maturity up to one year 0 -- . . . Ceiling on level of external pay- ments arrears of the Government (actual levels at end of period) k/ (2,722) 537 Financial benchmarks Base money (maxisun) Net banking system credit to non-government (maximum) (152.3) 25 (271.8) 3J 92 49.5 103 109 202 36.4 89 68 179 (In millions of U.S. dollars) -17 -167 45 -355 - -- 250 -- 350 __ 250 -- 350 __ -- __ -- 516 296 318 -- 95 -- (In trillions of karbovanets) 47.3 81 116 162 68.6 148 185 230 202 166 .343 mm -- -- 164 268 242 244 -519 500 500 -- 178 242 Sources: Data provided by the Ukrainian authorities; and staff estimates. I/ Definitions of the performance criteria and financial benchmarks are specified in the Memorandun of Economic Policies for 1995 of the Goverwnt of Ukraine (EBS/95/27, 3/3/95). z/ For the purposes of the program, foreign currency assets and liabilities will be converted into domestic currency at the program exchange rate of Krb 150,000 per USSl. 3/ Adjusted, relative to the original program, for a reclassified account. 4J As a performance criterion, the Government shall not accunrlate neu external payment arrears during the period of the arrangement. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 22 - Table 2. Ukraine: Selected Economic Indicators 1993-95 1993 1994 1995 Program Estimate Jan.-Sap. ' EBS/95/156 Activity Nominal GDP (in trillions of Erb) Real GDP (cllmulative, relative to same period previous year) 148 -17 Consumer prices Percent change over preceding period Percent change during period Exchange Rate 4,735 10,155 Auction:Krb/USS, end of period Auction:Erb/USS, period average Average National Economy Wage Percent change over preceding period Percent change during period Public finance (in percent of GDP) L/ Consolidated state budget balance g/ Revenue Expenditure Domestic financing z/ External financing $/ 25,000 10,160 2,236 3,850 -11.6 (42.8) (54.3) 11.6 -- Money and credit (percent change during period) Credit to nongovernment z/ a/ 1,894 NDA of the NBU 1,242 Base money 4,262 Broad money, M3 z/ a/ 2,103 Balance of Payments (in millions of USS) Balance of goods and nonfactor services (in percent of GDP) I/ Net international reserves (end period) Gross reserves (end period) (in weeks of imports) -970 . . . . . . . . . . . . 1,137 4,927 -23 -11 091 401 104,200 49,860 786 381 423 542 317 150 217 162 -8.6 -3.0 -4.1 -4.4 (44.3) (42.4) (41.3) (42.4) (52.9) (45.4) (45.4) (46.8) 8.5 5.4 7.1 6.4 0.1 -2.5 -3.0 -2.1 358 09 . . . 99 382 197 . . 164 466 117 . . . 108 465 105 . . . 95 -1,596 ,1,400 -1,579 -1,257 . . . 3.9 4.7 5.5 284 -235 -486 -59 646 1,752 1,096 1,163 2 7 4 4 340 119 . . . . . . 165,000 . . . . . . 139,000 4.877 -13 3,148 -13 376 470 180 132 Sources : Data provided by the Ukrainian authorities; and staff estimates. L/ Staff estimates of GDP. g/ Including the Pension Fund and directed credits; excludes privatisation receipts. 21 Includes privatisation receipts. For 1995, includes some unidentified domestic nonbank financing. A/ Including foreign interest payments. z/ Foreign currency components valued at parallel exchange rates through 9/94. a/ For purposes of comparison, foreign currency components of actual observations for 1995 are valued at the program exchange rate. 1/ Due to multiple exchange rates, the staff has not estimated USS GDP for 1993 and 1994. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 23 - Table 3. Ukraine: Prices and Wages, 1994-95 Consumer Real 7 Price Average Real Exchange Index Wane Wage Rate l/ Monthly Percentage Change 1994 January February March April May June July August September October November December 1995 January February March April May June July August September October November 19.2 12.6 5.7 6.0 5.2 3.9 2.1 2.6 7.3 22.6 72.3 28.4 21.1 18.1 11.4 5.8 4.6 4.8 5.2 4.6 14.2 9.1 6.2 -3.8 -0.4 11.3 -- 11.3 10.7 6.2 3.8 6.3 54.7 36.7 28.1 -0.6 -17.9 30.9 10.8 19.8 7.6 7.9 1.9 12.7 7.8 13.3 8.1 6.5 1.3 5.7 1.0 8.6 -4.9 10.7 1.5 . . . -19.3 18.9 -11.5 -6.6 5.3 4.3 -5.7 -5.2 5.8 -11.4 6.6 -0.4 4.0 0.1 1.1 0.7 -0.9 -12.1 26.2 -13.6 -20.7 24.1 -0.2 11.2 . . . 21.0 5.5 1.7 6.8 5.3 -3.8 4.1 -6.7 11.4 3.7 2.3 Sources: Data provided by the Ukrainian authorities; and staff estimates. u Against the U.S. dollar. Through October 1994, calculated assigning a weight of 20 percent to the official exchange rate, and a weight of 80 percent to the NBU administered rate, the NBU auction rate, or the interbank auction rate, as applicable. Calculated at the unified exchange rate thereafter. An increase in the index represents an appreciation. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 24 - Table 4. Ukraine: Operations of the Consolidated State Budget, 1994-96 u 1994 1995 1996 Budget Jan.-Sep. Est. Authori- Staff April (Year) g/ ties (without measures) State budget revenues e 40.6 VAT 11.4 10.4 Excises 1.5 1.0 Enterprise tax 12.6 5.0 Personal income tax 3.0 2.4 Chernobyl Fund 2.1 1.8 Pension Fund a.0 8.1 Revenue from foreign activity 0.8 1.2 Gas and oil -- 4.3 NBU profit transfers 0.3 1.3 State reserve 0.7 0.7 Other revenues 3.2 4.3 State budget expenditures Social protection Benefits Subsidies External gas arrears payments z/ National economy Of which: Capital outlays Socio-cultural expenditure Of which: Education Health care Other Administration and justice Defense Chernobyl Fund Pension Fund Interest on NBU/bank credit Other budgetary expenditure 52.9 43.9 6.2 8.5 (1.8) (2.9) (4.41 (5.6) -- -- 19.2 4.9 (3.8) (0.9) (1.4) (1.31 (2.3) (2.3) 11.3 10.1 12.9 12.3 10.5 11.5 (5.51 (4.9) (6.3) (6.0) (4.9) (5.41 (4.9) (4.31 (5.41 (5.3) (4.4) (4.9) (1.0) (0.9) (1.1) (1.1) (1.2) (1.21 2.6 3.0 2.8 2.7 3.3 3.3 1.9 2.3 2.2 2.1 1.9 1.9 2.0 1.8 2.0 2.1 2.4 2.4 7.8 8.1 0.4 0.3 10.2 10.2 0.5 1.6 0.1 0.2 1.3 1.3 1.4 3.6 3.7 3.4 5.3 5.3 State budget balance Memorandum item: SDP (in trillions of karbovanets) -8.6 1,137 -3.3 4,562 (In oercent of SDP) && 9.5 1.0 10.3 3.1 2.1 0.5 0.9 1.7 -- 0.4 4.9 41.3 46.3 42.2 9.3 10.4 9.4 1.0 0.9 0.9 9.8 7.2 7.2 3.3 2.6 2.6 2.1 2.4 2.4 8.4 10.2 9.4 0.8 0.5 0.5 1.3 3.7 2.9 -- 0.1 0.1 0.4 2.0 0.5 4.8 6.3 6.3 46.8 45.4 7.7 7.7 (2.3) (2.3) (3.31 (3.01 (2.2) (2.51 7.0 6.4 -4.4 3.140 -4 1 A 4,077 _48.6 48.5 6.7 7.1 (4.6) (5.01 (2.1) (2.1) -- -- 7.0 5.5 -2.3 7,140 -6.3 7,140 Sources : Data provided by the Ukrainian authorities; and staff estimates. &/ The staff presentation of the state budget differs from the official presentation as follows: on the revenue side, the proceeds from privatisation and drawings from foreign loans are classified as financing; on the expenditure side, the amortization of foreign loans and of the NBU are also reclassified *s financing items. 2/ Projection assumes that Ukraine pays in a timely manner all of its external debt service obligations and arrears. z/ Represents payment by the budget to clear gas arrears incurred in 1995. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 25 - Table 5. Ukraine: Financing of the Consolidated State Budget, 1993-95 Domestic financing Of which: Banking system Net foreign financing Inflows Outflows Privatization proceeds u State budget deficit Domestic financing Of which: Banking system Net foreign financing Inflows Outflows Privatization proceeds u State budget deficit Memorandum item: GDP 1993 1994 1995 April Jan.- Est. Budget Sept. (Year)u 11.5 11.5 -- _- _- 0.1 11.6 17 . . . -_ -- -- 0.2 16 148 (In oercent of GDP) 8.3 4.0 6.3 6.9 7.7 4.0 5.3 5.7 0.1 -1.1 -2.1 -3.0 1.8 5.1 1.6 1.5 -1.7 -6.2 -3.7 -4.4 0.2 0.4 0.1 0.2 8.6 3.3 4.4 4.1 (In trillions of karbovanets) 94 182 200 336 87 182 167 277 1 -49 -66 -144 20 231 50 73 -19 -280 -115 -216 3 17 3 8 98 148 137 200 1,137 4,562 3,148 4,877 Sources: Data provided by the Ukrainian authorities; and staff estimates. I/ Projection assumes that Ukraine pays in a timely manner all of its external debt service obligations and arrears. u In 1993, includes errors and omissions. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 26 - Table 6. Ukraine: Monetary Survey, 1994-95 1994 1995 f Dec. March June SeDt . Dee - Prog. L/ Prel. A/ Rev. Prog. u Net foreign assets 2/ Net domestic assets Net domestic credit Government (net) s/ Nongovernment z/ In domestic currency z/ In foreign currency 21 Other assets (net) 45 51 74 19 9 -32 274 343 457 609 612 687 371 475 620 780 806 888 99 134 lb3 278 265 343 272 340 457 502 540 545 146 175 264 287 335 340 126 165 193 216 205 205 -97 -132 -162 -171 -194 -201 Broad money 4/ 319 394 531 628 621 655 Domestic 217 268 385 471 467 499 Foreign currency deposits 21 102 125 146 156 154 156 Broad money A/ Krb broad money Net domestic credit Credit to nongovernment z/ 4/ (Stocks: in trillions of karbovanets: end-of-neriod) (Percentane change from end of the nrevious uuarter) 56 23 35 18 . . . 6 35 24 44 22 21 7 50 28 31 26 . . . 10 50 25 34 10 . . . 1 (Average over DrecedinK CWirter everase) Broad money A/ 58 36 30 25 . . . (&&&I Velocity of broad money S/ 8.8 8.8 a.7 10.1 . . . Velocity of Krb broad money 21 11.7 12.9 12.3 13.7 12.8 (Percent of GDP) . . . 10.8 14.3 Banking system financing of general government Memorandum item: Inflation (during the quarter; in percent) 5.9 4.5 2.9 7.8 7.5 4.5 171 59 16 13 26 20 Sources: National Bank of Ukraine; and staff estimates. &/ Foreign currency components valued at program exchange rate of Krb 150,000 per U.S. dollar. 2/ Valued at official exchange rates. g The figures have been revised, compared to the data reported in Table 6, EBs/95/27, sup. 1 (3/17/95), to reflect the reclassification of an asset account--previously included in credit to nongovernment--as credit to government. A/ For purposes of comparison with the program, the foreign currency components of these items in Septemher are valued at the program exchange rate. Thus, percentage changes from the actual June figures are not provided. 5/ Annualized quarterly GDP divided by the average stock of money during the quarter. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 27 - Table 7. Ukraine: Accounts of the National Bank of Ukraine, 1994-95 1994 Dec. 1995 March June Sept. Dec. Frog. L/ Prel. &/ Rev. Prog. A/ (Stocks: in trillions of karbovanets: end-of-oeriod) Net international reserves g/ 30 35 47 -11 -9 -35 (in millions of U.S. dollars) 284 266 329 -71 -59 -235 Net domestic assets 123 165 221 325 325 365 Net domestic credit 135 178 227 333 359 416 Government (net) 124 172 205 299 327 370 Banks 11 8 24 36 33 47 Refinancing 10 7 24 32 33 42 Other 21 -- 1 -- 4 -- 4 Nongovernment (net) -- -2 -1 -1 -2 -2 Other assets (net) -12 -13 -6 -9 -34 -51 Base money 152 200 268 314 316 330 Currency in circulation 79 113 178 218 224 236 Banks' reserves 73 86 89 96 93 94 (PercentaRe change from end of the orevious ouarterl Base money Net domestic assets 18 31 34 17 1 34 34 47 c-1 1.4 1.3 1.4 1.5 18 47 5 12 Krb money multiplier 1.5 1.5 Memorandum item: Inflation (during the quartsr, in percent) 171 59 16 13 26 20 Sources : National Bank of Ukraine; and staff estimates. r/ Foreign currency components valued at program exchange rate of Krb 150.000 per U.S. dollar. 2/ Valued at official exchange rates. a/ Projected on-lending of foreign credits to cosrsercial banks. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 28 - Table 8. Ukraine: Key Trade Indicators, 1994-96 1994 1995 1996 7 Merchandise trade balance -2.360 -2.105 -3.261 FSU -2,660 -2,634 -3,899 ROW 300 529 638 Exports, f.o.b. 11.818 12.350 13.552 FSU 7,170 6,909 7,504 ROW 4,648 5,440 6,049 Imports, f.o.b. -14.177 -14.455 -16.813 FSU -9,830 -9,543 -11,402 Energy -6,305 -5,835 -7,397 Other -3,525 -3,709 -4,006 ROW -4,347 -4,912 -5,411 Memorandum items: Export volume FSU ROW Import volume growth rate FSU Of which: Energy Nonenergy lJ ROW -15.8 3.0 7.7 -18.4 -5.7 6.5 -12.0 14.7 9.0 -13.8 -2.2 4.5 -15.9 -8.5 2.5 -6.6 -14.8 0.8 -28.8 3.0 5.0 -9.0 10.8 8.0 Terms of trade (+: improvement) 2.2 -2.7 -8.4 Energy imDorts Unit price Crude oil (US$/ton) Oil products (US$/ton) Gas (US$/thousand m3) Russia Turkmenistan Volume Crude oil (million tons) Oil products (million tons) Gas (billion m3) Russia Turkmenistan 92.1 99.8 100.4 130.0 147.1 147.6 50.9 53.5 79.1 50.0 50.0 80.0 55.0 68.8 75.0 15.4 11.5 11.7 10.5 10.7 10.4 69.2 58.2 59.3 57.2 47.2 48.2 12.0 10.9 11.1 (In millions of U.S. dollars) Sources: Data provided by the Ukrainian authorities; and staff estimates. I-J Including nuclear and coal. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 29 - Table 9. Ukraine: External Financing Needs, 1994-% (In millions of U.S. dollars) 1994 1995 (est.) 19% f @W-1 Balance of goods and services -1,595 -1,579 -1,415 Amortisation of medium - and long- term credits plus payments of other obligations Change in payments arrears Other short-term capital l/ Increase in official reserves (-) Reduction in monetary liabilities - 1,516 -986 -811 2,206 -3,134 -- -902 818 -0 -513 -450 -700 -- -- -- Gross financing needs (-) -2,320 - 5,331 -2,925 Net use of correspondent accounts Official transfers Gross medium- and long-term credit Foreign direct investment Gross financing (-) gap 235 -- -- 200 200 260 451 276 300 90 120 200 -1,344 -4,735 -2,165 IMF 373 1207 . . . World Bank 100 400 . . . EBRD -- 7 . . . Bilaterals 811 3,121 . . . Of which: Russia and Turkmenistan 2/ 711 3,011 . . . Errors and omissions 60 -- . . . Sources: Data provided by the Ukrainian authorities; and staff estimates. l/ Includes interenterprise arrears and unidentified short-term capital. 2/ Represents rescheduling of interstate debt and arrears on payments for gas deliveries. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 30 - Table 10. Ukraine: Scheduled External Debt Service, 1994-96 1994 1995 (est.) 1996 (PrW Total debt service 1,787 1,531 1,4f@ Scheduled amortization of medium- and long-term credit 11 Russia Other FSU ROW Estimated interest payments on external debt Russia (State Debt) Other FSU ROW Memorandum items: Total debt service 12.4 10.2 8.4 Amortization of principal 10.5 6.6 4.6 Interest 1.9 3.6 3.8 (In millions of U.S. dollars) 1,516 986 811 484 684 634 683 9 2 349 293 174 271 545 701 147 335 316 39 62 53 85 147 309 21 (In percent of exports of goods and nonfactor services) Sources: Data provided by the Ukrainian authorities; and staff estimates. l/ Principal falling due in 1994 to Turkmenistan and Russia was rescheduled in late 1994 and early 1995, respectively. Of the US$684 million falling due to Russia in 1995, US%484 million were rescheduled. 2/ Includes interest on gap financing. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 11. Ukraine: Medium Term Balance of Payments, 1994-2004 (In millions of USdollars, unless otherwise indicated) 1994 1995 19% 1997 19% 1999 20% 2001 2Oa2 2003 2004 Current account balance FSU ROW Merchandise trade balance Exports, to.b. Imports, f.o.b. Nonfactor services Investment income Official transfers (net) Capital account Medium- and long-term loans Disbursements Repaymenf Direct investment Short-term capital I/ Errors and omissions Overall balance - 1,571 Financing Gross official reserves (- is an increase) Net use of IMF resources Net use of correspondent accounts Exceptional financing Financinggap i,sn -513 373 235 1,477 0 -3,586 3,586 -450 1,207 0 2,828 0 -1,466 1,465 -700 0 0 0 2,165 442 314 -6% -225 0 -119 0 0 0 0 1,138 658 Memorandum items: Total external liabiiies Debt service ratio Interest payments as a percent of exports of goods and nonfactor services Gross international reserves inweeks of imports 7,167 8,143 9,7!n3 11,071 11,945 12.4 10.2 8.4 10.4 11.8 1.9 3.6 3.8 4.2 2.4 3.9 5.6 7.2 Export volume growth rate -15.8 3.0 7.7 6.2 Import volume growth rate -13.8 -2.2 4.5 5.0 Of which: energy -6.6 -14.8 0.8 2.3 -1.3% -1,753 358 -2,368 11,818 - 14,177 1,028 -264 200 -238 -1,065 451 -1,516 91 200 -2,206 -337 649 -986 120 -1.989 -510 300 -810 200 0 136 1,328 -1,192 450 1,034 1,428 1,708 334 178 458 1,751 1,959 1,959 -1,417 -1,781 -1,501 400 750 750 736 300 300 62 -- -- -442 -314 201 658 381 689 102 sn -1,380 -1,917 537 -2,105 12,350 - 14.455 -516 -1,156 -1,327 -1,348 -1,246 -1,051 -850 -1,712 -1,626 -1,603 -1,678 -1,761 -1,81S 556 298 255 431 710 965 -3,261 -3,284 13,552 14,589 - 16,813 - 17,874 2,484 2,595 -639 -738 -3,186 15,802 - 18,988 2,645 -807 0 -3,081 17,122 -20,203 2.6% -860 -2,946 18,476 -21,422 2,745 -850 0 -2,790 19,851 -22,641 2,776 -836 0 123Q 180 1,9& -1,7@ 750 300 260 100 -310 886 4.3 7.4 7.0 5.0 3.0 0 500 -- -202 -5:; 0 0 294 11,924 14.7 4.3 7.0 7.0 5.0 4.1 -615 -439 -1,875 -1,955 1,260 1,515 -2,600 -2,495 21,331 22,817 -23,931 -25,311 2,806 2,833 -821 -783 -238 -2,051 1,812 -2,382 -26,789 2,870 -727 0 0 13@J 254 1,976 -1,722 750 0 541 820 -509 1,991 -2,SW 750 500 300 300 -- -- -- -- -230 w@3 -2238 I 750 s 300 I -- -658 -234 -424 0 0 0 2 -129 0 0 0 -689 -102 -5n -561 27 -443 -129 -129 - 129 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 11,959 12,011 12,137 11,500 11,132 12.2 11.4 10.4 12.5 10.7 4.0 3.7 3.5 3.2 2.8 7.1 7.3 8.1 7.6 8.1 6.5 6.0 6.0 5.5 4.6 4.6 4.6 4.6 4.1 4.1 4.1 4.3 5.5 4.7 9 4.5 Sources: Data provided by the Ukrainian authorities; and staff estimates. 11 Includes changes in paymenls arrears. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 12. Ukraine: Indicators of Fund Credit, 1994-2004 (In percent, unless otherwise indicated) 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 Outstanding Fund credit l/ (in millions of SDRs) 249.3 1,037.2 1,037.2 1,037.2 959.8 628.2 353.0 269.8 186.7 103.5 20.3 2.5 8.3 7.2 4.4 2.3 14.4 12.4 8.1 4.6 63.8 54.3 35.9 18.5 104.0 96.2 63.0 35.4 1.7 1.1 3.5 2.4 13.1 7.7 27.1 18.7 0.6 0.1 5.0 55.1 25.0 10.0 8.9 18.5 16.2 137.8 88.6 104.0 104.0 1.4 0.3 4.3 0.8 10.4 20 2.0 28.1 62.3 61.0 138.0 382.4 306.3 102.1 97.0 92.0 : 87.0 ’ K I 0.2 0.4 0.2 0.3 0.5 0.5 1.0 2.7 2.0 0.6 0.6 0.5 0.4 2.7 6.4 4.7 8.8 18.4 16.5 5.6 5.4 4.0 4.2 3.7 5.3 3.8 7.8 21.8 16.1 4.9 4.0 3.8 3.3 2.8 6.2 6.1 13.8 38.3 30.7 10.2 9.7 9.2 8.7 In percent of: Exports of goods and nonfactor services Total public external liabilities Gross official reserves Quota Debt service due (in millions of SDRs) In percent of: Exports of goods and nonfactor services Public debt service due Gross official reserves Quota Source: Staff estimates l/ End of period. Includes only those purchases already made by Ukraine under the Systemic Transformation Facility and the Stand -by arrangement. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 33 - ANNEX1 Imolementation of Structural Reforms Bv Julv 1. 1995 Status Adjustment of housing rents and prices of communal services to cover no less than 30 percent of costs (May 1). Done. Commencement of operations of the new Treasury System. Completion of a study to re- structure the portfolio of non-performing loans of the largest banks. Approval by Parliament of a new Central Bank Law strengthening the independence and re- sponsibilities of the NBU for maintaining price stability. Abolition of quotas and licenses on grain exports. Completion of the privatization of at least 1,000 medium and large enterprises, including agri- cultural distribution, storage and transportation companies. Identification of a list of at least 25 enterprises in which sub- stantial blocks of shares are to be available, at auction, for foreign participation. Liquidation of five large loss- making state enterprises Simplification of bankruptcy procedures to allow creditors to seize and sell individual assets of defaulting enterprises. Authorization for treasury operations given. Draft completed. Law submitted to Parliamentary Commission; draft law requires substantial revisions. Not done; however, grain can be exported through commodity exchanges under certain condi- tions. The target of 1,000 medium and large enterprises was achieved by October 1. Enterprises available for foreign participation not yet identified. Done. Second reading of new legislation undertaken by Parliament in June 1995. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 34 - ANNEX1 Preparation of a strategy for breaking up sectoral and regional processing monopolies. Completion of strategy papers for comprehensive reform of social assistance programs, pensions, and unemployment compensation. Bv October 1. 1995 Adjustment of housing rents and prices of communal services to no less than 40 percent of costs by July 1 and 60 percent of costs by September 1. Increase in tariffs for public transportation and prices of gas and coal to households to cover at least 60 percent of costs by July 1. Anti-Monopoly Committee has identified regional monopolies< Drafts completed. Cost recovery ratio for housing rents and communal services approximately 50 percent in September, up from about 30 percent in July. Cost recovery ratio for public transportation about 60 percent by July; cost recovery ratios for gas and coal about 56 and 90 percent, respectively in September, up from 37 percent and 73 percent, respectively, in July. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicI. II. III. IV. V. VI. - 35 - Ukraine--Fund Relations (As of November 30. 1995) Membership Status: (a) Date of Membership (b) Status September 3, 1992 Article XIV General Resources Account: (In millions of SDRs) (In percent of auota) (a) Quota 997.30 100.0 (b) Fund holdings of currency 2,034.60 204.0 SDR Department (In nercent of allocation) (a) Holdings Outstanding Purchases and Loans: Stand-by arrangements Systemic Transformation Facility 97.06 -- 538.65 498.65 (In oercent of auota) 54.0 50.0 Financial Arrangements: Expira- Amount Approval tion Approved TvDe Stand-by Date Date (SDR Million) 4/07/95 4/06/96 997.30 ANNEX II Amount Drawn (SDR Million) 538.65 Proiected Obligations to the Fund: (SDR million; based on existing use of resources and present holdings of SDRs). Overdue 11/30/95 Forthcoming 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 Principal -- -- -- -- 77.3 331.7 Charges/Interest -- - -- A 50 1 49.9 -- 49 3 40 7 Total -- -- 50.1 49.9 126.6 372.4 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 36 - ANNEX III Ukraine: Relations with the World Bank Ukraine joined the World Bank on September 3, 1992. Since October 1992, the World Bank has maintained a resident office in Kiev. The first ' Country Economic Memorandum, distributed to Executive Directors in June 1993, focussed on macroeconomic developments and presented a framework for systemic change and structural reforms. The first Bank lending operation, an Institution Building Loan of US$27 million, was approved by the Board in June 1993. The next twelve months, however, was a period of rampant inflation, economic mismanagement, and irresolute structural reform. After the mid-94 election, and the new government's commitment to a strategy of stabilization and economic adjustment, the Bank expanded its activities. A Rehabilitation Loan of US$500 million in support of major economic reforms was approved in December 1994. In April and May 1995, investment loans for Hydropower Rehabilitation (US$114 million) and Agriculture Seeds (US$32 mil- lion) were approved. The Bank also chairs the Consultative Group (CG) on Ukraine. Ukraine has been a member of IFC since 1992 and of MIGA since 1993. IFC has an active technical assistance program in privatization and has made one equity investment in Ukraine. The objective of the Bank's strategy is to assist the Government of Ukraine in improving living standards and restoring sustainable economic growth. The full range of World Bank lending and non-lending instruments could be directed toward supporting this objective: policy discussions, coordination with the IMF, economic and sector work (ESW), adjustment and investment lending, mobilization of private capital through guarantees, and mobilization and coordination of official resources through Consultative Group meetings and cofinancing. The Government's commitment to sustained economic recovery, as demonstrated by an implementation of structural reforms, would be the most important determinant of the Bank's assistance strategy. If progress in the implementation of reforms is satisfactory, subsequent lending operations will include a mix of balance of payment loans and investment loans. The adjustment loans will include an Agricultural Sector Adjustment Loan (AGSECAL), and an Enterprise Development Adjustment Loan (EDAL) in FY96. Subsequent sectoral adjustment loans could assist the public sector, financial sector, coal sector restructuring, and social protection. Investment loans are being considered in critical infrastructure sectors such as electric power, natural gas transit and distribution, urban transport, telecommunications, and housing. Given the prospective financing gap of Ukraine in the coming years, lending for balance of payments support will constitute a significant share of total World Bank lending in the early years, providing the commitment to reform is strong. As reforms take hold, the share of investment lending will increase. Economic and sector work (ESW) has been critical to raising the awareness of Government officials regarding transition and sectoral issues. Special attention (for example, the organization of in-country conferences) was given to the dissemination of ESW; however, compared to the first set of ESW reports issued in 1993-95, which addressed sector-wide issues and policies, we expect ESW during FY96-98 to consist more of informal pieces responding to immediate needs. As in previous years, a strong linkage will be maintained between ESW and the identification of lending priorities. For example, the Public Expenditure Review (M96) will contribute to the design of a future Public Sector Reform Loan (F'Y97). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 37 - Ukraine: Basic Social Indicators L/ Population Total (in millions) As a share of total (in percent) Urban Rural Births (per thousand) Deaths (per thousand) Natural rate of growth (per thousand) Health and education Child mortality (per thousand born) Average life expectancy (in years) Men Women Number of doctors (per 10,000 inhabitants) Hospital beds (per 10,000 inhabitants) Student/teacher ratio u Training levels (per 10,000 inhabitants) Specialists All Higher education Scientists All PhDs Standard of living Housing (square meters per inhabitant) Consumption (kilos per inhabitant per year) Meat Vegetables Household equipment (per thousand inhabitants) Televisions Refrigerators Washing machines Private cars (per thousand inhabitants) ANNEX IV f 52.2 67.6 32.4 12.4 14.2 -- 22.0 69.4 64.2 74.5 39 135.5 12.8 1,319 569 42 16 18 67 125 324 288 210 60 Sources: Data provided by the Ukrainian authorities; and the World Bank. u Various years, 1989-94. 2J Primary and secondary education. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 38 - Statistical Issues ANNRKV The information contained in this report is based primarily on official statistics. The limitations of the current statistical data base for Ukraine remain considerable. The underlying principles covering the collection and processing of the data have been inherited from the command economy period and, as such, suffer from a variety of coverage and methodological problems. Drawing upon technical assistance from the Fund -- including a resident statistical advisor stationed since February 1994 -- and other multilateral and bilateral sources, the authorities are making efforts to improve statistics in a number of key areas. The authorities have identified appropriate correspondents for IFS statistics, and expect to begin the necessary work for an IFS page shortly, Key statistical data are generally provided in a timely manner, as summarized in the table below. 1. Real Sector The Ministry of Statistics has released revised national accounts covering the period 1993-1994, as well as preliminary data for the first half of 1995. For the first time, these national accounts include a breakdown of GDP by expenditure components. Nonetheless, important shortcomings remain. Quarterly national accounts are based on cumulative data, and real figures are expressed in comparable prices of the previous year. A Fund technical assistance mission for the quarterly national accounts -- originally slated for fall 1995 -- is now expected in early 1996. The authorities have repeatedly requested technical assistance to improve the industrial DrOdUCtiOn indices. In March 1995, the consumer orice index was re-based, for the first time since end-1992, using the 1994 household expenditure survey. A number of methodological problems remain with the producer nrice index. 2. Government Finance Although Ukraine has comprehensive budget statistics, including monthly coverage of central and local government, the classification of government finance statistics is yet to conform to the GFS. Ukraine has received considerable technical assistance in this area, and with the recent establishment of a Treasury, the authorities expect to move to a GFS consistent classification shortly. 3. Monev and Banking Statistics A technical assistance mission visited the National Bank in March 1995 to assist in the preparation of a series of new balance sheet accounts. A follow-up mission in September, however, found the reliability of the NBU's accounting records, particularly as they pertain to international reserves, to be wanting. While the mission made a number of recommendations to improve the net international reserves data, these recommendations are yet to be implemented. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 39 - ANNEXV 4. Balance of Pavments Statistics Balance of payments statistics remain weak, with responsibilities for their compilation spread over various agencies. Technical assistance has 7 been provided in 1994 and in 1995, and the authorities are making some, albeit slow, progress in this area. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicUkraine: Core Statistical Indicators (As of December 1, 1995) Date received Dec. 1, Nov. 25 Nov. 23 1995 Frequency of Data D 10 day M Frequency of D 10 day M Reporting Source of Updating A A A Mode of Reporting C C C Confidentiality C B B Frequency of D N/A N/A Publication I/ Reserve/ Base Money Nov. 21, 1995 Nov. 25 10 day 10 day A C B N/A Consumer Current Overall Broad Interest Price Exports/ Account Government GDP/GNP Money Rates Index Import6 Balance Balance Nov. Nov. 1 Oct. Sept. Sept. October July 21, 1995 1995 1995 1995 1995 1995 Nov. 25 Nov. 25 Nov. 0 Nov. 1 Nov. 1 Nov. 23 Sept. 10 day M M Q Q M Q 10 day 1 M 1 M 1 Q 1 Q I M I Q A A A A A A A C C C C C C C B C C C C C C N/A N/A M Q Q M Q A/ Some data (for instance fiscal data) are partially published by the authorities but cannot be used in the format in which they are being publirrhed. Explanation of abbreviations: Frequency of data, reporting and publication: D-daily, W-weekly, M-monthly, V-irrregularly in conjunction with staff visits, N/A-none. Source of data: A-direct reporting by National Bank, Ministry of Finance, Minsitry of Statistics and Analysis or other official agency. Mode of reporting: C-Cable or facsimile. Moat data are provided to the Resident Representative's office and then forwarded to Headquarters. Confidentiality: B-for use by the staff and the Executive Board, C-unrestricted use. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public