DOCUMENT OF INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND NOT FOR PUBLIC USE MASTER FILES ROOM HO C-525 0450 SMl99/161 CONTAlNS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION July 7, 1999 To: Members of the Executive Board From: Subject: The Acting Secretaty Mauritius-Staff Report for the 1999 Article IV Consultation Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staff report for the 1999 Article IV consultation with Mauritius, which will be brought to the agenda for discussion on a date to be announced. Mr. Rothman (ext. 38652) or Mr. ELMasry (ext. 37240) is available to answer technical or factual questions relating to this paper prior to the Board discussion. Unless the Documents Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the WTO Secretariat on Thursday, July 15, 1999; and to the African Development Bank and the European Commission, following its consideration by the Executive Board. Att: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicCONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND MAURITIUS Staff Report for the 1999 Article IV Consultation Prepared by the StaffRepresentatives for the 1999 Consultation with Mauritius Approved by Hiroyuki Hino and Ishan Kapur July 6, 1999 Contents Page Executive Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . ,._., ,..__.__._......,..., .._ ._., ,..,..__. . . .._ 3 I. Introduction ._,... .__.. . . . . ,__..___. ._. ..__.__. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 II. Report on the Discussions.. .............................................................................................. .4 A. Recent Economic and Financial Developments.. ........................................................ 5 B. Medium-Term Macroeconomic and Financial Scenario ............................................. 8 C. Fiscal Policies ........................................................................................................... .8 D. Monetary and Credit Policies.. ................................................................................. 11 E. External Sector Policies ........................................................................................... 14 F. Real Sector and Structural Policies ........................................................................... 18 G. Statistical Issues and Technical Assistance .............................................................. 19 III. Staff Appraisal ............................................................................................................. .20 1. Introduction of the Value-Added Tax ............................................................................. (7 2. Monetary Operations.. ........................ . .......................................................................... 11 3. Banking Supervision .......................... . .......................................................................... 13 4. ExtemalTariffReform ....................... ( .......................................................................... 15 5. Regional Industry Initiatives .......................................................................................... 17 Figures 1. Main Economic Indicators, 1990/91-1998/99 ................................................................ 23 2. Effective Exchange Rate Indices, January 1990-January 1999 ....................................... 24 3. Interest Rates, January 1994-April 1999 ........................................................................ 25 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2- Tables 1. Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 1994/95-1998/99 ....................................... 26 2. Balance of Payments, 1994195-I 998199 .......................................................................... .28 3. Summary of Government Finances, 1994/95-1998/99 .................................................... .29 4. Monetary Survey, 1995-99.. ........................................................................................... .30 5. Medium-Term Projections, 1998/99-2002/03 ................................................................. .3 1 Appendixes I. Relations with the Fund.. ............................................................................................... .32 II. Relations with the World Bank Group .......................................................................... .34 III. Statistical Issues.. ......................................................................................................... .36 IV. Social and Demographic Indicators.. ............................................................................ .39 V. Drafl Background Section for Public Information Notice.. ............................................ ,40 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3- EXECTJTM? SUMMARY l Since the conclusion of the last Article IV consultation in mid-1998, Mauritius’s broad- based economic activity has remained buoyant and its external reserve position relatively comfortable; however, the pace of inflation has quickened, and unemployment is likely to have edged up further. Near-term prospects have been dimmed by drought and a cyclone. l Against this background, the statf has emphasized that wide-ranging policy adjustments and reforms are needed for Mauritius to sustain high economic growth; contain the rate of inflation; reverse the rise in unemployment; and, given Mauritius’s open capital account and continuing uncertainties in the global financial markets, maintain external reserves at prudent levels. l Appropriately phased fiscal consolidation will need to center on enhancing value-added tax revenues; scaling down the large number of tax exemptions and concessions; and downsizing the civil service. At the same time, adequate resources will have to be allocated for extensive vocational training. . The required monetary restraint calls for continued government net repayments to the banking system; the discontinuation of the tax-free status of company debentures; and the development of till-fledged open market operations to achieve greater monetary control through indirect instruments. Moreover, speedy passage of long-overdue revisions to the Bank of Mauritius and Banking Acts is needed. Measures to further strengthen prudential requirements in the financial system should include mandatory compliance by banks with guidelines on loan classification and the submission of plans by exposed banks to rectify their situations; and quick passage of the overdue Anti-Money-Laundering and Economic Crime Bill is required to maintain the integrity of the expanding offshore sector. . The authorities will need to continue their policy of allowing the exchange rate of the Mauritian rupee to adjust to underlying market pressures, and to make the exchange rate more fully market determined by permitting the Mauritius Sugar Syndicate to sell its foreign exchange through an auction. Also, the authorities should proceed with a more ambitious liberalization of the tariff regime, within the framework of intraregional commitments. The statf has also stressed the need for the authorities to encourage foreign investment in Mauritius by adopting unambiguous and transparent guidelines for the approval of investment projects, as well as by expediting the approval process itself ’ l The staff has underscored the need for the authorities to replace the outmoded tripartite wage negotiation system and to revise laws governing labor shedding to allow appropriate labor market flexibility. Also, competition should be permitted in the importation and distribution of petroleum products and cement in order to enhance economy-wide efftciency. l The authorities have been encouraged to continue to provide mainly legislative and administrative support for private sector initiatives in Mauritius relating to export processing zone, sugar, and tourism activities, and to offer logistical support for private industry initiatives abroad. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4- I. INTRODUCTION 1. The 1999 Article IV consultation discussions were held in Port Louis during the period March 14-29, 1999.’ Mauritius is on the standard 12-month Article IV consultation cycle, and the last consultation was concluded by the Executive Board on June 1, 1998. On September 29, 1993, Mauritius accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2,3, and 4, and its exchange and trade systems are free of restrictions on the making of payments and transfers for current international transactions. Mauritius also maintains a liberalized capital account. Mauritius last availed itself of Fund resources in July 1986 and settled all its repurchase obligations by end-May 1991. 2. Summaries of Mauritius’s relations with the Fund and World Bank Group are provided in Appendixes I and II, respectively. The quality and timeliness of Mauritius’s reporting to the Fund of core minimum data, as well as of other economic and financial statistics, are, in general, satisfactory (Appendix III). However, the authorities are again urged to provide the Fund annual estimates and projections for the fiscal accounts and balance of payments on a more regular and timely basis. Social and demographic indicators are set out in Appendix IV, and a draft background section for the Public Information Notice is contained in Appendix V. IL REP~RTONTHEDISCUSSIONS 3. On the occasion of the conclusion of the 1998 Article IV consultation, Executive Directors commended the authorities for their generally prudent approach to economic and financial management. At the same time, they noted that, given Mauritius’s open current and capital accounts, and in the wake of the sharp depreciation of some Asian currencies, there was a need for the authorities to implement policy adjustments and reforms so as to sustain high economic growth, bring down the rate of unemployment, maintain moderate rates of inflation, and keep external reserves at prudent levels. Directors urged the authorities to aim at tinther fiscal consolidation, mainly through an effective implementation of a value-added tax (VAT), complemented by restraint on current expenditure, and to tighten monetary ’ The government of Mauritius was represented by Dr. Vasant Bunwaree, Minister of Finance; Mr. Rameswurlall Basant Roi, Governor of the Bank of Mauritius; Mr. Philippe Ong Seng, Acting Financial Secretary; and by other senior officials responsible for economic and financial matters. The statf representatives were Mr. Rothman (head), Mr. Kakoza, Mr. El-Masry, Mr. Akitoby, and Ms. Vibar (assistant) (all AFR). Mr. Ismael, Advisor to the Executive Director for Mauritius, participated in the policy discussions. The Deputy Managing Director (Mr. Ouattara) visited Mauritius during May 11-14 and also held discussions with the authorities. An MAE mission consisting of Mr. Ugolini (head), Mr. Nagayasu (EP), Mr. Barewal, Mr. Carbonaro, Mr. McConnell (all consultants), and Ms. De Biasi-Campanella (assistant) preceded the AFR mission and contributed to the staffreport on matters related to financial sector surveillance and monetary management. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-5- policy, principally through the introduction of full-fledged open market operations. In the external sector, Directors encouraged the authorities to allow the exchange rate to adjust to underlying market pressuresand to proceed with the rationalization of the tariff regime as soon as practicable after the tidl and effective implementation of the VAT. Directors also underscored the need for the authorities to remove the rigidities in the wage determination process and to ensure early passage of the Anti-Money-Laundering and Economic Crime Bill. 4. It was against this background that the staffrepresentatives assessed recent economic and financial developments, as well as discussed with the authorities a scenario that inchtded the policy adjustments and reforms required for the medium term. A. Recent Economic and Financial Developments 5. In 1997/98,’ and notwithstanding the turbulence in the global economy, Mauritius continued to build on its solid record of strong economic and financial performance. In particular, real GDP rose by 5% percent; the rate of inflation (as measured by the consumer price index) decelerated to 5% percent; and net international reserves of the banking system-despite a drop from their high 1996/97 level-were equivalent to 5 months of prospective imports (excluding the acquisition of aircraft and ships) (Figure 1 and Table 1). 6. Overall economic activity remained buoyant in 1998/99, with real GDP expected to have grown by a further 5% percent. The expansion continued to be broad based, with significant contributions recorded in manufacturing (especially in the export processing zone-EPZ), financial and business services (including offshore activities), trade (including tourism), and other services (particularly transport and communications). However, the pace of inflation quickened and is estimated at 8 percent. This pickup reflects the introduction of the VAT in September 1998 (at a rate of 10 percent); an ongoing drought; the continued rapid expansion of bank credit to the private sector; and the lagged impact of the depreciation ofthe Mauritian rupee (10 percent vis-a-vis the U.S. dollar in nominal terms) in the aftermath of the exchange market pressures that emerged subsequent to the Asian currency crises. Moreover, the rate of unemployment, although still relatively low (5% percent in 1997/98), is likely to have edged up further in an environment characterized by an increasingly serious mismatch in labor skills and inadequate labor market flexibility. 7. In 1998/99, Mauritius is estimated to have recorded a smaller external current account deficit (including transfers and the acquisition of aircraft and ships&equivalent to just over 2 percent of GDP, compared with 3 percent in 1997/98*wing mainly to a substantial rise in tourism-related earnings (Table 2). The trade deficit is estimated to have narrowed slightly as, despite marginally lower EPZ earnings (reflecting the depreciation of the h&titian rupee vis-a-vis the U.S. dollar) and a sizable increase in imports related to EPZ investment, ’ Fiscal year from July 1 to June 30. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-6- Mauritius benefited importantly from lower world market petroleum prices for its energy needs. Major developments in the capital and financial account in 1998/99 included a decline in direct investment in Mauritius that was more than offset by a turnaround in portfolio in- vestment, and a continued high investment inflow to public enterprises (in particular, Air Mauritius), and net international reserves are estimated to have remained at a S-month import cover at end-June 1999.3 Moreover, Mauritius continues to have a low external-debt-service ratio: for 1998/99, it is estimated at 8 percent of exports of goods and services. The expected rise in this ratio from 7 percent in 1997/98 largely reflects an early repayment of USS33 mil- lion on an international floating-rate note. 8. During 1997/98, the real effective exchange rate of the Mauritian rupee (on a period- average, bilateral-trade-weighted basis) appreciated by 3% percent because inflation was higher in Mauritius than in trading-partner countries (Figure 2). For the first half of 1998/99, the real effective exchange rate of the rupee was virtually unchanged, as the nominal effective depreciation of the rupee essentially offset the relatively faster pace of inflation in Mauritius. 9. With buoyant tax receipts (including from the recently implemented VAT-see Box 1) and nontax revenue and a decline in government capital expenditure and net lending, the overall fiscal deficit (including grants and exceptional factors) in 1998/99 is estimated to have narrowed further to some 3 percent of GDP 6om 4 percent in 1997/98 (Table 3). However, the underlying fiscal deficit, that is, excluding exceptional factors such as the proceeds from the sale of government-owned fixed assets (included in nontax revenue), is expected to have widened slightly to 4% percent of GDP, reflecting smaller operating surpluses of public enterprises. 10. Although the government’s overall borrowing requirement in 1998/99 was likely below that in 1997/98, domestic financing was higher, as external financing was negative, largely reflecting the repayment on the floating-rate note. Overall, the government met its financing needs from nonbank sources and, for the first time in the 199Os, made net repayments to the banking system. However, commercial banks reduced their holdings of treasury bills in favor of extending credit to the private sector, largely in the form of tax-free company debentures.’ As a result, the Bank of Mauritius (BOM) was obliged to take up a 3 Bank for International Settlements data show short-term claims on Mauritius at end- December 1998 of US0566 million, mainly on the nonbank private sector, with claims on Mauritian banks (excluding offshore banks) of about USS95 million. These short-term claims represented about 59 percent of Mauritius’s gross international reserves at end-December 1998. ’ Companies have been authorised to issue tax-&e debentures under statutory provisions (for example, any company listed on the Mauritius Stock Exchange is eligible) or at the discretion of the Minister of Finance in an attempt to spur private sector investment. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-7- substantial amount of treasury bills. The staff representatives pointed out that, apart from generating higher interest rates--the three-month treasury bill rate rose by about 3% per- centage points to 12% percent between June 1998 and April 1999-these developments have hampered the conduct of monetary and credit policy (Figure 3), Box 1. Mauritius: Introduction of the Value-Added Tax’ As had been planned, the value-added tax (VAT) was introduced on September 7, 1998. The law implementing the VAT closely maintained its key design element, namely, a comprehensive single-rate tax on goods and services, with very few exemptions. Following standard VAT practice, exports were zero rated. The rate of the VAT, however, was set at 10 percent, compared with the 12 percent rate that its designers had considered revenue neutral. In line with the planned reform of the indirect tax system, the sales tax (8 percent) was abolished and the hotel and restaurant tax (10 percent) is being phased out. Soon after the VAT law was enacted, however, revisions were made that substantially widened the scope of exemptions. The most important of these related to the imports of, and services provided to, the main export activities--export processing zone (EPZ) manufacturing and sugar production. In addition, domestic sales of the EPZ were granted a special VAT rate of r/2 percent, or only one-twentieth of the standard rate. The staff estimates that under current exemptions well over one-half of total imports are exempted Born the VAT. Despite these revisions, performance of the VAT in terms of compliance and revenue generation has been very favorable and, indeed, beyond initial expectations. The percentage of taxpayers filing returns on time has averaged more than 90 percent, and revenue collection over the period September 1998-April 1999 from the VAT and the two taxes it is replacing exceeded that during the comparable period in 1997-98 by 60 percent. The authorities are taking several steps to strengthen the VAT, including by improving the administrative capability of the VAT Department. In addition, plans are under way to introduce a Mauritian Revenue Authority by the end of 2000, together with a single taxpayer tile for all taxes. These changes are in line with the authorities’ overall restructuring of the indirect tax system, which places the VAT at the center. ‘For a more detailed discussion ofthe introduction of the v&e-added tax, see the section entitled “Implemeatation of the Value-Added Tax” in the fonhwmin8 8eleeted Issues and Statistical Appendix. 11. Bank credit to the private sector continued to rise rapidly, and, in the 12-month period ended March 1999, the increase was equivalent to 18% percent of beginning-of-period broad money (Table 4). In this regard, the authorities made no significant moves during this period to exert control over bank lending by, for example, raising bank reserve requirements or Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-8- curtailing the use of tax-free company debentures. Recently, however, they have stopped the discretionary granting of approval for the issuance of tax-free debentures, and, as a prelude to open market operations, the BOM has sold short- and medium-term treasury bills directly to the nonbank public. Nevertheless, even assuming some deceleration in the pace of credit expansion to the private sector in the last quarter of 1998/99, the growth in broad money for 1998/99 as a whole (13% percent) would have validated the pickup in the rate of inflation. 12. Effective January 1, 1999, the BOM made a further move to tighten prudential requirements in line with its intentions to bring them closer to Basle Committee recom- mended norms, as the minimum paid-up or assigned capital for both domestic and offshore banks was raised from Mau Rs 75 million to Mau Rs 100 million. However, the staffrepre- sentatives stated that the continued expansion of private sector credit well in excess of nominal GDP growth raised concerns about the quality of bank balance sheets. Moreover, a recent Fund technical assistance mission established that, inter aha, the ratio of nonperform- ing bank loans to total loans was high, reaching more than 20 percent in some banks; pro- visioning as a percentage of nonperforming loans was only about 30 percent; and significant mismatches existed between maturities of loans and deposits, with, for example, a ratio of short-term loans minus short-term deposits to total assets of about 35 percent. B. Medium-Term Macroeconomic and Financial Scenario 13. On the basis of the estimated macroeconomic and financial outturn for 1998/99, the staff representatives discussed with the Mauritian representatives a scenario through 2002/03 with the principal objectives of sustaining high economic growth (an average rate of 5% percent per year); limiting the rate of inflation to a moderate pace (on average about 4% percent per year); and, given Mauritius’s open capital account and the continuing uncertainties in the global financial markets, maintaining external reserves at prudent levels (about a S-month import cover) (Table 5). The scenario took into account the expected adverse impact in 1999/2000 of the ongoing drought and a cyclone in March. For example, sugar production will likely fall by about 25 percent (although the associated decline in export earnings will be cushioned somewhat by reinsurance receipts), and water shortages could eventually also affect EPZ and tourism activities. Jn order to realize this scenario, the staffrepresentatives underscored the need for the authorities to move forward with appropriately phased fiscal consolidation; a tightening of the monetary policy stance; a strengthening of prudential requirements in the expanding financing system; structural measures affecting the real sector; and actions to fbrther liberalize the exchange and trade systems. While, as indicated below, the authorities are prepared to press ahead with some key policy adjustments, other important reforms are not in the offtng, owing in part to the run-up to national elections in late 2000. C. Fiscal Policies 14. For the medium term, the staffrepresentatives stressed the need to bring the overall fiscal deficit (including grants but excluding exceptional factors) to a sustainable position, namely, to less than 1 percent of GDP by 2002/03, so as to provide the domestic savings to Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-9- support needed investment without weakening the external position and help to avoid recourse to inflationary financing. 15. To achieve the fiscal objectives, the staffrepresentatives emphasized the importance of a number of revenue reforms. They noted that it would be particularly important that modifications be made to the VAT to ensure quick and full attainment of its principal objectives, namely, to replace the revenue lost through the elimination of the sales and hotel and restaurant taxes; to compensate for the lowering of tariff rates; and to provide a per- manent boost to the tax revenue-to-GDP ratio.’ In this regard, while the staff representatives recognized that an adjustment to the tax rate might not be feasible in the near term (parlia- mentary elections must be held before end-2000), they strongly encouraged the authorities to quickly narrow the scope of exemptions and improve the VAT Department’s operational capability in line with the recommendations provided by Fund technical assistance, so as to broaden the base and raise the effective VAT rate. Moreover, for both the direct and indirect tax systems, the statf representatives urged the authorities to make a strong effort to rationalize the large number of tax exemptions and concessions;6 for this task, they recom- mended that the Ministry of Finance adopt for 1999/2000 the tax expenditure budget suggested by a 1997 Fund technical assistance mission. The staff representatives pointed out that such a tax expenditure budget should adequately estimate the amount of revenue forgone through incentives granted to all privileged activities and sectors. 16. On the expenditure side, the staffrepresentatives underscored that the need for restraint in current outlays implied that no real increases in the government wage bill could be allowed over the medium term and, in this context, stressed the need to pursue vigorously civil service reform and staff downsizing. The staff representatives also encouraged the authorities to allocate, as intended, some of the savings generated by the VAT to develop workers’ skills. 17. The Mauritian representatives considered the suggested fiscal scenario appropriate, especially as it made allowance for possible additional expenditures in 1999/2000 to mitigate adverse weather-related effects on the economy. For 1999/2000, the authorities would shortly seek to enhance VAT revenues following the specific recommendations provided by Fund technical assistance. At the same time, they intended to pursue tirther civil service down- sizing through natural attrition, the cancellation of unfilled positions, and the implementation ’ The tax revenue-to-GDP ratio (excluding exceptional factors, such as proceeds from the sale of fixed assets) is projected to move from 17% percent of GDP in 1998/99, to 18 percent in 1999/2000, and to 18% percent in 2000/01 when full and effective implementation of the VAT is assumed to be achieved. Conservatively, it is projected to remain at that level in 2001/02 and 2002/03. 6 For example, revenue forgone by the Customs Department was estimated at ahout 90 percent of actual collections. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-lO- of a portable pension system, for which the funding and other operational modalities were being finalized. Moreover, efforts would be made to allocate adequate resources for extensive vocational training and to consolidate the existing multiplicity of off-budget earmarked government funds with the central government budget; for the latter action, the authorities would request Fund technical assistance. Also, the authorities were considering establishing a mechanism for the automatic, regular transfer of the windfall profits of the State Trading Corporation (STC) to the central government once the petroleum stabilization fund had been replenished. Furthermore, as an outcome of a recent World Bank mission, the authorities expected to formulate proposals for reforming the financing, structure, and delivery of social services. For the near term, the Mauritian representatives indicated that, in the wake of the recent civil unrest and social disturbances, the government would attach particular importance to social issues in the 1999/2000 budget. To this end, a social trust fimd would be established that would finance projects aimed at advancing national unity and poverty alleviation. However, owing to an administrative reorganization being undertaken in the Ministry of Finance, there was little near-term prospect for the adoption of a formal tax expenditure budget. 18. The staff representatives, while appreciating that a number of important actions were envisaged, pointed out the downside risks to fiscal consolidation in the near term of the back- loading of some key revenue measures and urged the authorities to bring them forward, including, in particular, the scaling down of tax exemptions and concessions to ensure meeting a 1999/2000 fiscal deficit objective of 3% percent of GDP (including grants and excluding exceptional factors). 19. Regarding financing, the outlined fiscal adjustment path would be consistent with no external borrowing; a reduction in domestic borrowing from 4% percent of GDP in 1998/99 to r/z of 1 percentage point in 2002/03; and continued, larger net repayments to the banking system. The Mauritian representatives stated that a reduction in public debt-domestic and external public debt is estimated at 62% percent of GDP at end-1998/99-was an important motive for curtailing the fiscal deficit, as resources allocated to debt servicing could be put to more effective use elsewhere. The staff representatives pointed out that although, as pre- viously envisaged, treasury bills of maturities longer than one year had been introduced, the needed level of nonbank financing over the medium term would require the complete discontinuation of the tax-free status of company debentures, so as not to put government securities at a competitive disadvantage. In this vein, apart from undermining the effective implementation of monetary policy, maintenance. of the tax-free status caused losses in tax revenue and increased the cost of servicing the public debt. In 1998/99, domestic interest payments alone are estimated at 3% percent of GDP. The Mauritian representatives stated that, to help contain domestic interest wsts and following the recent termination of the discretionary tax-free status for wmpany debentures, the authorities would look into the possibility of discontinuing the statutory tax-free status of debentures. They cautioned, however, that efforts in this regard were likely to meet political resistance. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-ll- D. Monetary and Credit Policies 20. In view of the need for a tighter monetary stance, the staff representatives recom- mended that for 1999/2000 the authorities seek to limit the growth in broad money to 11?4 percent. In addition to the needed fiscal retrenchment, the staff representatives stressed that moderating the expansion in domestic liquidity would require the introduction of full- fledged open market operations on the part of the BOM to achieve greater monetary control through indirect instruments (see Box 2). For the interim period, the authorities may need to mop up excess liquidity through the additional sale of treasury bills to the nonbank public, with the proceeds placed in interest-bearing accounts at the BOM. As indicated in Table 5, and given the target for net international reserves (maintenance. of a Smonth import cover), net claims on government would have to decline by 3% of 1 percentage point of beginning-of- period broad money, and the expansion in credit to the private sector would have to be contained at 10% percent of beginning-of-period money supply. Box 2. Mauritius: Monetary Operations’ The high level of concentration in the Mauritian banking sector (the largest two banks account for more than 70 percent of deposit and lending operations) and the seasonality of activities in key sectors of the economy, in particular sugar and tourism, are reflected in a very thin domestic interbank money market. In general, the banking sector as a whole is either flush with or short of liquidity at the same time, and interbank operations are limited to overnight call money. In the absence of an effective interbank market for treasury bills, banks, when in need of short-term liquidity, are leg with only the possibility of requesting an overnight overdraft facility from the Bank ofMauritius (BOM). This facility is provided by the BOM on a case-by-case basis and at a penalty rate. Indeed, banks are very reluctant to avail themselves of this facility because its outcome is unpredictable and because approaching the central bank for short-term finance may be misinterpreted by the market as a sign of banks’ weak liquidity management. Presently, the BOM does not have an active instrument through which it can signal its monetary policy stance to market participants. The bank rate, which the BOM applies to advances it makes to the government, is calculated as the weighted average of the yields of treasury bills sold at the previous auction. Moreover, since the BOM does not conduct open market operations using its own portfolio of securities but merely manages the weekly treasury bill auctions as an agent of the government, it cannot directly influence market conditions by determining in line with its desired monetary policy stance the volume of securities offered at these auctions. Against this backdrop, the BOM has been advised to consider the introduction of two wllateralized indirect monetary instruments to improve its monetary operations: Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12- Box 2. Mauritius: Monetary Operations’ (concluded) l Under a Lombard facility, banks would be able to draw overnight funds gem the central bank on their own initiative and against eligible government securities. l However, repurchase operations, also known as repos (the buying of eligible securities from commercial banks under a contract to resell them at a specified time and price), would be conducted at the initiative of the central bank. The central bank would set the Lombard rate as an upper bound to short-term money rates and change it only periodically to signal to the market the need to adjust the overall level of interest rates. It would use the repo rate, which would be lower than the Lombard rate but ordinarily higher than the inter-bank money market rate, to a&ct short-term liquidity. When the central bank deemed it necessary to tighten its monetary policy stance, it would conduct repo transactions at rates close to the Lombard rate. By wntrasf if it chose to loosen monetary conditions, it would conduct repos at rates significantly below the Lombard rate and closer to the interbank money rate. The Lombard and repo facilities should be seen as complementary instruments that would need to be introduced as a package and clearly explained to the commercial banking community so that market participants wuld correctly gauge the signals transmitted to them by the central bank. Another precondition for the efficient application of these indirect instruments would be for the central bank to accumulate a portfolio of eligible securities in order to trade them in open market operations at its own initiative and when and how it considered appropriate. ‘For a d&M discussion of monetary operations, see the sectton entitted “Issues in Money and Bankin&t” in the fotthmming Selected Issues aad statistical Appuulix 21. In light of the findings of a recent Fund technical assistance mission, the staff representatives strongly encouraged the authorities to follow up on that mission’s key recommendations to &rther strengthen prudential requirements. These include, inter alia, enforcing compliance by all banks with BOM guidelines on loan classification and requiring financially exposed banks (with high ratios of, and low provisioning for, nonperforming loans, and significant maturity mismatches between loans and deposits) to submit promptly realistic adjustment plans, with agreed time targets, in order to rectify their situations (see Box 3). 22. The Mauritian authorities responded that they intended to develop t%ll-fledged open market operations, and, to this end, had requested Fund technical assistance; in early May, two experts visited the BOM to assist in implementing Fund recommendations in monetary management and operations. Furthermore, the authorities believed that, with meetings of the Monetary Policy Committee now held on a monthly basis, an appropriate mechanism had been established for coordinating in a timely manner the government’s financing needs and the operations of the BOM. To equip the BOM with, among other things, more autonomy to conduct monetary policy and enhanced capability to strengthen banking supervision, the staff representatives urged the authorities to speed passage of the amended Bank of Mauritius and Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13 - Banking Acts, now two years behind schedule, for which extensive Fund technical assistance had been provided. However, owing to recent changes in BOM management and a wnse.- quent lack of legislative priority, no schedule had been determined for passage of the Bank- ing and Bank of Mauritius Acts; no timetable had been established for the further strengthen- ing of prudential requirements; and even the timing for passage of the also overdue Anti- Money-Laundering and Economic Crime Bill-aimed at maintaining the integrity of the offshore financial and business sector-was uncertain. Box 3. Mauritius: Banking Supervision’ The Mauritian banking system is character&d by a high level of concentration, with the Mauritius Commercial Bank (MCB) holding about 45 percent of market share and the State Bank of Mauritius (SBM) 28 percent. The remaining 27 percent of market share is held by eight smaller commercial banks. Moreover, the MCB caters predominantly to the sugar, export processing zone (EPZ), and tourism sectors, while the SBM’s operations are mainly in the trade and parastatal sectors. Closely associated with the small size ofMauritius’s economy, its reliance on a few sectors (sugar, the EPZ, tourism, and, more recently, financial services), and the pronounced concentration of the banking system are relatively high levels of connected lending by larger banks and concentrated (i.e., single.-customer) lending by smaller banks. The authorities also need to be mindtid of the impact of expansionary monetary policies on the health of the financial sector. Experience has shown that weaknesses in banks’ balance sheets often have their roots in, and are at times masked by, rapidly expanding bank lending in a buoyant economy. Credit to the private sector has increased over the past two years by more than 25 percent annually, encouraged in part by the relaxation of cash reserve requirements and the elimination of the noncash liquid asset ratio in July 1997. The economy has also been growing at a brisk pace of 5-6 percent per year since the mid-1990s. Moreover, the extensive use of tax-exempt company debentures since 1997/98 (July-June) has added a further impetus to bank credit expansion. Inasmuch as commercial banks have replaced some of their short-term credits to private sector companies with long-term, debenture-based corporate lending, increased maturity mismatches between deposits and loans have also arisen in banks’ balance sheets. The level of nonperforming loans as a percentage of total loans has been increasing over the past three years, and, more important, certain banks have not been adequately following Bank of Mauritius (BOM) guidelines on loan classification and loan loss provisioning. Given the present strength of the Mauritian economy, the authorities are being encouraged to seize this opportunity to take corrective measures, including: . reviewing the organizational structure of the BOM’s Bank Supervision Department and upgrading its staffs skills to enhance its efficiency and effectiveness; Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14- Box 3. Mauritius: Banking Supervision’ (concluded) 1 . reviewing guidelines issued by the BOM to ensure consistency and coherence in prudential regulations; . regular monitoring of banks to ensure compliance with BOM guidelines; and . requiring exposed banks to submit realistic business plans with time targets to rectify their situations, including through more aggressive efforts to recover loans and strengthen their capital base. The staff representatives have also emphasized the need for the authorities to enact as soon as possible long-overdue revisions to the Bank of Mauritius and Banking Acts, which contain several critical amendments aimed at strengthening the supervisory regime. I I ’ For a detailed discussion 0fbmkin.S supcrvisioq see the section entitled “Issues in hbey and Banking” in the forthcoming Sektcd 1.w~ and Statistical Appclldin E. External Sector Policies 23. Regarding exchange rate policy, the Mauritian representatives indicated that they believed that the level of the rupee (just below Mau Rs 25 per USSl in mid-March, compared with Mau Rs 23 per US%1 one year earlier) largely reflected current economic timdamentals. They were not concerned about the relatively small real effective appreciation of the rupee over the past 18 months. Therefore, the authorities intended to continue their policy of allowing the exchange rate in the interbsnk market to adjust to underlying pressures, and of limiting BOM intervention to moderating short-term volatility and maintaining a prudent level of external reserves. The staff representatives agreed with the authorities’ policy stance in this area and, with the objective of making the exchange rate of the rupee more tblly market determined, recommended that the sale of foreign exchange by the Mauritian Sugar Syndicate (MSS) be effected through an auction rather than, as at present, an allocation system.’ However, the authorities, at this time, preferred to retain the existing system, as they believed it helped stabilize the rupee in an environment of excess domestic liquidity. 24. The staff representatives underscored that, to foster external competitiveness and the expansion of employment concurrently, the authorities needed to make progress in liberalizing Mauritius’s foreign trade regime and deregulating foreign investment while, on 7 Under the present system, which was introduced in December 1998 at the request of the BOM, the MSS sells its foreign exchange at the prevailing interbank market rate, while determining the quantities it allocates to banks in proportion to the volume bids it receives from them. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-lS- the domestic front, removing labor market rigidities. As for Mauritius’s trade regime, as indicated in Box 4, tariff rates are high (although, with almost one-half of imports zero rated, the average trade-weighted tariff rate is estimated at about 17% percent, excluding excises) and dispersed (as nine different rates range fiorn 0 percent to 80 percent). Import excise duties on selected products (alcoholic beverages, tobacco, petroleum products, and motor- cars) range from 15 percent to 400 percent, and nontariff barriers include state trading monopolies in petroleum products and cement (although additional companies are expected shortly to begin operations in petroleum storage and distribution and cement packaging). In the near term, the authorities intended to move forward in the 1999/2000 government budget with some reductions, albeit limited, in tariff rates, aimed at raising the tariff preference for imports from countries of the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Atiica (COMESA) and the Cross-Border Initiative (CBI) to 90 percent from the current 80 percent. The staff representatives strongly encouraged the authorities to move more ambitiously with regard to intraregional commitments, especially under the CBI to reduce the maximum tariff rate to 25 percent, the average trade-weighted tariff rate to 15 percent, and the number of nonzero tariff rates to no more than three, and, in this context, underscored the need to strengthen the government revenue effort, including through modifications in the application and even the rate of the VAT. The Mauritian representatives fully appreciated the need for Mauritius to move more forcefUlly on tariff liberalization and expressed the hope that the country’s various intraregional medium-term objectives could still be met. Box 4. Mauritius: External Tariff Reform’ In 1994, Mauritius undertook a significant restructuring of the external tariff regime with the objective of simplifying the taxation of imports, correcting anomalies and distortions, and reducing excessive protection. Consequently, the customs duty, the fiscal duty, and import levy were consolidated into one duty, and the number of nonzero rates was reduced from 60 to 7.’ Furthermore, the maximum rate of duty was reduced from more than 600 percent to 80 percent.) The restructuring also involved lowering customs duties on more than 4,000 items, mainly foodstuffs, raw materials, and capital goods. The tariff restructuring was intended to be the first step in the phased reform of the indirect tax system. However, while the above changes simplified the administration of import taxation, revenue losses entailed by the tariff reductions in the absence of compensating changes in other taxes amounted to the equivalent of almost 1% percent of GDP. The impetus for further tariff reform has, in recent years, been provided by Mauritius’s participation in several regional arrangements, particularly the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA), the Cross-Border Initiative (CBI), and the Southern African Development Community (SADC). Under COMESA, Mauritius undertook to abolish tariffs on intraregional trade by end-2000 and to adopt a common external tariff involving three nonzero rates and a maximum rate of 30 percent by end-2004; under the CBI, member countries committed to regional free trade and a harmonized external tariff regime (with three nonzero rates and maximum and average import-weighted rates of 25 percent and 15 percent, respectively) by end-2000. Mauritius has reduced external tariffs on intraregional trade by 80 percent for its COMESA and CBI trade partners on a reciprocal basis. It is envisaged that Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 16- Box 4. Mauritius: External Tariff Reform’ (concluded) the reduction will be brought to 90 percent in July 1999. However, little progress has been made in moving toward the common external tariff objectives envisaged under COMSSA and the CBI. A key obstacle to a further major scaling down of external tariff rates in Mauritius resides within the structure of current tariff revenue, as almost 90 percent of total revenue from the customs tariff is derived from imports taxed under the 30-80 percent tariff rate band. Moreover, revenue forgone in the form of import duty exemptions is equivalent to about 90 percent of actual customs duty receipts. Therefore, as receipts from the external tariff account for about one-third of total government revenue, a major reduction in tariff rates may well require a substantial restructuring of indirect taxes, especially an increase in the value- added tax rate, and a significant curtailment of exemptions. ‘For a more detailed discussion of external tariff r&m, see the section entitled “External TariEReform” in the forthulmingSc~Issuesaadstatisti~Apptndir ‘In 1998, an eighth nonzero rate of 10 percent was inhwhmd. ?-he staodd duty rates apply to “schcdukd” tmmtrics, which include the United States, numbers of the Europzan Union, and British Commonwealth muntries. For nonscheduled counhies, an additional rate of duty of 20 percent is applicable to imports taxable unda the 55 percent and 80 percent rates. 25. The authorities recognized that, for Mauritius to maintain broad-based economic expansion over the medium term, additional foreign direct and portfolio investment would be required, and, in view of the cumbersome procedures and associated delays encountered by the private sector, the staffrepresentatives encouraged the authorities to adopt unambiguous and transparent guidelines for the approval of investment projects and to expedite the approval process itself. 26. Mauritius’s private sector, applying its comparative advantage stemming Tom experience and know-how in a number of key sectors, has undertaken direct ventures abroad that, in the coming years, are expected to generate foreign exchange earnings in the form of income inflows. For example, as discussed in Box 5, Mauritius’s sugar industry has, or plans to have, operations in C&e d’Ivoire, Madagascar, and Mozambique; other private sector initiatives abroad include, for example, textile production and tourism. While taking note of these ventures, which could well buttress Mauritius’s external position in the future, the staff representatives encouraged the authorities to discontinue the tax incentives that were being provided for such undertakings and stressed that off&J assistance should be limited to logistical support. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17- Box 5. Mauritius: Regional Industry Initiatives’ In the mid-19909, following the liberalization of Mauritius’s capital account, a number of large.private sector companies based in Mauritius started looking at the Indian Ocean and southern AtEcan region for investment and growth opportunities. Their interest in these economies was supported by the active role that Mauritius was playing in regional organizations, including the Southern African Development Community (SADC) and the Common Market for Eastern and Southern At&a (COMESA). Common to these associations is the objective of promoting regional economic integration by encouraging intraregional trade and investment flows. Having reached a certain level of saturation in the domestic market, and given Mauritius’s limited natural resource base, particularly agricultural land, private businesses saw promising opportunities for diversification into neighboring countries, where they could apply their comparative advantage stemming from experience and know-how in a number of key sectors, including textile manufacturing; agro- industries (especially sugar); tourism; airline services and management; telecommunications; and banking. After initial contacts were made by private entrepreneurs with counterparts in the partner countries, the Mauritian authorities stepped in to provide logistical and administrative support. To this end, trade and investment missions comprising government and private sector offtcials were organized to several African countries, including Madagascar and Mozambique. Moreover, in 1998 several agreements were signed between Mauritius and Mozambique to, inter alia, relax visa requirements on a reciprocal basis; provide protection against expropriation; and allow for the repatriation of profits. Similar intergovernmental accords were signed with Madagascar in early 1999, and agreements with additional countries are currently being negotiated. To further encourage such regional activities, the Mauritian authorities introduced on July 1, 1998 a special incentive scheme, the so-called Regional Development Certificate, for companies that hold at least a 35 percent equity share in a regional development project. Such certiftcates provide the Mauritian holder with certain privileges, including a reduced corporate tax rate of 15 percent (rather than the standard 35 percent) on repatriated income and the possibility of claiming investment allowances for corporate tax purposes, both of which would treat regional investments on an equal footing with those made in similarly privileged sectors in Mauritius. In the agricultural sector, a consortium of three large Mauritian companies, backed by loans from Mauritian commercial banks, is rehabilitating two detbnct sugar estates along the Zambeze River in Mozambique. The companies plan to invest about US585 million by end- 2001 and produce about 100,000 tons of sugar annuaIly by end-2003. Another Mauritian company is expanding its operations in Madagascar by acquiring about 30,000 hectares of land on the west coast to produce 70,000 tons of maize and 50,000 tons of sugar annually and to increase its weekly yield of chicks from 25,000 to 130,000. Regarding manufacturing activity, the Mauritian Floreal Croup is already the largest textile-producing company operating in Madagascar’s export processing zone, and another large Mauritian Grm, the Compagnie Mauricienne de Textile (CMT), has recently started Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 18- Box 5. Mauritius: Regional Industry Initiatives’ (concluded) producing T-shirts in a new factory. This is in line with CMT’s long-term strategy to move the production of goods with low value added to Madagascar in order to benefit from lower labor costs. As for air transport, Air Mauritius has signed several cooperation agreements with regional air carriers, including Air Austral, Air Madagascar, and Air Seychelles, to provide joint air service on a code-sharing basis between Mauritius and neighboring islands. These strategic alliances are allowing Air Mauritius not only to improve its own capacity utilization, but also to forge closer relationships with its partners, which could lead to acquiring quity in these carriers. In addition, Air Mauritius is actively engaged in negotiations to establish a regional airline as a joint venture with its partners. In the hotel and tourism sector, a number of Mauritian entrepreneurs and hotel management companies are already investing in large projects in Mozambique, Madagascar, and Seychelles. The projects range from a convention center in Maputo to ewtourism in Madagascar and include luxury seaside resorts in all three countries. With respect to telecommunications-related services, Mauritius Telecom (MT) is investing USg25 million as part of a US%600 million joint-venture project with Malaysian, South African, and European companies to provide a direct underwater fiberoptic cable connection between South Africa and Malaysia via Mauritius. MT is also active in Madagascar and Cameroon in the mobile telephone market. Moreover, a Mauritian entrepreneur jointly owns a successful mobile telephone operation in Seychelles. ‘For a more detailed discussion of regionat tndusny inttiatives, see the section entitled “Regional Indesny Initistlves” in the forthmmiag Selected Issues and Statistical Appendix. F. Real Sector and Structural Policies 27. Since relatively high wage costs, particularly for low-skilled labor, are inimical to Mauritius’s competitiveness and have contributed to increasing unemployment, the staff representatives urged the authorities to replace the outmoded tripartite wage negotiation system-with its inflationary bias resulting from indexation-with a more flexible wage determination process8 The Mauritian representatives stated that, although discussions had been held between the government and civil service unions, there was no near-term prospect for a change in the wage determination process, especially in an environment of upcoming national elections. * For a discussion of the wage-setting mechanism, unit labor costs, competitiveness, and unemployment, see Box 2 of SM/98/91 (5/6/98). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 19- 28. In addition to the private industry initiatives noted above to extend operations abroad, other private sector endeavors were under way to help sustain broad-based economic expansion over the medium term. Room capacity for tourists was continuing to increase, and the authorities expected Mauritius to be able to accommodate 700,000 tourists+r some 110,000 more than in 199~in the next few years. As a complement to this expansion, the government had recently signed a management agreement with British Airports Authority (a subsidiary of British Airways) to address the need for quality improvements and increased capacity at Mauritius’s airport. At the same time, the authorities were caretidly examining the overall environmental implications of expanding tourism sector activities and were steadfastly seeking to keep Mauritius “an upscale tourist destination.” 29. The staff representatives encouraged the authorities to continue to provide financial support to the EPZ for its sectoral vocational training institutions, as well as legislative and administrative’support to the sugar industry for its campaign to enhance productivity, including through the centralixation of sugar mills and the relaxation of rigid labor laws. As for the latter, the Mauritian representatives stated that, with technical assistance from the International Labor Organixation and United Nations Development Program, a new Protection of Employment Act had been drafted, providing, among other things, for the termination of employment based on enterprise operational needs and for the removal of limits on working hours for young/female workers in accordance with international standards. However, the draft law was still under study, and, in any case, progress toward its enactment was not expected in the preelection environment. G. Statistical Issues and Technical Assistance 30. As indicated in paragraph 2, the quality and timeliness of Mauritius’s reporting to the Fund of wre minimum data, as well as of other economic and financial statistics, are, in general, satisfactory. However, the authorities were again urged to provide the Fund annual estimates and projections for the fiscal accounts and balance of payments on a more regular and timely basis. 31. After the recent receipt of Fund technical assistance, and related to their possible interest in participating in the General Data Dissemination System (GDDS) or subscribing to the Special Data Dissemination Standard (SDDS), the authorities will soon be making efforts to compile quarterly national accounts. These efforts entail, inter alia, the collection of information relating to (i) output of enterprises not belonging to the EPZ; (ii) changes in inventories; and (iii) final consumption expenditure of households. The staffrepresentatives alerted the authorities that similarly intensive efforts would be required for the fiscal accounts and balance of payments to ensure compliance with the demanding standards. Notwithstanding the associated likely heavy resource requirements, the authorities considered compliance very much in their interest, as, inter alia, it would provide them with more timely, comprehensive information on which to make sound policy prescriptions. 32. Regarding Year 2000 (Y2K) issues, specific measures were being taken at the banking level to address potential problems. For example, the BOM was reviewing, Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2o- correcting, and converting, where necessary, all computer systems to ensure that they were Y2K compliant; it was also obtaining Y2K warranty certificates for all information technology items purchased. Moreover, most commercial banks had invested in reviewing and correcting their programs and, in some cases, had renewed their critical computer systems. At the national level, the authorities had developed a Year 2000 brochure, established a Year 2000 website, organized workshops for targeted groups, and distributed circulars to all registered companies. Furthermore, working groups had been created to oversee Y2K readiness in the most important sectors (e.g., finance, health, public administration, public utilities, and transportation). 33. As discussed above and summarized in Appendix I, Mauritius remains a large recipient of Fund technical assistance. In all areas, the Mauritian authorities have generally made effective use of such assistance, although there have been some delays in the implementation of recommendations (for example, regarding revisions in the banking legislation). m. sTAFF&TRAISAL 34. Since the conclusion ofthe last Article IV consultation in mid-1998, Mauritius’s broad-based economic activity has remained buoyant and its external reserve position relatively comfortable. However, the pace of inflation has quickened, attributable in part to accommodative monetary policies, and unemployment is likely to have edged up t%ther in an environment character&d by an increasingly serious mismatch in labor skills and inadequate labor market flexibility. Moreover, near-term prospects have been dimmed by drought and a cyclone. 35. Against this background, the Mauritian authorities are already prepared to press ahead with some key policy adjustments needed to attain the principal medium-term objectives of sustaining high economic growth; moderating the rate of inflation; reversing the rise in unemployment; and, given Mauritius’s open capital account and the continuing uncertainties in the global financial markets, maintaining external reserves at prudent levels. 36. In view of the need to achieve appropriately phased fiscal consolidation, the authorities intend to enhance VAT revenues by enlarging their base and improving administration of the tax, and are considering establishing a mechanism for the automatic, regular transfer of windfall profits of the STC to the central government. At the same time, the authorities are strongly encouraged to adopt a formal tax expenditure budget, so as to scale down the large number of tax exemptions and concessions. 37. On the expenditure side, the authorities have embarked on a proper wurse in pursuing further civil service downsizing through natural attrition, the cancellation of unfilled positions, and the implementation of a portable pension system. However, it will also be important for them to proceed to consolidate, as intended, the existing multiplicity of off- budget earmarked government finds with the central government budget, and to allocate adequate resources for much-needed extensive vocational training. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-21- 38. The authorities are well aware that required monetary restraint calls for continued government net repayments to the banking system and the avoidance of central bank purchases of treasury bills, as well as the discontinuation of the statutory tax-free status of company debentures. Moreover, the authorities will need to pursue vigorously the development of full-fledged open market operations to achieve greater monetary control through indirect instruments, and to ensure that the meetings of the Monetary Policy Committee, now held on a monthly basis, provide an effective mechanism for coordinating the government’s financing needs and the operations of the BOM. Moreover, the authorities are urged to expedite passage of the long-overdue revisions to the Bank of Mauritius and Banking Acts to provide the BOM with an enhanced capability to effectively conduct monetary policy and strengthen banking supervision. 39. As a tbrther tightening of prudential requirements in the banking system is needed, the authorities should proceed, without delay, to establish a timetable for requiring all banks to comply with BOM guidelines on loan classification and to request the submission by financially exposed banks of realistic plans to rectify their situations. In addition, the authorities are encouraged to speed enactment of the also overdue Anti-Money-Laundering and Economic Crime Bill to maintain the integrity of the expanding offshore financial and business sector. 40. Regarding exchange rate policy, the present level of the Mauritian rupee appears consistent with current economic tlmdamentals, and the authorities appropriately intend to continue their policy of allowing the exchange rate in the interbank foreign exchange market to adjust to underlying pressures, and of limiting BOM intervention to moderating short-term volatility and maintaining a prudent level of external reserves. With the objective of making the exchange rate of the rupee more t%lly market determined, the foreign exchange of the MSS should be sold through an auction. 41. Also in the external area, the authorities are expected to move forward in the 1999/2000 government budget with some, albeit limited, liberalixation of the tariff regime. However, they should move more ambitiously to lower tariff rates in concert with the enhanced implementation of the VAT and consistent with the frameworks of COMBSA and the CBI. At the same time, the authorities will need to encourage foreign investment in Mauritius by adopting unambiguous and transparent guidelines for the approval of investment projects, as well as by expediting the approval process itself. 42. Although, in the present preelection environment, there is no prospect for replacing the outmoded tripartite wage negotiation system with a more flexible wage determination process, the authorities should prepare to make such a change once conditions permit, especially to forestall potential pressures on Mauritius’s competitiveness and mitigate the unemployment situation. In parallel, revised laws concerning labor shedding will be needed to allow appropriate labor market flexibility. The authorities should also press ahead with promoting competition in the importation and distribution of petroleum products and cement in order to enhance economy-wide efficiency. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 22 - 43. To help maintain broad-based economic expansion over the medium term, the authorities should continue to provide mainly legislative and administrative support for private sector initiatives in Mauritius (especially relating to EPZ, sugar, and tourism activities). Also, although private sector initiatives abroad are encouraging and merit continued government logistical support, the authorities are urged to discontinue the granting of tax incentives for these undertakings. 44. The quality and timeliness of Mauritius’s reporting to the Fund of core minimum data, as well as of other economic and financial statistics, are, in general, satisfactory from the standpoint of conducting surveillance. Nevertheless, the authorities are again urged to 45. provide the Fund annual estimates and projections for the fiscal accounts and balance of payments on a more regular and timely basis. 46. The staff proposes that the next Article IV consultation with Mauritius be held on the standard 12-month cycle. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 23 - Figure 1. Mauritius: Main Economic Indicators, 1990/91-1998/99 I/ Gmwih and Unemplqmmt e P-c-9 30. &a4ibrc d met lading 25 - 12 External Accounts 10 @paardGDP) 9lm1 9293 94i95 w97 9849 9w91 9293 94‘95 96197 98199 SouMs: h”k of Mauritius; Cent”,, Statistical Offke; b,i&,y of&,a,,w; a,,cJ F”,,‘, staff dn,&s. II Fiscal year from July ta June. 11 Contributions to annual changes io bread money. 3/ Net intemational reserves of the banking system in months of prospeclive imports, excluding aircraft. 41 Inc1udiig hansfcm. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicFigure 2. Mauritius: Effective Exchange Rate Indices, January 1990-January 1999 l/ (1990=100; foreign currency per Mauritian rupee) 150 140 - 130 - 120 - 110 - Real effativc rate 31 90- so- 70 - 60 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..‘...................‘.‘....‘....’..’~.....-.....“...‘.. LL Jan-90 h-91 Jan-92 Jan-93 J.m-94 Jan-95 Jail-96 Jan-97 Jlo-98 h-99 Souras: IMF, Intematiod Finmcial Satisttcs; and lnfcrmatim~ Ndia System. l/ Information Notia System multilateral weights based on the geographical pattern of trade and tourism. 2! Rclativc- priaq domestic pria indexkighted parhu.r pria indices. 3/ Bad on relative collsomcr prices. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public25 20 15 10 5 0 Figure 3. Mauritius: Interest Rates, January 1994April1999 (In percent) Discount mtc . -. ,’ *. Treasury bill rate (the month) Jan-94 Jan-95 Jan-96 Jan-97 JllIl-98 Jllll-99 fiourca Bank of Mauritius.; and Ih4F, Infemafio~l Fimmcid Stotidics. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public