DOCUMENT OF INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND NOT FOR PUBLIC USE MASTER FILES ROOM HO C-525 0450 sM/99/155 CONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION July 2, 1999 To: Members of the Executive Board From: Subject: The Secretary Slovak Republic-Staff Report for the 1999 Article IV Consultation Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staff report for the 1999 Article IV consultation with the Slovak Republic, which is tentatively scheduled for discussion on Wednesday, July 21, 1999. Mr. Feldman (ext. 363 17) or Mr. Mates (ext. 38807) is available to answer technical or factual questions relating to this paper prior to the Board discussion. Unless the Documents Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the WTO Secretariat on Tuesday, July 13, 1999; and to the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the European Commission, the European Investment Bank, and the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development, following its consideration by the Executive Board. Att: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicCONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND SLOVAK REPUBLIC Staff Report for the 1999 Article IV Consultation Prepared by the StaffRepresentatives for the 1999 Consultation with the Slovak Republic Approved by Michael Deppler and Ishan Kapur July 1, 1999 Contents Page I. II. III. IV. V. Introduction.. ............................................................................................................ .3 Economic Background .............................................................................................. .4 Policy Discussions ................................................................................................... 16 A. Macroeconomic Policies and the Near-Term Outlook ................................... I6 B. Structural Reforms: The Enterprise and Banking Sectors.. ............................. 23 C. Other Issues ................................................................................................... 25 Medium-Term Scenarios ........................................................................................ .26 Staff Appraisal ......................................................................................................... 28 Tables 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. Main Economic, Financial, and Social Indicators.. .................................................. 3 1 Selected Economic Indicators-A Regional Perspective ........................................ .33 Government Budgetary Operations, 1997-99 ........................................................ ..3 4 Balance of Payments, 1995-99.. ............................................................................. 36 Monetary Survey, 1995-99 .................................................................................... .37 Medium-Term Scenarios, 1997-2003 ................................................................... ..3 8 Medium-Term Adjustment Scenario-Government Budgetary Operations, 1998-2003 ........................................................................................................... .39 Balance of Payments Projections, 1998-2003 ......................................................... 40 Figures 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. Selected Economic Indicators.. ................................................................................. .7 Trade Balance.. .......................................................................................................... 8 Consumption and Investment, 1997-98 ..................................................................... 9 Real Effective Exchange Rate Index ........................................................................ 10 Exchange Rate of the Slovak Kourna (1996-99) ................................................... .:’ 15 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2- 1. 2. Macroeconomic Performance and Vulnerability to Financial/Balance of Payments External Crises: A Regional Perspective .............................................. 5 Medium-Term Scenarios: Key Elements.. ............................................................... .27 Appendices 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. Fund Relations ........................................................................................................ .41 Relations with the World Bank.. .............................................................................. 45 Statistical Issues ...................................................................................................... 47 The Banking System-Its Soundness, Supervision, and Restructuring.. .................. .50 Privatization and Enterprise Performance ............................................................... .S8 Appendix Tables 9. IO. Technical Assistance, 1991-99.. .............................................................................. 42 Core Statistical Indicators.. ..................................................................................... .49 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3- 1. INTR~DUCHON 1. Staff teams visited Bratislava during January 22-29 and April 8-23 to conduct the Article IV consultation discussions.’ The mission met with the Deputy Prime Minister for Economic Affairs, the Minister of Finance, the Governor and Deputy Governors of the National Bank of Slovakia (NBS), other senior officials at the NBS and various government agencies, public enterprises, and the Federation of Trade Unions, and representatives of private sector financial firms and research institutions. Mr. Rigasz, assistant in the oftice of the Executive Director for the Slovak Republic, participated in many of the meetings. 2. Slovakia accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Section 2, 3, and 4 on October 1, 1995 and maintains an exchange system that is free of restrictions on the making of payments and transfers for current international transactions. Relations with the Fund and the World Bank are discussed in Appendices I and II, respectively. Slovakia subscribes to the special data dissemination standard. Data on core statistical indicators are timely and provided promptly to the Fund (see Appendix III on statistical issues). However, data quality varies, with notable weaknesses in real sector and trade data, and the assessment of the macroeconomic situation is subject to several uncertainties because of data concerns (discussed in section II). 3. In concluding the last Article IV consultation on February 13, 1998, Directors expressed deep concern about economic developments in Slovakia and urged early and strong policy action. They cautioned that Slovakia’s macroeconomic successes were being jeopardized by the persistently large external imbalance. In their view, monetary tightening against the background of an expansionary fiscal stance had led to high real interest rates, which were straining the enterprise and banking sectors. Directors urged a tighter fiscal policy, a freeze on public sector wages, and a restrained monetary stance until after the external current account deficit had declined. 4. On the political front, after elections in September 1998, a new coalition government was formed at the end of October by four parties representing a broad political spectrum. The new government has improved Slovakia’s political image abroad, largely on the basis of its commitment to strengthen democratic institutions. ‘Discussions were concluded during the spring Ministerial meetings in Washington. Team members for the January mission, which focused on assessing the authorities’ fiscal plans for 1999 and assisting in budget preparation, were Messrs. Feldman (head) and Mates (both EUI), and Mr. Al-Yousuf (PDR). The April mission comprised Messrs. Feldman (head), Mates, and Christou, Ms. Ramakrishnan (EP)(all EUl), Mr. McDonald (PDR), Mr. Song and Ms. Khamis (MAE), and Ms. Williams (administrative assistant, EUI). Mr. Rocha (World Bank) joined part of each mission. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4- II. ECONOMIC BACKGROUND 5. The new government inherited a very diffkult situation, with huge macroeconomic imbalances and increasing strains on the banking and enterprise sectors. These developments were symptoms of an unbalanced macroeconomic policy mix, in which too lax a fiscal policy was combined with a relatively tight monetary stance, as well as delays in addressing key structural weaknesses in the economy. This was ultimately reflected in severe exchange rate pressures in August and September 1998, the abandonment in October 1998 of the former exchange rate band, and a subsequent currency depreciation of significant magnitude (Figure 1 and Table 1). 6. Thus, while important economic strides have been made since independence- including rapid growth and relatively low inflation-the economy has been vulnerable to crisis. Box 1 provides a regional perspective on Slovakia’s economic developments, both in terms of headline macroeconomic variables and indicators of financial vulnerability. 7. Persistently large external current account deficits have been a key risk factor of the Slovak economy in recent years. The current account deficit was about 10 percent of GDP in 1998, the third straight year of deficits of 10 percent of GDP or more. While tight monetary conditions and the imposition of a 7 percent import surcharge in July 1997 contributed to a temporary narrowing of the deficit, this trend was reversed in 1998, primarily on account of a widening merchandise trade deficit (Figure 2). The continuing external imbalance in 1998 reflected strong domestic demand (which, on a year-average basis, grew by 4. I percent in 1998 compared with 5.2 percent in 1997). The largest contributor to the annual growth of domestic demand in 1998 was fixed capital investment, in particular of the non-government sector. However, growth of this latter component declined in the second half of 1998 while private consumption strengthened (Figure 3). 8. Lost external competitiveness had also been a cause for concern, but one that became less pressing in 1998. From 1995 (when the external current account was in small surplus) to 1997, the koruna appreciated in real effective terms (ULC based, year-average figures) by some 25 percent (Figure 4). Any effects of the real exchange rate appreciation in raising imports were strengthened by the gradual reduction of the import surcharge, which was eliminated at the start of October 1998. However, conc.erns about external competitiveness have been mitigated to a large extent by the depreciation of the real effective exchange rate that started in 1998, and by the additional nominal depreciation of the koruna in early 1999.2 Moreover, merchandise exports recovered strongly in 1998 (rising in volume terms by 12.3 percent using the WE0 export deflator, compared with 1.5 percent in 1997 and ’ Chapter I of the accompanying background paper assesses external competitiveness and the level of the exchange rate and finds that, after the recent depreciation of the currency, the current level of the koruna is broadly appropriate on competitiveness grounds. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-5- Box 1. Macroeconomic Performance and Vulnerability to Financial/Balance of Payments External Crises: A Regional Perspective While Slovakia’s economic performance during 1996-98 surpassed that of many other economies of the central and eastern European region in terms of relatively high real growth and comparatively low inflation, other indicators of ecohomic performance were less favorable (Table 2). In pahuhr, Slovakia’s large and growing fiscal deficits, while contributing to demand-driven increases in economic activity, have also gone hand in hand with exceptionally large external current account deficits. The external current account deficit was more than 10 percent of GDP in 1998 for the third year in a row. At the same time, Slovakia’a ratio of external debt to GDP has risen very rapidly: in 1998, it ranked higher than that of all other countries in the table except Bulgaria. Moreover, the ratios of short-term debt and broad money to official international reserves compare unfavorably in Slovakia. Indeed, based on a range of indicators 0: vulnerability to financial/balance of payments crises, the Slovak Republic is highly vulnerable.’ As shown in the accompanying chart, not only is this indicated by the comparative size of Slovakia’s external current account deficit, and ratios of short-term debt and broad money to reserves, but also by the other three indicators shown in the chart, namely those on export growth, official reserve stocks, and the appreciation of real effective exchange rates (REERs). All these indicators suggest that official reserves are below a comfortable level, while other aspects of external sector performance also raise w::.ning flags. Furthermore, worsening tiagilities in the banking sector only add to the vulricrability concerns. Market signals seem to call for urgent action to tighten macroeconomic policies and accelerate structural reform. In the past year, the main credit-rating agencies have downgraded Slovakia’s sovereign debt to below investment grade. In addition, yield spreads on government borrowing have been high and variable. For example, in mid- 1998, the government issued eurobonds at 370 basis points over comparable U.S. securities. Following the downgrade of Slovak debt to below investment grade (which also broadly coincided with the Russian debt default), the spreads in August 1998 climbed to as high as 1,200 basis points. Xpreads subsequently fell to about 480 basis points in the last week of April 1999. ’ These indicators have been suggested by Kaminsky, Lizondo, and Reinhart (Staff Papers, March 1998), and other papers cn vulnerability. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicBox 1 (continued). Slovak Republic: Regional Comparison of Financial and Balance of Payments Vulnerability Indicators, Average 1996-98 0 -2 $ -4 0 6 t 2 -8 -10 -I* ~- s,a*i. cro.ua CwhRrp. Poland Hvngarl Turkey Export MlUmC SJwdh - oacis, rrs- mnmth. Ofirplt. 0fg0c& -__ Slovakia Croatia CzahRcp. Pdnnd Hungrry rtiv 120 9.2 64 30 Ll - Rrozd money to d-l&l - REER apprecihm 1 Sources: WE0 database, IFS and staff ertimatcr~ Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public4 2 0 -2 -4 -6 -8 -to -12 102 IO! / - 101 95 b . 9: I . 91 9: I . 91 I . 85 ) . 8 I . 8: -7- Figure 1. Slovak Republic: Selected Economic Indicators Current accomt balance % of GDP 1995 ,996 ,997 ,998 NEER Jan93=100 I 0 -I -2 -3 -4 -5 4 -7 60 50 40 30 20 I 0 . \ General ~ovemmcnt balance % of GDP 1995 1996 1997 1998 Overnight lending rate (offer) Jan-95 Jan-96 Jan-97 ,a”-98 Jan-99 k-95 Jan-96 Jan-97 Jan-98 Jan-99- Sources: Slovak authorities; and staff estimates. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicFIGURE 2 SLOVAK REPUBLIC TRADE BALANCE 1/ IN MILLIONS OF U.S. DOLLARS - Imports - Imports --Exports --Exports I Balance I Balance IIIII III I~/I,,,,I,,/I/ / I//‘,/,,,,/1,,,,,,,,//,~,,,//,,,/,,,/ I,,‘,,,,,,, ‘8 I, JAN A’“,;;:’ OCT JAN APR JUL 0‘2 JAN APR JUL OCT JAN APR JUL WT JAN APR JIJL CKYT JAN APR JUL OCT JAN APR 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 1300 ,100 300 700 no 100 I co , ,oo 100 300 500 1 source: Sb,.k authoritic.. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-9- Figure 3. Slovak Republic: Consumption ar,d Investment, 1997-98 6.0 Contribution to growth, in percentage points. B Private consumption EFixed capital formation 1997 1998 80 Consumption and inveshnent in constant 75 - prices, seasonally adjusted 70 - 65 - /- A’ -. f’ -. .. / --.. 60 - A / \ / / / \ / / / \ / -Private consumption / \ / \ . - - - Fixed capital formation 55 - / \ .0’ / 50 1997ql 3997q2 1997q3 1997q4 1998ql 1998q2 1998q3 1998q4 Sources: Slovak authorities; and staff estimates Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicFigure 4. Slovak Republic: Real Effective Exchange Rate Index l/ 2/ (1995 Ql=lOO) 150 ULC based 3/ 120 110 100 90 1995ql 1995q2 1995q3 1995q4 1996ql 1996q2 1996q3 1996q4 1997ql 1997q2 1997q3 1997q4 1998ql 1998q2 1998q3 1998q4 So&: Slovak authorities. 1/ An increase denotes appreciation. 21 The exchange rate indicators are calculated using Slovakia’s major industrial country trading partners and the Czech Republic. 3/ Using manufacturing sector value added data for Slovakia. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-ll- 6 percent in 1996).’ Virtually flat real net expo: is in the national income accounts in 1998 in the face of adverse cyclical conditions also suggest that external competitiveness was not an acute problem in that year. While the slowdowr of domestic demand growth was from 5.2 percent in 1997 to 4.1 percent in 1998 (year-average basis), WE0 data indicate a much sharper slowdown of trading partners’ import demand growth from 8.7 percent to 4.9 percent4 9. More recent indicators have been sol:lewhat mixed on the direction of domestic demand and related prospects for merchantiise imports and the external balance. While recorded domestic investment declined over th;.: course of 1998, and new data in 1999 show a sharp drop in construction activity, consumer c’.:mand strengthened in the second half of 1998, and more recent data on real.retail sales .)r the three months to February 1999 showed growth of about 5 percent, year on year.’ The i!ierchandise trade deficit in the first quarter of 1999 was US%323 million, compared with US5497 million in the same quarter ofthe previous year and broadly consistent on a seas: nally-adjusted basis with a current account deficit of roughly 7 percent of GDP. Moreover, imports in the first quarter of 1999 may have been temporarily low because of stockbuilding in the previous quarter, in expectation of further currency depreciation or the possible introduction of an import surcharge (see paragraph 38). Imports in the fourth quarter w;re about 20 percent higher in volume terms than a year earlier. 10. With little foreign direct investment (FDI), the persistence of large current account imbalances has resulted in an exceptionally rapid increase in external indebtedness. This debt rose from 33 percent of GDP at end-1995 to about 60 percent of GDP (USSI 1.9 billion) at end-1998, ofwhic: about 40 percent was short-term debt.6 While the external debt of the government and the P;3S at end-1998 was US$2.5 billion, contingent a The assessment of trade flows has been con plicated by the absence of comparable, and disaggregated, trade data over time, which ar-: only available most recently for 1997 and 1998. 4 In addition, real GDP growth was much fa:, >r in Slovakia than in its trading partners, 4% percent versus 0.8 percent in 1998. ’ Data released after the mission indicated th.<i real retail sales in March were 9.8 percent higher than a year earlier. 6 Window-dressing operations to comply witir the banking regulation on minimum foreign assets (in relation to banks’ foreign currency liabilities and koruna liabilities to nonresidents) resulted in substantial increases in both gross external debt and gross external claims, and net debt is therefore lower. This regulation was arjolished in early 1999, resulting in an estimated decline in gross short-term external debt of s(:me US$2 billion as window-dressing operations were unwound. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12- liabilities in the form of guarantees on commercial sector debt amounted to an estimated US$2.3 billion. FDI has been small because privatization discriminated against foreign investors and was directed instead to insiders.’ 11. Despite the large external imbalance, iiscal policy eased further in 1998 and fell far short of stated objectives. The overall deficit of the general government expanded to 6 percent of GDP in 1998, compared with 5.2 percent of GDP in 1997 and an official target of 2 percent of GDP for all of 1998 (Table 3). The main reasons for overshooting the oflicial target were an expansion in extrabudgetary investment in the pre-election period, cost overruns in the public health sector, and a deterioration in tax compliance of large enterprises, with almost 11 percent of assessed VAT revenue remaining uncollected. 12. The activities of the public enterprises were another factor that kept the external current account deficit high. Particularly striking is that the operations of four large public enterprises have accounted for most of the saving-investment (S-I) imbalance in the enterprise and private sectors (treated residually for lack of data and shown in the table below).8 The S-I gap of these four enterprises reflected relatively high levels of investment, but also poor control over costs (including wages) and delays in adjusting administrative prices (which in the case of prices for households were often below cost recovery). 13. The new government was initially reluctant to tighten fiscal policy. In November, facing strong pressures to increase health and social assistance expenditure, it decided against implementing a planned cut of Sk 4 billion (0.6 percent of GDP) in overall state budget expenditure, and in favor of accommodating tilly a revenue shortfall by increasing the ceiling for the state budget deficit by Sk1 1 billion. The new government also approved a provisional state budget for the first quarter of 1999 that called for a deficit of about 1.3 percent of quarterly GDP, compared with a surplus in the first quarter of 1998 of 0.6 percent of GDP. 14. With an insufXciently tight fiscal stance, the macroeconomic policy mix has placed a heavy burden on monetary policy, at a time when the NBS has been hesitant to tighten. In particular, owing to concerns about the health of the three largest state-owned banks, the NBS felt it had limited scope, especially during the second half of 1998 and early. 1999, for raising domestic interest rates. This was apparent in the NBS’ decision not to resist for too long, through interest rate hikes, the speculative pressure on the koruna in September 7 Appendix V provides more details on enterprise privatization, as well as the related issues of governance and performance. * The four enterprises are Slovak Electricity Company, Slovak Railways, Slovak Telecommunications, and Slovak Post. Comparable data for other state enterprises were not available. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13 Slovak Republic: Saving-In\.estment Balance, 1997-98 (In percent of GDP) External Saving 10.1 10.1 Domestic Saving-Investment Balance -10.1 -10.1 General Government -5.2 -6.0 Enterprise and Private Sector -4.9 -4.1 Of which: 4 Public Enterprises -4.3 -3.5 1998. Indeed, as evidenced by a gradual recovery in credit growth and declining short-term interest rates, monetary policy was less restrictive in 1998 than in 1997, which did little to encourage external current account adjustment In mid-February 1999, the NBS eased liquidity and allowed interest rates to fall in a publicized effort to help the government lower its financing costs. Short-term interbank rates t+ll to 10 percent in mid-February from 17 percent throughout most of January. The relaxation of monetary policy included a reduction in reserve requirements and the extension of direct credit to the government from the NBS, the effects of which were not offset by open market operations. 15. Measured inflation has been broadly stable so far in 1999, with the CPI in April 7.1 percent above its year-earlier level. Whi!c the currency depreciated significantly relative to the U.S. dollar, this was offset by th;: substantial decline in world trade prices and the elimination of the 7 percent import surcharge in October 1998. Headline inflation had also been held down to some extent by decelerating wage growth (year-on-year economy- wide nominal wages increased by 7.2 percent :n the first quarter of 1999, compared with 12.3 percent in the previous year), and by low food price increases (1.5 percent in the year to April 1999) induced by favorable weather coniitions. However, measured inflation is likely to pick up in the remainder of 1999 because oi the more recent depreciation of the currency and the expected adjustment of administrative orices. 16. Developments in the real economy may be worse than officially measured, as the national income accounts may overstate growth in economic activity. According to the official statistics, real GDP in 1998, for example, grew at an average annual rate of 4.4 percent. About half of this growth is attributed to “other” market services, non-market services, and unidentified sectors, suggesting the possibility that output growth has been overestimated. Indeed, real value added in indirstry increased by only 1 percent. There may also be difficulties with the expenditure data, c:: the national income accounts have reported a comparatively large increase in investment in j 998 and substantially lower private consumption growth than indicated by retail spies data. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14- 17. While Slovakia’s overall balance of payments position was stable through mid- 1998, the currency came under strong pressure beginning in August. BOP stability had primarily derived from the relatively easy access to foreign borrowing that enterprises had enjoyed and the government’s successful placement of a sovereign eurobond (providing almost US$I billion in May-July 1998). However, severe exchange rate pressure was triggered in August-September 1998 by the combined effects of(i) domestic uncertainties in the run-up to the September elections, (ii) widespread expectations of a post-election devaluation, and (iii) the crisis in Russia. The NBS was reluctant to react to this pressure- either by substantially raising interest’rates or letting the currency depreciate-as it wanted to avoid such developments before the elections. Thus, it lost about US% 0.7 billion (about one- fifth) of its international reserves in August and September 1998, reducing them to an uncomfortable level of 2% months of imports of goods and services, 49 percent of short-term debt, and 23 percent of broad money.’ As the situation did not improve immediately after the elections, the NBS floated the koruna on October 1: immediately after the float the exchange rate dropped to I5 percent below its former central rate from 6 percent below that rate in September; and it stabilized at about 10 percent below the former central parity in the four months to January 1999, likely reflecting an unwinding of domestic residents’ speculative positions (Figure 5). In addition, the NBS temporarily tightened monetary conditions during this period, as evidenced by higher overnight interbank interest rates and similar changes in the NBS repo auction rates. 18. Since end-January 1999, there have been renewed bouts of downward pressure on the exchange rate. Unfavorable reviews by the international ratings agencies have been a factor.” In addition, recent disbursements of medium- and long-term loans to Slovak borrowers have been limited to foreign-owned firms in Slovakia. Against a background of worsening foreign sentiment and existing downward pressure on the currency, monetary policy was eased in mid-February to help the government lower its financing costs. All told, the depreciation of the konma amounted to I7 percent against the basket of the former currency band from early August 1998 to the end of April 1999. ’ The ratio to broad money is considered low, especially in view of banking sector weakness. The ratio to short-term debt includes medium- and long-term debt due in 1999. It also includes debt associated with so-called window-dressing operations (see footnote 6), without which the ratio of reserves to short-term debt would rise from 49 percent to 73 percent. lo On February 18, Moody’s changed the outlook for Slovakia from stable to negative (while confuming the current, noninvestment grade, Bal rating). Standard and Poor’s confirmed the unchanged negative outlook and the BB+ rating (also noninvestment grade), indicating that this assessment reflected the new government’s untested ability to reduce the wide fiscal and current account deficits and implement urgently needed policies for the restructuring of the enterprise and banking sectors. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 15 - FIGUW 5 SLOVAK IW’UBLIC EXCHANGE RATE OF THE SLOVAK KORUNA (1996-99) (At NBS fixing; decline indicates depreciation) 135.0 The basket against the Slovak Koruna I/ 135.0 (Deviations from the central rate of the farmer exchange rate band; Central rate indexed to 1001 123.8 1 ,232 I 552 58.2 45.0 1 , , IAN FEBMKiMIYI”NI”!. AUGOCI NO” ow~i7u*n~nuruJuLAtic sip IiT DEC y&m *PRY*YI”N*“UGsEP ocrNbv~i~BFEwu” 45.0 ,880 6.0 5.5 5.0 4.5 1.0 3.5 3.0 l)------+ us. Do&v per 100 skmar Koruna i "'1" 2.5 -yh z.oi / MN Es MARMAY I”* 11R. *lx oc? HO” DEC ;;f,YARAPR uuy IUL AUG SP OCT DEC ;;M&iFE MEMAY ,“N A”‘2 SEP OCT ND” ;;a9m YIRL ,888 so 5.5 5.0 1.5 4.0 3.5 3.0 25 2.0 sources: Bhxnberg an.3 NexsEDGE services. 1/ “Iall October 1998 s1cNar koruna “as pegged I.0 a OS/OM basket xitb weights 40/60 as Of July 14, 1904. The fluctuation band was succesnvcly rid~ned from +/- 1.5 percent in ,996 to +/- 7 percent in ,987. On October 2. 1998. the band VBJ abolished. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- l6- 19. Meanwhile, delays in dealinglwith deep-seated structural problems have adversely affected the banking and enterprise sectors. The financial condition of the three state-owned banks has been getting worse, with non-performing loans reaching the equivalent of almost 25 percent of GDP (Appendix IV discusses banking sector performance in more detail). And overall enterprise profits-which dropped from 5 percent of GDP in 1997 to less than 1 percent of GDP in 1998-have been deteriorating in the face of poor management, weak governance, and the reported acceleration of asset stripping by managers that acquired companies under questionable privatization contracts (Appendix V discusses privatisation and enterprise performance). Some large enterprises that had borrowed heavily from abroad (often with government guarantees) have incurred large financial losses as a result of the depreciation of the koruna. 20. The new government’s policy statement appropriately emphasized the need for accelerated structural reforms. The government emphasized that dealing with the weaknesses in the banking and enterprise sectors was essential, including through significant privatization involving foreign strategic investors and by improving the bankruptcy law and proceedings as well as other aspects of the legal and institutional framework. lII. POLIO DISCUSSIONS 21. The policy discussions focused on reducing Slovakia’s vulnerability by implementing tighter macroeconomic policies to bring the external current account deficit to a sustainable level, and by accelerating reforms for dealing with major weaknesses in the banking and enterprise sectors. In addition, the mission discussed the broad parameters of a medium-term framework to put Slovakia on a viable external path and set the basis for durable growth. It was agreed that while large external imbalances reflected both lax macroeconomic policies and delays in undertaking structural reforms, tighter macroeconomic policies would have to be the driving force behind external adjustment in 1999. Accelerated structural reform-and the improved productivity and profitability that it would engender-was also important for ensuring the maintenance of a sustainable current account deficit alongside rapid economic growth. A. Macroeconomic Policies and the Near-Term Outlook 22. Recognizing the necessity of stabilizing the economy and reducing the excessive external current account deficit, the authorities announced an ambitious fiscal tightening in January 1999. In particular, they announced publicly a target for the 1999 deficit of the general government of Sk 16 billion (2 percent of GDP, based on the authorities’ projection of 3 percent real GDP growth). This represented a reduction of the fiscal deficit of 4 percentage points of GDP from the outturn in 1998, and was seen to contribute directly to a much needed narrowing of the external current account deficit in 1999 and to allow monetary policy to be less restrictive, 23. The mission in January 1999 supported the authorities’ announced target as ihe centerpiece of the macroeconomic adjustment effort in 1999. Fund staff commended the Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17- authorities’ intention to cut subsidies as well as purchases.of goods and services in nominal terms, and to keep state benefits and housing support unchanged in nominal terms. In addition, Fund staff welcomed the proposed changes in tax laws, which were expected to reduce the possibility of claiming fraudulent VAT credits and eliminate obstacles to seizing the business assets of delinquent taxpayers. Staff also welcomed that a wage freeze for all of 1999 for the budgetary and state enterprise sectors would be part of the government’s program, This was intended not only to help achieve fiscal savings, but also to realize wage moderation through demonstration effects, strengthen financial performance of enterprises, and improve external competitiveness. Moreover, efforts were made to keep the budgetary outturn for the first quarter of 1999 tighter than in the provisional budget for that period, which resulted in a first quarter budget surplus of Sk 1 billion, mostly because of lower-than- budgeted investment outlays. 24. However, statY advised the authorities that their overall fiscal plans for 1999 implied a larger fiscal deficit than targeted. The mission felt that the authorities’ projection of the increase in non-tax revenue of the state budget by about 75 percent was too optimistic. In addition, the authorities’ projection of interest expenditure needed to be increased by Sk 3.5 billion to include the discount at which one-year bonds were issued. Based on discussions with, and the financial plans of, some of the segments of the general government outside the state budget, especially the more important social security and extrabudgetary funds, the mission also estimated a deficit of the general government outside the budget of Sk 8 billion, compared with the authorities’ target of a Sk 1 billion deficit. All this implied an overall deficit of the gener::l government of Sk 28 billion (3% percent of GDP). The mission also noted several downside risks and identified specific fiscal measures to achieve the authorities’ overall fiscal target.” 25. The authorities agreed during the April 1999 mission that their fiscal target would be at risk without additional tiscal measures. While the state budget had just passed parliament, several factors cast serious doubt on whether the target deficit for the state budget of Sk 15 billion could be achieved. These included weak revenue collection in the first quarter of 1999, data showing deteriorating enterprise profits in the fourth quarter of 1998, higher-than-expected retimds of tax payments, and new information indicating much higher government debt service obligations on guaranteed debt. The authorities also concurred that the deficit of the non-budgetary operations of the general government could be much larger than their target. While the Finance Minis!ry maintained its projection of 3 percent real GDP growth in 1999, Fund staff projected growth of 0.7 percent, and therefore lower revenues.” I’ Downside risks related to, inter alia, non-tax revenues, uncertainties over certain expenditures by the Road Fund, and the assumptions that local governments would be in balance. The identified fiscal measures are largely discussed in paragraph 29. I2 At that point, some independent forecasters were projecting flat real growth or even declining activity, while other independeilt forecasters put growth at 2 percent or less. - Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 18- Fund staff also noted that some important administrative price adjustments had been put on hold. Moreover, wage policy was relaxed, as the wage freeze was limited to the budgetary sector and would no longer include the public enterprises, 26. In these circumstances, there were serious concerns about the sustainability of the external current account and about macroeconomic stability. In all, Fund staff estimated that, unless additional measures were taken, the deficit of the state budget could reach Sk 30 billion, while the deficit of the general government could reach almost Sk 40 billion (5 percent of Fund staff projected GDP). The external current account deficit would tend toward a deficit of some US$1.3 billion. However, taking into account economy-wide amortization payments of USS1.4 billion, Fund staff could not identify financing for a deficit of this size, as reflected in a balance of payments financing gap of about US%1 billion under this “passive” scenario (Table 4). While the size of this gap is difficult to estimate with precision, there is little doubt that it is substantial and that it is unlikely that additional inflows close to this magnitude could be realized this year. Were a strong program of fiscal and external adjustment not to be implemented, the economic costs could therefore be unacceptably high: some combination of a rapid depletion of the NBS’ international reserves, a large currency depreciation, rising interest rates, weaker economic activity, and illiquidity difftculties in banks and enterprises, all potentially compounded by worsening creditor sentiment. 27. A key topic of discussion was the adjustment measures to he taken to bring the 1999 external current account deficit in line with projected financing. Fund staff estimated that the external current account deficit should not exceed US$925 million (4.9 percent of Fund staff projected GDP), on the assumption that a strengthened policy package would enhance the credibility of the government’s program for 1999 as well as external financing prospects.‘s However, a current account deficit of this size still implied a decline in the NBS’ international reserves from an uncomfortable level of 2.3 months to 2 months of imports of goods and nonfactor services (Table 4). 28. Under this adjustment scenario, several factors would contribute to the narrowing of the external current account deficit to 4.9 percent of GDP in 1999. First, with further fiscal adjustment measures, the deficit of the general government could be held to 3 percent of GDP in 1999, implying a deficit that would be 3 percentage points of GDP smaller than in the previous year. While keeping to a deficit of this size in 1999 would result in a deficit 1 percent of GDP larger than the authorities’original fiscal target, Fund staff ” Both this adjustment scenario and the passive scenario above assumed government borrowing of US$400 million and new credits to the entire enterprise sector (assumed to be half the size of those in the previous year). With adjustment measures, the government was assumed to be able to borrow an additional US%100 million (on terms broadly similar to those associated with the 1998 eurobond issue). These measures were also assumed to elicit an additional US$300 million in other foreign investment flows and external credits. - Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 19- projections of economic activity and domestic demand were weaker than when the authorities’ fiscal target was initially announced. Thus, there was room for a somewhat larger fiscal deficit than originally planned without significantly compromising external current account objectives, Second, now underlying Fund staffs projection of 1999 GDP was a 5 percent decline in domestic demand, reflecting sharp declines in government expenditures (including those from further fiscal adjustment measures), as well as a drop in non- government investment (in the face of significantly less external financing and reductions in enterprise profits) and a modest decline in non-government consumption. A tighter monetary policy than the NBS had intended would also be a factor contributing to the projected drop in domestic demand. Third, the 17 percent depreciation ofthe koruna since early August 1998 would help to raise exports and reduce imports, and contribute to non-government saving. In a related vein, Fund staff encouraged the authorities to take a firm stance in remaining wage negotiations this year by freezing wage rates in loss-making enterprises and otherwise keeping wage hikes below the inflation target. Wage moderation would contribute to underpinning the gains in external competitiveness and to keeping inflation in check. 29. Holding the deficit of general government to 3 percent of GDP would require a significant fiscal effort (equivalent to 4 percent of GDP at an annual rate in the second half of 1999). Fund staff recommended both revenue and expenditure measures, most of which were already under consideration by the authorities. On the revenue side (generating about Sk 8 billion in the remainder of 1999), these included: (i) an increase in the lower VAT rate from 6 percent to 10 percent and an increase in the VAT on electricity from 6 percent to 23 percent;14 (ii) increases in excise taxes on tobacco and petroleum products; (iii) the introduction of a tax on motor vehicles; (iv) increases in administrative and other fees; and (v) implementation of a number of recommendations from Fund technical assistance on tax administration. Measures to contain expenditure (generating about Sk 9 billion in the remainder of 1999) included: (i) increases in administered prices and reductions in enterprise operating costs in order to limit debt service payments by the budget on government guaranteed debt and subsidies; (ii) postponement of both the adjustment of family and other social benefits to inflation, and the introduction of a housing allowance; (iii) reduction in the proposed pension increase from 8 percent to 5 percent; (iv) cuts in government capital expenditure; and (v) approval of the necessary regulation to limit discretionary spending of spending units.” The mission emphasized-via a financial programming analysis-that there I4 In addition to reducing distortions caused by the large differential between the current rates, such an increase in the lower VAT rate was meant to be implemented in the context of a medium-term strategy that ensured that raising this rate would not lead to a permanent increase in the tax-to-GDP ratio, but would be used instead to relieve the burden of direct taxes. Is Fund staff also recommended that the authorities start preparing a reform of state social benefits, which are budgeted to equal 2.2 percent of GDP in 1999 and which overlap with- separately budgeted social assistance programs operated by regional o&es. The rapid (continued.. .) Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 20 - could still be significant financial pressures within the year, even if the fiscal adjustment measures were taken, reflecting the expected timing of capital inflows, while most of the additional fiscal measures would be implemented during the second half of the year. Thus, a backloading of discretionary fiscal spending was recommended. 30. The authorities agreed with the necessity of taking deficit-reducing measures. They indicated that they would do whatever it takes to meet the state deficit target, while also acknowledging that all the necessary measures had not yet been put in place and that it would be very difftcult to hold the line on the rest of the general government. On revenues, they indicated that, with the exception of the increase in the lower VAT rate, all measures supported by the Fund staff had been approved by the Council of Ministers. The VAT increase did not enjoy broad support at that time because of concerns over its impact on inflation. The authorities also emphasized their commitment to issuing a decree to cut discretionary expenditure by as much as necessary,16 while noting several other fiscal measures that were in the works.r7 Finally, it was acknowledged that the government’s control over the fiscal position of those parts of the general government outside the state budget was insufficient. The authorities indicated that they would request technical assistance for developing mechanisms for improving the monitoring, control, and consolidation of accounts of the general government, as well as for shifting to fiscal planning over a two- to three-year horizon.‘* 31. The NBS designed its preliminary monetary program for 1999 to be consistent with a broadly stable exchange rate, a fiscal deficit of about 1% percent of GDP, an inflation target of 7-9 percent, and year-average output growth of 3 percent. As the NBS expected velocity to rise in light of greater uncertainty after the float, broad money was projected to grow by some 6 percent, with private sector credit growth of almost 9 percent increase in spending on these regionally-operated social assistance programs (to over 1.3 percent of GDP in the 1999 budget) and the increase in the personal exemption for those with the lowest incomes (implemented in early 1999) further suggest that there is room to rationalize and scale back state benefits without adversely affecting social protection of the neediest. The mission suggested that the authorities seek technical assistance on these matters from the World Bank or the Fund. I6 As understood by Fund staff, this would apply only to about half of expenditures. I7 Among the latter measures were accelerating reforms of social benefits, increases in some administrative prices (especially gas to households), postponing the introduction of a housing allowance for as long as possible, reducing employment benefits, and delays in increasing pensions. ‘* This request was made in June 1999, along with a request to follow up on recently provided technical assistance by FAD on tax administration. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2l- (Table 5). For the exchange rate objective to be achieved, the NBS indicated that monetary easing would need to be preceded by fiscal tightening and clear signs that the external current account would stay on a significantly downward trend. 32. Taking into account the uncertainties about the equilibrium level of the exchange rate, Fund staff urged the authorities to allow the continued float of the koruna and to gear monetary policy toward protecting international reserves and containing inflation. However, the Fund staff projection of lower economic growth than the 3 percent growth assumed by the NBS, and achieving an inflation target of 9 percent (i.e., toward the upper end of the NBS’ target range), implied a more restrained monetary stance than in the NBS’ monetary program. In particular, with velocity most likely increasing further until full confidence in macroeconomic policies is Fe-established, broad money growth would need to be lower than in the NBS’ monetary program. 33. Fund staff also expressed the view that the NBS will need to be prepared to raise interest rates to support its objectives and should not subordinate its actions to concerns over lowering government borrowing costs. Rather, the necessary fiscal tightening should help rebalance the policy mix and give monetary policy sufficient room to maneuver to meet its objectives, Fiscal tightening does so by helping to take pressure off the external accounts and the exchange rate, reduce interest rates, and thereby relieve strains on the banking and enterprise sectors which otherwise have constrained monetary tightening. However, monetary policy can only be relaxed once fiscal tightening has taken hold. 34. The NBS agreed with this assessment, and that the monetary easing in February 1999-before clear signs that the external current account deficit would stay on a significantly downward trend-had been premature. This was all the more the case, according to the NBS, in circumstances in which it was important to keep the exchange rate stable in order to meet the inflation target. In this context, the NBS also pointed out that price and wage pressures needed to be held in check for the depreciation of the exchange rate to date to improve external competitiveness and promote external adjustment, though it thought that the high import content of Slovakia’s exports lessened the impact of an exchange rate change on the trade balance. A pronounced downward move of the currency from current levels would likely risk a price-wage spiral and threaten further progress on disinflation in the medium-term. With regard to its monetary program, the NBS noted that delays in taking fiscal adjustment measures to reduce the general government deficit to the original target of 2 percent of GDP had put the achievement of monetary policy objectives at risk. The NBS also considered that a relaxation of the fiscal target to 3 percent of GDP was inappropriate, as this action would squeeze the available scope for private sector credit growth and make its monetary management more difftcult. 35. Meanwhile, the Ministry of Finance expressed several concerns. It noted that a weaker koruna had made state foreign debt service more expensive and expressed the view that the NBS had already unnecessarily and inappropriately allowed the currency to depreciate instead of intervening more actively in the foreign exchange market. Enterprise- foreign debt service would also be more expensive as a result of currency depreciation, Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 22 - which could seriously compromise fiscal policy in light of government guarantees on the debt of enterprises that were experiencing poor financial performance. At the same time, the Finance Ministry was concerned about the strain put on debtors by higher real interest rates at a juncture when they had already been hit hard by currency depreciation. The conundrums policy faced in such circumstances were therefore well recognized. Fund staff emphasized that, until fiscal tightening had a chance to take hold, interest rates would have to adjust to any strong downward pressures on the exchange rate. 36. Since the conclusion of the Article IV discussions, financial markets in Slovakia came under significant pressure in May. The exchange rate depreciated by an additional 5 percent, notwithstanding about a doubling of interest rates to above 20 percent and moderate foreign exchange market intervention by the NBS in support of the currency. Uncertainties associated with presidential elections may have helped trigger these developments. On the fiscal side, revenue collection continued to be weak for most taxes. 37. All this prompted the authorities to put together a new fiscal package, which they announced on May 31,1999 after the conclusion of the presidential elections. Those elements requiring passage in parliament are expected to be approved soon. The measures contained in that package should be sufficient to realize a target deficit for the general government of Sk 23% billion (3 percent of GDP) or less.” On the revenue side, the package calls for the following measures to generate about Sk I8 billion in additional revenue in rest of 1999: an increase in the lower VAT rate from 6 to 10 percent (Sk 3.5 billion), a motor vehicle tax (Sk 2.5 billion), and increases in excises and administrative fees (Sk 2 billion), as well as the introduction of a 7 percent import surcharge (Sk 10 billion).” Expenditures measures, which should generate fiscal savings of about Sk 2 billion, include a reduction in the daily sickness benefit, and a reduction in the duration of unemployment benefits. In addition, though not yet quantified, the government decided to reduce the minimum guaranteed income support for some categories of recipients by 20 percent and to strengthen the enforcement of eligibility criteria for family benefits, while also introducing a housin 3, allowance to compensate for substantial adjustments in administrative prices as of July 1. These price adjustments include: a 35 percent increase in household electricity prices (after a 30 percent increase in January); a 5 percent increase in electricity prices for enterprises; a 50 percent increase in household gas prices; a 70 percent increase in rents; a 21 percent I9 Fund staff show unrecorded interest costs (Sk 3% billion) associated with the discount on government bonds above the line. Thus, the government’s announced target of a deficit of Sk 20 billion would equal Sk 23% billion using the Fund’s methodology. ” The surcharge, effective June 1, 1999, applies to imports from all trading partners and to about 80 percent of tariff lines. The government intends to reduce the surcharge to 5 percent on January 1, 2000; to 3 percent by July 1, 2000; and to eliminate it by end-2000. ” These measures together could yield another Sk 2% billion in deficit reduction. - Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-23 - increase in telecommunications prices; a I5 percent increase in railway prices; and an increase of 40 percent in heating prices (after a 21 percent increase in January). These increases would take pressure off government subsidies as well as government spending for servicing government-guaranteed debt. 38. Fund staff urged the authorities not to resort to an import surcharge as a means to address the external imbalance. Staff stressed that while an import surcharge is an instrument that countries have on occasion resorted to when they faced balance of payments and fiscal problems, its introduction distorts international trade and undermines efftciency and longer-run adjustment. Thus, if the authorities insisted on introducing a surcharge, staff urged them, consistent with Fund advice to other member countries, to keep the surcharge low (2-4 percent) and to eliminate it quickly (within 6-9 months of its introduction) according to a pre-determined phaseout schedule, with the time being used to strengthen expenditure consolidation.22 B. Structural Reforms: The Enterprise and Banking Sectors 39. The authorities and Fund staff agreed that accelerated structural reform is the key to the future prosperity of the Slovak Republic. Fund staff urged the authorities to promptly seek the assistance of the World Bank in the design and implementation of programs of bank and enterprise restrucming, including improvements in bankruptcy procedures, and other aspects of the legal and institutional framework. In addition, with the Fund mission’s work also involving efforts to strengthen financial sector surveillance under Article IV consultations, there was close collaboration with the World Bank on financial sector related issues. 40. The mission discussed with the authorities the deteriorating situation in the three major state-owned banks, and urged them to quickly launch a comprehensive program for their rehabilitation and privatization. Two banks are insolvent and a third, although in a relatively better position, is undercapitalized and possibly insolvent. Taken together, the total negative net worth of the three banks could be in a range as high as Sk 72-92 billion (9.2 to 11.7 percent of Gi)P in 1998)‘s The mission also expressed concerns about the potential impact of a currency crisis on these three banks (and other domestic ” The authorities had originally planned tc retain the surcharge until July 2001. They also revised the rate after mid-2000 to levels lower than initially planned. The surcharge raises Slovakia’s overall import tariffs above the levels bound in the World Trade Organization (WTO) and the authorities have indicated they will seek a temporary derogation under the WTO’s balance of payments provisions, ” This also has consequences for the budget deficit over the medium-term, discussed in Section IV. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 24 - banks) because they are highly exposed to enterprises with large foreign exchange exposure.z4 41. The authorities agreed on the need to accelerate the rehabilitation and privatization of the state-owned banks and informed the mission about the interministerial working group that had been formed, with a view to advancing these efforts. The mission welcomed the authorities’ intentions to have an extensive audit of the IRB (Investment and Development Bank) completed by a recognized international accounting firm by the end of April 1999, after which offers from potential strategic investors would be sought The mission strongly urged the authorities to privatize the bank without delay and welcomed that there would be no discrimination against foreign investors (which represented a reversal from previous policy). With regard to the WB (General Credit Bank), the authorities informed the.mission of the new management’s recent actions to cut costs and strengthen overdue loan collection, which were seen as essential, but not sufficiently ambitious by the mission. However, the authorities have recently announced that they would seek a strategic investor for VUB in 2000 and this is a welcome development if it succeeds. Moreover, as also announced recently by the authorities for 2000, Fund staff would support and urge early privatization of the Savings Bank (but without the government necessarily preserving a majority stake). Reputable privatization advisers for these latter two banks should be tendered for and brought on board quickly. 42. The mission was supportive of the intentions of the interministerial working group to also formulate measures to rehabilitate enterprises, and improve bankruptcy procedures and corporate governance. Indeed, the mission encouraged the authorities to accelerate efforts in these areas.” The mission also encouraged the authorities to accelerate and complete privatization of the state’s holdings in the enterprise sector and, in this context, welcomed measures the authorities intended to take to move the privatization process forward. In particular, the authorities explained their intentibn to remove the remaining legal restrictions for the privatization of about 35 state enterprises now on the so-called strategic listz6 They also explained their desire to divest minority shares in the portfolio of the National Property Fund (NPF) and to sell minority interest in some state utilities (e.g., electricity and gas), both of which would help relieve the burden of the forthcoming repayments on the privatization bonds associated with the cancelled voucher privatization and due in 2000. In addition to supporting these efforts, the mission encouraged the 24 See Appendix IV for more details on the banking sector. That appendix contains more sensitive material than the background paper on the banking sector. 25 Appendix V contains details on the mission’s findings on the enterprise sector, x However, preparatory work for privatization is in an early state. Some of these enterprises are heavily indebted and facing bankruptcy. Unless their privatization is accompanied by large debt rescheduling, buyers will be difficult to find. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 25 - authorities to make the NF’F bonds negotiable and usable for remaining privatization projects. The mission also encouraged the authorities, to the extent possible, to define more precisely the scope and timeframe for the review of privatization contracts signed under the previous government, with a view to avoiding the uncertainties facing new investors. Moreover, publicly announcing the list of privatization contracts that have been cleared could provide a positive signal. 43. The mission pointed out the importance of improving governance in the state- owned enterprises not envisaged for privatization in the immediate future (e.g., electricity, water management, post, and gas). Against a background of falling profits, a relaxation of wage policy, and other indications of the weak cost consciousness, the mission stressed the importance of developing procedures and criteria for defining financial performance targets for evaluating enterprise management. The mission also urged the authorities to proceed with the necessary adjustments in administrative prices and discontinue the practice of cross-subsidizing household consumption of electricity and gas. The authorities explained that electricity price hikes had been delayed owing to concerns about social consequences, which also were delaying the proposed increase in gas prices. Finally, the authorities noted that they were concerned about the recent wage increases in the public enterprises, while saying additionally that they would try to freeze their overall wage bills and work to rationalize employment. Fund staff emphasized that even if the wage bill of the state enterprises were to be held constant, wage rates could still rise as long as downsizing continues. Higher wage rates could send a poor signal and, if anything, generate demands for increases in wage rates in other sectors of the economy. 44. The authorities’ FDI strategy includes measures which, if fully implemented, provide the necessary incentives to attract FDI. These incentives include an improved legal and institutional framework, convergence of indirect tax rates toward those prevailing in EU countries, and public sector reforms to improve transparency and tight corruption. However, Fund staff urged the authorities to reconsider the financial incentives package of the FDI strategy, by removing those tax exemptions that are contingent on firms’ lines of business and export performance or discriminate between foreign and domestic investors or between industries. C. Other Issues 45. The mission urged the authorities, after a late start, to speed up their efforts to deal with potential computer problems related to the start of the year 2000. Fund staff stressed that cooperation with the World Bank and others in this regard should be continued, and that the authorities should seek financial and technical support from the international community. In the financial sector, the mission was informed that commercial banks, the NBS, and the Slovakia’s Clearing Center had started to test their computer systems in order to preempt problems. Banks with foreign capital participation are somewhat ahead in this process, as they are utilizing technical assistance from thei!- foreign shareholders. _ Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-26- 46. On environmental issues, the authorities are in the process of adapting legislation to the requirements of future membership in the European Union. Implementation of this legislation might require substantial investments over the medium- term, particularly in water management and air quality improvements. IV. MEDIUM-TERM SCENARIOS 47. Reflecting the key elements highlighted in Box 2, the first medium-term (adjustment) scenario targets achievement of a sustainable external position, setting the stage for durable economic growth of 4 % to 5 percent during 2001-2003. After reahzing a substantially smaller external current account deficit in 1999, further adjustment takes hold in later years so that the deficit falls to 0.8 percent of GDP by the end of the period (Table 6). The reduction in the debt-to-GDP ratio to about 40 percent by 2003 is facilitated by solid growth in foreign direct investment (Table 8). Structural reforms together with gains in external competitiveness enhance export performance throughout the period, while moderate demand growth, owing in part to continued fiscal consolidation, contributes to restraining import demand. 48. The recently announced package of fiscal measures contains important elements that would underpin medium-term fiscal consolidation and that are consistent with the assumptions underlying the adjustment scenario.27 On the expenditure side, the package includes continued rationalization of social benefits beyond 1999, reform in the pension system (including through an increase in the retirement age), significant reduction in government payroll beginning in 2000, and establishing mechanisms to provide better control over the expenditures of the extrahudgetaxy and social security funds. All these measures would reduce the role of the state in the economy. They would also provide ample room for achieving the authorities’ goals of reducing the tax burden, including by reforming the personal income tax, reducing the upper VAT rate, and lowering the corporate income tax. At the same time, the planned adjustments in administrative prices--which are also included in the government package-are expected to further improve the financial performance of state enterprises in 2000-03. 49. The second medium-term (passive) scenario illustrates a situation in which a current account deficit persists at large and vulnerable levels in the absence of fiscal consolidation. Lagged effects of the recent improvement in external competitiveness help to bring about a moderate decline in the external current account deficit in 1999-2000. s7 The fiscal chapter of the accompanying background paper discusses medium-term fiscal issues in some detail. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 27 - Box 2. Medium-Term Scenarios: Key Elements Two alternative scenarios have been prqamd: an adjustment rccnmio and a passive scenario. Rather than being pmjections, these scenarios am meant to be illustrative of the way in which economic developments in the Slovak Republic could unfold over the medium term The adjustment scenario assumes, beginning in 1999, stmng fiscal adjustment and a reduced role of the state in the economy, as well as the accelerated implementation of major sbuctmal reforms, including privatization. By comparison, there is less fiscal adjustment and a slower pace of structural reforms in the passive scenario. In the adjustment scenario, the deficit of the general governmen t declines to about 3 percent of GDP in 1999, followed by more moderate but significant reductions in subsequent years (Table 7). On the extemal side, the current account deficit nmmws to 4.9 percent of GDP in 1999, and subsequently falls to a deficit of about % pncent by 2003. Projections of buoyant import demand growth in trading partner countries, tmadly consistent with WE0 wumptions, and further gains in external competitiveness resulting from stmchual reforms underpin expxt growth (averaging 6 percent in volume terms during ZOCO4I3). and also serve to reduce the current awxmt &;icit by raising savings in the mteqnix sector. These competitiveness gains, comb&d with moderate demand gmti. reflecting in part fiscal consolidation, serve to restrain import demand. With solid gmwth in FDI and other nondebt crwdng inflows, total external debt falls from a peak of 55 percent of GDP at end-l 999 to about 40 percent at end-2003. ‘Ihe ratio of official reserves ta short-term cxtemal debt (including medium- and long-term debt falling due in the coming 12 months) rises from 73 percent in 1999 to a mom comfortable level of 120 percent in 2001 and fiutha improves to some 130 percent by 2003. The key medium-term fiscal assumptions pettaining to government expenditure are: (i) a reduction in general administration expenditure, including wage moderation and civil service reform; (ii) timely adjustmen& in administrative prices and pressure from the government on mterprixs to reduce operating costs and thereby meet debt smice obligations on loans guaranteed by the government; (iii) mtionalization of state benefits and social assistance programs, by strengthening ebglblhty criteria and means testing for those benefits; (iv) lower bubsidies, reflecting adjustments in administrative prices; (v) mtionalization of expenditure of the social security funds-including the introduction of larger copayments for users of public health services for the Health funds, and only moderate pension increases for the Pension funds; and (vi) mtionalization of investment expadihxe of the extra-budgetary funds (espcially the Road fund), coupled with increased pfivate sector participation in the building and operation of major inbastmcture projects. At the same time, the fiscal costs of bank resmactuing are accounted for: these costs in,‘udc tie interest on government bonds to bring the banks’ net worth to zero and to recapitalize the banks bringing the capita .tdequacy ratio to international standards In addition, net lending declines sharply reflecting the decline in the amount of grwxnment guarantees that are called and fuhtrc privatization. Finally, the National Property Fund exchanges its bcqds maturing at end-2000 (some Sk 28 billion) for shares in the Gas and Electricity Companies. Revenue capacity is favorably affected by growing economic activity, increased enterprise profitability, and strengthened elhts to reform the tax system, and is only partially &set by somewhat weaker revenue on account of lower personal and social security taxes as a result of labor shedding in the mstmctme~ entqris sector. Medium-term revenue measures include: (i) an increase in the lower VAT rate and a reduction in ti. : higher VAT rate to bring them in line with European Union counties, (ii) taxation of electricity at the higher VAT rate. .ii) a reduction in the corporate income tax rate, which is currently high compared with other transition countries of the regr- :; (iv) reform of the personal income tax, including adjustment in the brackets; (v) increases in excise taxes so as to br 7 them in line with European Union and other transition countries; (vi) increase in administrative and other fees; and (vii). llntinued improvement in tax administration and compliance of taxpayers, particularly regarding the pasonal incor.:~- tax, social secmity conbibutions, VAT, and excises In the passive scenario, the current account defmit widens from so:ne 7 percent of GDP in 1999 to 9.3 percent of GDP in 2003. FDl and other non-debt creating capital inflows are smaller &an under the adjustment scenario. As a resulf assurmng that extemal facing were available, external debt would rise from 64 percent of GDP in 1999 to 73 percent in 2003, and the ratio of reserves to short-term debt would stay well below i$ lcvel in the adjustment scenario. In this scenario, atIer a modest decline to 4.2 percent of GDP in I ,w9, the deticit of the geneml government expands to about 5% percent in 2003 (Table 7). This expansion reflects: (i) continued high interest costs owing to very high borrotig costs; (ii) a need for the government to make payments for entq r~ <es whose guarantees arc called; (iii) high costs of bank restmctming; (iv) low revenue capacity owing to weak economic ::;tivity; (v) father declines in enterprise profitability; and (vi) a slow pace of privatization. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 28 - However, the deficit subsequently widens and remains sizable. The ratio of external debt to GDP could rise quickly to over 70 percent of GDP by 2003 (Table S), if debt financing were forthcoming. Of course, it is probably the case that sufftcient financing would not be available: if the shortfalls were sizable, the country could experience some combination of a rapid depletion of the NBS’ reserves, large currency depreciation, rising interest rates, and weaker economic activity. v. STAFF APPRAISAL 50. Fund staff welcomes the authorities’ intentions to stabilize the economy and advance structural reform. There is strong recognition on their part of the need to reduce the excessive fiscal and external current account deficits that were inherited from the previous government, and to deal with the weakness in the banking and enterprise sectors, including through significant privatization involving foreign strategic investors and by improving the legal and institutional framework. This represents a welcome reversal from the poorly conceived policies of the past, which discouraged foreign investment and financial discipline, and promoted privatization in ways that were detrimental to good governance. 51. The key priority for 1999 is to narrow the external current account deficit to a clearly sustainable level. While the current economic difftculties in Slovakia reflect both the large macroeconomic imbalances inherited from the past as well as delays in undertaking structural reforms, tighter fiscal policy will have to be the immediate driving force behind external adjustment. At the same time, favorable prospects for external financing depend crucially on market confidence that the tough but necessary measures to reduce the wide fiscal and external current account deficits will be taken. Implementing urgently needed policies for the restructuring of the banking and enterprise sectors would add markedly to market confidence and external financing prospects. 52. If the policy response to the present difficulties were to be inadequate, there would be a risk that continuing vulnerability would induce a significant reduction in available foreign exchange, thereby raising difficulties for financing the current account deficit. Thus, policies should seek to provide compelling and credible evidence that the economy is on a viable adjustment path, including by maintaining a broadly stable exchange rate. While the exchange rate depreciation to date is judged to be broadly consistent with maintaining an adequate degree of external competitiveness, a more pronounced depreciation from current levels would be very costly to the foreign-currency indebted state enterprise sector and, given government guarantees on this debt, have tiuther negative spillovers on the fiscal deficit. Such a depreciation would also run the risk of a price-wage spiral. 53. The government’s recent efforts to reduce the fiscal deficit are well placed and will help to restore confidence. In particular, the fiscal package announced at the end of May 1999 demonstrates the authorities’ determination to move decisively to lower the fiscal deficit to 3 percent of GDP or less. At the same time, several important actions were also put in place during the first half of this year, among them strengthened tax collection efforts, some unpopular administered price increases and related subsidy cuts, a wage freeze in the Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 29 - budgetary sector, and more general expenditure restraint compared with budgeted levels. In the staff’s view, the envisaged reduction in the fiscal deficit, in conjunction with the projected decline in other components of domestic demand, would be consistent with achieving the desired reduction in the external curent account deficit in 1999. 54. The staff urges the authorities to gear monetary policy, in the context of a flexible exchange rate regime, toward protecting international reserves and containing inflation. In circumstances in which a broadly stable exchange rate is an important element to meeting inflation objectives and reserves are ei an uncomfortably low level, the NBS needs to be prepared to raise interest rates and cannot subordinate its actions to concerns over lowering government borrowing costs. Of cours: fiscal tightening is essential to help the NBS to meet its objectives, including by creating more room for maneuver on interest rates without straining the banking and enterprise sectors further, and ultimately setting the stage for a gradual reduction in interest rates without putting the central bank’s objectives at risk. But with lower economic growth than officially projected, the NBS’ monetary program would still need to be based on slower monetary growth than initially formulated. 55. While the macroeconomic policy goals espoused by the authorities are generally consistent with the macroeconomic adjustmeg. t deemed necessary by the staff, there are nevertheless some policy concerns. First, whil: important policy steps have recently been taken, Slovakia’s economy continues to be expc.:ed to risks and the staff would therefore urge the authorities to complete as soon as possl::le the legislative process for putting all fiscal policies in place. Second, uncertainties over expenditures of some of the social security and extrabudgetary funds, and, more generally, the indications from the authorities that they are concerned about their ability to control some operations of the general government outside the budget raise the possibility of fiscal :Aippage. The stat7 therefore welcomes the authorities’ request for technical assistance to s::engthen control over fiscal developments. Third, the high level of government expenditur- prompted the staff to propose fiscal measures for 1999 that were oriented more tov::.rd expenditure cuts than the fiscal package finally approved by the government. Staffregr:::s the imposition of the import surcharge, preferring additional expenditure cuts instead, nd would urge the authorities to phase out the import surcharge at an early date. It is encouraring that the authorities have already announced planned expenditure measures for 2ioO (including cuts in the government payroll, rationalizing the system of social benefits, and .-eforming the pension system). These measures should facilitate a reduction in the ta\ burden and the phasing out of the import surcharge. 56. After having frozen wages in the hut: retary sector, it is unfortunate that the authorities were unable to extend this wage policy to state enterprises as originally intended. Especially in circumstances in which external current account adjustment is a primary policy concern, and several state ente:.orises are running losses and encountering difficulties servicing their debt, every effort n. .st be made to keep a firm grip on wages. While enterprise governance can only be addr -sed in a durable way through more ambitious structural reform, this will take a while; in the >neantime, a strong wage policy is necessary to Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 30 - safeguard against an erosion of external competitiveness and profitability that would have negative macreoeconomic effects. 57. More generally, the authorities must strive to reinvigorate and accelerate structural reform in both the banking and enterprise sectors. The banking sector is an area of concern, particularly with respect to the state-owned banks, and a potential source of macroeconomic instability. Formulating and implementing a comprehensive restructuring program for the banking sector is a matter of the highest priority. This should include the immediate initiation of ambitious operational restructuring to substantially cut operating costs, and a strengthening of credit policies and loan recovery efforts. The ultimate aim is to impose better governance: privatization, involving foreign strategic investors, is recommended. Measures to accelerate and complete enterprise privatization are also welcome and needed, but additional actions are essential for improving corporate governance and enterprise performance. Strengthened creditor rights and improved bankruptcy procedures would need to be especially important elements of the enterprise restructuring effort. Clear financial performance targets for evaluating management in those enterprises not envisaged for more near-term privatization would also be strongly recommended. Finally, with the public enterprises also having been the main contributors to the saving- investment imbalance in the non-government part of the economy, further increases in administrative prices to eliminate cross-subsidization and embrace cost recovery would play, along with strengthened cost control, an important role in improving enterprise financial performance and encouraging external adjustment. 58. All told, bold and immediate actions are essential, both in terms of near-term macroeconomic adjustment and accelerating the medium-term agenda of structural reform. These are needed to reduce the current account deficit to a sustainable level and to strengthen the banking sector and corporate governance. Without such actions, durable economic growth and job creation is unattainable. With them, a renewal of confidence in the sustainability of Slovakia’s external position would be fostered, and stability and sustainable growth would be feasible. 59. The authorities’ subscription to the special data dissemination standard is welcome. With a view to enhancing the conduct and monitoring of economic policies, the staff encourages the authorities to continue their efforts to improve the statistical base in a number of areas, including real, fiscal, and balance of payments statistics. 60. It is recommended that the next Article IV consultation be on the standard 12-month cycle. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 31 - Table 1. Slovak Republic: Main Ecw .,I& Financial. and Social ldicators RI., “CU. Real GDP Conrvncr p&c. Pcrd .“‘rspC 12monllu losndolpmod Grou mdwmal 0Ytp”t (COnstanl pnces) Red WngC’ In idwry PPI.bad cPI.bad Employmel n indvrtry ““moplopc”t mc, pmcd wcmgc IIn, emuli*e ‘“h,“(r “It 1, CPI-bawd inc.bud z! GC”<“, 8a”mmm ““.“Cl. Rwcnur sxpcndilwe Bdalm slate bed@ bdmm hfmay and credit 2-w do”CstlC B(I~U Crd* to mtirpnrcs and hourholds Broad mmxy Intrre,, r&l (mpcrccnl. rnd-or-period) Ldlng call (rho”-amI) Dqmll mu (cnwmk) “ClOClW 99 58 6, 67 92 72 5.4 64 56 98 ‘18 2.8 2.2 36 iPcrrm chanpc, I2 mmUv to edpmad dru oUlm>sr mdlcatd ,\ I> 1.. I. I”? I? ; 6 .I .I .I 200 88 II 9 18.2 22 66 167 88 42 135 216 18.9 95 171 16.2 ~46 34 58 84 4, * 7 41 60 41 *:j (28 :., 8.: 02 “> -02 (2”:‘: 3:: (3 7) (28 6) 5’ I.? : ,, (12 1 1 I%- 516 b. 29 ‘) 29 ‘, (A; II I (26 3) -2 3 -2 I (-11 2) (A; 06 *) 57 77 & ,154 5717 30 7 319 (65 3) (84 7) 949 73 5 6539 7174 33 6 35 1 34 8 369 64 41 7810 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 32 - Table l(continued). Slovak Republic: Selected Social and Demographic Indicators Area Land area (in sq. km) 48,080.O Cropland (in percent of land area) 2.7 Population per sq. km. 111.1 Population Characteristics Population, total (end-1997, in millions) Population of working age, in millions Average annual rate of growth in 1990-97 (percentage change) Life expectancy at birth (1997, in years) 5.4 3.6 0.2 Male 68.9 Female 76.7 Total 72.7 Adult mortality rate (1997, per 1,000 people) Male 208.0 Female 90.0 Income GDP per capita (1997, in current US%) 3,613.0 GDP per capita, PPP (1997, in current US$) 7,910.o Health Physicians (1995, per 1,000 people) Hospital beds (1996, per 1,000 people) 3.0 7.5 Education Gross enrollment ratio, primary schools (1996, in percent) 101.8 Gross enrollment ratio, secondary schools (1996, in percent) 94.0 Gross enrollment ratio, tertiary schools (1996, in percent) 22.1 Source: World Bank World Development Indicators; and staff calculations. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 33 - Table 2. Slovak Republic: Selected Economic Indicators-A Regional Perspective SlOwk Rep. Croui. Bulgari. czecll Rep. H~SUY Poland R&a Red GOP @rcenbF Cbnsef -m p-ion, period-~ (olmr* in pcrocd) 0ancr.l govcmm ml bdulcx (in pmmtt of ODP) state budget bolrncc (in perccnl of GDP) -t ourmll -t (in paosnt af OOP) Ratio ofcrttaul debt ta ODP lhtiOOfmmYl&bturviCCtO-OfG&NFS asa, GDP (psrccnugc h”gc) Ccnsumr ,mcc*. period wcngc (ohurgc in porsont) 0mn.l go”- t b.hnu (in percent of GDP) stats budgst Mancc (in percent of GOP) Extcrnd currcnl accoun1 (in percent of CDP) Ratio of c*nl., d&t to GDP Ratio ofsaemal dsbt UrviEC Lo c- of0 Br NFS 6.6 5.8 -1.3 -1.9 -,l.l 40.4 14.7 6.5 6.1 -5.2 -2.6 -10.6 50.4 12.5 4.4 6.7 -6.0 -2.6 -10.1 58.3 13.7. 5.8 6.2 4.2 -2.4 -10.4 49.7 13.4 6.0 3.5 -0.4 4.1 -5.8 23.2 8.2 6.5 3.6 -1.3 -0.9 -11.6 31.9 LO.3 2.7 5.7 0.7 0.9 -7.3 37.6 13.0 5.I 4.3 d.3 0.0 -8.2 to.5 1.3 23.5 4, n... -3.7 61.0 39.8 4.6 18.3 -4.8 n... -2.2 51.9 27.2 5.1 14.3 4.6 ma. -4.8 36.2 27.3 3.7 18.7 4.2 II*. -3.6 56.4 31.4 6.1 19.9 4.6 -3.8 -1.0 30.1 7.8 6.9 15.1 -3.3 -2.8 -3.2 28.4 5.8 4.8 11.7 -3.0 -2.9 4.5 27.3 7.8 5.9 15.6 -3.3 -3.2 -2.9 7.1 3.9 38.8 -4.0 4.9 -7.4 25.2 12.8 4.6 154.8 -3.6 -4.6 -6.2 27.3 17.0 -7.3 59.1 -3.l -5.7 -7.9 25.2 21.5 -3.3 84.2 -3.6 -5, -7.2 25.9 LT., sourcss: WE0 D.UbnsC, suthoriticr; and ala,? C.,irn,tc.. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 34 - Table3.Slowk Republic. Oovemme", Budge~Operations. 1997-99 (In millions of Sk) 1997 1998 Estimate ,999 1999 Authorities Staff Proj. ,i RcVel"ie 159,607 166.008 Tax rew""e 145,528 152.978 Inane, profit and capital income taxes 54,883 61,700 Pmso"di"comctax 25.642 29,372 Corporate income tax 23,372 24,612 Wimholdi"gtaxmcapita, income 5,651 7,627 Property taxes 1,019 1.291 Domestic~xesongwdsmd services 76,811 78,323 "alwadded tax 54,877 55,264 Excise tax 21,872 23,071 Taxer on inkmatimal trade 12,815 11.664 Customs duties 5,252 5.241 lmpartsurcharge 7,450 6.286 Nontax ‘e"en"c 14,079 13,030 174,483 156,636 3,;620 27,326 8,7,0 1,500 82,206 58,000 24,200 5,274 5,100 0 17.847 175,085 157.016 63.313 31.803 22.800 8.710 1,641 86,045 60.045 26.000 6.017 5,843 0 18.069 Expcndilweandnctlending 176.687 184,709 189,484 189,823 Expenditure 171,747 182,471 190,701 188.740 Current cxp-sndihln 136,568 144.732 153,590 155.065 Budgctmd subsidizcd orgmizatitions 83,029 81,866 86,835 85,879 WagCS 33,877 37,929 39,171 39,171 Social security conb'ibutians 12,670 14,195 L4.418 14,418 Hcalticarc,excl. sages 655 5,6 480 466 Educatiq exc,,wagcs 2,218 1,541 1,547 1,502 Goodsmd services 33,609 27,686 31,219 30.32, Subsidies 16,535 14.430 14.272 13.86, Sod expmditwes 25,390 31,810 32,533 31.874 Transfers to individuals & "on-profit instihltions 9.066 14,298 15,035 14.602 Satebenefits 16.324 17.512 17,498 17.272 *merest 11,614 16,626 19,957 23.451 CapiUcxpendiDlre 16,290 11,7L3 11,523 8.823 I"h.go"em"mtalm"sfers 18,889 26,026 25,588 24,852 To ,ocSl aumorhies 1,443 1,801 1,888 1.834 To socid security sector 11,007 11.680 ,2,,34 11.785 Too,heremmb"dgcfaryscc,ors 6,440 12.545 11.566 11.233 Ncflmding 4,941 2.237 -1,218 L.083 Lendingand guarlnteer 6.184 2.296 4,199 6,499 Repnynents 1.244 58 5.417 5.417 Statcbudgetoverallbalance -17.080 -,8,70, -15,000 -14,738 Resrafgcneralgav~nmcntbalance -16,962 -24,014 -1.000 -7.808 Em.b,,dg&sryfund.sb.,mcc -11,617 -8,296 -2,006 Social security funds balance -5,097 -7,878 -5,801 Lmdgovcmentsbalancc 770 -1,640 0 Emabudgctarypmjectsmd NPF -1,018 -6.200 0 Consolidated gmcra, govemnmtbalmcc -34,042 -42,714 -16,000 -22,546 Sources: MinisbyofFinmce: and stnffestimates. Ii Adjushncnlrcenario. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 35 - Table 3 (Continued). Slovak Republic: Do”-cot Ihdgetary Opcmtions, I99749 (In percent of GDP) ,997 ,998 ,999 1999 Estimate AUhritiCS Staff Proj. II flevcn”C 24.4 23.1 21.5 22.4 Tax revenue 22.3 21.3 19.3 20.1 hwme, profit and capital income taxes 8.4 8.6 8.3 8.1 PersoGl income tax 3.9 4.1 3.9 4.1 caporuc inme tax 3.6 3.4 3.4 2.9 ‘WithhIding lax on capital inunnc 0.9 I.1 1.1 I., Propmy taxes 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 Domestic taxes on goods and sewices ,I.7 10.9 10.1 11.0 Vduc added fax 8.4 7.7 7.1 7.7 Excise tax 3.3 3.2 3.0 3.3 Taxes on inhrmtianal tmdc 2.0 1.6 0.6 0.8 Cus,mns duties 0.8 0.7 0.6 0.5 lmpml surcharge 1.1 0.9 0.0 0.0 Nontax rmnuc 2.2 I.8 2.2 2.3 Expadihln and net lading 27.0 25.7 23.3 24.3 Expcndimre 26.3 25.4 23.5 24.2 Chmnf cxpcndihlre 20.9 20.2 18.9 19.9 Budget and subsidizcd organiulions 12.7 11.4 10.7 11.0 W@S 5.2 5.3 4.8 5.0 Social security wnpibutior~s I.9 2.0 I.8 1.8 HcalU~ care, excl. wages 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 Education cxcl. wages 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.2 Goods and SQyiccs 5.1 3.9 3.8 3.9 Subsidies 2.5 2.0 I.8 1.8 Social expnditurcs 3.9 4.4 4.0 4.1 Transfers to individuals 81 not-pro61 imtihltions 1.4 2.0 1.8 1.9 stat0 baletits 2.5 2.4 2.2 2.2 Interest 1.8 2.3 2.5 3.0 CaphI expendihne 2.5 1.6 1.4 1.1 I”trago”w”manhl UanSfers 2.9 3.6 3.1 3.2 To lacal mlmoritics 0.2 0.3 0.2 0.2 To social security sector 1.7 1.6 1.5 I.5 To o&r extmbudgetwy sectors 1.0 1.7 I.4 1.4 Net kdii8 0.8 0.3 -0.1 0.1 Lcadi”g “Id gU.“l”taS 0.9 0.3 0.5 0.8 RcppNltS cl.2 0.0 0.7 0.7 State budget overall balance Rcsf of gaeml govcmme”f bahce Exerb”dgewy funds b.lancc Social xauity funds balance LOUI go”emmmts balsncc Etiudgctary projects and NPF -2.6 -2.6 -1.8 -2.6 -3.3 -0.1 -1.8 -1.2 -0.8 -,.I 0.1 a.2 -0.2 -0.9 Consolidated general government balance -5.2 -5.0 -2.0 -1.9 -1.0 6.3 6.7 0.0 0.0 -2.9 Sources: Minis of Finance; and staff estimates. I/ Adjustment scenario. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 36 - Table 4. Slovak Republic: Balance of Payments, 1995-99 (Millions of U.S. dollars) ,995 1996 1997 1998 1999 1999 Prelim. Adjust. P1SSiW scensrio SC~“hO Trade a- rzxpcd, to.b. bnpom. f0.b. sties. alId i”como bdanss lneoms bhsc cmnl tmdm capital vmdm Fa+l invs.tmc”~ “et Dimcf !nwanm” Pmfoh bl-t MET crediti clsditd sitended, net crcdita rootid, “et Eisbummentl R-m” SM.IcIm upiul, “St CIPiul ACMIUU Erm” m-4 omiubns Grmr ISISNW ollsrcYc, -) “nc ommd Erdl “” Ma”nom”d”rn Ibnn cmt accm!A” bah”cc (in psrznt of GDP) Gr@ss om!A - (USI “li!Amu) I” “wndu ofimpm ofoQ*s Total r.xkmd debt (USI m88cm). adjusti II In pertent Of GDP ST cxIcmd debt (US rdUim*~. *djWcd I/ 2, ac&rvcd8T tcu, debt @mat, 2, Rucrvu,Brcd mmcy (puFmt) ?a.T debt smvicc I cxpon of O&w8 @crcc.lt) -228 Cl,579 -8,807 527 540 2,376 -1,936 -14 92 391 46 30 134 246 394 69 325 1,052 -726 91 994 385 1,771 -1,771 -1.579 -192 2.2 3,449 3.9 5,678 32.6 2,898 119.0 21.6 9.3 -2,293 8,131 -11,124 -8 36 2.068 -2,032 -45 203 -2,098 30 295 199 96 986 136 849 2,033 -1,184 882 2,192 268 362 -362 -237 -IX -11.2 3,491 3.2 6,661 35.5 3,031 86.8 26.8 L4.7 -2,084 9,641 -I,,725 47 73 2,169 -2,094 .I20 I73 -1,958 0 235 47 117 1,265 86 1,190 2,265 -1.095 294 1.795 309 146 -146 -94 -52 40.1 3.285 2.9 7,811 40.2 3,462 60.1 25.2 12.5 -2,290 LO.665 -12,956 -137 I7 2292 -2,275 -154 366 -2,061 70 248 27.1 27 I,601 5% 1.543 2,716 -1.172 -96 1,823 -186 -423 423 491 -67 -10.1 2,923 2.3 9,878 48.5 3,979 48.9 22.8 -1.042 11.138 -12,980 -135 58 2343 -2,285 -193 254 -97.3 0 471 386 15 252 150 102 1,500 -1,398 Cl 723 0 -*w 200 254 -53 4.9 2,497 2.0 10,185 54.1 3,792 65.8 21.1 L4.I -1.355 11,138 -13,193 -225 -32 2.343 .L375 -193 254 -1,326 0 371 286 85 -48 150 -198 1,2w -1,398 0 323 0 -1,004 -53 0 -53 1,017 -7.0 14938 57.8 3,749 14.1 GDP (us* mithl) 17,4001 18,781 19,m 20,364 18.825 18,931 smncu: Data pmG&d by Slav* mbmilic*; md ,*tr crli”uter. II Exchdu the ctfccu ofs.-cdlsd ‘tidow dIcs.ing opemim undcticn in Ia- Lo the NBS’ ““mew reg.lh6on an b* ti rodgn uy1 paidcal @mv .boibbcd), Wbicb led c-rnil bank, la ic.ccru,c bail sbawe”” sxtemd .1*61 ml.3 lubi8dc% Thcac opcnticmr .EM”O1 for gral debt Of kcaG 12.cm mi”ica .t d-1997 and cd-1998 and flcm rnillicm .t au-,996. nc ruync~g *.p for 1999 is blClti in cdcmll dcbl. )/ hcludss mdm- and long-mm debt fa”ing due Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 37 - T.bk J SlOti Rcp”b!x MauYr/ sumy, !99%% li 0”blu,~oii~~~.t~.r~ycu~ ,995 1596 1997 15% NE ho*chold, cntcrpcr “xurulrC mm- TvnC drpoa ho”dlol* m*rpnm ““-< ccinwcr /n hap oJmnry howholdr .mmpm Memrrvldum ,lmn on prcmq 4’ I I-rnc”lB p* nrrr: BIcd lnO”W Ford@1 ovrmcy &Qouu Net brugn “se Net &rncJbc YIC” Doma& Odif cm& to a7taT”L.n alId houchol* Conuibumn to mmcy pwm WA NW. OfWhih Nd “ant to *o”mu,,mt d NPP Cd,, u) plvatc x1101 639 lyll 86.1 193 3 3106 661 -2.3 3061 183.8 21.7 -773 317.2 14 I 3217 2830 113.9 37.4 no I.5 I69 I ,217 27.7 157 197 354 43 189 1.4 111.3 3.0 7.7 Id.? I39 .:: 11.9 61.0 1*1* 111 I 3J1.9 4306 71 6 .3 I 362.1 3314 Jr.8 .m., 4169 435 373 1 ,,I 6 ,344 46.2 81, 17 *oi 2 1484 310 17.8 41s 3x3 IO 16.7 5.3 1.7 200 162 IS.2 03 164 1:: m., 233 5 II.0 383.0 168.7 ,017 -3 0 370.0 33.6 31.4 -85.7 453.5 a.7 rn.8 ,118 117.4 462 696 16 1.0 4 182.8 41.4 16.2 410 39.6 7.4 8.8 12.4 8.5 8.8 8.8 *.* 1.3 :: 19 II a 133.5 190.1 99.3 5yl.7 139.4 0.2 191 I 3.6.9 442 ,011 4717 198 019 3,‘ 3 91 I 417 II I 07 216.8 lll.5 31.7 136 686 19.7 I89 4i.z -31.8 119 14.1 66 -5.8 10.1 91 I.4 31.6 465.5 J,. 7 149.4 4d.i -IW 1 H)I I 60 -18.1 8.4 83 87 .I.? 7.7 PI II sovm Nldmd Btiofsh*~: andSUtTC,&T.rcr li A, -t mhmge rue, 21 hd”drS mmcian Lmbrs OIulS vxe”““rm 31 Based 0” the mai”pvMdrn o<lhe .ppm”~d prop”’ u CIoti ntrs .d,“dd lo, r.rl%snb..bon 0frlmu .t hr bcglmin~ atlhc ycu Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 38 - Table 6. Slovak Republic: Medium-Term Scenarios, 1997-2003 (In percent of GDP) 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 Estimate Projection Passive Scenario: Consolidated general govemment savings lnveabnent Savings-investment gap External savings I/ 1.8 0.0 0.6 -0.6 -0.9 -1.1 -1.3 7.0 6.0 4.8 4.6 4.6 4.5 4.4 -5.2 -6.0 -4.2 -5.2 -5.5 -5.6 -5.7 10.1 10.1 7.0 6.3 7.2 7.8 9.1 Non-govemtnent savings Investment Savings-investment gap Public debt 26.8 29.3 28.5 29.7 29.2 28.7 27.6 31.7 33.4 31.2 30.8 30.9 30.9 31.0 -4.9 -4.2 -2.8 -1.1 -1.7 -2.2 -3.4 27.1 30.6 31.1 32.6 34.2 35.1 35.9 . Adjustment Scenario: Consolidated general govemment Savings Investment Savings-investment gap 1.8 0.0 1.2 2.1 2.6 2.5 2.9 7.0 6.0 4.1 3.9 3.8 3.6 3.5 -5.2 -6.0 -2.9 -1.8 -1.2 -1.1 -0.6 External savings l/ 10.1 19.1 4.9 2.3 1.5 1.1 0.8 Non-government Savings Investment Savings-iovestment gap 26.8 29.3 29.3 29.9 30.1 30.7 31.1 31.7 33.4 31.4 30.4 30.3 30.7 31.3 -4.9 -4.2 -2.0 -0.5 -0.3 0.0 -0.2 Public debt 27.1 30.6 31.0 29.9 28.7 27.6 26.2 Sources: Data provided by the authorities; and staff&mates. l/ Current account balance. A positive sign indicates a current account deficit Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 39 - Tablo 7 slo”* Repbk Md,“n-Term Adjwunml Scna.,o--oow”““cnt B”dgccq Dparatm”,. ,998.2003 (In pllc’“, OlODP, 19% ,999 2m wo, *am 2003 Sbmrqa,mu C.WtU,C 23 I 21 3 86 4, 34 I I “1 109 71 32 16 07 09 18 25 ? 214 20 2 11.4 73 22 4 2” I 81 41 *9 / I “2 11” 7.7 3.3 0.8 07 0.0 23 24 3 24 2 199 II 0 69 41 IS 41 19 22 30 00 I 1 32 02 I.5 14 01 0.8 “.7 -1.9 -I 0 -0.3 -0.i 0.0 “0 -2.9 40 7 43.6 zz.2 19.9 7.9 39 29 I I 0.2 II I 16 35 0.7 07 00 23 232 23 2 192 10, 64 39 17 38 I* 2, 34 I I 10 3.0 02 1.4 1.4 0.0 06 06 -1.0 .z -0 6 0.0 00 -I 8 40.1 420 21 7 195 I.5 37 2.7 I I 0.2 II I 71 36 07 “7 00 22 22 3 22 4 I8 I 102 61 39 16 3.7 I7 20 30 I., 09 10 02 1.4 I3 -0 I 06 0.7 -0.6 -0 6 -0.1 45 00 DO .I 2 394 406 *I 4 192 72 36 25 II 02 II I 73 38 07 01 00 *z 21 9 22.0 182 102 63 3.9 16 37 17 2.0 28 1.0 09 2.9 0.2 1.4 I3 -0 1 OS 0.6 -0 5 -0 5 -0 I .o 4 00 0” ~1 I 38 7 39 * 2, 2 190 ?I 36 24 1, 02 II 0 7.3 38 07 06 “0 *z 21.5 21.6 17.5 102 ,“z IS 37 II 20 26 0.9 09 28 02 I4 13 -0 1 05 “6 -0 3 -0 3 00 -0.2 00 00 -0.6 38 2 38 8 41 20 44 20 24 23 “II lb 36 03 1.6 1.7 0.3 03 00 ~2.6 -13 -I 2 -I I ~“2 -09 -6 II 42 4 48 3 Sourerr. Mvvrtry olhaner. ad *ta8e*thlmtrs and pro,‘cumu Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 40 - Table 8. Slovak Republic: Balance of Payments ProjcFtionn, 1998-2003 @4mons orus. Mhrs) ,998 ,999 *MO 2031 *cm zc.33 Est. Froj~timu Mmaxadumrtsla. cwrmt YCOLYII cprc.mt Of ODP, Gmu - (nil,iOru Of” s dOllYI) In mnUu oflnpm ofm.w czbt to GDP nlio @smt) 21 &a.Tddstlnoco-@mt~ STcdemal drM&iSltillims). *djutcdY4/ smca and incom captd account O,VhiCh FlNnCurg Gap 21 Msmrmdvnitsla cvrrmt amc.m,cpcml OfODP) Grou-(mlhau 0f”S dollam) hlmnun.fm-afGNFS D&t UI GC9 ratio cprcalt~ 3, MLT debI scnocs !a eapru @.sccn,) STcxtani debt (vs*nullmnr). adjusted 941 -2.c.51 0 -2289.8 -1.3MI -1.307.0 m32.9 -23H 238.0 2.035.0 343.2 I.602 6 6.3 3.452.3 1.6 604 IZ.0 481.1 -629 I 12867 5 .13.4% 6 mo 1380 1.2128 so,.* 617.5 -2 3 3.4523 2.6 52.7 II 8 3.470 2 -2.476.6 -1.940.1 .16,89o.C -774.4 238.0 3.K.51 593.0 2.409 ‘I -9.1 3.2 68.0 21.4 -234.2 -351.0 16.002.8 .X.353.8 -LZ, 1 138.0 863.9 7893 49.8 -0.8 5.252 3 3.3 403 14.4 3.455.7 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-41- APPENDIX I I. II. In IV. V. VI VII. VIII. IX. X. Slovak Republic: Fund Relations AsofMarch31, 1999 Membership Status: Joined: 01/01/1993; Article VIII General Resources Account: Quota Fund Holdings of Currency SDR Million % Ouota 357.50 100.0 477.41 133.5 SDR Department: Holdings SDR Million % Allocation 0.11 N/A Outstanding Purchases and Loans: SDR Million % Ouota Stand-by arrangements 12.65 3.5 Systemic Transformation 107.25 30.0 Financial Arrangements: Approval Expiration Amount Approved Amount Drawn Tvoe Date Date _ISDR Million) (SDR Million) Stand-by 07/22/1994 03/21/1996 115.80 32.15 Projected Obligations to Fund: (SDR Million; based on existing use of resources and present holdings of SDRs): Overdue Forthcoming 03/3 111999 1999 2oJlo~~~ Principal -- 23.4 21.5 21.5 21.5 21.5 Charges/Interest -- 3.1 3.2 2.4 1.6 0.8 Total -_ 26.5 24.7 23.9 23.1 2.3 Exchange Rate Arrangement: The currency of the Slovak Republic is the Slovak koruna, created on February 8, 1993 upon dissolution of the currency union with the Czech Republic. A single exchange rate applies to all transactions within the convertible currency area. The exchange rate band of +7 percent relative to a currency basket comprised of the deutsche mark (about 60 percent ) and the U.S. dollar (about 40 percent) was abolished on October 1, 1998, after which the currency was floated. The exchange rate stood at Sk 41.92 per U.S. dollar, and Sk 44.95 per euro on March 3 1, 1999. Article IV Consultation: Last consultation with the Slovak Republic was concluded on February 13, 1998 (SM/98/28, January 29, 1998). Technical Assistance: See Table 9. Resident Representative Post: The post in Bratislava was closed in September 1997. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 42 - Table 9. Slovak Republic: Technical Assistance, 1991-99l Dewtment Tin Punlose MAE April 1991 September/Octoba 1991 February/March 1992 May 1991 and December 1992 nlrough September 1991 December 1992 January 1993 -June 1994 January 1993 February 1993 March 1993 June 1993 November 1993 November 1993 - December 1996 Februry/March 1994 May 1994 September 1994 January 1995 January 1995 May 1995 Mission to the Slate Bank of Czechoslovakia: design of monetq policy instruments and operating pmcedues; and development of foreign exchange operations and the legal framework for central and commercial banking and tbc reaganization of the State Bank Staff visits on monetary instruments Regular visits by experienced central banker Mission to the newly-established Slovak Central Bank: monetq imtmments, operations and analysis, foreign exchange operations, and banking supmision Several expert visits on banking supervision Expert visit on foreign exchange operations Staff visit on monetary operations and analysis Mission on payments and clearing systems, central bank accounting, end central bank organization Expext visit on monetary projections and analysis Expert visit on monetary operations and analysis Resident advisor on taking supavision, co-sponsored by the EC-PHARE Mission on monetary analysis and operations, foreign exchange opcdons, tanking supervision and regulation, central bank accounting. clearing and payment system, and central bank organization Visit by senior advisor to advise the NBS Governor Visit by senior advisor to advise the NBS Governor Expert visit on organisations and methods Mission on issues in monetary and foreign exchange operations, banking supervisiq payments, accounting, legal, and organization and management asion on issues in monetary and foreign exchange operations, banking supewisioh payments, accounting, legal, and organization and management L Wltb the exception of the MAE mission in December 1992, technical assistance in 1991-92 was delivered to the Czech and Slovak Federal Republic. _ Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 43 - Dcpmtment Thing December 1995 April 1997 Furpose Expert visit on monetary operations and research Mission on the banking law, monetary policy implementation, coordination between monetary operations and government debt management, and rescsrch work done by the NEB. FAD LEG April and July 1991 STA October 1997 FebmayandJulyl991 May and September 1991 December 1991 March 1992 April 1992 April 1993 May 1993 June 1994 March/April 1998 October 1991 January 1992 March 1992 May 1993 September 1993 May 1995 June 1991 September 1991 May 1993 December 1993 Mission on monetary statistics compilation procedures, and classitication of bank accounts in monetary statistics. Advice on the design of new corporate and personal income taxes Advice on policy and administmtive aspects of the introduction of a ‘?4T Visit by FAD consultant on VAT administration Advice on administration (particularly VAT) Examination of public timaxial management Follow-up mission on public fmancial management h;:ssion on tax policy and adminisl~ation VAT administration, visit by expert Tax and customs adminishation, and administmtion of social security contributions Assistance with the drafting of new corporate and personal income tax laws Assistance titb the &aRing of income tax and VAT Iam Assistance with the drafting of the tax administration law Follow-up visit by consultant focusing an the income tax and tax ad”Ii”is2raton laws Assistance with revision of taw reform legislation Assistance with income tax legislation Assistance v&b drafting of the foreign exchange acf and acceptance of Article VIII obligations Mission on government tinancing statistics Mission on balance of payments statistics Mission on monetary statistics Mission on b&nce of payments statistics Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 44 - Department Timing plupose January 1994 Mission cm go”-alt financing statistics F&nay 1994 November 1994 November 1995 November/December 1995 October 1997 September/October 1998 February 1999 Mission on money and tanking statistics Mission on money and banking statistics Mission on national accounts statistics Mission on balance of payments statistics Mission on money and tanking statistics. Mission on dissemination standards bulletin board Mission on money and banking statistics Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 45 - APPENDIX II Slovak Republic: Relations with the World Bank 1. The Slovak Republic became a member of the World Bank on January 1,1993, by joint succession with the Czech Republic to the membership of the Czech and Slovak Federal Republic. 2. A Structural Adjustment Loan (SAL) (USS450 million), approved in June 1991 with Czechoslovakia, was fully disbursed. The Czech and Slovak Republics assumed repayment obligations in the ratio of 2: 1. The SAL was cotinanced by the Japanese Export-Import Bank in the amount of US%200 million. 3. The Board approved a telecommunications loan in May 1993 to strengthen the international and domestic long-distance networks. The loan, with World Bank participation of US%55 million, was cotinanced by the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development and the European Investment Bank. 4. An Economic Recovery Loan (ERL) for US%80 million, approved in November 1993, was fully disbursed. The ERL provided support for the country’s fiscal and structural adjustments associated with the shocks following the break-up of the Federation. The loan supported reforms in four areas: (a) fiscal retrenchment; (b) strengthening and diversifying the fiscal sector; (c) continued privatization, private sector development and enterprise restructuring; and (d) a more efficient social safety net. 5. A Country Economic Memorandum (CEM), which evaluated the transformation progress of Slovakia’s economy and the main EU accession challenges, was completed in early 1998, based on mission to the country in December 1996/January 1997. The final report was released in May 1998. 6. The World Bank is planning to prepare a Country Assistance Strategy paper for Slovakia which would develop a blue print of thr Bank’s assistance program for the next three years. 7. Preparatory work has begun on an Enterprise and Financial Sector Structural Adjustment Loan (EFSAL), at the request of the Slovak authorities, This loan would assist the authorities in restructuring and privatizing the bank and enterprise sectors. The government has also shown interest in developing, jointly with the Bank, a small program of investment projects in the social sectors and the environment (grassland conservation and industry co-generation). An anti-corruption diagnostic will be launched to address key areas of concern and develop mechanisms to contain and prevent corruption. An overview of the transport sector will be initiated to develop a strategy for that sector in light of the demands of EU accession. Technical assistance programs will focus on the areas of debt management and energy sector (in light of the EU accession demands). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 46 - 8. The IFC has conducted investment seminars in Bratislava. Sectors of particular interest for IFC investment include pharmaceuticals, forestry products, glass and construction materials, and durable consumer goods. Some minor lending to private companies and credit lines have been approved during 1998, and more projects are in the pipeline. MIGA has several contracts outstanding. The IFC opened a resident representative office in Bratislava in May 1998. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-47- APPENDIX III Slovak Republic: St:: tistical Issues 1. From the point of view of macroeconomic analysis and policymaking, there are several key data issues. One main problem in Slovakia’s statistics is the weakness of national accounts data, which may have overestimated output growth over the last few years. In addition, data on the external sector and the currert account balance have, at times, been unreliable and subject to large revisions. Moreovc:. changes in definition and coverage, without providing comparable data for a transitor period, often diminish the usefulness of published data. Other important deficiencies are the lack of reliable data on import and export prices and volumes, and the absence of fiscal data for the consolidated general government compiled in accord with Governmen, Finance Statistics methodology. Slovakia has subscribed to the Special Data Disseminatiot Standard (SDDS), and intends to take the necessary actions to meet these sta&tical requirements. 2. With regard to timeliness and public accr:;s, the authorities in general follow a free and open data publication policy. Data are promptly released to news services, and are also published regularly in various monthly and quarterly statistical publications, and on the Internet.’ Data on core surveillance variables are provided regularly to the Fund, and with minimal lags: a week or less for exchange rates ::!ld foreign exchange reserves; three weeks or less for government financing data; two week:, for consumer prices, reserve money, broad money, and interest rates; a month for foreign trade data; and about three months for other fiscal, balance of payments, and national accoum s data. Real sector and prices 3. Much progress has been made in the elaboration of the Slovak national accounts statistics, although there are indications that output growth for the last few years may have been overestimated. In particular, the contribution of the government sector to consumption and value added is difficult to reconcile with the fiscal data. A similar problem is associated with the offtcial estimation of private consumption growth, which seems to be underestimated when compared with the data on retail sales growth. The annual and quarterly GDP figures are also not always fully consistent, as they are estimated by different methods. Moreover, the authorities should consider providing data for comparison over a transitory period when the underlying methodology for compiling a data series is changed (e.g., in the recent case when the industrial production index was replaced with an indicator of industrial sales). Furthermore, in light of the importance that the National Bank attaches to the concept of underlying net inflation, it would be helpful ii the Statistical Office started compiling data related to this variable on a systematic basis.’ Further progress in estimating reliable deflators for imports and exports is also required. ‘Data are available on the web site of the Natiocll Bank of Slovakia: www.nbs.sk., and the web site of the Slovak Statistical Office: www.statistics.sk. ’ Net inflation excludes changes in the price of .*od items and regulated prices. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 48 - Fiscal Sector 4. Fiscal statistics fail to comply with international statistical standards. The authorities do not currently compile revenue and expenditure data for the consolidated general government, providing only data on various subsectors (state budget, state extrabudgetary funds, extrabudgetary projects, social security funds, and local governments) with different frequencies, lags, and often in formats that are not comparable with budget documents. The monthly reporting on state budget operations is inconsistent with the annual budget data, as it includes unbudgeted intergovernmental transfers that are not distinguished from revenue and expenditure items. The reported interest expenditure on government bonds includes only coupon payments, while the discount is unreported. Data on government operations are not yet published in the GFS Yearbook or in IFS. Moreover, the authorities should publish annual accounts of the National Property Fund (NPF), and other privatization transactions. External sector 5. The Slovak Republic provides balance of payments statistics in a timely manner. However, monthly data are often unreliable because only annual data are subject to control and ex post revisions. Banks are now reporting their arbitrage transactions accurately. Information on external debt in foreign currencies, including short-term debt, is reported on a timely basis. Improvements have also been made in reporting nonresident claims and liabilities in Slovak koruna; these data are expected to be incorporated in foreign debt data as of mid-1999. Some problem areas remain, including: (a) the measurement of inward portfolio investment; (b) the need for more timely information on public guarantees on enterprises’ foreign debt; and (c) the need to improve data compilation on the composition of exports, to enable the needed assessment of export behavior (e.g., by identifying re-exports with low value added). Moreover, as mentioned above, data are often subject to substantial ex post revisions. Monetary sector 6. Monetary statistics are of good quality, and are reported on a timely basis to the Fund. A follow-up statistics mission visited Bratislava in February 1999 to review the NBS’s implementation of the recommendations made by an October 1997 mission on enhancing the reporting of monetary data. In May 1999, the NBS provided an update on the status of recommendations made by the February 1999 mission and advised that all recommendations will be implemented. The valuation of securities, however, will continue to follow the national accounting standard, which calls for the valuation of some securities at purchase price and other securities at face value, instead of using market valuation for all securities. The authorities will also review the current compilation and the reporting of data on repurchase agreements and the Fund accounts. Further, with the view to ensure greater consistency, the NBS will start reporting more detailed data on the positions between the NBS and the commercial banks. The reporting of the revised data, as necessary, will - commence in June 1999. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 10. Slovak Republic: Core Statistical Indicators (As of end-April 1999) CUltral Reserve/ Bank ConsUmer current Ovaall Exchange lntemational Base B&UCe Broad Interest Price EXPOM Account Govemmalt ExtWMI Rates ResaV.5 Money Sheet Money R&S Index lmpo* B.&Ice Balance GDP/GNP Debt Date of latest observation 4/30/99 Date received 4/30/99 Frequency of data D Frequency of D xpxting sowccofupdate I/ R MC& of reporting 21 0 Confidentiality 31 u Frequency of D publication 4199 3199 4/30/99 4199 W M W M R A 0 E u u W M 3199 3199 3199 4199 4199 4199 M M M M M M A A A E E W u u u M M M 3199 3lP9 12/98 3199 12198 Des-98 4199 M M A 0 u M 4199 3199 M Q M Q A A 0 E U u M Q 4199 M M A E U M 3199 Q Q A C U Q Mar-99 Q Q v C U Q II R = Press Release; A = Central Bank; Minisby of Financial or other official agency. 21 E = e-mail; 0 = On-line; W = National Bank of Slovakia’s w&site; C = Cable or facsimile. 31 u = unrestricted use Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-SO- APPENDIX IV Slovak Republic: The Banking System-Its Soundness, Supervision, and Restructuring 1. The banking sector in Slovakia can be classified into five distinct groups. Group 1 comprises the three major state-owned banks (the Slovak Savings Bank, VUB, and lRB) with a total share of about 46 percent of banking sector assets at end-1998. The Slovak Savings Bank is the largest in the banking system with a 21 percent share in total assets; VUB is the second largest with a 20 percent share of total assets; and IRB is the fourth largest with a share of 5 percent of total assets. The rest of the banking sector includes 18 private banks (group 2) accounting for 36.5 percent of total banking assets; two housing savings banks (group 3), which have about 5.5 percent of total assets; two tilly state-owned specialized banks (group 4);’ and two foreign branches (group 5). Conditions in the banking system and related vulnerabilities 2. The declining profitability of the enterprise sector in 1998 and the recent downturn in economic activity have had a significant adverse effect on the banking sector in general, and on the three major state-owned banks in particular. However, quantifying the true conditions of banks is difF&lt, especially because of questionable collateral valuation and loan classification practices. Collateral valuation may be unrealistic under present circumstances of underdeveloped markets and prolonged and costly bankruptcy procedures. Furthermore, strict enforcement of loan classification procedures is doubtful. Thus, estimating the amount of problem loans in the Slovak banking sector is very problematic and most likely understated, and banks’ capital positions are potentially overvalued by substantial margins. This is especially so in the case of the three state-owned banks in view of the large volume of non-performing loans in their portfolios, but the implications on the rest of the banking sector could also be significant. 3. In addition to worsening loan portfolios, the financial performance of the three state- owned banks deteriorated in 1998 because of their continuing high operating costs. VUB, in particular, has also been hit hard when interest rates rise. This reflects its high dependence on the interbank market for liquidity, which may, at times, have been a factor that dissuaded the NBS from tightening policy. According to official data, the share of non-performing loans in the portfolios of the three state-owned banks climbed from 3 1.9 percent at end-1997 to 37.3 percent at end-1998; their combined losses increased from about Sk 3 billion in 1997 to an estimated Sk 13 billion in 1998; and the return on assets (ROA) and the return on equity (ROE) were minus 3.4 percent and minus 157.3 percent in 1998, respectively. In addition, ’ The analysis in this appendix excludes the two specialized banks in this group. The two banks are the Slovak Guarantee and Development Bank and the Consolidation Bank. The Slovak Guarantee and Development Bank supports private business development and holds only about 0.6 percent of total banking assets. The Consolidation Bank is an asset resolution company that does not conduct traditional banking operations. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-51- the shortfall in loan provisioning in the three banks was Sk 21 billion at end-1998, significantly greater that the Sk 10 billion recorded at end-1997.2 4. Estimates of capital adequacy reveal the depths of banking problems in the state- owned sector. Preliminary offtcial data for 1998 indicate that IRB and VUB are insolvent, and that the Slovak Savings Bank, although in a relatively better position, is undercapitalized (the official preliminary estimate of the risk-weighted capital adequacy ratio (CAR) for the Savings Bank at end-1998 is 6.6 percent). The offtcial estimate for the recapitalization costs of the three banks currently stands at about Sk 18 billion (2.3 percent of 1998 GDP); these costs, however, are highly underestimated. Adjustments to the offtcial data on the three banks to account for overvaluation of collateral and strengthened loan classification suggest that all three banks may be deeply insolvent. The Fund staff estimate of the total negative net worth of the three banks, based on preliminary data for 1998 and adjusted to reflect a more realistic evaluation of collateral value and a stricter loan classification, suggests it could be in a range as high as Sk 72 billion to Sk 92 billion (9.2 percent to 11.7 percent of 1998 GDP). 5. Conditions in the rest of the banking sec.tor also worsened during 1998, but to a lesser degree than in the state-owned banks. The share of non-performing loans in total loans increased from 5.7 percent to 7.2 percent in the I8 privately-owned banks (group 2), and from 10.8 percent to 35.0 percent in foreign branches (group 5).’ Official data indicate that the tinancial performance of group 2 banks continued to be strong, mostly on account of valuation profits related to the exchange rate devaluation and the returns associated with operations on government securities. In 1998, this group’s ROA and the ROE were 1.6 percent and 25.7 percent, respectively. Although its risk-weighted capital adequacy ratio declined in 1998, offtcial data indicate that this group continued to be well-capitalized with a CAR of 12.5 percent at end-1998. However, adjustments to offtcial data to reflect the potential overvaluation of collateral and a stricter loan classification suggest that the capital adequacy of group 2 banks as a whole could bc substantially lower than offtcial estimates. 2 Offtcial data on banks’ profits and losses do not take into account the shortfalls in loan provisioning. Estimates presented in this appendix of banks’ profits and losses, and of the return on assets and the return on equity, are adjusted to include these shortfalls. The official capital adequacy ratios reported below do, however, take these shortfalls into account (as stipulated by the NBS’ guidelines on calculating these ratios). 3 Group 5 is comprised of two branches of foreign banks, which have their headquarters in OECD countries. The branches are subject to the supervision of their national authorities in coordination with the NBS, and they can draw on the resources of their home of&es. Group 3 banks-which are in the early stages of their operations-have a negligible share of non- performing loans in their portfolio as most of their deposit base is invested in government securities (the license of these banks limit their operations to government securities and housing loans). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 52- 6. In addition to the worrying financial conditions of the three state-owned banks, the marked worsening of the rest of the banking sector’s loan portfolio and the possibility of a Cuther deterioration in the profitability of the enterprise sector raise serious concerns about the vulnerability of the banking sector. If the share of non-earning assets were to increase, cash flow would be restricted, liquidity problems could easily occur, and the undercapitalization of some currently well-capitalized banks cannot be excluded. These concerns would be more seriously pronounced in Slovak banks, to the extent that the ability of domestic shareholders to provide capital injections would be much less than for foreigners. Discussions with various market participants indicated that some smaller banks in the system were already experiencing problems: potential mergers with bigger banks, or capital injections by prospective investors, were being explored. 7. The implications for banks of unattended macroeconomic imbalances are also worrisome. Liquidity problems in some banks, widespread maturity mismatches, and large exposures to the enterprise sector, which borrowed heavily in foreign exchange, render the banking sector vulnerable to fiuther exchange rate depreciation and/or tighter monetary conditions and rising domestic interest rates. This vulnerability reflects both direct effects and indirect effects because of enterprise credit risk. . Direct effects on banks through interest rates. Banks, in general, appear to have shifted some of the burden of higher interest rates on to borrowers. This was evidenced, for example, by the increase in lending-deposit rate spreads that accompanied tighter monetary conditions in late 1998, and effectively transformed (a part of) interest rate risk into credit risk. Banks dependant on interbank resources for liquidity will, however, continue to be more vulnerable to higher interest rates, with WB being the most vulnerable among the three-state-owned banks (IRE% is currently fully dependent on the NBS for liquidity, and the Slovak Savings bank has excess liquidity). For the rest of the banking sector, data at end- 1998 indicate that 4 of the 18 privately-owned banks could not meet prudential liquidity requirements (which require that cash and assets with maturities of up to one month at least cover all liabilities with maturities of up to one month) at end-1998. Furthermore, this group of banks had substantial tinding gaps at maturities between one to three months rendering them vulnerable to a sustained increase in interbank interest rates: the ratio of assets to liabilities in this maturity range was 53 percent at end-1998. In contrast, banks’ income from securities operations would be expected to increase with increasing interest rates: the banking sector holds about 18 percent of its total assets in securities (mostly government debt and NBS bills), more than 85 percent of which are short-term. . Direct effects on banks through exchange rates. Among the three-state owned banks, VIJB had a short foreign currency exposure at end-1998 that has left it vulnerable to an exchange rate depreciation, particularly in view of its noncompliance with the overall foreign currency exposure prudential limit. By comparison, the 18 privately- owned banks had, in aggregate, a long foreign exchange position at end-1998 and, except for one bank, all banks in this group adhered to the overall foreign currency exposure prudential limit. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 53 - . Enterprises credit risk. Domestic banks are heavily exposed to the enterprise sector (credit to enterprises accounts for about 90 percent of total domestic bank credit). The’ enterprise sector, in turn, is highly vulnerable to currency depreciation in view of its large (unhedged) foreign currency indebtedness: at end-1998, total enterprise foreign currency debt amounted to almost US%8 billion (36.8 percent of GDP), ofwhich US$1.2 billion was owed to domestic banks and US.82.5 billion was short-term external debt. In these circumstances, a 10 percent depreciation of the koruna would increase enterprise debt by the equivalent of about Sk 28.7 billion (3.7 percent of 1998 GDP). An increase of this size would necessarily affect the ability of the enterprise sector to service all of its debts, including to domestic banks, Furthermore, the substantial koruna-dominated indebtedness of the enterprise sector (36.5 percent of GDP) makes it highly sensitive to increases in domestic interest rates: based on end-1998 data, a one percentage point increase in average lending rates, all else equal, would reduce enterprise profits by about 0.4 percentage point of GDP. Bank restructuring and privatization 8. In the face of slow progress in bank restructuring and the worsening financial performance of the three major state-owned banks, promptly launching a comprehensive restructuring program, and privatizing the banks rapidly, is a matter of the highest priority. Such program would have to be based on a realistic evaluation of the quality of the banks’ assets, which could only be established by undertaking extended audits of these banks. 9. The most immediate concern is the rapidly deteriorating condition of VUB, which is preserving its liquidity by offering unsustainably high deposit rates4 VUB posted substantial losses in 1998 and Fund staff estimates suggest that its negative net worth could be as high as Sk 41-55 billion. In addition, offering such high deposit rates has been generating mrther losses in the bank New management was appointed in mid-1998 and indicated its intentions to strengthen the bank’s credit activities, to effectively workout less problem loans, and to cut-down on operating costs (including by cutting the payroll by 10 percent). But notwithstanding a highly needed operational restructuring, VUB’s crumbling financial condition necessarily implies that a substantial carve-out of its classified assets and a subsequent capital injection would be required to enable it to grow. In view of VUB’s systemic importance, there are advantages to pursuing a rehabilitation strategy that embraces financial and operational restructuring, and a subsequent rapid privatization. But the authorities would be well advised to immediately launch a tender for a privatization advisor to assist in the determination of asset carve out and work out arrangements, to help prepare the bank for sale, and to solicit strategic investors, with of view of attempting to complete privatization in 2000. ’ For example, published rates for April 1999 indicated that VUB offered the second highest rate in the banking system on 7-day deposits (the highest rate was offered by IRB). - Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 54 - 10. Although IRB has been placed under NBS conservatorship since December 1997, little progress has been made in the resolution of its condition, or in the restructuring of its operations.’ In fact, during the last fifteen months, RI3 lost most of its deposit base and it is mainly dependent on NBS funding for its operations.6 Prompted by the maximum time period allowed for conservatorship of two years, after which the bank must be either recapitalized or liquidated, the authorities made some progress recently in the preparations for IRB’s privatization, as an extended audit of the bank was completed and contacts with potential strategic investors have been initiated. However, resolution strategies for IKB are limited by the fact that this bank has no commercially attractive loans.7 Thus, it is virtually inevitable that its privatization would need to be accompanied by almost a fbll carving out of its portfolio. Accordingly, the authorities should consider a strategy of selling parts of the bank (its infrastructure, cash, securities, and the small deposit base it maintained) to a strategic investor followed by the liquidation of the remainder of the bank. Based on such a strategy and using data at end-1998, Fund staff estimates that the negative net worth of IRB could be around Sk 21 bil1ion.s The resolution of the situation in IRS appeared to have been delayed by unrealistic expectations on the part of stakeholders-who are either the government or government-owned entities (e.g., the Slovak Insurance Company)-that they 5 Initial action in 1998 to increase the bank’s equity with only domestic participation failed. Only a partial recapitalization of the bank, through a capital injection by the Slovak Insurance Company of Sk 2 billion, was effected and the bank continued to be insolvent. Furthermore, the process did not include any restructuring of the bank’s portfolio. ’ At end-1998, NBS funding amounted to around Sk 26.4 billion, ofwhich, Sk 12.7 billion was redistribution credit to tbnd IRB’s social housing loans and, partially, the power plant loan. The rest comprises short-term liquidity support. The NBS has fully provisioned for the redistribution credit on account of the housing and power plant loans but the rest of NBS liquidity support is neither provisioned nor collateralized. ’ Of a total credit portfolio of Sk 3 1 billion (comprising 80 percent of its assets), Sk 13 billion is in a single exposure to the Mohovce nuclear power company, and SK 8.7 billion consists of social housing loans. Interest rates charged to these two types of loans are fixed at below-market rates of 15 percent and 1 percent, respectively. Although the government is committed, in principle, to compensate IRB for the difference between the interest rate charged on the housing loans and the discount rate which is paid to fund them, the budget allocation for this purpose was canceled in 1998. A budget allocation was reinstated in 1999, but it was insufficient to cover IKB’s costs on these loans (about Sk 800 million per year in 1998 and 1999). The remainder ofthe portfolio (about Sk 9.3 billion) is almost entirely classified credit to the enterprise sector. s This estimate assumes a discounted market value for the housing loans and therefore does not take into account annual interest subsidies on these loans (partially) accounted for in the budget. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 55 - would be able to avoid large losses. The resolution strategy of IRB should be decided independently from concerns related to the effect of the bank’s privatization on the solvency of the Slovak Insurance Company as a shareholder. The resolution,of IRB should also include compensating the NBS for the losses on account of liquidity support to this bank. 11. Despite its high liquidity deriving from its monopoly position in the retail market in many regions of the country, the Slovak Savings Bank has performed poorly. Offrcial estimates show it to be undercapitalized, but it could be insolvent. However, because of its size and large branch network, and because it provides interbank liquidity (particularly to WB, IRB, and the Consolidation Bank), the Savings Bank is of systemic importance to the authorities. Thus, the authorities’ resolution strategy rests first on operational and financial restructuring, then privatization. As in the case of VUB, the management of the Slovak Saving Bank is still new (appointed in mid-1998) and it must undertake significant operational restructuring. The government intends to partially privatize this bank (up to 49 percent). Fund staff would urge the authorities to consider a fast timetable, seeking immediately a privatization advisor to assist them in identifying the extent of the loan carve- out and recapitalization needed for the bank and to identify potential investors. 12. Until privatization is realized, the managements of the state-owned banks should pursue immediate measures to avoid &ther deterioration of the banks’ financial performance, including by undertaking ambitious operational restructuring, and by strengthening credit policies, collection practices, and governance more generally. A strategy to minimize fiscal costs and to facilitate the process of restructuring should be immediately adopted to include: (i) legislative amendments to the Bankruptcy Law and other related legislation to enable banks to more effectively work out their less problematic loans; and (ii) accelerated restructuring of the enterprise sector, which would be closely associated with the resolution strategy for state-owned banks; (iii) a clear and comprehensive cut-off criterion, in conjunction with the enterprise restructuring program, determining loans eligible for “carving out” from the three banks’ loan portfolio, so as to engage the banks themselves with the workout of the remaining loans; and (iv) legislative amendments to allow for the involuntary writing down of shareholders’ capital. Supervision and regulation 13. Banking supervision capabilities of the NBS have been enlarged and improved significantly in the last few years after the 1992 passage, and the subsequent amendment of, the modem Banking Law. Furthermore, prudential regulations on loan classification and provisioning, capital adequacy, credit exposure, connected lending, and foreign currency exposure were gradually strengthened and are currently considered to be largely consistent with best international practices. 14. Notwithstanding these significant improvements, banking supervision in Slovakia faces several challenges: (i) examination capabilities, including the frequency of on-site - examinations, should be reinforced by increasing the number of qualified staff and intensifying training; (ii) ensuring stricter loan classification is needed, particularly in Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 56 - emphasizing the evaluation of borrowers’ cashflow and their future ability to service their loans: (iii) a more realistic evaluation of collateral value is also needed and should be combined with amendments to the Bankruptcy Law to enable lenders to realize more effectively the value of their loan collateral; (iv) although prudential regulations are largely in line with best international practices, regulations on banks’ liquidity management should be improved-particularly via the adoption of a maturity ladder-to avert funding gaps at maturities longer than one month,” and more emphasis should be placed on effective management of various risks such as foreign exchange and interest rate risks; (v) there is a relatively large incidence of non-compliance in regard to a number of regulations, particularly in relation to credit exposure regulations, and stricter corrective measures to achieve better compliance with prudential regulations are needed ittensure the system’s resilience to shocks;” (vi) better coordination between off-site monitoring and on-site examination is needed in order to improve the effectiveness of banking supervision; (vii) the supervisory and legal frameworks would need to be upgraded to conduct supervision on consolidated basis;” (viii) the existing supervisory framework dealing with problem banks gives the NBS a large scope for discretion in implementing necessary corrective measures and accordingly, to minimize the eventual costs of restructuring problem banks, a “prompt corrective action” system should be introduced in the legislation without delay; and (ix) the power of the NBS to revoke banking licenses should be strengthened by the removal of the existing consultation requirement with the MOF. 9 Weak on-site supervision provides leeway for banks to classify loans purely on the basis of the time period that the loan is overdue. The NBS is considering a strengthening of current regulations on loan classification to ensure the implementation of casMow analysis. ” Current regulations only emphasize maturity mismatches up to one month. Data at end- 1998 indicate substantial fimding gaps at maturities between one to three months; the ratio of assets to liabilities in this maturity range amount to 20 percent in the three-state-owned banks and 53 percent in the 18 privately-owned banks. ‘I Non-compliance with prudential regulations is widespread in the three-state owned banks as well as among the 18 privately-owned banks. In addition to non-compliance with the capital adequacy ratio, the three state-owned banks are in non-compliance with the credit exposure to non-banking and to banking clients, two banks in this groups are in non- compliance with the liquidity regulations, and one bank is in non-compliance with the foreign currency exposure limits. Furthermore, data at end-1998 indicate that, among the 18 privately-owned banks, six banks did not comply with credit exposure to non-banking clients, three banks did not comply with the credit exposure to banking clients, one bank did not comply with the foreign currency exposure limit, four banks did not comply with the liquidity limit and one bank did not comply with the capital adequacy ratio. ia Existing regulations take into account this shortcoming; banks’ investments in other enterprises are deducted from the capital base. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 57 - 1s. Accounting standards are problematic, particularly in relation to the continuing practice of accruing income (which is also taxed) on nonperforming loans. The government’s intentions to provide full tax deductibility on accrued interest on nonperforming loans are welcome and parallel efforts should be made to increase the tax deductions of specific loan provisions. Systemic Issues 16. Systemic disturbances in the banking sector, both on account of the deteriorating conditions in the three state-owned banks and the likely collapse of some small privately- owned banks, cannot be dismissed. Under these conditions, it might not be possible to enforce the existing provisions of the limited deposit insurance scheme, and the re-extension of the blanket arantee covering all deposits of the three state-owned banks would need to be considered. Ft If such an extension were undertaken, it should be for a limited time period (which would reasonably be somewhere around 18 to 24 months), accompanied by legal provisions for bringing problem banks to the point of sale by the end of such period. Furthermore, if signs of a systemic crisis were to appear on account of problems in the privately-owned banks, the authorities should stand ready to consider extending a similar guarantee for the remainder of the banking sector on an urgent basis, I3 This guarantee, which was extended in the context of the earlier attempts to restructure these banks, expired at end-l 997. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 58 - APPENDIX V Slovak Republic: Privatization and Enterprise Performance 1. The privatization model used in Slovakia has not succeeded in restructuring the majority of old enterprises into profitable and dynamic corporations. Instead, the old management has in most cases preserved control, while these enterprises have remained heavily indebted and unattractive to new investors, The state-owned banks, on the other hand, have continued to finance old enterprises and are now greatly burdened with portfolios of bad loans. The government urgently needs to design a strategy for addressing the bad loans in state-owned banks and the high indebtedness of old enterprises, to complete the privatization process, and to improve the performance of the remaining state-owned companies. A. Flawed Privatization 2. Deficiencies of the privatization process in Slovakia are evidenced by the deteriorating profitability in the enterprise sector. In every year since 1996, profits have declined, even though privatization has almost been completed in all sectors except for energy, transportation, and finance.’ Moreover, comparisons with other transition economies indicate that cumulative productivity growth in Slovakia’s industry over the last five years was much lower than in other central European transition economies.2 3. The privatization method applied in the period 1993-98, which consisted almost entirely of direct sales to managerial groups, lacked transparency and was reportedly subject to corruption3 The process of competing for privatization projects was supposed to be open to all investors, but it has been extensively reported that the statutory procedures were widely disregarded, and that the existing managerial groups politically connected with the ruling ‘Profits of the enterprise sector, consolidated with losses, declined from 8.3 percent of GDP in 1995 to 0.9 percent in 1998. * Cumulative productivity growth in manufacturing in Slovakia during 1994-98 was 38 percent, compared with 44 percent in Estonia, 70 percent inHungary, 57 percent in Latvia, 63 percent in Poland, and 41 percent in Slovenia. While these data are based on gross output, and can therefore be distorted if the shares of low-value-added activities vary markedly across countries, they do suggest that productivity growth in Slovakia was relatively modest. (Source: EBRD database.) 3 Small-scale assets privatization, and a limited voucher scheme were completed in 1991-92. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 59- parties were strongly favored.4 In the most blatant cases, particularly in the profitable oil sector, controlling share packages were sold at prices equivalent to a fraction of enterprises’ annual profits, and much below the prices in the secondary market. Even in cases where respectable foreign investors submitted higher bids, the privatisation contracts were awarded to Slovak bidders, including establishments with miniscule capital and no solid business reputation. 4. Total cash receipts from privatization in 1995-98 were modest, as a result of large discounts and long payment periods. They amounted to only 1% percent of GDP for enterprises with a book value of about 20 percent of GDP. This compares with privatization receipts of about 4 percent of GDP under the small-scale privatization of 1991-92, when assets were sold at close to their book value. The collection of payments for privatized firms has been weak, owing to vaguely defined penalties and ineffective enforcement. In addition, the privatization contracts obligated the new owners of the acquired firms to increase investment in fixed assets, and in some cases to preserve employment, but these obligations proved difficult to enforce. B. The Negative Legacy of the Privatization 5. There have been important negative consequences from the way privatization took place. First, the management of the enterprises has in most cases been left unrestructured. Second, several factors have dissuaded or made it difficult for potential new investors to acquire control and restructure companies after their privatization. For example, shares in these companies have continued to be burdened with obligations to the National Property Fund (NPF), not only for the remaining installments, but also for vaguely specified obligations for investment in fixed assets. In addition, investors have been deterred by the fact that privatization deals were legally questionable and thus the purchase of these firms could involve them in legal disputes. Finally, because controlling share packages were in most cases sold in blocks to partnerships of managerial groups, and not to individual managers or a larger number of employees, transactions have been reduced in the secondary market. This helps explaining why almost no corporate takeovers have been taking place, and why the stock market has remained so thin.’ 6. Also reflecting the method of privatization, enterprises have received almost no new equity injections, aggravating their other key problem of high indebtedness. In the absence of 4 On privatization in Slovakia see articles by Mr. Miklos, the current Deputy Prime Minister, including ‘Corruption Risks in the Privatization Process,” Bratislava, May 1995, and “Privatization in 1996,” MESA10 website. ’ The free trade in shares amounted to only Sk 220 million in 1998 (excluding direct sales agreed outside of the market, and the transactions with the NPF). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 60 - prolonged inflation, debts from the pre-transition period were not inflated away as in a number of other transition economies. Moreover, rapid domestic credit growth up to 1996, and easy access to foreign borrowing during 1995-98, increased the total debt of Slovakia’s enterprise sector from 70 percent of GDP in 1992 to 85 percent of GDP at end-1998, with additional obligations for tax arrears equivalent to about 10 percent of GDP. This level of indebtedness of the enterprise sector is much higher than in other transition economies.6 7. The survival of a large number of unrestructured enterprises has only been possible because the state-owned banks reputedly continued to extend politically motivated loans, or have not been effectively trying to collect their old loans. The government’s concerns about high unemployment in certain regions contributed to these practices. The mirror image in the state-owned banks was a deterioration in their asset quality, with their non-performing assets reaching about 24 percent of GDP at end-1998. C. Restructuring After the Privatization 8. Problems in the enterprise sector appear to be concentrated in improperly privatized old enterprises. The thriving small enterprise sector in Slovakia indicates that the overall legal framework need not be unfriendly to private enterpreneurship.’ Successtil greenfield investments by foreign corporations tInther supports this assessment, 9. To address the issue of post-privatization restructuring of old enterprises, the government is currently proceeding in two directions. First, the government is undertaking a wide-ranging review of the privatization contracts, including efforts to renegotiate, or completely cancel contracts in court, the latter being reserved for the most extreme cases. As the authorities are aware that new investors will be reluctant to invest in companies with contested ownership, the scope and the time frame for the review should preferably be clearly defined, and the list of contracts that will not be challenged should be published. Second, the authorities are trying to develop a comprehensive program to address the issues of weak governance and overindebtedness in the enterprise sector as well as the rehabilitation 6 In Hungary, the comparable number at end-1998 was only 34 percent of GDP, and in Poland 27 percent of GDP. Slovakia’s ratio was also higher than the ratio in the Czech Republic (73 percent of GDP), and in Croatia (53 percent of GDP). Enterprise debt includes domestic bank credit, based on monetary statistics, and enterprise foreign debt reported in debt statistics. ’ In 1998, enterprises with fewer than 20 employees, most of which had originally been established as private undertakings, contributed about 17 percent to value added, and 70 percent to total profits, while employing only 10 percent of the workers in the enterprise sector. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-61 - and privatization of the state-owned banks.8 This will require that the authorities reconcile their objective of encouraging enterprise restructuring, which will include debt write-offs, with the objective of limiting the fiscal costs of recapitalizing the state-owned banks. Complicating the task is the fact that the government has remained a large creditor of privatized enterprises in three ways: (i) as the owner of state-owned banks; (ii) as a guarantor of their loans, and (iii) as a claimant of tax and social security contribution arrears. 10. While the preparations of the new government’s program are necessarily at an early stage, it is evident that accelerating the restructuring of the enterprise sector requires the state-owned banks to forcefully start taking measures to collect their bad loans. The current situation, in which overdue loans remain on the books but no serious collection efforts are made is a strong disincentive for enterprises to restructure. Indebted enterprises remain unattractive to potential investors, their new owners and managers have strong incentives for asset stripping, while enterprises’ resources remain tied in unproductive uses. Large tax arrears that do not result in bankruptcies and liquidations have similar effects. 11. Enterprise restructuring could be promoted by defining clear objectives and incentives for managers of state-owned banks to start forcefully collecting overdue loans, and by allowing trading in loans. The current legal framework appears to provide the possibility for seizing collateral and even assuming ownership over corporate entities in default, but the state-owned banks have apparently been reluctant to use these measures in light of politically motivated concerns. However, under current regulation banks are not allowed to sell their loans. Revising legislation to encourage loan sales could be an efficient and market-based way to accelerate restructuring and reduce bank recapitalization costs for the government.’ 12. More efftcient bankruptcy procedures are another, and inescapable, way to accelerate restructuring in the post-privatization phase, particularly because of the very high indebtedness of the enterprise sector. Contrary to the current situation, creditors should be given the right to propose restructuring plans, and to request and propose the appointment of new management for companies in bankruptcy. The authorities should also review why even the small number of bankruptcy cases takes so much time to resolve in courts, as this clearly dissuades creditors from initiating bankruptcy procedures. Finally, the authorities should review regulations that in various ways pmvide seniority to the tax administration in seizing assets of debtors (including by creating a “priming lien” ahead of previously filed liens, as well as in the cases of asset liquidation). A more equitable solution should be sought that provides more seniority to other creditors, particularly since large tax arrears-which, in any ’ For this purpose, work has begun on an Enterprise and Financial Sector Adjustment Loan (EFSAL) from the World Bank. ’ Some tax regulations are not conducive to :he sale of loans, an issue that would also need to be addressed. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public1 - 62 - event, are often not aggressively enforced by the tax administration-now make it impractical for creditors to pursue foreclosure and liquidation. D. Other Privatization Tasks and Governance in Public Enterprises 13. The most valuable assets remaining for privatization in the enterprise sector are in telecommunications, energy, and transportation, The government appears to be willing to sell rapidly a minority share in the telecommunications company, which might be completed in late 1999, but more likely in early 2000. Proposals also appear to be under discussion to offer minority shares in the gas and electricity companies, in exchange for the NPF bonds. (Some Sk 28 billion of these bonds were issued as compensation for the aborted second round of voucher privatization, and will come due at end-2000.) 14. Minority privatization of the gas and electricity utilities will have limited effects on their profitability unless administrative prices are increased and corporate governance is improved. The gas company, for example, is still profitable owing to gas transit fees, but it is heavily subsidizing household gas consumption. The proposal to increase household gas prices by 80 percent (currently, only two-thirds of procurement costs are covered) has not yet been approved, reflecting social considerations. In a similar vein, the profitability of the main electricity company has dramatically declined over the last few years as a result of inadequate price adjustments, and cross-subsidization of the household sector. The new government has only reluctantly approached this issue, and even after the price adjustment in early 1999, household electricity prices have remained far below costs. Price increases for users were scheduled for April 1, but have been postponed, and plans for the second price increase for households are on hold. The electricity company’s access to foreign borrowing is now quite constrained, and the government will have to assume repayments of some of its debts in 1999. At the same time, recent wage developments in the gas and electricity sectors, despite the fact that wages in these sectors are well above the private sector, indicate that the cost consciousness in these companies remains weak. Rapidly increasing losses in the public railway company, equivalent to 0.8 percent of GDP in 1998, also reflect insufficient price adjustments, as well as the deficiencies in management. In these circumstances, it is important to develop procedures and criteria for defining financial performance targets and evaluating enterprise management. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public