DOCUMENT OF INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND NOT FOR PUBLIC USE MASTER FILES ROOM C-525 0450 SM/96/21 CONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION January 30, 1996 To: Members of the Executive Board From: The Secretary Subject: Turkmenistan - Staff Renort for the 1995 Article IV Consultation Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staff report for the 1995 Article IV consultation with Turkmenistan, which is tentatively scheduled for discussion on Wednesday, February 21, 1996. Mrs. Giirgen (ext. 37413) or Mr. Snoek (ext. 38823) is available to answer technical or factual questions relating to this paper prior to the Board discussion. Unless the Documents Preparation Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD), the European Commission (EC), and the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), following its consideration by the Executive Board. Att: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicCONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND TURKMENISTAN Staff Report for the 1995 Article IV Consultation Prepared by the Staff Representatives for the 1995 Consultation with Turkmenistan Approved by John Odling-Smee and Susan Schadler January 29, 1996 Contents Page T! Introduction 1 11, Background 2 .- III, Recent Economic Developments and Policies 3 1. Output, prices, and wages 3 2, Financial developments 4 3, External sector developments 6 4: Structural reforms a IV. Report on the Discussions and the Economic Reform Program 9 i. Overview 9 2. Fiscal policy and the social safety net 10 a. The 1996 budget 10 b. Social safety net 13 3. Monetary, credit and interest rate policies 14 4. External sector policies and prospects 15 b": Exchange and trade policies 15 External arrears 17 C. Balance of payments outlook for 1996 and the medium-term 17 5. Structural policies 19 V. Technical Assistance 19 VI. Staff Appraisal 20 Boxes 1. Turkmenistan's Potential for Cotton Exports 2. Economic Reform Program Announced on December 27, 1995 2 10 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTables 1. Selected Economic Ind.icators,. 1993-96, 2. Price and Wage Developments, 1993-95 3. General Government Operations, 1994-96 4. Monetary and Credit Developments, 1993-95 5. Consolidated Balance of Payments, 1993-96 6. Arrears on Gas Payments as of November 1, 1995 Appendices 1. Fund Relations .' 2. Relations with the World Bank 3. Statistical Issues * 4. Medium-term Scenario Appendix Table ' 1. Medium-term Balance of Payments, 1993-2001 Charts 1. Selected Economic Indicators, 1993-95 4a 2. Monetary and Credit Developments, December 1993-October 1995 6a 3. Nominal and Real Exchange Rate Indicators, 1994-95 8a 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 33 34 37 39 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicI. Introduction Article IV consultation discussions were held in Ashgabaf during November 3-21, 1995. The staff team u met with the Deputy Head of the Cabinet of Ministers and the Minister of Finance and Economy, Mr. Otchertsov; the Deputy Head of the Cabinet for Agriculture, Mr. Radjapov; the Minister of Oil and Gas, Mr. Esenov; the Chairman of the Central Bank of Turkmenistan (CBT), Mr. Qrazov; the Heads of the State Tax Inspectorate, the State Committee of Statistics, and the State Commodity Exchange; and other senior officials, Turkmenistan became a Fund member on September 22, 1992, with a quota of SDR 48 million. 2/ The last Article IV consultation was concluded on February 10, 1995. On that occasion, Executive Directors noted that the difficulties in transforming Turkmenistan's economy into a market-oriented one were exacerbated by the emergence of large arrears on payments for its gas exports. They urged the authorities to pursue tight fiscal and monetary policies and push forward with systemic reforms. . In June 1995, a EUR II mission assessed progress on economic reforms and reviewed the status of, and the rescheduling prospects for, gas payments arrears. During 1995, FAD, MAE, and STA technical assistance missions visited Turkmenistan as part of the Fund's ongoing technical assistance program (Appendix I). MAE and FAD resident advisors have been stationed in Ashgabat since 1994. The World Bank approved an Institution Building/Technical Assistance loan of US$25 million to Turkmenistan in 1994, of which very little has been disbursed, and conducted health and agricultural sector reviews during 1995. A number of other projects are under consideration (Appendix II). The EBRD approved a US$31 million credit to Turkmenistan in December 1994 to develop small- and medium-sized businesses; there have been no disbursements to date. In January 1996, EBRD financing of US$28 million (loan plus equity) was approved for a textile plant in Turkmenistan. The timeliness, coverage, and accuracy of Turkmenistan's economic data remain weak (Appendix III). However, through ongoing technical assistance, some progress has been made towards bringing the data base closerto international standards and meeting the interim needs for surveillance work. u The team comprised Mrs. Giirgen (head), Messrs. Snoek, Wein, Buchanan (all EUR II), Mr. Fratzscher (PDR), and Ms. Nikdjou (staff assistant, EUR II). The Fund's Resident Representative, Mr. Blackwell, assisted the mission. u Turkmenistan avails itself of the transitional arrangements of Article XIV, Section 2. On the basis of available information, the staff has not identified any exchange restrictions maintained under Article XIV. Turkmenistan's relations with the Fund are summarized in Appendix I. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 2 - II. Background Turkmenistan is a highly specialized economy, with the gas sector presently accounting for more than half of GDP and exports. It is also among the top ten cotton producers, with cotton const.ituting almost a fifth of GDP and a fourth of exports. The major markets for Turkmenistan's gas exports are countries of the former Soviet Union (FSU), while cotton is exported primarily to non-FSU markets. The concentration of exports in two key items, coupled with heavy reliance on imports for most investment and consumer goods, has rendered Turkmenistan highly vulnerable to external shocks. While benefiting significantly from gains in its terms of trade since independence with the shift toward world prices in FSU energy trade, Turkmenistan has not been able to fully realize its gas export potential because of a limited regional pipeline network for shipments and the payments difficulties faced by its major trading partners. Export earnings have been further constrained by the prevalence of barter arrangements, notably for cotton, with adverse implications for export prices (Box 1). The authorities acknowledge the distortionary impact of barter arrangements. They note that, in recent years, cotton has been partly earmarked to meet service payments,under contracts entered into with foreign construction firms for building cotton processing factories in Turkmenistan, which may have resulted in some undervaluation of cotton shipments., Boxl. ‘I’urlnnenisEpn’sPotentiplforcoftonExports The agriculhual sector in Turkmenistan haa been dominated by cotton production, and cotton fibre has accounted for about 25 percent of Turkmenistan’s exports. Since 1994, the majority of cotton exports has been channelled through the State Commodity Exchange, whichhas attempted to realize competitive prices for cotton exports. While this objective may havebeenmet fortheportionofcotton traded directly forhard currency, theprevalenceofbarter arrangements on cottontrade(some ofwhich are paymenta under agreements concluded with foreign construction firms in 1993) appear to have resulted in realisation of much lower values for Turkmenistan’s cotton exports than if the same volumes were exported entirely against foreign exchange at world market prices. Approximate staff calculations, baaed on official data, indicate that realized export prices for Turkmenistan's cotton were at least 30 percent below world market prices during 1994-95, although the quality of cotton was close to world market standards. In particular, contra& which included clearing/exchange/barter componenta resulted in lower returns. For instance, cotton exporta to the United Kingdom, the United States, and Hong Kong in the firat half of 1995 yielded less than 60 percent of average world market prices. Barter trade in cotton with countries of the former Soviet Union, although a small share of the total, appears to have resulted in significantly lower retuma, with the implicit price on such trade averaging only 35 percent of world market prices. Barter trade was encouraged by the dual exchange rate regime and surrender requirementa at the official exchange rate that were in effect in Turkmenistan until January 1996. The calculations indicate that Turkmenistan’s annual receipts from cotton exports could have been higher by approximately US$2OO million during 1994-95 if exports were p’riced at world market levels. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public. - 3 - During 1993-95, the decline in earnings from gas exports was accompanied by a strengthening of centralized controls. To protect international reserves, imports were severely compressed through restrictions on access to foreign exchange. Monetary and exchange rate policies were geared towards sustaining a network of implicit taxes and subsidies that helped promote selected areas of economic activity. In the face of declining gas revenue, expenditure compression became the major means of containing the imbalances in government operations narrowly defined to exclude a number of extrabudgetary funds and key‘ministries. In this setting, little progress was made with systemic reforms and public enterprise restructuring. To compensate for the loss of foreign exchange from arrears on payments for gas,. there was increased public sector recourse to short-term.external borrowing. III. Recent Economic DeveloDments and Policies Turkmenistan faced growing economic difficulties in 1995. Real GDP continued to decline, the central government budget moved into a small deficit, and broad money growth rose sharply, as the CBT engaged in the financing of enterprise arrears clearance. These developments, coupled with a sizable devaluation of the manat in September, fueled monthly inflation to 33 percent by October 1995. Notwithstanding large wage adjustments during the year, real wages declined sharply. 1. ' OUtPUt. Drices. and wages Based on tentative staff estimates, u real GDP declined by about 14 percent in 1995, following a 19 percent drop in the previous year (Table 1). 2/ A further sharp cutback in gas production in the face of continued uncertainties relating to payments for Turkmenistan's gas exports was largely behind the contraction in GDP, while there was some upturn in cotton production and construction activity. Inflation averaged almost 900 percent during the first ten months, of 1995 over the comparable period of 1994. Price liberalization continued to lag behind other FSU countries, despite a number of decontrol measures. In January 1995, the list of products subject to price controls was narrowed, although a number of key prices--notably energy, transportation, bread, flour, meat, and dairy products-- continued to be determined by decree. In mid-year, procurement prices for raw cotton, grains, and livestock were raised significantly, narrowing the wide differentials with world market prices. In the absence 1/ Staff adjustments are made to official GDP data for the valuation of gas and cotton exports. For details, see Chapter II of the Recent Economic Developments (RED) report which will provide background information. a During 1993-95, the cumulative decline in gas production and real GDP reached three fifths an,d over a third, respectively. production was less than half of capacity. On average, annual gas Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 4 - of an immediate pass-through to consumer prices, food subsidies grew substantially by the third quarter of the year. During November- December 1995, bread prices were raised by a factor of'lO-30, domestic energy prices (fuel oil and gasoline) were more than doubled, on average; and domestic transportation prices were increased by up to 10 times. The adjusted prices, however, fell far short of fully recovering costs. By the final quarter of 1994, average economy-wide real wages declined to about a fourth of their 1993 levels (Table 2 and Chart 1). Wages in budget organizations were raised by 4 times in January 1995 and by an additional 2.5 times in July, triggering similar increases in wages in other sectors. Despite these adjustments, average economy-wide real wages are estimated to have declined further during 1995. However, if account is taken of other benefits (such as family allowances and subsidized housing, health care, and education) provided to the population, the decline in real incomes during the period in question was much less than indicated by wage developments alone. 2. Financtal developments The Government has implemented quarterly budgets that have essentially covered spending on wages, salaries, and social benefits. The policy of expenditure compression to contain fiscal deficits in the face of declining revenue has been reflected in reduced capital and maintenance spending. u Moreover, some arrears were incurred on domestic budgetary payments in 1994, which were cleared during 1995. The authorities indicated that the only new arrears incurred during 1995 were on the servicing of external debt. u Estimates for the year, based on actual data through the third quarter, indicate an overall budget deficit of about manat 18 billion or 1.6 percent of GDP (approximately the same as in 1994), with domestic bank financing limited to one percent of GDP (Table 3). However, the partial coverage of the budget 1/ and implicit taxes and subsidies administered outside the budget through the dual exchange rate system and preferential bank lending, masked a generally weaker underlying fiscal position. While it is difficult 1/ Total budgetary revenue declined from about 19 percent of GDP in 1993 to 10 percent of GDP in 1994-95, triggering a contraction of approximately similar magnitude in total expenditure. Capital expenditure dropped to l-2 percent of GDP during 1994-95, from a peak of 9 percent of GDP earlier. However, there was capital spending (airport and hotel construction) outside the budget in,this period. u These were, for the most part, to the U.S. and Turkish Exim Banks and the European Union (EU). The former two were cleared as of September 1995, while arrears to the EU (US$58 million) are still outstanding. In addition, as of November 1, 1995, there were about US$20 million in arrears to a number of bilateral creditors. y There are as many as 29 so called "self-supporting" ministries in Turkmenistan (including the Ministries of Agriculture, and Oil and Gas) which are outside the purview of the budget. Moreover, a number of extrabudgetary funds are maintained, although two of these--the Pension and Social Security Funds --were brought under the central government budget in mid-1995. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 4a - Chart 1 TURKMENISTAN SELECTED ECONOMIC INDICATORS, 1993-95 consumer Pricfa (PenYalt change) ,60 Real wllge Indices (lees = loo) l/ I I uehwums price --Bed minimum mat.2 -Real ~vuqc rage -20 '1 " '1 " ' " ' "1 1"' 1" 1 ' 1' '1 " ' "1 JAN APR ,;9; OCT JAN APR JUL OCT JAN APR JUL OCT 1994 1995 central Gov emme!nt Budget J- 2C II IE 14 l.? 10 :n Percent of GDP) 160 140 120 100 90 &I 40 20 0 -20 20 18 16 I4 I2 10 5 0 -5 -lC -1: -2t 3ooc 250( zoo< 150( moi 5oc 0 eal GDP and Caa Production ~lteal GDP ~mrtb(h pxcml. left de) -Gas produclion(ln bIlliona of cubic melen. ri#ht raid 1993 1994 1995M. btenml Tre& (In millions af US. dollar, left male) 2/ I! I - )- )- , - )- I- 64 70 60 50 40 30 20 25 20 I5 10 5 0 Sources: Data provided by the Turkmen authorities: and staff estimates. l/ Nominal wages deflated by consumer prices. 2/ Exports are an an accrual basis and do not reflect exports, regardless of whether payment has been receive s ayments arrears. The current account captures all or not, with the arrears on gas export payments recorded in the capital account, and hence reflected in the overall balance. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 5 - to estimate the size of the quasi-fiscal deficit, if domestic bank financing of public enterprises (heavily subsidized until recently) were to be taken as a proxy, approximate staff estimates would suggest that the quasi-fiscal deficit in 1995 could be in the order of 5-8 percent of GDP. Revenue collections by the central government remained weak in 1995, as gas export earnings fell further and a highly appreciated official exchange rate severely constrained the tax base. I-J A number of revenue measures were adopted during the year, including the introduction of excise taxes on motor gasoline and diesel (at 55 and 60 percent, respectively); the shifting of the collection of excise duties on imported goods to customs; and the adoption of a uniform (8 percent) personal income tax rate. The net revenue impact of these measures, some of which followed earlier FAD and EU recommendations, were not significant, partly because of new exemptions, so that the budget deficit was once again contained through expenditure compression. Wages and food subsidies, however, grew sharply, and there was net lending to agriculture of manat 15 billion (1.3 percent of estimated 1995 GDP) in the final quarter; financed by CBT credit. During 1995, the authority of the CBT over the conduct of monetary policy continued to be limited. As of late 1994, credit auctions were discontinued and CBT credit was allocated by Presidential decree. Although credit growth was contained during the first half of 1995, this trend was reversed with the authorization in April of an interest-free credit line of manat 20 billion (1.8 percent of GDP) for agriculture, which was drawn down rapidly following the adjustments in procurement prices for key commodities in mid-year. This development, together with the sharp increase in net credit to the Government and credit to banks, resulted in base money growth of more‘than six-fold during the twelve months through October 1995 (Chart 2). Total banking system credit and broad money displayed stronger growth during the same period, as commercial banks were instructed to lend about manat 10 billion to clear interenterprise arrears. Broad money growth is estimated to have dampened in the final months of 1995, as domestic credit expansion was held in check. 2/ Reflecting the loss of confidence in the manat, there was an increase in income velocity during 1995 (Table 4). The authorities followed a policy of administratively lowering interest rates during 1995 to reduce the cost of borrowing to state enterprises. In February 1995, a maximum limit of 15 percent per annum was imposed on banks' lending rates to enterprises and the upper limit on the CBT refinance rate was reduced from 50 percent to 15 percent per annum, with many loans carrying lower rates. In addition, the interest rate on time deposits with the state-owned Savings Bank was lowered in stages from 150 percent to lJ Earnings from state exports continued to be valued at the official exchange rate for tax purposes. 2J Preliminary monetary data for November 1995 confirm this expectation. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 6 - 70 percent by April 1995. Finally, in August 1995, the interest rate on. treasury b'ills, held mostly by banks as an attractive alternative to lending at 15 percent, was reduced from 150 percent to 60 percent per annum. Hence, interest rates grew increasingly negative in real terms, discouraging financial savings, fuelling monetary and credit growth, and promoting a shift from domestic to foreign currency. Some progress was made by the CBT during 1995 in the area of bank supervision, notably in strengthening and enforcing-prudential regulations and increasing the number of staff engaged in supervision activities. Turkmenistan has avoided the proliferation of banks witnessed in many of the other FSU countries; the number of banks has gradually declined to 15, with the closure of smaller banks, which could not comply with the increased minimum equity capital requirement. 3. External sector develonments L/ Turkmenistan has enjoyed a relatively strong external position, despite the accumulation of arrears on payments for its gas exports. As noted earlier, this has reflected, for the most part, a combination of sharp terms of trade gains and import compression. International reserves have remained high during 1993-95, averaging the equivalent of over 7 months of imports annually. Despite some deterioration in Turkmenistan's balance of payments in 1995, the current account and overall surpluses are estimated at about 2.5 percent and 3.6 percent of GDP, respectively, with end-1995 gross official reserves rising to about USS1.2 billion, or almost 10 months of imports (Table 5). Turkmenistan continued to maintain officially quoted multiple exchange rates during 1995, although the special rate (manat lO/US$) for gas transactions was discontinued as of February. Following a long period of stable rates, on September 18, 1995, the official exchange rate 2J was devalued by 62.5 percent from manat 75/US$ to manat 2OO/US$, and the commercial exchange rate (covering non-state transactions) by 61 percent from manat 195/LS$ to manat 5OO/US$. As in the'past, the gains in competitiveness for the majority of exports to which the official rate continued to apply were quickly eroded in the subsequent months, with the official exchange rate appreciating rapidly in real terms as inflation accelerated. In contrast, the parallel market rate depreciated sharply in I/ Throughout this discussion, the current account captures all exports, regardless of whether payment has been received or not, with the arrears on gas export payments recorded in the capital account, and hence reflected in the overall balance. u. Covering all transactions between the Government of Turkmenistan, broadly defined, and. other countries. All state trade transactions, including gas and cotton exports and grain imports, were accounted for at the official exchange rate, which also applied to all government and government-guaranteed liabilities to other states. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 6a - J 0 I I I I I gz$ 0 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 7 - nominal terms from May 1995 onwards, displaying a similar, although less consistent trend in real terms (Chart 3). IJ On November 27, 1995, there was a partial freeing of the exchange market. The CBT authorized commercial banks to transact in foreign exchange for up to US$l,OOO for a single sale, without, however, a limit on the total number of transactions. The commercial exchange rate was abolished and banks allowed to freely set their own rates. This move effectively eliminated the parallel market rate, By mid-December, the bank rate rose to manat 2,5OO/US$, reportedly reflecting market anticipation that the newly introduced exchange practice would be short-lived, but stabilized at about this level in subsequent weeks as such doubts dissipated. Turkmenistan's exchange and payments system underwent several changes since the last Article IV consultation. The multiple currency practices &sing from the application of a special exchange rate for gas transactions and from th.e advance deposit requirement for imports were eliminated. A system of officially quoted dual exchange rates was maintained during 1995, but on January 1, 1996, the exchange rate was unified on the basis of the rate at the interbank exchange market on that day. The staff is currently looking at the jurjsdicfionaa implications of the daily operation of the exchange market-following reports that the differential between the rates quoted by the CBT and the commercial banks may exceed 2 percent. However, several exchange restrictions subject to approval under Article VIII have been identified. These include a comprehensive restriction on access to foreign exchange to US$l,OOO per transaction for most current international transactions, including invisible transactions (such as travel allowances, interest, dividends, profits); mandatory approval by the CBT and the Foreign Exchange Committee of all non-prlvate import payment orders; restrictions on the transferability of manat proceeds received by non-residents from current transactions, including those held in non-resident manat accounts. The staff is also currently looking into the jurisdictional implications of the operation of new official correspondent accounts with FSU countries. Payments arrears to Turkmenistan on gas exports (including amounts rescheduled under bilateral agreements) stood at close to USS1.5 billion on November 1, 1995 (over 60 percent of estimated 1995 GDP), of which about USSO. billion was owed by Ukraine (Table 6). 2J While new arrears were incurred during 1995, the payments ratio on the total amounts owed (on new shipments, as well as on the servicing of rescheduled arrears) rose to 70 percent, compared to 58 percent in 1994, mainly on account of improved payments by Ukraine. Further understandings were reached with Ukraine in November on the clearance of about US$62 million in cash arrears outstanding on October 1, 1995, with US$30 million to be paid in goods and the remainder I-J Exchange restrictions promoted a parallel market, where the rate reached manat l,SOOflS$ by early November. The size of this market, however, remained relatively small. u In addition to Ukraine, arrears were incurred by Georgia, Armenia, and Azerbaijan. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 8 - in hard currency. By mid-December, according to the Turkmen authorities, the latter component had risen to almost US$40 million, as a result of new cash arrears incurred by Ukraine. Finally, a protocol was signed with Georgia on December 25, 1995, setting out the conditions and timetable for negotiating a possible rescheduling of the 1993-94 debt to Turkmenistan. Partly to ameliorate the loss of foreign exchange fromarrears on gas exports, Turkmenistan resorted to external borrowing with short maturities. The total stock of government and government-guaranteed external debt almost tripled to US$470 million (21 percent of,GDP) between 1993 and 1995. I/ Turkmenistan experienced debt servicing problems to its non-FSU creditors in 1995. As of November.1, 1995, Turkmenistan's external arrears stood at about US$78 million, of which US$58 million was owed to the EU and the rest to a number of bilateral creditors. 4. Structural reforms Progress with structural reforms has been very limited. Most key prices remained controlled during 1995 and the exchange and trade system continued to be highly restrictive. Privatization took place sporadically and was confined almost exclusively to small scale enterprises, with only a handful of medium-scale and large enterprises privatized. 2J Even in the small-scale category, majority state ownership. was retained in most cases. The four medium- and large-scale enterprises and three of the small-scale enterprises were auctioned and, for the rest, shares were distributed to employees. Turkmenistan has received EU assistance (under the TACIS program) for the privatization of the four medium-scale enterprises,.and. more assistance is planned for privatizing two large-scale enterprises. In agriculture, farm restructuring and privatization has followed three tracks: creation of independent private farms on reserve land, expansion of household plots within traditional farms, and reorganization (as of mid-1995) of state and collective farms as peasant associations. The authorities view these moves as interim steps to deepening agricultural sector reforms, although no tangible results have been obtained so far in terms of increased private agricultural production. 3J lJ More than half of external debt outstanding at end-1995 carried maturities of less than two years. 2J According to information provided by the World Bank, to date, 1,652 small-scale enterprises (up to 100 employees) were privatized from a total of 3,980 enterprises; four medium-scale enterprises (loo- 500 employees) were privatized out of an earmarked 730 enterprises (from a total of 1,645 medium-scale enterprises); and only one large-scale enterprise (above 500 employees) was privatized out of an earmarked 90 enterprises (from a total of 200 large-scale enterprises). J/ Turkmenistan's Constitution recognizes the private possession of land. A decree on land tenure limits land ownership rights to holding and use, without the right of disposition. So far, the transfer of land to private ownership has been negligible. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicI NOMINAL and REAL EXCHANGE RATE INDICATORS, 1994-95 I_ --Manat/US$. market rate (left scale) l/ --Real market rate index (right scale) 2/ _ 2600 2080 1560 1040 520 0 i I I I I I I , I 1 I I I I I I JAN MAR MAY JUL SEP NOV JAN MAR MAY JUL SEP NOV 1994 1995 - 8a - Chart 3 TURKMENISTAN 500 - 450 - 400 - 350 - 300 - 250 - 200 - 150 - -Gas rate (in manate per US. dollar, right scale) 3/ =Officiat rate (in manats per U.S. dollar, right scale) 6YCOmmerCia.l rate (in manats per U.S. dollar. right scale) 4/ -Real official rate (left scale) 2/ MAY JUL SEP NOV JAN MAR MAY JUL _-. ._ . SFP NllV 1994 1995 JAN MAR ____ Source: Data provided by the Turkmen authorities. 440 130 ?20 110 0 350 300 250 200 150 100 50 550 l/ Morket rate is the parallel market rate until November 1995 and the interbank rate thereafter. 2/ Nominal index deflated by the consumer price index; January 1994=100. An increase in the index is a real deprecloilon. 3/ Until February 21. 1995, when the gas rate was discontinued and official exchange rate applied to gas transaction. 4/ As of end-November 1995. the commercial exchange rate was abolished. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 9 - IV. ReDOrt on the Discussions and the Economic Reform Proeram 1. Overview At.the outset of the mission's discussions, the authorities indicated that President Niyazov was considering the adoption of an economic stabilization and reform program in 1996. A number of measures were under review and a complete package was expected to be presented by the President to the Popular Council on December 27, 1995. u In response to the authorities' request, the mission's work centered around the preparatton and discussion of a possible reform scenario for 1996 and the associated policy framework, including a detailed financial program that would be consistent" with substantially lowering inflation by the end of 1996. The staff underscored that a well-coordinated and effective economic reform program would entail substantial exchange and trade liberalization, the freeing of prices and interest rates, and the adoption of a comprehensive privatization program. More specifically, it would be necessary to: (i) unify and allow for the market determination of the exchange rate; (ii) make further progress with the easing of price controls; (iii) achieve market-determined interest rates by activating CBT credit auctions and discontinuing credit issuance by decree; (iv) adopt a strict financial program and limit the bank-financed budget deficit to no more than one percent of GDP in 1996; and (v) clear all external payments arrears and reach early understandings with major trading partners on the arrangements for gas shipments and payments in i996. Under such a scenario, and as the gas export payments situation stabilized, there would be scope for some recovery in GDP in 1996 u and a reduction in monthly inflation to about 3 percent by year-end, although inflation would remain high initially in response to the liberalization measures and attendant adjustments in wages and social benefits. The balance of payments could be expected to move into a small deficit (both on current account and overall), as the easing of exchange restrictions boosted imports. Despite some drawdown in international reserves, import coverage would remain ample. along On December 27, 1995, an economic stabilization and reform program the above lines was announced by President Niyazov and approved by the Popular Council. Most notably, as of January 1, 1996 the exchange rate was unified, credit allocation by decree was discontinued and interest rates freed, and further substantial measures toward price liberalization were introduced. The key features of the Government's economic reform program 1/ The Popular Council, consisting of elected (50 percent) and appointed members (cabinet members, parliamentarians, and local representatives), is the highest decision making authority on matters of domestic and external policy. u Given the heavy share of the gas sector in GDP, even a modest upturn in gas output (5 percent), coupled with some increase in cotton output, implies real GDP growth of about 2 percent in 1996. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 10 - are presented in Box 2 and its implications discussed in the following sections. Box2.Tl' . a : Economic Reform Program Aa~mcedon~27,1995 The key features of the economic reform program announced by the President of Turkmenistan on December 27, 1995 and effective as of January 1, 1996 include the following: 1. Unification of the exchange rate and its market determination; 2. Promotion of the foreign exchange market through regular CBT foreign exchange auctions and the channelling of part of export surrender requirements to the foreign exchange market; 3. Establishment of a Foreign Exchange Committee at the Office of the President to oversee foreign exchange transactions; 4. Liberahzation of the bread price within a profit margin of 20 percent and adjustments in other administered ‘prices, including a fourfold increase in the price of meat and a fivefold increase in the price of flour; 5. Wage increases of 2-2.5 times for employees of budget organizations and state enterprises, setting of the aGerage economy-wide wages at manat 20,ooO per month (about US$8 at the current exchange rate), compared mabout manat 9,200 in the fourth quarter of 1995, with attendant increases in pensions, stipends, and other social payments. 6. Discontinuation of credit allocation by decree, initiation of CBT credit auctions, unification of reserve requirements at 11 percent, and the lifting of ceilings on banks’ lending rates and the refinance rate; market determination of the refinance rate and application of a market interest rate to Government borrowing from the CBT. 7. The implementation of a tight monetary and credit program by the CBT and limitation of the bank financed budget deficit to one percent of GDP in 1996, with a view to sharply lowering inflation. 2. Fiscal oolicv and the social safetv net a. The 1996 budget The staff noted that the limited coverage of the budget restricts its usefulness as an instrument of macroeconomic management. The lack of transparency, moreover, impedes the assessment of policies and ,effective surveillance. To address these weaknesses, the staff urged the authorities to broaden the coverage of the budget to include extrabudgetary funds and fiscal functions of the ministries presently outside the budget. These moves, coupled with an easing of price and exchange controls and the unification of the exchange rate, would considerably increase the Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 11 - transparency of government operations and the scope for effective fiscal management. The unification of the exchange rate, moreover, would raise budgetary revenue significantly by,allowing gas and cotton exports to be valued at market exchange rates for tax purposes. lJ The easing of price controls would curb subsidies and release valuable budgetary resources for spending in other crucial areas. These two measures would help generate a small budget surplus in 1996, evenafter allowing for adjustments in wages and social benefits 2J and some augmentation of capital,and maintenance spending. The ensuing budget surplus (2.6 percent .of GDP), in combination with bank financing (one percent of GDP) and moderate foreign borrowing, would allow for the servicing of government and government-guaranteed external debt, including the payment of outstanding arrears on the servicing of external debt (Table 3). 3J The staff also suggested that a number of revenue measures be implemented to offset possible revenue shortfalls during the year, including: reduction/elimination of tax exemptions, holidays, and benefits; imposition of a profits tax on collective farms; and introduction of a general import duty at a single rate in the range of 5-10 percent on all imports. Beyond the immediate period, the staff noted that progress should be made in implementing other recommendations on reforming the tax system (particularly for value added tax, including the move to a destination basis) and improving tax administration, along the lines of FAD recommendations. The authorities were broadly receptive to the staff's budget scenario. On coverage, they noted that some control was exercised by the Government over the expenditures of the self-supporting ministries outside the budget. Nevertheless, the possibility of bringing a number of these ministries directly within the purview of the budget would be explored. On extrabudgetary funds, the authorities noted that an increasing number of these funds were being incorporated into the budget. When questioned about the Foreign Exchange Reserve Fund (FERF), they pointed out that this Fund is lJ Unification is estimated to affect budgetary revenue and expenditure disproportionately and have a net positive impact on the budget. 2J The mission's projections allow for a 10 percent real increase in wages in budget organizations in the first quarter of 1996 over the fourth quarter of 1995, and no further change in real wages in the remainder of the year. The wage adjustments announced on December 27, 1995 (including the average economy-wide wage level of manat 20,000 per month in the first quarter of 1996) are broadly consistent with this. 3J This scenario does not assume an expanded coverage of the budget, other than the full-year incorporation of the Pension and Social Security Funds (whose budgetary revenues accounted for close to 2 percent of GDP and 16 percent of totalbudget revenue in 1995). The projected sharp increase in revenue results mainly from exchange rate unification. collection rate is assumed on current gas export payments, A 70 percent compared to a realized rate of 66 percent during the first ten months of 1995. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12 - directly under the control of the President and not used for budgetary purposes, except when specifically authorized by him. Some allowance is made for anticipated authorizations in preparing the budget, although these are not significant amounts. Finally, the authorities noted that the draft budget under preparation incorporated measures to sharply reduce price subsidies and aimed at containing the bank-financed deficit to no more than one percent of GDP. The budget approved by Parliament on November 24, 1995 closely approximates the version discussed with the staff, apart from the gas export projection for 199.6. The volume of gas exports for 1996 was raised by about a third from 22 billion cubic meters projected earlier (also the amount assumed in the staff scenario) to 30 billion cubic meters. This revision was made on the strength of a commitment by a new joint venture with Russia formed to export Turkmenistan's gas. I-J The .additional tax revenue generated was allocated to expenditure in the social sectors (health and education). The approved 1996 budget projects a deficit of 0.5 percent of GDP. However, the budget is in constant prices and does not incorporate the impact of the measures announced on December 27, 1995--notably exchange rate unification, administrative adjustments in prices (only partially included), wages, and social benefits., and the freeing of interest rates. The President has instructed the Cabinet of Ministers to make the relevant changes in the approved 1996 budget, while containing the bank-financed budget deficit to no more than one percent of GDP. Since the staff projections of the 1996 budget had built in the measures announced, the outlook for 1996 following the adoption of the economic reform program would remain broadly unchanged in the staff scenario. The authorities' budget outlook, on the other hand, can be expected to strengthen considerably, when the measures (notably, exchange rate unification) are combined with the highly optimistic gas.export volume projection underlying the approved budget. Under such a scenario, the budget can be expected to generate a larger surplus than projected by the staff. This would run the risk of gearing policies to unrealistically high revenue projections, which could jeopardize achievement of the inflation objective, although the authorities remain confident that expenditure will be held closely in line with revenue as in the past. u On November 15, an agreement was signed between Gazprom of Russia and Turkmenistan to form a joint venture, Turkmenrosgaz, for the prospecting and exports of Turkmenistan's gas. It was agreed that gas exports in 1996 would be channeled exclusively through this joint venture (the initial agreement is for one year) and the export target for the year was set at 30 billion cubic meters, with a target of 23 billion cubic meters for exports to Ukraine. In recent years, actual gas'export volumes have remained well below contracted amounts. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13 - b. Social safety net L/ The discussions indicated an increased awareness on the part of the authorities of the need to replace the system of subsidies through administered prices by direct and transparent means of social protection. The price measures announced on December 27, .1995--notably the liberalization of the bread price.within a 20 percent profit margin and the substantial increases in flour and meat prices --coupled with adjustments in social benefits, u are moves in the right direction. The staff had also recommended the phasing out of food rations, and argued for the gradual imposition (as meters are installed) of charges on household use of gas, electricity, and water to cover costs and encourage efficient use. The. authorities noted the political constraints to immediate action in some of these areas, while not disputing the economic arguments for such changes. Hence, they have maintained the food rations and have effectively raised the flour ratton by unifying it for urban and rural consumers. In addition, price controls have been retained for most basic food items, household and transport services, and energy, fertilizer, and cement tariffs, with the understanding that there will be periodic adjustments to reflect cost developments. The staff encouraged the authorities to implement earlier technical assistance recommendations to streamline and more closely target social benefits to those most in need, and to seek additional technical assistance if necessary. The staff,also noted that as market-oriented reforms take hold, state employment guarantees could no longer be maintained and measures would need to be taken to address the consequences of a likely short-run increase in unemployment. It stressed that procedures should be initiated to ensure the collection of contributions to the Employment Fund, which could be integrated into the budget. 3J JJ Turkmenistan implements an extensive system of social protection, consisting of guaranteed employment in state-owned enterprises and farms; subsidized prices for basic consumer goods, housing, health care, and other key consumption items, such as gas, water, and electricity; and a system of pensions, family allowances, and unemployment benefits. The system has been costly to operate and the benefits have not always reached the most vulnerable groups of the population. In September 1995, an FAD mission to Turkmenistan advised the authorities on subsidy reform and social protection. 2J These include a threefold increase in the existing allowances to families with children and a doubling of the stipends for students, which, nevertheless, imply sharp real declines. 3J The Employment Law stipulates a payroll contribution of 2 percent to be paid by enterprises and earmarked for the Employment Fund, although this provision is not being implemented. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14 - 3. Honetarv. credit. and interest rate ~olit&g The system of providing free and/or cheap credits and setting interest rates by decree has rendered monetary and credit policies ineffective in stabilizing Turkmenistan's economy and achieving an efficient allocation'of financial resources. The staff urged the authorities to discontinue the issuance of credit by decree and introduce a financial program for 1996, with the objective of sharply reducing inflation. It argued that the CBT should‘refrain from granting new credits in the remainder of 1995. Thereafter, CBT credits, other than to the Government, should be issued in conformity with'the financial program and on the basis of CBT credit auctions.. Net CBT credit to the Government should be strictly in line with the amount specified in the program. The CBT refinance rate should be determined in.the credit auctions and allowed to rise substantially toward a positive real.level. The ,staff noted that a major factor behind continued high inflation during 1995 was the CBT/government financing of the clearance of interenterprise arrears, notably in agriculture. J,/ To partly sterilize the impact of these operations, the mission recommended that the Government issue six-month treasury bills to banks and the public at market-related interest rates in an amount of manat 15 billion, equivalent to government net lending to agriculture' in 1995. The proceeds of this issue would be used by the Government to repay (ahead of schedule) the CBT credit of an equivalent amount extended in October 1995 'for onlending to agriculture. This measure was all the more necessary, given the uncertainties related to the extent an& timing of the repayments on bank credit to agriculture. The staff stressed that, in the future, the Government and CBT should refrain from financing arrears clearance operations, as such moves intensified inflationary pressures and weakened payments discipline of enterprises by creating expectations of repeated bailouts. The authorities were in agreement with the crucial need to formulate a monetary and credit program for 1996, with the objective of lowering monthly inflation to 3-4 percent by the final months of the year. Past attempts at this had failed, primarily because the CBT was not accorded sufficient autonomy in the conduct of monetary policy. On the lending to agriculture, the manat 20 billion authorized in April 1995 was considered, at the time, as a temporary advance to be mostly repaid after the cotton harvest. The authorities noted that the issuance of treasury bills in the amount envisaged to mop up liquidity could unduly.squeeze banks' reserves, so that it would be desirable for the issue to be taken up jointly by the banks and the public. J/. Interenterprise arrears (as reported on the "Kartotek 2" form and recorded in the banking data) rose from manat 14 billion at end-1994 to manat 44 billion at end-May 1995, fluctuated in the subsequent months as clearing operations 'were carried out, and stood at manat 41 billion at end- October 1995 (equivalent to 3.6 percent of estimated 1995 GDP). ' Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 15 - The staff urged the authorities to remove the 15 percent ceiling on commercial bank lending rates to state enterprises, allow banks to set their lending rates freely, and subject government borrowing from the CBT to market-related interest rates. The budgetary impact of the latter move could be partly offset by CBT profit transfers to the Government, for which there were provisions in the CBT Law, although no transfers had taken place so far. The staff also stressed that all interest-free lending should be discontinued, reserve requirements unified at 15 percent of banks' deposit liabilities (including foreign currency deposits), u the rate on treasury bills be raised substantially and preparations begun for their auctioning. The measures announced on December 27, in particular, the discontinuation of credit allocation by decree, the initiation of CBT credit auctions, and the freeing of interest rates, go far in meeting the above recommendations. The CBT has announced that it will implement a tight monetary and credit program in 1996 and refrain from further financing of interenterprise arrears clearance operations. The unification of banks' reserve requirements at 11 percent rather than the 15 percent recommended by the staff will need to be reflected in the revisions to the financial program for 1996 discussed with the mission. So far, the authorities have not issued the manat 15 billion in treasury bills noted above and there has not been much repayment of agricultural credits. The CBT will need to ensure adequate and flexible use of monetary instruments to achieve the stabilization objective for 1996. At the same time, it will need to further strengthen its supervisory activities and.monitor closely the impact on banks of the recently announced liberalization measures. 4. External sector oolicies and orosoects a. Exchange and trade oolicies The staff urged the authorities to liberalize the exchange and trade system, in particular to unify the exchange rate and phase out barter arrangements. u The staff suggested that in Turkmenistan's present circumstances, adopting a floating rather than a fixed exchange rate regime would be more appropriate, given the largely untested commitment to strict financial discipline, the unpredictability of foreign exchange receipts, and the early stage of systemic reforms. The market determination of the exchange rate could be achieved by reinstating the weekly CBT foreign exchange auctions, while allowing unrestricted trading outside the auctions, and modifying the existing surrender requirements to allow surrenders to the u As of January 1995, reserve requirements were 10 percent on deposits of state enterprises, 5 percent on private sector demand and time deposits (a lower rate to encourage their mobilization), and 15 percent for ail other deposits. u Barter arrangements may have also been used as a means of avoiding surrender requirements. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 16 - market rather than to the FERF. u The CBT would limit its interventions in the market to smoothing out sharp fluctuations in the rate, and be prepared to allow the manat to appreciate as economic reforms take hold and confidence in the domestic currency is restored. Over time, the CBT auctions would give,way to an interbank system, where the exchange rate would be freely determined by banks. u The staff suggested that export surrender requirements be phased out at the earliest opportunity. With the measures announced on December 27, the exchange rate was unified on January 1, 1996 at manat 2,4OG/US$ on the basis of the rate at the interbank foreign exchange market on that day. As of the same date, surrender requirements were modified to allow 20 percent surrender to the market and 30 percent to the FERF at the unified exchange rate, compared to the previous arrangement of full surrender to the FERF at the official exchange rate. For oil and gas transactions, the total surrender requirement was raised from 60 percent to 70 percent of export earnings, with a 30-40 split between surrenders to the market and the FERF. A schedule for the phasing out of surrender requirements has not so far been announced. The authorities also expect to introduce an interbank foreign exchange auction as of mid-February 1996. On other exchange restrictions, during the discussions, the authorities indicated that CBT screening of import payment requests for all imports outside the private sector was triggered by the desire to avoid unproductive spending of foreign exchange by enterprises. 2/ The staff argued that this would best be' achieved by subjecting enterprises to hard budget constraints, and urged the authorities to allow free access to foreign exchange for the purposes of making payments and transfers for current international transactions. With the measures announced on December 27, however, a Foreign Exchange Committee has been set up at the Office of the President to oversee foreign exchange transaction, in particular, to clear payments for imports of good and services by state enterprises, organizations, and institutions.. The staff will seek clarification on the I/ During the first nine months of 1995, gross inflows into the FERF were about one-third of total exports (accrual basis) or the equivalent of current gas export receipts. The drawing down of the FERF to augment the auctions should, in principle, also be an option, but the strict control over the use of the FERF rules this out in practice. a/ The operation of the existing interbank market is subject to some restrictions (notably the US$l,OOO limit per transaction) and the volume of transactions is thin. Moreover, the infrastructure necessary for the adequate functioning of an interbank market is not fully developed. Guidance on the latter and the institutional reforms to develop the interbank market could be provided under the ongoing MAE technical assistance program to Turkmenistan. 9 The authorities noted that clearance by the CBT of the requests forwarded by commercial banks on behalf of their customers was normally obtained within the same day. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17 - operations of this Committee, which open the way for the intensification of the restrictions on payments for current foreign exchange transactions L/ and is in contradiction with the moves toward economic liberalization in other areas. b. External arrears The authorities held several discussions during 1995 with their major debtors on the payments arrangements for the arrears on gas export payments incurred on 1995 shipments, as well as the rescheduling of arrears outstanding (and not yet rescheduled) from 1993-94 shipments. While some progress was made in reaching understandings, a great deal of uncertainty still pertains to the related payments by the debtor countries concerned. Payments arrangements for Turkmenistan's gas shipments in 1996 are to be negotiated by the newly formed joint venture.' Prospects for collecting the amounts due will 'depend crucially on the success in obtaining either bank guarantees on or prepayments for gas exports, since under their reform programs, Turkmenistan's key trading partners will no longer be providing government guarantees on payments for gas imports. Regarding Turkmenistan's external debt service arrears, the staff argued that these should be discharged in full immediately, particularly given Turkmenistan's strong international reserves. The authorities have since reached agreement with the EU for the payment of Turkmenistan's outstanding arrears in four installments during 1996, although no payments have taken place so far. C. Balance of navments outlook for 1996 and the medium-term Turkmenistan's balance of payments is expected to deteriorate further in 1996, while still remaining relatively strong. Staff projections, developed in discussion with the authorities, .indicate a small current account deficit (about 3 percent of GDP) in 1996, largely on account of a contraction in the trade surplus. As noted earlier, gas export volumes are projected conservatively at 22 billion cubic meters, and the collection ratio on current gas export payments at 70 percent. Cotton exports are expected to stabilize, with offsetting volume and price changes. The current account deficit is expected to be financed by a net capital account surplus (one percent of GDP, reflecting stabilized gas payments situation) and some drawdown of international reserves (to about 8 months of import coverage). Should gas export volumes in 1996 turn out to be closer to the authorities' present projection of 30 billion cubic meters, the balance of payments outlook would improve considerably, assuming a similar collection ratio on payments. L/ It is not clear whether this arrangement replaces or supplements the import clearing procedure of the CBT. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 18 - Medium-term balance of payments projections for Turkmenistan are subject to more than the usual degree of uncertainty, given the difficulty in judging how rapidly the gas payments arrears problem can be resolved and/or export markets diversified, and the implications of progress in these areas for the volume of gas production and exports. Clearly, if Turkmenistan is able to realize its gas export potential, and strengthen earnings from cotton exports through increased processing and improved pricing, its balance of payments outlook is likely to be very comfortable. An illustrative scenario along these lines for the-period 1996-2001 is summarized below and detailed in Appendix IV. u An obvious way out of the present impasse relating to payments for gas exports would be to diversify gas export markets, while intensifying efforts to improve collections from existing trading partners. However, this would require mobilizing substantial financing for the construction of new gas pipelines. Presently, various alternatives are under discussion (for details, see RED Chapter V). So far, the only construction initiated is on the Turkmenistan-Northern Iran segment of a project to build a gas pipeline from Turkmenistan to Turkey via the Islamic Republic of Iran. A scenario that combines the completion of this project by the intended date of 1999 (including the associated investment flows,by Turkmenistan, financed through borrowing from as yet unidentified foreign sources) with fairly optimistic assumptions on gas and cotton exports and full import liberalization during the projection period, would indicate small current account deficits (averaging 2 percent of GDP) during 1996:97, followed by surpluses that rise steadily from 2 percent of GDP in 1998 to 11 percent of GDP in 2001. The latter, together with foreign borrowing and a drawdown of international reserves (with average import coverage maintained at about of 4 months during 1998-2001), would finance Turkmenistan's envisaged contribution to the gas pipeline construction outside its borders. External debt and debt service indicators would rise initially, but improve thereafter, and the stock of gas payments arrears would decline, as full collection on payments for current gas exports is achieved by 2001. The strength of the above scenario derives mostly from the assumptions on collection of gas payments and improvements in cotton export earnings, which help finance the new gas pipeline project, while the full benefits from the latter begin to be realized only at the end of the six-year period. Hence, the payments performance by Turkmenistan's traditional trading partners remains crucial to the outcome. An alternative scenario depicting a deterioration in payments for gas exports and/or loss of traditional markets, would jeopardize financing for a.new pipeline project, at the same time that import compression is resumed, combined with a sharper depletion of international reserves. Options for export diversification could be IJ The scenario presented is an attempt to highlight the broad features of one of several possible alternatives, and should not be interpreted as the most likely outcome. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 19 - explored, but Turkmenistan's greatest gains are likely to rest with exploiting its rich energy resources. The, thrust of the message for the medium-term is that every effort should be made by all the parties concerned to resolve the gas payments arrears problem in mutually acceptable ways, and, equally critically, for Turkmenistan to sustain the momentum of economic reforms in order to attract foreign financing and investment. 5. Structural nolicies The staff noted that progress in the area of structural policies had been slow and uneven. Regarding price liberalization, the staff welcomed the recent steps taken and those that the authorities indicated would be introduced at the beginning of 1996. It cautioned, however, that the momentum of liberalization should be sustained and extended to those commodities the prices of which remain controlled, including those now provided free of charge. The authorities were generally receptive to these recommendations although, on the free provision of energy resources to households, the view was expressed that this constituted a simple means of social protection, without substantive costs to the economy, given the country's large gas reserves and the relatively small proportion of household gas consumption in total production. The staff noted that a much bolder approach to privatization was needed. The authorities pointed out that the present law on privatization (and the draft revision) allowed for further action. Nevertheless, a marked acceleration or deepening of the privatization program was not immediately expected, partly because of concern over possible adverse short-term consequences for employment. The staff urged the authorities to develop a comprehensive privatization program, with further technical assistance from the World Bank and the EU, that would involve auctioning the remaining small-scale enterprises, developing a broad-based mass privatization program for medium- scale enterprises, and preparing large-scale enterprises through restructuring for eventual privatization on a case by case basis. The staff also stressed the urgent need to tighten budget constraints on enterprises remaining under state ownership. The short-term unemployment consequences of these moves could be ameliorated by enforcing collections to the Employment Fund. The staff urged the authorities to make progress on the reform of the agricultural sector with World Bank assistance. It further noted the importance of strengthening financial sector reforms, including in the area of bank supervision. V. Technical Assistance The Fund has provided substantial technical assistance and training to Turkmenistan. The assistance has focused on strengthening monetary and fiscal institutions; enhancing the effectiveness of monetary, exchange, and fiscal management; and improving the compilation and presentation of economic statistics. In addition to stationing a resident representative in Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 20 - Ashgabat since October 1993, MAE and FAD have provided two resident advisors since February 1994 to the CBT and the Ministry of Finance, respectively. With Fund technical assistance, considerable progress has been made over the past two years in the establishment of a treasury. Other international agencies--including the World Bank, the EU, and the OECD--and bilateral donors are also extending technical assistance to Turkmenistan in several areas. In general, the authorities have been receptive to the recommendations made by Fund technical assistance missions, although implementation in a number of areas has been constrained by the slow progress with structural reforms and the lack of skilled personnel. Continued technical assistance will be needed, with priority on national accounts and balance of payments statistics, improvements in the coverage of the budget, development of interbank credit and foreign exchange markets, setting up of a government securities market, further strengthening of bank supervision, and streamlining of the social safety net system. In addition, the authorities support the continuation of the MAE and FAD resident advisor positions, and have accepted an STA proposal to station a regional advisor on balance of payments statistics. ' VI. Staff Appraisal Turkmenistan faced growing economic difficulties during 1995; aggravated by the perpetuation of a system of centralized controls that reduced transparency and constrained policy responses. Measures introduced during the year were largely ineffective or even amplified existing imbalances in the absence of a well integrated economic policy stance. Decision-making continued to be complicated by uncertainties relating to payments for Turkmenistan's gas exports, despite some improvement in collections. A growing loss of confidence in the manat triggered a shift into foreign currency and sharply raised the parallel market rate. In this environment, real GDP declined for the fifth consecutive year, monthly inflation accelerated sharply, and Turkmenistan incurred arrears on the servicing of its external debt, notwithstanding its large reserve holdings. No significant progress was made in introducing market-oriented economic reforms and institutions. The economic reform package announced by the President of Turkmenistan on December 27, 1995 marks a significant break from the past and constitutes an essential first step in adopting market-oriented reforms. The staff welcomes, in particular, the measures to unify and flexibly determine the exchange rate, discontinue credit allocation by decree and free interest rates, and move forward with price liberalization. Equally important will be the determination with which the measures introduced are implemented and backed by commensurately bold moves in structural areas. Successful liberalization of Turkmenistan's economy, moreover, will require easing of the restrictions on the use of foreign exchange reserves. The staff stands ready to assist the authorities in the implementation of their economic reform program, which can be expected to considerably strengthen Turkmenistan's prospects for stabilization and growth. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 21 - The success to date in containing the central government budget deficit through the close alignment of expenditure with sharply declining revenue is commendable, although it may prove difficult and undesirable to sustain over a prolonged period. Moreover, expenditures of largely unknown quantity are .not channeled through the budget, undermining both the value of the budget as an indicator of policy and the transparency of fiscal operations. While progress has recently been made in integrating some extrabudgetary funds into the budget, all fiscal activities of government agencies and ministries that are outside the budget should be brought under the budget as soon as possible. Including all government transactions from the Foreign Exchange Reserve Fund in the budget is particularly important. In formulating the central government budget for 1996, the authorities have adopted what appears, in the staff's view, to be a highly ambitious export volume projection for gas in 1996, based on commitments by the newly formed joint venture with Gazprom of Russia. Given the formative stage of this venture and the continued uncertainties relating to collections, the authorities' approach risks gearing economic policies to an overly optimistic revenue target that could prove difficult to realize. Moreover, significant changes in structural and pricing policies will affect implicit subsidies that now exist. Resisting pressures for direct budget subsidies will be critical to achieving the budget targets. On the other hand, the approved constant-price budget does not incorporate the net impact of the new measures, notably of exchange rate unification, which can be expected to be positive. Nevertheless, the staff would caution the authorities to closely monitor budgetary developments, given the continued uncertainties pertaining to payments for gas exports and the constraints faced in diversifying export markets in the immediate future, and make every effort to observe the envisaged limit on government recourse to bank financing. The execution of fiscal policy can be expected to benefit from the further development of the treasury system under ongoing Fund technical assistance. Although substantial recent progress has been made in price liberalization, additional measures will be needed to fully eliminate price subsidies. Price liberalization should be accompanied by moves to develop a cost effective and closely targeted social safety net system, which would help ensure continued popular support for reforms. At-the same time, until the economic recovery is firmly underway, care should be exercised not to fully compensate the population for the impact of inflation through further large wage increases, as this could seriously undermine the objective of lowering inflation. The discontinuation of credit extension by decree is a long overdue measure that will accord the CBT much greater scope for effective monetary management and improve the efficiency of resource allocation. Similarly, the lifting of interest ceilings will encourage domestic savings and more productive investment decisions. These changes will also help promote the treasury bill market, laying the ground for an eventual shift to indirect instruments of monetary control. Altogether, the measures introduced can be expected to substantially strengthen the prospects for reducing inflation Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 22 - within the framework of a tight monetary and credit program for 1996 to be implemented by the CBT. The staff would urge the authorities to monitor monetary and credit developments closely with a view to taktng corrective action, as called for, to achieve the inflation objective for 1996. The staff welcomes the authorities' recent efforts to strengthen bank supervision through the tightening of prudential regulations and minimum capital requirements of banks, and would encourage the authorities to closely oversee the banking system in the period of economic liberalization. The staff would caution the authorities that success in adhering to a financial program aimed at reducing inflation will be strictly contingent on instilling financial discipline on state-owned enterprises and abiding by the declared intention of the Government not to rescue enterprises in persistent difficulty through additional bank and/or budget financing, notably by clearing interenterprise arrears as happened in 1995. Experience has shown that such bail-out operations derail the adjustment effort and weaken incentives for enterprise reform. The staff commends the authorities for taking steps toward a market- determined exchange rate that will apply uniformly to all foreign exchange transactions. This approach is appropriate at a time of ongoing relative price adjustments and systemic changes in Turkmenistan, and following the dismantling of highly distortionary exchange rate arrangements and the partial freeing of a restrictive exchange regime. The staff welcomes the recent modification of surrender requirements, but is concerned about the establishment of a Foreign Exchange Committee to oversee foreign exchange transactions. This arrangement should be removed quickly and free access allowed to foreign exchange for current international transactions. The staff would also encourage the authorities to phase out barter arrangements and to place Turkmenistan's international reserves under the control of the CBT to permit their use for policy purposes, while not precluding the maintenance of adequate levels. Turkmenistan's economy continues to be adversely affected by the persistence of arrears on payments for its gas exports. The authorities are to be commended for the constructive way in which they have worked recently to reach understandings with the debtor countries concerned. The latter have begun to address their payments difficulties within the framework of ongoing economic reform programs. Turkmenistan is likely to gain considerably over the medium-term from supporting the efforts to stabilize the economies of its major regional trading partners. At the same time, it will be important for Turkmenistan to explore all possible options for diversifying its gas export markets through construction of alternative pipelines. Since such projects, as well as the development and diversification of the export sector, investment, will require considerable foreign it will be all the more crucial for Turkmenistan to persevere with economic reforms, which will help create the conditions needed to attract foreign capital. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 23 - Turkmenistan's external debt has grown rapidly in recent years, with several loans carrying short maturities. Despite its relatively strong reserve position, Turkmenistan has incurred external debt service arrears, which have not so far been fully cleared. It is commendable that the authorities have agreed to a.new schedule for the payment of the amounts owed to the European Union. The staff urges the authorities to pay promptly all outstanding external arrears and avoid incurring new ones. The latter would require the strengthening of external debt management and monitoring procedures, including those pertaining to-government-guaranteed debt, as failure to service the latter by the borrowers can,be expected to impose a heavy burden on the budget. Adequate budgetary provisions should be made for the scheduled servicing of the Government's foreign debt, and contingency funds set aside for the servicing of government-guaranteed debt, should the need arise. A critical task facing Turkmenistan in the period ahead is to push forward with systemic reforms to promote private sector development and ensure that the gains from economic stabilization and reform are not short- lived. The staff would underscore the importance of proceeding ambitiously and vigorously in formulating'and implementing a comprehensive privatization program. At the same time, the staff would urge the authorities to develop an appropriate legal,,and institutional framework for reforming state-owned enterprises,' and adopt a timetable for.@rivatization and enterprise restructuring, with further technical assistance from the World Bank and the European Union. The Fund has provided substantial .technical assistance to Turkmenistan in.recent years. To'reap the full benefits of such assistance, further progress will need to be made in implementing the key recommendations. With regard to statistics, in order to effectively monitor economic and financ.ial developments in Turkmenistan,. it will be essential to step up efforts to establish a comprehensive economic data base that conforms to international standards, and ensure the timely compilation and dissemination of key data. During the 1995 Article IV discussions, several exchange restrictions subject to approval under Article VIII'were identified, including restricting access to foreign exchange to up to US$l,OOO for most current international transactions, including invisible transactions; mandatory approval of all non-private import payment orders by the CBT and the Foreign Exchange Committee; and restrictions on.the transferability of current proceeds by non-residents. The staff is currently looking into the jurisdictional implications of the operation of new correspondent accounts with FSU countries. Further, despite the introduction of a single unified market exchange.rate as of January 1, 1996, a potential multiple currency practice may remain because of a possible spread between the rates quoted by the CBT and the commercial banks (the staff will monitor developments in this area). In the absence of a clear timetable for the elimination of the remaining restrictions, the staff does not 'recommend their approval and continues to strongly urge their removal. It is recommended that the next Article IV consultation with Turkmenistan be held on the standard 12-month cycle. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 24 - Table 1. Turkmenistan: Selected Economic Indicators, 1993-% 1993 1994 1995 Oct. 199s Est. 1996 Proj. 141 -18.8 10 - 10.0 . . . 1,129 6,646 . . . -13.9 20 2 2 2 75 7s 200 200 500 800 200 II . . . WfJo II 3,500 . . . 3,500 9,743 . . . I,@ 1,328 1,748 . . . . . . . . . 771 855 193 899 887 477 342 136 L2- 911 . . . 9.161 woo . . . 6,496 29,375 19.2 10.4 10.7 y 10.2 26.6 19.7 11.9 11.2 3J 11.8 2A.0 -0.4 - 1.4 -0.5 y -1.6 2.6 . . . . . . -0.7 3J 1.0 1.0 612 91s 428 1,184 873 984 7 16 1,035 y 6W$i 713 g . . . 389 220 421 244 577 223 17 17 2693 2,176 - 1,593 -1,690 1,432 21 UC@ 1,779 ,1,102 2/ - 1,472 - 1,700 776 84 --3J 55 -81 28.1 5.5 -- Y 2s -3.4 475 95 35 y 79 -56 12.3 6.3 1.6 21 3.6 -2.4 818 932 1,162 7J 1,213 1,879 6 7 9Y 10 8 168 418 484 4.4 27.7 27.2 321 13.5 0.2 0.1 1.9 2.1 13.1 21 22.9 469 21.1 13.0 11.7 14.2 10.7 Nominal GDP (in billions of manat) Real GDP (percent change) Exchange rate (manat/ U.S. dollar, end-of-period) Official Commercial Parallel market Prices (percent change) Retail prices (end-of-period) _U Consumer prices (end-of-period) Consumer prices (average) Average economy-wide wages (manat per month) End-of-period Period average General government budget (in percent of GDP) Revenue and grants Expenditure and net lending Overall balance (- deficit) Of which: Domestic bank fiiancing Money and credit (end-period; percent change) Domestic credit Reserve money Broad money Velocity (GDP/average broad money, level) External sector Exports (in millions of U.S. dollars) 3 Imports (in millions of U.S. dollars) Current account (- defmit) $/ In millions of U.S. dollars In percent of GDP Overall balance (- deficit) $/ In millions of U.S. dollars In percent of GDP Gross official reserves (end-of-period) In millions of U.S. dollars In months of import Externaldebt (end-of-period) In millions of U.S. dollars In percent of GDP External debt service In percent of exports In percent of GDP Sources: Data provided by the Turkmen authorities; and staff estimates and projections. u End-December 1995. y The retail price indenwas discontinued after May 1995 and replaced by a consumer price index 3/ January-September. 4J October 1994-October 1995. w Transit charges are included in gas exports through 1995, but excluded in 1996. Bxports do not reflect payments arrears. @/ The current account captures all exports, regardless of whether payment has been received or not, with arrears on gas payments recorded in the capital account, and hence reflected in the overall bahnce. 11 September 1995. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 25 - Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 26 - Table 3. Turkmeniatan: General Government Operations, 1994-96 , (1 n millions of manat, unless otherwise indicated) 1994 1995 a 011 QIII QIV Annual Edtimak 1996 Approved Staff budget Y proj. 21 Revenue 14.723 12,174 20,401 32,834 49,627 115,d36 272.452 1,770.111 In percent of GDP 10.4 6.5 12.3 12.8 9.6 10.2 16.0 26.6 Profit tax Value-added tax Natural resources tax Personal income tax Ekckc tax Sale of clearing goods Other tam and revenue Pension, social, and geological funds Voluntary medical insurance Transfer of Central bank profit 2,907 3,217 4.574 8,182 4,301 3,153 7,053 11,020 1,100 943 1,654 2,829 842 496 877 1.167 450 515 %l 2,276 -- -- -- -- 1,678 1,273 1.293 2,459 3,445 2,577 3.989 4.901 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 7,105 16,891 7,546 1,358 2,950 I 5.700 1,576 6,500 -- 23,078 38,117 12,972 3,898 6,702 5,700 6,601 17,967 -- 51,294 88,997 39.887 7,000 33,687 8,500 14,356 28,731 -- -- 325,170 746,232 335,797 30,030 131,379 -- 37,315 110,545 20,412 33,230 Expenditure In percent of GDP 16,738 11,908 23,441 32,853 68,469 11.9 6.4 14.1 12.8 13.2 -- -- 132,973 280,622 11.8 16.5 53.00s 122,857’ 23,385 43,390 11,693 21,695 11,693 21,695 12,006 29,157 4,327 17,018 1,940 15,992 1,403 6.570 681 3,018 9.178 6,400 85 1,312 30,748 84,630 17,492 42,308 ‘, 1,726 4,455 10,061 31.338 60 1,744 499 3,101 234 1,684 676 -- 12,397 38,875 . . 25.508, . . . 9,167 . . . 4,200 722 1,829. 278 1,303 180 800 50 200 -- 4,758 4,727 920 15.000 -- 15,866 24,450 -- . . . - 17.937 -8,170 -1.6 -0.5 17,937 . . . 10,771 . . . 10,771 . . . 1.0 . 10,771 . . -- . . . -- -- . . . -- . . -4,434 8,481 - 12.915 . . . 11.600 1/ . 1,594,5n 24.0 National economy expenditure Capital invedtmcnt Imported Domestic Price subsidies Operational cats Capital repair Subsidies on utilitim, transport Maintenance of public buildings Other Free provision of water Socio-cultural expenditures EdUCAO” Culture H&il Physical culture Social welfare Science Qther Defence, police, administration Defence Judiciary Government adminirtratio” Domestic debt service Foreign debt service Emergency Fond Businear Fund Voluntary Medical lnaumncc Fund Other Net lending Pension, social a+ geological Funds Direct transfers to low income group 6.784 4,411 1.5% 1,864 798 932 798 932 1,358 511 632 634 367 214 . . . . . . . . . 2,831 1,188 . . . . . . 5,173 3,109 3,110 1,891 281 123 1,560 1,003 . . . . . . 144 57. 64 ‘34 14 1 1,528 1.169 707 566 436 343 385 260 218 340 142 146 . . . . . . -- -- -- -- 501 156 -- -- 2,392 2.577 . . 8,662 3,612 1,806 1,806 764 . . . . . . . . . . 3,176 15.731 4,259 2,130 2,130 5,319 . . . . . 3,275 7,719. 4,755 302 2,372 . . . . 290 V= . . . . . . . . 34 . . . -- -- 2,235 -- 2,833 . . . 7,585 4,275 313 2,612 . . . . . 385 2,968 . . . . . . . 39 . . . -- -- 2,113 -- 4.45b 28,189 13,650 6,825 6,825 5,412 3,693 1,726 1,403 681 1,539 85 12,335 6,571 988 4,074 60 442 200 -- 6,268 3,437 1.%3 868 166 58 180 50 -- 223 15.000 WJ’M 814,304 497,745 389,540 108,206 113,712 73,007 62,369 25,623 11.770 24,960 5,117 311,360 155,761 18,855 117,357 6,802 6.174 6,412 -- 158,194 105,139 35,894 17.140 66.461 43,250 3,120 780 20,412 3,588 -- 102,904 70,200 Overall balance (- deficit) In percent of GDP, -2,015 -1.4 2.015 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 266 0.1 -266 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . -3.040 -1.8 3,&O . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . -19 -- 19 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . - 18,842 -3.6 175,539 2.6 Financing 18,842 - 175,539 Domestic financing Domestic banking ayrtem In percent of GDP Banking system, not including Treasury bilh Net asks of Treasury bilk l~aues of Treasury bills Redemptiona of Treasury bills Domestic nonbank financing 15,000 15,000 2.9 15,000 -- -- -- -- 76,461 66,461 1.0 51,461 15,000 30,000 -15.000 10,000 Net external financing Disbunement Amortiration 3,842 15,719 -11,876 -32,975 168,480 -201,455 External arrears . -219,024 A/ Sourccs: Turkmenistan Ministry of Economy and Finance; Central Bank of Turkmenistan; and staff estimate: and projections. y Official budget ezqxcsred in estimated prices of the fourth quarter of 1995. as approved by ParEment on November 24,199s; excluding the impact of measures announced on Deccmbx 27,1995; rati- are derived using GDP under the staff scenario for comparative purpose only. y Staff projection a&sume~ unification of the exchange rate on January 1,1996. a” export gas volume of 22 billion cubic meters. and a payment ratio of 70 pcrccnt on gas exporth 1/ Arrears on the EU loan (US858 million). 4/ Repayment of government antars on the servicing of the EU loan (US958 million) and arIcars on government-guaranteed bilateral loans (US=0 million). t Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 27 - Table 4. Turkmenistan: Monetary and Credit Developments, 1993-9S (In millions of maoat, end-of-period) 1993g 1994 1995 Ql QII QIII Oct. Dec. Est. Central Bank of Turkmenistan Net foreign assets 1,223 69,490 74,988 80,109 Convertible currencies 1,583 69,658 15,231 80,356 Non-convertible currencies -360 -168 -249 -247 231,783 234,426 241,881 231,909 234,533 . . . -125 -lb7 Net domestic assets Domestic credit Net credit to Government Credit to Government Government deposits (-) Credit to the economy Public enterprises Private sector Credit to banks Poreign Exchange Reserve Fund (net) _U Other items (net) 70 2,726 853 8% -43 2s 2s -52,878 4,602 3,151 4,031 -879 -52,161 15,966 5,126 5,126 -- -- -- -57,043 5,852 4,023 4,031 -8 529 529 -- 1,848 -1,565 -1,091 -- -- 1,451 LJ@J -55,743 -57,172 -1,737 -5,723 9,12a 9,125 3 1,712 -58,913 -9,214 - 178,371 -166,407 - 155,370 34,027 46,182 49,028 4,506 16,812 19,506 5,670 20,670 . -1,165 -3,859 . . . a~ 22,804 a~ 23,007 22,803 23,007 1 1 1 6,514 6,566 6,514 -198,335 -193,715 - 189,335 -14,063 -18,814 - 15,063 Reserve money 1,294 16,613 17,945 27,949 53,413 68,019 86,511 Currency issued 1,122 8,981 11,467 21,180 34,345 44,135 Banks’deposits 61,500 158 4,157 3,765 4,228 18,460 23,281 Other deposits 23,511 1s 3,468 2,713 2,540 608 604 1,500 Monetary survey Net foreign assets 1,167 51,244 58,234 58,196 157,546 155,371 Central Bank of Turkmenistan 168,248 1,223 69,490 74,988 80,109 231,783 234,426 Commercial banks 241,881 -56 -18,247 -16,755 -21,914 -74,237 -79,055 -73,633 Net domestic assets 894 -28,884 -31,559 -10,258 -74,176 -48,750 Domestic credit - 16,853 4.060 41,214 44,885 74,422 146,942 115,975 Net credit to Government 201,732 751 2,684 2,825 3,364 -1,456 12,838 Credit to Government 13,442 897 5,138 4,783 5,282 11,040 26,446 . . . Government deposits (-) -145 -3,054 -1,958 - 1,918 - 12.4% -13,608 . . . Credit to the economy 3,309 38,530 42,060 71,058 148,398 163,137 188,299 Public enterprises 2,406 34,882 31,169 67,255 137,959 148,083 Of which: In foreign currency 175,789 2a2 29,034 28,336 33,997 80,808 85,484 Private sector 903 3,648 4,290 3,803 10,440 15,054 Foreign Exchange Reserve Fund (net) y 12,501 - 1,565 -55,743 -57,172 -58,913 Otheritems (net) - 198,335 -193,715 - 189,335 -1,602 -14,355 -19,273 -25,768 -22,784 -31,010 -29,250 Broad money Currency Demand deposits Time and savings deposits Foreign currency deposits 2.063 QW 26,674 47,937 83,369 106,620 925 8,579 10,628 20,288 33,687 43,422 823 11,155 12,544 22,481 34,807 47,228 214 1,208 1,718 2,774 7,033 8,873 101 11,155 12,544 22,481 34,807 47,228 Memorandum items : Money multiplier Velocity of average broad money Growth of broad money, in percent 3/ 1.59 1.35 6.80 16.27 873.0 984.0 1.49 1.72 1.56 1.57 . . . 19.3 19.7 13.9 27.9 151,395 . . . . . 1.75 11.2s 577.1 Sources: Central Bank OfTurkmenistan; and staff estimates. 1/ The manat was introduced in November 1993. _U A U.S. dollar denominated deposit, representing the counterpart of the foreign exchange reserves under control by the President minus a special loan provided by the CBT for squiring the reserves. 3/ For quarters, compared to end previous quarter; for October 1995, monthly growth rate. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 28 - Table 5. Turkmenistan: Chsolidated Balanceof Payments, 1993-96 (I” millions of US. dollars) Current acuxmt (- deficit) 716 84 132 -2s -107 ss ss -81 Trade balance 1,100 485 257 51 23 20s 536 60 Exparb 2,693 2,176 613 416 403 572 Gas exports I/ 2NJ8 1,779 I.860 1,430 353 205 285 312 1,lSS 924 Ukainc 884 743 218 80 203 185 6% 549 Georgia 299 207 31 17 S -- 53 -- cotton 428 363 168 131 30 1so 478 480 Oil products 186 186 45 54 60 60 220 213 Ekchcity 99 91 38 -- 2 27 67 70 0tk.r 119 106 10 26 26 26 88 93 Impcxu -1593 -1,690 -357 -365 -380 -370 -1,472 -1,700 Services (net) -336 -403 -126 -7s -130 -lso -482 -173 Gas translportation 1/ fhkstruction Interest income (net) Other servicer (net) -288 -351 . . . 23 91 -71 -143 -1% -62 -6S -94 -347 -- -20 -7 -30 -2s -82 -10s 18 14 1s 19 65 57 -18 -20 -30 -51 -119 -125 Private hanrfers 12 2 1 -- -- -- 2 12 Capital accwnt (- deficit) -551 -208 -95 4s 33 -11 -29 2s Official credit -630 -311 Medium- and long-term loam(“ct) 297 -435 Disbursement 299 267 Amatiration -2 -32 Rescheduling ol arrears 3 . . . -670 Net &m&e in atream -9n 124 New smsas (mwd) 3J -927 -708 Ofwhich gas -915 -595 Of which: by Ukainc -672 -353 Previous arreas (paid) 1/ 162 Ofprbidx ps 162 Of which: by Ukainc a7 Rescheduling of arrears 5/ 670 Foreign direct investment 79 103 -99 16 13 18 24 91 -12 -73 -- -- -111 -2 -169 -80 -154 -n -94 -70 $8 78 58 78 30 so -- -- 4 28 17 -27 -93 -ss -36 -366 -371 -347 39 44 198 1so -7s -67 -226 -220 -- -343 -343 -277 53 338 278 292 -2s -103 -377 -30s -23 -94 -343 -277 -21 -56 -240 -165 78 98 312 320 78 98 312 320 77 91 248 1% -- 343 343 277 16 16 64 80 Errors and omissions 250 219 26 47s 9s 62 -475 -95 -62 1s 34 -34 -1 -34 1 13 -61 61 -- 44 -44 -Sl -11 18 53 79 -79 -- Overall balance (- deficit) -56 56 Net fa+n assets of the banking system (bmeasc -) -475 -95 Repayment of arrears 4/ Accumulation of arrears y -- -- -- -- -96 -- 34 -10 -1 71 Memaandum items: (In c-uc-mt nf GDP, unless otherwise stxcihd) Current sccount bahcc Overall baIa”ce Averap: nominal exchange rate Gross otTiciicial rcrcrva In q illio”s of US. dollars In months of impcxts 20.1 55 12.3 6.3 2 93 818 932 6.2 6.6 19.4 -5.3 -24.0 8.7 9.1 75 -13.7 6.9 200 233 SO0 1,100 1,012 1,078 1,162 1,213 8.5 8.8 9.2 9.8 -1563 -1565 -1510 -1,S70 19 84 BS 73 3.1 20.2 21.1 12.7 20.1 118.7 482 58.4 46s 450 484 469 17.1 24.4 27.2 18.4 93 71 177 12s Arrears and debut” Turkmenistan In milliorv of US. dollars Debt service In millions of US. dollars I” Percent of eqxxts In percent of current Pasre~~i~ta E&nal debt 1 ’ In millions of US. dollars In percent of GDP Current gas receipts I/ In millions of US. dollars -977 -1,452 4 0.2 0.7 41 1.9 8.4 168 418 4.4 27.7 658 484 -157 134 -46 -78 124 -- 25 -3.4 3.6 -2.4 SO8 2808 1,213 1.079 9.9 7.6 -1.570 -1.S60 261 253 13.0 142 56.0 39.1 469 21.1 466 321 135 647 Sources: Central Bank of Turkmenistan; and staff estimates and project&s. I/ Transit charger are included in gas eqxxts until 1995 but excluded in 1996. y Reschcduli”8 of year-end gas arrc~rs as medium-term loans. 21 New srrean incurred to Turkmenistan and payment of arrears t”Turkmcnbtsn incurred previously. $/ Prcviousarrearsrcpsid byTurkmenistan and new arrears inwed by Turkmenistan. I/ Current gas payments are current year’s gas cxponr (net transit charges) minus new arrears 0” those expatr. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 29 - z 9 7 oq I= I I I 2 c o! w I I 6 5 I I -! 2 3 ? 3 3 3 2 I I 2 -! E z :- .z 3 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 30 - APPENDIX I Turkmenistan - Fund Relations (As of January 1. 1996) 1. Membership status: Date of membership: September 22, 1992 Status: Article XIV 2. General resources account: In millions of SDRs Quota (under Ninth Review) 48.00 Fund holdings of currency 48.00 Reserve position in the Fund 0.01 As percent of auota 100 100 _- 3. SDR deDartment: Allocations: None Holdings: None 4. Outstanding purchases and loans: None 5. Financial arrangements: None 6. Projected obligations to the Fund: None 7. Exchange rate arrangements: The currency of Turkmenistan is the manat, which was introduced on November 1, 1993. During the conversion period from ruble to manat, the official exchange rate was set at manat 2 per U.S. dollar. On March 15, 1994, the official exchange rate was set at manat 10 per U.S. dollar. A commercial exchange rate, quoted at manat 60 per U.S. dollar, was introduced on May 4, 1994. This rate was devalued on August 15 to manat 75 per U.S. dollar and on November 1, the official rate was also devalued to manat 75 per U.S. dollar. In January 1995, the commercial rate was devalued to manat 200 per U.S. dollar. In February 1995, the official rate was set at manat 195 per U.S. dollar. On September 18, 1995, the official rate was devalued from manat 75 to manat 200 per U.S. dollar, and the commercial rate from manat 195 to manat 500 per U.S. dollar. On November 27, the CBT authorized commercial banks to transact in foreign exchange for up to US$l,OOO for a single sale, without, however, a limit on the total number of transactions. The commercial exchange rate was thus abolished and banks were allowed to freely set their own rates. Official transactions, including those related to gas and oil exports, continued to be conducted at the official exchange rate. On January 1, 1996, the exchange rate was unified at manat 2,400 per U.S. dollar on the basis of trading at the inter-bank foreign exchange market. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 31 - APPENDIX I Turkmenistan avails itself of the transitional arrangements under Article XIV. u : 8. Article IV consultation: Turkmenistan is on a 12-month consultation cycle. The second Article IV consultation'discussions were concluded on February 10, 1995. The third Article IV consultation discussions took place between November 3-21, 1995. . 9. EU2 missions. staff visits and technical assistance: The following list summarizes technical and policy assistance provided by the Fund to.Turkmenistan since December. 1991:' EU2 - Acquaintance mission :_ December 1991 EU2 - Pre-membership economic review February-March 1992 FAD - Public finance management and reform March-April 1992 MAE - Modernization of operations of the June 1992 Central Bank and the banking system INS - Seminar on macroeconomic and July 1992 financial policies for senior officials FAD - Budgetary procedures November-December, 1992 MAE - Central Bank development and market- December 1992 oriented financial 'system EU2 - Staff visit - Y March 1993 MAE - Central Bank.development May 1993 STA - Money and.Banking May 1993 STA - Multi topic ,..'. July 1993 FAD - Budget, establishment of a Treasury, July 1993 and public expenditure EU2 - Staff visit June 1993 EU2 - Article IV consultation discussions July/August 1993 INS - Financial programming seminar September 1993 EU2 - Program discussions September 1993 MAE - Introduction of a new currency and October 1993 Central Bank development EU2 - Program Discussions and Article IV October 1993 Consultations conclusion Managing Director's Visit December 20-22, 1993 STA - Balance of payments statistics January 1994 FAD - Establishment of a Treasury January 1994 MAE - Resident advisor acquaintance visit January 1994 STA - Money and banking statistics January-February 1994 EU2 - Staff visit February 1994 u Turkmenistan has notified the Fund of the exchange rate arrangements that it intends to apply in fulfillment of its obligations under Article IV, Section 1, of the Articles of Agreement. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 32 -' APPENDIX I STA MAE Eu2 STA STA STA STA Eu2 - Consumer prices - Modernization of the Central Bank - Staff visit - Consumer prices - GFS - Balance of payments statistics - Money and banking statistics - Article IV consultation discussions FAD - Tax administration STA - National income accounts EU2 - Staff visit FAD - Social safety net MAE - Monetary and exchange reforms EU2 - Article IV consultation .discussions STA - Money and banking statistics FAD - Inspection visit Treasury Advisor March 1994 May-June 1994 June 1994 September 1994 September 1994 November 1994 November 1994 November 1994 January 1995 February 1995 June 1995 September 1995 September 1995 November 1995 November 1995 December 1995 10. Resident ReDresentative: Mr. Michael Blackwell assumed his duties as the Fund's new Resident Representative in October 1995. 11. Resident Advisors: At the request of the authorities, Mr. Sharma assumed his duties as the Resident Advisor to the Ministry of Economy and Finance in January 1994. His term has recently been extended for a third year. In February 1994, Mr. Akrami was assigned as Resident Advisor to the Central Bank of Turkmenistan. Mr. Brown has succeeded Mr. Akrami as of January 1996. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 33 - APPENDIX II Turkmenistan --Relations With the World Bank u Turkmenistan signed the Articles of Agreement of the World Bank Group on September 22, 1992. It became member of MIGA in October 1993. The Bank started preparing the first Country Economic Memorandum (CEM) on Turkmenistan in 1992. After discussions with the Government, the CEM was updated and finalized in May 1994. The CEM covered a number of sectoral areas, including energy and gas, agriculture, industry, transport and telecommunications, as well as more general discussions on the environment, privatization, the financial sector, labor markets, trade, and the social safety net. The Bank also sent a number of energy sector missions to Turkmenistan (two in 1992, one in March/April ,1993, and one in September 1993). An energy sector review pap'er was prepared and discussed with the authorities in November 1993. An Institution Building/Technical Assistance Loan in the amount of US$25 million was approved on September 15, 1994, and became effective in July 1995. This loan is expecte,d to support selected areas of the structural reform program, including financial sector reform, privatization, energy sector reform, and the social safety net. Also, the loan includes a significant component on institutional'support and development. This component, which will support the introduction of broadly based legal and regulatory reforms, finances training in accounting, auditing and project analysis. In June 1995, the Bank finalized a Health Sector Review, which is under review'by the Government of Turkmenistan. A possible health sector loan is under discussion. The Bank is preparing an Urban TransDort Project (US$40 million, board discussion expected in fiscal year 1996) which is designed to arrest the deterioration in transportation services in Ashgabat. Among other things, the project will support the reorganization of service provision, shift peripheral services to the private sector, and support a phased increase in fares to support costrecovery. As part of the program focused on the reversal of the degradation of the Aral Sea, the Bank is preparing a loan of up to US$30 million to improve the Water SUDDPV and Sanitation in North-east Turkmenistan (Board discussion expected in March 1997). The Bank is also discussing an Irrination and Drainane Proiect. Preparation of a Farm Restructuring and Privatization Proiect have been put on hold pending progress in agricultural reform and the results of an Agricultural Sector Study; the latter has started with a mission to Turkmenistan in early December 1995. 1/ Information provided by World Bank staff. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 34 - APPENDIX III Turkmenistan--Statistical Issues 1. National accounts Until recently, the State Statistics Committee (Goskomstat) of Turkmenistan estimated output by use of methodologies inherited from the Soviet Union. The resultant measure of National Income Produced in the Material Sphere (NIP) was imprecise due to weaknesses in both reporting by enterprises and in the measures of appropriate price deflators. Goskomstat provided an estimate of GDP from the production side, valuing exports of state enterprises at the official exchange rate. This rate was significantly overvalued in relation to the commercial rate, and even more so in comparison to the parallel market rate. The staff currently estimates GDP by adding in an explicit calculation of value-added in the gas sector. There are at present no official estimates of GDP from the expenditure side. One key problem remains that the Goskomstat measure of "accumulation" includes revaluation of the existing capital stock. The STA mission urged Goskomstat to produce a basic measure of GDP using currently available data based on the methodology described in the 1993 SNA. 2. Price indices Until May 1995, Goskomstat.measured inflation by use of a retail price index (RPI) with changing weights determined from retail sales data. Inflation is now measured by an annual chain-linked Laspeyres index, following extensive technical assistance provided by STA. However, the weights of the producer price index continue to be changed frequently. Turkmenistan has requested STA technical assistance in compiling price indices for imports and exports. 3. Government finance An economic and functional classification of budget expenditures can now be constructed from Ministry of Economics and Finance (MEF) sources, but the estimates are imprecise. In addition, the coverage of this data is too limited to be a ,reliable record of government activity. After significant technical assistance from the Fund, the MEF is introducing a Treasury system, which should improve statistical reporting during 1996. Also, provision has been made for extending the term of the FAD Resident Advisor for Turkmenistan. A government finance statistics mission visited Ashgabat during September 15-28, 1994, to reclassify the authorities' budget accounts on a GFS basis. Data on considerable government activity outside the budget are not being reported. 4. .Monev and banking In the past, efforts to compile monetary statistics on a routine basis were frustrated by the introduction of new accounts and the misclassification of the existing accounts. A STA money and banking Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 35 - APPENDIX'111 statistics mission visited Ashgabat during the EUR II mission's stay in November 1995, and worked closely with the authorities and the EUR II mission to reclassify the accounts of the CBT, and update the monetary statistics. On the basis of the recommendations of the STA mission, a system was established to compile monetary statistics that could be used by the authorities, KUR II, and STA. The STA mission also provided further training to the staff of the CBT in the methodology for compiling monetary statistics and discussed arrangements for regular reporting of monetary data to the Fund. 5. Balance of oavments Since the first quarter of 1994, reporting and processing of the balance‘of payments (BOP) within the CBT has permitted quarterly reporting. Problems remain in a number of areas, including the accounting for barter trade and the recording of transfers. The authorities have agreed to a STA proposal to assign a regional BOP advisor (to cover the Kyrgyz Republic, Turkmenistan, and Uzbekistan). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 36 - APPENDIX III P . 4 -x d 8 u I -ti d i+ t3 8 0 d I: m Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public. - 37 - APPENDIX IV Turkmenistan--Medium-Term Scenario The staff's illustrative medium-term scenario is an exercise to demonstrate the effects of liberalization, the financing needs for major investment projects, and the sustainability of a macroeconomic balance during the next six years. In the context of Turkmenistan, the key issue is the construction of alternative pipelines for gas exports, which have not materialized so far. It is assumed that at most one pipeline can be financed in the medium-term, even under optimistic assumptions on export growth and inflows of foreign financing. annual growth in gas export volumes, Staff projections assume 5 percent 10 percent average annual growth in cotton export receipts through higher volumes and higher realized prices, full liberalization of imports, and foreign direct investment inflows averaging 5 percent of GDP during 1996-2001. These assumptions require the implementation of a comprehensive program of economic reforms in order to correct economic,distortions and build investor confidence. Coooeration with Iran and Turkey is the first building bloc: The pipeline to Iran, which is presently under construction, is expected to become operational in mid-1997, with an estimated annual throughput of 4 billion cubic meters (bcm) valued at world market prices, and at an expected cost of US$400 million to Turkmenistan. The extension of the pipeline to Turkey is expected to be completed in mid-1999, with an estimated additional annual average throughput of 5 bcm during 1999-2001, priced at world market levels (net of transit charges), and at an estimated cost of US$2 billion to Turkmenistan. Additional revenues from new gas exports would cumulate to about US$3 billion during 1997-2001, approximately sufficient to finance amortization and interest payments and higher imports which are driven by an average GDP growth of 9 percent annually. Liberalization is the second building bloc of this scenario: Imports were compressed during 1992-95 while a comfortable stock of foreign reserves was accumulated. Hence, import volumes are expected to grow by 10 percent in 1996 and 1997 as controls are eased, and by 5 percent annually thereafter, while import prices continue to increase by 5 percent annually (reflecting shifts from barter to cash trade and a move toward world market prices). As a result, even under the assumption of buoyant export earnings, current account deficits averaging about 2 percent of GDP annually are projected during 1996-97, which would be financed mostly through a reduction in international reserves. This scenario assumes a gradual improvement in the arrears situation, with the collection ratio on current gas export payments rising to 75 percent in 1997 and to 100 percent by 2001, which would considerably strengthen the current account by the latter year. The Foreign is the final building bloc of this scenario: envisaged pipeline cannot be fully financed through in-kind payments, so that sizable foreign financing would be required. It is assumed that such financing is secured at broadly favorable terms, with a four-year repayment period and LIBOR-plus-l interest. ,,As a result, a cumulative capital account deficit of some US$650 million is projected for 1997-2000, reflecting strong Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public. - 38 - APPENDIX'IV net investment outflows, which would be financed through a combination of foreign borrowing, current account surpluses, and use of reserves. Under this scenario, the debt service ratio would average about 23 percent annually during the projection period, foreign exchange reserves would decline to under four months of imports in 1999 and recover gradually thereafter, external debt would return to 11 percent of GDP by 2001, and external arrears to Turkmenistan would decline from 66 to 17 percent of GDP during 1996-2001 (Table 1). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Publicc - 39 - APPENDIX IV Table 1. Tukmenktaa h4edti-Term BaknceofPaymentr, 1993-2001 1993 1994 1995 ’ 19% 1997 19% 1999 2olm 2001 Est. Projections Current account (- defrit) 776 84 Trade b&we ET- -apomY FSU GtIcr cottoD Gucr l=po- sewiccl and trafcfen (net) 1,lW 2693 1,w 1WJ -- 428 40s -1.593 -324 2% 1.430 1,430 -- E -1.690 -401 Capital accamt (- deficit) Medium-term loam (net) Ofwhiilx Reschedulingof anearn y Additimal pipeline loans (net) Oanwnhip in pipelii (abroad) Foreign direct imutma Net change b arrean Ncav- (omd)y Pre-vioru arrcan Emon nod omiuiim -208 -435 -670 -- -- 103 124 -704 162 670 219 OnraIl bakax (def=it -) Financing -SSl 297 . . . -- -- 79 -921 -921 . . . . 2so 47.5 -475 -415 -- -- 20.1 12.3 618 62 -977 25.3 168 4.4 4 0.2 6% 95 -95 Net foreign auets of banking rylcem. inmcase (-) -95 Net accumulation of aman y -- Financing @p -- Memorandum items : CulTeat accomt balamx omall balance Grou offcial mserwa lo millioru of U.S. dolkn h month¶ of imports Amam and debts to Tultmeniatan In milliotu of U.S. dolkn In paceat of GDP External debt In milliim of U.S. dollan h percent of GDP Debt servke payments In millionr of U.S. dolkn In percent of uporb Current pa receipta 3 In millioru of US. dolkn 5.5 6.3 932 66 -1,452 96.0 418 27.7 41 1.9 484 -371 -343 -- -- 64 270 -377 312 343 (In millions of U.S. dollars) -19 59 80 156 l,f79 2,119 924 1,250 924 1WJ -- 1% 480 4n 375 3w -1.7Gu -1,963 289 2.454 1,514 1.128 E 405 -2.164 -161 -175 -230 2.5 -347 -277 -- -- 80 292 -3% 320 277 -86 -246 -227 -97 -61 -24 -23 -11 -- -- -- -- 300 800 200 -600 -400 -1,200 -MO -- 100 l.50 200 200 -2S 28 1% 314 -313 -303 -179 -105 287 331 316 419 . . . . . . . . . -- -56 56 -- -104 104 104 -- -- -- -187 187 la7 -- -- (In Dcrcent of GDP. unku othcnviw rpccifkd) ;: -3.4 -2.4 -4.0 -0.7 -6.6 2.1 1.213 1,079 975 788 9.9 7.6 6.0 4.4 -1,570 -1,560 - 1,585 -1,557 m.7 65.9 61.1 55.2 469 321 560 1.336 21.1 13.5 21.6 47.4 261 2.53 364 696 l3.0 14.2 17.2 26.4 466 641 938 1,211 143 288 408 2,:; 1,792 1,200 592 607 -%Z -290 3,:: 2,092 1,282 810 687 431 -2&w -297 673 3,574 2,361 1.346 1,015 759 454 -2,901 -266 138 -7 -- -500 -- 200 444 -- 444 . . -- -84 84 -- 191 -191 -- 545 -545 84 -191 -545 -- -- -- -- -- -- 4.7 8.6 11.3 -2.1 5.7 15.2 704 8% 1,610 3.5 4.1 6.0 -1,360 -1,046 -602 44.2 31.4 16.7 l.Sl3 902 49.2 27.0 932 33.0 1.613 903 23.1 1.937 395 11.0 1% 21.2 2,361 Souxea: Central Bank ofTurkmenistan; and staff estimatea. Y Transit chargea M included in gas exportsuntil 1995 but excluded in 1996. _U R.ache&ling of year-end gas - aa medtm-tam loam. 2 New- itxured to Trutmeahtaa and payment of Mean to Turkmctitnn incumd previously. $I Amean incord by TurlMcaktaa in 1993 sod the rekted repayment, in 1936. y cumt gm payment9 M cunvnt year’s gas exports (net transit chqes) mimu new arrean 00 those exports. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public, Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:54 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public