DOCUMENT OF INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND NOT FOR PUBLIC USE MASTER FILES ROOM HQ C-525 0450 sM/99/90 CONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION April 14,1999 To: Members of the Executive Board From: The Secretary Subject: Iceland-Staff Report for the 1999 Article IV Consultation Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staff report for the 1999 Article IV consultation with Iceland, which will be brought to the agenda for discussion on a date to be announced. Mr. Thakur (ext. 34860) or Ms. Cerra (ext. 38596) is available to answer technical or factual questions relating to this paper prior to the Board discussion. Unless the Documents Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the WTO Secretariat on Thursday, April 22, 1999; and to the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development, following its consideration by the Executive Board. Att: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicCONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND ICELAND Staff Report for the 1999 Article IV Consultation ‘Prepared by the Staff Representatives for the 1999 Consultation with Iceland Approved by Alessandro Leipold and Carlos G. M&z April 13, 1999 . The discussions were held in Reykjavik during January 20-28, 1999. The staffs concluding statement was released by the authorities shortly thereafter. . Staff representatives met with Mr. Geir H. Haarde, Minister of Finance, Mr. Birgir Gunnarsson, Governor and Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Central Bank, other senior officials, and representatives of the National Economic Institute, the Ministries of Commerce, Labor, and Fisheries, the federations of labor and employers, and the financial and academic communities. . The staff team comprised Mr. Thakur (Head), Ms. Cerra, and Mr. Kontolemis (EP, all EUl), Mr. Clarke (TRE), and Ms. Rodic (Assistant, EUl). Mr. Hansen, Executive Director for Iceland, and Mr. Palmason, Advisor in the Office of the Executive Director, also participated in the discussions. . Iceland has accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4. It maintains an exchange system free of restrictions on the making of payments and transfers for current international transactions. Iceland has paid for the increase in its quota under the Eleventh General Review of Quotas and has accepted the l proposed Fourth Amendment. . Iceland is on a 24-month consultation cycle. The last Article IV consultation was concluded on February 10, 1997 (EBM97/12). An interim Staff Visit took place in November 1997. . A center-right coalition government, in power since 1995, enjoys a two-thirds parliamentary majority and broad public support ahead of general elections scheduled for May 8, 1999. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2- 1. TheEconomicSetting ............................................... . A. Introduction ............................................... 3 B. Economic Developments and Policies .............................. 5 C. Outlook for 1999 and Beyond .................................. 10 II. The Policy Dialogue .............................................. 11 A. Short-Term Policy Issues ...................................... 11 B. Medium-Term Issues ......................................... 15 C. Structural Reform and Other Issues .............................. 17 III. Staff Appraisal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Text Boxes 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. Disinflation: Achievements and Prospects .................. Fiscal Transparency .................................. Assessing the Current Account .......................... Financial Liberalization and Reform ...................... Implications of the Euro for Iceland ...................... . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . * . . . . . . . . . . 4 . . . . . . 8 . . . . . 14 . . . . . 16 . . . . . 18 Tables 1. Selected Economic Indicators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23 Figures 1. Volatility of Economic Variables in Selected Small Economies . . 2. Economic Developments, 1960-98 ....................... 3. Contributions to Growth .............................. 4. Unemployment and Inflation ........................... 5. l External Developments ............................... 6. External Debt and Interest Differentials ................... 7. Exchange Rate and Competitiveness ..................... 8. Fiscal Developments ................................. Monetary Developments .............................. 10. Monetary Conditions ................................. 11. Financial Sector Indicators ............................. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24 . . , . . 25 . . . . . 26 . . . . . 27 . . . . . 28 . . . . , 29 . . . . . 30 . . . 319. . * . . . 32 . . . . . 33 . . . . . 34 Appendices I. FundRelations .................................................... 35 II. Statistical Information .............................................. 36 III. Press Information Notice ............................................ 3 8 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3- 1. THE ECONOMIC SETTING A. Introduction 1. As a small open economy, heavily dependent on exports of marine products, Iceland has historically been vulnerable to sharp economic swings. Although economic growth has generally been high, it has also been rather volatile (Figure 1). External shocks combined with accommodating macroeconomic policies-featuring periodic devaluations-have led to a history of high and variable rates of inflation (Figure 2). 2. Over the past decade, a shift in policies toward the pursuit of greater financial stability and lower inflation has set in train a successful disinflation process. Sustained maintenance of an exchange rate anchor, supported by steady fiscal consolidation, has helped bring inflation down decisively into low single digits. A tindamental shift in the public’s attitude to inflation seems to have assisted in containing the output and employment cost of disinflation (Box 1). Structural reforms initiated in recent years in the context of membership in the European Economic Area (EEA)-providing free movement of goods, services, labor, and capital in relation to the European Union (EU)-have also improved the climate for investment and growth. 3. Economic growth gathered steam in the mid-1990s, exceeding 5 percent in 1998 for the third consecutive year (Figure 3). Domestic demand rose in 1998 at a blistering pace (12 percent) on the strength of a continued surge in both private investment (23% percent) and private consumption (11 percent). While inflation has remained subdued, the external current account deficit has widened sharply. The prolonged upswing is driven by a combination of factors: (i) an investment boom led by three large projects in the aluminum smelting, ferro-silicon, and associated power generation sectors; (ii) a strong recovery in private consumption, sustained by large employment and wage gains and, more recently, rapid credit expansion; and (iii) favorable fish catches and an upturn in prices of marine exports. 4. At the conclusion of the last Article IV consultation in February 1997, Executive Directors welcomed the improvement in Iceland’s economic performance but expressed concerns about emerging imbalances. Directors praised the record of strong economic growth and low inflation, underpinned by policies of exchange rate stability and fiscal consolidation. However, in view of concerns over the rapid pace of credit expansion and large wage increases that had fueled a consumption boom and contributed to the emergence of a current account deficit, Directors called for a tighter monetary policy and a faster pace of fiscal consolidation as well as more vigorous structural reforms. 5. Developments over the past two years underscore the validity of these concerns, although Iceland has remained in many respects a success story. Indeed, Iceland is at present one of only a handfU1 of advanced economies to be growing rapidly. In this context, Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4- Box 1. Disinflation: Achievements and Prospects Iceland experienced high inflation from the mid-1970s to the mid-1980s. An accommodating monetary policy with a devaluation bias in the face of adverse external shocks was the major factor behind high inflation. Since the late 198Os, the tension between the need for flexibility in the exchange rate to deal with external shocks and the need for a nominal anchor has been resolved by adoption of an adjustable peg regime with a band. The stable exchange rate, supported by fiscal consolidation, has helped transform Iceland into a low- inflation country. Twelve-month Changes in CPI 1980-98 (In percent) 1980-98 1980-89 1990-98 1994-98 Average 23.2 39.7 4.5 1.8 Standard Deviation 23.8 21.5 4.9 0.7 Highest Value 102.9 102.9 23.9 3.2 Lowest Value -0.1 11.9 -0.1 -0.1 Source: Central Bank of Iceland, Autumn Statement, November 1998. Inflation expectations, measured by market surveys, have lagged behind actual inflation, with particularly large divergences in the early period of disinflation. This slow adjustment of expectations generally raises the cost of disinflation in terms of lost output and employment. In Iceland, however, wage setting in centralized negotiations based on official forecasts of inflation, and in which the government plays a proactive role, has helped reduce this cost. Widespread use of fmancial indexation also prevented increases in ex-post real interest rates.’ With the advent of low inflation, the authorities’ goal is to phase out such indexation. The current upswing presents a test of the durability of disinflation. In the mid-1990s, slow growth of import prices, the impact of slack in the labor market on wage growth, and strong productivity gains facilitated the maintenance of low inflation. In the current upswing, labor shortages have been met partly by importing labor, reducing pressure on wages in some sectors. Nevertheless, wage growth has been very rapid in 1997-98. Econometric work at the central bank suggests that the transmission of higher wages to the price level may have been somewhat delayed in the 1990s as compared with earlier periods. The present recovery, now entering its fourth year, has so far co-existed with continued low inflation. But output is now above potential and unemployment has declined further than earlier was believed to be consistent with stable inflation. These developments pose a risk to the durability of low inflation. ’ M. Gudmundsson and Y. Kristinsson, “Monetary Policy in Nordic countries: Experiences since 1992”, BIS Policy Paper No. 2, October 1997. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-5- Executive Directors may wish to focus their remarks on the principal issues around which the policy debate in Iceland and the staffs dialogue with the authorities have revolved: . If overheating does not subside over the coming year, what would be the appropriate policy mix? . How should the authorities respond to the risks inherent in the ongoing credit boom, which follows on the heels of financial deregulation and the opening of the capital account? . Over the medium term, what should be the focus of structural reform efforts, particularly in view of the advent of the euro? B. Economic Developments and Policies 6. The expansion became progressively broad-based during the course of 1998. Private consumption and business investment (outside the major projects) were particularly buoyant. Consumption was driven by large gains in disposable incomes, as well as a fall in the private saving rate as households borrowed to finance purchases of consumer durables. The rise in business investment, while facilitated by easy credit availability, stemmed primarily from decisions to expand capacity following a period of weak capital spending. Output is estimated by the staff to be running about 2 percent above potential, and there are clear signs of a build- up of pressures on capacity. With import prices weak and the exchange rate remaining above the center of its band (&6 percent), inflation has remained subdued. Selected Indicators of Demand Pressure (Change in percent, unless otherwise indicated) 1996 1997 1998 Domestic demand 7.6 6.2 12.0 Nominal Wages 6.4 5.4 9.4 Real disposable income capita per 3.0 5.5 9.0 Import volume growth 16.7 8.6 22.1 Consumer price inflation 2.3 1.8 1.7 Unemployment rate (in percent) 4.3 3.9 2.8 Output gap (in percent of potential GDP) -1.5 0.5 2.0 Sources: Data provided by the authorities and sttiestimates. 7. Unemployment has fallen sharply and labor shortages have emerged. From its recent peak of 5 percent in 1995, unemplqyment fell to 2% percent toward the end of 1998, below that deemed compatible with stable inflation. The steep fall in the rate of unemployment Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-6- in the current upswing reflects rapid gains in employment-up 8 percent over the three years to 1998. As the local labor force moves progressively into more skilled and “white-collar” jobs, low-skilled jobs, particularly in the fish processing sector, have been increasingly filled by foreign workers. The net inflow of labor-accounting for about a fifth of the increase in labor demand in 1998-is a relatively new phenomenon in Iceland and has contributed to easing pressures on wages in some sectors. Real wages nevertheless rose sharply (Figure 4). Wage drift edged up from about 1% percent in the previous two years. 8. The wage bargaining system is in transition. Iceland recently moved to a three-year framework for wage negotiations, embodying annual central agreements and firm-level supplementary agreements. With tight conditions prevailing throughout the economy, central wage agreements have become de facto minimum wage increases. Public sector wages have risen rapidly, especially for teachers and health workers under the jurisdiction of local governments, far outstripping central agreements. Some observers see a risk that the wage bargaining framework may be breaking down. 9. The rate of consumer price inflation has remained low. The benign inflation environment also reflects improved labor productivity (up 3 percent). Asset price inflation has also remained modest. Inflation expectations, as measured by the central bank’s market surveys, as well as by the differential in yields on indexed and non-indexed government securities, have declined only gradually from around 3 percent a year ago to 2% percent in recent months. 10. Excess demand has spilled over into the balance of payments. Indeed, the external current account deficit widened to nearly 6 percent of GDP in 1998 (Figure 5). Private investment is expected to account for the lion’s share of the increase in merchandise import volumes. Imports of consumer goods have also picked up, with strong growth in imports of cars and other durable goods. Export volume growth has been iackluster, despite a generally favorable external environment and the recovery of fish stocks; labor disputes earlier in the year disrupted fisheries production but this was more than offset by a sharp increase in marine export prices. With oil and other commodity prices falling, the terms of trade have improved substantially. Iceland has thus emerged largely unscathed from the world economic turmoil of the past 18 months: declining marine exports to Asia and Russia were easily made up in other markets, and the coming on stream of new capacity compensated for weak aluminum prices. In turn, the financing of this expansion through foreign direct investment has helped to contain the growth of net external debt (Figure 6). The debt service ratio has generally been on a declining trend since its recent peak in 1994. The most recent data from the BIS suggest a slight shortening of the maturity structure of external debt during the first half of 1998, with short-term external liabilities standing at just over $1 billion at end-June 1998. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-7- Selected External Indicators 1996 1997 1998 Current account deficit to GDP -1.6 -1.4 -5.7 Net external debt to GDP 49.5 50.6 55.9 Debt service to exports GNFS 22.2 18.9 20.7 Official reserves to short-term external debt 50.8 38.7 42.2 Real effective exchange rate appreciation (CPI) 0.3 0.9 1.5 Terms of trade change -3.2 2.7 5.6 Export growth GNFS 10.0 5.7 2.6 Sources: Data provided by the authorities and stti estimates. 11. Indicators of competitiveness have deteriorated somewhat. The krona has generally remained in a narrow range around the center of its band.’ With inflation in line with that in Iceland’s main trading partners, the CPT-based real effective exchange rate has risen only marginally, Measured in terms of unit labor costs, competitiveness has been eroded somewhat since 1995, the last year in which the current account showed a surplus (Figure 7). The profitability of the business sector appears to be quite strong. Profits in the fisheries sector have clearly benefitted from the improvement in the terms of trade, while profitability of the manufacturing sector has worsened somewhat in the wake of large wage increases and heightened domestic price competition, 12. The private saving ratio has fallen and household debt has risen sharply. The favorable effects of fiscal consolidation in recent years have been eclipsed by a continuing deterioration of the private saving ratio. The private sector financial balance has swung from a surplus of 6% percent of GDP in 1994 to a deficit of 6% percent of GDP in 1998. As a result, national savings are estimated to have reached a historic low. Combined with a surge in investment, the fall in the savings ratio has led to the sharp widening of the current account deficit. Household debt as a proportion of disposable income has continued to reach new peaks, rising from 116 percent in 1994 to an estimated 13 5 percent last year. 13. Public finances continued to improve in 1998 but not by as much as warranted by cyclical conditions. Confirming the reversal of large chronic deficits of the.early 199Os, the general government balance is estimated to have been in surplus on an accrual basis for the second successive year (Figure 8). However, the underlying structural balance of the general government is estimated to have deteriorated from a surplus of about % percent of GDP in 1997 to a deficit of ‘/4 percent of GDP in 1998. The Treasury financial position has ’ The fluctuation margin, set at f 2% percent in 1989, was widened to f 6 percent following the full liberalization of capital flows in 1995. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Publicalso improved, although less than warranted by cyclical conditions. On an accrual basis, the balance for 1998 is expected to show a modest deficit, compared with a budgeted balance (Box 2),2 Expenditures are somewhat higher than budgeted, stemming mainly from higher than expected pension liabilities, as well as a higher wage bill and health care spending.3 Significant receipts from asset sales have contributed to a healthy surplus in the net Treasury financial balance, enabling the retirement of public (mostly foreign) debt. Box 2. Iceland: Fiscal Transparency In recent years, the authorities have initiated efforts to enhance the transparency of fiscal practices as a part of a broader program of improving public sector management. . Cash to Accruals: A key element of the drive toward greater transparency is the shift of the Treasury budget presentation to an accruals basis in 1998. The shift would assist in assessing the long-term impact of decisions made during the budget year, such as commitments made for public pensions and accumulated interest payments. For example, the shift to an accruals basis shows that the conventional cash presentation understates the liabilities of the state pension fund. With this shift, all of the general government accounts (including the central and local governments and social security) are now reported on an accruals basis, and include imputed contributions to unfunded pensions for public employees. . Government Guarantees: The authorities have also decided to publish the details of their borrowing and lending guarantees at the time of the budget, thereby consolidating all decisions regarding central government finances into the budget. . Tax Expenditures: The authorities are considering publishing the details of tax expenditures with the core budget papers. Most tax expenditures are related to the personal income tax system. The seamen’s tax credit and equity purchase tax credit amounted to over 2 billion krona in 1998. The two-tier VAT also implies a tax credit for food, heating, and electricity. The fishing fleet is exempted from taxes on fuel. 14. The budget for 1999 is slightly expansionary. The budget envisages a surplus of nearly l/2 percent of GDP, reflecting a further fall in the expenditure-GDP ratio of about 1 percent, primarily due to reduced spending on interest payments and public investment. The budget provides for increased real spending for health care, transportation and R & D 2 The 1998 budget consolidates some previously off-budget items. This factor and the switch of budget presentation to an accrual basis makes comparison with previous years difficult. 3The shift of supplemental pay into basic salaries of public servants resulted in increased pension liabilities, which were not provided for in the budget. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-9- activities. The revenue-GDP ratio is expected to remain broadly unchanged. With a projected net financial surplus of about 23/4 percent of GDP, the Treasury again expects to retire sizable amounts of its debt. Selected Financial Indicators (In percent; financial balances in percent of GDP) 1996 1997 1998 Treasury revenue balance (accruals basis in 1998) General government financial balance General government structural balance Private sector financial balance Bank credit growth (end-period) Broad money growth (end-period) Treasury bill repurchase yield (period average) Nominal exchange rate change (end-period ) -2.5 0.2 -0.5 -1.6 0.0 0.4 -0.4 0.2 -0.2 -0.1 -1.6 -6.4 11.8 11.9 31.5 6.8 9.4 14.4 6.6 6.9 7.3 0.6 1.4 0.7 Source: Data provided by the authorities. 15. Monetary policy continued to be oriented toward price stability, with the exchange rate as the intermediate target. With substantial net inflows of capital during the first half of 1998, the krona appreciated, notwithstanding sizable net purchases of foreign exchange by the monetary authorities. A sharp reversal of inflows in early autumn, linked to turbulence in world financial markets, led to a weakening of the krbna. In response, the central bank raised its policy interest rate by 30 basis points in September 1998 to 7.5 percent. This move widened the interest rate differential with abroad and led to a reversal of outflows and some strengthening of the krona, which ended the year broadly unchanged. International reserves stood at US$430 million at end- 1998 (1.6 months of imports), sufficient to cover 42 percent of short-term external liabilities. 16. Monetary conditions remained supportive of activity during 1998. An indicator of monetary conditions suggests some tightening, reflecting the appreciation in the first half of the year and the September interest rate increase. A host of other indicators nevertheless argue that liquidity remained ample (Figures 9 and 10). Thus, the rate of growth of broad money rose from 9% percent at end- 1997 to 14% percent at end-1998. Bank credit accelerated dramatically to a 12-month rate of growth of over 30 percent at end-l 998 from 12 percent a year earlier. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- lo- 17. With little indication that the projected slowdown in demand was occurring, the central bank announced a pre-emptive increase in its policy rate, effective March 2. The increase by 40 basis points to 7.9 percent was intended to restrain credit growth, dampen domestic demand, and strengthen international reserves. With interest rates declining through early April 1999 in Europe (including Norway and the United Kingdom), interest rate differentials in favor of short-term krona-denominated assets widened further. It is too early to gauge whether this monetary tightening is having the desired impact on the pace of demand expansion. C. Outlook for 1999 ‘and Beyond 18. The outlook for 1999 is for buoyant growth and a pick-up in inflation. The stafl’s forecast assumes the modestly expansionary fiscal stance set out in the budget, no further change in interest rates, and broadly unchanged competitiveness. . Domestic demand is envisaged to decelerate from its extremely rapid pace of 1998 as large investment projects are completed. . GDP is expected to grow at a rate well above potential, supported by continued strong growth of private consumption.4 . Exports of goods and services are projected to rebound, reflecting in part the coming on stream of new capacity in aluminum and ferro-silicon. . With little improvement projected in the terms of trade, the current account deficit is forecast to narrow only slightly. . Wages are projected to rise again steeply, contributing to a pick up in consumer price inflation.s Looking further ahead, the economy would slow down further in 2000 as investment returns to its historical norm. Growth is expected to fall a bit below potential over the medium term, with the current account deficit hovering around 2% percent of GDP. 4 Based on an updating of earlier work (SM/97/22, l/27/97, Chapter II), stti estimates suggest potential GDP growth of around ?‘/z percent taking into account new capacity. 5The model underlying the staffs inflation forecast is described in the Selected Issues Paper. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- ll- Economic Outlook 1998 1999 Average 2000 2001-2003 Domestic demand Private consumption Investment Exports of goods and nonfactor services Imports of goods and nonfactor servicies Gross domestic product Potential GDP Consumer prices Current account deficit -5.7 -5.5 -4.0 -2.6 Net external debt 55.9 59.9 62.4 64.4 12.0 11.0 23.4 2.6 22.1 5.0 3.4 1.7 (Change in percent) 4.9 3.6 7.0 5.0 -0.2 -0.5 5.2 5.7 3.6 2.6 5.6 4.7 3.6 3.2 3.5 3.2 (In percent of GDP) 2.5 2.7 2.3 5.0 3.4 3.1 3.0 2.9 Sources: Data provided by the authorities and sttiprojections. 19. Official forecasts envisage a significantly faster deceleration in domestic demand. In particular, the authorities see a sharper decline in private investment and slower growth of private consumption. The official forecast is also more sanguine on inflation and the current account deficit. In the staffs view, the continued strong growth in wages and the rapid expansion of credit suggest that the risks are on the upside. A deterioration in the external environment-slower growth in key markets and weaker export prices-would, while dampening activity, worsen the current account deficit. II. THEPOLICYDIALOGUE A. Short-Term Policy Issues 20. The discussions took place against the backdrop of the longest sustained expansion in many decades. Moreover, this is the first upswing of any duration during which Iceland has enjoyed a rate of inflation at or below that prevailing in the main trading partner countries. Set against the considerable satisfaction that the boom has been managed quite successfully thus far is the growing anxiety among policy makers that demand pressures have begun to build up rapidly over the past year. The current upswing is also the first since financial deregulation and the full opening up of the capital account in 1995, and there are signs that a credit-fueled boom may be leading to a sense of euphoria. The challenge of managing the boom is compounded by the electoral cycle, which is constraining the menu of policy options available to address the risks of overheating. Uncertainty surrounding prospects Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12- for the world economy in general, and the EU in particular, adds to the difficulty of assessing the gravity of the emerging risks and tailoring the policy response. 21. The appropriateness of the fiscal stance at this stage of the cycle is a key issue. The budget for 1999 was formulated on the assumption of a significantly faster deceleration in demand than is now foreseen, and the budget will have a modest expansionary impact on the economy. The authorities did not contest the view that a tighter fiscal stance for 1999 would have been appropriate. They noted, however, the difficulty of keeping up the momentum of fiscal restraint after four years of cutbacks in expenditures, especially in an election year. The staff observed that a stronger fiscal position would have been appropriate at this stage of the cycle. The large repayment of public debt had highlighted the fruits of fiscal consolidation to the financial markets and the public at large. Seizing the opportunity provided by the upswing to push further on fiscal consolidation would ease the pressures on monetary policy and help to restore flexibility to fiscal policy to deal with ikture economic shocks. The experience of the last downturn-when large fiscal imbalances drastically curtailed the authorities’ room for providing a fiscal cushion to activity- argued strongly for restoring fiscal flexibility. 22. The discussions explored alternative policy responses if overheating were to continue. The staff enquired about the feasibility of a mid-year tightening of fiscal policy by holding back budgeted expenditures. While not averse to such a course in principle, officials noted the difficulties in implementing expenditure cuts late in the budget cycle. In practice, the planning for the next budget will start by mid-summer after the new government takes office, and any decision to tighten the fiscal stance would have to be made in that context. Action in the course of the year was not ruled out, however, if warranted by the economic outlook; the staff was assured that legislative and administrative mechanisms to implement such a decision were in place. Containing the growth of public sector wages was more of a challenge, however, as wage discipline was weakest at the local government level. With the economy again expected to grow well above potential, revenues may exceed official projections. The stafFwas of the view that any such additional revenues should be used to strengthen the fiscal position. While sympathetic to this standpoint, officials had yet to formulate a definitive view on this issue. 23. As for monetary policy, the challenge is how to bring about a soft landing. Since the budget for 1999 implied a pro-cyclical stance of fiscal policy, short-term pressures on monetary policy are all the greater. The monetary authorities are also confronting what is a relatively new dilemma for Iceland, reflecting the full opening of the capital account a few years ago: monetary tightening dictated by considerations of internal balance runs the risk of putting excessive upward pressure on the exchange rate, potentially worsening the external position over the medium term. Balancing these considerations calls for fine and calibrated judgments on a continuing basis, Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13- 24. In this regard, the monetary authorities have demonstrated a greater willingness than in the past to exploit the upward flexibility provided by the exchange rate band. The interest rate increases of late 1997 and September 1998 pushed the interest rate differential in favor of Iceland to its highest level in recent years, leading to an appreciation of the krona. While recognizing the external constraints on policy, the staff argued that there was little choice but to raise interest rates to dampen demand, all the more so as fiscal policy was on hold. Furthermore, with the krona close to its central rate, there was some short-term scope for appreciation within the band. In case of strong inflows, some of the pressure could be channeled toward building up international reserves. This is consistent with the decision of the Minister of Finance to shift the composition of public debt retirement this year more toward domestic rather than foreign debt. 25. The authorities remain committed to the current exchange rate regime. An adjustable peg with a wide band has successfully resolved the traditional tension in Iceland between the need for a transparent nominal anchor and a degree of flexibility to deal with external shocks. In particular, the stable exchange rate has played a central role in Iceland’s transformation over the 1990s from high-inflation to low inflation on a par with the best performers in the advanced country group. Since late 1993, the krona has remained broadly within a narrow band of *2*/4 percent; it has observed these narrow margins even after the band was widened in 1995. The favorable external environment, combined with structural reforms initiated in recent years, has ensured that the exchange rate regime has not faced any serious strains. In the event of another reversal of sentiment in the exchange markets, which cannot be ruled out, the authorities would again need to stand ready to raise interest rates. 26. The authorities agree that the underlying current account deficit is a concern. Abstracting from the impact of the large investment projects and the cyclical position of the economy, which is running well ahead of potential and most of Iceland’s trading partners, the staff estimates that the underlying current account deficit is about 2% percent of GDP. A deficit of this magnitude needs to be seen in the context of Iceland’s low savings, relatively undiversified export base, weak export growth, and sizable external debt (Box 3). Looking forward, there is also the risk of a prolonged period of subdued world demand; the current favorable prices for marine exports and, more recently, aluminum may not be sustained. At the same time, export capacity has significantly improved as foreign investment has spearheaded the exploitation of Iceland’s comparative advantage in power-intensive industries. The increasingly dynamic fisheries sector has diversified into new products and markets, which augurs well for this mainstay of the economy. Iceland is also carving out a niche in high-tech sectors such as software and biotechnology. The recent erosion in competitiveness has been modest. In weighing these considerations, there was full agreement between the staff and the authorities that, barring a severe shock, improvements in competitiveness should be sought through the containment of domestic demand and domestic cost inflation. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14 - Box 3. Assessing the Current Account Chronically weak national savings lie at the heart of Iceland’s current account deficits. The sharp fall in ,rivate savings in recent years more or less mirrors a decline in household savings, which coincided with the acceleration of financial deregulation and sizable gains in disposable income in a booming economy. Elements of the tax system may also encourage the accumulation of debt, such as the widespread availability of interest rebates for home buyers. Recent pension reforms offer the prospect of some improvement in private savings, &hough experience indicates that strengthening public savings is more effective in raising national savings. Low savings in turn may have constrained investment. This may have been the case in the years prior to the Full opening of the capital account in 1995, which would have adverse implications for future growth. Private investment may also have been inhibited by historical factors, such as the pervasive role of the state in the :conomy and the absence of financial stability. In other OECD countries with a similar export structure, savings md investment have been substantially higher, each amounting to over 22 percent of GDP on average over the past twenty years. Recent current account deficitxare essentially a reflection of private sector decisions. The sharp spike in investment since 1996 in large energy-intensive projects has largely been financed through foreign direct investment. While this investment is likely to pay dividends in terms of higher future export revenue, the remaining deficits must nevertheless be financed by borrowing abroad, adding to Iceland’s external debt and debt-service burden, which is higher than most countries in its credit rating class. Other sources of concern include a sharp rise in short-term external debt and an associated expansion of domestic credit, low official reserves, weak and declining export growth, and reliance on debt-creating financing flows. 12 10 6 6 4 2 0 -2 -4 -6 -6 . . Balance of Payrrmts Financing (in percent of GDP) l Current account q Asset transactiins HMm-debtfbws gsDebtfbws l Overall balance r 1996 These indicators need to be set against Iceland’s considerable strengths. These include its recent record of sound macroeconomic management, improved public finances, and prudent external debt management. The fisheries sector, long a source of instability, has undergone a considerable transformation in recent years, demonstrating a new-found capacity to adapt to adverse conditions. At the same time, the export base is becoming more diversified, relying increasingly on its comparative advantage in energy-intensive industry and high-value service sectors such as software and biotechnology. Reflecting these considerations, Iceland has been largely unaffected by the external financing pressures facing a number of other countries; indeed, Moody’s recently confirmed its already high sovereign credit rating for Iceland (Aa3), highlighting the fact that Iceland enjoys relatively easy access to international capital markets on favorable terms. Source: Selected Issues paper. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 15 - 27. Officials share the staffs concern about the rapid growth of bank lending and the sharp rise in short-term external borrowing. They are mind&l of the experience in other Nordic countries in the early 199Os, when rapid credit expansion in the wake of financial deregulation and increased competition among financial institutions had contributed to banking crises (Box 4). They have therefore initiated steps intended to alleviate these concerns. The importance of risk management was underlined anew to the managements of the key financial institutions toward the end of 1998. The staff noted that moral suasion alone was unlikely to be effective in reining in the growth of credit, and suggested that stronger prudential measures be considered. The authorities subsequently introduced a minimum liquidity requirement for banks (1.5 percent) in conjunction with the increase in interest rates. It is estimated that, when fully effective in June, the new requirements will raise liquid reserves of banks by 25-30 billion kronur (13 percent of deposits). Guidelines for the prudential regulation of credit based on a maturity analysis of bank balance sheets, which are currently under consideration, are expected to provide greater flexibility than liquidity limits and could in due course replace them. 28. Financial supervision has been consolidated in a new independent body. Reflecting the increasing depth and sophistication of the financial sector, formal responsibility for financial sector supervision, which was divided between the central bank and the Insurance Supervisory Authority, was consolidated in January 1999 in a newly established Financial Supervisory Authority (FSA). The FSA is to cooperate closely with the central bank, through, inter alia, information sharing on developments in the financial system. In addition, one of the three Directors on the Board of the FSA is appointed on the recommendation of the central bank. Officials underscored that the central bank will continue its broad oversight over the financial system. 29. Discussions with the FSA and financial market representatives suggest that there appear to be no major strains in the banking system. Although there is little evidence yet of inflated asset prices, the rapid buildup of household debt and the increasing reliance of the banking system on short-term external borrowing are areas of particular concern, Experience in Iceland suggests that increased provisioning for bad loans generally lags by three years the start of a credit boom. The FSA has thus reiterated the importance of maintaining adequate provisioning. Capital adequacy rules are based on Basle and EU guidelines; the risk-weighted ratio for banks was close to 10 percent at end-1998. The FSA also noted that most foreign borrowing was being used to finance lending to export-oriented firms, primarily in the fisheries sector. The foreign exchange exposure of banks is, moreover, subject to aggregate and individual currency limits, B. Medium-Term Issues 30. Fiscal consolidation has been anchored in reductions in public expenditures. The staff saw scope for further reductions in subsidies and transfers, as well in the growth of real public consumption. Officials felt that the remaining areas of significant support to the private Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 16- Box 4: Financial Liberalization and Reform Changes in Iceland’s financial sector over the last decade have fostered market development and improved control of macroeconomic perfonnance.However, liberalization of financial markets and the capital account has also introduced new economic challenges for policy-makers. The changes have been broad-b-compassing changes in the structure of the financial system, the supervisory system and regulatory framework, the instruments of monetary policy, and conditions in the financial markets-and have created conditions in which market forces play an increasing role in economic and financial performance. Institutional investors, notably pension fi.mds, have increased in prominence in the financial system. This rise will provide a disciplining effect to corporations by creating large, intluencial shareholders, and also will provide a mechanism whereby private savings can be channelled more efficiently into equity investments. In 1998, initial steps were made toward privatization of two state-owned commercial banks and a state-owned investment bank. Capital adequacy rules have been tightened and a new supervisory body established. In connection with the agreement on the EEA, new legislation for fmancial institutions, securities transactions, mutual funds, ,and the stock exchange was enacted in 1993 based on EU directives. Moreover, the BIS standards for capital adequacy of commercial and savings banks became effective. The new rules will assist in maintaining integrity of financial institutions. The capital account in Iceland has been fully liberal&d. In 1993, an interbank market for foreign exchange was introduced. Long-term portfolio capital movements were completely liberal&d in 1994, and in 1995 the remaining restrictions on short-term capital movements were abolished. Most restrictions on foreign direct investment have also been removed, except for some specific industries. Deregulation of markets has led to a rapid increase in the issuance of financial instruments. The bond market has been widened and deepened. Moreover, widespread interest rate indexation that had prevailed in Iceland is being gradually phased out with the shiti to more credible anti-inflation policies. Equity trading on the Icelandic Stock Exchange began in 1992 and has grown to over 50 quoted companies. Iceland’s liberalization has elements similar to the other Nordic countries (Figure 11). The upswing of the last 3 years following the full opening of the capital account and financial deregulation has been accompanied by a rapid rise in bank lending which has outstripped the increase in domestic deposits. This lending boom mirrors developments in Norway, Sweden, and Finland just prior to the Nordic banking crises. l/ Much of the new lending has been financed by increases in banks’ liabilities to nonresidents. The current account deficit has widened sharply in 1998, only partly reflecting imports of export-related investment goods. Household saving ratios have dropped while household debt has accumulated. While total net household wealth has increased, the rise can be attributed to a sharp increase in pension tid assets, which are fairly illiquid. Net wealth excluding pensions has fallen steadily and the ratio of debt to fixed assets has risen, indicating an increased vulnerability of households to income shocks in meeting their obligations. Equity prices in Iceland have risen in line with those in other Nordic countries. However, in contrast to the experience of the Nordic countries, real estate prices in Iceland have risen only modestly. 1/ See Burkhard Drees and Ceyla Pazarbeioglu, “The Nordic Banking Crises: Pitfalls in Financial Liberalization,” IMF Occasional Paper No. 161 (April 1998). Source: Selected Issues paper. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17- sector, such as agricultural subsidies, were politically more difficult to address. The mission argued that an explicit medium-term program of fbrther fiscal consolidation by the new government would help sustain the confidence of financial markets. In the years ahead, public finances are likely to benefit from a virtuous cycle of lower interest payments that would in turn facilitate fiscal adjustment. A substantial structural surplus at the level of the general government (against a deficit of ‘/r percent of GDP in 1998) would provide the cornerstone of a strengthened external position. It would also contribute to a faster decline in public debt, and would thereby help bring down Iceland’s relatively high long term real interest rates. Officials noted that a reduction in public debt, especially foreign debt-which accounts for 50 percent of public debt-was indeed the authorities’ long-run objective, not least because it would enhance the country’s already high credit rating. A view on the precise medium-term fiscal program will have to await the new government. 31. The tax system has undergone a major reform in recent years. Reform has been aimed at strengthening incentives to work and save, reinforcing the role of automatic stabilizers by shifting from indirect to direct taxation, and enhancing competitiveness by aligning the tax system with that of other OECD countries. The corporate tax regime has been made more flexible, with the tax’rate lowered to 30 percent from a high of 51 percent a decade ago; various exemptions have been abolished and the tax base thus widened. Marginal rates of taxation of personal incomes have been reduced in stages from 42 percent to 38 percent effective this year, and numerous exemptions and deductions have been abolished. There was agreement that these reforms had addressed the most important issues regarding the structure of taxation. 32. The euro may have implications for the exchange rate regime in the medium term. Although Iceland is a member of the EEA, it has remained outside the EU. Over the longer run, if the euro area were to expand to include the United Kingdom and the other Nordic countries, Iceland’s current exchange rate regime may need to be reassessed (Box 5). After a careful examination of the issue, the government has concluded that, for the present, a wait-and-see stance was appropriate. The staf?’ emphasized that irrespective of the eventual decision regarding the exchange rate regime, it would be important to demonstrate a sustained commitment to stability-oriented policies. A major step in this direction would be to secure full operational independence for the central bank to pursue a clear mandate of price stability. C. Structural Reform and Other I&sues 33. The privatization program gained momentum in 1998 with the successful partial privatixation of a large investment bank-the first such operation in the banking sector. Two state-owned commercial banks were incorporated in 1998 in anticipation of their eventual privatization, and four state-owned investment credit fimds were merged into a new investment bank. The government subsequently reduced its stake in the investment bank by 49 percent, which proved remarkably popular: fully one third of the population participated in the operation, the proceeds of which (about $65 million, or 0.8 percent of GDP) were more Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 18- Box 5. Implications of the Euro for Iceland Since 1995 Iceland has successfully operated a peg to a basket of currencies, with a band of ,+ 6 percent. Until Decemberl998, the basket consisted of 16 currencies and shares in trade in goods and services determined the weight of each currency. After the introduction of the euro, the basket was adjusted with the weights of the euro area countries combined into one. As a result of this technical adjustment, the euro has become the most important currency in the basket. If the United Kingdom, Sweden, and Denmark were to join the EMU, the euro share would rise to just below 60 percent. The New Currency Basket for the krona (weights, in percent) $ euro Stg Dkr Nkr Y Skr SFr C$ Total 24.1 32.1 13.4 9.2 8.3 5.4 3.9 2.4 1.4 100.0 ‘Over the medium-term, the euro will impact Iceland’s exchange rate options in different ways. One issue is whether a peg to the euro would be preferable to the peg to a basket. It could be argued that a peg to the euro would provide a clearer and more credible anchor for price expectations than a peg to a composite currency basket. If exchange rate stability was valued as an objective, then a basket peg that balances the euro with other major currencies, such as the U.S. dollar, would be preferable. A peg to the euro could be either unilateral or one based on participation in an ERM II-type arrangement. The second option is unlikely outside the EU. The credibility of any arrangement would be enhanced by bringing Central Bank laws and practices in line with those of the European Central Bank. Recent changes in the operating instruments of monetary policy go in this direction. The economic impact of the euro will be felt principally through monetary and exchange rate channels. If it is not possible to respond to external shocks through adjustments in the exchange rate, greater flexibility throughout the economy would be needed. In particular, labor market behavior would need to adapt. As a small economy, subject to external shocks, Iceland may be expected by financial markets to aim at ambitious fiscal targets. Finally, Icelandic financial markets in general, and the banking system in particular, would need to strive for greater efficiency to be able to benefit from greater competition and efficiency of euro area financial markets. Source: Selected Issues paper. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 19- than double the receipts from all privatization operations since 1991. The government reduced its control over two other state-owned banks by 15 percent by author&g the issuance of new shares to the public. The government has indicated its intention to sell its remaining stake in the investment bank but has yet to announce its plans for privatizing the remaining two state-owned banks. It also retains full or part ownership in other sectors, notably telecommunications. 34. There was agreement that the pension system is in generally good shape. The public pension system has been put on a sounder financial footing. The main mandatory occupational pension scheme, run mostly by private pension funds, is more or less filly funded. Increased emphasis has recently been given to voluntary private pension savings. Officials noted that this three-pillar approach is in close conformity with the recommendations of both the OECD and the World Bank. With the effective retirement age at 70, one ofthe highest in Europe, and built-in disincentives for early retirement, Iceland seems well placed to cope with demographic challenges of the future. 35. The management of Iceland’s valuable marine resources continues to stir impassioned debate. The present system built around an exclusive 200~mile fishing zone and enforcement of aggregate quotas within this limit seems to have broadly succeeded in effective management of fish stocks. However, the initial allocation of quota shares free of charge to existing owners of fishing boats remains a highly contentious.political issue. This method of allocating quota rights is equivalent to an off-budget transfer, raising an issue of fiscal transparency. The staff noted that a more open system consisting of on-budget taxation of economic rents from the use of common property resources and transfers in the pursuit of social or regional objectives would help clarify the use being made of public resources. 36. Iceland is well prepared to meet the challenges of the Year 2000 problem. Under the aegis of an intergovernmental committee reflecting all sectors of the economy, plans are well advanced to minimize possible disruptions. III. STAFFAPPRAISAL 37. Iceland is enjoying a prolonged economic expansion. Real output is expected to expand by 5 percent for the fourth consecutive year in 1999. The major gains in incomes and employment generated by this upswing are all the more impressive because they have been accompanied by a sustained process of disinflation. Generally sound macroeconomic policies, anchored in exchange rate stability and fiscal consolidation, have underpinned the expansion. Financial deregulation and other structural reforms aimed at encouraging greater competition have played a key role in imparting much-needed dynamism to the economy, thereby sustaining the expansion. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2o- 38. The upswing shows no sign of losing steam, repeatedly belying expectations of a slowdown. The extraordinary strength of the expansion-evidenced by the blistering pace of domestic demand growth-has begun to create pressures on capacity, as any remaining slack has by now been fully absorbed. An ongoing boom in private consumption, sustained by large wage gains and fed by rapid credit growth, has amplified the impact of the investment surge built around large energy-intensive projects. As a result, the external current account deficit has widened sharply to nearly 6 percent of GDP. Inflation as measured by consumer prices has remained low, although the gradual decline in inflation expectations seems to have leveled off. With the prospect of another year of growth above potential, inflation is projected to rise this year. The key challenge for economic policy therefore is to safeguard disinflation and financial stability from the gathering risks posed by macroeconomic imbalances. 39. Economic growth is expected to remain well above potential in 1999, supported by the continued strength of private consumption and a rebound in exports. A slowdown in markets abroad and weak commodity prices could have a dampening effect on activity in Iceland and plausibly bring about a fortuitous soft landing. However, with real wage increases running well ahead of productivity gains and a further acceleration in credit growth in recent months, the balance of risks remains on the upside. 40. The preferred policy response would be to tighten fiscal policy in order to restrain demand. The 1999 budget embodies an insufiiciently tight fiscal stance. Given the strength of the current upswing, a more ambitious fiscal target would have been desirable. With fiscal policy likely to remain on hold at least through summer, the option of holding back some budgeted expenditures should be exploited if the expected slowdown fails to materialiie. At a minimum, any additional revenues over those budgeted should be reflected in a commensurately larger surplus. 41. With fiscal policy constrained, the burden of reining in demand in the near term will have to be borne by monetary policy. The authorities have been alert to the emerging ’ risks and, in line with the staffs recommendations, raised policy interest rates by 40 basis points in late February. It remains to be seen whether this action will be sufficient to rein in demand pressures until fiscal policy can play a more active role. With the krona close to the center of its band, there remains scope for some appreciation in response to the widening of interest rate differentials. Pressure for an excessive appreciation should be addressed through intervention. In any case, some build-up of international reserves would be prudent. 42. The government should set an example in moderating wage growth. Public sector wages seem to be leading those in the private sector, and recent wage awards to local government employees are likely to add to wage pressures. Unless wage growth slows markedly, profit margins will be squeezed and price inflation could pick up. The government’s role as a major employer places it in a strong position to exert a moderating influence on wage negotiations in the private sector by containing the growth in public sector wages. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2l- 43. Financial supervision needs to remain alert to risks in the financial system. Financial markets in Iceland are gaining in depth and dynamism in the wake of their deregulation and the liberalization of the capital account. While these changes offer prospects for considerable efficiency gains over the longer run, they also pose a challenge to the regulatory and supervisory framework for financial institutions. Developments that bear close scrutiny include: increased funding of bank lending through short-term foreign borrowing; the rapid build-up of household debt; and a possible loosening of credit standards in an increasingly competitive environment. In this setting, the institutional separation of banking supervision and lender-of-last resort responsibilities following the establishment of the FSA calls for close cooperation between the FSA and the central bank. Recently enacted prudential measures are a welcome demonstration of the authorities’ heightened vigilance to cope with the uncertainties inherent in the new financial environment. 44. The advent of the euro does not call for a change in exchange rate policy in the near term. The current exchange rate regime has served Iceland well and has played a central role in its emergence from its inflationary past. Over the medium-term, if and when a larger EMU emerges, the present arrangement may need to be reassessed. A closer link to the euro would require that the monetary policy framework be aligned with that of the European Central Bank; recent changes in the monetary policy instruments of the Central Bank of Iceland are aimed at this objective. Whether or not Iceland decides to follow this route, full operational independence for the central bank should be ensured, thereby enhancing the credibility of its anti-inflation commitment. 45. Over the medium-term, fiscal policy should play the primary role in restoring a sustainable saving-investment balance. The solid accomplishments of recent years in strengthening public finances have begun to be visible to the public, as substantial public debt, including foreign debt, is being retired. The new government should build on the growing awareness of the benefits of financial stability by articulating a clear medium-term fiscal framework, with an explicit goal of achieving a significant structural surplus for the general ’ government. This would boost national savings and thereby contribute to external sustainability over the medium-term. It would also provide the needed room for discretionary policy in the event of a future external or supply shock. The emphasis of fiscal adjustment should continue to be on expenditure reduction. There is scope for further cutbacks in government support to private sector activities. Beyond strengthening public savings, expenditure restraint would also allow room for reducing the tax burden, which has remained broadly unchanged in recent years. 46. Iceland has made important strides in enhancing the transparency of government operations. The shift in budget presentation to accrual accounting is a step in the right direction. Further steps to improve fiscal transparency would nevertheless be desirable, such as providing a clear accounting of all tax expenditures and outstanding direct as well as indirect government loan guarantees in the core budget papers. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 22 - 47. Structural reforms should be accelerated. The reforms of the pension system, in particular the establishment of a voluntary private pension scheme and fkther progress in assuring the full funding of the state pension scheme, go a long way toward preparing Iceland to meet the demographic challenges that lie ahead. The government’s steps toward reducing its role in the economy, notably by partial privatization of state-owned financial institutions, are welcome and indeed long overdue. With the success of these early steps well established, the authorities should now move to fully privatize the banking system. Extending the privatization program to other sectors of the economy, such as telecommunications, would also yield considerable efficiency gains. 48. Sound management of Iceland’s valuable marine resources should not preclude further reform of the system. The current fisheries management system seems to have succeeded in ensuring sustainable exploitation of Iceland’s marine resources. From a public policy perspective, however, the economic rents stemming from the use of common property resources should be taxed and any transfers in the pursuit of social and regional objectives should be channeled through the budget. This would be consistent with the authorities’ efforts toward imparting greater transparency to public policy, and could create room for a reduction in distortionary taxes. 49. Trade and aid policies could be improved. Iceland’s liberal and stable trading regime could benefit further from a lowering of tariff and nontariff barriers on farm products. With a growing and prosperous economy and one of the highest standards of living in the world, it would also be fitting for Iceland to raise its development assistance from 0.09 percent of GDP in 1998 toward the norm for the advanced, if not for the Nordic, economies. 50. The quality and availability of offkial statistical data are generally of a high standard and are adequate for surveillance purposes, Iceland subscribes to the SDDS. 51. It is recommended that the next Article IV consultation with Iceland be held on the 24month cycle. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 23 - Table 1. Iceland: Selected Economk Indicoton 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 1999 o&id oeial Stdf Eatimtt Forecast Fomcast Cpere dmgt. urltss otbcrwist n&d) 3.7 1.0 5.7 5.2 1.5 3.1 7.6 6.2 1.9 4.2 6.4 6.0 3.7 1.3 1.0 3.1 -1.1 -2.8 27.4 10.5 10.0 -2.1 10.0 5.7 4.2 3.8 16.7 0.6 -2.6 4.0 -1.5 0.5 Natlmml Accounts (constant prlees) Grms domestic product Total dometic demmd Private Mm\mrptioo Public cawmption Groasfixedinvestmmt =vftofgw~~ nonfactor- Impatsofgcodsmd nonfactor stNicu c-cput@P 11 1.0 4.1 4.5 2.3 -11.4 5.0 4.8 5.6 12.0 3.0 4.9 11.0 6.0 7.0 3.0 3.4 3.5 a.4 -5.3 -0.2 7.1 2.6 7.4 5.2 -8.6 4.1 22.1 2.3 3.6 2.0 3.4 3.8 Stktted IndIaton Fish catch (value in constant prices) 3.1 -0.5 -0.7 8.1 -1.1 lJrmmploymtnt rate 4.4 4.8 5.0 4.3 3.9 Red dispossble income per capita 2/ -6.0 0.0 3.0 3.0 5.0 c!omumtr price index 4.1 1.5 1.7 2.3 1.8 NOtlliMl~iada 1.4 1.2 4.5 6.4 5.4 Real cffectivc e.xckgc rate (CPI) 31 -5.4 -5.5 0.1 0.3 0.9 Ttrms of trade -5.3 -0.1 I.0 -3.2 2.7 Money and Credit -5.8 2.7 28 . 2.4 9.0 5.5 1.7 2.5 3.5 9.4 7.3 7.6 1.5 0.0 _- 5.6 0.1 Deposit money bank credit (end-period) Damtstic crtdit (md-paiod) Broad money (end-period) Treaswy bill - 7.0 -0.1 0.8 11.8 Il.9 31.5 8.2 4.7 -1.5 8.6 16.7 24.9 4l 6.5 2.3 2.2 6.8 9.4 14.4 mpurch%seratt(pcriodavaagt) 8.4 5.3 6.9 6.6 6.9 7.3 (In pcrcant of GDP, uokss othawk noted) Public Flnanct Trttmy 51 RevmuC EXpUlditmc BlllMKC Net bonowlng nqwcment 25.1 25.2 25.3 26.4 24.9 29.7 29.7 27.4 26.9 27.3 28.8 247 30.2 293 __ -2.3 -1.7 -2.0 -2.5 0.2 -0.5 0.4 __ 1.6 3.4 4.1 2.6 0.1 -2.5 -2.7 __ Localgovemmcnt balance 61 -1.2 -1.6 -0.3 4.1 -0.6 -0.6 -0.2 Gcncnl govtmmtnt balance 6/ 4.5 4.7 -3.0 -1.6 0.0 0.4 0.7 General govcmmult StNdural balance 61 -2.3 -3.2 al.7 -0.4 0.2 -0.2 0.0 General govumnmtptimaly balance 4 -2.4 -2.5 -0.3 0.7 2.1 2.4 2.5 __ Balance of Payments currmraccolmtbalanm Trade balance Financial and capital accmmt Net errors and ommissiom Net exttmal debt Debt s&cc ratio 71 Intcmaticaal rcsewcr (in months of imparr of goods and sewices) 0.1 1.9 0.8 -1.6 -1.4 -5.7 3.0 4.5 3.0 0.2 0.0 4.3 0.2 -23 0.3 1.5 23 6.5 -1.0 0.3 -1.2 0.1 -1.3 -0.7 59.0 54.0 51.9 49.5 50.6 55.9 27.4 34.0 28.2 22.2 18.9 m.7 4.4 -5.5 -2.6 -3.4 __ 3.0 1.8 1.7 2.1 1.8 16 Sourcts: National E-commit Institute; Central Bank of Icelannd; h4inistry ofFi of Iceland; and SL& csumates. II Staff estimates. in percent of potential ODP. 2.l Dc5ated by the consumer price index 31 A positive (negatwe) sip indicates an appreciation (dcprcciation). 41 The dehltion varies sllghtiy from the IFS data pranted for 1993-97. 51 Csshbasis~~1997;Accmal~sinl998rmd1999. 6l Accrual basis; including imputed contributions for unfunded pe~ims for the general govmnnmt. 71 Ratio of long-term external debt set-vice paymats to exports of goods and scrwccs. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public9.00 8.00 6.00 FIGURE 1 ICELAND VOLATILITY OF ECONOMIC VARIABLES IN SELECTED SMALL ECONOMIES I m GDP hs Employment WProductivity rza Real wages m,Real labor cost -Average variability l/ ~. ____ - Standard Deviation (Percenta e oints) 1968~d95 Ireland Iceland Portugal Norway Denmark 9.00 8.00 7.00 6.00 I ta CI 5.00 , Source: Palle S. Andersen and Gudmundsson M., “Inflation and Disinflation in Iceland”, (Jan. 1998) l/ Average variability of economic variables for each country. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 25 - FIGURE 2 ICELAND ECONOM I C DEVELOPMENTS, 1960-98 - 16.0 REAL GDP GROWTH (Annual percentage change) -4.0 t ,,,v ,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,( lI"Fl -6.0. I ' : 60 65 70 75 80 85 90 95 10.0 8.0 6.0 UNEMPLOYMENT (In percent of lobor force) ft.,, j ‘... i \ x, )“. ‘.., / i ,.... .x,, ;! :.. ! i i : : \ .>: : j : ..,f 3 65 70 75 80 85 90 95 90.0 CONSUMER PRICE INFLATION 'dYY (Annual prreentagr changr) 80.0 - 8.0 6.0 -6.0 10.0 6 5.0 6.0 4.0 2.0 0.0 -6 -a -1c -12 90.0 80.0 70.0 60.0 50.0 40.0 30.0 20.0 10.0 0.0 W-i , I I I I 1, I,, I I I I I I I I1 I ,I I I, 1, I I I,, 1, I I, -1-2 65 70 75 80 85 90 95 Sources: National Economic Inslitute; Central Bank of Iceland; and IMF, World Economic Outlook. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 26 - FIGURE 3 ICELAND CONTRIBUTIONS TO GROWTH (In percent) - 10 1 'hw"a I 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 1 COMPONENTS OF DOMESTIC DEMAND iFAnvestment - 10 'dM"b I I I I 1 I 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 15 10 5 0 -5 -10 --I -10 1999 Source: Notional Economic Institute. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 27 - FIGURE’ 4 ICELAND UNEMPLOYMENT AND INFLATION UNEMPLOYMENT EMPLOYMENT (In percent of labor force) (Ratio to working aged population) 4 4 5.0 5.0 i i 4.0 4.0 - - 2.0 2.0 - - ___-.- . . . . ___-.- . . . . II II **__ **__ a’ a’ ,’ ,’ -.. -.. *..._.- *..._.- -f -f Employment Employment IIImla IIImla (Right scale) (Right scale) 1.0 ‘. 0 ” 1 ” I ” ‘I” I I”’ 1.0 ‘. 0 ” 1 ” I ” ‘I” I I”’ 1990 1990 1991 1991 1992 1992 1993 1993 1994 1994 1995 1995 28.0 26.0- INFLATION AND WAGES ’ (Percent change from a year ago) Consumer prices -2.o...“““““,.“““,‘.‘.,““....,‘,,””.,..,’.....’ ..‘,..“““‘,‘,,,.““‘,.1”“““““....”.....L 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 Sources: National Economic Institute; Central Bonk of Iceland; and OECD, Moin Economic indicators. 76 73 72 71 28.0 26.0 24.0 22.0 20.0 i 8.0 16.0 14.0 12.0 10.0 8.0 6.0 4.0 2.0 0.0 -2.0 1999 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 28 - FIGURE 5 ICELAND EXTERNAL DEVELOPMENTS Current account 27.0 27.0 23.0 23.0 19.0 c9Exportr of goods and services 19.0 15.0 lalmporfs of goods and servicss 15.0 11.0 11.0 7.0 7.0 3.0 -1.0 -1.0 -5.0 -5.0 - 1990 1991 1992 1993 I994 I995 1996 1997 1998 -9.0 1999 -4.0 -6.0 108 108 TERMS OF TRADE ,06 (,n-'?-- IIIM-IM\ 92 yLm 1990 92 1991 1992 i 993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 Sources: Certrol Bank of Iceland; National Economic Institute. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 29 - FIGURE 6 ICELAND EXTERNAL DEBT AND INTEREST DIFFERENTIALS Pemed of CDP 5&O- Net externo Il.,& l” Debt service 44.0 42.0 ! 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 38.0 36.0 34.0 32.0 30.0 28.0 26.0 24.0 22.0 20.0 18.0 750 1 OFFICIAL FOREIGN RESERVES 700: (In mlllions of U.S. dollars, end of period) 650- 650 600- 600 550. 550 500 500 450 400 350 300 250 200 I II III IV I II III IV I II Ill IV I II III IV I II III IV I II Ill IV I II Ill IV I II Ill IV I II Ill IV I 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 ___ I I n*IP TCl3LI kIALII*l*l ILll-CaCCT m*-rr n LVI‘IV-I Lnm IIVM Ill(nL II! I CITLJI 11:1$ (In b-w poln+*) ~ R,+,c "IFFERENTIAL 600 - LOO Dlffrrtnilol wlth ~yv - _ 2oo I 200' r 0 PY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . f ffr.:z~o r/” L/i. Dlffwantlol with V Unitad Kingdom , ,,v ,,,( .,,., ,,,,.,,,..,.,..,, , -200 II Ill IV I II Ill IV I “l99141l ‘” I “192 IV I II Ill IV I II -400 Ill IV I II Ill IV 1992 1993 1996 1997 1998 Sources: Central Bank of Iceland; Office for National Statistics, Financial Statistics (United Kingdom); and iMF, International Financial Statistics. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public92.5 95.0 97.5 100.0 102.5 105.0 107.5 110.0 112.5 115.0 117.5 120.0 122.5 115 110 105 100 95 90 85 50 75 - 30 - FIGURE 7 ICELAND EXCHANGE RATE AND COMPETITIVENESS 92.5 OFFICIAL EXCHANGE RATE INDEX I/ (Index: Dec. 31, 1991 = 100) - 95.0 - 97.5 Official band (-6x) Central rats 112.5 115.0 117.5 Official band (+6x) 120.0 " 122.5 I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II Ill IV I II III IV I II III IV I 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 COMPETITIVENESS (Indices: 1980 = 100) Real effrctlve exchange rate based on ULC *.&I Real effective exchange rate based on CPI wblm I,..I,,,! ,I...II..I.I.I.III...l...II..II..III 1981 1983 1985 1987 1989 1991 1993 1995 1997 Sources: National Economic Institute; and Central Bank of Iceland. ^15 110 105 95 85 80 75 1/ The current weights, based on 1997 trade shares, include: US: 24.1%; UK: 13.4~; Germany: 13.8~; Denmark: 9.2x; Norway: 8.3%. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 31 - FIGURE 8 ICELAND FISCAL DEVELOPMENTS (In percent of GDP) FISCAL BALANCE (In percant of GDP) cz2Cwwral gov*rnm*nt 1 1 .o m1r9orury z/ 0.0 -1.0 -2.0 -3.0 -4.0 -5.01 1990 ‘991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 R-I 1998 1999 .-.- GROSS DEBT (In pwwnt of GDP) 2.0 1.0 0.0 -1.0 -2.0 -3.0 -4.0 -5.0 -jjjyT 70.0 1 60.0 I 50.0 ‘-.-I GENERAL GOVERNMENT FINANCES I -Y!!c I ‘-.- - 42.0 - 41.0 40.0 - 39.0 : 36.0 - 37.0 - 36.0 J 35.0 Sources: Notional Economic Institute; and Ministry of Finance. 1,’ Accrual basis; including imputed government pehsion liabilities. 2/ Cash basis. The Treasury balance shown for 1996 and 1997 abstracts from the impact of early redemptions of savings bonds which entailed the payment of accrued interests of ISK 10.0 billion (2.0~ of GDP) and ISK 4.0 billion (0.8x of GDP}. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 32 - FIGURE 9 ICELAND MONETARY DEVELOPMENTS 18.0 SELECTED INTEREST RATES (In perunt) 16.Ok,, ‘i,,- Repurchase rate 14.0- -, : :. . .._._ ~~ Vl.lrl h” 18.0 - 16.0 _ lA.0 10.0 8.0 6.0 4.0’. * c j ‘*..‘..* I..,’ “l99:1’ ‘” ’ “,g;ji IV I II III IV I II III IV I II Ill IV I II III IV I 4.0 II III IV I 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 8.00 8.00 SHORT-TERM INTEREST RATE DIFFERENTIAL 7.50 On par-n+) - 7.50 7.00 - . 7.00 Ylold on I-month 6.50 Trsorury bills. - 6.50 Iceland 6.00 - - 6.00 5.50 .* *. - - 5.50 36.0- 36.0 MONEY AND CREDIT 32.0: (ll-month prrcsnt change) . 32.0 28.0 - - 28.0 20.0 - 16.0- - 4.0 0.0 --- - --------------------L--.. 0.0 -4.0 - - -4.0 byy -8.0 , c ” ” j ” 8 ’ ” II III IV I II III IV I II Ill IV I II III IV I c . -8.0 II III IY 1992 1993 ll,gg~i IV I II ill IV I 1995 1996 1997 1998 Source: Central Bank of Iceland. l/ Weighted average based on the official basket of the krona. 2/ IFS data through June 1997. Starting in July 1998 source is Central Bank of Iceland. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 33 - FIGURE 10 ICELAND MONETARY CONDITIONS 120 115 110 105 10: 95 9c 15 10 5 0 -5 -1c Monetary Conditions Index (1990=100) l/ Iklb1510 1...ll.ll...l..~llll..,,~........-~,.~~~~~’~~~’~~~‘~~~“~ 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 Real Short-Term Interest Rates 2/ Idbw2b I 6 I I I I 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 Source: IMF, Surveillance database; INS; and staff colculotions. l/ Weights of 50% for REER and real short-term interest rates. 2/ Real interest rates are defined OS yields on 3-month treasury bills minus consumer price inflation the preceding 12 months. 120 115 110 105 100 95 90 L 15 10 5 0 -5 -10 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public120 100 80 60 40 20 0 - 34 - Figure 11. Iceland: Financial Sector Indicators Bank Lending to Private Sector (As percent of GDP) A Finland Tie of deregulation L . . I . -8 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 1981 1983 1985 1987 1989 1991 1993 1995 1997 350 300 250 200 150 100 50 0 Iceland: Household Debt and Net Wealth pensionlids l! .m--- .__-.-- I . I . . . . I & I . I . . . . I & 20 15 10 5 0 -5 -10 300 250 200 150 100 50 0 Housebold Savings Ratio Real Stock Prices 1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 1981 1983 1985 1987 1989 1991 1993 1995 1997 Source: Central Bank of Iceland; International Monetary Fund, World Economic Outlook, and International Financial Statistics. l/ As a percentage of household disposable income. 2/ As a percentage of total fixed assets. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 35 - APPENDIX I I. II. III. IV. V. VI. VII. Exchange Rate Arrangements: From early 1992 to September 1995, the Icelandic kr6na was pegged to a currency basket consisting of the ECU, US dollar, and Japanese yen within a fluctuation band of *2’/4 percent around a central rate. Since September 6, 1995, the exchange rate of the krbna has been determined against a trade-weighted basket of 16 currencies, and the fluctuation band has been widened to *6 percent around the central rate. On January 1, 1999, the composition of the basket was changed to reflect the introduction of the euro. ICELAND: Fund Relations (As of February 28,1999) Membership Status: Joined 12/27/45; Article VIII General Resources Account: SDR Million Quota 117.60 Fund holdings of currency 99.03 Reserve posltion in Fund 18.57 SDR Department: SDR Million Net cumulative allocation 16.41 Holdings 0.02 Outstanding Purchases and Loans: ’ None % Quota 100.0 84.2 15.8 % Allocation 100.0 0.1 Financial Arrangements: None Projected Obligations to Fund: (SDR Million; based on existing use of resources and present holdings of SDRs) Overdue orthco B 2/28/1999 1999 2000 & z 2002 2003 Charges/Interest 0.0 u Q&j 0.6 0.6 0.6 06 Total 0.0 0.4 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 Iceland maintains exchange restrictions pursuant to UN sanctions against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (SerbiaMontenegro), Iraq, and the Socialist People’s Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, which were notified to the Fund under decision No. 144 (5215 1) on July 29, 1992, September 10, 1990, and December 1, 1995, respectively. VIII. Last Article IV Consultation: Discussions for the 1997 Article IV Consultation were held in Reykjavik during November 6-14, 1996. The Staff Report (SM/97/20) was considered by the Executive Board on February 10, 1997 (EBM 97/12). An interim staff visit was held November 11-17, 1997. IX. Technical Assistance: None X. Resident Representative: None Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-36- APPENDIX II t Iceland-Statistical Information Iceland’s economic database is comprehensive and adequate for effective surveillance, and Iceland has subscribed to the Special Data Dissemination Standard established by the Fund. Statistical data on a wide range of economic and financial variables are provided to the Fund in a timely manner during and between consultations. In particular, reporting of data on the accounts of deposit money banks to the Statistics Department for publication in International Financial Statistics has improved significantly. Statistical data are provided to the Fund through regular publications, mail correspondence and electronic transmission. In addition to periodic press releases, statistical information is disseminated to the public through a range of monthly, quarterly and annual publications by four main institutions (The Central Bank, the National Economic Institute (NEI), the Ministry of Finance and Statistics Iceland), and is now partly available on their Internet sites. Notable progress has been achieved in the area of electronic data transmission and in opening accessible Internet sites. The presentation of the balance of payments was changed in 1996 to reflect the new guidelines provided by the fifth edition of the Fund’s Balance of Payments Manual and subsequent revisions have been made in 1997. The basket used for the consumer price index has been updated in 1997 on the basis of a household survey conducted in 1995. Annual government finance statistics have been reported on an accrual basis by the NE1 for some years and the Ministry of Finance has changed the presentation of the treasury accounts following the recommendations of a special commission that reviewed the entire system of financial reporting in Iceland. While traditionally based on cash accounting, the 1997 budget bill was presented on both cash and accrual bases; in 1998, treasury accounts are now only presented on an accrual basis. The authorities have taken steps towards developing quarterly national accounts as required by the Special Data Dissemination Standard. No technical assistance is required for the operations envisaged. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Publicc Iceland: Core Statistical Indicators as of March 19, 1998 Date of Latest Observation Date Received Inter- Exchange national Rates Reserves Monthly Frequency of Reporting Daily Monthly Source of Update CBI and CBI TRE Monthly Bulletin Mode of Reporting Electronic Electronic and and Public- Internet ation Confidentiality m Frequency of Publication Central Bank Reserve/ Balance Base Broad Sheet money Money Monthly Monthly Monthly Monthly Monthly Monthly CBI CBI CBI Monthly Monthly Monthly Bulletin Bulletin Bulletin Mail and Mail and Mail and Public- Public- Public- ation ation ation No No I I No Consumer Interest Price Exports/ Rates Index Imports CBI Statistics Statistics Iceland Iceland Electronic Electronic Electronic and and and Internet Internet Internet No No I I No Monlhlylhlonlhy Overall Current Govern- Account ment Balance Balance GDP/GNP Quarterly Annual Annual Quarterly Annual Quarterly CBI Ministry NEI Monthly of Finance Bulletin and NEI Electronic Electronic Internet and and and Public- Internet Public- ation ation No No No Monthly Annual Quarterly Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 38 - APPENDIX III Public Information Notice (PIN) No. International Monetary Fund FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE Washington, D. C. 20431 USA IMF Concludes Article IV Consultation with Iceland On May [ 1, 1999, the Executive Board concluded the Article IV consultation with IcelandI. Background Over the past decade, economic policies in Iceland have been directed toward the attainment of financial stability and lower inflation. The maintenance of an exchange rate anchor since 1993, supported by’steady fiscal consolidation, has helped to bring inflation down decisively into low single digits. The transformation of the macroeconomic landscape has been accompanied by a range of structural reforms initiated in the context of Iceland’s membership in the European Economic Area, which have improved the climate for investment and growth. Economic growth gathered steam in the mid-1990s, exceeding 5 percent in each of the past three years. The prolonged upswing is being driven by a combination of factors: (i) an investment boom led by three large projects in aluminum and ferro-sillicon smelting and the associated power generation sector; (ii) a strong recovery in private consumption, sustained by large employment and wage gains and, more recently, rapid credit expansion, and (iii) favorable fish catches and marine export prices. The expansion became progressively broad based during the course of 1998. Private ‘Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial information, and discusses with officials the country’s economic developments and policies. On return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the Board, summarites the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the country’s authorities. In this PIN, the main features of the Board’s discussion are described. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 39 - consumption grew at a brisk pace, driven by large gains in disposable incomes and a fall in the private savings rate as households borrowed to finance purchases of consumer durables. Business investment began to recover, facilitated by the growing ease of credit availability. With the economy booming, unemployment has fallen sharply and real wages have surged. These trends have been accompanied by a sizable increase in imported labor-a new phenomenon for Iceland. Inflation has nevertheless remained remarkably subdued, falling slightly to 1.7 percent in 1998. Excess demand has spilled over into the balance of payments, with the current account deficit widening to nearly 6 percent of GDP. The improvement in public finances has not kept pace with the strength of the economy. The general government balance was in surplus for the second consecutive year in 1998 but, taking into account the cyclical position of the economy, is estimated to have shifted to a modest deficit. The budget for 1999, formulated on the basis of a sharper deceleration in growth than is now expected, is estimated to be slightly expansionary. Monetary policy continued to be oriented toward price stability, although monetary conditions were generally supportive of economic activity during the year. The krona appreciated in real terms during the first half of the year but began to weaken in August following a sharp reversal of capital inflows linked to turbulence in world financial markets. The Central Bank acted in early September by raising interest rates by 30 basis points to 7.5 percent, which stimulated a return of capital inflows and led to a strengthening of the krona, which ended the year broadly unchanged. The increase in interest rates was nevertheless insufficient to dampen liquidity in the economy, as evidenced by the acceleration in rates of growth of broad money and, in particular, credit by the banking system. An increase in foreign borrowing, encouraged by the large interest rate differential with abroad, has been facilitated by the relatively recent deregulation of the financial sector and liberalization of the capital account of the balance of payments. Reflecting the growing sophistication of the financial market, supervisory authority over all financial institutions has been consolidated in a new agency. With little indication that domestic demand was slowing, the Central Bank announced a further increase in interest rates in late-February. The increase by 40 basis points to 7.9 percent was intended to restrain credit growth, dampen domestic demand, and strengthen international reserves, which had fallen to the equivalent of 1.6 months of imports at end-l 998. The interest rate action was accompanied by the introduction of a minimum liquidity requirement for banks. Executive Board Assessment Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public