DOCUMENT OF INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND NOT FOR PUBLIC USE MASTER FILES ROOM HQ C-525 0450 CONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION June 25. 1999 To: Members of the Executive Board From: Subject: The Secretary Lesoth&StaRReport for the 1999 Article IV Consultation Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staff report for the 1999 Article IV consultation with Lesotho, which is tentatively scheduled for discussion on Friday, July 9, 1999. Mr. Kalinga (ext. 36974) or Mr. Darbar (ext. 34252) is available to answer technical or factual questions relating to this paper prior to the Board discussion. Unless the Documents Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the WTO Secretariat on Tuesday, July 6, 1999; and to the African Development Bank and the European Commission, following its consideration by the Executive Board. Att: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicCONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND LESOTHO Staff Report for the 1999 Article IV Consultation Prepared by the Staff Representatives for the 1999 Consultation with Lesotho Approved by Hiroyuki Hino and Leslie Lipschitz June 24, 1999 1 Consultation discussions were started in Maseru during the period February 21-March 9, 1999, and were concluded at headquarters when the Minister of Finance and other senior offtcials visited Washington from May 21-27, 1999. , The representatives from Lesotho included: the Deputy Prime Minister, Mr. Maope; the Minister of Finance and Development Planning, Dr. Ketso; the Governor of the Central Bank of Lesotho, Mr Swaray; other cabinet ministers, and senior offtcials and representatives of the diplomatic community and the private sector. , The mission team consisted of Mr. Kalinga (head), Mr. Martin, Mr. Yuguda, Mr. Darbar, Ms. Kourelis, and Ms. Haddi (all AFR). , Lesotho is on the standard 12-month Article IV consultation cycle. The last consultation was concluded on February 4, 1998. On that occasion, Executive Directors noted the considerable progress achieved in economic growth in a context of relatively low inflation. However, they expressed concern over the prospective difficult fiscal and external situation. They therefore emphasized the need to broaden the revenue base and to consolidate expenditures. Directors urged the authorities to deepen and accelerate the implementation of structural reforms, and they stressed the need to improve the performance and soundness of the banking system and to strengthen bank supervision. Directors noted the importance of promoting export diversification and growth, flexibility in wage determination, and foreign direct investment to strengthen the medium-term external outlook. , Lesotho’s outstanding use of Fund resources was equivalent to SDR 15.35 million (44.0 percent of quota) at end-May 1999. Lesotho has accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4 of the IMF Articles of Agreement, and has formally consented to the increase in its quota to SDR 34.9 million under the Eleventh General Review of Quotas. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2- Contents Page Executive Summary .................................................................................................................... ,3 I. Background and Recent Developments ................................................................................ .4 II. Report on the Discussions .................................................................................................... 9 A. Development Strategy.. ........................................................................................... 11 B. Fiscal Policies ......................................................................................................... 13 C. Monetary and Banking Sector Issues ...................................................................... 16 D. External Sector Issues ............................................................................................. 16 E. Institutional and Other Structural lssues.. ................................................................ 17 F. Poverty Issues ........................................................................................................ .18 G. Statistical Issues ..................................................................................................... .18 III. Staff Appraisal .................................................................................................................. .19 Boxes 1. The Lesotho Highlands Water Project _..,,.,._......_._................,..,.....,.,...,,,,,.....,,........,,....... 5 2. Government Support for the Restructuring of Commercial Banks, 1997/98-2001/02 .___.._ 7 3. Impact of the Civil Unrest.. ._. ._.___.. ._. .___. ._. ._...__.. .__. ._. ._____. ._.. ._. .___. ._. ._, .__. .___ 10 4. Important Macroeconomic and Structural Reform Issues Facing Lesotho.. ._. ._. _. ._ ._. 12 Figures 1. Output and Prices .......................................................................................................... 22 2. Fiscal Developments, 1991/92-1998/99 ......................................................................... 23 3. Monetary Developments.. ............................................................................................. .24 4. External Developments ................................................................................................. .25 Tables 1. Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 1994/95-l 998/99 ..................................... .26 2. Central Government Operations, 1994/95-l 999/2000 .................................................... 27 3. Monetary Survey, March 1995-March 2000 .................................................................. 28 4. Balance of Payments, 1994/95-1999/2000 ..................................................................... 29 5. Medium-Term Economic Prospects Without Measures, 1998/99-2003/04.. .................. .30 6. Medium-Term Economic Prospects With Measures, 1998/99-2003/04. ........................ .3 1 Appendixes I. Relations with the Fund ................................................................................................. 32 II. Financial Relations with the World Bank Group.. .......................................................... .34 111. Statistical Issues ............................................................................................................ 36 IV. Selected Social and Demographic Indicators .................................................................. 39 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3- EXECUTIVE SUMMARY . In the decade ended 1996197, the economy performed strongly, holstered by favorable external developments, the successful establishment of export-oriented manufacturing output, and the construction of the large Lesotho Highlands Water Project (LHWP). Real GDP growth averaged 6.1 percent a year, and inflation was moderate. The fiscal situation strengthened, resulting in a significant buildup of government deposits with the banking system and a corresponding accumulation of foreign reserves to the equivalent of about nine months of imports. Lesotho also made notable progress in improving life expectancy and adult literacy and in cutting infant mortality rates, within the context of generally disciplined expenditure management. . In the past fiscal year, a sharp reversal in Lesotho’s economic situation took place as a result of weaknesses in policy implementation, mounting political tensions, and negative external shocks. The economy contracted sharply, pulled down in part by the recent sharp drop in LHWP-related investment and declining migrant remittances from South Africa. In addition, foreign direct investment tapered off in response to the increased political uncertainty and rising structural impediments. The fiscal situation deteriorated as a result of the effects of the economic slowdown on revenue and increased expenditure pressures, and the overall balance of payments weakened. . Over the medium term, Lesotho’s economic situation is expected to remain difftcult as a result of the prospective decline in customs revenue, continuing decreases in migrant workers’ remittances, and uncertain outlook for foreign direct investment. These developments are likely to put pressure on the fiscal situation and further generate external imbalances. Accordingly, the discussions focused on actions to revive economic growth while preserving financial stability, including a strengthening of incentives provided to enterprises, a restructuring of public enterprises, a broadening of the revenue base, and the building of an effective domestic revenue mobilization capacity, and a rationalization of expenditures. . Lesotho’s membership of the Southern African Customs Union (SACU) and the Common Monetary Area (CMA), as well as the peg to the rand at parity, has generally served the country well. The financial and structural measures outlined in the report should help to strengthen Lesotho’s competitiveness and its commitment to the CMA. The staff encourages the authorities to eliminate the minimum local asset requirement as soon as possible as it has impeded capital integration with neighboring countries. . The authorities have indicated their intention to embark, in the near future, on a program of economic reforms with the assistance of the Fund and other donors. In view of the urgent need for fiscal consolidation and structural reforms, the Fund should stand ready to assist Lesotho’s economic reform efforts, assuming that agreement can be reached on a medium-term economic framework, as well as on an appropriately strong program. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4. . With the support of Fund technical assistance, Lesotho has made progress in improving the quality and timeliness of national accounts and fiscal data, but more needs to be done and problems persist with respect to balance of payments and price data. The mission discussed measures to facilitate an early start on the compilation of monthly price and trade data. I. BACKCROUNDANDRECENTDEVELOPMENTS' I. After a prolonged period of intermittent political instability, general elections were held in May 1998, in which the governing party won all but I of the 80 parliamentary seats. The results were contested by the opposition parties, which alleged widespread rigging. The subsequent protests led to civil unrest and an army mutiny in September. A South African-led Southern African Development Community (SADC) force was brought in to restore security; the Lesotho army was retired to barracks. Plans are reportedly under way to reconstitute a new force of 1,500 to replace the SADC forces, which were withdrawn in May 1999. However, considerable uncertainty remains with regard to the political situation, as there is no agreement among the various political parties on appropriate security and political arrangements. A new Interim Political Authority (IPA) comprising 24 members, with equal representation from each of the 12 largest political parties, has been set up to promote and create conditions conducive to a more durable peace and to the holding of general elections by April 2000. The new body will, among other things, review Lesotho’s electoral system and oversee the preparation of a new electoral register. 2. In the decade ended March 1997, the economy performed strongly, bolstered by the favorable impact of the construction of the Lesotho Highlands Water Project (LHWP) (Box 1) and the surge in export-oriented manufacturing output-primarily clothing, electronics, and light manufacturing. The wholesale and retail sectors also grew robustly. Buoyed by these activities, real GDP expanded at an annual average rate of 6.1 percent during the ten-year period.* However, economic activity began to slowdown in 1997/98 (April-March), and real GDP declined by an estimated 5.4 percent in 1998199. This contraction reflected in part the negative impact of the September 1998 civil unrest on manufacturing, trading, and construction activities (Table 1) and the drop in public and LHWP-related investments (Figure 1). ’ Summaries of Lesotho’s relations with the Fund and the World Bank Group are provided in Appendices I and II, respectively. Statistical issues and a survey of reporting of main statistical indicators are presented in Appendix III. Selected social and demographic indicators are provided in Appendix IV. * Real GNP grew at an annual average rate of 3.5 percent during the ten-year period, reflecting the sizeable repatriation of income earned by expatriate personnel employed by LHWP and other entities, and the sluggish growth of migrant remittances which were adversely affected by the contraction of the South African gold industry and the decision of the South African government to rationalize migrant labor schemes. Migrant labor remittances, primarily from South Africa, account for about 35 percent of GDP. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicBox 1: The Lesotho Highlands Water Project The Lesotho Highlands Water Project (LHWP) is a five-phase joint-venture project between the Kingdom of Lesotho and the Republic of South Africa, involving the export of water from Lesotho’s Senqu and Orange Rivers syaem tbmugb a series of dams and ton&s to Gauteng, South Africa. In addition, a hydroelectric plaot has been conshuctcd at Muela to meet the energy needs of Lesotho. A treaty signed in 1986 between the govemments of Lesotho and South Africa committed the hvo countries to phase 1 only; phases 2 through 5 are still under negotiation. Phase 1 comprises hvo components, 1 A and IB, with estimated costs of about USS2.5 billion and USEl. 1 billion, respectively. The development cost of the water transfer components was to be met by South Africa while the hydropower station was the responsibility of the govemmcnt of Lesotho. A statutory body, the Lesotho Highlands Development Authority (LHDA), was established and entrusted with the task of implementing the project. Phase 1A activities peaked during 1994-97 and were completed in early 1999. They included the constroction of a 182-meter dam at Katse, a Z&meter dam at Mu&, a 72-megawatt underground hydropower plant at Muela, and an 82-kilometer interconnecting tunnel system. Water deliveries to South Africa commenced in January 1998, while the Muela hydropower station was inaugurated in January 1999. The civil works for phase 1B began in 1998 and are expected to be completed in 2003. They include the construction of the 146-meter high Mohale Dam, a smaller dam on the Matsoku River, and 40 kilometers of interconnecting hmnels. Although the LHWP is primarily an enclave operation, it has had a substantial impact on Lesotho’s economy, both directly and indirectly, as evidenced by the following: . the receipt of M 346 million in water royalties during the period 1996/97 - 1998/99 and about M 120 million per year in subsequent years; . buoyant custom revenues associated with the large imports for the const~ction of the project, contributing to fiscal surpluses and the buildup of government deposits with the banking system in the decade to 1997198; . several ancillary developments, including the construction of new roads and bridges, improvements in communications systems, environment protection programs, and the creation of a development fund, with part of the royalty receipts, for financing prognms targeted toward the alleviation of poverty in rural areas; and . GDP growth rates avemging 6.1 percent during 1987/t%-1996197. The cost of the Muela hydropower component was estimated at M 925 million (as of January 1999), of which M 351 million was in the form of grants, M 43 million in concessionary loans, and M 531 in commercial loans that were contracted by LHDA but guaranteed by government. Prior to the commissioning of the Muela hydropower plant, the Lesotho Electricity Corporation (LEC), a parascatal responsible for buying and distributing electricity, imported all of Lesotho’s electricity requirements from South Africa at an average price of M 0.13 per kilowatt and distributed it at M 0.20 per kilowatt. Owing to excess supply of electricity in the subregion, the import price is expected lo fall by almost 50 percent. However, the LEC now purchases electricity from Muela (operated by the LHDA); Muela can currently generate all of Lesotho’s power requirements at below import parity but would need to sell power at M 0.22 per kilowatt to cover its debt-service obligations. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-6- 3. The fiscal position also weakened in 1998/99, as the overall deficit, excluding grants, more than doubled to 4.2 percent of GNP from the previous year (Figure 2). Revenue declined moderately by the equivalent of 0.8 percent of GNP, primarily on account of a marked drop in customs receipts.’ More importantly, total expenditure and net lending rose by the equivalent of 1.9 percent of GNP in 1998/99 as a sharp drop in capital outlays was more than offset by increases in current outlays (Table 2). Both externally and locally funded development outlays fell sharply reflecting the near completion of the large Muela hydroelectric project, the impact of the reduced allocation of counterpart funds on the utilisation of foreign funds, and the slow implementation of the development fund. On the other hand, current expenditure rose by 7.6 percent of GNP tieled by (a) a jump in bank restructuring costs equivalent to 3.1 percent of GNP (Box 2); (b) a pickup in external and domestic interest payments; and (c) the 10 percent across-the-board wage award effected at the beginning of the fiscal year.4 ’ With the availability of external loans and grants falling substantially during the year, the deficit was fUnded through a drawdown of government deposits with the Central Bank of Lesotho (CBL), which contrasted sharply with the previous year when the government was a large net depositor to the banking system. Although the net foreign assets of the banking system continued to rise, the growth in 1998/99 was substantially lower than in 1997/98. Broad money expanded marginally, reflecting primarily increased uncertainty arising from the September 1998 civil unrest and the ongoing restructuring of the banking sector. Credit to the rest of the economy was broadly steady as the sharp contraction in credit to the private sector was offset by increases in credit to the parastatal sector (Table 3, Figure 3).” ’ Considerable progress was made during the year in completing 3 Under the current SACU framework, 1998/99 customs receipts are based on 1996/97 imports, which fell by about 5.0 percent. Negotiations on a new SACU revenue sharing framework have recently been concluded. While details of the new arrangement have not yet been released, general expectations are that Lesotho’s share of the SACU revenue pool will fall substantially from 2000/o 1. 4 Expenditure trends through I998/99 indicate that outlays on education, health. and other social services have remained broadly steady at about 12.5 percent of GNP, while expenditure on defense, public order, and security rose somewhat. ’ Nevertheless, the wage bill rose by 16.1 percent, reflecting also a 2.0 percent increase of government personnel and the normal 3.5 percent wage creep, which is linked to yearly increments and promotions. 6 Movements in the other liabilities of the LB dominated the changes in the total liabilities of the banking system in 1998/99. The LB, which accounted for 70 percent of deposits and 60 percent of banking sector assets, failed to publish financial accounts on a regular basis from March 1997 to September 1998, although it remained the main vehicle for government transactions. Monthly accounts have been produced since then. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-7- the rationalization of the financial sector, which included the liquidation of the Lesotho Agricultural Development Bank (LADB) in July 1998 and the restructuring of the Lesotho Bank (LB), pending the identification of a potential external partner.’ These changes in the banking system contributed to a contraction in credit to the private sector, and greatly disrupted rural financial intermediation, monetary management, and the monitoring of financial developments. The LADB and LB had the largest network of branches in the rural areas. Despite the major upheaval in the banking system, there was little evidence of a significant flight of capital out of Lesotho. Furthermore, those changes did not significantly affect economic activity as the modern sector continued to rely on South Africa for credit. Bon 2: Government Support for the Restructuring of Commercial Banks, 1997/9X3-2001/02 II (In millions of maloti) 1997198 1998199 1999/00 2000/o I 2001/02 Est. 21 Est. 2/ Proi. 31 Proi. 3/ Proi. 31 Lesotho Bank (LB) Cash support Interest cost 50.0 92 7 88.0 0.0 0.0 1.5 13.2 79.0 105.0 105.0 Lesotho Agricultural Development Bank Cash support Interest cost 0.0 145.3 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Total cost (excluding interest) 50.0 238.0 88.0 0.0 0.0 Total cost (including interest) 51.5 251.2 167.0 105.0 105.0 II Fiscal year beginning in April. 21 During I997198 and I998/99 the Central Bank of Lesotho, at the instruction of the government of Lesotho, made advances to the LB to alleviate the short-term liquidity problems of the latter bank The total amount of the advances was M 97.7 million, extended at an annual interest rate of 22 percent. A fist disbursement of M 50 million took place in December 1997. The remaining M 47.7 million was disbursed during the fust qunner of 1998199. In December 1998, the advance was converted into equity Additional cash injections of M 20 million and M 25 million were made to alleviate LB’s short-tam liquidity problems in February 1999. 3/ Long-term securities valued at M 700 million are expected to be issued on July I, 1999 to cover the difference behveen assets and liabilities of Lesotho Bank Ltd. Interest costs for I999/00-2001/02 arc based on an annual interest rate of I5 percent (m line with projected interest rates in South Africa). Bank recapitalizatton is to take place at end-June 1999. ’ Inflation continued to decline through the third quarter of 1998 in line with developments in South Africa but picked up in the last quarter in response to the dislocation in the supply of essential commodities that followed the September civil unrest. ’ The distress in state-owned banks stemmed primarily from weak management, excessive political involvement in the credit allocation process, and weak supervision by the monetary authorities. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-8- 4. Notwithstanding the widespread use of the South African rand as legal tender, and the peg of the loti at par to the rand in the context of Lesotho’s membership of the CMA, treasury bill rates in South Africa remained substantially higher than in Lesotho; nevertheless, the spread narrowed somewhat during the latter part of the year as Lesotho money market rates firmed, reportedly in response to the weakening of the financial situation and the dislocation in fmancial intermediation.’ However, bank deposit rates in South Africa remained well above those in Lesotho, reflecting in part an inability by Lesotho banks to offer competitive rates on account of their large nonperforming loans. 5. Lesotho’s overall balance of payments position weakened markedly in 1998/99, with the surplus falling from US%127 million in 1997/98 to US%33 million in 1998/99. The deterioration was the result primarily of the drop in miners’ remittances, the fall in manufacturing exports and SACU nontax receipts, and the increased reliance of the budget on domestic financing sources. Nevertheless, the current account deficit narrowed somewhat as the decline in aggregate investment equivalent to 14.9 of GNP was largely offset by a fall in savings. The latter stemmed primarily from the fall in migrant remittances and SACU receipts. Both LHWF’ and public investment dropped in 1998199 relative to 1997/98.” 6. The loti is pegged to the South African rand and its movements reflect changes in the rand against other currencies. The loti depreciated by 22.9 percent in 1998/99 against the U.S. dollar and by 18.4 percent in nominal effective terms. In real effective terms, the loti depreciated by 12.7 percent as the consumer price index rose by 8.8 percent (year-end basis; see Figure 4).” Nevertheless, relative to South Africa, Lesotho’s competitive advantage weakened on account of the recent cut in the corporate income tax rate in South Africa and the deterioration in Lesotho’s utilities’* and other services, which appears to have offset the relatively lower and more flexible labor costs. ’ Money market rates in Lesotho have historically been lower than in South Africa mainly because of the imposition of the minimum local asset ratio by the CBL on commercial banks’ asset holdings, ” Investment activity on the LHWP is estimated to have dropped from the equivalent of 23.7 percent of GNP in 1997/98 to 15.0 percent ofGNP in 1998/99. ” Based on the 12 months ended February 1999 and excluding South Africa, which accounts for about 65 percent of exports. l2 Lesotho has promoted projects in the utility sector that have been geared primarily to supply the local market. As a result of the narrow domestic market and large overhead costs, the unit operating costs of public utilities have generally been considerably higher than in South Africa. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-9- 7. Little progress was made during the year in strengthening the management structures and operations of the three public utilities, with the result that their reliance on bank financing rose.” Furthermore, with the coming into force of the Muela hydroelectric plant (which was constructed to achieve energy self-sufficiency) during 1998, the operating costs of the Lesotho Highlands Development Authority (LHDA) have risen substantially (Box 1). The debt-service obligations of the LHDA also rose sharply during the year, as a sizeable proportion of the loans contracted in connection with the Muela project, largely on commercial terms, began to fall due; as a result, the recourse of the LHDA to bank financing increased during the year. Most of the banks’ credits to the parastatal sector were provided with government guarantees, even though most of these loans were in breach of the limits imposed, for prudential reasons, on the exposure of banks to individual borrowers. Moreover, these credits helped to delay the implementation of overdue restructuring and pricing measures and raised the contingent liabilities of the government. 8. A joint World Bank /United Nations Development Program (UNDP) mission that visited Lesotho in November 1998 to undertake a post-conflict needs assessment study estimated the total cost of reconstructing properties damaged during the September 1998 civil unrest at M 167 million or 2.7 percent of GNP (see Box 3). The rehabilitation of government buildings would be funded from normal government appropriations, over an extended period, while the Lesotho National Development Corporation (LNDC) is expected to rely primarily on private sector binding sources. The mission also concluded that the impact of the civil unrest on the manufacturing sector was small. In this connection, by end-1998, production had more or less recovered to the pre-September 1998 level. Reconstruction has been rendered more difficult by the decision of the government to apply more firmly the zoning regulations, which has had the effect of raising the cost of the minimum acceptable building structures for urban centers. II. REPORT ON THE DISCUSSIONS 9. The discussions were held against the background of a significant weakening of Lesotho’s economic prospects. Medium-term projections indicate that, in the absence of major policy changes, economic growth would be modest and productive capacity would weaken over the medium term, as public investment would not recover appreciably because donor support for new sectoral programs and projects would likely not be forthcoming in the absence of fundamental structural reforms. Furthermore, the squeeze in the availability of counterpart funding would continue to inhibit the absorption of donor resources. Moreover, the partial recovery in foreign investment associated with the implementation of phase 1B of the LHWP would be more or less offset by the drop in private foreign direct investment. 10. Moreover, as SACU gives way to a broader free-trade area in the context of the various regional trade liberalization initiatives. Lesotho-based enterprises would increasingly be placed at a competitive disadvantage if the major structural impediments, particularly in the utilities sector, are not effectively addressed. Under these conditions, many enterprises would likely respond by contracting operations in Lesotho. The resulting depressed economic conditions, as well as the I3 The three utilities are the Lesotho Electricity Corporation (LEC), the Lesotho Water and Sewage Corporation (LWSC), and the Lesotho Telecommunications Corporation (LTC). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-lO- limited domestic revenue collection capacity, would undermine the ability of Lesotho to replace income and sales tax receipts for the expected fall in SACU customs revenue. Accordingly, even with the pursuance of conservative expenditure policies, large fiscal and balance of payments deficits would result. In addition, it would be difficult for the government to avert a major contraction in the volume and quality of public services (Table 5). The resulting drawdown in government deposits would lead to a drop in foreign reserves, which could undermine confidence in the government’s ability to maintain the present exchange rate and monetary arrangements. Boa 3: Impact of the Civil Unrest The April I998 general elections resulted in the ruling Lesotho Congress for Democracy’s winning all but 1 of the 80 seats in parliament. Immediately following the elections, the opposition patties raised allegations, accompanied by widespread protests and calls for new elections, of unfair practices by the ruling party. These protests escalated into civil unrest in early August. accompanied by an zumy mutiny. At the invitation of the government, a militnry force from the Southern African Development Community (SADC), led by South Africa, entered Lesotho with the aim of regaining control of the mutinous army nnd reestablishing conditions for B peaceful resolution of the political crisis. In the event, the SADC forces faced resistance, resulting in some loss of life and extensive looting and arson, particularly in the large cities-Masem. Mafctcng, and Mobalc’s Hook. The vandalism was directed mostly toward foreign-owned or operated commercial enterprises. About 392 businesses were burnt and/or looted-299 of which were in the wholesale and retail sector. A UNDPAKorld Bank mission that visited Lesotho in October-November 1998 estimated that it would cost about M 160 million to restore the damaged buildings: about 47 percent for properties belonging to the private sector; 39 percent for Lesotho National Development Corporation properties; 7 percent for private homes; and 7 percent for govemment buildings. Furthennorc, the loss of stocks and equipment sustained by the private sector was estimated at M 106 million. In addition, an estimated M 35 million of government stores and supplies in the education, health. and a~cultnre sectors, Including textbooks, school supplies, medicines, and vehicles, was also destroyed or looted. The I999/2000 budget has allocated M 5 million for the rehabilitation of microenterprises affected by the unrest and M 4 million toward the reconstruction oft3asotho Hat--an ~enne for the sale of hnndicratls by indigenous entrepreneurs. A further M 35 mdlion was allocated for rehabilitation and reconstmction of government buildings. 11. Accordingly, the staff explored with the authorities the main elements of a development and structural adjustment strategy that could begin to lay the ground for a resumption of economic growth, reduce poverty, and enhance Lesotho’s ability to respond to globalization and the important changes in the subregion. The staff also discussed fiscal policies designed to cut expenditure in line with the envisaged drop in SACU receipts so as to safeguard financial stability. In addition, the mission reviewed structural measures in the public, parastatal, civil service, and divestiture areas aimed at fostering economic efficiency and complementary institutional capacity- building measures needed to enhance economic management. In this connection, while most of the problems now besetting Lesotho have been known for many years, inadequate administrative and institutional capacity in the Ministry of Finance and other central government agencies appear to have seriously impeded public policy formulation, coordination, and implementation. In the event that the authorities embark on the sustained implementation of the financial policies and structural measures outlined below, an economic recovery can be expected as the reforms begin Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- ll- to take hold (Table 6). The improved economic climate would encourage foreign direct investment, Moreover, the pursuit of sound sectoral and macroeconomic policies should help to raise donor interest in Lesotho and thus, the ability of the government to expand social and economic investment. 12. During his recent visit to the Fund, the Minister of Finance informed management of the government’s decision to embark on a program of economic reforms geared to addressing Lesotho’s difficult economic situation. He also requested a resumption of discussions on a medium-term economic framework and supporting policies, as well as on a program that could be supported by the Fund under one of its financial facilities. In view of the deep seated nature of Lesotho’s structural problems and the need to address the prospective widening of financial imbalances in the context of a coherent medium-term economic framework, the staff indicated that Fund financial assistance in the context of an ESAF would need to encompass structural reforms, as well as a suitably strong program. However, given the need to establish the authorities’ commitment to meaningful economic reforms and to facilitate the strengthening of Lesotho’s monetary data base, as well as key institutions, including the Ministry of Finance, it is envisaged that a period of staff monitoring would precede commencement of discussions in early 2000 on a program that could be supported by the Fund. Some of the issues that are likely to feature prominently in the discussions are outlined in Box 4. A. Development Strategy 13. Lesotho’s close proximity to the large South African market, as well as its limited natural resource endowment, low domestic savings, and small local market, suggests an outward oriented economic strategy as the most appropriate approach to promoting economic development and effkiency. Lesotho needs therefore to take advantage of the opportunities afforded by its geographic location, substantial water resources, scenic mountainous terrain, young and reasonably well-educated labor force, and flexible labor market conditions to forge a meaning&A development strategy. Moreover, the spill-over benefits from the successfiA training, during the past decade, of a labor force that has demonstrated an ability to produce garments and other light manufactures under modern technological conditions, could be substantial. If Lesotho is to capitalize on these favorable factors, it will need to address urgently the poor infrastructure, weaknesses in the administrative and institutional infrastructure, including a poor economic management capacity, and a political climate that has not favored close economic integration with neighboring countries. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12- Box 4: Important Macroeconomic and Structural Reform Issues Facing Lesotho ’ Real sector issues . A streamlining of tax incentives provided for all foreign direct investment and a reduction in the corporate tax rate to at least 30 percent. . A mtionalization of the cumbersome administrative and regulatory procedures for processing investment. Fiscal policies . A prompt revision of the budget, as the budget for I999/2000 does not provide for all the immediate direct and contingent liabilities ofthe government, the full implications ofthe projected losses of public utilities, bank rest~cturing costs, elecbicity sector t’ationalization, and payment of tax arrears to South Africa. An avoidance of new spending, unless its costs are met through the identification of equivalent expenditure cuts in other areas. A revamping of the revenue departments. with a view to increasing the independence and authority of management, strengthening managerial systems and upgrading eqtipmmt to enhance tax administration. Enactment by parliament of the value-added tax (VAT) bill. Early conclusion of discussions on the possible use of regional institutions for collecting the VAT. Institution of multiyear budget system for managing expenditures. 3nitiation of expenditure rationalition process by requesting ministries to develop cost and manpower implications of ongoing program and commitments. Requirement that ministries provide a list of inesxntial programs and potential budgetary savings from their retrenchment. On the basis of desired overall fiscal targets, development by lhe hGnistry of Finance of expendihxe limits for line ministries for the nexl three years. Development of a program to reduce the wage component of the budget through cuts in excess manpower and the hiving off of commercially oriented activities. Development of a timetable for the implementation of the results of the timctionsl review of stmctmes, responslbdltms, and personnel of key ministries and govemment departments. Restructuring of the Ministry of Finance, including establishment of Macroeconomic and Fiscal Analysis Unit. Public enterprises . Articulation of time frame for public enmise reform, involving a claritication of the governance sttuchues to reduce ministerial discretion and to enhance the role of the privatisation Unit in the monitoring and supervision of operations and _ reforms of all pamstatals. . Clarification of government policies regarding the provision of guarantees ta pamstatals and the on-lending of funds by novemment to wastatals, as well as the institutional mwkdities for monitoring such operations. I . Early ration&&m of the supply and pncing arrangements of the Mu& hydroelectric scheme within the regional context . Restructuring of the domestic electricity supply and distribution arrangements, including the roles of the LHDA and LEC. . Full libemhzntian of the telecommunications sector and sale of the Lesotho Telecommunications Corporation. Monetary and financial sector Issues . Enactment of the Central Bank of Lesotho Bill. . Further actions to strengthen prudential regulations and minimum capital adequacy requiremats for fmancial . mstitutions, consistent with intematmnal standards Other issues . A shelving of the old-age pension scheme and clarification of the timetable and modalities for introducing free primary education. . A clarification of the policy and procedures for the contracting and guaranteeing of external debt by the government and other state bodies. ‘The issues and policies to be included in a fuhrc program will be discussed by future Fund missions to Lesotho Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13 - 14. Lesotho’s growth prospects could be significantly enhanced if the change in economic policy orientation is supported by sustained economic reforms and a more aggressive promotion of foreign direct investment. The latter objective could be pursued through the harmonization of corporate income tax rates with neighboring countries and the provision of an expanded package of infrastructure to a wider range of enterprises.14 It will also be important for Lesotho to show more flexibility in the types of organizational ventures that it is willing to permit and support. In particular, in light of the potential activities that are likely to interest foreign-owned enterprises, the size of the local market and the close proximity of Lesotho to a large market with a well- developed enterprise sector, wholly owned ventures are likely to be the preferred organizational and ownership structure for most foreign-owned entities. The development of an environment conducive to the promotion of both local and foreign enterprises will also require that the problems relating to the high cost and poor quality of utilities be addressed through a deregulation of the sector, and that steps be taken to simplify the cumbersome regulations governing the processing of approvals for foreign projects and personnel. The authorities were in broad agreement with the staff on the need to promote foreign direct investment. In this connection, they indicated their intention to lower the corporate income tax rate early next year. They also indicated that the LNDC was exploring external funding for the building of new factory shells. 15. Achievement of the above strategy will need to be underpinned by a supportive environment. A first key element of such a strategy would be the maintenance ofthe present monetary and exchange arrangements. However, in view of the prospective weakening of the fiscal position, this will require revenue broadening, expenditure reduction and rationalization, and prudent management of monetary policy and the tinancial system. Moreover, it will be essential for Lesotho to consolidate the recent progress made in improving the transparency of the government and in fostering the independence of the legal system. B. Fiscal Policies” 16 In view of the prospective weakening of the near- and medium-term fiscal situation stemming from the potential sharp decline in SACU receipts and thus, the unsustainability of current outlays, the discussions focused on measures to enhance revenue collection and expenditure consolidation. With respect to revenue, the authorities explained that Lesotho’s I4 The corporate income tax rate in South Africa was recently lowered to 30 percent. The envisaged harmonization of the corporate income tax rate with those in neighboring countries is likely to have a limited negative revenue impact in the near term as many of the large trading houses are expected to sustain losses in the wake of the September civil unrest. Moreover, a delay in the realignment of the tax rate could result in the cross-border relocation of many enterprises, particularly in the services sector. I5 The contemplated public sector reforms will require increased technical assistance in the areas of budget management and revenue mobilization. The Fund, as well as the World Bank and other donors is willing to consider such assistance to Lesotho as soon as the Macroeconomic and Fiscal Analysis Unit is established. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14 - membership of the SACU, wide and largely unpoliced open borders, and weak domestic revenue collection capacity severely limited its ability to introduce new revenue measures, They pointed out that external tariffs were jointly determined with other SACU members, while the scope for a significant deviation of excise and sales taxes from those in neighboring countries was circumscribed by the need to maintain competitiveness and to minimize the smuggling of goods across the border. Even in the area of personal and corporate income taxation, the persistent substantial loss of skilled personnel to neighboring countries, as well as the need to attract foreign investment and scarce skills, argued against the imposition of income tax rates above those prevailing in neighboring countries. For these reasons, the authorities were of the view that an expansion of the tax base remained the most effective way of raising revenue. They therefore saw the building of an effective domestic revenue capacity and the present move to a value-added tax (VAT) as key steps in that direction. In this regard, they regretted the delay in introducing the tax, which they attributed to three factors: longer-than-anticipated consultations with neighboring countries on the modalities for collecting the tax; pressures on the government’s limited legal drafting capacity; and the impact of the September civil unrest. In addition, preparatory work for introducing the VAT, including the training of staff and establishment of a business register has taken longer than earlier anticipated. 17. Lesotho needs to build an effective domestic revenue mobilization capacity as deficiencies in tax administration account for a significant portion of the relatively low noncustoms revenue effort This should involve management strengthening, the removal of excessive political involvement in tax administration, improving staff morale and reducing the high vacancy ratios. Accordingly, the mission discussed measures aimed at strengthening tax administration, including the provision of enhanced training of staff, the carrying out ofjoint inspections of taxpayers by the income and sales tax departments, the accelerated computerization of departments, and the increased exchange of information on taxpayer activities among departments. The latter measure would require setting up a common tax identification number for all taxpayers. 18. The implementation of these measures will not fully compensate for the likely loss in SACU receipts over the medium term. Accordingly, achievement of fiscal balance will require decisive and immediate action to cut and reprioritize expenditures. This is particularly so because expenditure pressures will remain strong over the medium term for three main reasons. First, the government is expected to be called upon to meet most of its contingent liabilities to the banking system-estimated at M 80 million (1.2 percent of GNP) as of end-March 1999-as the financial position of the three public utilities and the LHDA remains precarious.‘6 Second, debt-. service payments are projected to rise markedly. Finally, the upward drift of public sector wages I6 Most of these commitments arise from external and domestic debt obligations of the LHDA. Since this corporation was set up to assist in the promotion of LHWP investment activity and is thus not a revenue-generating body, it was agreed that all the debt obligations of the corporation should be included in the budget. The government has also requested World Bank assistance in streamlining LHDA operations, as well as those of the LEC and the LWSC. The small obligations of the LTC to local banks are expected to be repaid from the proceeds of the sale of the corporation. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 15- and salaries will be difficult to arrest in view of the need to minimize wage differentials with neighboring countries for skilled personnel.” Moreover, the government budget management system tends to have an expansionary bias as under the present system: (a) new expenditure allocations are made on the basis of the previous year’s outcomes; (b) the one-year time horizon for the budget hinders an effective evaluation of future expenditure commitments from past and present decisions; and (c) the budgets of parastatals are not systematically incorporated in the government budgeting system. 19. To address these issues, the staff representatives pressed the government to cut outlays and to launch a major reprioritization of public expenditure, beginning with the 1999/00 budget, on the basis of clearly established priorities and in line with recent government discussions with the World Bank in the context of the Public Expenditure and Budget Management Review (PEBMR). With this in mind, the staff urged the authorities to: (a) introduce a multi-year budget management framework for controlling budget aggregates under which line ministries would be given three-year relatively firm indicative expenditure limits which would incorporate the desired cuts in wage and nonwage outlays; (b) grant line ministries more flexibility in the development of sectoral programs, in the management of their allocations, and in the determination of activities and personnel to be retrenched within their establishments, consistent with the reduced allocations;‘* (c) cut substantially the government building program; (d) examine with the World Bank the modalities for butding the rural development program, with a view to permitting the substitution of external donor resources for local resources within the overall objectives of the program and thus, to reducing the domestic funding of the program by 50 percent; and (e) increase moderately the allocation of local counterpart funds for projects in education, health, agriculture, and road building to facilitate the absorption of increased donor resources and the execution of an expanded capital budget program in these areas. 20. Although the government representatives acknowledged the need for prudent expenditure management, the budget for 1999/2000 that was announced in April 1999 does not address the difficult near- and medium-term fiscal problems facing Lesotho. It also does not tackle the issues relating to the development of a machinery for establishing aggregate fiscal discipline and improving allocative efftciency. Instead, the budget envisages that the overall deficit (excluding grants) and bank financing will expand from the equivalent of 4.2 percent of GNP and 1.9 percent of GNP, respectively, in 1998/99 to 7.4 percent of GNP and 4.5 percent of GNP, respectively, in 1999/2000-even before taking account of the full costs of restructuring the LB and the likely losses of public utilities. Moreover, the budget does not outline a program for shedding inessential activities, or for corporatizing or privatizing commercially oriented public operations, and it does ” The inevitably close linkage between the salaries and wages of skilled civil service personnel in Lesotho to corresponding South African wages-maintained to minimize a significant loss in skilled personnel-severely limits the scope for expenditure cuts through wage compression. In this connection, the authorities have recently confirmed that they have continued to lose large numbers of skilled personnel, such as primary teachers and nurses, to South Africa. I8 More work on the identification and quantification of expenditure cuts, including programs and activities to be cut, will be undertaken by future Fund and World Bank missions. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 16- not develop the modalities for rationalizing public sector employment. Instead, the budget proposes two new program initiatives-the introduction of an old-age pension scheme and free primary education beginning in January 200~neither of which are identified as priority areas in the recently completed PEBh4R. Moreover, the current and prospective costs of these new initiatives do not appear to have been fully worked out. The staffs view is that the old-age pension scheme should be shelved while universal primary education should be phased in gradually, in line with the availability of budgetary resources, and only after full consultations with the World Bank on the modalities for implementing the change. During their recent visit to Washington, the authorities agreed to review the 1999/2000 budget in the context of the forthcoming discussions on Lesotho’s medium-term economic policies. C. Monetary and Banking Sector Issues 21. The authorities indicated that the restructuring of the banking system that had almost been completed should in time help to restore confidence in the banking system, both within Lesotho and in the regional financial community. The staff commended the authorities for addressing the distress in the banking system and for enacting the Financial Institutions Act, which provides the framework for strengthening prudential regulations of banks, in line with the Basle Committee recommendations. The staff also welcomed the CBL decision to build a strong capacity for on-site and off-site bank supervision, supported with the technical assistance provided by the Fund. In this connection, revised prudential regulations and minimum capital adequacy requirements for tinancial institutions, consistent with international standards, have been drafted and will be put in place with effect from July 1999. The staffrepresentatives also urged the authorities to expedite the enactment of the draft CBL bill. Meanwhile, the evolution of monetary aggregates in 1999/2000 is highly uncertain because in the near term, the problems faced by banks in getting their checks and other negotiable instruments cleared expeditiously through the regional clearing arrangements as the financial system is rebuilt will tend to reduce the demand for loti-denominated assets. 22. The authorities explained that they were concerned about the impact on rural financial intermediation, owing to the closure of the LADB and the consolidation of LB operations. They indicated that they would seek World Bank technical assistance in identifying an appropriate institutional framework for promoting rural savings. In response to queries by the staff concerning the appropriateness of maintaining the minimum local assets ratio (MLAR), the authorities explained that their intention was to phase out the MLAR gradually over the medium term. They pointed out, however, that holdings of local assets by most banks were in excess of the required ratio, which was reduced to 60 percent of deposits from 85 percent in April 1998. D. External Sector Issues 23. Present indications are that the negative internal and external developments mentioned above will continue to dominate the evolution of Lesotho’s balance of payments in 1999/2000 and over the medium term. In this connection, the revised 1999/2000 balance of payments projections, which incorporate the likely effects of the 1999/2000 budget, show that overall balance of payments pressures would intensify with the overall balance moving from a surplus of US$33 million in 1998/99 to a deficit of US%62 million in 1999/2000. Notwithstanding Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17- the budgeted increase in the overall fiscal deficit, the external current account deficit is projected to contract in 1999/2000 relative to 1998/99, reflecting mainly the impact of the ongoing scaling down of LHWP investment on the absorption of imports. The current account deficit is expected to be partially funded by the disbursements of offtcial loans and capital inflows linked to the LHWP, but a drawdown of the foreign reserves of the CBL is foreseen from US$584 million (9.0 months imports) at end-March 1999 to US$523 million (7.7 months imports) at end- 1999/2000 and to virtually zero by the end of the five-year period. 24. The government representatives expressed their deep concern about the prospective weakening of the financial and balance of payments situation. They pointed out that, while the negative effects of the winding down of the LHWF’ on the economy had been foreseen, the government had hoped that by now adequate steps would have been taken to strengthen the environment for foreign direct investment and enterprise. In this regard, they pointed out that the increase in political tension in recent years had distracted the attention of the government and delayed the implementation of desired policy changes. The officials therefore indicated that the present focus of the government on the establishment of durable and stable political conditions was an essential initial step to rebuilding investor confidence in Lesotho. They further explained that they appreciated the importance of external competitiveness in retaining and attracting business enterprises. For this reason, they pointed to the determination of the government to maintain flexible labor market conditions and to its commitment to upgrading Lesotho’s human capital through the priority given to education. While noting the progress made in the education sector, the staff representatives reminded the authorities that strong fiscal and structural policies, including the proposed rationalization of public utilities, would be needed to safeguard competitiveness and sustain the present monetary and exchange rate arrangements. They t%rther urged the authorities to remove the remaining administrative barriers to investment and to rebuild the strong financial linkages between Lesotho and neighboring countries’ banks. These actions would also help to build the strong production base that is needed if Lesotho is to benefit significantly from the various trade liberalization initiatives now under way in the subregion. E. Institutional and Other Structural Issues 25. Successful implementation of a consistent policy of reforms will require an accelerated program for expanding and upgrading the technical skills of key departments. This is essential to increasing policy coherence and to enhancing flexibility in response to changes in the environment. The present weak technical capability of most central ministries, including the Ministry of Finance, has allowed political interest groups to penetrate the decision-making process to an excessive degree, even in areas such as the allocation of bank credit, civil service employment, and the selection of management for parastatals. Moreover, under these weak institutional conditions, attempts to solve pressing economic problems has led the government to undertake unsound public investment with high social costs, such as the Muela project. 26. Despite indications of a broad consensus within the government on the objectives of the public enterprise reform program, progress has been slow, in part because of inappropriate institutional arrangements for carrying out the reforms. At present, each ministry is responsible, after cabinet approval is obtained, for developing the reform strategies for enterprises under their jurisdiction and for superintending the reforms. As most of the ministries lack the Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- l8- technical skills necessary for the effective management of such undertakings, these reforms are therefore largely carried out with limited oversight from the responsible ministry. In addition, the cabinet has tended to get involved in detailed operational aspects of these undertakings, in part to minimize divergences in the approaches followed by various ministries. Moreover, the dominance of senior civil servants in the governing boards of most public corporations has tended to reduce the independence of management in carrying out its tasks, In addition, as mentioned above, a reorientation of investments in the utilities sector toward a broader regional market is essential to cutting costs and restoring viability to the sector. 27. In discussions with the authorities, the mission proposed changes in the supervision of public enterprises and the implementation of reforms. The changes would clarify the roles and responsibilities of cabinet ministers and the Privatization Unit in the oversight and supervision of these enterprises. Under the staffs proposal, the responsibility for coordinating parastatal reforms and for monitoring parastatal operations would be vested in the Privatization Unit. Ministries would be responsible for developing the broad policy framework and for approving the strategies developed by parastatals for achieving their goals. In response, the authorities informed the mission that they would review the suggestions, which were apparently similar to the recommendations made by the World Bank. F. Poverty Issues 28. The government places considerable priority on the goal of reducing poverty. The government’s strategy to reduce poverty includes promoting efficient cash crops and labor- intensive industry and investing in human resources through increased budgetary allocations for basic education and health. Social safety net features in the economy will also be strengthened. In particular, receipts from the privatization of state enterprises will be earmarked to assist employees who are being retrenched in the process of selling of these enterprises. The government has also indicated that it will transform the Lesotho Highlands Revenue Fund, a special fund established in 1992 to manage the revenue from the LHWP, into a social fund that will use public resources and donor assistance to reduce poverty, especially by financing income- generating microprojects in rural areas. With the assistance of the World Bank, the authorities are addressing a number of problems that have limited the effectiveness of the fund’s interventions, including the targeting mechanism of the activities and projects for addressing poverty. Efforts to maximize income generation for the rural poor are also to be pursued through the Policy Reforms and Capacity-Building Project for Agriculture. G. Statistical Issues 29. Lesotho currently provides the Fund with core surveillance data that are broadly adequate for the Article IV consultation process, but weaknesses in the coverage and periodicity of economic data remain. The timeliness and reliability of national accounts, fiscal, trade, and monetary data have been of particular concern. Accordingly, the mission commended the authorities for the considerable progress made in improving the quality and timeliness of government accounts. In this regard, the audited accounts for the period 1993194 - 1998199 are scheduled to be published in the period ending October 1999, and audited accounts for subsequent years would be produced within six months of the end of the fiscal year. However, the Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 19- mission noted that the failure of the LB to produce regular accounts from June 1997 to September 1998 had greatly complicated the use of monetary data to monitor financial developments.” Accordingly, the authorities agreed to seek technical assistance from the Funds’ Statistics Department to help resolve the issue. The mission welcomed current government efforts to improve the timeliness of national accounts and to move to the issuance of monthly consumer price data. The mission also discussed Lesotho’s effort to address Year 2000 (Y2K) issues through the formation ofthe National Coordinating Forum and Y2K task forces, including the CBL, government departments, and the financial sector. The staff urged the authorities to strengthen these efforts and to pursue this endeavor with vigor to ensure the Y2K compliance of all relevant institutions before the end of September 1999. 30. In response, the authorities explained that they were committed to strengthening their data management systems. They were concerned, however, that the Fund and the Bank were not providing adequate support for training needs. IlI. STAFF APPRAISAL 31. In the decade ended 1996/97, favorable exogenous developments, combined with the successful development of an export-oriented manufacturing sector and the launching of the LHWP, boosted the growth in Lesotho’s per capita income to above the average for sub-Saharan Africa. The overall balance of payments strengthened, and fiscal performance improved. The resulting significant buildup of government deposits was reflected in a corresponding accumulation of foreign reserves, equivalent to about nine months imports, Lesotho also made notable progress in improving life expectancy and adult literacy and in cutting infant mortality rates, within the context of a disciplined expenditure management. 32. In the latter part of the 199Os, the economy has faltered as a result of rising political tensions; weakening aggregate fiscal discipline and declining SACU receipts; mounting inefftciencies of public institutions, particularly the public utilities; and increasing dislocation of the banking sector. Moreover, LHWP-related investment has been winding down. Economic activity, as well as financial performance, has also been negatively influenced by the deterioration in the external environment facing Lesotho, which is reflected in the marked drop in the number of Basotho miners in South Africa. 33. The response of the authorities to the deterioration in economic conditions has, on. the whole, been disappointing. The orientation of economic policies has not changed materially. Public expenditure prioritization has not been addressed as the budget has continued to base annual ministerial expenditure allocations largely on the basis of previous year’s outcomes, with little concern for emerging problems and previous commitments. No coherent civil service reform strategy has been put in place to address the considerable overstaffing in many departments. Actions to introduce more flexibility in public service emplotyment conditions have yet to be introduced. Reforms in the parastatal sector have been slow, with the result that management of I9 From September 1998 onward, detailed monetary data are available on a regular and timely basis. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 20 - public enterprises remains lax, with considerable bureaucratic discretionary power over the operations of parastatals. Measures to strengthen tax administration and broaden the revenue base have been executed tardily. If the present economic policy stance is maintained, financial imbalances will widen, and the efficiency of public expenditure will continue to drop. As a result, foreign direct investment will likely not return and unemployment would grow. In addition, it would be difficult for Lesotho to sustain the present monetary and exchange rate arrangements. 34. Major hurdles cloud Lesotho’s near- and medium-term outlook, including (a) the uncertain prospective evolution of her political and security institutions; (b) the potential adverse impact on Lesotho’s privileged access to the South At?ican market owing to the envisaged broadening of the SACU free trade zone to cover more countries in Southern Africa; (c) the projected drop in SACU receipts from 2000/01; and (d) the ongoing retrenchment of Basotho Miners in South Africa. Moreover, the LIB&P-which has accounted for about IO percent of GDP, a s&able proportion of customs revenue, and a substantial percentage of foreign exchange receipts-is winding down. This set of adverse exogenous developments will reduce the budgetary resources available to the economy and impinge negatively on Lesotho’s growth potential. Greater economic efficiencies and new sources of growth will have to be found. 35. A restoration of growth will depend on the establishment of an environment favorable to private economic activity. A climate conducive to domestic entrepreneurship and foreign direct investment will require speedy simplification of the institutional and regulatory framework for processing investment; a broadening and deepening of structural reforms, particularly in the public sector; the divestiture of public enterprises; and investment friendly tax and labor market systems. The most arduous early challenges will be to reduce government consumption and unproductive investment; this will call for immediate cuts in public outlays, the hiving-off of inessential public activities, and a rationalization of public utility prices. The sustained implementation of structural reforms will require the mobilization of broad public support behind the reforms-not an easy task in view of the recent political disruption and the less-than-favorable external circumstances- and the process of reestablishing investor confidence in Lesotho is likely, therefore, to take time and perseverance. Early action to upgrade the management capacity of key institutions will be essential to the successful promotion of the reforms. 36. Strengthened fiscal performance will be crucial to achieving the needed macroeconomic stability In view of the prospective decline in SACU revenues, strengthening public finances will require a broadening of the tax base and a consolidation of expenditures. On the revenue side, the focus should be on revamping the revenue departments; strengthening enforcement, compliance, and monitoring; and enacting the VAT bill. These actions should begin to yield early positive results. Expenditure cuts and restructuring will be needed to achieve the macroeconomic objectives and improvement in the delivery of public services. The reprioritization of expenditures, will be greatly facilitated by a move to a multiyear budget system and the decontrol of expenditure management. Moreover, the planned introduction of an old-age pension scheme should be shelved, and universal primary education should be phased in gradually, in line with the availability of resources and as discussed with the World Bank. 37. Lesotho has made considerable progress in restructuring the banking system, building a supervisory framework, and strengthening the management of monetary policy Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2l- Notwithstanding this progress, the financial system remains a concern as the payments system and the clearing of regional transactions are problematic, bank credit to the weak parastatal sector has continued to rise, and rural intermediation has not been adequately addressed. Decisive actions are needed in these areas. 38. Maintenance of financial stability is essential for preserving Lesotho’s membership in the CMA and thus creating an environment favorable to entrepreneurship, foreign direct investment, and economic growth. The financial and structural measures outlined in the report should help to strengthen Lesotho’s commitment to the CMA and to the rand, which has served Lesotho well. The staff encourages the authorities to eliminate the MLAR as soon as possible so as to improve capital integration with neighboring countries. 39. The staff welcomes the authorities’ decision to embark on a program of economic reforms. Assuming that understandings can be reached on a medium-term economic policy framework and on a strong program, the Fund should stand ready to assist Lesotho to reform its economy. Such assistance will also be essential to the mobilization of strong donor support behind the reforms. In view of the structural nature of Lesotho’s problems, such assistance would need to be in the context of an ESAF arrangement. A period of staff-monitoring, before Lesotho’s request to such an arrangement is presented to the Board, will enable the authorities to demonstrate their commitment to economic reforms. 40. Lesotho produces core data that are broadly adequate for the Article IV consultation process and for the monitoring of financial developments. Nevertheless, the staff urges the authorities to continue improving the coverage, quality, and timeliness of macroeconomic data, especially those relating to the national accounts, foreign trade, government finances, and monetary statistics that are important for policy formulation and management. The reconciliation of data and sharing of key macroeconomic statistics across and within government departments should also be improved. 41. It is proposed that the next Article IV consultation with Lesotho be held on the standard 12-month cycle. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 22 - Figure 1. Lesotho: Output and Prices (Annual percentage changes) Real GDP and GNP, 1988/89-1998/99 l/ 15 - Real GDP -- Real GNP 10 5 0 - ,............ . ..*- 0 \ \ -5. \ -5 -10 m/as 89/90 go/91 91/92 92/93 93/94 94/95 95/96 96/97 97/9a 98/99 -10 Consumer Prices, 1989521-19 199:Ql t ~ Lesotho -- South Africa 6 t i 6 41 1989 1990 1991 14 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 23 - Fig ‘ure 2. Lesotho: Fiscal Developments, 1991/92- 1998/99 l/ (In percent of GNP) Revenue. Expenditure. and Overall Balancs 25 Composition of Revenue Rutm rDMnup Es : :I Comporition of Expwdltura source: Larotho (IY+hori,i~*. I/ Firm year bagins April I. 2/ Left sc(II.. 3/ Right ICd.. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 24 - Figure 3. Lesotho: Monetary Developments Monetary Aggregatss, 1991/92-1998/99 l/ (In parcent ot bglnnln9-of-perbad brood money) , IM 40 -....,.. ..-’ aa -40 &“tV . . . . . . . *.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .._..... .-. . . . ...-* .,. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...*. W.. *& wl .- . . . . . . . . .*_.*............ ...*“-ae* I 40 -901 I 1991/92 1992/93 1993/94 1994/95 1995,95 1999,97 1997/99 1999/99 -6o Lendlnq Rotas, l@WOl-1998534 sot (I” prmnt) ,yI w- 20. .** Smdh Apica . . . . . . ..-............... -..-*-- . . . . . ..-...............-....... I.’ /I - . . . . . .._...*...I.......” . . . . . ..I....... . I 15. Luo~ I O I lo I, ,9M,11 I” \ I! ,\, I” , II LII I” , 1, /I\ I” , II \iL I” 1995 1996 ,997 ,999 Dsposlt Rates, 1994~01-199904 25 (In prmt) -l9 9. .9 O I II ,994”’ I” I II III I” I II I” I II 111 I” I II Ill I” o ,945 ,999"' ,997 1999 Sourc.: LM+ho authorlth I/ Flrcd par begins April. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 25 - Figure 4. Lesotho: External Developments External Accounts, 1993/94-1998/99 l/ 50 (I" pamnt Of GNP) (33 b%“., mnt,tona JO I svd”r” lfian hvtwn. “emI nw%pl* _.____. ~...~ . ...~.~. 10 ,I Exports rmd Imports, 1993/%1998/99 v 60 (A”““d porc*nt cbxd w-t. :: : ,~~~~~~.,, .,.\,, ,’ . . 1 I . . . . . 0 ,,,’ “‘.i:... ., -..... D ,:’ I ImE.ao a*hlmuI ,dev -20 ,=vq,dinprf.(indy Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PubliccnN”mcrplicc index (end Ofpmid) Nomind GDP (in muions Ofrnalcdi) NOmind CiNp (in muorv ofmalai) IMemd so2tor 31 Expau, L0.b. Impmu, fob 6lcuin# Lclaho tri#lhn* W* Pmjcst BHWP)) Lmpmts, f.0.b. (UcMing LfnvP) Net Iabcm inmc RCA cffsstk wriunge rate 41 Sources: Lmotho Whoritiss; and Fund m5cstinutss and pjccticm. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicIPPWI 199,m lG%Ji’)’ t591m ,m 1999Mo B”.w RW. RO,. s*t u Rcrmue c”mm lO”D”“C 1.6811 I.4115 se65 101.0 ms 111.0 116 I I.6 271.8 ,oz 162 0 1612 1.721 1 1.104 9 ,I*7 606 314 212 ,dZ 6,:: 1’9.6 II 2 4% 8 I61 2 2716 -38 0 ,212 -121.2 2019 2716 .I, 7 -127.2 -,li.l .98 .I 9 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 3. L.csomo: Monomy sumay, M,,cb ,995~Much 2000 1995 Mar. 1996 Mar. ,997 1998 ,998 1998 1998 1999 2000 Mar. Mar. JIB". Sep. Dec. Mu. Mu. Est. Proj. (In millions ofmalc.6) Net foreign ass& 1.736.5 2.018.6 2.539.6 3.480.4 3.573.6 X.798.0 3.122.6 3~584.6 3.328.9 Cenbalbank 1.407.5 ,,80,.4 *,3,0.3 3.034.0 3.268.5 3.436.5 3.363.2 3.4OiI.5 3.0363 Commezcialbaks 329.0 217.2 229.3 446.4 305.1 36L.5 359.4 284.1 292.6 Netdomcsticarsels -572.7 -196.1 -1.138.9 -1.735.5 -,.818.8 -,,9,3.9 -1.880.5 -1.919.8 Domestic credit -266.5 -465.7 -855.1 -,,95.9 -1155.9 -1227.0 -1192.3 -1103.8 Claims on gcJ"emmmr (net) -873.2 -1,190.7 -1,712.l -2.162.6 -2.145.5 -2.135.0 -2.129.5 -2.046.3 Centr.,bsnk -923.8 -1.217.6 -1.722.4 -2,17,., -2.146.1 -2.147.3 -2.112.5 -2.015.2 Commercial banks 50.6 26.9 10.3 8.6 0.5 12.3 -17.0 -31.2 Claimso"mcres,ofmcsco"omy 606.1 725.0 857.0 966.7 989.7 907.9 937.2 942.5 Prive sec,or 568.2 632.2 690.4 842.7 865.7 741.7 711.6 705.0 Stahltolybadics 38.5 92.8 166.6 124.0 124.0 166.3 225.6 231.5 Other items (net) I/ -306.2 331.0 -283.8 -539.6 -662.9 -686.9 -688.2 -816.0 -1.537.6 -121.6 -1.749.0 L.021.4 Moncymd quasi moncy(M2) Narrow money (M,) Maloti with public Demmdand call deposits Quasi money Tim deposits SavlnSsdcposits 1.163.8 L221.9 1,400.7 ,,I449 13754.8 1.884.1 L.842.2 L.764.8 595.6 596.8 706.9 975.2 1.OL5.5 1.2446 1.112.5 L.09L.4 61.4 13.9 86.8 91.l 106.7 129.8 145.L 127.5 534.2 520.9 620.1 884.1 908.8 1.114.8 967.3 %3.9 568.2 625.1 693.8 769.7 739.3 639.5 129.7 673.4 161.2 183.9 219.9 220.5 205.3 137.9 164.9 157.9 407.0 441.2 473.9 549.2 534.0 501.6 564.8 515.5 (Annualcbsngcin pcrcm,ofbcSi~ng-af-periodMZ;un,esaomcnviseindiuhd) -816.0 1.791.2 Net foreign assets 40.6 24.2 42.6 67.2 5.3 l8.2 13.9 11.7 Nctdomesticassets -27.3 -19.2 -28.0 -42.6 -4.8 -10.2 -8.3 -10.6 Chims on government (net) -26.4 -27.3 -42.7 -32.2 1.0 L.6 L.9 6.1 Clsimsonmercst of rncec0-y 4.7 10.2 10.8 7.8 1.3 -3.4 -1.7 -1.4 om~items (net) -5.6 -2.1 3.9 -,8.3 -7.1 -8.4 -8.5 -,5.8 Money and quasi money (MZ) 13.3 5.0 14.6 24.6 0.6 8.0 5.6 1.1 o/w/d: quasi money 4.1 4.9 5.6 5.4 -1.7 -7.5 -2.3 -5.5 -20.2 21.7 16.8 4.8 0.0 1.5 Memorandum items: Net foreign asscts(in millions ofU.S. dolh 483.6 507.1 514.3 691.3 606.2 641.1 633.1 596.4 538.9 Money velocity (GNWM2: nvsrsgc) 3.9 4.0 4.2 3.9 3.1 3.5 3.5 3.5 3.7 Moneyve,ociry(GNP/MZ,end ofperiod) 3.7 3.9 4.0 3.6 3.5 3.3 3.3 3.5 3.7 Sources: Central Sank ofl.csoh; and h"d staffestimatcs and projections. lil‘bc mwemenfs in "Other items (nctY p~rdfly rcflccl valuation adjusimcnb nnd tic distotORio"s caused by tic problem banks,cspccia,,y me Lcsotbo Ban!s Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-29. T&k 4. Lclotho: Bdansc ofPsymenl8, 199u95-3999noml,/ 199w5 1995M 1996197 ,99x98 199&991!J¶9RMo -798.3 191.1 -989.4 -121.9 52.3 119.5 -67.2 -818.4 I%.5 ~1.011.8 -153.4 II.9 81.7 -66.7 315.2 301.6 360.5 299.7 -5P.9 13.7 67.7 -54.1 -13.3 ZL4.L 212.1 151.5 8.5 49.2 2.0 -2L6.7 291.5 56.4 75.1 -18.7 -1.3 236.5 20x.9 3.1 0.0 28.9 106.9 322.0 313.9 372.5 310.5 -58.6 1.1 68.3 -6cl.2 -11.2 239.0 237.6 176.9 19.1 41.6 1.4 -242.4 345.4 81.2 Kl1.6 -20.4 .a* 265.0 233.6 45.8 0.0 -21.7 127.1 -127.1 -614.3 175.1 -789.7 -17.6 19.3 75.2 -55.9 zu.0 zn.5 254.3 IN.5 -41.9 10.5 60.7 -50.2 -xl.1 185.1 183.9 ISO. 2.5 31.2 1.2 -,87.0 ZL3.0 3.0 29.0 -26.0 0.3 209.8 198.6 -8.8 0.0 LS.5 32.7 -32.7 -653.4 178.6 -832.1 -18.0 5.6 63.2 47.6 Sourssr: Ctnval Bmk oflrrolha; and Fund s!ATucimalcn and projcclim. li Fiscal year t@nnilg in APd. U LcsnIho Highhnds Wrtcr Pmjcst (LHWP). II Also srpmr rrwxms”u In *c no”-BwJ”,o mi!pl, schlc ,,mden fm WhJCh no da0 h w~bblc. 41 Excluding MUT unpoc!s 5, In red tsm. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 5. Lcnatho: Mdium-Tcm Ecanmic prospeds Without Mauures, 1998/99-2003/04 112, 1998~9 w9mo zwomi zwIm* zctnm3 2003m4 Rev. Pmj. Roj. FYoj. Pmj. hj. Pmj. Gutput and pries Real GDP Red GNP GDP d&tor Nominal GNP (in millim ofmaloti) Fiscal -nLI Revenue c”*oms re”en”C Non- revenue Total grmLr Total expenditure and nd lending Dome&& litndod expmditums Rcmrreot expenditure Capital cqxndiim Extmnlly funded capital expmditure Gvef-all bP,nncc @CfOrc prants, Gvml, bnlvrc (ah @anti) Fm-eign fhncing Domestic fuuncinS Balance afpaymcms Exports hpnrs Services (net) lnccae (“et) Tnnafcn (net) currmt acccu”l (in pcmnt ofGNP) Capital accounl Gllicial (net) Goln (“et) 31 G”er.ll bdmcc Gross ofid reserves (end ofperiod) Gross oflicial ~CICWCE (months dimpork, f.o.b.) lwcament and wing 41 l”“estmenl Public Ri”atc LHWP 5, Gross national savings (includii remitices) Public Privrtc (AnnLl*l percmbgc duns. ““less &h&se speiticd) -5.4 0.0 0.3 0.2 -9.1 0.9 1.0 0.1 7.8 6.5 5.9 5.6 6.139.5 6.592.9 7.117.3 7.523.5 (InpacmtofGNP) 1.0 1.0 03 -0.1 4.6 4.3 7.912.5 8.248.2 3s.o 36.8 31.8 29.8 16.8 17.9 15.4 13.4 18.2 18.8 16.4 16.4 2.0 2.4 2.4 1.4 39.2 44.2 40.2 40.0 34.9 39.1 35.1 34.9 31.1 32.8 18.8 28.6 3.8 6.3 6.3 6.3 4.3 5.1 5.1 5.1 4.2 -7.4 -8.4 -10.2 -2.2 -5.0 -6.0 -7.8 0.3 0.5 0.8 0.9 1.9 4.5 5.1 6.9 28.0 26.4 11.6 10.0 16.4 16.4 2.4 2.4 39.9 39.8 34.8 34.7 28.5 28.4 6.3 6.3 5, 51 -11.9 -13.3 -9.5 -10.9 1.1 1.2 8.4 9.7 (h millions of U.S. dollars, unlcsr *mvisc specified) 175.4 178.6 184.5 190.5 195.8 -789.7 -832.1 -870.8 -905.7 -959.0 19.3 5.6 5.0 6.3 7.1 213.0 305.8 185.1 166.0 -187.0 .284.3 -17.7 -21.1 219.7 L40.6 3.0 2OL.O -973.3 12.5 -298.5 -21.3 32.7 244.8 279.9 295.1 214.4 188.3 177.2 -188.6 -213.1 -236.6 -16.8 -17.6 -18.5 126.6 13O.L L23.4 31.6 10.2 13.2 95.0 I19.9 110.2 -62.0 -83.0 -,,3.2 522.5 432.6 318.8 7.7 6.0 4.1 (h,mmtafGNP) 306.6 154.6 17.4 L23.2 124.5 14.1 110.4 .,43.7 -174.0 9.0 174.4 6.7 2.2 0.1 28.6 28.9 29.1 26.2 23.5 8.1 9.8 11.4 1 L.4 11.4 5.5 8.5 8.5 8.5 8.5 15.0 10.6 9.2 6.3 3.6 LO.9 12.0 11.5 7.7 2.4 11.8 11.9 8.2 6.2 4.4 -1.0 0.2 3.4 L.5 -2.0 23.4 11.4 8.5 33 2.1 2.8 -0.7 Sources: Lesotho authorities: ad Fund destimates and projcctiom li Fiscal year b-+nninS in April. 2, Tltis scenario is illwtralive only. 3, Also capturs movements in OK non-BasoOm migrant scheme transfers fa which no data M wailable. 4, The pmjated in- in private se&or raving and invcstmad in ,999/2000 rdleds Ihe c&ct of the anticipated reconrtlmdion ofprivate propatic~ dnmaged during the September ,998 civil unrest. 51 Leaolbo Higblmds Water Project (LHWP). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTlbk 6. Lcralbo: Msdi”m.Tcml Econenis PImpCC~ witb Msuurss, 19%99-2cmm I/U 1999199 ,999,oo 2033,Ol 200*102 *oozm, 2w3104 Rev. Pmj. Proj. Roj. Pmj. Fmj. Pmj. mlpul and picss Rd GDP RCd GNP GDP ddhtor NomiMI GNP (in ndlimu Of n!AOti) FiCd acCc.““U Rcvmuc clatoms mve”“S Noncu,olrd ,CVC”“E Total grants Told cxpmditws 2nd “d 1cndbg DQmssuuuy fudsd sxpcndburc Ks‘mnl cxpcndirm Crpitd cxpcndihlrc F.xtsm.“y funded capital sxpmdNrc Overa bahss (before wan&) ovsrau brhnnrc (aocrpnu) Fcegn fuunCin8 rhmcalis onming I”vcs!nlc”lmd rawng 41 bl”CSmlcnl Public Ptialc l.mw 5, Grms nationrl men* (d”di remillancc3, Public P!iv.k wxlual pCm”llgE sbmgc. “nkm otbhcwiw apcs*cd, -5.4 0.2 1.0 1.7 2.3 2.9 -9.1 L.1 1.8 2.0 2.3 2.2 7.8 6.4 s.9 s.5 4.6 4.3 6.139.5 6.603.0 7.LLS.S 7.6S8.8 8,197.O 8.742.6 (bl psrccntigs OfGNp, 175.4 -789.7 II.3 223.0 L8S.L -187.0 -17.7 219.7 3.” 216.8 32.7 30.0 8.9 28.6 81 5.5 15.0 10.9 11.8 -1.0 26.0 26.2 11.5 no 11.0 11.0 3.5 3.3 L4.0 14.4 10.8 11.4 3.2 3.0 Soursu. Lssotbo rutlwritics; and Fund slaifdmakr md projsstionr. L, Ficr, yCar bCgiMing in Apd. u Tbk rccnrno is iuurv~livc oniy as 07s macrocrowmic hmcwart “ID, would lmdcrpbl tbc “SXI pmm wodd bc dewlOped by *c u*wiac. wh *c aslmlanss offutwc Fund mission3 10 Lpo*o. 3, Alp0 C1pmS~ rrmvSnlC”b in tbs no”-Brsotbo migml rsbsms lmsfcn, far wbicb no data are .wailnbls. 4, The projcctcd insrslrc in private ~ccm s&g and invcstmcnt in 1999/*000 r~Occt3 tbr cffccf oftbc mticipatsd ,Ccm.twEliD” ofprivalc propcllicn &mgs* during tbs Ssplcmbcr ,998 CiIll UNSSI. Si Lzrotbo Higblmdr War Project (IHUW Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 32 - Lesotho: Relations with the Fund As ofMay 31, 1999 1. Membership Status: Joined: 07/25/1968; Article VIII II. General Resources Account: SDR Million %Ouota Quota 34.90 100.0 Fund Holdings of Currency 31.37 89.9 Reserve position in Fund 3.53 10.1 JJI. SDR Department: Net cumulative allocation Holdings 3.74 0.85 %AllocatiQn 100.0 22.8 IV. Outstanding Purchases and Loans: Structural Adjustment Facility (SAF) arrangements Enhanced Structural Adjustmen Facility (ESAF) arrangements SDR Mtlti 1.36 13.99 %Ouota 3.9 40.1 V. Financial Arrangements: Approval Expiration Type -!YhLL- -D&L Stand-By 09/23/1996 0912211997 Arrangement Stand-By 07/3 l/l995 07/30/1996 Arrangement Stand-By 09/23/1994 07/3 111995 Arrangement Amount Approved Amount Drawn 7.17 0.00 7.17 0.00 8.37 0.00 APPENDIX I VI. Projected Obligations to Fund:(SDR Million; based on existing use of resources and present holdings of SDRs): Overdue Forthcoming 04/30/1999 1999 2Qi!!l 2001mm Principal 0.0 2.9 3.9 3.4 2.9 1.8 Charges/interest 0.0 0.1 0.1-.LLlo.1--!2J Total 0.0 3.0 4.0 3.5 3.0 1.9 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 33 . APPENDIX I VU. Exchange Rate Arrangement Lesotho’s currency, the loti (plural, maloti), continues to be pegged at par to the South African currency, the rand. For the 12-month period ended February 1999, the nominal effective exchange rate (excluding the rand) depreciated by 18.4 percent, and the real effective exchange rate depreciated by about 12.7 percent, according to preliminary calculations (based on composition of partner countries, excluding South Africa). The Central Bank of Lesotho (CBL) deals with commercial banks mainly in South African rand. As ofMay 27, 1999, the rand (maloti) rate per U.S. dollar was M 6.275. VIII. Article IV Consultation The Executive Board concluded the 1997 Article IV consultation (SM/98/10) on February 4. 1998. Ix. Technical Assistance Mission: taxation (value-added tax (VAT)) FAD short term 1992-96 Mission: taxation (income and sales tax) LEG short term 1993-95 Mission: bank operations MAE short term 1995 Advisor: governor of the CBL MAE long term 1995-98 Mission: organizational issues MAE short term 1995 Mission: bank supervision MAE short term 1995 Mission: taxation (sales tax/VAT) FAD short term 1996 Mission: government financial management FAD short term I996 Mission: multisector statistics mission STA short term 1996 Mission: balance of payments statistics STA short term 1996 Mission: banking supervision MAE short term 1997 Advisor: government expenditure management FAD long term 1997-98 Advisor: banking supervision MAE long term 1998-99 Advisor: national accounts STA long term 1998-99 Advisor: governor of the CBL MAE long term 1998-99 X. Resident Representative: None Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 34 - APPENDIX II Lesotho: Financial Relations with the World Bank Group The attached table summa&es the World Bank’s lending operations. As of April 30, 1999, IDA had approved 26 credits amounting to US16292.8 million, ofwhich US%190.7 million was disbursed; US%35.3 million was canceled; and USIE63.9 million remains undisbursed. An IBRD loan of US%I 10 million was approved for phase IA of the Lesotho Highlands Water Project (LHWP) in July 1991; of this amount, US$70.0 million has been disbursed; US$36 million canceled; and US$4.0 million remains undisbursed. A second IBRD loan of $45 million was approved June 1998 for Phase IB of the Lesotho Highlands Water Project. The Bank Group’s first operation in Lesotho was approved in February 1966. To date, the World Bank has financed six projects in education; five in roads and roads rehabilitation and maintenance; four each in private sector development and water supply; two each in rural development, urban development, and health/population; and one each in agriculture, infrastructure, and land management/conservation. Currently, the IFC has no outstanding investments in Lesotho. However, the IFC African Project Development Facility (APDF) has completed two projects by providing project appraisals and assistance in the mobilization of loan financing to (a) Maseru Private Hospital, a USO3.4 million project to build and operate a 3 I-bed private general and maternity hospital; and (b) Pioneer Plastics Limited, a US%O.5 million project to install facilities to manufacture polyethylene film bags, the first of its kind to be established in Lesotho. In addition, the IFC contributed to industrial reform in Lesotho through its Foreign Investment Advisory Service (FIAS). Studies and technical advice by FIAS contributed to the design of the ongoing IDA-assisted Industry and Agro-industry Development Project and to the Privatization and Private Sector Development Project. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicLesotho: World Bank Lending Operations (As of&xi, 30. 199% in mi,,im ofUS. datlan, unkss othmuiw indicated) SStO‘ Disbursed Credits Disbursing Credits and Loam Total Approved Total Total Disbumed kremt krcmt of ma, original atnoun Disbursed 1121 Driginalmount Disbursed 21 Undirbumd 2, 03 = Credit Loans Disbursed and “ndisbursed OfTotal Disbursed md (4 (B) CC) CD) (0 CD) + w W=@)*(c) (WOHW UHWO) Dirburred Undisbwxd Cwdiw Education Tranipll31 A@culturab,md manag-t and CONCNMiD” Industy Water supply Urban development Health and population l.esaolo Highlands water ProjeLl Pri”atiZ.diO” Total 31.5 34.6 33.3 34.4 46.2 49.8 24.5 12.5 22.1 33.2 46.5 45.6 77.7 84.4 57.7 46.9 79.8 80.0 22.1 21.4 18.0 21.4 34.4 13.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 34.4 13.5 13.5 6.5 5.8 21.0 19.3 1.9 21.2 27.5 25.1 27.0 6.0 5.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 6.0 5.I 5.L 26.4 10.8 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 26.4 10.8 LO.8 3.5 4.2 12.1 10.7 2.3 13.0 15.6 14.9 17.2 9.8 10.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 9.8 10.4 10.4 0.0 0.0 11.0 6.4 4.5 10.9 11.0 6.4 10.9 152.7 I17.4 140.1 73.3 63.9 137.2 292.8 190.7 254.6 5.2 3.6 9.6 7.2 1.9 1.4 4.2 2.9 5.7 4.6 4.0 2.8 2.4 2.9 73.1 68.1 I z Loam Lesotho Highlands Water Projecl 0.0 0.0 155.0 70.3 48.7 I19.0 155.0 70.3 119.0 26.9 31.9 100.0 100.0 Total credits and ,om 152.7 117.4 295.1 143.6 112.6 256.2 447.8 261.0 373.6 7.1 20.1 Repayrunts Cancellation 13.0 -35.3 -36.0 -71.3 Total obligation 104.4 136.5 240.9 Soura: IBRD. 11 original principal ,es cancellations. 2, Re”cas adjument for exchange rate movements 31 bafra$xunure Proja md Road Rehabilitation and Maintenance Project. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 36 - APPENDIX III Lesotho: Statistical Issues The authorities have provided data to the Fund during missions and between consultations. However, fiuther technical assistance is required to make improvements in the reported data. The most recent multisector statistical mission in July 29-August 14, 1996 addressed these issues. National accounts The Lesotho Bureau of Statistics (BSL) compiles annual estimates of GDP by kind of economic activity at current prices. Current price estimates of GDP by type of expenditure and income category are also produced, with one major component of each estimated as a residual. The income and outlay account, the capital accumulation account, and the rest of the world current account are also prepared. Estimates of GDP at constant I980 prices are compiled by kind of economic activity and type of expenditure. Fund missions typically make estimates of current-year national accounts and projections of Wure years, in consultation with the relevant institutions. Sometimes, adjustments to historical data are made on the basis of available information. The production of other macroeconomic indicators, such as a monthly or quarterly industrial production index, is needed to monitor developments during the year. Data on employment and other labor market indicators are missing. The 1996 STA mission noted that the national accounts data still suffered from several substantial shortcomings, namely, the nonavailability of basic underlying data in a number of areas and the need to make extrapolations on partial coverage; the use of historical and outdated input/output relationships, in many instances; the use of old benchmarks estimates in deriving current series; and the use of inappropriate trend indicators, in a few instances. In terms of the GDP by expenditure categories, a major problem is the derivation of estimates of household expenditure as a residual. Also there are major weaknesses in the timeliness and coverage of imports, as well as in their disaggregation by commodity. In addition, as the constant price series were constructed in 1980 prices, there is an urgent need to change the base year. In order to facilitate the necessary improvements and expansion of the national accounts and related basic statistics, long-term technical assistance, in the form of a resident advisor, was provided for one year beginning in July 1998. Prices Owign to a lack of staff resources, the BSL currently produces only a consumer price index (CPI); no other indices, such as a producer price index (PPI), wholesale price index (WF’I), export index, or import index are in production or are planned; an import index was formerly maintained but discontinued in 199 1. The Lesotho CPI is not a monthly series but is compiled quarterly and produced in a timely mamer in January, April, July, and October of each year. The index is compiled using weights from the 1994/95 Household Budget Survey (HBS), with a base of April 1997=100. In addition to the nationwide index, separate indices are compiled and published for high-income households (i.e., households earning more than M 500 according to the 1994/95 HBS) in Maseru and for low-income households (households earning less than M 500) in all six lowland towns. The index for high- income households is based on different weights than the low-income and nationwide indices. The Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public, - 37 - APPENDIX III CPI is now based on the Laspeyres index formula. The 1996 STA mission found that the quality of the index is good generally and compares favorably with the CPI for other countries in the region. Government Finance statistics Data on government revenue (and grants), current and capital expenditure, and financing of the deficit/surplus are provided by the Ministry of Finance to missions. However, it would be us&11 if these data were reported to AFR on a regular (monthly) basis and with Ii&her disaggregation. There is scope for tirther improvement in the reporting of current and capital expenditure data. Government finance statistics (GFS) have been reported to STA for publication in the 1998 GFS Yearbook through 1997. However, component details for some important aggregates are lacking in the data from 1993 onward. Monetary statistics Until September 1997, money and banking statistics were compiled in accordance with the Fund’s statistical methodology and reported to STA with a lag of three to four months. Between September 1997 and June 1998, the compilation of monetary statistics was interrupted as a result of the failure of the information system in the largest commercial bank. The reporting of monetary data to STA was renewed in July 1998; however, data are reported with long lags, and there are also concerns about reliability of commercial banks’ analytical accounts. The data reported to AFR are highly aggregated. There is an urgent need to improve the quality and timeliness of the monetary data used for monitoring the financial program with the Fund. A multisector statistics mission that visited Lesotho during July 29-August 14, 1996 considered several possible approaches to estimating foreign currency cocirculation, and it presented a numerical exercise on the estimation of South African rand that circulate in Lesotho as legal tender. Balance of payments and external debt Detailed balance of payments statistics are prepared by the Central Bank of Lesotho on a quarterly basis, and the time lag has been recently reduced to three to six months. However, these data are not reported to AFR or STA on a timely basis for dissemination in the Fund’s statistical publications. The quality of the data could be improved, in particular by developing a dependable method of estimating imports, given the porous border with South Africa, and by monitoring private foreign investment. The technical assistance mission in April-May 1996 made a number of recommendations that addressed these issues, as well as the recording of workers’ remittances, the treatment of transactions related to the Lesotho Highlands Development Authority, and other important items in the balance of payments accounts. Estimates and projections for the remainder of the current year and future years are prepared by Fund missions in consultation with the Central Bank of Lesotho. The compilation of detailed external debt data is less than satisfactory. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 38 - APPENDIX III Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public.a -39. APPENDIX Iv Lesotho: Selected Social nnd Demographic Indicators Population Population (1996; in millions) 2.0 Annual rate of growlh (1989-96) 2.2 Population 14 years and under (percent) 40 Density (persons per 1,000 hectares) 685 Population characteristics (I 997) Life expectancy at birth (jars) Male (years) Female (years) Infant mortality @er thousand) Crude death rate (per thousand) Crude birth rate (per thousand) Fertility rate Access to safe water (1995) Percentage of population Urban R”l”l Education Adult literacy rate (in percent; 1995) 71 MdC 81 Female 62 Enrollment rate (I 993-95) Primary school (net) Male Female Secondary school (gross) Pupil-teacher ratio in pximary school (1993-95) 65 60 71 28 49 56 57 55 74 10.5 31.9 4.6 60.0 64.0 60.0 Health Population per physician (1990-94) Population per nurse (1993) hmnunization rate @ercent under 12 months) Measles (1996) DPT (1993) 24,095 3,000 100 52 Distribution of land Percentage of arable land I960 1996 Labor force (I 996) Total (millions) Female @cent) 13.0 10.5 0.825 36.9 Sources: AJrrcan I)evelopmenf Indrcators 1998199, World Bank; and World Development Indicators, 1999, World kla”k. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicI - , Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public