DOCUMENT OF INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND NOT FOR PUBLIC USE I.,‘,“,“,, MASTER FILES ROOM HQ C-525 0450 sMf99/3 09 CONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION December 27, 1999 To: Members of the Executive Board From: The Secretary Subject: Bangladesh-Staff Report for the 1999 Article IV Consultation Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staff report for the 1999 Article IV consultation with Bangladesh, which will be brought to the agenda for discussion on a date to be announced. Mr. Molho (ext. 38558) and Mr. Arnason (ext. 38867) are available to answer technical or factual questions relating to this paper prior to the Board discussion. Unless the Documents Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the WTO Secretariat on Wednesday, January 5, 2000; and to the Asian Development Bank and the European Investment Bank, following its consideration by the Executive Board. Att: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicCONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND BANGLADESH Staff Report for the 1999 Article IV Consultation Prepared by the StaffRepresentatives for the 1999 Consultation with Bangladesh Approved by Mario I. Blejer and Ishan Kapur December 23,1999 0 The 1999 Article IV consultation discussions were held in Dhaka during October 13-26, 1999. 0 The staff team consisted of Messrs. Molho (Head), Arnason (both APD), Dalsgaard (PDR), and Ms. Dabla-Norris (FAD). Mr. Hicks, the Resident Representative, assisted the mission, The team collaborated with the World Bank resident mission. Mr. Watal (Assistant to the Executive Director) attended some meetings. 0 The team met with Finance Minister Kibria, Principal Secretary to the Prime Minister Samad, Finance Secretary Khan, Governor Farashuddin, and other officials of the Ministry of Finance, Bangladesh Bank, other ministries and agencies. The team also met with representatives of the banking system, the business community, non-governmental organizations, trade unions, and official donors. l Bangladesh has accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2,3 and 4, and maintains an exchange system that is free of restrictions on payments and transfers for current international transactions. 0 Bangladesh reports core minimum economic data on a regular basis. However, there remain significant weaknesses in the areas of government finance and balance of payments statistics, which could potentially hamper effective surveillance. Greater political commitment to transparency in the classification of government transactions will be necessary to address these problems in a timely manner. l The principal authors of this report are Messrs. Molho and Arnason. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2- Contents Page I. Introduction and Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 II. Recent Developments and Short-Term Outlook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5 III. Policy Discussions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..~......... 12 Iv. Staff Appraisal ..,............,...........,.................,..,..............................................,... . . . . . . . . . . . . 24 Text Boxes 1. The Poverty Challenge ..................................................................................................... 4 2. The 1999/2000 Budget .................................................................................................. 14 3. Fiscal Transparency and Accountability and Economic Performance.. .......................... .17 4. Banking System Problems ............................................................................................. 19 5. Recent Trade Policy Developments ............................................................................... 21 6. Proposed Actions to Pave the Way for PRGF Discussions ............................................. 23 Charts 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. Growth and Inflation ....................................................................................................... .6 External Sector Developments ......................................................................................... 7 Fiscal Developments ....................................................................................................... .8 Monetary Developments ................................................................................................ 10 Exchange Rates and Official Reserves.. ......................................................................... 11 Tables 1. Selected Economic and Financial Indicators. 1996/97-199912000 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. Balance of Payments, 1996/97- 1999/2000 .. :. ................................................................ .28 Central Government Operations, 1996/97- 1999/2000 .................................................... 29 Monetary Survey, 1996/97- 1999/2000 .......................................................................... .30 Medium-Term Projections, 1998/99-2005/06: Baseline Scenario.. ................................ .3 1 Medium-Term Projections, 1998/99-2005/06: Adjustment Scenario .............................. 32 hexes I. Medium-Term Scenarios ............................................................................................... 33 II. Fund Relations .............................................................................................................. .3 5 III. International Comparison of Selected Social Indicators ................................................. 37 Iv. Relations with the World Bank Group ........................................................................... 38 V. Relations with the Asian Development Bank ................................................................ .41 VI. Statistical Issues ........................................................................................................... .44 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3- L INTRODUCTIONAM) BACKGROUND 1. Bangladesh’s policy performance over the last decade has been mixed. In the early 199Os, considerable progress was made in stabilizing and restructuring the economy with the aid of successive SAP and ESAP arrangements. Prudent macroeconomic management and measures to liberahze the exchange and trade system and the financial sector helped lower inflation, promoted rapid export growth and financial deepening, and restored external viability. However, the momentum of reform dissipated and financial discipline was eroded during a prolonged period of political strife and civil disturbances in the mid-1990s. As a result, inflation picked up and the level of reserves fell from more than $3 billion in mid-1995 to $2 billion or 3 months of imports, by June 1996. Inflationary pressures eased somewhat following elections and a change of government in the summer of 1996, which led to a lull in political confrontation. However, the macroeconomic situation has remained fragile and the building of political consensus for much-needed reforms has been slow. Deep-seated weaknesses in governance have continued to hamper the mobilization and effective use of public resources, undermined the performance of state-owned enterprises (SOEs) and the banking system, discouraged entrepreneurial activity, and prevented the effective allocation of scarce private savings and donor funds. 2. Investment and growth have, therefore, remained laclduster and progress in reducing the country’s pervasive poverty has been slow. With annual output growth unable to break out of a range of 4-5 percent, per capita income growth has been modest and the income gap relative to other countries in the region remains large. Although the incidence of poverty declined somewhat during the first half of the 199Os, and important social indicators have seen some improvement, there is evidence of increasing income inequality, with more than half the population continuing to be classified as poor (Box 1). 3. Following the massive floods iu July-September 1998, Bangladesh requested emergency assistance from the Fund (as well as other offkial sources) on the understanding that the government would soon adopt a reinvigorated reform program that could be supported by an ESAF arrangement. The Executive Board approved an emergency loan of SDR 98.1 million (25 percent of quota) on October 28, 1998, at the same time it concluded the 1998 Article IV consultation (EBM/98/109). On that occasion, Directors commended the authorities for the macroeconomic performance Bangladesh had achieved in the face of regional turmoil, and for their prompt and effective response to the floods. Directors welcomed the authorities’ intention to adopt an ESAP-supported program and underscored the critical importance of reforms in regard to revenues, the banking system, and the state-owned enterprise sector in paving the way for an ESAP. 4. Progress in implementing reforms in these areas has, however, been disappointingly slow. As a result, investor confidence has remained weak and there are signs of a waning of donor support. In the meantime, a worsening political situation has begun to narrow the window of opportunity for the adoption of a credible reform program. The current parliament’s constitutionally mandated term is not due to expire until mid-2001, and the government has indicated that it will stay in office until about March 2001, at which Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4- Box 1. The Poverty Challenge Reducing poverty is the central development challenge in Bangladesh. According to a recent World Bank study, in 1995-1996,36 percent of Bangladesh’s population was rated as very poor (below the national poverty line, measured in relation to the cost of basic needs), while 53 percent of the population was classified as poor. l/ There had been some decline in the incidence of poverty from the start of the decade, when 43 percent and 59 percent of the population had been classified as very poor or poor, respectively. The incidence of poverty in Bangladesh is uneven. Poverty is more prevalent in rural than in urban areas, a disparity that increased in the 1990s. Poverty rates are also higher among rural households headed by women than by men, and lack of education and land holdings further contributes to the incidence of poverty. Notwithstanding the decline in the poverty rate during the first half of the 199Os, income inequality as measured using Gini coefficients increased in both rural and urban areas. The widening of inequality has been particularly striking in urban areas. The incidence of intense poverty in Bangladesh seems to be of the same order of magnitude as that of other South Asian countries, including India (35 percent), Pakistan (34 percent), and Sri Lanka (35 percent) (Annex III). Compared to East Asian countries, the rate of intense poverty is lower than in Lao P.D.R (46 percent) and Vietnam (5 1 percent), but much higher than in China (7 percent), Indonesia (15 percent) and Thailand (13 percent). The comparison with Indonesia, another predominantly rural and densely populated country, is instructive. The two countries had approximately equal levels of GDP per capita in the early 1970s. This suggests that rapid and sustained growth, achieved with the help of prudent macroeconomic policies and outward-oriented reforms, could make a significant contribution toward poverty reduction. However, the average annual growth rate of 4-5 percent recorded by Bangladesh in recent years would be insufficient to make a rapid dent in overall poverty. Extrapolations indicate that, to raise annual per capita income from $350 in 1998/99 to $650 by 20 10 and to between $1200-1300 by 2020, GDP would have to grow at an annual rate in excess of 7% percent for the entire period. 11 “Bangladesh. From Counting the Poor to Making the Poor Count”, World Bank April 1998. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-5- point it will hand over power to a caretaker government to oversee the next parliamentary elections. However, the coalition of opposition parties has recently escalated its campaign of nationwide strikes (harfals) and street demonstrations in an attempt to force the government to resign and set an early date for elections. Against this background, the policy discussions focussed on the need to ensure that macroeconomic discipline is maintained in the period ahead and that the reforms required to address the most critical weaknesses in governance are adopted before the electoral campaign begins in earnest. II. RECENTDEVELOPMENTSANDSHORT-TERMOUTLOOK 5. The economic recovery from last year’s floods remains uneven, although output and inflation performance appear to have suffered only a small setback during 1998/99 (July-June). Real GDP is estimated to have risen by 4.2 percent in 1998199 (Chart 1 and Table l), a significant upward revision from what was projected in the government’s emergency adjustment program. However, this outturn largely reflects a bumper boro rice crop in mid-1999, which more than offset earlier flood-related crop losses, and a strong boost to construction activity in the latter part of 1998/99 resulting from post-flood reconstruction. The growth of value added in manufacturing, by contrast, slowed to 1.6 percent, from around 9 percent in 1997/98, owing in part to a sustained weakening in export performance (see below).The flood-induced surge in food prices pushed up the rate of inflation from an average of 7 percent in 1997/98 to 9 percent in 1998/99. However, the 12-month headline inflation fell from a peak of 12.7 percent in December 1998 to 7.7 percent in June 1999, as the food supply situation improved and non-food inflation continued to moderate. 6. Export growth slowed to 3 percent in U.S. dollar terms in 1998/99, or less than a fifth of the average earlier in the decade. While this slowdown was initially due to the floods, it was aggravated by recurrent power shortages, inadequate port facilities, and other infiastructural bottlenecks. The recovery of Bangladesh’s major export industries-which are heavily concentrated in garments, knitwear and a few primary commodities-was, moreover, slowed by deteriorating competitiveness stemming from the earlier depreciation of regional currencies as well as by compressed profit margins resulting from the increased cost of production and the fall in commodity prices. With a sharp rise in food grain imports, the current account deficit (excluding official capital grants) widened from 0.6 percent of GDP in 1997/98 to nearly 2 percent of GDP in 1998/99, despite buoyant workers’ remittances (Chart 2 and Table2). Notwithstanding higher aid inflows, official reserves fell from $1.7 billion at end-June 1998 to $1.5 billion at end-June 1999, the equivalent of 2.1 months of imports of goods and non-factor services. 7. The government’s post-flood budget, adopted in October 1998, aimed to accommodate the costs of rehabilitation in the aftermath of the floods. Notwithstanding the introduction of some revenue raising meabures, the overall budget deficit was targeted to widen from 4.2 percent of GDP in 1997/98 to 4.9 percent in 1998/99. The actual deficit is now estimated to have exceeded 5 percent of GDP, as revenues fell short of the post-flood target, reflecting mainly the poor performance of VAT and customs duties stemming fi-om disruptions in industrial activity and imports (Chart 3 and Table 3). Total expenditure was Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 6 - CHART 1. BANGLADESH GROWTH AND INFLATION 6 (percent change) Non-agriculture / \ / / \ / \ \ /-- / / \, /y _--w--w_ -.S -\ / . \ / . / . / \ . . . /I \ / ‘I Agriculture I I I I 1 1 I I 90191 91192 92193 93194 94195 95f96 9619-I 97/98’ 98199 :onsumer Price Inflation 12 month percent change) - General - - - Food ,....~......I...........1......~~~~.”~.’..~~~~~‘~~~~~~~~ 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 6 20 I5 IO 5 0 -5 Source: Bangladesh authorities. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-7- CHART 2. BANGLADESH EXTERNAL SECTOR DEVELOPMENTS 131 ,550O 6.0, ..r- ,--.-ln---.--~--~ --J ..>I n~.-~- 16.0 a- 6- 4500 5 - 4000 -3m - 3000 - 2500 -2oco 1 r I 1 I I I 5 9W91 91192 92193 93194 9495 95196 96l97 91198 98l99 “OQ I 11 I I I I I 1 2S 90191 91i92 92193 93194 94195 95196 96/97 97l98 98l99 I 3alance of Payments JII percent of GDP) - - Capital account balance - Overall balance 17 Cwtmt account baiance , ‘\ -w,/ \ \ .- - 9 r?‘ \ \ \ / L-W- 0 -- 0 I I I I I I I I 3W91 91l92 92l93 93f94 94l95 95196 96/97 97/98 9819 Source: Bangladesh authorities. woncers mxninances ana Ala mxlom (In percent of GDP) \ Aid inflows 5.5 5.0 4.: 4.0 1, - - 4.5 4.0 /’ / / ,c i --# 3s J.., r I W-W~*FT ~~iflances -. - - . -. I /--- // / l/ r 3.0 /- --. / 7 / Y / / / / 0 . 3.0 xtemal Debt Debt service ratio 1 I I I t I I I IO/91 91l92 92193 93i94 94l95 9Sl96 96l97 97198 9889 !.5 10 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-8- 14 I2 Central Government Revenue (In percent of GDP) m Non&x revenue m Value aa&d tax BEXCiceTaX C~rloms duties 6 9ot91 91192 92193 93194 94195 95196 96/97 97/98 98/99‘ ' 5 20 15 10 S 0 10 8 6 9oi91 91192 92193 93194 94195 95196 96197 97/98 98199 O Central Government Overall Deficit 10 (In percent of GDP) msS Netforeignjinoncing 8 borrowingfiom domesfic banking system 6 I 90191 91192 92193 93194 94195 95196 96/97 97198 98199 -' CHART 3. BANGLADESH FISCAL DEVELOPMENTS Source: Bangladesh authorities. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-9- broadly in line with the post-flood target, with a slower-than-targeted implementation of the Annual Development Program (ADP) helping to offset overruns on interest payments, public sector salaries and pensions, and subsidies to loss-making SOEs. With slow project implementation keeping external aid inflows below target, government reliance on domestic bank financing rose to 1 percent of GDP in 1998/99, well above the post-flood target. 8. Monetary policy during 199W99 was also primarily geared toward accommodating the impact of the floods. The monetary targets incorporated in the emergency assistance program envisaged an acceleration of broad money growth to 12% percent in 1998/99, more than allowing for the expected rise in inflation and a brisk expansion of domestic credit (Table 4). Bangladesh Bank lending to agricultural banks and other specialized credit institutions was targeted to increase significantly in the early part of 1998/99 to provide for farmers’ temporary rise in working capital needs, but that increase was to be largely unwound by the end or’ 1998/99. In the event, both bank credit to the government and Bangladesh Bank credit to agricultural banks remained well above the post- flood targets through June 1999 (Chart 4). Total disbursements of agricultural loans from the banking system nearly doubled from their pre-flood annual average to about 1.4 percent of GDP in 1998/99. Although total bank credit to the private sector undershot the official monetary program target, net domestic assets of the banking system and broad money exceeded their target levels for end-June 1999, while net foreign assets failed to rise as programmed and declined. 9. Exchange rate policy has continued to be based on discrete, periodic adjustments of the taka in light of movements in the real effective exchange rate (REER) and other macroeconomic indicators. After having been devalued against the US. dollar in two steps by a cumulative 4% percent during 1998/99, the taka was devalued by 2 percent in July 1999 and by another 3 percent in November. However, notwithstanding a partial recovery of key trading partner and competitor currencies from their troughs associated with the Asian crisis, these adjustments have been insufficient to reverse the real effective appreciation that had occurred during 1997 and the first half of 1998. Thus, even after taking into account the most recent devaluation and the continued decline in the rate of inflation (see below), the REER as of end-November 1999 remained some 8 percentage points above the end-1996 level (Chart 5). 10. In the structural areas, the main improvements over the last year have occurred in the regulatory and legal framework for the banking system. Loan classification and provisioning regulations were tightened in January 1999 in order to bring them more into line with international standards. In July 1999, the interest rate ceilings for credit to small and cottage industries and agriculture were removed, leaving export credits as the only category still subject to interest rate ceilings. In the legal area, the courts confirmed Bangladesh Bank’s authority to remove loan defaulters from the boards of directors of private domestic banks (PDBs). This strengthened incentives for borrowers to reschedule overdue loans, with the result that the incidence of nonperforming loans in a number of PDBs began to decline. However, there has been no sign of improved management in the nationalized commercial’ banks (NCBs) and specialized credit institutions, over which Bangladesh Bank’s effective Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 10 - CHART 4. BANGLADESH MONETARY DEVELOPMENTS Broad Money and Credit Growth :Annual percent change) - Domestic credit - - - Private credit 0 Broadmoney Contribution to Reserve Money Growth In percent) / \. / 1 60 i 40 . 20 4 0 -20 -40 -6o 1995 / \ \ / / / f-J \ \ /. r-l&- -0 14 12 IO B 6 1996 1997 1998 1999 I Reserve money growth --- Netdomesticassets - Net foreign assets 1996 1997 1998 1999 35 30 25 60 -40 -60 1 Short term Interest Rates and Inflation I l4 ,(In percent) IO 8 6 . / / -. - - - 90-day T-bill I/ 4 - 30-day T-bill 21 - CPI 12-month change 2 0 l.......---.‘.--.‘..-..-‘....-.-..-.’-..--’....-“.-.‘.-” -2 199s 1996 1997 1998 1999 -2 Source: Bangladesh authorities. l/ Bangladesh Bank bill rates till October 1998. 2/ Bangladesh Bank bill rates till October 1998. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 11 - CHART 5. BANGLADESH EXCHANGE RATES AND OFFICIAL RESERVES 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 110 105 100 95 90 85 80 75 3.5 3.0 2.5 2.0 1.5 1 .o bilateral Exchange Rates 20 em- Take per US dollar - Indian rupee per US dollar ..T --\ ‘- \ L---. b- 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 Effective Exchange Rate (index 1990=100) l/ --- Nominal - Real 25 30 35 40 45 50 110 105 100 95 90 85 \ 80 1993 1994 Offkial Reserves 2/ (In billions of U.S. dollars) 2.5 I I993 1994 1995 1996 I997 1998 1999 1 .o Sources: Data provided by the Bangladesh authorities; IMF, Information Notice System and International Financial Statistics. I/ Downward movement indicates depreciation. 2/ Total official reserves minus gold. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-12- supervisory authority and enforcement capability are limited. As of end-June 1999, classified loans were close to 47 percent of total loans outstanding for the NCBs, 29 percent for the PDBs, 68 percent for the specialized credit institutions and 4 percent for foreign banks. 11. While bumper crops have underpinned rural incomes and helped reduce inflation to a yearcon-year rate of 3% percent as of October 1999, and the regional environment continues to improve, the macroeconomic outlook for Bangladesh is vulnerable. In light of the strong competitive pressures on exports, the staff project that, on current policies, manufacturing activity will remain subdued in 1999/2000 and GDP growth will remain around 4% percent, which is close to the average growth rate for the previous decade and significantly lower than the official target.’ While declining food imports, along with a weak demand for capital goods, should allow some narrowing of the current account deficit, in the absence of a pickup in the pace of structural reform, the capital account balance is liable to be depressed by slowing disbursement of project aid and weak foreign investment. The overall balance of payments position is, therefore, likely to remain fragile. A principal downside risk to this outlook is that political pressures and mounting civil unrest could lead to a further unwarranted easing of financial policies in anticipation of the elections, posing a serious threat to stability and growth. IIL POLICY DIKXJSXONS 12. The discussions focused on the policies required to consolidate macroeconomic stability, foster more rapid and sustainable growth and poverty reduction, and pave the way for possible discussions on a PRGF-supported program. The staffteam recommended a policy package consisting of tighter fiscal and monetary policies, a more flexible exchange rate policy geared to restoring and protecting competitiveness, and faster-paced reforms to improve transparency and accountability in economic management, strengthen the governance of SOEs and NCBs, and renew the momentum of trade liberalization. The team emphasized the overriding importance of early improvements in governance as a means to more effectively direct public funds toward poverty reduction and restore the confidence of the investor and donor communities. The authorities agreed that achievement of these objectives would be desirable. However, in their view, it was premature to tighten fiscal and monetary policies because domestic demand needed to be supported as long as external demand remained weak. They also questioned the advisability of accelerating the pace of structural reforms in the current political context and felt that a more measured, piecemeal approach, geared to limiting adverse political and social repercussions, was better-suited for the needs of Bangladesh. 13. The staff prepared two illustrative external medium-term scenarios to highlight the need for the early adoption of an ambitious adjustment and reform program. The baseline scenario shows how a continuation of current policies could lead to stagnating investment and economic growth and a further weakening of the external finances, which could jeopardize the achievement of the government’s economic objectives (Table 5 and Annex I). By contrast, ‘The 1999/2000 budget Eramework envisages a pick-up of growth to 6% percent, with inflation falling to 5 percent and official reserves rising to $1.8 billion by end-June 2000. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13 - policies along the lines proposed by the staff could maintain financial stability and bring about more rapid poverty alleviation through a progressive increase in the rate of economic growth to about 7 percent over the medium term (Table 6). A. Fiscal Policy and Public Sector Reforms 14. The 1999/2000 budget, which aims at reducing the overall deficit to 4.6 percent of GDP from about 5 percent in 1998/99, introduced important steps to improve revenue collection and root out corrnption in tax and customs administration. The staff team welcomed these actions, including the introduction of a large taxpayer unit (LTU), a uniform taxpayer identification number (TIN), and mandatory pre-shipment inspection (PSI). However, the team expressed concern that expected delays in their implementation, together with the poor profitability of SOEs, were likely to lead to a significant overshooting of the official budget deficit target (Box 2). These concerns were indeed being borne out by weaker-than-projected fiscal performance during the first five months of 1999/2000 (July-November), which had led to an escalating overrun on the government’s bank borrowing. In the absence of prompt measures to reverse these trends, the government’s bank borrowing seems set to grow by more than double the amount targeted in the budget. 15. To bring the full-year deficit back on track, the team urged the authorities to enact a mid-year package of corrective measures to raise an additional % percent of GDP of revenues during the second half of 1999/2000. This would have to be centered on prompt action to rationalize the prices of natural gas, electricity, fertilizer and petroleum products, including by adopting the price increases recently proposed by the state-owned petroleum company. While the authorities shared some of the team’s concerns, they were confident that the recent government bank borrowing was due mainly to a temporary dip in revenue collections, which would be made up as the commencement of the operation of the PSI system would lead to a strong pick-up in customs duty receipts in the second half of the year. 16. The authorities shared the stafPs concern that a strong effort was needed to maintain expenditures within the 1999L2000 budget target. Such an effort would be particularly important in light of a number of recently approved unproductive outlays that had not been explicitly provided for in the budget. These included the purchase of a squadron of MIG fighters, with financing through a supplier’s credit that was to be amortized over a number of years, and the subsidization of SOE wages. The team urged the authorities to postpone the purchase of military equipment, resist pressures for higher public sector wages, and curb open- ended subsidies for exporters and SOEs. The authorities said they would consider the possibility of expenditure cuts, but they thought that the budgeted contingency fund might be sufficient to cover the unbudgeted outlays. The team observed that ADP spending, which is slated to increase at a high rate in 1999/2000, would be an additional cause for concern, especially in light of the number of projects to be launched outside the budgetary process with financing from new suppliers’ credits. Low-priority ADP projects should, therefore, be deferred to limit total ADP spending to no more than 85-90 percent of the budget target, with clear priority Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14- Box 2. The 1999/2000 Budget The 1999/2000 budget envisages a reduction in the overall deficit to 4.6 percent of GDP, down ftom 5 percent of GDP in 1998/99. However, there are significaut risks of revenue shortfalls and expenditure overruns. According to staBprojections. oncurrenttrends,theoveralldeficitwauldrisetoabout5X percentofGDPin1999/2000. Tax Revenue Thebudgetincludesannmberofmeasurestobroadenthetaxbese,streamlinetbctaxandtariffstructuresand~~~tax and customs administration. With the help of these meames, tax revenue is targeted to increase kom 7.6 percent of GDP in 1998/99 to 8 percent in 1999/2000. However, some of the new measur eswillnotbeinforceuntilthesecondhalfof 1999/2000 and revenue performance during the first few months of the fiscal year has fallen significantly short of target On that~s,thestaffestimatesthafintheabsenceofadditionalmeesutes,thetaxnvermeratiocouldrisetonomorethan 7.7 percmt of GDP in 1999/‘2000. VAT cmdol;ker indire& lurea The VAT base uus extended in 1999aOOO to in&de 31 new retail items, including electricity, and a few professional services, but the resulting reven~ yield is likely to be limited The important transport and domestic textiles sectors were excluded &om the net and VAT was applied to electricity on a truncated base, which is unlikely to yield any more revenue than the old electricity duty. Measures in the initial draft budget to inch& doctors, lawyers and other professionals in the VAT were later withdrawn ctrptomr Du@ The average import duQ rate is expected to decline in 1999/2000. While the tariff structure was simplified, new exemptions were granted in a number of areas, and tzuiflh on raw materials and n&mediate goods reduced to support domestic indus&s Collections should be bolstered once the mand&ry pre-shipment inspection (PSI) system envisaged inthe budget becomes operational. However, with the PSI system expected to be in place at the earliest in Jammry 2000, customs duty receipts are likely to fall short of the budget target Income Tax The budget intmduced measumstorestructurepersonalincometaxslabs,simphfytaxpayment procedures, elimin& the exemption on interest earnings, snd further expand the scope of the withholding tax at source. However, no measures have been t&en to phase out the existing extensive exemptions and fiscal incentives that have eroded the tax base, and the exempt income threshold for the personal income tax was raised fium Tk 60,000 to Tk 75,000, thus ud ’ ’ J the progressivity of the tax system. Taz Ahthirtrda A sizeable revenue yield is envisaged front measures to strqthen tax administration, notably by establishing a Large Taxpayer Unit and a uuiform taxpayer identification number. However, delays in implement&on make it unlikely that these measures will produce a measurable yield duriug 1999L?OOO. Nontar mvenues Nontaxrevenues are budgetedto increme from 1.9 percent of GDP in 1998/99 to 2.4 percent of GDP in 1999/‘2000. Given thepoortinaucialperformance of the state-owned enterprises and the absence of an action plan to rationahze the current administered price regime, this target will be difficult to attain. Expenditures Current expenditures are budgeted to fall from 8 percent of GDP in 1998199 to 7% percent of GDP, largely due to declines in the level of tmnsfers aud subsidies, interest paymentq and allocations for operations and maintenance. The feasibility of restminiq current spend@ to the budgeted levels, however, appears questionable in light of growing domestic debt, and increesing pressures for higher wnges for SGE workers aud civil servants. Despite the waning effect of the floods, ADP spending is targeted to rise firm slightly less than 6 percent of GDP in 1998’99 to 6% percent of GDP in 1999/2000. While ADP spending outtums have traditionally fallen short of the budget target, the approval of some new suppliers’ credit-fmsnced projects outaide the budgetary process increases the risk of a sharp increase in ADP spend@ Non-ADP capital expenditures and net lending are also budgeted to incresse sharply, owing in large part to higher transfers to loss-making SOEs. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 15- given to infiastructursl development and basic health and education facilities. The authorities indicated that usual implementation delays were likely to keep the ADP spending rate close to 90 percent of the budgeted level, obviating the need for corrective action on their part at this point. 17. The staff team argued that, over the medium term, a strong effort would be necessary to bolster Bangladesh’s revenue-to-GDP ratiewhich is one of the lowest in the world-so as to ensure that the quasi-focal claims arising from the banking and SOE sectors could be met without crowding out social expenditure. In the team’s view, this would, at a minimum, require an increase in the revenue ratio by 3 percentage points of GDP over 1999/2000-2003/04; an even stronger revenue effort might be required to prevent an unsustainable rise in ublic previously projected. !i? debt if the banking and SOE restructurings turned out costlier than To meet this objective, significant steps to broaden the tax base should be taken beginning with the 2000/01 budget, including by expanding the VAT to transport, domestic textiles, and cottage industries. In subsequent years, the VAT net would need to be further expanded to cover a broader range of retail activities and professional services, tax and customs administration should continue to be streamlined, and exemptions now available across a number of taxes progressively phased out. The team found it disconcerting that, under the present industrial policy, the regime of open-ended tax holidays was set to be extended beyond the current expiration date of June 2000. The authorities agreed that the revenue/GDP ratio was indeed low and needed to rise, but expressed concern that a 3 percentage point increase would place too onerous a burden on private business. The stti team noted that the proposed measures to expand the tax base should eventually lead to a more equitable and less distortionary tax structure. 18. The staff team expressed concern about the lack of progress in the SOE sector. SOEs in the jute, textiles, and fertilizer sectors were unable to meet their wage payments and remained in default on their debts to the NCBs, while billing and collection problems continued to plague the energy, telecommunications, and water supply sectors. Yet reform and privatization had proceeded at a snail’s pace, reflecting resistance not only from trade unions but also from vested interests within the ministries responsible for traditional industries. The team found it worrying that the granting of wage increases was being considered for the workers of clearly bankrupt enterprises, and that SOEs in the fertilizer and power sectors- already incurring heavy losses despite continued access to natural gas at below-market prices- were about to invest in new foreign-funded projects. 19. To foster a more productive use of public funds and an environment more conducive to private activity, the team urged the authorities to develop and announce without delay a reform strategy encompassing the restructuring and privatixation of viable industrial SOEs and the closure of non-viable ones. In the energy sector, a long-term reform agenda needed to be adopted to rationalize tariffs, curtail system losses, and unbundle generation, transmission, and distribution operations, to ensure that no quasi-fiscal losses 2The costs of banking sector and SOE reforms are estimated to be on the order of 10 percent of GDP (see Chapter II in “Bangladesh-Selected Issues” (M/98/241, 10/6/98)). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 16- emerge from the ongoing foreign direct investment (FDI) by independent power producers (IPPs). The authorities agreed that more rapid progress should be made in reforming the SOEs. However, it would take time to build consensus for a comprehensive reform plan among the stakeholders involved. 20. The staff team highlighted the need to improve transparency and accountability in fiscal operations. Pervasive weaknesses in this area undermined the management of Bangladesh’s scarce public resources and posed a serious threat to continued donor support (Box 3). The team encouraged the-authorities to develop a plan to implement the Fund’s Code of Good Practices for Fiscal Transparency. The authorities agreed to review the code and assess the need for technical assistance for its implementation. B. Monetary Policy and Financial Sector Reforms 21. In the staff team’s view, monetary policy is on an excessively expansionary course. The Bangladesh Bank rate was reduced from 8 percent to 7 percent in August 1999, and the non-interest bearing cash reserve requirement was lowered by 1 percentage point in October, thus amplifying the effects of the continuing overruns on government borrowing from the banking system and on Bangladesh Bank lending to specialized credit institutions. Broad money growth accelerated to a year-on-year rate of almost 16 percent in October 1999, well in excess of the official monetary program target. In the team’s view, to help achieve the authorities’ inflation and reserves objectives, broad money growth would need to be restrained to no more than 10 percent in 1999/2000. To that end, domestic credit-particularly to the government- should be kept well within the official monetary program target, while leaving room for an adequate rate of growth of credit to the private sector. The team questioned the need for the planned expansion of the main agricultural bank’s branch network and of directed credit to agricultur+much of which will not be recovered-when the farm sector is no longer in distress and has yet to repay the debts incurred following the floods. The staff also cautioned about the currency and maturity risks associated with a recently introduced initiative to fund medium-term domestic lending through the issuance of government-guaranteed NCB certificates of deposit abroad. 22. The authorities were aware of the risks associated with an overly expansionary monetary policy, but also saw a need to accommodate the business sector’s demand for credit. In their view, the provision of adequate credit to the private sector was essential to boost investment and domestic activity, the more so given the continuing weakness of exports. As regards credit to agriculture, support for the rural sector was a central goal of the government’s economic policy and, although weak loan recovery had been a problem in the past, efforts were now under way to instil1 better discipline in the agricultural credit system. The staff team noted the high quasi-fiscal costs that would be incurred by continuing to channel credit through poorly governed banks and stressed that an appropriate policy package designed to address the difficulties faced by exports would be a sounder way to spur economic growth. In the team’s view, the alleged tightness of credit conditions was difficult to square with the recent maintenance of aggregate credit growth at a rate in excess of 13 percent, and was probably’ a reflection of banks’ welcome efforts to adopt more prudent lending practices, including the Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17- Box 3. Fiscal Transparency and Accountability, and Economic Performance Inadequate fiscal transparency and accountability have contributed to weaknesses in the management of key public institutions in Bangladesh. This has fostered a culture of taxpayer noncompliance, weakened public resource management, and undermined conditions for investment, productive economic activity, and poverty reduction. The main fiscal tmnspamncy and accountability issues and their broad significance for economic performance are as follows. Unclear boundaries between the government sector and tbe rest of the economy. Government intervention in the economy remains pervasive, with the state accounting for 20 percent of mamifactming output, most of the services provided by public utilities, and a large share of banking system assets. There are multiple interactions between central government fmances and the operations of other public sector entities, which are not properly scrutinized by Parliament. Discretion in tbe application of tax and customs laws. While some welcome steps have recently been taken toward strengthening tax and customs administration, the tax system is still chamcterized by extensive specific and ad hoc exemptions which have reduced tax collections, encouraged rent seeking, and discouraged entrepreneurial activity. Weaknesses in budget preparation, execution, and reporting. The planning and budgeting system is beset with sign&ant shortcomings in the prioritization and allocation of expenditure. The ADP budget process is undermined by the launching of projects throughout the fiscal year, which are approved outside the normal budgetary cycle and financed through suppliers’ credits obtained on non-transparent terms. Moreover, the budget is not framed within a consistent macroeconomic and medium-term expenditure framework. Parliamentary scrutiny of end-year expenditure outcomes is also weak and existing systems for monitoring, audit and evaluation are very deficient. Lack of availability of comprehensive information on fiscal activity. Reporting of fiscal data suffers from weaknesses with regard to timeliness, comprehensiveness and reliability. Comprehensive data on actual budget outtums are not produced and disseminated on an a timely basis, owing to extensive delays in identifying government transactions and problems with bank reconciliation. In addition, data on quasi- fiscal operations of the government, including operations of the enlarged public sector, and on debts with explicit or implicit government guarantees, are not compiled. Nontransparent financial arrangements between tbe government and public enterprises. Limited progress to date with privatization and restructuring of state-owned enterprises (SOEs), open-ended access to government subsidies and loan guarantees, and informally directed credits through poorly governed public banks, have led to a perpetuation of mismanagement in the jute, textiles, energy, and fertilizer sectors. Key SOEs in the power and fertilizer sectors are implicitly subsidised through the maintenance of artificially low administered prices for their natural gas inputs. Poor governance, including inadequate billing practices and pervasive corruption, have led to mounting system losses in the power sector, further weakening the public finances, undermining the efficient use of scarce energy resources, and eroding incentives for private investment. As a result, power shortages are a major constraint on economic growth. Lack of clarity over the mandate and authority of the central bank. Limited institutional autonomy with respect to the design and implementation of monetary and exchange rate policies, and the licensing and regulation of deposit taking institutions, has undermined the operational independence of the Bangladesh Bank. Important quasi-fiscal activities, including subsidized central bank lending to specialized credit institutions, have tended to erode the underlying financial position of the Bangladesh Bank without’ being subject to the scrutiny of the budgetary process. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 18- cessation of lending to defaulters. While greater selectivity by banks would inevitably ration out some borrowers, this was a key step toward improving the efficiency of financial intermediation. 23. The authorities stressed that they were firmly committed to rehabilitating the banking system. Significant progress was under way in strengthening the legal and regulatory framework (Box 4). The team welcomed the apparent improvement in loan recovery by some PDBs, but noted that a number of PDBs were still technically insolvent, while the condition of NCBs and specialized banks remained dismal. Although the level of nonperforming loans in many of these banks had breached 50 percent, there was no visible progress toward reforming their management practices. Indeed, it was disconcerting that a recent wave of rotations of staff in the government-owned banks had resulted in the transfer of a number of officers from the main agricultural bank to NCB management positions, for which they lacked appropriate qualifications. 24. To redress this situation, the staff team called for stronger and faster-paced reform in two areas. First, Bangladesh Bank should be granted more autonomy and authority to design and implement monetary policy and to license, supervise and regulate all banks, including by disciplining poorly performing managers and by closing banks that do not comply with prudential regulations. Second, bold steps would have to be taken to improve corporate governance in the NCBs and specialized banks, discontinue their quasi-fiscal operations, and prepare them for eventual privatization. This would need to include steps to enhance the accountability, integrity and professionalism of NCB managers, including by selecting them strictly on merit and by giving them operational autonomy, and a mandate to vigorously pursue defaulters and to rationalize staE and branches. The authorities agreed that the enforcement capability of the Bangladesh Bank had to be enhanced and noted that progress in this area was under way in the context of a technical assistance project supported by the World Bank. However, the prospects for a decisive reform of the NCBs and specialized banks seemed more remote, as the government was not yet fully prepared to abandon the practice of using these institutions to channel credits to preferred borrowers nor to surrender the privilege of treating their top officials as civil servants. 25. The team encouraged the authorities to consult the Code of Good Practices on Transparency in Monetary and Financial Policies for guidance in the process of revamping banking system legislation to enhance the effectiveness and independence of Bangladesh Bank. The authorities agreed to do so, with technical assistance from the MAE expert who has been posted as Advisor to the Governor of the Bangladesh Bank. C. External Sector Policies and Reforms 26. The staff team made a strong case for a move to a more flexible, market-based exchange rate system. In the team’s view, this would be essential to restore and protect external competitiveness, thereby encouraging export growth and diversification. The practice of relying on discrete adjustments of the taka had made exchange rate policy overly subject to political considerations. A more flexible exchange rate system along the lines recommended Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 19- Box 4. Banking System Problems Dimension of problem Bangladesh’s banking system problems are both systemic and chronic. In 1997, all four nationalized commercial banks @‘CBS), most of the private domestic banks (PDBs), and all four specialized banks were insolvent, a situation that has changed Little since. In June 1999, the average ratio of nonperforming loans to total loans amounted to 43 pcrccot. It is estimated that the cost of rehabilitating tbe banking system will be around 10 percent of GDP, as a result ofths assumption of bad SOE loans, the rctmnchment of redundant NCB staff, and the recapitabzation ofNCBs. The costs could be higher if reform continues to be delayed and/or if the macroeconomic situntion worsens. The risks to stability and growth posed by an unsound and undacapitalized banking system have been brought into sharp relief by the recent East Asian crises. These crises have clearly demonstrated the importance of prompt and decisive action to deal with banking system problems and tbe dangers of escalating costs when reforms are postponed. For the countries affected by crises, the cost of bank restructuring has been estimated at between 15 and 45 percent of GDP. Causes of the problems Poor corporate governance in both the NCBs and the PDBs. together with weaknesses m the legal framework and in the supervisory and enforcement capabilities of Bangladesh Bank (BB), have led to unchecked insider lending and l&d by sbareholding directors and managers in the PDBs and fostered the development ofa default culture throughout the economy. NCB performance has also been undemtined by political interference in the management of the banks, including government directed lending to tivored sectors. As of June 1999. the four NCBs were among the worst- performing banks, with their nonperforming loan ratios ranging from 40.JO percent Recent meeaurea The govcmment has, so far, taken a piecemeal approach to reform: . BB has progressively tightened its prudential and supervisory norms and regulations to bring them into line with intemational standards and has reorganized its operations to better monitor problem banks snd facilitate loan recovery. In the last year, BB has removed a number of loan defaulters from the Boards of Directors of PDBs, thereby improving incentives to reschedule overdue debts. This has led to an apparent reduction in the incidence ofnonperforming loans in some PDBs. However, Bangladesh Bank continues to lack the authority and independence to effectively discipline institutions that do not comply with its regulations. The government has ruled out the possibility of allowing non-compliant PDBs to fail. . New debt recovery and bankruptcy laws have been enacted and two financial loan courts and several speciahzed banlouptcy courts have been established to expedite the processing of court cases. While this, along with tougher restrictions on reschedulings, should facilitate loan recovery, Bangladesh Bank and the NCBs seem to lack the political cover and determination to pursue the largest defaulters. . Under a World Bank-supported technical assistance project, independent audits have been completed for all four NCBs, confhming the urgent need to rcatructure these institutions. However. the necessary followup actions have yet to be taken and the financial situation of the NCBs has continued to deteriorate. Fund and Bank stafF recommended reform strategy Prompt nnd decisive measures are required to foster a credit culture and avoid a possible crisis down the road. These will need to include strong upfront action to strmgthen Bangladesh Bsnk, remove the causes of poor governance in the NCBs, and take on loan defaulters and other vested interests. All insolvent PDBs should be required to adopt time-bound action plans to meet prudential standards and timdammtal restructuring (managemoot and ownership changes, mergers, cease and desist actions, and liquidations) mandated for those that do not meet the standards within an agreed timeframe. Once the rise in bad loans has been arrested, the causes of the defhult culture have been removed, and a more effective loan recovery effort is beginning to make a dent on the incidence of nonperforming loans, public funds could be injected to restore capital adequacy, thus paving the way for a privatization of the restructured NCBs. Measures to be taken over the next 12 months could include the following: . Adopt amendments to banking legislation to install Bangladesh Bank as the sole regulator and supervisor of all banks and to enhance the Bank’s operational independence, including by establishing a Icgnl minimum term for the Governor. . Continue to upgrade Bangladesh Bank’s prudential regulations to limit exposures to single or connected parties and to curb insider lending and facilitate loan recovery by hiring more qualitied judges and providing adequate budgetary support for the court system. . Improve the process of appointing and removing hoards and managements in the NCBs to ensure the selection of the best-qualified persons irrespective of political afliliation, and provide them with autonomy and accountability and with a mandate to launch debt recovery program against major defaulters, to expedite judicial and out-of-court settlements, and to rationalize staff and branches. . Establish strict selection criteria and performance standards for auditors of the PDBs and adopt, and strictly enforce, restructuring plans and performance targets in signed MOUq applying a system of graduated penalties on nonpcrforming PDBs (including possible closure/liquidation) coupled with a carefully articulated and well-publicized plan to provide deposit guarantees as needed to protect banking system stability. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2o- by MAE, which, as a first step, would rely on a daily resetting of Bangladesh Bank’s buying and selling rates based on market conditions, would serve to depoliticize exchange rate management and insulate the economy from external shocks. Before such a system is put in place, it would be necessary to amend the Bangladesh Bank Order, which now grants the government sole responsibility for the setting of exchange rates at which Bangladesh Bank may deal with commercial banks. The authorities considered their existing exchange rate policy to be sufficiently flexible and emphasized their determination to move the rate in line with market conditions. They were, nevertheless, reluctant to adopt a market-based exchange rate system before a more comfortable cushion of reserves had been built up. 27. The team observed that, while Bangladesh had made considerable progress in opening up its trade system in the fust half of the 199Os, the pace of trade liberalization had slowed in recent years. The 1999/2000 budget included only modest steps toward tariff reduction, mainly on intermediate inputs and raw materials, which have in fact resulted in increasing tariff dispersion (Box 5). In addition, the budget had introduced costly new subsidies for exports of jute goods, finished leather products, and fresh and artificial flower~.~ The team recommended that the authorities adopt a medium-term plan to rationalize and lower Bangladesh’s tariff structure, reduce tariff dispersion, remove quantitative restrictions, phase out export subsidies, and consider options for the export of natural gas. The authorities felt that it would be politically difficult to accelerate Bangladesh’s trade liberaiization unless other South Asian countries did likewise. As regards the export of natural gas, it was clarified that, while the existing Export Policy Order contains no legal restrictions on such exports, the government would not decide to allow gas exports until it had first been ascertained that the existing reserves were sufficient for domestic needs. However, the authorities recognized the risk that, in the absence of timely SOE reforms, policies to promote the expansion of the fertilizer industry could lead to inefficient resource allocation and a weakening of the country’s underlying fiscal and external positions. 28. The staff team emphasized that a fair and transparent mechanism in the allocation of contracts to IPPs and foreign suppliers was necessary to sustain investor confidence and protect the public interest. The team also called for improved monitoring of financial flows and commitments associated with IPP contracts and suppliers’ credits, including by establishing a rigorous system for the approval of all externally funded projects with implicit or explicit government guarantee. The authorities noted that a monitoring system for private sector external debt had been recently established under the jurisdiction of the Board of Investment’s Scrutiny Committee (on which Bangladesh Bank is also represented). During the first nine months of 1999, S450 million of private sector loans had been approved. Technical assistance in this area is being provided by the AsDB. D. Statistical Issues 29. While Bangladesh provides most core minimum data to the Fund on a regular basis, significant weaknesses remain in government finance and balance of payments ‘For a fuller discussion on Bangladesh’s trade regime, see also Chapter V of RED paper. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-21- Box 5. Recent Trade Policy Developments Bangladesh began a gradual liberalization of its trade regime in the mid-1980s, which gained momentum in the early 1990s in the context of the country’s E&V-supported program. Since the mid-199Os, however, the liberalization process has again slowed. Prior to liberalization, quantitative restrictions were pervasive and tariffs on many consumer products were prohibitive. In 1991/92, for example, the maximum tariE rate was 350 percent. As the tabulation below shows, the unweighted average tariff rate remained broadly constant during 1995/96-1998/99. While the 1999/2000 budget measures are estimated to have led to some decline in the average tariff rate, this has been accompanied by an increase in tariff dispersion (standard deviation of tariff bands over the average tariff rate) and a consequent increase in the effective protection of a number of domestically produced import-competing products. Selected Indicators of Trade Protection 91192 92f93 93194 94195 95196 96197 97/98 98199 99100 Average (weighted) l! 24.1 23.6 24/l 20.8 17.0 18.0 18.6 16.6 . . . Average (unweighted) l/ 56.7 46.8 35.8 25.4 22.2 21.5 23.2 22.7 19.0 Dispersion 71.9 65.6 68.2 75.6 74.4 75.7 74.4 72.4 82.1 Maximum rate 11 350 300 300 60 SO 45 45 42.5 40 Number of bands 2/ 17 14 11 s 6 6 6 6 S Import restrictions 3/ 239 . . . . . . . . . 120 124 . . . 1.. . . . Sources: “Bangladesh Trade Liberakation: Its Pace and Impacts,” World Bank, 1999; and stiestimates. 11 Includes inf?astructure development surcharge. 2/ Includes zero band. 3/ Number of quantitative import restrictions (4digit codes). As the next tabulation shows, Bangladesh’s average tariff rate, as well as the degree of openness of the economy (as measured by the share of trade in GDP), is in the middle of the field compared to other countries in the region (India, Nepal, Pakistan, and Sri Lanka). However, compared to a number of other Asian countries (Indonesia, Korea., Malaysia, and Thailand), the average tariff rate is quite high and the degree of openness is low. Cross-Country Comparison of Trade Regimes and Performance, 1998/99 Structure of Tariff Rates Share in World Exports (percent) MaXimUm Average Average Share of Trade 1972 1996 rate (unweighted) (weighted) exports share in to GDP GDP Bangladesh 42.5 23 17 12 31 0.07 0.42 South Asia India Nepal Pakistan Sri Lanka 4s 40 20 9 22 0.62 3.73 80 14 10 16 47 0.01 0.26 35 21 21 14 28 0.17 0.85 35 18 10 32 72 0.08 0.42 Southeast and East Asia Indonesia Korea Malaysia Thailand 60 10 14 66 131 0.45 30 13 10 49 85 0.41 40 9 10 98 17s 0.43 60 17 1s 58 99 0.27 4.13 12.37 6.65 5.34 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 22 - statistics, which could potentially hamper effective surveillance. No comprehensive data on the actual operations of the central government are being produced and the quality of available data is compromised by a lack of reconciliation among different data sources and a lack of coordination among compilers, The absence of any system for compiling data on the government’s extensive quasi-fiscal operations, and on debt with implicit or explicit government guarantees, further limits the information content and analytical relevance of existing fiscal data. In the balance of payments, important coverage deficiencies as well as some classification problems in both the current and capital and financial accounts give rise to a large unexplained residual, which undermines the reliability and usefulness of the existing data. The available information on private sector debt transactions is particularly weak. 30. As indicated in the recently completed IMF Report on the Observance of Standards and Codes (ROW) (EBS/99/158), the authorities plan to participate in the General Data Dissemination System (GDDS) by July 2000. Substantial progress has been made towards meeting GDDS recommendations. With regard to fiscal data, the authorities felt that the ROSC’s reference to the need for greater political commitment to transparency was too subjective and could be misunderstood and misinterpreted if the report were to be made public. In line with existing constitutional requirements, the final audited expenditure accounts for 1995/96 had just been placed before parliament, while the 1996/97 accounts had gone to press and were to be placed before parliament by early 2000. In the authorities’ view, delays in the availability of fiscal data were due mainly to a lack of computer&d systems; an ongoing UK- assisted project was addressing some of these problems, but its coverage was not comprehensive. The authorities estimated that it would take at least five years to develop a fully computerized system for the compilation of government accounts; it could then be envisaged that actual fiscal data could be produced with a lag of six to nine months. Against this background, the authorities would not like to see the ROSC published in its present form. 31. As regards the delays in the dissemination of real sector data, and associated concerns about possible political interference, the authorities explained that these delays stemmed from the rules of business introduced by the government in mid-1996. Under these rules, the release of any data from the Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics must be author&d by the Minister of Planning; it has, therefore, not been possible to adhere to a predetermined publication schedule for national accounts and consumer price statistics. In the case of the national accounts, the authorities hoped that a decision could soon be made to officially replace the old accounts with revised accounts, based on SNA methodology and more up-to-date data sources. E. PRGF Discussions 32. In discussing the recent change of the ESAF into the new Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF), the authorities recognixed that a PRGF program could help promote more disciplined macroeconomic policies and the adoption of the most urgent reforms in the period up to the next elections. The team reviewed with the authorities a set of measures in line with the policy requirements elaborated above, which could be taken over the next few months to establish the basis for discussions on a possible PRGF program (Box 6). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 23 - Box 6. Proposed Actions to Pave the Way for PRGF Discussions Fiscal policy l Make large taxpayer uuit &TU), uniform taxpayer identification number (ITN) and pre-shipment inspehon (PSI) system fully operational. l Adopt state-owned petroleum company’s proposal to raise petroleum prices, and speed up implementation ofplans to rationalize natural gas, fertilizer, and electricity rates, so as to progressively phase out implicit subsidies. l Defer low-priority ADP projects to keep ADP spending to 85-90 percent ofthe budgeted amount as needed to keep the overall deficit and domestic bank financing w-ithin the 1999/2000 budget targets. l Announce government’s medium-term targets and strategy for revenue mobilization, m&ding the policies on open-ended tax holidays and on broadening the VAT net to accompany 2000/01 budget. Monetary and exchange rate policies l Reshin the growth ofmoney and credit to well within the official monetary program targeta including through open market sales of treasury bills and by freezing Bangladesh Bank lending to specializedbanks so as to meet earlier targets to unwind their flood-related loans. 0 Introduce flexible exchange rate system in line with recommendauons of past MAE missions to restore external competitiveness, depoliticize exchange rate management, and protect the level of remes. Banking system . Pass amendments to Bangladesh Bank Order and Banking Companies Act and issue Statement of Public Policy on the financial sector in line with IMP and World Bauk recommendations. l Halt direct4 lending through the NCBs, in&ding by abolishing sectoral targets for NCB lending, and shift responsibility for new lendiug to specialized banks from Bangladesh Bank to the budget. l Design andannounce a strategy and tune frame for the restructuring ofNCBs and spe&l&d banks. State-owned enterprises (SOEs) l Publish Policy Statement on SOE reform in Government Gazette. l Enact a P&at&ion Law in line with World Bank recommendations, adopt government plan to fold the Ministries of Industries, Jute and Textiles into a new minis&y for the industM sector, and launch a time-bound program to restructure and pxivatize viable industrial SOEs and close nonviable SOEs. l Take adequate steps, in consultation with the World Bank, to improve the governance of the power sector and ensure that the independent power pmducer (JPP) program is kept within prudent limits. Trade system l Design aud anuounce medium-term trade reform strategy, including plans for tariff reduction and compression, tari.fBcation of quantitative restrictions, and phasing out of export subsidies. Statistical policies l Announce a schedule for the annual publication of actual audited fiscal data adopt and publish revised national accounts series, and announce a schedule for the monthly release of consumer price statistics. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 24 - To speed up the process of moving toward such a program, the authorities would need to begin preparing a poverty reduction strategy. While the authorities generally agreed with the direction, if not the pace, of reforms proposed by the s@ they could not make any commitments in these areas until all interested government agencies had been consulted. Iv. STAFF APPRAISAL 33. Bangladesh mounted an effective response to the disruptions and damage caused by last year’s floods, but the recovery that is underway is uneven and fragile. While bumper crops have helped underpin rural incomes and restrain inflation, manufacturing activity and export growth are being held back by competitive pressures and infiastructural bottlenecks. With investor confidence and donor support faltering in the face of pervasive weaknesses in governance and a worsening political situation, the outlook for faster growth and poverty reduction remains clouded. Concerns for stability and growth have been heightened in recent months by an unsustainable loosening of fiscal and monetary policies. 34. To maintain external viability and raise the GDP growth rate to a level needed to make more rapid inroads against poverty, economic policies need to be promptly reoriented from supporting domestic demand toward promoting export-oriented and private sector-led investment and growth. This will require sounder fiscal and monetary policies to ensure stability, the adoption of a more flexible exchange rate system, and the introduction of faster- paced structural reforms to establish more transparent and accountable public institutions and a market-friendly environment. 35. Sound fiscal management is key to lasting macroeconomic stability and is the first requirement of an effective poverty reduction and growth strategy. The recent surge in government borrowing from the banking system points to an alarming relaxation of fiscal discipline. Reversing this is the most urgent task. The plans to introduce a large taxpayer unit, a uniform taxpayer identification number, and a mandatory pre-shipment inspection system are welcome and should be implemented without delay. However, to prevent crowding out of credit to the private sector, a mid-year package of corrective measures, including adjustments in key administered prices, also needs to be adopted. Unproductive military expenditures and subsidies to defunct SOEs need to be curtailed and no further wage increases should be granted for civil servants and SOE workers until comprehensive civil service and SOE reforms are in place. To bring the 1999/2000 deficit back within the official budget target, the launching of ADP projects outside the budgetary process must be halted and low-priority projects deferred. 36. For fiscal adjustment over the medium term, the key is a strong revenue effort of no less than 3 percentage points of GDP, which will be needed to maintain fiscal sustainability while protecting essential social programs. This will require bold actions to widen the tax base, including by expanding the VAT net, eliminating tax exemptions and holidays, and strengthening tax and customs administration. In addition, continued efforts will need to be made to tighten discipline over expenditures, including by introducing a comprehensive program of civil service reform and by streamlining the selection of public investment projects. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-25 - 37. Fiscal adjustment needs to be supported by a revived effort to arrest the hemorrhaging of public funds in the SOE sector. In the traditional industrial sectors, viable concerns should be expeditiously restructured and privatized and non-viable ones closed. Investment in new fertilizer projects should be put on hold until the profitability of existing fertilizer plants has been restored and their reliance on explicit or implicit support from the budget discontinued. For the energy and telecommunications sectors, the reform agenda needs to include the early rationalization of tariffs and decisive steps to curtail system losses. 38. Monetary policy needs to be tightened in order to consolidate the recent reduction in the rate of inflation and help achieve the authorities’ official reserve target for 1999/2000. Early steps should be taken to reduce the growth of money and credit to well within the official monetary program targets. In conjunction with the fiscal measures adopted to bring the government’s bank borrowing back within the offkial monetary program target, directed lending through the NCBs should be eliminated, including by removing the NCBs’ responsibility for lending to agriculture and halting the issuance of government-guaranteed NCB bonds abroad. Bangladesh Banks role in the provision of agricultural credit should also be unwound and the funding of subsidized credit schemes, to the extent that they are continued, explicitly incorporated in the budget. 39. The recent progress in establishing an improved legal and regulatory framework for the banking system is welcome. However, more drastic steps are needed to remove the entrenched weaknesses in the governance of state-owned banks, enhance the effectiveness of monetary policy and financial intermediation, and safeguard financial stability. To these ends, the autonomy, authority and institutional capacity of the Bangladesh Bank must be greatly strengthened and the operations of the NCBs and specialized credit institutions need to be urgently revamped. 40. A competitive exchange rate, coupled with an open and nondistortionary trade and investment regime, is the most efficient way to encourage export-led growth. The recent devaluations of the taka should go some way towards reversing the erosion of external competitiveness recorded since early 1997. To better protect competitiveness and insulate the economy from external shocks on a more lasting basis, however, a more market-based exchange rate system that allows for much greater flexibility should be adopted as soon as possible. At the same time, a reinvigorated program of trade liberalization needs to be launched. The expansion of FDI in the energy sector creates new opportunities for growth but also poses new challenges, reinforcing the case for an accelerated program of tariff rationalization and SOE reform and highlighting the need for a prudent approach towards the assumption of new foreign liabilities by the government. 41. To improve transparency and accountability in the conduct of public policies, the authorities are encouraged to adopt the Fund’s Code of Good Practices for Fiscal Transparency and the Code of Good Practices for Monetary and Financial Policies. The government’s plan to participate in the GDDS is welcome. To ensure that statistical practices conform with GDDS recommendations, an ambitious timetable should be set for the regular publication of properly classified, sufficiently reliable fiscal data. To improve the integrity of key real sector data, the Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 26 - current practice of granting the government access to data before their general release to the public should be terminated and early action taken to institute pre-determined data dissemination schedules, including for the monthly release of consumer price statistics. The revised national accounts should be adopted as soon as possible. 42. It is proposed that the next Article IV consultation with Bangladesh take place on the standard 1Zmonth cycle. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 27 - Table 1. Bangladesh Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 1996/97-l 99912000 11 Land ama: 147510 rquM kilometsn GDP (1998199): usS44biuial GDP psr capita (I 998&9): US345 Population (1998): 126 million Quota: 8DR 392.5 tllillh 1996.Q7 1997198 1998199 1999tzmo ESL Of6Cit.l 8ta6Proiactim Pmj. Bssdiia AdjUdtDd National inctnne end prices @srcont cbrqe) Real GDP 21 Marion (annual awrap) ‘h”td &lW”l”l ent bud8et (percent of GDP) Total -us Tax Total expaidii cumm cxpsnditum Food account balance AMualDcvclopmantpmgran other cspital and net lending Ovarsll balance hcl. grants Damsrtic 6nanc;np Banb Foreign timatxinp ContraI gwutlmalt d&t Money and cmdlt (end-year, percent change) Domestic mdii Fl-imte aactor Broad money Balacce of payments (us5 mm) Expmts. Lab. (bd mt changs) Imports. c.i.f (hual pcrcat OhMgo) cmr accoullt (id e-t bnlufafs) 31 (Percent of GDP) Currant account (id. cum and cap trarufera) (Percent ofGDP) Fw*gn inveatmmt M disbunsmenta (loana and capital transfers) Gwall balance Gross omciai -ad (us.5 Inn.) 1719 1733 1523 1800 I500 1600 @~monthsoflmportr) 2.7 2.6 2.1 2.5 2.1 2.2 Mcdtum and long-term extarnal debt (US.5 mn.) 15025 14019 Total &bt @arc& of GDP) 36.3 32.8 Debt service @crcent of current earnings) 87 8.0 Temucfeadc 5.4 5.2 4.2 6.5 4.5 5.0 2.6 7.0 9.0 5.0 5.5 5.0 9.4 9.6 9.5 10.4 9.7 10.1 7.5 7.6 1.6 8.0 7.7 7.8 13.8 13.8 14.6 14.9 IS.1 14.4 7.0 7.4 8.0 7.6 7.9 7.8 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 6.1 5.8 5.9 6.6 6.5 5.9 0.5 0.4 0.3 0.5 0.s 0.5 -4.4 -4.2 -5. I -4.6 -5.4 -4.4 -2.7 -2.9 -3.7 -3.2 -4.1 -3.0 1.5 1.7 2.1 1.8 3.0 1.8 I .o 0.7 1.0 0.6 I.7 0.5 2.9 2.5 2.6 2.8 2.4 2.6 0.0 13.7 12.6 13.1 13.0 13.5 10.5 12.1 13.0 13.8 14.1 9.2 11.5 10.8 10.4 12.8 14.2 12.2 10.0 4418 13.8 7162 4.1 -543 -1.3 -155 -2.4 -120 1133 -163 72 2.2 0.0 0.0 47.4 5172 5324 5751 17.1 2.9 7.6 7520 8337 8625 5.0 10.9 8.0 -249 -823 -436 -0.6 -1.9 -0.9 56 -475 -0.4 -1.1 336 653 243 1075 1215 1312 82 -171 267 15144 35.0 7.9 -4.3 49.0 0.0 5660 5660 6.3 6.3 8132 8176 -2.5 -1.9 -531 -549 -1.2 -1.2 -162 -165 0 -0.4 562 611 1195 1264 -13 87 15413 15442 33.8 33.9 7.1 7.1 -1.3 -I .3 Soumx Bangla&h sutborities; and &tTcstimata and projections. II Fii year begins July I. Baseline projectiolll assume unchsngJ policks, whiie adjustment projections asmwne bnplemmlt8tion of cmprehemiw reform policies in line with steJTrecommmdat. 2l Nsthsl accounts bad on 1989t90 benclmmrk and prices. 31 PlwkxIsly CurraIlt traIlsfell we rsportsd in the c&al 8000lmL Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 28 - Table 2. Bangladesh: Balance of Payments. 1996/97 - 1999/2000 11 (In millions of US, unless otherwise indicated) 199697 lP97/P8 199&w l999nooo lht OlSiChl StaffRci~ Roi. Bbdilm Attnutmmt Tmde t&m* -2,744 -2,348 EXpOltr 4.418 5,172 w -7.162 -7.520 F&&l& -184 -369 clpiagoodr .1937 -2,072 OlhU -5,041 -5,079 -3,012 5.324 -8.337 -g -5.040 Net Smvicsr 56 83 -46 Jbcsipb 745 7% 818 Pa-0 489 -715 464 dwEnqyml&d 0 -12 -128 Tl-UBh-S official RyRnt lmwrml Plivw9 baMf*n ofwkilraksn’lmnithnca 2.145 2.017 2,235 375 267 260 1.770 1.750 1975 1.475 1,526 I.706 CmImlt accoopt b&am 2/ -543 -249 -823 Cqitd account b&w Aid-b 31 commodity low ProjatidU Medium snd bn@rm debt ~orliMion odln medmm4oqJ hrm apit& “et Fm+n duvct md pmtfoEo inwnmenr Otherlhorltmapi~inoludingbmd9ccn&ta 191 379 522 1.133 1,075 1,215 16 42 205 1.117 I.033 1.009 -329 -308 -340 46 -50 -30 -120 336 653 -539 -674 -975 Ermnurdanarxnr 189 -49 82 -82 -131 -I4 -II7 -107 0 -107 .I0 49 I30 Overall b.l.u,cc -163 -171 Fmcmg ltmlu 163 sMBLduhBd 180 AndI (. i.mw*) 320 Linbililiw -I46 Pxindcdl~nst -II4 FSAF md ofha Fund didnnmnmtr 0 tidnp.ymmts -II4 otk, n* -16 ccmnl~bulkl -17 171 218 210 9 17 138 -III -19 -47 Mem~dmn itmm Cumntncconntb&nce(lnpaesntof 0DP)Y Current account bahee (In percent of ODP) # oroarcrelva(smn)7/ (In monrhr ofrmpo~ ofSo& md NF netviw) (ta rhort-term dmbt) (to t.42 (III perat)) (10 MO (ii percent)) Mednm nnd lonS.torm exlorml public dsbt (S mn.) (m percent ofODP.) (to exports of swd, nsd NF tic@ Short-term debt (E nut.) 8/ OllMnduy Fund edit (S Inn) Debiasvice mtio 91 Debt-nwice ta tbo Fund 91 l?x.chMp nte (bkds, d WmaJp) -1.3 -0.4 I.719 2.7 14.8 PP.1 15.025 36.3 3.4 467 8.7 1.7 41.7 -0.6 -1.9 0.1 -1.1 1.733 1.523 2.6 2.1 2,s 2.3 144 12.2 985 85.0 14.019 15,144 32.8 35.0 3.0 2.4 695 655 320 352 7.9 7.8 1.4 1.4 45.4 47.8 -2874 5,751 -8.625 -440 -2300 -5.885 230 770 -540 1348 288 v@J I.780 -436 992 1312 .335 .4I 243 -187 -289 267 -267 -287 -277 -10 -104 0 .lM 0 20 -0.9 1.800 2.5 12.4 90 .., 49.5 -2,472 -2,516 5.660 5.660 -8,132 -8.176 -413 -413 w.50 -2,424 -5,468 -5339 -220 824 -1.044 -280 407 838 -1.045 -280 2.161 2,174 I69 182 1992 1992 133 1,723 -53 I -549 518 636 1.195 1.264 I25 149 1 .cno 1,115 -334 -334 -20 .20 562 611 -885 -885 0 0 -13 87 I3 -87 -87 -IS7 23 -71 -111 .lll -91 .Pl 0 0 -91 -91 -20 -20 loo loo -1.2 -1.2 -0.4 -0.4 I.500 1.600 21 2.1 2.3 2.4 10.5 11.2 77.7 82.8 15,413 15.u2 33.8 33.9 2.4 2.4 659 659 274 274 7.1 71 I.2 I.2 m.4 50.4 Nominal ODP (mu. IJSS) Som~M~~ti~mdtiS 41,345 42,700 43,292 46.480 45,550 45,551 II Fircal ycpr be& July I. Buelbw pmjectwru BWMII uuchuqed policies. whiJe ldjusmwnt pmjecIituu -a uapkmatntion of compr&nsivs nfm pdiciw in b.ru titb smtT ruummm&horu. 2/ Excluda official csp~trl gmncr. 31 lnclurlm &i&i capial ~p”ts 4/lncldn nm-ADPf,nannry~d~l,,,,~~ 5/Plsvlouslyewant tmufer~wmrepatedmtho npiti wcoun(. 61 Inchading cnmmt md clpihl tnuufa. 71 CiIon forei@ IwwJ” of enBglA&l k& ilAud& nonrti&t fc&n “nncy *#itI ud otber speckI rcount8. 8I short-tm-m drbi - bud on Joint BtS-IMF-OECD-World Bu,k utem,l d.bt rbMiu plu ml&bon p,m.ab. Pi In pnc9nt of oment nctip+ Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 29 - Table 3. Bangladesh: Central Government Operations, 1996/97- 1999/2000 l/ 1996i97 1991198 mm9 PoS&Cd Budget 21 staff Est. 1999/2000 BUdgSl staff Projcctio”a Bascknc AdjMnvmt Total revenue 165.9 185.5 206.0 198.1 241.2 222.9 231.0 Tax 133.1 147.0 164.0 1584 185.1 177.2 178.8 o/w: Taxes on incanc and profits 16.4 20.0 23.0 23.5 27.8 17.8 27 8 VAT and supplemc”bry duties 65.8 69.8 78.2 73.2 83.7 80.7 82.0 Taxes on inkmational trade 40.1 43.5 48.7 47 4 57.5 52.6 52.6 NO”kX 32.8 38.5 42.0 39.7 56.2 45.7 52.2 Total expndiolre Clment cxpcndihrre CL&: Pay and e.uow”ccs Inkrest stidier and tN”8fm Food wamt swplu(.)/d&it(+) An”ul Dewlopment Promu” (AD!‘) II Non-ADP cqzikl and “et k”diq 4/ 244.0 267.0 307.8 303.7 123.6 143.2 162.2 167.3 43.9 46.5 51.0 17.6 23.3 29.4 31.9 41.3 51.5 -4.50 3.2 8.7 5.9 108.5 113.0 129.0 123.2 8.0 7.5 8.0 7.2 347.4 345.6 331.4 177.4 180.2 178.2 55.8 55.8 55.8 28. I 30.9 30.9 50.1 50.1 49.6 6.0 6.0 6.0 152.5 147.9 135.7 II.5 11.5 II.5 Rend& 51 -0. I -7.4 Budget surplu(+)/debit(-) .78.2 -81.5 -101.8 -105.6 -106.1 -122.7 -100.4 (lncl. grants) -46.7 -55.3 -66.3 .76.5 -73.4 -93.0 -69.1 Net hancmg 78.1 81.5 101.8 98.1 106.1 122.7 100.4 Net forqn Gnancm~ 61 51.3 48.6 67.5 53.7 65.1 54.8 58.8 Dlsbwcmenk 65.3 64.1 83.7 69.9 83.6 71.9 75.6 hlartization -14.0 -15.5 -16.2 -16.3 -18.5 -170 -16.8 Net domethc haming 26.8 32 9 34.3 44.5 41.0 67.9 41.6 Bank@ syskm 17.1 12.6 15.0 19.8 IS.0 37.9 11.6 Other domcshc 9.7 20.3 19.3 24.7 26. I 30.0 30.0 Total reK”“e 9.4 0.6 9.9 9.5 10.4 9.7 IO.1 Tax rewnue 1.5 7.6 1.9 7.6 8.0 7.7 7.8 NO”kX I.9 20 2.0 1.9 2.4 2.0 2.3 Total cxpn&ture 13.8 13.8 14.8 14.6 14.9 15.1 14.4 current cxpc”&huc 7.0 74 7.8 8.0 7.6 7.9 7.8 Food account rurplus(-)/d&it(+) 0.2 0.2 0.4 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 Armul Development Program (ADP) 6.1 5.8 6.2 3.9 6.6 6.4 5.9 Non-ADP capikl and net lendi”# 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.3 0.5 0.5 0.5 Overall budget balance ml. D”w Net fore&n 6nancin@ Net domestic hancmg SW system Other do”uShC Memorandum ,te”m Gwemmcnt debt EXkIlUl Domestic Socd expc”d”we 3.9 Mibkry expend~ttue 1.3 -4 4 -4.2 -4.9 -5.1 -4.6 -2.6 -2.9 -3.2 -3.7 -3.2 2.9 2.5 3.2 2.6 2.8 1.5 I.7 1.6 2.1 1.8 1.0 0.7 0.7 1.0 0.6 0.5 1.0 0.9 1.1 1.1 47.2 34.8 12.5 44.5 31.4 13.0 3.8 1.4 (I” biions of take) (I” percent ofcDP) 47.2 47.7 47.4 33.4 33.4 32.7 13.8 14.3 14.8 4.2 4.2 39 I.4 1.4 I3 -5.3 -4.1 1.4 3.0 1.7 1.3 49.0 33.1 15.9 3.9 1.3 .4.4 -3.0 2.6 1.8 0.5 1.3 41.6 32.8 14.8 3.9 13 Sources. Bangladesh authorities; and sklTestimakr “nd projections. I/ Fiscal year be@s July I. Baseline projections assunc unchangtd policies. while sdJusbne”t ,XOJCCtbN asm implmenktio” of cmnprehcnsiw r( polices I” line WIUI staffrecommendations 2/ Aa agreed m co”“ectio” with the emergency assistance 6om the Fund in October 1998. 3IThc central government component of ADP spending cciuisk of capitol spenti& “et lending and some current spending 41 bxludes retxnchment cost, capital spending. and other spendmg such as the Food-for-Worl; Program. 51 Dfierence between the balance of revmus and cxpenditwcs from the hrcal acco~nb nnd the estimates oftokl 6nrmcing 61 lnciudcs foreign sank and loam Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 30 - Table 4. Baugladesh: Monetary Survey, 1996/97- 1999/2000 11 1996197 June 1997198 1998199 1999/2000 JUnC J i!i J iif: J E June June StaffprojeCtionS ROplIl Program Baseline Adjustment Net Foreign Assets 65.4 67.9 Monetary authorities 50.1 54.0 Deposit money banks 15.3 14.0 Net domestic assets 440.8 490.8 Domestic credit 494.0 556.4 Public sector 138.9 155.2 Government (net) 80.2 92.7 Other 58.7 62.5 Private sector 355.0 401.2 Other items (net) -53.1 -65.6 Broad money 506.3 558.7 Of which: Cur-r. in circ. 75.7 81.5 Deposits 430.5 477.2 Net Foreign Assets -2.8 3.8 Net domestic assets 13.2 11.3 Domestic credit 13.7 12.6 Public 17.8 11.7 Government (net) 27.1 15.7 Other 7.2 6.4 Private 12.1 13.0 Other items (net) -18.1 -23.5 Broad money 10.8 10.4 Net Foreign Assets -0.4 0.5 0.8 -0.7 2.1 -0.5 0.3 Net domestic assets 11.2 9.9 11.7 13.5 12.1 12.7 9.7 Domestic credit 13.0 12.3 13.9 13.0 12.9 13.5 10.5 Public sector 2.8 3.4 3.3 3.1 2.7 6.8 2.2 Private 8.4 9.1 10.6 9.9 10.2 6.7 8.3 Other items (net) -1.8 -2.5 -2.2 0.5 -0.8 -0.8 -0.8 (In billions of taka) 72.6 64.0 77.0 57.3 47.1 60.5 15.3 16.9 16.4 555.9 566.2 642.8 633.9 629.1 710.6 173.5 172.7 189.7 107.7 112.5 127.5 65.8 60.2 62.2 460.4 456.4 520.9 -78.0 -62.8 -67.8 628.5 630.3 719.8 84.9 86.9 99.2 543.6 543.4 620.6 (Annual percentage change) 6.9 -5.8 20.2 13.3 15.4 13.5 13.9 13.1 13.0 11.8 11.3 9.8 16.2 18.2 13.3 5.3 -4.0 3.3 14.8 13.8 14.1 18.8 4.3 -8.0 12.5 12.8 14.2 (Percentage contribution to broad money growth) 61.1 66.2 48.3 53.4 12.7 12.7 646.1 627.1 713.9 695.0 215.5 186.3 150.4 124.1 65.1 62.2 498.5 508.7 -67.8 -67.8 707.2 693.3 95.6 93.7 611.6 599.6 4.6 3.3 14.1 10.8 13.5 10.5 24.8 7.9 33.7 10.3 8.1 3.3 9.2 11.5 -8.0 -8.0 12.2 10.0 Sources: Bangladesh authorities; and staff estimates and projections. 11 Fiscal year begins July 1. Baseline projections assume unchanged policies, while adjustment projections assume implementation of comprehensive reform policies in line with staff recommendations. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 31 - Table 5. Bangladesh: Medium-Tcnn Projections 1998/99-2OOV06. Baseline Scenario 11 1998l99 l999r2ooo 2OoOml 2001/02 2002m 2003/04 2004m 2005lc6 Est. Pro,. Natmnal income and prices (percent change) Real GDP 2/ lntlation (annual average) Lmmtmmt wd savings (patent of GDP) 2t Gross inwtmmt Public Private hhtmnal Ming Central govcmmmt budget (pcrccnt of GDP) Total rwmuc Tax Total expmditurc cumnt cxpmdltlrc Of which intcwt payments Food account surplus (-)/deficit (+) Annual Developmmt Prm Other capital and net lmding Overall wmcc Id grants Domestic fvlenclng B& Foreign financing Central govcmm mt debt 477 49.0 49.5 49.9 50.6 51.6 52.6 53.7 (including ban& rccapitaliation) 47.7 49.1 52.1 54.9 56.8 58.2 59.2 59.7 Money and credit (end of year. percent change) Domutic credit Private sector Broad money 15.1 I35 11.7 12.3 12.3 12.3 12.4 I2 4 138 92 7.6 8.0 6.8 5.9 5.7 56 12.8 12.2 11.1 II.6 II.6 II.6 11.6 11.6 Balance of paymenta (US.5 ma) Exports. f.o.b. (Annual percent change) Imports. c.1.f (AMus percent change) Current account (pcrcent of GDP) cumnt accolml, incl. capital glmu (Pcrcmt of GDP) Forel@ inwslmcnt Ad dishummmh (loans and capital grmts) Overall balance 5324 5660 6028 6419 6837 7281 7718 8185 2.9 6.3 6.5 6.5 6.5 6.5 6.0 6.0 8337 8132 8562 9044 9530 10018 10514 11031 10.9 -2.5 5.3 5.6 5.4 5.1 5.0 4.9 -823 -531 -562 -632 -991 -1020 -1068 -1112 -1.9 -1.2 -1.2 -1.2 -1.8 -1.7 -1.7 -1.7 -475 -162 -294 -368 -731 -766 -819 -868 -1.1 -0.4 -0.6 4.1 -1.3 -1.3 -1.3 -1.3 653 562 519 481 444 411 380 352 1215 II95 1195 1183 1159 1136 Ill3 1091 -171 -13 20 I1 I6 -31 -65 -67 Gmss oflicml rcwvcs (US q n) 1523 1500 1415 I330 In months of unports of goods and servica 2.1 2.1 1.9 1.6 Medmm and long-term extemal debt (us% mn.) IS144 15413 I5796 16231 Total debt @acmt of GDP) 35.0 33.8 32.4 31.2 Debt srrvmz @rcent of current earn-) 7.9 71 7.3 7.1 Terms of tmde -4.3 -1.3 -0. I -0.1 Jnncmenlal capital-output ratio 53 4.8 4.8 4.8 4.2 9.0 22.0 21.8 21.6 21.4 21.2 21.0 20.8 20.6 5.9 6.4 6.0 5.9 5.8 5.1 5.6 5.6 16.1 15.4 15.6 IS.5 15.4 15.3 15.2 IS.0 20.9 21.4 21.0 20.7 19.9 19.7 19.5 19.3 9.5 9.1 10.2 10.3 10.2 IO.1 10.1 10.0 7.6 7.7 8.2 a.3 8.2 8.2 8.1 8.0 14.6 15.1 15.5 13.8 16.1 16.2 16.2 16.3 8.0 79 8.3 8.8 9.2 9.5 9.8 10.0 I.1 I .3 1.8 2.3 2.7 3.0 3.3 3.5 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 5.9 64 6.0 5.9 5.8 5.7 5.6 5.6 0.3 0.5 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.7 0.6 0.5 -5.1 -5.3 -5.3 -5.5 -5.9 -6.1 -6.2 -6.4 -3.7 -4. I -4.3 -4.6 .5.0 -5.2 -5.4 -5.6 2.1 3.0 3.0 3.3 3.8 4.3 4.5 4.9 1.0 I? 1.7 I.8 2.1 2.4 2.5 2.7 26 24 2.3 2.2 2.1 1.8 1.6 1.5 4.5 4.5 4.5 4.5 4.5 4.5 4.5 5.5 6.0 6.3 6.5 6.5 6.5 6.5 1245 1.5 16662 30. I 7.2 .o. I 4.7 11&l I.3 1075 1.1 990 1.0 17046 17431 17787 28.9 27.8 26.7 6.9 6.5 6.6 -0.1 0.0 0.1 4.7 4.6 4.6 Sources Banglacksb autboritics; md staff estimates and pmjcctiotu. II Fiscal year begins July I. Baseline projections awane uncbmged politic ;. 2iNat~onal accounts bared on 1989i90 benchmark and prices National saving includes offxisl transfers. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 32 - Table 6. Bangladesh: Medium-Tern Projections. 1998/99-2OOYO6. Adjustment Scenario. I/ 1998199 1999CulO 2QOOIOl 2001/02 2002/03 2003104 2004/05 2005/06 National mcome and prices @ercenr change) Real GDP 2l Inflation (annual average) 4.2 5.0 5.5 6.5 7.0 7.0 7.0 7.0 9.0 50 4.5 4.0 4.0 4.0 4.0 4.0 lnvvestment and savings @aant of GDP) 21 Gras i”va.shllent Public Pnvatc National saving 22.0 22.3 22.7 23.0 23.4 23.7 24.1 24.5 5.9 5.9 6.1 6.4 6.6 6.8 6.9 6.9 16.1 I64 16.6 16.6 16.8 16.9 17.2 17.6 20.9 21.9 22.1 22.4 22.1 22.1 22.4 22.7 central govcmmcnt budget @ercQll of GDP) Total twmuc TUC Total cxpmdiurc (includmg bank reqitalization) cwmt cqmiitllrc Of which: lntaest Feymenu Food account auplus (-yda!icit (+) AMual Developmmt m Otha capital and net lmding overall balance Incl. grants Domesttc facing (including bank rczapitalization) Banks Foretgn fmanciq 9.5 IO I 10.8 II.4 11.9 12.5 12.8 13.0 7.6 7.8 84 9.0 9.5 10.1 10.4 10.6 14.6 14.4 IS3 15.9 16.1 16.2 16.1 15.8 14.6 145 I79 I8 5 17.8 Il.2 16.8 15.8 8.0 78 a: 84 8.5 8.5 8.4 8.3 I.1 1.3 IS 17 I.9 2.0 2.0 1.9 0.3 0.3 c.3 03 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 5.9 5.9 61 64 6.6 6.8 6.9 6.9 0.3 0.5 08 08 0.8 0.7 0.6 0.5 -5. I -4.4 45 45 -4.2 -3.7 -3.3 -2.8 3.1 -3.0 -3 2 -3.3 -3.0 -2.6 -2.2 -1.8 2.1 I.8 2.0 2.1 1.8 1.4 1.0 0.6 2.1 I.9 45 4.7 3.6 2.4 I.7 0.6 1.0 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.0 2.6 2.4 25 2.4 2.3 2.3 23 2.2 Central government debt 47.7 47.6 468 46.0 44.6 43.0 41.0 38.9 (includmg bank rccapitaliLstmn) 47 7 47.6 49 5 51.0 50.8 49.5 41.6 44.8 Money and credit (md of year. percent change) Domesoc credit Pnvate sector Broad money I3 I 10.5 10 2 10.7 11.4 11.6 11.9 11.9 13.8 II.5 109 II.4 12.4 12.5 12.8 15.7 12.8 10.0 IO 6 II.1 11.6 116 11.6 Il.6 Balance of payments (VSS mn.) Bxpmts, f.o.b. m”“ul Pam”1 change) Imports, c.i.f. (Annual percent change) CuTlmt acmunt (Percent of GDP) Cumnt account. incl capital grants (Percent of GDP) Forelp mvestment Aid disbwcmmts (loans and capital grants) overall balance Gross offkial xserves (USS mn.) 1523 1600 1660 1780 1900 2020 2140 2260 In months of tmports of goods and services 2.1 2.2 2.1 2.1 2.0 2.0 1.9 1.9 Medium and long-term external debt (US mn.) Total debt @emed of GDP) Debt service (percent of cment earnings) 15144 35.0 7.9 15442 15807 16202 I6613 17110 I7695 18335 33.9 32.3 30.6 28.8 27.3 25.9 24.6 7.1 7.1 6.6 6.4 5.8 5.3 5.2 Terms of trade Incremental capital-output ratio 4.3 5.3 -1.3 4.5 0.0 4.1 -0.1 3.5 -0.1 3.3 0.0 3.4 0.0 3.4 0. I 3.5 5324 5660 6305 7040 7758 8472 9209 IcQlO 2.9 6.3 11.4 Il.7 10.2 9.2 87 8.7 8337 8176 8917 9747 IO638 11614 12616 I3665 10.9 -1.9 9.1 9.3 9.1 9.2 8.6 8.3 -823 -549 -622 -693 -1154 -1407 -1635 -1855 -I .9 -1.2 -1.3 -1.3 -2.0 -2.2 -2.4 -2.5 -475 -165 -27 I -324 -766 -993 -1187 -1371 -1.1 -0.4 -0.6 -0.6 -1.3 -1.6 -1.7 -1.8 653 61 I 630 643 656 669 682 6% 1215 1264 1326 1393 1462 1561 1681 1809 -171 87 I66 216 221 174 140 I40 Sources Bangladesh authorities; and staff estimates and projections. II Fiscal year begins July 1. Adjustment projcctlons a~umc implentation of comprchmsivc reform polices m line with staff recommendations. 2/National accounts based on 1989190 benchmak and prices. National savmg includes offkial tramfen. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-33 - ANNBXI Bangladesh: Medium-Term Scenarios To illustrate the implications of alternative policy paths for Bangladesh’s economic. performance over the medium term, the staff has developed two scenarios. The first is a baseline scenario, which assumes that there is a continuation of recent policy trends. The alternative, adjustment scenario is based on the assumption that the authorities adopt a comprehensive policy package along the lines recommended by the staff. The principal assumptions and policy parameters underlying the baseline scenario are presented in Table 5. In the absence of sustained and ambitious reforms, fiscal policy remains on an expansionary path. While progress towards enhancing revenue is minimal, the fiscal accounts continue to be burdened by loose public wage policies and unproductive spending, including for subsidies and transfers to loss-making public enterprises and, in time, higher interest payments. The overall budget deficit (excluding grants but including the quasi-fiscal costs stemming from the need to support the ailing SOE and banking sectors) widens steadily, rising to above 6 percent of GDP by 2003/04. A diminishing availability of foreign financing, owing to faltering donor support, leads to heavy domestic bank financing of the deficit and rapid monetary growth. The need to ease the pressure on the balance of payments leads to a severe crowding out of credit to the private sector. The ratio of public debt to GDP (including the quasi-fiscal liabilities arising from the poor condition of the SOE and banking sectors) rises steadily Corn less than 50 percent of GDP in 1999/2000 to about 60 percent of GDP by 2005/2006. The implications of the baseline scenario for macroeconomic performance are grim. Private investment gradually declines in relation to GDP, reflecting both a decline in foreign direct investment and the crowding out of domestic investment. While ADP spending is initially at a level in excess of 6 percent of GDP, it gradually declines as the rising interest bill absorbs an increasing share of public revenues. The overall rate of investment declines from 22 percent of GDP in 1998/99 to 20% percent of GDP by 2OOYO6, while the productivity of capital remains low in the absence of progress in structural reforms. As a result, the rate of economic growth remains stagnant at around 4l% percent per year. Despite the continuation of an insufficiently flexible exchange rate policy, inflation accelerates to around 6’% percent. While export growth remains subdued in the face of a continuing erosion in external competitiveness, the lackluster investment performance helps restrain import growth and keeps the current account deficit under 2 percent of GDP. Nevertheless, falling aid inflows and declining foreign investment lead to a continuing decline of the level of official reserves, which fall to about 1 month of import cover by 2005/06. The increasing vulnerability of the economy to external shocks acts as a further disincentive to private investment and exposes the economy to large downside risks. The adjustment scenario in Table 6, which assumes the implementation of disciplined macroeconomic policies and far-reaching structural reforms, paints a decidedly brighter outlook. On the fiscal policy front, the revenue-to-GDP ratio is raised by about 3 percentage points through sustained efforts to broaden the tax base (both VAT and corporate income tax) and through continued improvements in tax and customs administration. Current expenditure Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-34- ANNEX1 is restrained by exercising strong discipline over public wages, curtailing unproductive outlays and, in time, reducing the burden of servicing the public debt. This makes room for the financing of the quasi-fiscal costs associated with reforming the SOE and banking sectors, while also making room for a sustained, if somewhat delayed, increase in ADP spending. The fiscal deficit (excluding grants but including the costs of reforming the SOE and banking sectors) is brought down gradually to about 3 percent of GDP by 2005/06. This reduces and, eventually, eliminates the need for domestic bank financing and makes room for a sustained expansion of real credit to the private sector. In relation to GDP, government debt (including costs associated with the reform and recapitalization of the banking sector) peaks at about 5 1 percent of GDP in 200 l/02-2002/03, and declines rapidly thereafter to below 45 percent in 2005/06. The favorable fiscal environment enables the authorities to restrain monetary growth and bring about a sustained decline in the annual rate of inflation-to 4 percent. This, together with reforms to improve fiscal transparency and accountability, strengthen governance and restore efficient operation in the SOE and banking sectors, enhance exchange rate flexibility, and adopt an open and competitive trade and investment regime, lead to a rapid increase in the productivity of public and private investment and a sustained expansion of foreign direct investment and donor support. With an increased availability of bank credit also helping to spur domestic investment, the ratio of total investment to GDP rises by a cumulative 4 percentage points relative to the baseline scenario by 2005/06. Annual GDP growth accelerates to around 7 percent per year by 2002/03, thereby creating the resources required for more rapid poverty reduction. The growth of income and investment gives rise to increasing demand for imports, which is partly financed through receipts from faster export growth. Even so, the current account deficit widens to around 2% percent of GDP by 2005/06. Nevertheless, this is easily financed from stronger inflows associated with foreign direct investment and aid disbursement. While official reserves expand in nominal terms, their import cover edges down to less than 2 months of imports, a level that is still uncomfortably low. This highlights the possible need for additional balance of payments financing to diminish the vulnerability of the economy to external shocks. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-35- ANNEXII Bangladesh: Fund Relations (As of November 30,1999) I. Membership Status: Joined 8/17/1972; Article VIII II. General Resources Account: Quota Fund holdings of currency Reserve position in Fund SDR million 533.30 63 1.24 0.19 Percent of quota 100.0 118.4 0.0 III. SDR Department: Net cumulative allocation Holdings SDR million 47.12 1.07 Percent of allocation 100.0 2.3 IV. Outstanding Purchases and Loans: SDR million ESAF arrangements 133.44 First Credit Tranche’ 98.13 Percent of quota 25.0 18.4 V. Financial Arrangements: Expira- Amount Amount Approval tion Approved Drawn Type Date Date (SDR million) (SDR million) ESAF 08/10/1990 09/13/1993 345.00 330.00 SAF 02/06/1987 02/05/1990 201.25 201.25 Stand-by 12/02/1985 06/30/1987 180.00 180.00 VI. Projected Obligations to Fund (SDR Million; based on existing use of resources and present holdings of SDRs): Overdue 1 l/30/99 Forthcoming 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 Principal 0.0 0.0 66.0 47.3 66.3 51.9 Charges/interest 0.0 0.4 6.6 6.3 5.3 3.1 Total 0.0 0.4 72.6 53.6 71.6 55.0 VII. Exchange Rate Arrangement Since August 13, 1979, the value of the taka has been pegged, within margins, to a currency- weighted basket. Until January 1, 1992, when the official and secondary exchange markets were unified, the authorities maintained a secondary market in which proceeds from workers’ ’ Purchase in connection with emergency assistance in October 1998. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 36- ANNEX II remittances and most services and exports were sold. The exchange rate has slowly depreciated reflecting periodic minor downward adjustments of the taka. From mid-l 997, there have been nine such adjustments, resulting in a cumulative depreciation of 16.4 percent vis-a-vis the U.S. dollar. As of November 30, 1999, Bangladesh Bank’s buying and selling rates of the taka were Tk 50.85/$1 and Tk 51.15/$1. VIII. Last Article lV Consultation The 1998 Article IV consultation report (SM/98/232) was discussed by the Executive Board on October 28, 1998. Ix. Technical Assistance Department Subject Action FAD FAD FAD FAD FAD MAE MAE MAE MAE MAE MAE MAE MAE MAE STA Tax administration Tax administration Revenue reform Tax administration Tax policy Foreign exchange (dealing room) Government securities markets Securities markets Foreign exchange (dealing room) Monetary policy and research Banking sector restructuring and supervision Banking sector reform Monetary instruments and Monetary programming Foreign exchange market and Current account convertibility See Annex VI. Mission Mission Mission Experts Experts Mission Mission Expert Expert Expert Expert Mission Mission Mission X. Resident Representative Timing August 1999 February 1999 April-May 1998 May 1994 January 1994 March 1999 November 1998 September 1997 September 1997 October 1994-to date August 1995- February 1997 January 1995 January 1994 July 1993 Counterpart MOF MOF MOF MOF MOF BB BB BB BB BB BB BB BB BB The resident representative office was established in 1972. Mr. Ronald P. Hicks took up the post in May 1998. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public. International Comparison of Selected Social Indicators l/ Bangladesh Cambodia China PapuaNew lndia Indonesia Lao PDR Malaysia Pakistan Philippines Sti Lanka Thailand Vietnam Guinea Human resources Population (millions) Age dependency ratio Urban (in percent of population) Population growth rate Urban 122 0.80 19.0 1.6 4.7 0.:: 21.0 2: 1215 0.60 31.0 1.1 4.4 945 197 0.60 0.60 27.0 36.0 ::; ::: Natural resources Density (population per q. km) Cmpland (pemnt of land area) 930.0 60.0 130.0 320.0 110.0 20.0 60.0 170.0 241.0 280.0 120.0 230.0 9.7 67 22 10 57 17 4 23 28 32 29 40 21 1 Income distribution Share of top 20 percent @cent of total income) Shareofbottom2opercent@rcentoftotaJiucom 38 . . . 48 39 43 40 54 40 48 39 53 44 . . . 9 . 6 9 8 8 5 8 7 9 6 8 . . . Fuel and power Energy consumption per capita (kg of oil q.) 67 52 707 260 442 Poverty @adcount index in pcrccnt of population) National poverty line Imanational povaty line Population below $1 a day Population below S2 a day 36 28 . . . . . . . . . . 7 5; 35 ii 15 :; Education Grossem.ollIuentratios Primq (percent of school age) Pupil/teacher ratio secondary@mentof~‘w Pupil/teacher ratio Rhterxy(pcnxntofpop. 15+) 122 118 :: 2:: . 15 35 19 Health Popt&iOnperhospitalb+ Mz (per thousand he births) Under 5 5,479 491 612 1,371 77 105 33 65 112 170 39 85 1,503 2 In--=ym (pcrona of age kwp) DPT 91 75 96 79 Child malnutrition under 5 Qercent of age group) Life expectmq (years) . . . 53 Total fertility rate @itths per woman) Maternal mortality rate (per 10,000 live births) 68.0 58 3.4 850 4.6 900 89 92 17.5 70 1’l.Z z 66.0 63 4”;: 89 92 38.7 65 J’it 0.9: 0.2 21.0 54.0 2.9 2.4 5.9 3.9 40 46 . . . 107 :i 12 43 1.655 243 307 136 878 104 232 16 2’: ;A z: 61 26 19 19 17 62 405 101 140 65 54 40.0 53 5.7 650 437 11 14 El 23.3 72 3.4 43 134 0.90 35.0 2.8 4.3 0.:: 0.:: 0.I;‘: 0.;: 0.7: 55.0 22.0 20.0 19.0 16.3 ::: ::‘: ::: i:; i:; 34 12 57 32 . . . . . . 35 4 41 116 113 ;: ;t 50 20 5 10 1,769 655 1g :: 365 15 19 53 86 88 58 86 91 40.0 29.6 38.0 63 66 73 3.6 2.3 208 30 13 2: 51 . . . . . 87 20 55 I8 6 114 z 23 6 615 261 :i ii it? 13.0 69 1.8 200 E 44.9 68 Iti 22 . . . . . . I w 4 8o 39 I 14 . . . 28 . . . 62 85 . . . 58 Ei E 4.7 . . . Sources: The World Elank, World Development Indicators, 1998; and IMP stafFreports. 1/Dataretkatomostrecentestim&s 21 Althou& accurate estimates are not available, some estimates suggest that maternal mortal&y in PNG is the fit& highest in the world (source: UNDP). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-38- ANNEXN Bangladesh: Relations with the World Bank Group Lending operations 1. The Board of Executive Directors of the World Bank Group discussed a Country Assistance Strategy Update on July 20, 1999 (Document #lDA/R99-141). The Update presents developments since the adoption of the 1998 joint IDA-IFC strategy. The strategy seeks to assist the government in reducing poverty by promoting rapid, job-creating growth and interventions that directly assist the poor. It seeks to help the government tackle the challenge of building institutional capacities to carry out policies and projects effectively and overcome vested interests that weaken commitment in the face of complex, politically difficult reforms. The strategic priorities that provide the framework for Bank assistance are: Ensuring sound macroeconomic management as a precondition for achieving rapid, sustainable economic growth. Promoting a competitive private sector by ensuring that incentives are right, building a supportive environment- especially in the financial sector-and providing essential physical infrastructure. Promoting better public sector management and improved public services for the private sector and civil society. Accelerating agricultural growth and rural development and strengthening the linkages between agricultural and nonagricultural development. Promoting faster and more equitable human development on the basis of a long-term vision of education, health, nutrition, and population. The Country Assistance Strategy and its Update envisage a base-case lending _. ._ scenario with a lending level of $600-650 million per year, depending on maintaining macroeconomic stability and progress in implementing structural reforms, particularly those relating to the banking sector, privatization of state-owned enterprises, administrative reforms, and the framework for private participation in infrastructure and utilities. If macroeconomic conditions were to worsen or no progress was achieved on structural reforms, the Bank would limit lending to a core set of operations for which significant poverty impact, human development, and institutional reforms were assured. The low case would limit lending to $400-450 million per year. 3. The IFC’s investment focus-on the financial sector, power and gas, telecommunications, and competitive export-oriented and domestic industries-is consistent with the above priorities, As IFC and MIGA expand their activities in Bangladesh, they will contribute to and benefit from IDA’s efforts to help create an enabling environment for private sector growth. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 39 - ANNEXIV 4. During 1998-99 the Bank approved credits for Arsenic Mitigation ($32.4 million, approved August 1998), Dhaka Urban Transport ($177 million, approved January 1999) Road Rehabilitation Maintenance III ($273 million, approved October 1998), Municipal Services ($138.6 million, approved August 1998) and Export Diversification ($32 million, approved June 1999). To help Bangladesh respond to the 1998 floods, IDA approved a $200 million Emergency Flood Recovery Project in November 1998. In addition, five supplementary credits for emergency flood rehabilitation, adding up to $167.9 million, were approved in April 1999. 5. No new structural adjustment lending is planned, though all sector investment operations emphasize policy and institutional reforms in line with the objectives of the Country Assistance Strategy. The lending commitments planned for FY2000 and FY2001 include 35-40 percent for rural development, 15-20 percent for infrastructure, 25-30 percent for finance and private sector development, 15-20 percent for energy, and 5 percent for health, population and nutrition (the last being low because of recently extended very large program credits to these sectors.) A social investment program is being prepared to fund community-based and NGO initiatives that will improve access of the poor to basic services and social and economic infrastructure. I. ECONOMIC AND SECTOR WORK 6. Economic and sector work completed during 1998-99 include periodic economic updates; a report prepared for the 1999 Development Forum; a series of comprehensive sector strategy notes relating to the energy, urban, and rural development sectors; a series of economic policy notes covering FDI, tariff reform, and fiscal policy, and a study on the impact of trade liberalization. 7. Other economic and sector reports completed in the past two years include a poverty assessment, a report on the non-farm sector; an education expenditure review; a trade policy report; a report on non-bank financial markets; two public expenditure reviews; a population and health sector strategy, and a municipal finance study. II. TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE 8. The Bank is actively involved in providing technical and advisory assistance to the Government in a number of areas, including banking, SOE privatization, direct taxation, judicial reform, tariff and trade policy, transport, and poverty monitoring and analysis. III. DONOR COORDINATION 9. IDA chairs the annual Bangladesh Development Forum. The next Development Forum meeting is presently slated to be held in Paris in April 2000. With the decentralization of the World Bank, the Country Director is now based in Dhaka. The Dhaka office plays a leading role in local aid coordination through the local consultative group forum. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 40 - ANNEXIV Table la. Bangladesh: JBRD and IDA Lending Operations (In millions of U.S. dollars; as of June 30,1999) Disbursed Undisbnrsed Closed loans/credits IBRD IDA Active loans/credits IBRD IDA Total Repayments Total outstanding (including undisbursed)’ 5,294.6 0.0 54.9 0.0 5,239.7 4.1 1,093.2 1889.0 0.0 0.0 1,093.2 1,889.O 6,387.g 1.889.0 417.7 0.0 7,859.1 Table 1 b. Bangladesh: IBRD and IDA Lending by Sector, 1972/73- 1998/99 Sector Agriculture Original Amount 1,515.4 Percent 16.8 Number of Projects 49 Education Electric Power & Other Energy Environment Finance industry Multisector Oil & Gas Population, Health & Nutrition Public Sector Management Telecommunications Transportation Urban Development Water Supply & Sanitation 629.3 7.2 13 910.7 10.5 11 260.5 1.4 2 386.9 4.5 7 752.0 8.3 20 1,873.5 19.3 25 481.5 5.5 7 614.8 7.1 6 51.0 0.6 3 62.7 0.7 3 1.884.9 15.3 20 47.6 0.5 1 239.2 2.4 8 Table 1 c. Bangladesh: Disbursements and Debt-Service Payments to the World Bank FY92-FY99 (as of June 30,1999) FY92 FY93 FY94 FY95 FY96 FY97 FY98 FY99 lBRD (net) -2.4 -3.4 -3.7 -4.2 -4.7 -4.5 -4.5 -4.7 Disbursement 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Amortization 2.4 3.4 3.7 4.2 4.7 4.5 4.5 4.7 IDA (net) 218.6 313.8 330.7 249.9 181.1 262.4 273.3 405.9 Disbursement 236.2 338.4 360.2 287.3 226.6 3 14.6 331.5 472.0 Amortization 17.6 24.6 29.4 37.3 45.5 52.2 58.1 66.1 Interest 35.7 37.3 39.9 43.6 46.2 44.8 44.7 46.8 LBRD 3.7 3.6 3.4 3.5 3.4 2.8 2.4 2.1 IDA 32.0 33.7 36.5 40.1 42.8 42.0 42.3 44.7 Source: Data provided by the World Bank (Jntegrated Controllers System-Net Disbursement and Charges Summary Report), ‘Net of exchange rate adjustments. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4l- ANN-EXV Bangladesh: Relations with the Asian Development Bank I. LENDING OPERATIONS 1. The Asian Development Bank (AsDB) has assisted Bangladesh since 1973. As of June 30, 1999, the AsDB had provided Bangladesh with 134 loans amounting to $5,643.6 million. 2. The AsDB’s overall operation strategy for Bangladesh focuses on poverty reduction. The medium-term priorities are: (i) to promote faster private sector-led economic growth; (ii) to create better development opportunities for the poor; (iii) to improve human development; and (iv) to improve and protect the environment. 3. The AsDB’s lending program for 1999 is about $332 million ($75 million OCR and $257 million ADF). This is the first year in which Bangladesh will receive a loan from the Bank’s ordinary capital resources (OCR) window. The AsDB has approved a loan for the Secondary Education Sector Improvement Project ($60 million). Two more loans are expected to be approved in the fourth quarter i.e., Southwest Road Network Development ($115 million), and Dhaka Power Systems Upgrade ($75 million ADF, and $75 million OCR). II. 2000-2002 PROGRAM 4. The overall size of the lending program of the AsDB for the 2000-2002 period is $1,315 million with 19 loans ($255 million OCR and $1,060 million ADF). The program covers several sectors/subsectors and reflects the Bank’s strategic priorities of economic growth and targeted social sector/poverty alleviation interventions. 5. In terms of sectoral distribution, agriculture, natural resources and social infrastructure comprise 63.2 percent by number of projects. The balance is for finance and industry, energy, and transport. The program includes $270 million for energy, $250 million for transportation, $330 million for agriculture and natural resources, $345 million for social infrastructure, and $120 million for finance and industry. IIL TECHNICAL AsSIsrANcE 6. Until June 30, 1999, AsDB bad provided Bangladesh with $145.5 million for 242 technical assistance (TA) grants for project preparatory and advisory services. 7. The TA program in 1999 includes 11 advisory TAs and 4 project preparatory TAs, in the total amount of $11.8 million (including $3.5 million fi-om the Government of the Kingdom of the Netherlands). 8. The AsDB’s pipeline of TA program in the period 2000-2002 includes 34 TAs with total grants of $20.8 million. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-42- ANNEXV IV. ECONOMIC AND SECTOR WORKPROGRAM 9. The economic and sector work program is designed to support the basic policy agenda of the AsDB’s operation and the Government’s reform agenda. In the past, the AsDB has produced a number of studies of Bangladesh’s macroeconomic and sectoral policies. The AsDB publishes its Country Economic Review and Asian Development Outlook every year in which it assesse macroeconomic performance. 10. The major activity in the economic and sector work in 1999 is the finalization of the Country Operational Strategy of the AsDB in Bangladesh. The annual Country Economic Review and country report of the Asian Development Outlook will also be prepared in the year to update the Bank’s understanding of Bangladesh’s macroeconomic situation. A series of operational strategies in key areas, such as private sector development, water resources, capital market development, and governance, will also be prepared. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-43- ANNEXV Table 1. Asian Development Bank: Loans to Bangladesh by Sector’ (As of June 30, 1999) sector Number of Amount Percent Loans (In millions of U.S. dollars) of Total Agriculture and agro-industry 60 2,051s 36.4 Energy 18 1,069.S 19.0 Social it&structure 23 956.4 16.8 Transportation and communications 16 981.8 17.4 Industry and nonfuel minerals 8 262.5 4.7 Finance 8 217.6 3.9 Multisector 1 104.0 1.8 Total 134 5,643.6 100.0 Source: Data provided by the Asian Development Bank. ‘Includes loans to the private sector. Table 2. Asian Development Bank: Loan Approvals and Disbursements to Bangladesh, 1992-99l (In millions of US. dollars) 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 Loan approvals 256 331 280 227 256 420 184 325’ Loan disbursements 320 230 380 279 301 193 239 Ill3 Undisbursed balance at the beginning of the year 1,758 1,475 1,692 1,382 1,244 1,226 1,221 1,173 Source: Data provided by the Asian Development Bank. ‘Excludes loans to the private sector. *One loan for the Secondary Education Sector Improvement Project ($60 million) was approved on June 22, 1999, with the remainder expected to be approved in the second half of 1999. 3Janwy-June 1999. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 44 - ANNEXVI Bangladesh: Statistical Issues Bangladesh reports core minimum data on a regular basis which are, with some exceptions, notably in the fiscal data, adequate for the conduct of economic analysis and the monitoring of economic performance. With respect to real sector statistics, the national accounts estimates have improved significantly; price statistics, however, are in need of revision. While the monetary data are generally good, the determination of the government’s position vis-a-vis the banking system is complicated by the classification of the accounts of the state- owned enterprises with the accounts of the government. In the fiscal accounts, monitoring of developments has been hampered by a lack of timeliness in the provision of data, the low periodicity of the available data, inconsistent data compiled from different sources, and the incomplete coverage of government transactions. The authorities are participating in the General Data Dissemination System (GDDS) and have agreed to be a pilot country for the preparation of metadata. To this end, STA assistance was provided during July 1998 and May 1999 to develop the metadata and other elements necessary for participation in the GDDS. Outstanding statistical issues Real sector National accounts Bangladesh has a fairly complete system of real sector statistics. The national accounts 1984185 benchmark has been published through 1997/98 in theA4ontMy Statistical Bulletin, prepared by the Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics (BBS). These national account series suffer from a significant downward bias of the manufacturing and trade sectors due to undercoverage of small- and medium-size business establishments, an underestimation of private consumption, and possible overestimation of value added from agriculture. By June 1998, the BBS had revised a new national account series, based on 1989/90, for the period 1989/90 to 1995/96, as result of the Strengthening National Accounts of Bangladesh (SNAB) project funded by the AsDB. In the new series, the coverage and method of estimation of the national accounts have been improved. On the production side, the GDP estimates have been revised based on a new data base developed from the censuses, surveys, and studies conducted between 1988 and 19%. The revised series have also expanded the classification of industrial sectors. Fishing, hotels and restaurants, health, and education are the four new separate sectors in the revised national accounts. On the expenditure side, estimates of GDP have also been revised to some extent in respect of coverage and methodology. In revised estimates, private consumption is directly estimated based on Household Expenditure Survey (HES) data while the 1984/85 benchmark estimated it as a residual. Coverage of investment (gross capital formation) has been expanded to include changes in stocks. The discrepancy between GDP estimates based on the production Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 45- AN-N-EXVI approach and on the expenditure approach now is reflected in the line item “statistical discrepancy.” The 1998 STA mission on real sector statistics found that the SNAB project has significantly improved the national accounts estimates. Consequently, the mission concurred with the November 1997 joint ESCAP/AsDB assessment mission that the revised estimates should be adopted. It also agreed with ESCAP and AsDB that further basic statistical work was needed and that clear priorities and funding support should be established for additional national accounts surveys. In this regard, the mission recommended that the BBS: (i) complete some refinements of the new national accounts estimates, particularly in service activities; and (ii) take the necessary steps to expedite the government’s approval of the dissemination of these estimates. The mission also urged that the BBS continue to implement the recommendations of the 1996 STA mission in the national accounts regarding priorities for new data collection, in particular the development of a comprehensive business register, an improved survey of manufacturing establishments, a survey of trade margins, and a continuing review of relationships between inputs, value added, and output in agriculture. Prices Price series include a consumer price index (CPI), a producer price index (PPI), a wholesale price index, and unit value indices for external trade. All of the price series are in need of revision and updating. Concerning the CPI, the 1998 STA mission on real sector statistics recommended that the BBS give priority to: (i) updating the list of CPI items and outlets using the weights derived by the mission from the 1995/96 Household Expenditure Survey @ES); (ii) improving the price collection system; (iii) expediting the computerization of data compilation; and (iv) periodically reviewing the list of representative products, including their specifications, and implement methods documented by the mission to address specific problems, such as missing price observations, adjustment for quality change and substitution of CPI products. The mission recommended updating the weights of the PPI from the 1994 Census of Manufacturing Industries, and adopting a sales rather than value added basis. In the longer term, broader coverage beyond manufacturing was recommended. Finally, the mission recommended narrowing the product specifications in the external trade price indices to avoid unit value bias, and suggested alternative approaches to accomplishing this objective. Foreign trade Unit value indices of imports and exports have been reported through 1991 only. Government finance Actual data are not available for the budget because of extensive delays in identifying government transactions. Budget estimates are prepared once a year. The main shortcomings also include a lack of coordination among compilers and a failure to reconcile data among different sources, a lack of frequency and timeliness in data compilation, an incomplete Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 46- ANNEXVI coverage of government transactions, and the absence of central compiling and monitoring of government borrowing and debt. A STA mission in August 1995 recommended that the 1996197 budget adopt the new classification system consistent with the Fund’s government financial statistics (GFS) methodology and that the revised government finance data be available by 1996. At present, Bangladesh does not report data on government operations to the Fund for publication in the GFS Yearbook and IFS. The STA database contains data for the budgetary central government for the period 1973-89. The authorities need to improve the consistency of banking and government records on government accounts with banks as well as improve the statistics on government operations. Since the beginning of 1996, the ODA- sponsored Reforms in Budgeting and Expenditure Control (RIBEC) project for improving data on government operations has been revamped, although its scope is now considerably narrower than originally envisaged. A GFS mission sent to Bangladesh in April 1997 found a number of deficiencies in the accounting records of budgetary operations and outlined a number of recommendations that, in conjunction with the RIBEC project, could lead to adequate and timely fiscal data. The GFS mission urged, in particular, that the authorities sharply reduce the extensive delays in identifying government transactions so that all transactions could be classified within a reasonable time after the fiscal period. STNGFD more recently provided detailed comments on the new budget classification proposed by RIBEC, specifying some areas in which it falls short of GFS requirements. The next step would be for the authorities to implement the proposed classification and coding consistent with GFS methodology and report actual budgetary data in an adequate and timely manner. Monetary accounts Monthly data on the accounts of monetary authorities and deposit money banks are reported to STA on a regular basis with a lag of about two months. However, the recent money and banking statistics mission identified a number of problems with monetary data. Most importantly, the mission found that (a) foreign currency-denominated accounts and gold holdings of Bangladesh Bank have been revalued infrequently; (b) the monetary survey data were adjusted to show loans to the private sector as net of provisions; (c) government accounts in the reported monetary data include deposits of several nonfinancial public enterprises; and (d) two banks in Bangladesh, which were licensed by Bangladesh Bank to operate as offshore banks, were treated as foreign banks rather than domestic banks. In addition, on the basis of more detailed information on the accounts of the Bangladesh Bank and the deposit money banks, the mission identified and recommended a number of improvements in the classification of accounts in the monetary aggregates. The mission also concluded that, while the Bangladesh Bank collects and publishes a wide array of interest rate data, most of the data pertain to mandated or announced rates rather than market rates. The authorities reported that some progress was made in addressing these issues, and a STA review mission is scheduled for early 2000. Balance of payments Balance of payments statistics are compiled on a quarterly basis with a lag of about two quarters. The basic data are derived primarily from exchange record data. With the liberalization of the trade regime and eventual abolition of exchange control, the usefulness of this source will diminish. In addition, both current and capital and financial accounts data Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 47 - AIWEXVI have serious coverage deficiencies and some classification problems. Several measures need to be taken to improve the data, including improving the measurement of trade in goods, grant aid, the coverage of direct investment capital flows, and shortening the reporting lag of official publications, which is still about six months, For the long term, enterprise surveys will need to be conducted on a quarterly basis covering all major enterprises, including those active in the Export Processing Zones, and having significant services, income, transfer, capital, and financial transactions with nonresidents. To ensure high quality data derived from surveys, a good response rate to conducted surveys is vital. To achieve this, a strengthening of the legal framework and a stronger commitment of the authorities is necessary. In addition, the collection and the coverage of private sector external debt data need to be improved in order to support the monitoring of private sector external debt. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 48 - ANNEXVI Technical assistance missions in statistics (1994-present) SUBJECT GDDS GDDS Money and banking Balance of payments Real sector GDDS Balance of payments National accounts Government finances Consumer prices Multisector MAIN TASK Follow-up on GDDS Preparation Preparing metadata in all statistical areas covered by the GDDS Reviewing money and banking statistics Reviewing the implementation of recommendations from previous technical assistance and addressing current issues in balance of payments statistics Reviewing price statistics and national accounts Developing the data dimension of the GDDS Reviewing the coverage and compilation of the BOP statistics Reviewing the coverage and compilation of the national accounts statistics Training for relevant officials in the Controller General of Account Office, Bangladesh Bank, and Bureau of Statistics Advising on price statistics Improving the quality of statistics and further developing the institutional capacity of the main statistical organizations DATE May 1999 July 19-28, 1998 February 19- March 4,199s February 2-25,1998 December 29,1997- January 11,1998 May 24-29,1997 February 25- March 2,1997 May 6-17, 1996 August 15-29, 1995 April 19-May 1,1995 July 15-31, 1994 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public. . Bangladesh: Survey of Reporting of Main Statistical Indicators l! (.4s of mid-Dezunba 1999) current overall Exchange International Reserve Central bank Consumer price Exports/ account government External rates remves money balance sheet Broad money Interest rates index imports balance balance GDP debt Data of latest observation 12/15/99 1245/99 1on 1199 10/31/99 10/31/99 I I/30/99 September-99 October 99/July 99 July-99 1998J99 1998/99 1997f98 Data received 12/15/99 12fl5/99 I 29199 12l9/99 1219199 124 1199 1 l/28/99 12f9l99 I l/18/99 11118/!99 10/15/99 10/15/99 10115I99 Frequency of data D D w W W D M M Q A A A Frequency of reporting D W W W w W M M Q A A A Source of data C A A .4 .4 A A A N A N N Mode of reporting E C M M C C M M M V M M Confidentiality C D D D D C C D C D C C li All data is preliminary and subject to later revisions k x C l-i Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public