DOCUMENT OF INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND NOT FOR PUBLIC USE MASTER FILES ROOM HQ C-525 0450 W/99/28 1 CONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL IN-FORMATION November 24,1999 To: Members of the Executive Board From: The Acting Secretary Subject: Kenya-Staff Report for the 1999 Article IV Consultation Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staff report for the 1999 Article IV consultation with Kenya, which will be brought to the agenda for discussion on a date to be announced. Mr. Fajgenbaum (ext. 38637), Mr. Georgiou (ext. 36099), and Mr. Farah (ext. 34526) are available to answer technical or factual questions relating to this paper prior to the Board discussion. Unless the Documents Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the WTO Secretariat on Monday, December 6, 1999; and to the African Development Bank and the European Commission, following its consderation by the Executive Board. Att: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicCONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND KENYA Staff Report for the 1999 Article IV Consultation Prepared by the StaffRepresentatives for the 1999 Consultation with Kenya Approved by G.E. Gondwe and Christian Brachet November 24, 1999 Contents Page Executive Summary.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 I. Introduction.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5 II. Background.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . 6 III. Report on Policy Discussions .......................................................................................... 11 A. Governance Issues .................................................................................................. 11 B. Macroeconomic Policy Issues ................................................................................ .14 C. Structural Reforms ................................................................................................ .20 D. Other Issues .......................................................................................................... .21 IV. Staff Appraisal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22 Text Box 1. Governance Measures Implemented Since July 1999 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .13 Figures 1. Real Sector Indicators .................................................................................................... .25 2. Fiscal Indicators, 1990-99 ............................................................................................... .26 3. Money and Interest Rate Indicators ................................................................................ .27 4. Inflation and Exchange Rates .......................................................................................... .28 5. External Sector Indicators, 1989-99 ............................................................................... ..2 9 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2- Tables 1. Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 1995-2004 ................................................. .30 2. Central Government Financial Operations, 1995/96- 1999/2000 ....................................... .3 1 3. Monetary Survey, 1997-2000 ......................................................................................... .3 3 4. Balance of Payments, 1995-2004.. .................................................................................. .34 Appendices I. Relations with the Fund .................................................................................................. .3 5 II. Relations with the World Bank Group ............................................................................ .38 III. Statistical Issues ............................................................................................................. .43 IV. Selected Social and Demographic Indicators ................................................................... .47 V. Medium-Term Scenarios .................................................................................................. 48 VI. Governance Measures ..................................................................................................... .5 1 Appendix Tables 5. 6. 7. 8. Status of World Bank Group Operations ....................................................................... ..4 1 Survey of Reporting of Main Statistical Indicators .......................................................... .46 Selected Social and Demographic Indicators ................................................................... .47 Medium-Term Scenarios, 1997-2004 .............................................................................. .50 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3- Executive Summary Kenya has pursued generally cautious macroeconomic policies since early 1998, against the background of persistent governance problems and delays in structural reforms which had adverse effects on investor and donor confidence. Investment and productive efficiency have accordingly remained low, resulting in continued weak economic growth. To deal with these problems, the authorities have begun to implement a comprehensive set of measures to improve governance and have stressed their commitment to implement additional measures in this area. 7hey have also begun to inten& structural reform. l Following a considerable relaxation in 1996/97 and in the first half of 1997/98, fiscal policy was tightened under a staff-monitored program for March-June 1998, and Cuther when a balanced budget was adopted for 1998/99. In the event, there was an overall deficit of 0.7 percent of GDP in 1998/99, reflecting unanticipated outlays of 0.9 percent of GDP related to the rescue of the state-owned National Bank of Kenya (NBK). A government instituted task force concluded in April 1999 that domestic arrears, whose stock turned out to be much larger than originally thought, often did not comply with the relevant financial regulations. External arrears have continued to increase. l Monetary policy was appropriately cautious throughout most of 1998. Starting in November 1998, however, there were unsterilized injections of liquidity associated with the rescue of the NBK. Following a sharp decline in interest rates, a 20 percent depreciation of the shilling, and a considerable fall in official reserves, monetary policy was tightened in mid-1999, partly reversing those developments. Inflation, which had been below 2 percent until mid-1999, has increased subsequently, mainly owing to fuel and food price increases and the lagged effects of the depreciation. Real GDP growth slowed from 2.3 percent in 1997 to 1.8 percent in 1998 and may have slowed further in 1999. Until June 1999, progress in implementing governance measures was slow and, in .some cases, mechanistic while only modest steps were taken in the areas of structural reform during 1998-99. l The Article IV consultation discussions focused on policy reforms necessary to achieve economic growth rates in the range of at least 5-6 percent a year over the medium term and thus help reduce unemployment and poverty. Such reforms include a comprehensive set of measures to address wide-ranging problems in governance; a consolidation of the macroeconomic stabilization achieved since early 1998; and steps to improve the allocation of resources through an acceleration and broadening of the scope of structural reform. l To improve governance, the authorities undertook to implement a comprehensive set of measures, covering areas such as (i) enhancing accountability; (ii) strengthening control bodies; (iii) improving budget planning and execution; (iv) changing incentive mechanisms; and (v) removing rent-seeking opportunities. They have implemented a substantial array of measures in these areas, particularly: government procurement; the strengthening of anticorruption and audit bodies; the application of existing regulations to officials to deal with governance issues; budget monitoring; and expenditure commitment authority. Measures that the authorities intend to adopt but that will take longer to formulate and implement include strengthening anticorruption legislation; improving budget planning and implementation; Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4- formulating and executing a reform plan for the judiciary; strengthening the code of conduct for officials; and eliminating rent-seeking opportunities by reform of the tax and trade system. l In reviewing the budget for 1999/2000 in early October, the authorities and the staff agreed that the overall deficit (commitment basis and excluding grants, which are about 0.6 percent of GDP) would likely amount to about 1 percent of GDP. Such a deficit would about triple the domestic financing requirement of the government to 5 percent of GDP, owing to large net external debt amortization payments and the need to pay off domestic and foreign arrears. This would pose considerable risks to maintaining the stabilization gains achieved since early 1998. The authorities agreed to take steps to limit this requirement to about 2 percent of GDP. They intend to implement measures equivalent to 1 percent of GDP and to delay clearing part of the stock of domestic arrears (1.3 percent of GDP) until proper verification; they expect the remaining gap of 0.7 percent of GDP to be covered by the privatization proceeds from the planned sale of the telecommunications company (TELKOM). If the latter is delayed, they would maintain external arrears at US$80 million and repay them in the next fiscal year or reschedule them. The staffurged the authorities to eliminate all external arrears as soon as feasible and to monitor fiscal developments closely so as to be ready to take additional measures as necessary to contain the government’s domestic financing at the agreed level. l The authorities undertook to sustain a conservative monetary policy. To facilitate the conduct of such policy, the Central Bank of Kenya (CBK) will broaden the set of indicators it uses to assess the monetary stance. The exchange rate would be market determined, with intervention by the CBK guided by the achievement of the reserve target. The decision to privatize the remaining 35 percent of the Kenya Commercial Bank (KCB) is welcome, and the sale of the NBK should proceed soon thereafter. Progress has been made in implementing NBK’s restructuring plan since early 1999, but the bank’s position remains fragile. The Banking Supervision Department and prudential regulations have been strengthened, and strict enforcement of the regulations is important. l Increases in import duties and additional suspended duties were introduced with the 1999/2000 budget. The staff strongly recommended the reversal of these steps, and the subsequent phasing out of remaining suspended duties. Protectionism and dumping practices faced by Kenya need to be addressed through appropriate mechanisms, including through the cautious use of WTO-consistent antidumping procedures in valid cases. l To achieve sustainable fiscal consolidation and improve expenditure composition, the authorities intend to accelerate the rationalization of government functions, the formulation of a civil service reform strategy, and the preparation of a medium term expenditure framework. In an important step toward the rationalization of government functions, the number of ministries was reduced from 27 to 15 in September 1999. However, the number of ministers remained the same. l The authorities have recognized the need to intensify structural reform and have decided to sell 49 percent of TELKOM to a strategic partner. However, they need to accelerate the privatization of other public enterprises and address remaining market distortion. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-5- I. INTRODUCTION 1. The 1999 Article IV consultation discussions with Kenya were held during June 28-July 13 in Nairobi and during October l-5 in Washington. The mission’ met with the Vice President, the former and the new Minister of Finance (in June-July and in October, respectively), the Secretary to the Cabinet and Head of the Civil Service, the Minister of Agriculture, the Minister of Regional Integration, the Governor of the Central Bank, the Attorney General, other senior officials, and representatives of the business community and the labor unions. The staff worked in close cooperation with the donor community and the staff of the World Bank in Nairobi. In late July, President Moi made a number of significant appointments, including those of Dr. Leakey as Secretary to the Cabinet and Head of the Civil Service and of a new economic team, who have contributed importantly in the efforts at strengthening governance in Kenya. In a brief visit to Nairobi during August 23-24, the head of the mission met with President Moi, as well as with the new economic team. 2. Kenya’s last arrangement under the Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility (ESAF) was approved on April 26, 1996 for an amount equivalent to SDR 149.6 million (75 percent of the then quota), but only the first disbursement (SDR 24.9 million) was made. The first annual arrangement expired in July 1997 without completion of the review because of insufficient progress in addressing governance issues. The ESAF arrangement lapsed in April 1999. 3. At the conclusion of the last Article IV consultation (5/22/98), Directors urged the authorities to implement the agreed prior actions for initiating program discussions, and emphasized the need for further and sustained improvements in the area of governance. In view of the large fiscal slippages in 1996/97 (July-June) and the first half of 1997/98, Directors stressed the need for strong and sustainable fiscal adjustment to ensure financial stability and lower real interest rates. They urged the authorities to resist pressures to relax monetary policy and to maintain exchange rate flexibility. Directors stressed the importance of strengthening bank supervision and accelerating structural reform to place the economy on a path of higher, sustainable growth. 4. At the informal Executive Board meeting held on May 18, 1999, Directors viewed the implementation of the agreed prior actions on governance as rather formalistic and recommended postponement of the initiation of negotiations on an ESAF-supported program. They suggested, instead, that the staff conduct the 1999 Article IV consultation discussions first and pursue informal consultations with the authorities, with a view to assessing their record of policy implementation and their commitment to reforms in the area of governance. On this basis, Directors would consider whether the authorities have made sufficient progress in the area of ’ The staff team comprised Mr. Fajgenbaum (head), Mr. Farah, Mr. Georgiou (all AFR), Mr. Flanagan (FAD), Mr. McGettigan (PDR), and Ms. Hemandez (AFR; staff assistant). It worked closely with an MAE mission that took place during the July discussions. Mr. Osunsade, the Fund’s Senior Resident Representative, participated in the work of the missions. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-6- governance to warrant the initiation of program negotiations. In this light, the stti agreed with the authorities to conduct the Article IV consultation discussions in two stages, so as to allow them time to implement measures to address governance problems. -5. Kenya accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4 of the Fund’s Articles of Agreement on June 30, 1994 (EBD/94/116; 7/l l/94). It maintains a multiple currency practice subject to Article VIII, Section 3 (EBS/94/141; 7/6/94), arising from outstanding commitments under the now abolished Exchange Risk Assumption Fund. The Board on May 22, 1998 approved the retention of this practice until December 3.1, 2003. On October 3 1, 1999, Kenya’s outstanding use of Fund credit amounted to SDR 112.13 million, or 4 1.3 percent of quota. Kenya’s relations with the Fund and the World Bank are described in Appendices I and II, respectively. 6. Reporting of the core financial data to the Fund is generally timely, but the quality of Kenya’s official macroeconomic statistics has deteriorated over time. Deficiencies in national accounts, money and banking, government finance, external debt, and balance of payments statistics complicate economic analysis, and technical assistance is being provided by the Fund to address them. A detailed assessment of the quality of Kenya’s statistics is provided in Appendix III. IL BACKGROUND 7. Kenya’s economic performance weakened over the last decade because of the failure to sustain prudent fiscal and monetary policies, the slow pace of structural reform, and the persistence of governance problems. The often lax fiscal policy led to a rapid buildup of short- term government debt, which, in combination with declines in the saving rate,2 translated into lending rates in excess of 20 percent in real terms. This, together with other high costs of doing business in Kenya--on account of corruption, a deteriorating infrastructure, and an inefficient parastatal sector (e.g., utilities, port services, and rail transportation)-depressed investment and its effectiveness, and as a consequence economic growth (Figure 1 and Table 1). Since early 1998, Kenya’s economic performance has been mixed. It has achieved a fiscal adjustment against the difficult backdrop of worsening terms of trade, a dearth of external financing, and adverse climatic conditions. At the same time, the rescue of a major bank in late 1998 strained fiscal policy and temporarily weakened monetary policy, contributing to a depreciation of the currency. Reflecting these elements, investor confidence has remained weak, growth has continued to decline, and external arrears have risen. 8. Following a considerable relaxation in 1996/97 and in the first half of 1997/98, fiscal policy was tightened in March 1998. The relaxation mainly reflected the large wage increases ’ National saving fell from about 20 percent of GDP in 1991 to 13 percent in 1998, reflecting the instability caused by bouts of policy indiscipline and a decline in real per capita income. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-7- that were awarded to teachers and civil servants in the run-up to the national elections.3 However, confronted with a budget deficit (commitment basis and excluding grants) estimated to widen to 3.9 percent of GDP in 1997/98, compared with an original target of 1.7 percent, the authorities adopted fiscal measures in the context of a staff-monitored program for March-June 1998. As a result, the overall deficit (commitment basis and excluding grants) was contained at 2.5 percent of GDP in 1997/98 and 1.7 percent when including grants (Figure 2 and Table 2), broadly in line with the program target.4 Domestic arrears (which are included in the deficit estimate) rose by 0.4 percent of GDP during the program period, in contrast to the envisaged reduction. 9. Continuing with the tightening of fiscal policy, the authorities adopted a balanced budget for 1998/99. The budget was based on (i) the politically sensitive abrogation of the remainder of the 200 percent increase in teachers’ salaries; (ii) a freeze in the salaries of civil servants and teachers, except for the 4 percent annual grade increment; and (iii) a 23,000 post reduction in the government payroll as of July 1998. In the event, the government finances showed an overall deficit (commitment basis and excluding grants) of 0.7 percent of GDP in 1998/99 (and a balance of zero when grants are included), owing to unanticipated government outlays of 0.9 percent of GDP related to the rescue of the state-owned National Bank of Kenya (NBK, the fourth largest commercial bank). The authorities considered that they had to shore up the NBK to avert the spreading of the loss of confidence to other banks, particularly the largest commercial bank, the Kenya Commercial Bank (KCB, which is also partly government-owned). Expenditure on development projects was significantly lower than budgeted,5 offsetting additional wage costs arising from delays in civil service reform and unanticipated outlays on the maize safety net. With the exception of investment income, which benefited from large Central Bank of Kenya (CBK) profit transfers, revenue was weaker than expected, owing to slower-than-projected economic growth, small commercial bank profits caused by heavy provisioning for impaired assets, and administrative problems in collecting fees. As net amortization of external debt amounted to 1.2 percent of GDP, domestic financing was 1.5 percent of GDP in 1998/99. 10. The authorities reduced the stock of domestic arrears in 1998/99, but there was a further buildup of external arrears. In April 1999, a special task force estimated the stock of domestic arrears (which include those of the central government and public authorities) at K Sh 25.4 billion (about 3.4 percent of GDP) as of end-August 1998. This implied that the stock 3 Following a strike, teachers received a salary increase of 200 percent over a five-year period, starting with a 35 percent rise in 1997/98, and substantial increases in allowances. Civil servants received salary increases of 18 percent in 1997/98. 4 The transfer of K Sh 7.6 billion (1.1 percent of GDP) in realized central bank profits on the final day of the fiscal year is not included as revenue in 1997/98 because it was originally expected to take place in 1998/99. ’ Persistent weaknesses in the management and implementation capacity of development projects also constrained donor financing and development spending. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-8- of central government domestic arrears was K Sh 19.8 billion (about 2.7 percent of GDP) at the end of 1997/98-K Sh 9.7 billion more than had previously been estimated. The report of the task force revealed that most of these arrears were related to development spending, of which only a small fraction strictly conformed with financial regulations and procedures, thereby suggesting a link between the buildup of domestic arrears and governance issues. By the end of 1998/99, the stock of domestic arrears was about K Sh 15 billion (2 percent of GDP), as the authorities cleared K Sh 6.6 billion in arrears through a netting out against tax arrears of public utilities (K Sh 5.7 billion) and through direct securitization (K Sh 0.9 billion), and reportedly incurred new pending bills amounting to K Sh 1.8 billion. An external audit of domestic arrears that is under way (see Box 1) may find that a number of these arrears are not valid. However, unreported arrears may come to the surface on account of the 800 development projects that were removed from the 1998/99 budget but were not necessarily contractually terminated. External arrears rose by US%58 million (0.5 percent of GDP) in 1998/99. The authorities explained that liquidity constraints and a tight domestic market for government paper contributed to this buildup. 11. Monetary policy was appropriately cautious throughout most of 1998 and was supported by a marked reduction in domestic government borrowing (including arrears) between March and end- 1998. The CBK gradually reduced its holdings of government paper, including through a more active use of repurchase operations. This led to a drop in the 1Zmonth growth rate of M3X (broad money plus foreign currency deposits) from 11.9 percent at end-1997 to 9.2 percent in November 1998 and of M4X (M3X plus government securities held by nonbanks) from 14.9 percent to 6.2 percent over the same period (Figure 3 and Table 3). In this context, during the 12-month period to November 1998, inflation (end of period) was reduced from 8.3 percent during 1997 to 2.9 percent (Figure 4), the treasury bill rate--the benchmark rate in financial markets in Kenya-declined from 27 percent to 15 percent, and the net foreign assets of the banking system rose by about UW20 million. 12. Monetary policy was relaxed in late November 1998, as the injection of liquidity associated with the rescue of the NBK was not fully sterilized. The injection represented about 7 percent of reserve money. As a result of the increase in liquidity, the treasury bill rate fell below 8 percent by February 1999, and the interbank rate dropped to less than 5 percent in March 1999. In these circumstances, during December 1998-May 1999, the Kenya shilling depreciated by about 20 percent against the U.S. dollar, and official international reserves were allowed to decline by about US$180 million to less than US$600 million, or to the equivalent of 2.1 months of imports. The increase in bank liquidity did not lead banks to significantly increase their lending, except in foreign currency terms, but they built long foreign exchange positions (often in excess of the prudential ratio).6 13. Beginning in June 1999, a tightening of monetary policy through sterilixation repurchase operations led to an increase in interest rates, a gradual buildup of reserves, 6 The CBK did not directly sell foreign exchange to the banks, but it did not replenish its reserves by buying from the market what it sold to the government to service its foreign debt. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-9- and the stabilization of the shilling. The monetary stance, together with increased government borrowing around the end of the fiscal year, caused the treasury bill rate to rise to some 17 percent and the (monthly average) interbank interest rate to about 15 percent in September. The shilling has fluctuated within the range of K Sh 73-77 per U.S. dollar since June 1999. 14. Following a considerable decline, inflation has rebounded, and economic growth has remained weak. Consumer price inflation declined from 2.5 percent during 1998 to -0.6 percent during the 12 months through July 1999 but rose to 8.2 percent through October 1999, on account of rising fuel and food prices and the delayed effects of the depreciation. Real GDP growth is estimated to have slowed from 2.3 percent in 1997 to 1.8 percent in 1998, and to have slowed further to 1.4 percent in the 12 months ended August 1999. The agricultural sector recovered somewhat from the adverse effects of the “El Nifio” phenomenon, while growth in almost all other sectors declined.’ This weak performance reflected the dire condition of Kenya’s infrastructure, continued governance problems, and a decline in investment from 19 percent of GDP in 1997 to some 17 percent in 1998, while the effectiveness of investment remained poor.’ The decline in investment seems to reflect weak investor confidence regarding the course of macroeconomic policies, as suggested by the persistent high real interest rates. Employment growth remained slow and well below the estimated increase in the labor force, implying further increases in unemployment and poverty.g 15. Although the external current account weakened somewhat, the overall balance of payments showed a modest improvement in 1998. The current account deficit (excluding official transfers) increased from 4.4 percent of GDP in 1997 to 4.8 percent in 1998,” reflecting a poor export performance and a worsening in the terms of trade (Table 4 and Figure 5). The capital account surplus increased in 1998, mainly on account of lower public sector net amortization payments on external debt and the return of relative calm to financial markets in Kenya after the instability experienced in the second half of 1997. As a result, the overall balance of payments shifted from a deficit ofUSS13 million in 1997 to a surplus of US$74 million in 1998. External arrears were reduced by US$95 million to US$23 million at end-1998, and gross foreign reserves remained virtually unchanged, amounting to US$783 million (2.4 months of import cover) at end-1998. ’ Preliminary data suggest that a recovery in tourism may have recently begun. ’ See the accompanying background paper for an analysis of total factor productivity developments in Kenya. ’ Appendix IV contains social sector indicators for Kenya. lo There are significant shortcomings in the external current account data, and a portion of the positive net errors and omissions that are now included as part of the capital account are believed to reflect unrecorded current transactions, particularly tourism receipts. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- lo- 16. Preliminary data indicate that the external current account weakened further in the tist half of 1999. The latter development was due mostly to a continuing deterioration in the terms of trade. By the end of October, gross foreign reserves had recovered from their low level in mid- 1999, reaching nearly US$680 million, while external arrears had increased to US$133 million. 17. The authorities made some progress on structural reform during 1998-99, but it was slower than envisaged. They reduced the number of civil service and teachers’ positions by an estimated 17,000 (out of a total of 462,000), compared with a target of 23,000; the difference is attributable to fewer-than-anticipated “ghost” workers being identified, the verification of adequate documentation of teachers who had not been able to produce it during the 1998 head count, and fewer-than-expected workers retiring in the context of the Voluntary Retirement Scheme. The authorities started to prepare the rationalization of government functions, including the transmittal of rationalization guidelines to ministries. In the area of privatization, progress was made toward the divestiture of state-owned enterprises.” 18. Progress in the area of governance, with regard to the actions that the authorities had agreed to implement as prior actions to the initiation of negotiations on an ESAF- supported program,‘* was slow and somewhat mechanistic. AtIer a false start, the Kenya Anti-Corruption Authority (KACA) was reconstituted in April 1999, in accordance with regulations aiming to ensure that the selection process of its board and directors involved a large cross section of Kenyan society. Regarding the prior action related to the Kenya Revenue Authority (KRA), the authorities reafhrmed in public its autonomy; the KRA Act was amended, reducing the number of ex officio members on the KRA Board from five to two and ensuring that Board members could be removed only for good reasons; staff involved in corruption were removed; and the Authority has been operating quite efficiently since early 1998. On the prior action related to the energy sector, the authorities renegotiated power purchase agreements that had been deemed flawed and constituted the Energy Regulatory Board with powers to oversee power generation and distribution activities in accordance with new legislation. The implementation of the prior action vis-a-vis the Goldenberg scandal was, however, less ” The government sold the assets of Atiican Tours and Hotels in March 1999; made some progress toward the sale of TELKOM, by separating the Kenya Post and Telecommunications Company into the Kenya TELKOM, the Kenya Postal Corporation, and the Communications Commission of Kenya; sold to a French Kenyan joint venture the license for a second cellular operator in November 1999; recently approved restructuring plans for Kenya Railways (KR) and the Kenya Ports Authority (KPA); signed two new independent power purchase (IPP) agreements in November 1999; approved the sale of shares of the Mumias Sugar Company and is reassessing the options for privatizing the Chemelil Sugar Company, following the unsuccessful offer for sale in 1998; appointed a private management team for the Nzoia Sugar Company in January 1999; and adopted a plan to fully privatize the Kenya Reinsurance Company (following an unsuccessful offer to sell part of the company). ‘* These understandings were reached in August 1997. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- ll- satisfactory as the investigation into the culpability of officials did not go deep enough, and the report prepared by the Attorney General drew superficial, at best, conclusions on this matter. 19. Other steps taken by the authorities to improve governance included completing of the Kwach Report on reforming the judiciary and starting the implementation of its recommendations;‘3 carrying out some accounting reforms with the help of the World Bank staff; amending the Banking Act to help reduce insider lending; and giving the CBK vetting power over bank directors and the legal authority to supervise institutions and levy penalties, as well as issue cease and desist orders to the managements of commercial banks, which are deemed to be in difficulty, requiring them to take corrective actions within an established time. III. REPORT ON POLICY DISCUSSIONS 20. There is a widely shared view that Kenya needs to raise its real GDP growth to at least 5-6 percent a year on a sustainable basis to achieve modest growth rates in per capita income and to succeed in reducing unemployment, in order to create the basis for a lasting reduction in poverty and improvement in social indicators.14 This would require a considerable rise in investment, as well as a marked increase in the efficiency of investment. Accordingly, the first stage of the discussions focused on the necessary conditions to revive economic activity in a sustainable manner, including (i) implementing a comprehensive set of specific measures to address wide-ranging problems in governance; (ii) safeguarding the stabilization gains achieved since early 1998, in view of a bunching of external debt maturities (4.4 percent of GDP), which has given rise to a very large domestic financing need and an increase in external arrears; and (iii) improving the allocation of resources through an acceleration and broadening of the scope of structural reform in the areas of privatization, budgetary control, rationalization of government functions, and elimination of market distortions. A. Governance Issues 21. The authorities agreed that the adoption of specific, wide-ranging measures to improve governance in the administration of public finances and to reduce the corruption faced by the private sector is critical to help enhance Kenya’s growth prospects. Such measures are also bound to help reduce poverty, as available resources would be used more productively and more resources could become available to address this problem. The authorities also agreed on the need for a systematic approach, rather than a piecemeal one focused on l3 The recommendations include: (i) the introduction of a code of conduct for, and requiring the declaration of assets by, judicial stti, (ii) the establishment of a system of vetting individuals proposed for appointment in the judiciary; (iii) the strengthening of the performance appraisal and incentive systems for judges; and (iv) the improvement of case management and transparency of the judicial system. I4 A medium-term scenario, consistent with these conditions being put in place, is presented in Appendix V. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12- isolated areas or incidents. Such an approach would increase the credibility of the government’s intention to improve governance among the Kenyan public, investors, and donors, and would buttress the current system of financial regulations and procedures. In addition, it would help to reduce the potential for fiscal slippages and the consequent macroeconomic instability that keeps the risk premium and domestic real interest rates high and hampers economic growth. Lessening the corruption faced by the private sector would lower the cost of doing business in Kenya, boost external competitiveness, and, therefore, significantly increase investment. 22. To achieve a material improvement in governance, the authorities agreed to implement an extensive list of measures,” covering the following areas: (i) enhancing accountability, which involves, inter alia, greater transparency; (ii) strengthening control bodies by increasing their resources, independence, jurisdiction, and competence; (ii) strengthening budget planning and execution; (iv) changing the incentive mechanisms faced by potential participants in corruption; and (v) removing rent seeking opportunities. 23. The authorities reviewed the list recommended by the staff, and found it to be in line with their own thinking. A summary of the authorities’ plans, including the status of measures, is provided in Appendix VI. They have already adopted important measures in the areas, inter alia, of government procurement; contract variations; external auditing of domestic arrears; strengthening anticorruption and audit bodies; enforcement of existing regulations related to governance issues; parliamentary auditing of budgetary performance; budget monitoring; tightening expenditure commitment authority; and rationaliition of government functions (Box 1). The measures slated for implementation beyond October 1999 are aimed at addressing additional issues in these areas, as well as enhancing the transparency of the &ances of public officials; strengthening anticorruption legislation; reviewing and reforming the system of internal audit; improving budget planning and implementation; formulating and executing a reform plan for the judiciary; strengthening the code of conduct, including sanctions for civil servants; and eliminating rent-seeking opportunities by reforming the tax and trade system. The staffurged the authorities to priori&e and establish a clear timetable of implementation of planned measures. 24. With regard to the KACA, the Director and Deputy Directors of the KACA who were appointed in April 1999 spent the recent months preparing the institution for its role. They developed and obtained cabinet approval for the conditions of service for KACA staff, and, after interviewing potential candidates, recruited 32 investigators, who started work on October 1, and 15 prosecutors, who entered duty a month later; they also adopted a code of conduct for the KACA staff. The KACA is now adequately equipped to initiate its functions, but additional funding will be necessary ifit is to operate outside Nairobi (e.g., in Mombasa or Kisumu). The KACA is also seeking technical assistance from donors and international organizations. In l5 The list benefited from discussions with donor representatives in Nairobi. The staff explained to the authorities that these measures were not exhaustive, nor should they be interpreted as conditions for resuming negotiations on an ESAF-supported program. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13 - . . . . . . l . . 0 . . . . . . . . . . l . . . Box 1. Governance Measures Implemented Since July 1999 Increased the membership of the Central Tender Board (CTB) from eight to ten, with new members nominated by civil society organizations; appointed a private sector representative as chairman of the CTB. Initiated tender advertisements in at least two newspapers with wide circulation. Initiated making public the summaries of tender boards’ minutes, with the full minutes made available to interested parties upon request. Established the quarterly reporting of CTB activities, including all bids received, names of bidders, and successful bids. Established an appeals board for tender decisions; three of its seven members were nominated by civil %oc.iety organizations. Established the requirement that all contract variations follow tendering procedures. Established the requirement that bidders in tenders declare any contribution in connection with the tender made to any politician/off~cial. Established the requirement that all local authorities and public institutions establish tender committees and follow the strengthened procurement regulations adopted by the central government. Initiated a procedure to identify and include in the budget all extrabudgetary transactions on stalled (but not legally terminated) projects. Strengthened enforcement of existing rules and regulations on improper governance in the public sector. In this context, the authorities dismissed in the period July-October 1999 at least 15 senior public sector officials (including at the Kenya Ports Authority, the Kenya Pipeline, the Coffee Board, the Tea Board, the National Hospital Insurance Fund, the Kenya Veterinary Vaccine Production Institute, forest conservation office, and various regional administration areas); over 100 judicial system employees; and about forty central government employees of various levels, including in the Off& of the President. Engaged four leading accounting firms to verify the validity of outstanding domestic arrears. Issued a circular requiring the submission of semiannual audited budget performance to parliament. Initiated a process to engage an external consultant to review the internal audit system of the central government and make recommendations to strengthen the system. Established a budget-monitoring unit to improve budget planning and execution. Advertised and selected candidates for the positions of finance o&ers in line ministries, who would have to countersign all expenditure commitments and be accountable to the Ministry of Finance; selected candidates will begin work on December 1,1999. Prepared quarterly revenue and expenditure projections and, based on these, issued circulars to ministries advising them of their quarterly (monthly) commitment ceilings. Issued a circular requiring ministries to report their expenditure commitments to the treasury two weeks after the end of each month. Issued (and publicized) a circular banning any contractors found to have acted corruptly in their dealings with the government from continuing to do business with the government. Created a “reception” unit (slated to install a well-advertised “hot line”) in the KACA to which the public can report cases of corruption. Put in place a code of conduct for KACA employees. Prepared and approved the terms of service for KACA staff, interviewed candidates for all positions, and made all hirings envisaged at this stage, including the appointment of 32 investigators and 15 prosecutors; the first set of prosecutions started on November 1,1999. Initiated a wide-ranging process of strengthening the st&mg of the Office of the Controller and Auditor General (C&LAG), including by beginning to recruit 142 additional staff, and considering improvements in the remuneration of the staff. A draft gazette notice has been prepared whereby the Civil Service Commission would transfer authority for staffing decisions to the C&AG. Initiated a review of all waivers and exemptions from duties and taxes, with a view to recommending any amendments in next year’s budget. 1 Suspended all transactions in public land. I Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14- accordance with the law, the Attorney General transmitted his report on the investigation of the culpability of officials in the Goldenberg scandal to the KACA in early November so that the latter could follow up on the investigation when it is ready to do so. 25. The steps that have been taken to improve governance and the perceived determination of the authorities to deal with issues in this area have prompted the public to submit to the relevant bodies (e.g. the KACA) a growing number of letters reporting alleged corrupt practices and calling for appropriate actions. This civil society-based anticorruption drive is likely to help make the measures that are being introduced irreversible by changing the culture of complacency toward, and espousal of, corruption. B. Macroeconomic Policy Issues 26. Major challenges confront macroeconomic policy in 1999/2000. According to the projections agreed with the authorities, the domestic financing requirement of the government would rise from 1.5 percent of GDP to 5 percent in the absence of corrective measures. This increase is a result of the bunching of external debt maturities mentioned above, the need to pay off domestic and foreign arrears, and the liited availability of external financing. A domestic financing requirement of such a magnitude would inevitably lead to a resurgence of inflation, a further weakening of the currency, and a significant increase in interest rates that would have detrimental effects on the already weak economic activity. Discussions between the staff and the authorities focused on identifying measures to contain the domestic borrowing of the government to manageable levels; in the meantime, external arrears have increased to US$133 million. The authorities agreed to implement expenditure cuts and revenue increases, spread the clearing of domestic arrears to the next fiscal year, and complete the privatization of TELKOM this fiscal year. Nevertheless, as the timing of the latter could not be guaranteed, external arrears amounting to some US$80 million would persist until then; the authorities are also considering the possibility of rescheduling these arrears. More recently, preliminary data on fiscal revenues have raised the possibility of a revenue shortfall that, if it materializes, would require additional fiscal measures to avert jeopardizing the gains in stabilization. Fiscal issues 27. The budget for 1999/2000 envisages an overall deficit (commitment basis and excluding grants) of 1.2 percent of GDP, compared with an outturn of 0.7 percent in 1998/99; the budget projects grants at 0.7 percent of GDP. Overall revenue is projected to decline from 26.7 percent of GDP in 1998/99 to 24.5 percent, while total expenditure would be reduced from 27.4 percent of GDP to 25.7 percent. The decline in revenue emanates mainly from nontax revenue on account of a drop in investment income due to lower central bank transfers to the budget.16 Ordinary revenue is projected to grow in line with nominal GDP, as slight decreases r6 This is because government paper held by the CBK was converted into non-interest-bearing long-term debt at the beginning of 1999/2000. This transaction reduces both revenue and expenditure by the same amount. The authorities argued that the gains from not approaching the (continued. . . ) Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 15 - in tax revenue are offset by increases in nontax revenue.” On the expenditure side, a projected acceleration in foreign-financed development expenditure would be offset by lower interest payments (on account of lower interest rates relative to last fiscal year and the conversion of the government securities held by the central bank into non-interest-bearing bonds) and reduced net lending-which had been increased in 1998199 by the rescue of the NBK. The budget also included a rise in the wage bill of some 7 percent, reflecting the regular annual wage increment and the harmonization of housing allowances among civil servants. 28. In early October 1999, the mission reviewed the budget with the authorities and concluded that an overall deficit of about 0.9 percent of GDP was a more likely outcome for 1999/2000. This outcome is based mainly on a smaller increase in development spending- consistent with the implementation capacity observed over the past four years-and a larger impact of the depreciation on VAT and trade tax receipts, compared with that in the budget. The revised deficit implied, however, a domestic financing requirement equivalent to 5 percent of GDP as a consequence of large net external debt amortization payments and the need to pay off domestic and external arrears.‘* 29. In view of the likely adverse consequences of such a large domestic borrowing requirement on financial stability, the authorities agreed in early October to undertake corrective measures to limit this requirement to about 2 percent of GDP, a level closer to those in the two previous Fiscal years. They agreed to implement expenditure cuts and revenue increases equivalent to 1 percent of GDP and to clear only some K Sh 5 billion of the outstanding domestic arrears this fiscal year, leaving some K Sh 10 billion (1.3 percent of GDP) in arrears to be cleared next year, following proper verification. lg The corrective measures identified by the authorities place emphasis on expenditure cuts and include delaying the harmonization of allowances in the civil service (0.4 percent of GDP), implementing cuts in low-priority other recurrent expenditures (0.3 percent of GDP), and increasing the recovery of loans from market during the year to borrow in order to cover the interest payments on CBK-held paper outweighed the decrease in transparency. ” The decrease in tax revenue reflects, inter alia, the reduction of the top marginal income tax rate from 32.5 percent to 30 percent and the harmonization of the VAT at the lower rate of 15 percent; the standard VAT rate was reduced from 16 percent to 15 percent while the lower rate,, which mainly applied to services, was increased from 12 to 15 percent. ‘* Net amortization amounts to about 2.3 percent of GDP (not including the repayment of end- 1998/99 arrears, which adds another 0.5 percent of GDP). lg The authorities agreed that a wholesale clearance of these arrears would not be advisable, as they need to be carefully audited-a process that has now begun, as indicated in Box 1. The staff urged the authorities to clear domestic arrears over the 12 month period after the audit process is completed. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 16- parastatals (0.1 percent of GDP). Revenue measures include reinstituting visa fees and strengthening tax administration; these measures could yield about 0.2 percent of GDP. These measures would shift the overall balance (commitment basis and excluding grants) to a surplus of 0.2 percent of GDP and a surplus of 0.8 of GDP when including grants. The authorities expected that the remaining gap of 0.7 percent of GDP would be covered by applying the proceeds from the privatization of TELKOM-the timing of which, however, could not be guaranteed-or by maintaining external arrears at about US%80 million in this fiscal year, which would be rescheduled or repaid in the coming year. The staff urged the authorities to eliminate all external arrears as soon as feasible. To date, the authorities have secured the delay in harmonizing the housing allowance and reinstituting the visa fee-which together would yield 0.4 percent of GDP-and have obtained cabinet agreement in principle on the remaining measures.” 30. Recent information indicates that actual revenue in the first four months of the fiscal year fell short of staff projections by 0.3 percent of annual GDP, but the authorities feel that there is no need to revise the revenue outlook because these projections are based on flawed seasonal factors2’. The staff has expressed concern about the situation and urged the authorities to closely monitor revenue developments, with a view to taking additional measures that may be needed to contain the domestic financing requirement of the government at about 2 percent of GDP, including postponing the reduction in income tax rates that is to become effective on January 1,200O. 31. The staff strongly urged the authorities to strengthen expenditure controls, including the avoidance of domestic arrears. A number of steps that could be useful in this area were discussed with the authorities, who incorporated them in their work plan to improve governance. The stti also supported the recommendations of the task force on pending bills, and urged the authorities to incorporate in the budget all projects previously not included in it, and to properly terminate such projects as appropriate. In addition the government should encourage the public authorities to address their own domestic arrears problems. Monetary and banking sector issues 32. Following the mission’s recommendations, the CBK has been undertaking sterihxation operations to absorb the excess liquidity held by banks and thereby limit possible pressures on the exchange rate and prices. In this context, the treasury bill rate *’ The authorities are working with line ministries to identify specific expenditure cuts. *’ The authorities’ view is based on seasonal factors derived using revenue performance of the last 5 years, while the staff projections exclude revenue performance in 1997/98 because of the extraordinary revenue shortfall in the first half of that fiscal year caused by the financial instability and the run up to the national elections. If the seasonal factors used in the staff projections are correct, the staff estimates a revenue shortfall for the fiscal year as a whole of 0.3-0.5 percent of GDP. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17- increased to about 18 percent by end-October (about 10 percent in real terms). The revised monetary program for 1999/2000 is based on conservative projections about the demand for broad monetary aggregates, consistent with an inflation rate of 6 percent and real GDP growth of about 2 percent, and takes into account the planned payment of domestic arrears (equivalent to about 1.5 percent of broad money).** The program allows for an increase in credit to the private sector of about 10 percent and a small buildup of official reserves to about 2.2 months of imports (some US$700 million) by June 2000. In addition to targeting broad money, the staff recommended the use of other indicators to help assess the monetary stance. Such indicators would include various market interest rates, movements in international reserves and the exchange rate, and a variety of measures of liquidity in the economy. The mission also advised the authorities to clari@ the definition of the prudential ratio on the foreign exchange position of banks and forcefUlly apply the prudential regulation to all banks; the authorities have requested Fund technical assistance on the matter. The staff also encouraged the authorities to gradually uni@ (in a liquidity-neutral manner) the reserve requirements on foreign currency deposits (0 percent) and on domestic currency deposits (12 percent), but the authorities were concerned that such a measure could lead to capital outflows. 33. The authorities agreed to maintain exchange rate flexibility, with the central bank intervention basically limited to achieving the reserve target. The CBK has been replenishing the foreign exchange it sells to the government to service official foreign debt while gradually rebuilding its foreign reserves from the currently relatively low level. The authorities acknowledged the need to implement the fiscal steps described above to avoid excessive pressures on the currency. Kenya’s external competitiveness, as measured by the consumer price index- based real effective exchange rate has been volatile over the last few years, but with a gradually declining trend (Figure 4); the depreciation of the shilling since late 1998 has brought down the real effective exchange rate to its mid-1996 level. The acceleration of structural reforms, improvements in infrastructure, and the reduction of the costs of doing business in Kenya would be critical in helping to improve external competitiveness. z 34. The mission welcomed the decision to privatize the remaining 35 percent of Kenya Commercial Bank (KCB) and urged the authorities to proceed with the privatization of the NBK soon thereafter. Regarding the NBK, the authorities expressed satisfaction with the overall implementation of the restructuring business plan (approved by the CBK) beginning in early 1 999:24 it had helped to halt the run on the bank, reduced gradually the bank’s operating ** The authorities intend to eliminate bearer certificates of deposit by end-1999, as these certificates have been perceived as a repository of fbnds from illegal activities. 23 The accompanying background paper contains an analysis of Kenya’s external competitiveness. 24 The management of the NBK was restructured, and new board members were elected in April 1999, creating four board committees for audit, credit, finance, and staff. Approximately 150 employees (including 11 managers) were removed. All identified nonprofitable outlets were closed by end-September 1999. The major fixed assets of the bank were valued, and offers have (continued.. .) Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 18- losses, and improved public confidence in the NBK, as evidenced by a recovery of deposits. Notwithstanding this progress, the bank’s financial position remains fragile because it is considerably undercapitalized and burdened by a large share of nonperforming loans. An MAE technical assistance team supported the proposal of the new management of the bank that the two major shareholders (the government and the National Social Security Fund) convert their deposits in (and loans to) the NBK to equity to help the bank satisfy the minimum capital adequacy ratios. 35. The CBK has begun to build the capacity of the Banking Supervision Department (BSD) and strengthened prudential regulations in the banking sector along the lines recommended by an earlier MAE mission. Banking legislation was amended to prevent insider lending and to give the CBK both vetting power over bank directors and legal authority to supervise institutions, levy penalties, and issue cease and desist orders. The authorities decided to gradually raise the minimum capital adequacy ratio from 8 percent to 12 percent of risk-weighted assets by end-1999, and increased the minimum initial capitalization from K Sh 200 million to K Sh 300 million effective December 3 1, 1999, and to K Sh 500 million by end- 2003. Additional staff members were recruited in the BSD, and training of new bank supervisors has been a high priority. The mission urged the authorities to put in place regulations that would enable the BSD to monitor banks more frequently and encouraged the BSD to be more aggressive and timely in its intervention practices with those banks that do not comply with prudential regulations. External sector issues 36. The 1999/2000 budget included increases in import duties on agricultural products and a broadening of the coverage of suspended duties that reversed in part the progress made in liberalixing Kenya’s trade regime. 25 The staff strongly recommended reversing these steps because they promoted inefficient, uncompetitive activities at the expense of export-oriented sectors. Moreover, the proliferation of suspended duties in recent years has made Kenya’s trade regime more distortive and less predictable and transparent, created opportunities for rent seeking, and contravened the “standstill” provisions of the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA) treaty. been received for all assets identified for disposal and are currently under review. Sale of movable assets is under way through tenders. Loan recoveries since launching the restructuring business plan have amounted to about 7 percent of outstanding loans, and collection performance has improved. The government and the National Social Security Fund (NSSF) converted K Sh 3.6 billion of deposits into long-term loans, and a further K Sh 2 billion is under discussion. 25 Suspended duties (also called standby or supplementary duties) are ad valorem duties levied temporarily on specific products at the discretion of the authorities. Kenya’s trade regime is moderately restrictive--it is rated 6 on the IMF’s lo-point trade restrictiveness index. It has three nonzero tariff bands, excluding suspended duties. The simple average tariff rate in 1998/99 was 16% percent, including suspended duties, but the measures included in the 1999/2000 budget have raised it by 1 percentage point. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 19- 37. Both the authorities and private sector representatives expressed great concern about a perceived increase in dumping practices by a number of countries, as well as the high levels of protection against their own exports. The stafftook the view that any dumping practices should be addressed by cautious implementation of antidumping mechanisms, in cooperation with regional trading partners, and suggested that the authorities seek technical assistance to enhance Kenya’s implementation expertise in this area. It also encouraged the authorities to document any protectionist measures against Kenyan exporters and to present their case in the respective importing countries as well as in COMESA. 38. Although external arrears were reduced during 1998, the mission noted with concern the sharp increase in such arrears that has taken place in 1999. Arrears were reduced by US$95 million during 1998 to US$23 million but increased again to US$133 million by early November 1999.26 The staff expressed strong concern about the growing stock of external arrears outstanding and its implications for the creditworthiness of the country and urged its elimination as soon as feasible. The authorities expect the stock of external arrears to fluctuate in line with the government’s cash flow, but they would reduce these arrears to about US$80 million as revenue collections increase (reflecting seasonal factors). As indicated above, this stock would be eliminated with the proceeds from the sale of TELKOM or rescheduled. The staff urged the authorities to put in place a debt-monitoring and debt-management system that would help to, inter alia, avoid the bunching of maturities and the potential unauthorized assumption of foreign liabilities, including by centralizing the contracting of external debt. 39. Export volume growth is projected to remain weak in 1999, as exporters are constrained by the same factors affecting all Kenyan producers (see paragraph 7), but export growth could reach 6.5 percent in 2000. Import volumes are projected to decline by 5 percent in 1999, but to increase by about 4 percent in 2000 following the expected economic recovery. On the services side, after an incipient recovery in late 1999, tourism earnings are expected to continue to grow in 2000, as a result of the more depreciated shilling and the improving security situation in Kenya. In the context of the planned macroeconomic policies described above, the current account deficit (excluding official transfers) is expected to remain at about 5 percent of GDP in 1999 and 2000. Both official and private capital inflows are expected to increase in 2000, as confidence in the governance and economic reforms takes hold. After a projected deficit of about US$lOO million in 1999, the overall balance of payments is expected to register a surplus of US$l 1 million in 2000. However, a financing gap of US$259 million is projected for 2000, reflecting the need to repay the Fund, eliminate external arrears, and maintain the import coverage of reserves broadly unchanged at 2.2 months of imports. 26 Most of these debt arrears are to bilateral creditors. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 20 - C. Structural Reforms 40. The authorities agreed that addressing existing structural distortions was necessary to achieve the desired high and sustainable growth over the medium term. In the agricultural sector, the authorities planned to fit-ther liberalize the tea sector, including by reducing the role of the Kenya Tea Development Authority in the marketing of tea. Along similar lines, and in view of the decline in coffee output, the staff recommended limiting the monopoly power of the Coffee Board in coffee marketing (including the coffee auctions), restricting the board’s activities to providing extension services and research, and eliminating the requirement that small coffee growers sell their output to cooperatives. The mission also recommended that the involvement of the National Cereal and Produce Board (NCPB) in maize marketing be limited to managing a small strategic reserve. The staff expressed concern about the growing unemployment and encouraged the authorities to review the existing labor market regulations, including those affecting the setting of minimum wage guidelines and the Industrial Court, in order to ensure that they were consistent with the need to create employment opportunities. 41. The authorities agreed on the need to accelerate the privatization of public enterprises and enhance its chances for success by offering to strategic investors larger shares of capital than had been considered and by lifting restrictions on the quantity of shares that can be purchased by foreign investors in initial public offerings (IPOs). The staff also urged the authorities not to invest heavily in restructuring enterprises prior to their offer for sale or to favor domestic over foreign buyers. In view of the expected efficiency gains and the pressing need to generate high privatization receipts this fiscal year, the staff urged the authorities to carry out the privatization of TELKOM, sell the state’s shares in the KCB, Kenya Reinsurance, Mumias, and Chemelil,*’ separate the assets of Kenya Energy Generation Company (KENGEN) and Kenya Power and Lighting Company &PLC)-in preparation for the privatization in the energy sector-and accelerate the concession to the private sector of both port and railway services. The authorities recently took a number of important steps in these areas, including the decision to offer for sale 49 percent of the capital of TELKOM to a strategic partner, compared with 26 percent previously. They also agreed to announce a clear timetable for privatization in order to catalyze the progress needed in this area. 42. To achieve sustainable fiscal consolidation and improve expenditure composition and management, the authorities stressed their intention to accelerate the rationalixation of government functions. Central to this effort are the identification of the core tin&ions of government, the formulation of a civil service reform strategy, and the preparation of a medium- term expenditure framework (MTEF), *’ with the assistance of the World Bank staff. This would *’ The privatization of these and other sugar mills would significantly improve the prospects for poverty reduction as the inefficient management of these mills has devastated the livelihood of a large population of sugar farmers. ** More generally, the MTEF would help to increase the allocation of resources to priority areas within the aggregate fiscal constraint, as well as improve the operation of line ministries. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2l- help carry out a well-designed program of retrenchment of the civil service and the teachers’ corps-including cost-effective forms of retrenchment-which is a prerequisite for improvements in their pay structure. In an important first step toward the rationaliiation of government functions, the authorities reduced the number of ministries from 27 to 15 in September 1999.*’ The staff welcomed the authorities’ intention to intensifj this reform process in order to reduce the wage bill and thereby enable the reallocation of expenditure to priority areas such as nonwage outlays on education, health, and infrastructure. 43. The authorities expressed concern that social conditions have been worsening during the 1990s and agreed on the need to adopt a strategy to reverse this process. In addition to increasing unemployment and declining per capita income over this period, infant mortality (per thousand) rose from 61 in 1990 to 74 in 1997, and life expectancy declined from 57 years in 1990 to 52 years in 1997, reflecting in part the incidence of AIDS. According to 1997 estimates, about 43 percent of the population lives below the poverty line. The authorities should start formal&g a poverty reduction strategy and in this effort they may want to consider assistance from the World Bank staff and other partners. The sta.E emphasized that policies to increase employment generating-opportunities and reprioritize and enhance the efficiency of public expenditure in health and education should be at the forefront of the authorities’ poverty reduction strategy. In this regard, the authorities expressed their intention to review present policies in the education and health sectors in the context of the MTEF, including an assessment of the need to allocate more resources to health and education spending-especially its non-wage components. This should be supplemented by the more effective safeguarding of such allocations through the budget monitoring and execution process and by closely monitoring the effectiveness of social expenditure through the development of relevant social indicators. The staff suggested that the implementation of a well-targeted social safety net should also be considered in the context of a broader poverty reduction strategy. D. Other Issues 44. The mission welcomed the efforts made to deal with the Year 2000 problem, which appear to have moved Kenya toward relatively advanced readiness by end-1999. The highest level of readiness exists in the central bank, while the banking system has also made considerable progress. In this context, the payments and settlement systems are not expected to encounter problems; if needed, they could revert quickly to the manual systems that were used until recently. Other systems, such as that of the stock exchange, are still manual. Central government systems also appear to be in an advanced stage of preparedness, although there is a risk that sufficient f%nds may not be available to complete all the necessary work. There is also uncertainty about the preparedness of the local authorities and the nonfinancial private sector enterprises; problems in the latter could have important ripple effects throughout the economy. *’ The authorities explained that the number of ministers had been kept unchanged for political reasons. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-22- 45. The staff noted the deterioration of Kenya’s macroeconomic statistics in recent years, and the consequent weakening of the basis for the formulation and monitoring of economic policies. The staff expressed particular concern about shortcomings (and timeliness problems) of the balance of payments data, as well as the state of the fiscal and national accounts. It urged the authorities to address these weaknesses, including by providing adequate resources to the Central Bureau of Statistics (CBS) and by seeking technical assistance. The authorities stated that they would give due consideration to the financial needs of CBS but noted the current budgetary constraints. They also welcomed the assistance provided by a Fund balance of payments advisor during May-August 1999 and requested technical assistance in the fiscal area to, inter alia, help improve the presentation and timeliness of the data. Technical assistance missions from STA in the areas of government finance statistics and money and banking statistics are planned for 2000. Iv. STAFF APPRAISAL 46. The generally cautious macroeconomic policies pursued since early 1998 are commendable, but weak economic growth has persisted over this period, partly on account of slow progress in the areas of governance and structural reform. This slow progress has had adverse effects on investor and donor confidence, and has resulted in increased poverty and deteriorating social indicators-a trend that needs to be reversed urgently. More recently, however, the authorities have undertaken with determination important steps to improve governance and intensify structural reform. With regard to governance, the measures are part of a systematic approach- rather than a piecemeal one focused on isolated areas or incidents--that covers all possible areas relevant to improving governance: enhancing accountability (including transparency); strengthening control bodies by increasing their resources, independence, jurisdiction, and competence; strengthening budget planning and execution; changing the incentive mechanisms faced by potential participants in corruption; and removing rent-seeking opportunities. Furthermore, the measures already taken in this area are substantial and constitute a good basis for initiating a material improvement in governance. To reinforce these measures, the authorities intend to implement an ambitious and comprehensive work plan of f%ther measures in the areas mentioned above, but which require longer to carry out. The present momentum of the reform effort needs to be maintained, as this would be essential for increasing the credibility of the authorities’ commitment to address governance problems. Progress in this area, coupled with an acceleration of structural reform and the pursuit of prudent macroeconomic policies, is critical both in restoring investor and donor confidence, and in fostering sustainable high economic growth in Kenya. 47. Kenya faces important challenges in 199912000 to maintain and consolidate the macroeconomic stability attained since early 1998. The originally projected large increase in the domestic financing requirement of the government-mainly reflecting a bunching of external debt maturities-poses considerable risks, and therefore the authorities’ agreement to adopt corrective fiscal measures and accelerate privatization is welcome. The authorities should quickly identify the necessary expenditure cuts and ensure their appropriate implementation. Moreover, the authorities need to closely monitor revenue developments and stand ready to take promptly any additional corrective measures that may be needed to contain the government’s domestic financing requirement at about 2 percent of GDP in order to maintain macroeconomic stability. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-23 - 48. The increasing delays in the payment of external obligations hamper Kenya’s credit worthiness; the authorities need to clear the outstanding external arrears as early as possible. Critical to this would be cat-tying out the intended privatizations according to schedule. 49. The authorities are aware of the need to strengthen expenditure control (including the avoidance of domestic arrears) and have identified a number of measures in this regard, as part of their work plan to address governance issues. Moreover, they have put in place an important set of measures in the areas of government procurement; external auditing of domestic arrears; strengthening of anticomtption and audit bodies; strengthening the application of existing regulations to officials over governance issues; parliamentary oversight of budgetary performance; budget monitoring; and expenditure commitment authority. The authorities intend to proceed rapidly with the implementation of the remaining measures that they have identified in these areas, including the prompt termination of the arrears-generating extrabudgetary projects, or their inclusion into the budget. The establishment of a clear timetable for such implementation, with appropriate prioritization, would be critical in strengthening the authorities’ credibility in this regard. The authorities’ request for Fund technical assistance in the area of expenditure control and budgeting is welcome, as it should lead to additional steps for further improvement in this important area. It will also be important that all verified domestic arrears are eliminated over the 12-month period following the completion of the audit process. The authorities also need to strengthen the government’s external debt management system. 50. The authorities should be commended for their cautious monetary policy during most of 1998 and the recent actions taken to absorb excess liquidity. The monetary program for 1999/2000 is appropriately based on a conservative assumption about the demand for monetary aggregates, given the envisaged repayment of domestic arrears, and it allows for sufficient credit to the private sector and a gradual increase in international reserves. The exchange rate should continue to be determined by the market, with the CBK intervention basically guided by the achievement of its international reserve target. 51. The decision to sell the remaining government shares in the KCB is appropriate, and the authorities need to proceed rapidly. Regarding the NBK, they should consider ways to help the bank satisfy the minimum capital adequacy ratios and to privatize it as soon as the government’s share in KCB is sold. While significant progress in strengthening bank supervision has been made, there is a need to monitor banks more frequently and to strictly enforce the regulations. 52. The recent increases in import duties and the proliferation of suspended duties have partially reversed the progress made by Kenya in liberalizing its trade regime. These measures need to be reversed and the existing suspended duties phased out, especially given the incentives for rent-seeking behavior they create. Problems of alleged dumping or protection against Kenyan exports need to be addressed through the presentation of the cases in the appropriate forums and, if needed, through the cautious implementation of WTO-consistent antidumping mechanisms. 53. The authorities have recently taken some welcome steps to accelerate structural reform. Specifically, the commendable decision to offer for sale 49 percent of the capital of TELKOM to a strategic partner needs to be followed up with rapid steps to carry out the sale. Moreover, Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 24 - similar steps need to be taken vis-A-vis the privatization of, inter alia, the KCB, NBK, KRE, Mumias, Chemelil, KR, and KPA, while avoiding the investment of significant amounts into these enterprises prior to their sale or the favoring of domestic over foreign buyers. To fbrther enhance the conditions for high and sustainable growth over the medium term, the authorities need to eliminate distortions in product and labor markets, including limiting the monopoly power of the Coffee Board, removing the need for small coffee growers to sell their output to cooperatives, reducing the roles of the Tea Board and the National Cereal and Produce Board, and reviewing existing labor market regulations. 54. The reduction in the number of ministries is a positive step in the direction of streamlining the government, and should help focus the discussion on the core fimctions of government and on the identification of existing redundancies. The authorities’ intentions to follow these steps with a revision of the civil service reform strategy and to prepare both cost-effective forms of retrenchment and a more appropriate pay structure deserve strong support. It is therefore important to use the momentum of these reforms to materially advance the work on the MTEF, with the assistance of the World Bank staff. Strong progress on such a framework is much needed to increase the efficiency and to prioritize government spending, so that resources can be effectively directed toward investment in human capital and poverty reduction. The establishment of appropriate outcome indicators in the health and education areas would help in this process. 55. Kenya’s macroeconomic statistics have deteriorated over time, impairing economic analysis and policy implementation. The authorities need to provide the Central Bureau of Statistics with adequate resources and to implement the necessary measures to improve macroeconomic statistics, especially in the areas of the national accounts, fiscal accounts, debt recording and monitoring, and the balance of payments. 56. It is recommended that the next Article IV consultation with Kenya be held on the standard 12-month cycle. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 25 - Figure 1. Kenya: Real Sector Indicators 9 8 6 GDP goti (ia percent), 1975-99 Employment (in percent), 1985-98 Real GDP growth 75 77 79 81 83 85 87 89 91 93 95 97 99 1985 1987 1989 1991 1993 1995 1997 L . 9 14 8 7 13 6 5 12 4 3 11 2 1 a 10 Investment (in percent ofGDP), 1975-99 I I I I 1 r I I 30 7 6 5 25 4 3 20 2 1 15 0 Formal employment/total active population I/ Employment and population growth (in percent), 1985-98 e Employment growth 73 77 79 81 83 85 a7 89 91 93 93 97 99 1985 1987 1989 1991 1993 1995 1997 14 13 7 6 Sources: Kenyan authorities; World Bauk database; and staff estimates. 1/ Active population (ages 15-64). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public3s 30 25 20 15 10 2 0 -2 -4 4 -8 -10 -12 -26- Figure 2. Kenya: Fiscal Indicators, 1990-99 I/ (In percent of GDP) RWUllle Jq- . \ It Tax revenue --- . .--- -4.m.- / 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 199s 1996 1997 1998 1999 Sources: Kenyan authorities; and staE estimates. 35 30 25 20 1s 10 2 0 -2 -4 -6 -8 -10 -12 35 30 25 20 10 5 0 8 6 4 2 0 -2 -4 40 EXjXlldii~ ;:I; - 20 02 / \ pa- / \ /- \ / --\ \ --..- *I --b capital cxpulditun . 5 10 1990 I991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 l/Data are for fiscal years (July-June); 1998, e.g., refers to 1998/99. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 27 - Figure 3. Kenya: Money and Interest Rate Indicators 80 70 60 50 40 30 20 10 n Domestic Financing and Treasury Bill Rates, June 1992 - June 1999 , 12 .A Domestic financing 1 10 (In percent of GDP, right scale) I( . . ..-- I Treasury Bill rate (In percent of GDP ; letI scale ) -L -- 1 -2 JunY2 Dec.92 JunY3 Dec.93 Jung4 Dec.94 Jun’95 Dec.95 Jung6 Dec.96 JunY7 Dec.‘97 Am’98 Dec.98 Jung9 Lending Rates, June 1992 - June 1999 80 (In percent) 80 70 \ - - 70 60 - - 60 - 50 - 40 /--------. NW.-- -.----me. - 30 - 20 10 - - 10 0 I I 0 Jun 92 Dec. 92 Jun 93 Dec. 93 JunY4 Dec. 94 Jun 95 Dec. 95 Jun ‘96 Dec. 96 Jun97 Dec. 97 Jun 98 Dec. 98 Jun 99 Liquidity Aggregates and Inflation, December 1993 - June 1999 50 (annual percentage change) 50 45 - CR /A-\ \ \ 40- \ Mation (annual average) - 40 \ 35 - M4X 11 \ 30 - \ - 30 25 - 20 - - 20 IS - 10 - - 10 5 - 0 - I 0 Dec. 93 Jun ‘94 Dec. 94 Jun ‘95 Dec. 95 Jim ‘96 Dec. 96 Jun 97 Dec. 97 Jun 98 Dec. 98 Jun 99 Sources: Kenyan authorities; and staff estimates. l/ M4 X equals M3X plus nonbank holdings of government debt. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-28- Figure 4. Kenya: Inflation and Exchange Rates Inflation, February 1991 -October 1999 (In percent, end of period) 70 70 60 - - 60 50 - - 50 40. -40 30 - - 30 20 - - 20 10 - - 10 0 v- - c 0 -10 _ - .rn . . 1991 1992 1993 1994 199s 1996 1997 1998 1999 Nominal Bilateral Exchange Rate, February 1991-October 1999 90 80 70 60 SO 40 30 20 10 0 1991 160 140 120 100 80 60 40 20 0 90 80 70 60 50 40 30 20 10 0 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 EffectiveExchangeRateqFebnmy 1991September 1999 (1990=100) 160 Real d%ctivc exchange nte - 80 - 60 4c, - 40 - 20 .o 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1991 1998 1999 Sources: Kenyan authorities; staff estimates; and JMF Information Notice System. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public250 250 225 225 Imports11 ccc-NN_c , 175 150 Terms of trade l/ 125 100 75 50 I I t I t I I I I I 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 100 75 50 Current account % 1 \ deficit (including I . grants; in percent of 4 Current account % 1 \ deficit (including / \ grants; in percent of GDP) 2 0 - grants; in percent of -6 -8 -8 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 -10 - 29 - Figure 5. Kenya: External Sector Indicators, 1989-99 Sources: Kenyan authorities; and staff estimates. l/ Indices (1989=100); in U.S. dollar terms Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 30 - Table 1. Kenya: Selected Economic and Fin&l hdicaton, 1995-2004 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2Ou2 2003 2004 FTd staffpmjsctions N~thnsl tmwm and @es Real QDP (factor cost) Real GDP per capita Nominal GDP (-m biUiom of Ml.iqs) GDP dathtor -price in&x (annual averege) ConNmur price iadex (end of period) Extonul Ibctol l3qm-b. f.o.b. (ii U.S. dollars) lmporb. f.o.b. (m U.S. d&n) E$:E Tear of kub (- detsriontion; baaed on o.it impah) Nomimdeffec&exdum,y~(-doprtcistion;andofpcaiod) Realeffedinaxchanprat.e(-~andofPa+mi) Gwmmmmnt bud-t 3/ Dcmte&-~ Tobdmtpmlditmn8odnatbnding cllmeatma Capital exp&ime and net lsnding Money l rd cndlt Net doom160 mtseb 4/ 51 cludittotlmg-snt4/ cmdittooemltoftheecommy4lsJI M3@rmdmwieyexcludingfordppcun’mmy&porib) ~x(M3plur~rdgn-cydcporib) M4X (M3X phu nontank hold& holdiap of Scwmnm at papar) Valocity (GDPM3) Intaratti(Wytraarrybill;sndofpariod) Invatmmtt mad nrfn~ btvattnmt cmalg-at otha m4sllatiml~ cantigonmm.ant aher Goremmut budget II Domatic -ltd TdI9-J Tobdc!xpmditum ChadI bakncs (commianant basis) locludblg pnb Exchrding~-’ Nstdomstic6nmtcingm~t -0nnMipb External sutor Cun~ntextemalbalmmc.inchrdmgofhdalkcmsfsn cllmntexb?ntdbtllmlm, m&dingolScinltrnnafen Nstpmsentvalueofs&me.lpubtic&bt(m~t ofaxporhofgoodrtmdmmfackuontactor#Nicsr) Scheduled exbd debt sewice. including the Fund (imparwntofQcpar(ofgoodzandsesvica) D&t~~~(ii~drap~Ofgwrbrmd~tO) Sahsdulcd debt rarvics cmchIdin8 the kndy8ovSmm mt revenue (proant) Owd balance of pqmenta -+I gBP Exbmai debt (end of period) Fxtmnd payt'tenb mrem-t (end of yea) Grov inbrtmtioMl -(end ofyear) (ii motttbt of Imports) Aveqe exchqe tata (K WUSS) 4.8 4.6 2.3 1.8 1.6 2.0 3.2 4.4 5.5 5.9 2.1 2.0 -0.1 -0.7 -0.8 -0.4 0.6 1.8 3.0 3.3 465 527 621 699 740 199 869 947 1.039 1,145 10.8 8.2 15.2 10.6 4.2 5.9 5.3 4.4 3.9 4.0 1.5 9.0 11.2 6.6 2.6 II 6.0 5.0 4.5 4.0 4.0 6.9 10.8 8.3 2.5 8.2 II 5.0 5.0 4.0 4.0 4.0 29.6 8.3 -1.1 -2.3 30.6 -2.6 13.3 2.9 16.6 8.7 -10.7 -2.1 32.2 22 1.1 -2.2 -3.2 4.6 2.8 -4.4 -21.3 3.9 -3.8 -1.2 -18.3 12.3 I.9 0.1 -5.8 9.2 6.2 7.1 -5.6 7.9 6.5 1.2 0.9 6.5 6.0 6.0 4.9 3.9 6.7 5.5 -5.9 -1.3 0.4 -0.6 -17.8 Y -12.2 2/ . . . . 6.5 5.9 5.2 5.8 6.1 5.5 4.2 4.8 -0.6 -0.5 . . . . . . . 16.3 2.6 20.3 7.1 -0.2 9.3 8.5 9.0 9.8 10.5 11.6 13.8 14.1 0.8 -3.5 9.9 8.8 9.0 8.6 9.7 15.4 16.6 13.5 0.2 -2.3 9.7 1.6 1.7 7.0 8.1 -1.9 2.4 16.7 3.5 -14.6 10.8 14.3 14.8 15.5 16.0 28.7 6.5 7.4 0.3 1.2 -1.6 3.3 2.9 20.9 11.5 12.6 5.2 12.5 15.9 9.8 3.1 14.1 15.9 11.9 3.2 . . 14.1 14.9 2.4 2.1 2.0 2.1 2.3 18.3 22.3 26.3 10.7 0.7 tY 5.1 II 6.0 6l 1.3 11 7.1 61 7.5 11 2.7 W 5.8 71 5.1 6l 6.1 71 3.2 6/ 8.0 71 . . . 6l 17.7 w . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (In percent of GDP. unless othsnule indicated) 21.8 20.4 18.6 17.2 17.7 18.7 19.5 21.7 23.4 25.1 5.9 5.1 4.8 4.4 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.2 16.0 15.3 13.7 12.8 13.6 14.5 15.1 17.0 18.5 19.9 17.4 19.5 15.0 13.0 13.6 14.4 15.3 17.4 19.6 21.3 5.9 4.0 3.0 4.3 5.0 5.1 5.2 5.4 5.8 6.2 11.5 15.4 12.0 8.8 8.6 9.4 10.1 12.0 13.8 15.1 29.3 26.0 27.2 26.7 24.9 25.1 25.1 25.0 25.0 25.0 1.2 1.0 0.8 0.7 0.6 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.6 30.4 29.9 29.7 27.4 24.8 25.1 25.1 25.0 24.7 24.5 0.1 -2.9 -1.1 -3.9 -0.4 2.7 0.8 0.2 -1.7 0.0 0.8 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.9 1.1 -2.5 -0.7 0.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.3 0.4 1.8 I.5 1.9 0.2 -1.6 -2.4 -2.8 -2.9 0.3 0.0 0.1 . . . . . . 4.5 -0.9 -3.6 -4.1 4.0 -4.3 -4.3 4.2 -3.8 -3.9 -5.7 -2.3 -4.4 -4.8 4.9 -5.0 -5.0 -5.0 4.5 4.5 191 170 160 153 154 131 120 114 110 108 24.9 24.3 24.7 25.1 27.9 28.6 22.4 21.8 26.7 23.2 18.5 21.8 22.6 23.0 21.4 la.5 23.5 20.6 26.2 25.8 21.0 (In milliorv of U.S. dollars, unless otbenvisa indicatsd) 12. I 10.0 8.1 12.1 10.0 a.1 13.9 11.6 9.4 -139 438 . 6,280 6.172 124 99 458 855 1.4 2.5 51.4 57.1 -13 74 -99 11 134 259 185 5,950 5.750 5.546 5.452 5.514 118 23 123 0 0 788 783 707 809 1,102 2.3 2.4 2.1 2.2 2.8 58.0 61.8 75.5 6/ 182 185 5.733 0 1.450 3.5 209 155 5.97 1 0 1.795 4.1 194 126 6,229 0 2.102 4.5 . . Sources: Kmyao mtthmitia; md stat?cstimat~ and pmjoctimrs I/ IZ-month period ended Oatobar 1999. 2112-mMdil pied mdd fiaptambsr 1999. Y Ds+a era on tid-ye=m (July-June) ba+ 1998 mfen to &al year 1998/99. 4/ chmlgesinpsrcsntofbegbmiq~fpsriodmoMyrtock Y ForMmpMbilitywithdahbcforsl998.(hspat&~ofnc(domerticntabsndsrsWtoUla~ractorIrsuMdthrw%2000. Net domatic nwb hem ir d&cd m h43 mimu the for& exchqe porition of the banLing system, and private sector aodaaxdudslcrsdittonon-dsporit-(lkinghnancial~mdforaigncurrancyossdit,toraridanb. 64 12-madhPe.Iiod end@dAugust 1999. 7/ Thm S#.ma mfer ta the 1999/2000 (June-July) monetmy program w Qd-octobr. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-31- Table 2. Kenya: Central Govctnmmt Financial Operatim, 1995/96-1999t2000 11 1995/M 1996l97 1997l98 1998199 1999/00 Budeet otman Budget Pmjectiont do maaura wtnaauret Rcvmw ordiMtyrcvmue Jncome tax kaport duty (net) Exciiduty value-added tax lnMtmentincomeY3l othu revenlle Appropriatias in aid (AiA) 4/ 145,502 149,250 179.593 188,241 192,263 192,672 190,355 191.855 138,639 140,368 168.338 172,850 175.207 175,509 173,192 174,692 48,054 49,266 56,040 58,537 55,235 59,850 58,394 58,394 21,176 22,773 24,953 27,368 28,444 30,650 32929 32,929 22,612 24,788 28,735 29,095 28,733 31,350 30,695 30,695 28,404 29,050 34,807 37,916 39,205 41,300 42,284 42,284 6,539 4,596 12,272 8,328 16.906 1,850 1,150 1,150 11,854 9,895 11,531 11,606 6,684 10,509 7,741 9,241 6,863 8,882 11,255 15,391 17,056 17,163 17,163 17,163 Eqmditure snd net kndbq 150,848 171,797 195,939 188,724 197,456 202,433 197,302 190,492 rtccmmtcxpmdiarrr 121,742 141,978 161,152 155,592 161,468 161,269 164,592 157,783 wag0 and &tiet 45,886 48,171 62,148 61,020 63,253 67,936 67,677 64,677 Pensiorw 3,086 4,648 4,735 5,674 5,171 5,770 5,770 5,770 Inttratpayuunb 37.245 34,786 37,971 35,788 40,055 28,972 32,005 30,195 Dotnatic interat 31 25,928 26,569 30.358 27,348 3 1,743 19,ao 22,079 20,269 Foreign interest due 11,317 8,217 7,613 8,440 8,312 9.152 9,926 9,926 othertt.mrmll 32722 46,032 45,690 41.217 40,610 44.819 45,369 43,369 Ofwhich: civil service reform 1,990 1,011 800 1.500 750 1,000 1,000 1,000 maize safety net 1,075 1,696 1,327 550 1,050 200 750 750 Adjusknmt for commitment k&s 51 -4,419 940 2,721 -900 -1,188 0 0 0 tinnannt 7,223 7,401 7,887 12793 13,567 13.772 13,772 13,772 Development and net lending 29,106 29.819 34,787 3 1,132 35,988 39,164 30,710 30,710 otdimy dcvelopmmt 10,965 13,513 15201 11,314 7,547 15,476 9,529 9,029 Net lending 2,848 2,476 2,243 1,100 7,712 1,379 1,500 500 Adjuahomt for commitment basis 51 2,427 718 1,336 -1,100 3,002 0 0 0 AiAdove1opment 12866 13,112 19,007 19,818 17,727 22.309 21,180 21,180 COlltiIlg~ 0 0 0 2,000 0 2,000 2000 2,000 Balance (commitment busis) -5,347 -a547 -16,346 -483 -5,193 -9,76 1 -6,947 1,3 63 Granta Balance (commitment basis, including m&) 5,814 5,783 5,272 5,791 4,920 5,844 4,667 4,667 468 -16,764 -11,074 5,308 -273 -3,917 -2,280 6,030 Adjutmmta to cash bask -2,364 6,911 4,444 -9.600 -2,011 -10.537 -16,009 -6,009 Of which: dmge in cxpendiiure aman -2,071 2,418 4,057 -2,000 874 -10,537 -15,000 -5,000 Balmwe (cwh basis) -1,897 -9,853 -6,630 -4,292 -2,284 -14,454 -18,289 21 FiMlUing 1.897 9,853 6,630 4,292 2,284 14,454 18,289 -21 Net foreign bmncing 138 -6,634 -7.20 1 -5,086 -8,732 -9,661 -21,170 -21,170 Ptitizationprocteds 3,846 1,135 1,789 1,500 0 1,500 1,000 1,000 Net domestic tintming -2,087 15,352 12,042 7,878 11,016 22,615 38,459 14,449 Of Ai&: epmdihm amars rccuritization 0 0 0 0 940 10,537 15,000 5,000 Financinggap 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5,700 GDP 6l Stock of domestic debt net (end of period) Military cxpendituv Halth Expmditlt?c Education expenditure 495,948 573,784 659,95 1 108,091 123,443 135,863 9,039 10,472 10,161 9,059 10,568 13,053 31,723 33,483 46,224 711,476 143,741 10,893 . . . 787,811 169,494 11.997 .*. . . . 719,462 146,879 11.087 14,194 50.039 . . . 769,659 769,659 185,338 161,328 1.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Sources Kmym authorities; and Fund staff @imates and projections. l/Fiscal year ending June 30. 2lIn 1997/98. outturn excludes K Sh. 7.6 biion in unexpected advance payments of centtni bank profits (budgeted for 1998/99). 3lIn w99nooo, the numbm dkct the coovasion of CcnEA bank short-term tnaarry bill holdings intn zero-interest long-term bon&. 4/ Rcvmue received by w individual line mini&y that is credited dktly to its vote to defray pat of h expenses 51 With the exception of foreign interest due. the Gscal acc~tmb ETC on 8 ash bti and include expaditwe on previously committed items and do not inciudc some current expenditvc commitmcntr. ‘Ihe edjushnent made here reflects changes in the n&ant itema, namely cxpendihxe armam and the float 6/The lower growth in nominal GDP assumed by the r@fTfor 1999/2000 mainly reflects lower assumed real GDP gowth. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 32 - Table 2 (concluded): Kenya: Central Government %uxncial Opcratio~, 1995/96-1999/2000 I/ 1995l96 1996m 1997198 m9am 1999lOO Budget outtunt Budgel Projections WI0 mesnmr w InmaurCS (ii percent of GDP, unless othenvisc indicated) ReVenUe 29.3 26.0 27.2 26.5 26.7 24.5 24.7 24.9 OtdiNlyrevcnUe 28.0 24.5 25.5 24.3 24.4 22.3 22.5 22.7 xncoulcbx 9.7 8.6 8.5 8.2 7.7 7.6 7.6 7.6 hport duty (4 4.3 4.0 3.8 3.8 4.0 3.9 4.3 4.3 -duty 4.6 4.3 4.4 4.1 4.0 4.0 4.0 4.0 VdN-added tax 5.7 5.1 5.3 5.3 5.4 5.2 5.5 5.5 lnvcatnlmt income 2/ 3/ 1.3 0.8 1.9 1.2 2.3 0.2 0.1 0.1 OtbatBvenN 2.4 1.7 1.7 1.6 0.9 1.3 1.0 1.2 Appmpriatio~ in aid (AiA) 4/ 1.4 1.5 1.7 2.2 2.4 2.2 2.2 2.2 Bxpmdi~mdNtlmding 30.4 29.9 29.7 26.5 27.4 25.7 25.6 24.8 RenanntmqNldihN 24.5 24.7 24.4 21.9 22.4 20.5 21.4 20.5 wages and datia 9.3 8.4 9.4 8.6 8.8 8.6 8.8 8.4 PmsiON 0.6 0.8 0.7 0.8 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 Intcmt paymmb 7.3 6.1 5.8 5.0 5.6 3.7 4.2 3.9 Domestic interest 3t 3.2 4.6 4.6 3.8 4.4 2.5 2.9 2.6 Porcign inkrest due 2.3 1.4 1.2 1.2 1.2 1.2 1.3 1.3 OIhcr-t 6.6 8.0 6.9 5.8 5.6 5.7 5.9 5.6 Of which: civil smicc reform 0.4 0.2 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 maize safety Nt 0.2 0.3 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.0 0.1 0.1 Adjutmmt for cmnmitmmt basii 51 -0.9 0.2 0.4 -0.1 -0.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 AiA-t 1.5 1.3 1.2 1.8 1.9 1.7 1.8 1.8 Devclopmmt and net lmding 5.9 5.2 5.3 4.4 5.0 5.0 4.0 4.0 Ordinmy development 22 2.4 1.8 1.6 1.0 2.0 1.2 1.2 Net lmding 0.6 0.4 0.3 0.2 1.1 0.2 0.2 0.1 Adjustment for commitmmt hasii 51 0.5 0.1 0.2 -0.2 0.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 AiA developmmt 26 2.3 2.9 2.8 2.5 2.8 2.8 2.8 ContllemcV 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.3 0.0 0.3 0.3 0.3 Balance (canmihnmt basis) -1.1 -3.9 -2.5 -0.1 -0.7 -1.2 -0.9 0.2 Gnlnb Balmm (commitment basis, including grants) 1.2 1.0 0.8 0.8 0.7 0.7 0.6 0.6 0.1 -2.9 -1.7 0.7 0.0 -0.5 -0.3 0.8 AdjustntmutocashbGs -0.5 1.2 0.7 -1.3 -0.3 -1.3 -2.1 -0.8 Of IdItch: dlmge in cxpendilurc. mlcars -0.4 0.4 0.6 -0.3 0.1 -1.3 -1.9 -0.6 Balance (ah basis) -0.4 -1.7 -1.0 -0.6 -0.3 -1.8 -2.4 0.0 Film&g 0.4 1.7 1.0 0.6 0.3 1.8 2.4 0.0 Net foreign Gnmcing 0.0 -1.2 -1.1 -0.7 -1.2 -1.2 -2.8 -2.8 F3ivntiNtionpnlNcds 0.8 0.2 0.3 0.2 0.0 0.2 0.1 0.1 Netdomeaticlitiancing -0.4 2.7 1.8 1.1 1.5 2.9 5.0 1.9 ofwhich: cxpmdiw atream amuritization 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 1.3 1.9 0.6 Finnncinegsp 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.7 Mctnomndum items: GDP (ii Kenya shillings) 61 Stock of domutic debt, net (end of period) Militatyapmdituu HcalthExpendiaN ~ionexpmdi~ 495,948 573,784 659,95 1 711,476 719,462 21.8 21.5 20.6 20.2 20.4 1.8 1.8 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.8 1.8 2.0 . . . 2.0 6.4 5.8 7.0 . . . 7.0 787,811 769,639 21.5 24.1 1.5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 769,659 21.0 . . . . . . . . . Sourca: Kmym aodmtitia: ml Fund staff estimates and projections. I! Fiscal year mding June 30. 2/In 1597/98. outturn excludes K Sh 7.6 billion in mcxpmkd ndvsnce paymmts of cmtral bmk @its (budgeted for 1998&W). 3/ ln 1999/2000. the numbers dlmt the convmia of centA hmk short-w trasny bill holdings into zerwintercst long-term bonds. 4/ Revmue received by m individual line ministry that ir credited directly ta its vote to detsy pprt of ib cxpmau. 51 With the exeption of foreign in&rest due, the fircal accountr US on * ash beak md include expmditure on previously ocmmitted item md do not include some currmt expmditure Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-33 - Table 3. Kenya: Monetary Smwy, 1997-zoo0 II 1991 1998 1998 1998 1998 1999 1999 1999 2000 DCC. Mat. Jun. Sep. Dec. Mar. JUU. Aug. Jon. Act Act. Act. Act Act. Est. ESL Est. A&. Proj. (In millions of Kenya shillings) Central Bank of Kenya Net foreign assets 32,402 32,662 3 1,883 38,634 42,518 Net domestic assets 43,451 42,488 46,585 Domestic credit 45,350 44.448 32,494 Govcnnnmt (net) 36.226 34.53 1 3 1,292 Commercial banks 9,124 9.917 1,202 Other items act -1.898 - 1.960 14.091 31,451 3 1,648 2 1,983 20.83 1 29,424 20,83 I -7.44 I 0 9.468 10,817 Reserve money 75,853 75,150 78,468 Currency outside banks 36,182 34,436 33,011 Bank ~eservcs 39,671 40,714 45,457 34,3 15 34,850 31,911 35.266 35,641 39,723 38,186 37,524 20,409 33,871 16,226 25.160 22,695 28,040 2 1,670 29,52 I -2.286 5,831 -5,444 -4.36 I 15,232 5,852 21.961 12,364 69,956 74,573 70,097 72,790 34259 38,894 36.769 36,308 35,697 35,679 33,328 36,482 70,085 74,166 36,649 30,468 33,436 35,698 Banks Net foreign asscu 13,031 12989 9,397 6,52 I 12,274 12,971 8,894 7.024 Net domestic assets Domestic credit Govennnmt (net) Other public sector Frivau sector Other items net 229,420 224,824 220,078 230,903 242,497 244.2 IQ 242,609 240,062 272.258 302,763 310,110 323,454 339,832 346,485 359,892 371,913 383,462 413.191 46,440 48,548 43,122 61,276 63,089 72.59 I 66,084 68,808 78.1 I5 7,823 7,624 8,394 6,565 5,396 6,753 7,152 8,199 6,930 248,500 253.938 271,938 271,991 277,999 280,548 298,677 306,454 327,546 -73,343 -85,286 -103,375 -108.929 -103,988 -115,673 -129,304 -143,399 -140,933 Total deposits 272.998 268,610 273,730 275,407 279,922 295.266 296,423 289,834 3 14.980 Monctaty Survey Net foreign asscfs (NFA) 45,432 45,652 41,280 40,836 42,427 44,185 48,237 47,528 4” :,,;2 Net domestic assets (NDA) Domesdc credit Govcmmmt (act) Other public sector Private 0th~~ items (net) 272,524 266,081 273,228 278.254 285,673 296.46 I 292,455 288,784 3 ] T6 338,988 344,641 354,745 362.527 374,525 381,562 401,433 412,886 4; .,! ..2 82,665 83,079 74,414 83,971 91,129 94,26 I 95.604 98,232 9L.546 7,823 7,624 8,394 6,565 5,396 6.753 7,152 8,199 6,930 248,500 253,938 271.938 271.991 277,999 280,548 298,677 306,454 327,546 -66,464 -78,560 -81,517 -84,273 -88,85 1 -85,101 -108,978 -124,101 .122,116 Money nod quasi money (M3) 294,694 288,718 291,232 296,930 303,750 313,784 309,871 305,056 327,948 M3 and foreign cun-mcy deposits (M3X) 3 17.956 311,732 3 14.508 3 19,090 328,100 340,647 340,692 336,313 361,448 M3X and nonbank holdings of govemmmt debt (M4X) 371,255 377,86 1 375,957 378,392 380,067 392.11 I 391,473 394.507 422.737 Memorandum items: (Change3 in percent) M3 9.8 1.7 3.4 8.1 3.1 8.7 6.4 2.7 5.8 M3X 11.9 4.2 5.8 a.5 3.2 9.3 8.3 5.1 6.1 M4X 14.9 11.4 8.2 9.2 2.4 3.8 4.1 3.2 a.0 Money base Cmmcy outside banks -1.5 -7.9 5.9 -13.3 -1.7 -6.7 -7.2 -8.7 1.9 19.0 10.9 13.2 13.7 7.5 6.8 10.0 6.6 6.0 NDA of banking sector NDA growth (as pcrccnt of base period M3X) NDA of banking sector 2/ NDA growth (as percent of base period M3) 21 . . . 4.8 11.4 7.0 3.8 . . . . . 4.1 9.1 6.1 3.3 8.3 3.2 4.0 4.2 0.3 6.5 4.4 0.8 7.4 2.8 3.4 3.7 0.3 5.7 3.8 0.7 6.7 5.7 6.0 5.1 Other ltcms Net of bankiig sector . . . . . . . . . 33.7 8.3 33.7 52.2 12.1 Privam sector credit including tonoadeposit fm. mtcrprises snd for+ cm-rmcy credits (FCCS) to rcsidmts private sector credit excluding FCCs and credit to nondepository 6% entcrp. 31 . . . . . . . 11.9 10.5 9.8 12.0 18.4 15.7 15.4 10.7 6.7 5.0 7.8 9.2 9.7 9.1 Sourcu: Cmtnl Bank of Kenya and staff estimates 11 In cunmt exchange rates. 2/ Until 1998 NDA was defmcd as M3 minus the forcip exchange position of the banking system, inrtcad of M3X minus #te NFA. This past measure of NDA is used here to eakdae rates of growth against base periods for which there do not exist complete data for MA. The se&s is provided up to 2000 to give a scnsc of dcvelopmmts over time. ps the series of growth rates using the sew definition Of NDA is only available from December 1998 ooward. 3/ Data oo credit to nondcposit fmmcial mtctprises and foreign currency credits are not available before December 1997; tlms gmwtb rates using the inclusive definition of credit to tbe private sector arc only available from Dcccmbcr 1998 onward. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 34- Tabk 4. Kenya: Bskna ofPnymats, 1995.2004 plni8imaofu.s.&~NlasolhnvLe~ 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2W3 2DO4 Rd. Rojediona E f0.b Rink oil tnhel 149 98 90 129 115 138 I51 158 172 I?7 I.024 952 916 837 804 867 933 986 1.045 1.m 486 452 388 290 290 334 377 403 435 457 538 MO 528 547 514 533 554 583 6c9 635 -876 .a54 426 -709 490 -n9 -ml -828 -873 -915 fhnaongoodsmdsmica -594 .417 -?94 -Baa .a48 -876 -936 -1,010 -1,027 -1,090 lncow wo crd Debit f+hielr:oWintaatpIymentr -320 -226 -172 -133 .I50 -145 -I21 -82 -51 -44 26 22 39 41 37 33 48 64 81 97 446 -247 -211 -175 -187 -183 -168 -145 -142 -141 a51 -225 -160 .I51 -159 -152 -135 -112 -108 -107 clJn8nt bmsb (mc) 516 558 579 554 5m 571 587 600 614 624 Plink b4 409 433 497 476 474 499 508 518 528 538 05d be0 107 125 82 79 96 n 79 82 86 86 a@talsaonnt 259 523 373 541 328 460 603 673 682 m4 blvcsencnt-~ ai!Aies be0 OmdJmcdih~. -km lnaows Ptcgmmlo;: Pmjat bar -loons Govamwntsvmnd DUUIOWS cotmnd bsh (a0 Rivltc w -5 43 -127 13 .244 -92 109 207 217 235 -61 -51 -199 -119 -244 -18.5 -97 53 101 14.5 378 400 241 287 257 300 323 325 327 336 111 117 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 192 241 194 230 182 226 249 251 253 7.56 16 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 59 3s 30 40 57 57 57 57 57 57 -439 -452 -440 -406 -501 -486 -420 -272 -226 -184 23 88 3 83 -20 27 27 27 27 27 33 6 69 49 20 67 179 127 89 63 BllCd-(Mt)~ ,,dcmmand.missioMlI 264 480 500 528 5n 552 494 467 465 469 ovdbslma -139 438 -13 74 -99 II 134 182 209 194 139 -438 13 -74 99 -11 -134 -162 -209 -194 Re%m-wJ=) u,eofFundmditmllanstothePund(nct) Dk- Rcpoymmb ChtlgCill- Exap6oNl~ Renmimi%W 172 -389 62 I4 59 -102 -39 -25 -67 -63 -60 -44 0 36 0 0 0 0 -39 -61 -67 -63 40 41 6 -2.5 19 -95 loo -123 0 0 0 m 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 259 a.93 -348 -345 -307 -26 -19 -19 -13 0 0 0 0 -26 -19 .I9 -13 0 0 0 0 185 185 155 126 -398 -84 .387 -467 -427 -450 469 -491 -474 -510 -505 -209 -469 -546 -523 -522 -548 -574 -560 -596 1.924 2.083 UJ60 2,012 I.895 LO@ 2,196 2.352 2.505 2.654 282 287 7.96 212 144 166 I89 214 232 251 331 396 406 546 433 473 493 513 535 554 95 91 170 149 174 207 197 206 223 239 I.217 1303 1,187 1.105 I.144 133 1317 1.418 I.516 1.610 -aa -2398 -1944 -212 .142 -92 -2,454 -2.456 -2,852 -401 -448 -519 -2.053 -2,008 -2333 -laze -2,857 -148 -104 -2,881 -2,153 -g -$I -3.083 -3.283 -3,520 -3.704 -121 -127 -133 -140 -2962 -3,157 -3387 -3,563 -681 -652 -690 -765 -2,281 -2.505 -2,697 -2,799 -3921 -148 -am -i= -142 -515 -884 -1,016 -962 -1,014 -1.087 -1,168 .1,199 -1268 458 855 788 783 707 809 1.102 I.450 1.795 2,102 1.4 2.5 2.3 2.4 2.1 2.2 2.8 3.5 4.1 4.5 4.5 -0.9 -3.6 -4.1 -4.0 -4.3 -4.3 -4.2 -3.8 -3.9 .5.7 -2.3 -4.4 -4.8 -4.9 -5.0 -5.0 -5.0 -4.5 -4.5 24.9 24.3 22.4 21.8 26.7 23.2 18.5 12.1 10.0 8.1 32.1 2.2 1.1 -2.2 -4.9 3.9 6.7 5.5 4.2 4.8 43.2 4.5 -7.0 2.5 -5.0 4.2 4.6 5.4 6.3 7.3 16.6 a.7 -10.7 -2.1 0.9 6.5 6.0 6.0 6.1 5.5 5,636 5,170 4,750 4.362 4,147 3.833 3.744 3,809 W’2 4.051 71 67 56 51 52 51 49 49 48 47 Mcmamdumilemc: Gmuo5cialrenlvu (end OfPmioa (lnmontln ofpmjskdlnportr) Y curant acwunt hskna @rant of GDP) lncfudineofiiokl!nnst-ers 8xcktdiogo5cklbaNh QchcduleddchtraricsntioY lmP=-~m~ecno ltnpoavolumo~@a~s~~)@ Export wlume m wosn) NetPTesentnhmofdebt DoWGDP @a=‘@ g,,m &,-pn mthodk, and rbffatinuta md pmjtionr I/ in&da lmrocorded tanian caminsr. ~~~&0fpmjakdimpmts ofgoo&mdnarbaorrsrviea. y ll+rcmtofexPolkdgoodsmd~. 4 ~&fhmdakdimport*imPorkofmixmd~,m4~h1996. ~t&bdtntehhiwmoftheen!Ygysata. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicI. IL In. Iv. V. VI. -35 - APPENDIX I Kenya: Relations with the Fund (As of October 3 1, 1999) Membership Status: Joined February 23, 1964; Article VIII. General Resources Account: Quota Fund holdings of currency Reserve position in Fund SDR Department: Net cumulative allocation Holdings Outstanding Purchases and Loans: Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility (ESAF) arrangements Financial Arrangements: Approval Expiration Tvpe Date Date ESAF 4126196 4125199 ESAF 12122193 12/21/94 ESAF S/15/89 313 l/93 SDR million Percent of quota 271.40 100.0 258.98 95.4 12.43 4.6 SDR million Percent of allocation 36.99 4.70 SDR million 112.13 Amount Approved (SDR million) 149.55 45.23 261.40 100.0 12.7 Percent of quota 41.3 Amount Drawn (SDR million) 24.93 45.23 216.17 Projected Obligations to Fund: (SDR Million; based on existing use of resources and present holdings of SDRs): Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 36 - APPENDIX I Overdue Forthcoming 913 o/99 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 Principal 0.0 16.3 32.2 18.6 14.0 14.0 Charges/interest 0.0 0.6 1.6 1.5 1.4 1.3 Total 0.0 16.9 33.8 20.1 15.4 15.3 VII. Exchange Rate Arrangement Managed float. The exchange rate on October 29, 1999 was K Sh 75.16 = US$l. VlIL Article IV Consultations Kenya is on the 1Zmonth cycle for Article IV consultations. The 1998 Article IV consultation was concluded on May 22, 1998 (SM/98/92). Ix. Technical Assistance Department LEG FAD MAE/LEG FAD STA MAE/LEG FAD Purpose Advice on foreign exchange legislation Advice on government expenditure management through short-term visit by a panel expert Mission on banking legislation Mission on foreign exchange management Technical expert to follow up on advice on government expenditure management Mission on improving financial markets and instruments Mission to review data standards Advice on amending the Central Bank of Kenya(CBK) Act to make the CBK more independent Resident advisor at the Kenya Revenue Authority, financed by the World Bank and under Fund supervision, to provide Time of Delivery February 1994 February 1994 and July 1994 April 1994 July 1994 July-December 1995 February and December 1996 March 1996 May-July 1996 September 1996- assistance on strengthening tax administration present Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 37 - APPENDIX I FAD STA STA Mission on strengthening expenditure management and control Mission on improving management of market liquidity Multisector statistics mission Mission on banking supervision Mission on banking supervision and bank restructuring Resident expert on balance of payments statistics Mission on banking supervision X. Resident Representative April 1997 May 1997 January-February 1998 November 1999 February 1999 May-August 1999 July 1999 The Fund has had a resident representative in Kenya since December 1993. Mr. Festus Osunsade is the current Senior Resident Representative. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-38- APPENDIXII Kenya: Relations with the World Bank Group 57. As of June 30, 1999, the World Bank had committed to Kenya about US$3.6 billion, of which US$3.2 billion had been fully disbursed (see attached Statement A). As of July 3 1, 1999, outstanding commitments (loans and equity net of repayments cancellations, exchange rate adjustments, write-offs, terminations and sales) by the IPC had totaled US$ll9.2 million, of which US$76.7 million had been fully disbursed (see attached Statement B). Agriculture 58. The Bank’s activities in the sector support the government’s development strategy, which aims at realigning the policy f&rework and the incentive structure, redefining the role and core functions of the government in the sector, and encouraging a more competitive marketing system with increased participation by the private sector. The government’s development strategy also envisages support for the core programs of research and extension. The Bank currently has three ongoing projects in the agriculture and environmental areas, including a Second National Agricultural Research Project, which would set the stage for developing a sustainable agricultural research program. 59. On environmental/natural resource management, the Bank financed the preparation of the National Environmental Action Plan. The Bank also approved in December 1995 an Arid Lands Resource Management Project, which seeks to ameliorate economic and environmental conditions in the more fragile arid areas. In addition, the Bank approved in July 1996 a Lake Victoria Environmental Management Project, which will support efforts by the Kenyan, Ugandan, and Tanzanian governments to improve management of the lake’s ecosystem. Infrastructure development 60. A major impediment to private sector development is inadequately maintained and inefficiently operated physical infrastructure. Public enterprise inefficiency is at the heart of many of these problems. Addressing these deficiencies requires an appropriate role for the private sector. Bank activity in this sector has aimed at financing critical infrastructure needs while putting in place policy and budgetary reforms to increase long-term sustainability through greater private sector participation. 61. The Bank has four ongoing infrastructure projects. In January 1996, the Bank approved two infrastructure projects: an Urban Transport Project, which will finance new and expanded road links, intersections, and public transport facilities in urban areas, and a Nairobi-Mombasa Road Rehabilitation Project, which will support rehabilitation of Kenya’s chief transport corridor. The Bank also approved an Energy Sector Reform and Power Development Project in June 1997, which is expected to increase generation capacity, reform energy pricing, and encourage private sector participation in the sector. An Emergency Infrastructure Rehabilitation Project to assist the country in coping with the damage done by the “El NiHo” floods was approved by the Board in July 1998, providing US%40 million of new support and redirecting US$37 million of existing commitments toward rehabilitation. In addition, the Bank is preparing, with the government, a Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 39 - APPENDIX II Roads 2000 Project aimed at improving access to rural area, as well as a learning innovation loan to the Kibera slums to contribute to improve the delivery of infrastructure and drinking water services to the poor. Education and health 62. In these two sectors, the Bank’s emphasis has been on enhancing financing and management capacity to increase the effectiveness and sustainability of public sector expenditures. In education, the emphasis is on (i) improving the quality of primary and secondary education through curriculum reform; (ii) restructuring key sectoral institutions and policies to enhance the efficiency of service delivery, and (iii) shifting public expenditure to improve access to quality basic education, especially in rural areas. In health, the emphasis is on (i) the development of prevention programs for sexually transmitted diseases, including AIDS; (ii) a shift in resources from curative to efficient primary care, including reproductive services; and (iii) a clarification of the respective role of the private and public sectors. 63. The Bank has two ongoing human resource operations. The Sexually Transmitted Infections Project, which was approved in March 1995, has an objective of reducing both the incidence and impact of infectious diseases, including HIV/AIDS, and to reduce the direct costs of AIDS and the workloads of health facilities. In addition, the project will strengthen institutional capacity at the national and provincial/district levels. The Bank approved in April 1997 an Early Child Development Project, which will aim at reinforcing existing institutions and improving the quality of services offered to children of preschool age. Moreover, the Bank is discussing with the government (i) a project aimed at strengthening primary and secondary education, and (ii) a health services delivery project aimed at reversing the current trends of increasing HIV prevalence rates and deteriorating mother and child health by promoting decentralized delivery of HIV/AIDS and reproductive health services. Public sector management 64. The Bank has provided two credits to improve public sector management in Kenya. A Parastatal Reform and Privatization Technical Assistance Project provides overall technical support for the government’s privatization program, as well as for the preparation of specific restructuring plans for those enterprises remaining in the public portfolio. A Civil Service Reform Project provides support for the government’s efforts to reduce the siie of the civil service and rationalize specific ministries. Private sector development 65. In addition to the objectives of macroeconomic stability, infrastructure development, and privatization, as well as institutional and public sector reforms conducive to private sector development, the Bank is supporting the development of the informal sector. The Micro and Small Enterprise Training and Technology Project aims to enhance entrepreneurial development by reducing administrative constraints and increasing human capital in the informal sector. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 40 - APPENDIX II Adjustment lending 66. In June 1996, IDA approved a structural adjustment credit (SAC) of $126.8 million, including $36.8 million in IDA reflows. The first tranche of $79.8 million was released in June 1996. The second tranche of about $47 million, together with about $26.6 million in FY 97 IDA reflows and $17.5 million additional reflows approved in December 1997, was not released because of the government’s failure to meet fully all second tranche release conditions. The SAC was closed in June 1998, and $87 million was cancelled. 67. In September 1998, the Bank’s Board endorsed a new Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for Kenya. According to the CAS, the Bank’s lending program for Kenya is currently in the “low case,” with a projected lending program of up to US$lSO million in the next three years. Substantive progress in restructuring public sector institutions and improving public expenditure management could lead to an expansion of the lending program to the “base case,” with a potential lending of up to US$SOO million over the next three years. Most of the incremental lending over the “low case” is expected to be budgetary support. 68. With a major initiative of public sector reform under way in Kenya, the Bank may provide a small public sector reform credit (tentatively a one-tranche operation of about $40 million) late in the fiscal year 1999/2000. Ifthe reform program stays on track, it is possible that the Bank will prepare another, larger operation to support a more comprehensive reform program in 2000/01. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-41- APPENDIX II Table 5. Kenya: Status of World Bank Group Operations A. Statement of World Bank Loans and IDA Credits (In millions of U. S. dollars, as of June 30, 1999) Fiscal Credit No. Year Purpose (Less Cancellations) undis- Bank IDA bursed Sixty (60) loans and eighty-five (85) credits closed 985.9 2,078.6 Of which: SALASECAL loans and credits 90.9 1,044.4 Cr.24400 1993 Parastatal Reform TA 23.3 3.6 Cr.25960 1994 Micro & Small Enterprise 21.8 16.7 Cr.26710 1995 Institutional Development 25.4 8.9 Cr.26860 1995 Sexually Transmitted Infections 40.0 10.5 Cr.27970 1996 Arid Lands 22.0 15.3 Cr.28110 1996 Urban Transport 115.0 85.5 , Cr.28120 1996 Nairobi Mombasa Road 50.0 33.2 Cr.29070 1997 Lake Victoria Env. 12.8 10.8 Cr.NO150 1997 Early Childhood Development 27.8 24.1 CT.29350 1997 NARPII 39.7 28.0 Cr.29660 1997 Energy Sector Reform 125.0 109.9 Cr.3 1200 1999 Emergency hfrasructure Rehab . 40.0 38.0 Total Of which : repaid Total held by Bank and IDA Amount sold 11.74 Of which : repaid 11.74 Total undisbursed 985.9 2,681.g 898 3 d 103 0 d 87.6 2,578.g 11.4 384.6 396.0 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 42 - APPENDIX It Table 5 (concluded). Kenya: Status of World Bank Group Operations B. Statement of IFC’s Committed and Disbursed Portfolio (Inmil1ionsofU.S. dollars,as ofJuly31,1999) Fiscal YCar Approval Type of Business Committed Disbursed Loan Equity Quasi Partic. Loan Equity Quasi Partic. 1970’ PalXIfiican 1972 TPS(Kenya) 1980/83/98 DBK 1982 Diamond Trust 1982 US 1983/91 LXK 1985 EBP 1986 lPS(K>Allpack 1986 WV-~ 1986 IN(K)-Frigoken 1986 IPS(K>Prern Food 1992 AEF Future Hotel 1994 AEF Capital Fish 1994 AEF Mosi 1994 EARC 1994 Intl Hotels-Ken 1995 AEF Bawan Roses 1995 AEF Kihingo Rose 1995 AEF Vegpro 1995 Magadi Soda Co. 1996 AEF Equitea 1996 AR? Landmark 1996 AEF K-Rep Bank 1997 AEF Ceres 1997 AEFMakini 1997 AEF Redhill Firs 1997 CFC 1998 AEF AAR clinic 1998 AEF Deras Ltd 1998 AEF Locland 1998 GBBL 1999 AEF MultiHualer 1999 AEF Transenergy 1999 Kenya Comm. Bank 25.2 0.0 10.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 3.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.3 0.3 0.0 0.0 4.3 0.4 0.4 0.1 6.6 0.3 i:;: 0.9 0.5 0.3 10.0 0.0 1.0 0.6 7.0 1.0 1.0 30.0 4.5 0.0 1.3 0.8 0.6 0.6 0.0 0.4 0.6 0.1 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 1.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.0 1.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Gross commitments’ 104.6 11.8 Approvals pending commitment 1999 ANSPAR/STANMORE 2.0 0.8 1999 AEF Greenland 0.4 0.0 1999 AEF LEOPARD 0.5 0.0 1999 CDSC KENYA 0.0 0.2 1999 K-REP RI 0.0 0.4 1999 NIC 15.0 0.0 1999 PANAFRICAN RES. 1.5 0.0 Total 19.4 1.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 3.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 3.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 25.2 0.0 3.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 3.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.3 0.3 0.0 0.0 4.3 0.4 0.4 0.1 6.6 0.3 0.4 0.0 0.9 0.5 0.2 10.0 0.0 1.0 0.4 3.5 1.0 1.0 4.5 0.0 1.3 0.8 0.6 0.6 0.0 0.4 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 63.8 9.8 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 3.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 3.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 i:: 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 ‘The sum of commitments made in 1970,1974,1977,1979,1981; 1988,1989,1994, and 1996. 2~ss commitments consist of approved and signed projects. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 43 - APPENDIX III Kenya: Statistical Issues 69. Monetary, exchange rate, and some external data are published on a monthly and biannual basis by the Central Bank of Kenya (CBK) in its Monthly Economic Review and Statistical Bulletin. Core financial data are also available to the Fund on a regular basis. The Ministry of Finance (MoF) publishes its QuarterZy Budget Review. A detailed account of various sectoral activity and the corresponding statistical data are published annually by the Central Bureau of Statistics (CBS) in its Economic Survey. 70. A multisector STA mission visited Kenya in January-February 1998. It undertook a comprehensive review of the major statistical areas and prepared a work program providing a broad time frame for implementing the principal recommendations, which address most of the statistical problems discussed below. During May-August 1999, an STA advisor on balance of payment assisted the authorities in improving the balance of payment statistics. 71. During the 1999 Article IV consultation discussions, the stafFnoted the deterioration of economic and social statistics in recent years and emphasized the need to improve the timeliness and quality of these statistics. The authorities attributed this deterioration to the limited resources provided to the CBS. In addition to stressing the need to provide adequate resources to the CBS, the staff encouraged the authorities to promptly implement the recommendations of recent technical assistance missions from STA. National accounts 72. National accounts (annual only) and the supporting sectoral data are prepared by the CBS. Data quality, which was previously reported as good, has deteriorated significantly as a result of budgetary and staff constraints. The recent liberalization and transformation of the Kenyan economy have resulted in the emergence of new sectors, such as horticulture, which are not fully reflected in the national accounts. Moreover, national accounts data at constant prices use an outdated base year (1982). The authorities need to rebase their constant price national accounts and strengthen their institutional capacity to improve the timeliness and quality of data. The latest available national accounts data reported for publication in International Financial Statistics (IFS) are for 1997. Prices and production 73. A consumer price index (CPI) for Nairobi is compiled by the CBS and is reported on a monthly basis without significant lags. The CBS intends to commence publication of a newly rebased national CPI (12 urban areas). There is no producer price index. The index on manufacturing production needs to be rebased, as it uses an outdated base year and is available only with a significant lag. The latest available figure reported for publication in IFS is for the second quarter of 1997. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 44 - APPENDIX IIJ Government finance statistics 74. The staff is provided with current information on central government fiscal accounts on a monthly basis with a four to six-week lag. The data are fairly comprehensive, although expenditure items that are reported need to be further disaggregated, especially nonwage recurrent outlays, and do not necessarily comply with standard Government Finance Statistics (GFS) methodology. The treasury has not yet developed an adequate system to adequately monitor expenditure commitments, as well as domestic arrears, and relies mainly on monitoring cash movements in government accounts at the Central Bank of Kenya. During the discussion, the authorities indicated that they expected the recording of expenditure commitments to improve with the assignment to line ministries of finance officers from the treasury, who will countersign all commitments in the ministries. 75. The recording of external financing and expenditure directly financed from abroad also remains an area for improvement. Annual government finance data, covering the central government, have been reported in IFS up to 1997/98 (July-June). These data are as reported by the CBS for publication in the GFS Yearbook and are compiled according to the GFS methodology. As a result, considerable differences exist between these data and the annual data compiled by the MoF. Monetary statistics 76. Monetary statistics are compiled from a bank reporting system and are broadly adequate for policy, analytical, and supervisory purposes. A STA technical assistance mission in January- February 1998 recommended revisions to clarify the statistical definition of residency and a currency-based differentiation of accounts. Since then, the authorities have initiated revisions to monetary statistics in line with the recommendations of the mission. Balance of payments statistics 77. Balance of payments data are reported annually on a regular basis to the IFS, although with a considerable lag. Monthly trade values are reported for publication in IFS with a lag of about five to seven months. Trade volume and price indices are available annually but use 1982 as a base period. At present, data are available through 1997. There currently exist numerous sources of monthly information that would permit the development and dissemination of quarterly balance of payments statistics. The overall quality of data is reasonably good for trade transactions. However, data for other current account and financial account transactions are less robust. Following liberalization of the exchange system in 1993-94, gaps have emerged in the coverage of balance of payments statistics. The compilation system, used since 1994, relies on reports from domestic banks and may result in a substantial underrecording of current earnings, including tourism receipts, as well as a failure to capture transactions that are settled via accounts held abroad. The large positive errors and omissions that have emerged in the balance of payments since 1994 also raise concerns as to the potential size of external obligations. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-45 - APPENDIX III 78. The MoF compiles data covering Kenya’s public and publicly guaranteed foreign external obligations to official and commercial creditors. This database does not take account of nonresident purchases of the government’s domestic currency-denominated debt; however, estimates are being developed by the National Debt Office, using data on the operation of client accounts by the largest banks in Kenya. There is also, at present, no systematic reporting or recording of the external obligations of the nonfinancial private sector, and the use of annual survey data to capture foreign direct investment is hampered by a poor response rate. An STA expert assisted the authorities in May-August 1999 in improving the compilation of balance of payments statistics. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 6: Kenya: Survey of Reporting of Main Statistical Indicators (as ofOctober 31,1999) Date of latest observation Date received Frequency of data’ F~--P-Y of reporting’ Frequency of publication’ swrcc of data* Mode of reportin$ Confidentiality’ central Exchange Bank International Reserved Broad Rates Balance Sheet Reserves Base Money M-Y 1on l/99 lOI3 1199 D D/W D M DR DR F R 1ol3ol99 1on l/99 I 10/30/99 I 9199 D/w D/W M M h4 M DR DR DR f-f-j-+ Interest Rates IO/31199 LOl3 l/99 W W/M Consumer centre1 PIiCe Government Exports’ Index Balanee Imports 9199 9199 7199 10199 10199 IO/99 M M M M M M D M Q M DR DR DR DR F F F F/p Y-j-++- ‘D = daily, W = weekly. M = Monthly, = Q = quarterly, A - annually. ‘DR = direct reporting from the Central Bank of Kenya or Ministty of Fiie; OP = offtcial publication. ‘F = facsimile; P = mail; SV = staff visit. ‘R = restricted use; E = embargoed for a specified period and then unrestricted use. CulTent External GDP/ Balance Debt GNP c 7l99 end-1998 1998 IO/99 6t99 6f99 A A A A A A M DR PISV A OP PISV A OP PISV -q-q-T Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 47 - APPENDIX IV Table 7. Kenya: Selected Social and Demographic Indicators’ Area Total land area (square kilometers) 582,600 Population and vital statistics Total population (1997, in millions) Population growth rate (1980-97 average, in percent) Urban population (percent of total) Population density (1996, per square kilometer) Population age structure (1997, in percent) o-14 years 15-64 years 65 and above Crude birth rate (per thousand) Crude death rate (per thousand) infant mortality rate (per thousand; 1997) Life expectancy at birth (years; 1997) Real GDP per capita (1998 estimate; in U.S. dollars) 28.6 3.3 30.4 49.1 44.9 51.9 3.2 36.5 10 74 52 124 Health and nutrition Access to safe water (in percent of population) Urban (1994) 74 Rural (1989) Population per physician (in thousands; 1990) Per capita supply of Calories (per day) (1989) Proteins (grams per day) (1989) Access to sanitation (percent of population; 1996) 43 10 1,973 55 45 Employment Total formal sector employment (millions) Male (in percent) Female (in percent) 1.6 71.3 28.7 Education Enrollment rates (gross; in percent) Primary Secondary Pupil-teacher ratio (in percent) Primary (1992) 84.9 24.4 31 Secondary ( 1992) 17 Sources: The World Bank, Stars Data Bank; and Republic of Kenya, Economic Survey, 1998. ‘Unless otherwise indicated, estimates refer to 1995. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-48 - APPENDIX V Kenya: Medium-Term Scenarios 79. Prospects of reversing the economic stagnation that has beset Kenya and of reducing poverty hinge heavily on the authorities’ ability to implement far-reaching measures to enhance the country’s growth potential by consolidating macroeconomic stability, materially improving governance, and removing structural bottlenecks. The statI has therefore prepared two scenarios for Kenya’s medium-term outlook. 80. Scenario A assumes that a program supported by the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility -based on such measures-would be in place in the first half of 2000. Accordingly, real GDP growth would rise from the projected 1.6 percent in 1999 to 6 percent in the year 2004. A pickup in agriculture (mainly food production and coffee) and tourism is expected to be the main source of the recovery of economic growth in the earlier years of the projection period. A strong upturn in manufacturing, export-oriented agricultural (mainly horticulture), and the services sectors is projected to sustain growth over the medium term. To this end, gross investment would need to rise steadily from 17 percent of GDP in 1998 to 25 percent over the medium term, with the bulk of investment coming from the private sector, as investor confidence recovers and key telecommunications and energy enterprises are prioritized. Government investment-focused on restoring the dilapidated physical infrastructure-is projected to increase from 4 percent of GDP to about 5 percent, but a marked improvement in its efficiency is expected as governance improves. Increased donor support for the authorities’ program would reduce the government’s domestic financing requirement, facilitating a reduction in domestic debt. This, together with the confidence-building effect of sustained fiscal prudence, would help reduce the high domestic real interest rates and encourage private sector investment to support the targeted growth path. The scenario also assumes an increase in overall productivity from an average of -0.1 percent a year over the 199 l-98 period to about 1 percent a year over the medium term. 81. To finance the needed investment and avoid increasing the external current account deficit, national savings would need to rise from 13 percent of GDP in 1998 to 21 percent in 2004, with private savings increasing from 9 percent to 15 percent. The increase in national savings would come about from increased economic growth, enhanced prospects of macroeconomic stability, and some improvements in government savings. 82. In 1999, the external current account deficit (excluding official transfers) is expected to remain broadly unchanged, at about 5 percent of GDP. The deficit should narrow gradually to 3% percent of GDP by 2004 as export growth strengthens, including in the important coffee and tea sectors as a result of the planned liberalization, and as tourism earnings recover following the expected dissipation of security-related concerns. As for the capital account, it is expected that net official inflows will be some US$125 million smaller in 1999 than in the previous year, but progress in governance and economic reforms is likely to result in considerably larger net inflows. The overall balance would register a deficit of about US$lOO million in 1999 and would shift into surpluses thereafter. However, financing gaps averaging about US$180 million are projected over the next five years. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 49 - APPENDIX V 83. Kenya’s external debt burden is projected to decline significantly over the next five years, as a large proportion of debt contracted on nonconcessional terms is retired. As a result, debt service would decline from the equivalent of 22 percent of exports of goods and services in 1998 to 8 percent in 2004. Similarly, the net present value of external debt would decline from 153 percent of exports of goods and services in 1998 to 108 percent in 2004. Thus, Kenya should be able to meet its debt-service obligations without recourse to exceptional debt relief. 84. Scenario B assumes that the reforms described earlier, including the adoption of credible and prudent macroeconomic policies and measures to address governance problems, would not be adequately implemented. In this context, economic growth would be limited to some 2 percent a year over the projection period, as investment would be constrained by the crowding out effect of the government’s large domestic financing requirement, as well as by the continued weakness in investor confidence. National savings would remain low, at about 11 percent of GDP, reflecting lax fiscal policy and the continued decline in per capita incomes, and adequate foreign savings would not be forthcoming. In this context, the external current account deficits, which would broadly remain at about 5 percent of GDP over the medium term, would be financed through a rundown of international reserves and the accumulation of arrears. JO 3o Under this scenario, export growth would be significantly curtailed by the weakening of external competitiveness caused by delays in structural reform. Similarly, the growth of imports would be lower than in the baseline scenario because of weaker economic growth; however, because of larger fiscal deficits, the decline in the growth of imports would be less pronounced than that of exports. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicAPPl34DrxvI -5o- Tabb 8. Konyl: Mdiun-Tarrn 8caturim 1997.2004 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2ou3 2004 Rojdmu NatIonal Imoma and 9rItcn l&d CJDP (facke cat) RmlGDPpaapira -pieoirdar~~~) Esfo?lml~r Eigliz Tam ofti (- dctorimatpn) Bedlampc(i*o~RtO(-dOP100hlj011;dOfpQiod)z Cmra9tonth~II -=d* TOhI- Dwdlbdalw(-ti) WBanb -gmb Nal danatic 0mmiq r8qimmt Rtarmmlnctar cuImatpldwslbrlancq~0facicll~6oR cunat~~~0fliciaI~fan ~in--(ial~ofmpab) BxtarMl de4 (ii U.S. dollal) Ofwhidt: - Nat~whaofcldonuldabt~mpwantofoxporb ofgoochmdle.hcm) National l-r aad prims F&d GDP (f&or cost) RcdODPpoqita -~*indOX@osiodavorlps) rxmmalnctor figtzz Tamu of hda (- detkaahon) lblaffe&e~nto(-dcprochlion;and0fporiod)21 I-tddy I 1 -8- oawr Gmmttn6omduvittg -sownmrsnt Dam Cmrunt bud@ 3/ RwQuopldlgplb TO@lWpBdiW Dvdll?olmm( ” tbadr) zs Netdomdioftrm&g~ EXtUMlSWtU c!mreotoxhKulbolmt~jllohrding0~~(on cumtahuMl~axchlding0~~ Gmmshdomdkd-(iieofimporh) Bltroml &t4 (ii U.S. ddh) cyadlrA: m?wn Netpnvnrwhmofatmmldebt(iipmxntofexpxts ofpodnmdlorvica) 23 -0.1 11.2 1.8 1.6 2.0 3.2 4.4 -0.7 -0.8 -0.4 0.6 I.8 6.6 2.6 II 6.0 5.0 4.5 5.5 3.0 4.0 5.9 3.3 4.0 -10.7 1.1 2.8 1.9 -2.1 0.9 6.5 6.0 6.0 -2.2 -4.9 3.9 6.7 5.5 -4.4 -5.9 -1.3 0.4 -0.6 0.1 -12.2 21 . . . . . 6.1 5.5 4.2 4.8 -0.6 -0.5 . . . . . . (In percent of GDP. rmbu odwrwk hukated) 18.6 17.2 17.7 18.7 19.5 21.7 23.4 25.1 4.8 4.4 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.2 13.7 128 13.6 14.5 15.1 17.0 18.5 19.9 15.0 13.0 13.6 14.4 15.3 17.4 19.6 21.3 3.0 4.3 S.0 5.1 5.2 5.4 5.8 6.2 12.0 8.8 8.6 9.4 10.1 12.0 13.8 15.1 28.0 29.7 27.4 25.5 25.8 25.8 25.7 27.4 24.8 25.1 25.1 25.0 0.0 0.8 0.7 0.7 0.7 -0.7 0.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 I.5 1.9 0.2 -1.6 -2.4 25.6 25.6 24.7 24.5 -1.7 -2.5 I.8 -4.1 -4.0 -4.3 4.8 -4.9 -5.0 24 21 2.2 5.750 5.546 5.452 23.0 123.0 0.0 -3.9 -4.5 4.5 6.229 0.0 I53 154 I31 -4.3 -4.2 -5.0 -5.0 2.8 3.5 5,514 5.733 0.0 0.0 I20 II4 0.9 0.3 -2.8 -3.8 -4.5 4.1 5.971 0.0 110 1.1 0.4 -2.9 -3.6 -4.4 2.3 5950 118.0 160 108 2.3 I.8 1.6 1.8 2.1 22 2.3 2.3 -0.1 -0.7 -0.8 4.7 4.4 4.3 -0.2 -0.2 11.2 6.6 2.6 1/ 8.7 11.4 125 14.0 15.0 -10.7 I.1 2.8 1.9 -2.1 0.9 25 2.4 23 -2.2 -4.9 -1.9 2.5 28 -4.4 -5.9 -1.3 0.4 4.6 0.1 -12.2 21 . . . . . . . . . 1.9 I.8 I.4 I.1 4.6 -0.5 (hporeantofGDP,unlaotlwnvhindiatcd) 18.6 17.2 17.6 18.5 18.5 18.9 19.0 19.3 4.8 4.4 4.1 4.4 4.6 4.8 5.0 5.3 13.7 128 13.5 14.1 13.9 14. I 13.9 14.1 15.0 13.0 13.4 14.3 14.3 14.4 14.1 14.3 3.0 4.3 4.9 4.6 4. I 3.6 3.1 26 12.0 8.8 8.6 9.7 IO.1 10.8 11.0 11.7 28.0 n.4 29.7 27.4 25.1 25.0 25.0 25.2 0.2 -9.2 -0.4 -0.9 I.9 2.8 24.7 24.4 24. I 24.1 25.8 26.1 26.6 27.2 -1.7 -2.5 1.8 0.0 -0.7 1.5 -3.6 -4.1 -4.0 -4.2 -4.4 -4.8 -4.9 -4.9 2.3 2.4 2.1 1.7 5,950 5.750 5.546 5.m I18 23 I23 175 -1.1 -1.7 2.2 -4.2 -4.9 I.7 5,133 253 120 -1.7 -2.5 -3.2 -2.3 -3.2 -3.8 1.9 20 2.8 -4.5 -5. I 1.8 5.090 -4.9 -5.5 I.9 5.159 379 108 -5.0 -5.7 2.0 sm 517 160 153 I54 138 .283 II2 105 II 12-mtthpwiodondcdostobQ1999. Y 12-nLmthpcaiodQldodseptanbasl999. Y FSdyar(Juiy-June); 1998rsfsnt0fircal3’=l998”99. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-5l- APPENDIX VI Governance Measures This appendix provides a detailed list of adopted measures and those expected to be implemented in the near future. A. Measures Already Adopted With respect to enhancing accountability and transparency, the authorities have taken the following measures: Increased membership of the Central Tender Board (CTB) from eight to ten, with the additional two members nominated by civil society organizations and appointed a private sector representative as chairman of the CTB. Published tender advertisements in at least two newspapers with wide circulation. Made public the summaries of minutes of tender boards meetings, and made available the full minutes on demand to interested parties. Prepared quarterly reports detailing the activities of the CTB, including all bids received, names of bidders, and success&l bids. - Established an appeals board for tender decisions, with three (including the chairman) of its seven members nominated by civil society organizations. Required bidders in tenders to declare any contributions made in connection with the tendering process to any politician/official. Required all local authorities and public institutions to establish tender committees and follow the strengthened government procurement regulations adopted by the central government. Required all ministries to report their expenditure commitments to the treasury two weeks after the end of the month. Required that all contract variations follow the strengthened tendering procedures. Initiated a procedure to iden@ and include all extrabudgetary transactions on stalled (but not legally terminated) projects into the budget. Required the submission of semiannual audited budget performance to parliament Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 52 - APPENDIX VI In order to strengthen control bodiewincluding their independence and resources- the authorities have done the following: Reviewed budgetary allocations for the Office of the Controller and Auditor General (C&AG) the Kenya Anti-Corruption Authority (KACA), the Attorney General’s Office, and the Kenya Revenue Authority (KRA). Strengthened the capacity of the Office of the C&AG, including the recruitment of 142 additional staff and improvement of remuneration for the staff. Established a code of conduct for the KACA’s staff and board that specifies sanctions against those who deviate from their responsibilities/established regulations. Prepared and approved the terms of reference for KACA staff, interviewed candidates, and made the necessary hirings, including the appointment of 32 investigators and 15 prosecutors. Created a “reception” unit (with a well advertised “hot line”) within the KACA to which the public can report cases of corruption. Transferred the management of the Auditor General’s staff from the Office of Personnel Management (civil service) to the office of the Auditor General, in order to bolster the latter’s independence. A draft gazette notice has been prepared whereby the Civil Service Commission would transfer authority for staging decisions to the office of the C&AG. With a view to strengthening budget planning and execution, the authorities have enacted the following measures: Prepared quarterly (monthly) revenue and expenditure projections, and established quarterly (monthly) commitment ceilings for line ministries based on these projections. Required ministries to report their expenditure commitments to the treasury two weeks after the end of each month. Engaged four leading accounting firms to verifjr the validity of outstanding domestic arrears. Assigned to line ministries finance officers who would have to countersign all expenditure commitments and be accountable to the treasury. Established a budget-monitoring unit to improve budget planning and execution. Initiated a process to engage an external consultant to review the internal audit system of the central government and make recommendations to strengthen it. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 53 - APPENDIX VI With respect to changing incentive mechanisms, the government has done the following: Issued a circular banning any contractors found to have acted corruptly in their dealings with the government from continuing doing business with the government and issued a statement to inform potential participants in tenders of these regulations. Strengthened enforcement of existing rules and regulations on sanctions over governance issues. The authorities dismissed in the period July-October 1999 at least 15 senior public sector officials (including at the Kenya Port Authority, the Kenya Pipeline, the Coffee Board, the Kenya Tea Development Authority Board, the National Hospital Insurance Fund, the Kenya Veterinary Vaccine Production Institute, the forest conservation office, and various regional administration areas); over 100 judicial system employees; and about 40 central government employees of various levels, including from the Office of the President. As for removing rent-seeking opportunities, the authorities have taken the following steps: Initiated a review of all waivers and exemptions from duties and taxes, with a view to recommending any amendments in next year’s budget. Suspended all transactions in public land. B. Measures to be Implemented in the Near Future With respect to enhancing accountability and transparency, the authorities will enact the following measures: Adopt international standards in tendering. Strengthen reporting of transactions by line ministries by having them audited by the Office of the Internal Auditor. Strengthen financial reporting by public enterprises to the Auditor General’s (Corporations) Office, and ensure the timely audit of the financial accounts. Strengthen further the capacity of the Auditor General’s (Corporations) Office and merge it with the Office of the C&AG. Require that all public officials and members of government declare their assets upon appointment and every three years thereafter or upon leaving service, whichever comes first. Incorporate all extrabudgetary transactions into the budget. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 54 - APPENDIX VI Issue a statement to inform the public that the WAG reports are available for purchase from the Government Printer for purchase. Require the auditor general to submit the KACA’s report to parliament on a timely basis. Submit regularly a report on the operations of the KACA to parliament, including complaints received, cases investigated, and cases prosecuted. In order to strengthen control bodie+including their independence and resources- the authorities will do the following: Provide adequate budgetary support to the office of the C&AG, the KACA, the office of the Auditor General and the KRA. Amend the Prevention and Corruption Act (Cap. 65) to broaden the definition of corruption to include fraud, malfeasance, and other misuse of public funds. Set up a Crime Intelligence Unit within the KACA. Merge the Efficiency Monitoring Unit (Office of the President)) with KACA’s inspection Unit. Authorize the treasury to refer cases of alleged misuse of public resources to the KACA within three months after deliberation of the report prepared by the parliament’s Public Accounts and Public Investment Committees. Engage an external consultant to review the entire internal audit system and implement the necessary reforms to strengthen the system. Complete the implementation of the Kwach Report’s recommendation on reforming the judiciary and develop any additional plan needed to reform the judiciary, including the strengthening of its independence Transfer staffing authority for the office of the C&AG from the Civil Service Commission to the office of the C8zAG. With a view to strengthening budget planning and execution, the authorities will enact the following measures: Complete the auditing of all pending bills and settle all legitimate pending bills. Establish the necessary regulations to implement the new expenditure commitment approval procedures. Formulate and implement a three-year rolling medium-term expenditure framework. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 55 - APPENDIX VI With respect to changing incentive mechanisms, the government will do the following: Specify penalties against line ministries that fail to submit in a timely fashion their monthly expenditure reports to the treasury and the Auditor General, Increase remuneration for civil servants over the medium term, particularly through a reduction in the size of the civil service. Improve remuneration for judges, police, and other judicial system employees. Establish and enforce a code of ethics for judicial officers and their support staff Rotate financial officers in line ministries every two years to ensure that they adhere to the “arm’s-length principle.” Revise the existing Code of Regulations (Code of Conduct) to provide clearly for sanctions against actions contrary to the code. Establish widely publicized rules that exonerate the government from paying for expenditure committed outside the existing financial regulations As for removing rent-seeking opportunities, the authorities will take the following steps: Complete a review of all waivers and exemptions from duties and taxes, with a view to eventually eliminating them, with the exception of those under international agreements. Update the privatization policy of 1992 to strengthen the process and the institutional framework of privatization, with a view to enhancing transparency and widen participation Eliminate all suspended duties. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-56- APPENDIX VII J Public Information Notice (PIN) No. FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE International Monetary Fund 700 lgth Street, NW Washington, D. C. 20431 USA IMF Concludes Article IV Consultation with On 12/-/1999, the Executive Board concluded the Article IV consultation with Kenya.’ Background Kenya’s economic performance weakened over the last decade because of the failure to sustain prudent macroeconomic policies, the slow pace of structural reform, and the persistence of governance problems. The often lax fiscal policy led to a rapid build up of short- term government debt which, in combination with declines in the saving rate, translated into lending rates in excess of twenty percent in real terms. This, together with other high costs of doing business in Kenya-because of corruption, a deteriorating infrastructure, and an inefficient parastatal sector (e.g., utilities, and transportation services)-depressed investment and its effectiveness, and as a consequence economic growth. Since early 1998 Kenya’s economic performance was mixed. It has achieved fiscal adjustment against the difficult backdrop of worsening terms of trade, a dearth of external financing, and adverse weather conditions. At the same time, the rescue of a major bank in late 1998 strained fiscal policy and temporarily weakened monetary policy. In this context, investor confidence has remained weak, and growth has continued to decline. Following a relaxation in 1996197 and in the first half of 1997198, fiscal policy was tightened in the second half of 1997/98 and further in 1998/99. As a result, the overall deficit was reduced l Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial information, and discusses with officials the country’s economic developments and policies. On return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the country’s authorities. In this PIN, the main features of the Board’s discussion are described. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-57- APPENDIX VII from 3.9 percent of GDP in 1996/97 to 2.5 percent in 1997/98 and to 0.7 percent of GDP in 1998/99, compared with a targeted overall balance of zero. The higher deficit in 1998/99 relative to the target reflected unanticipated outlays of 0.9 percent of GDP related to the rescue of the state-owned National Bank of Kenya (NBK). A task force instituted by the government concluded in April 1999 that the stock of domestic arrears was much larger than originally thought and that its accumulation reflected weaknesses in expenditure control and circumvention of relevant financial regulations. Monetary policy was cautious throughout most of 1998, but it was relaxed in late 1998 in the context of the rescue of the NBK because the liquidity injection was not fully sterilized. Following a sharp decline in interest rates, a 20 percent depreciation of the shilling, and a considerable loss of official reserves, monetary policy was tightened in mid-l 999 partly reversing those developments. The external current account deficit (excluding official grants) widened to about 5 percent of GDP in 1998, reflecting a poor export performance and a worsening in the terms of trade, but an increase in the capital account surplus led to a shift in the overall balance of payments from a deficit of US$13 million in 1997 to a surplus of US$74 million in 1998. Gross official reserves remained virtually unchanged, amounting to US$783 million (2.4 months of imports cover) at end-1998. External arrears, which were reduced by US$95 million to US$23 million at end-1998, are estimated to have increased to US$133 million by early November 1999. Inflation remained subdued in 1998 and in the first half of 1999. But it increased in the third quarter of 1999 mainly owing to increases in fuel and food prices as well as the lagged effects of the depreciation of the shilling. Real GDP growth slowed from 2.3 percent in 1997 to 1.8 percent in 1998, and it is expected to slow further in 1999. Unemployment continued to increase. Executive Board Assessment Public lnfomation Notices (PINS) are issued, (I) at the request of a member country, following the conclusion of the Article IV consultation for countries seeking to make known the views of the IMF to the public. This action is intended to strengthen IMF surveillance over the economic policies of member countries by increasing the transparency of the IMPS assessment of these policies; and (ii) following policy discussions in the Executive Board at the decision of the Board. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-58- APPENDIX VII Kenya: Selected Economic Indicators, 1995-99 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 II Output and price6 Real GDP Consumer prices (period average) Real effective exchange rate (- depreciatiin; end of period) Investment and savings Gross investment Central government Other Gross national savings Central government Other Macroeconomic policy variables Total revenue and grants 4/ Total expenditure and net lending 4/ Overall government balance (excluding grants) 41 Overall government balance (induding grants) 41 Money and quasi money (end year; percent change) Interest rate (90-day treasury bill rate; end of period) External sector millions of U.S. dollars) Current account deficit (excluding official transfers) (in percent of GDP) Overall balance of payments External public debt (in percent of GDP) Gross official reserves (in months of imports) Scheduled debt service (in percent of exports of goods and services Exchange rates Kenya shillings per U.S. dollar (period average) (Annual percentage change; unless otherwise indicated) 4.8 4.6 2.3 1.8 1.6 1.5 9.0 11.2 6.6 2.6 2l -18.3 12.3 1.9 0.1 -12.2 3/ (In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated) 21.8 20.4 18.6 17.2 17.7 5.9 5.1 4.8 4.4 4.1 16.0 15.3 13.7 12.8 13.6 17.4 19.5 15.0 13.0 13.6 5.9 4.0 3.0 4.3 5.0 11.5 15.4 12.0 8.8 8.6 30.5 27.0 28.0 27.4 25.5 30.4 29.9 29.7 27.4 24.8 -1.1 -3.9 -2.5 -0.7 0.2 0.1 -2.9 -1.7 0.0 0.8 12.5 15.9 9.8 3.1 2.7 51 18.3 22.3 26.3 10.7 17.7 (In millions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise indicated) -505 -209 -469 -546 -523 -5.7 -2.3 -4.4 -4.8 -4.9 -139 438 -13 74 -99 71 67 56 51 52 1.4 2.5 2.3 2.4 2.1 24.9 24.3 22.4 21.8 26.7 51.4 57.1 58.0 61.8 75.5 2l Sources: Kenyan authorities; and staff estimates and projections I/ Projections. 21 12 months ended October 1999. 31 12 months ended September 1999. 41 Fiscal year (July-June). 51 12 months ended August 1999. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public