DOCUMENT OF INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND NOT FOR PUBLIC USE t-M/99/23 2 CONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFOR.MATION September 15, 1999 To: Members of the Executive Board From: The Secretary Subject: Portugal-Staff Report for the 1999 Article IV Consultation Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staff report for the 1999 Article IV consultation with Portugal, which is tentatively scheduled for discussion on Wednesday, October 6, 1999. Mr. T. Krueger (ext. 36854) and Mr. Clements (ext. 36950) are available to answer technical or factual questions relating to this paper prior to the Board discussion. Unless the Documents Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the WTO Secretariat on Thursday, September 23, 1999; and to the European Commission and the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development, following its consideration by the Executive Board. Att: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicCONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND PORTUGAL Staff Report for the 1999 Article IV Consultation Prepared by the Staff Representatives for the 1999 Consultation with Portugal Approved by Alessandro Leipold and Leslie Lipschitz September 14, 1999 Contents Page I. Introduction . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .3 II. Background and Prospects . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . ,.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 III. Policy Issues.. ................................................................................................................. .6 A. Overview ............................................................................................................. .6 B. Monetary Conditions and Macroeconomic Imbalances ......................................... .6 Monetary conditions.. .................................................................................... .6 Macroeconomic imbalances and cyclical juncture ......................................... .7 C. Macroeconomic Stabilization: The Increased Role of Fiscal Policy.. ................... 10 Prudent medium-term fiscal balance.. ........................................................... IO Near-term stabilization: Fiscal policy in 1999/2000 ...................................... 11 D. Structural Policies to Strengthen Growth.. ........................................................... 12 Fiscal policies .............................................................................................. 12 Education ..................................................................................................... 16 Privatization, competition, and product market reform ................................. 18 Financial sector issues .................................................................................. 18 IV. Statistical and Other Issues.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19 V. Staff Appraisal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20 Tables 1. Selected Economic Indicators, 1993-2000 .............................................................. .23 2. Fiscal Developments ............................................................................................... .24 3. Trade with Selected Advanced and Emerging Countries, 1997198.. ......................... .25 4. Comparison of Stability Programs for 1999-2002 .................................................. .26 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2- Figures 1. Comparison of Selected Economic Indicators, 1989-99 .......................................... .27 2. Monetary Conditions Index, Real Interest Rates, and Credit Growth, 1993:1-1999:6.. ................................................................................................... .28 3. External Performance and Exchange Rates, 1989-99 .............................................. .29 4. Labor Market Conditions and Price Developments, 1993-99 .................................. .30 5. Cyclical Conditions, 1989-2000 ............................................................................. .3 1 6. Official Interest Rates and Differentials with Germany, 1997:7-99:7.. .................... .32 7. Comparison of Fiscal Trends, 1993-99.. ................................................................. .33 8a. Composition of Fiscal Adjustment, 1994-98 ........................................................... .34 8b. Composition of Fiscal Adjustment, I 994-98 .............................. ,, ........................... .35 9. Asset Market Indicators, 1993:1-1999:6.. ................................................................ 36 Text Boxes 1. A Capital-Based Income Catch-Up, 1986-98.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13 2. The Portuguese Education System: Performance and Reform Agenda ._. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17 Appendices I. Fund Relations ........................................................................................................ .37 II. Statistical Issues ..................................................................................................... .38 III. Public Information Notice ....................................................................................... .40 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3- 1. INTRODUCHON 1. The 1999 Article IV consultation discussions with Portugal were held in Lisbon during June 24-July 5.’ At the conclusion of the last consultation on October 28, 1998 (SUR/98/122), Directors commended the authorities for the adjustment achieved in the drive toward participation in the third stage of European Economic and Monetary Union (EMU). Nonetheless, important challenges remained, including those posed by higher inflation and a larger cyclically adjusted fiscal deficit than in other prospective euro participants. Moreover, the continuation of Portugal’s convergence in living standards would require structural reforms to enhance flexibility in factor and product markets. 2. The minority Socialist government of Prime Minister Guterres faces parliamentary elections in October. II. BACKGROUND AND PROSPECTS 3. Since the mid-1990s, the Portuguese economy has combined one of the highest growth rates in the euro area with a successful disinflation process (Table 1; and Figure 1). This reflected to an important extent stability- oriented macroeconomic policies in the run-up to the third stage of EMU, which provided an anchor for expectations and resulted in a considerable reduction in real interest rates. Real convergence has also been facilitated by a relatively flexible labor market and by substantial support from the European Union (EU). 0.70 0.65 0.60 0.55 GDP PER CAPITA: A GRADUAL CATCH-UP (PORTUGAL RELATIVE TO EU 0.70 0.65 0.60 0.55 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 I/ PPP-adjusted. 4. Economic growth in 1998-close to 4 percent, little changed from the previous year -continued to outpace the euro-area average and was led by strong domestic demand.2 With rapid growth of consumer durable purchases, private consumption increased i The mission-comprising Messrs. Krueger (head), Clements, and Decressin and Mms. L&hart (EP) and La Torre (assistant, all EUl)-met with the Governor of the Bank of Portugal and senior government officials, representatives of regulatory agencies, academics, and labor and business leaders. Mr. Santos, Advisor in the Executive Director’s office, participated in the meetings and Mr. Faini, Executive Director, attended the concluding meetings. Portugal has accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4 (Appendix I). 2 Recent estimates of the National Statistics Office (INE) indicate lower growth in 1997 and 1998 (3.5 percent in both years); see also Section IV. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4- by 5% percent, reflecting rising disposable income and declining real interest rates (Figure 2). An easing of liquidity constraints contributed to a rise in household credit by some 30 percent, mostly related to mortgage lending and supporting strong growth in construction investment; in addition, investment benefited from large infrastructure prqjects, including the Lisbon World Exposition (Expo 98). Fiscal policy also contributed to domestic demand-led growth despite a marginal narrowing of the fiscal deficit to 2.3 percent of GDP (versus a budget target of 2.4 percent; Table 2): with output growth well above estimated potential and a finther increase in primary expenditure, the structural deficit deteriorated by ‘% percentage point, to 2.4 percent of GDP, the weakest structural balance in the euro area (and the primary structural surplus was halved, to 1 percent of GDP). 5. Strong growth in domestic demand and a slowdown in export markets resulted in a widening of the external current account deficit by 1% percentage points, to 4% percent of GDP.3 Import growth was fueled by the demand for consumer durables and investment goods, while export volume growth fell Corn double-digit levels in 1994-97 to less than 7% percent in 1998, with the deceleration particularly large outside the EU area.4 Real exchange rates remained on average broadly unchanged from 1997 until mid-1999 (Figure 3). The deterioration in the trade balance far outweighed an Expo 98-related boom in tourism in 1998, and the current account deficit was one of the largest among industrial countries. Viewed from the saving-investment perspective, over three-fourths of the deterioration in the current account from broad balance in 1995 was attributable to higher investment. In 1998, the deficit was financed predominantly by rising net foreign liabilities of the banking sector (see below). The foreign direct investment (FDI) balance turned negative as the increased 2-. 2 EXllXNAL CURRENT ACCOUNT AND THE ROLE OF l- SAVl?4GSANDlNVh5TMENT (In percent of CJDP) - 1 0 0 -1 -1 -2 -2 -3 -3 -4 8 cumuhtive change in inve3tmerd since 1995 II 8cumuluiw change in swings since 1995 -4 -5 ’ - -5 1995 1996 1997 1998 I/ Ncpbvc number indicate8 inmuse in imestmant. internationalization of Portuguese firms led to a sizable rise in FDI outflows. Net external liabilities were estimated to be around zero at end- 1998. 6. On the labor market, the economic expansion has resulted in robust growth in employment, and the unemployment rate, which has been below 5 percent since the spring of 3 Based on the IMF’s new fifth Balance of PaymentsManual, the current account deficit was 6% percent of GDP in 1998; the difference reflects capital transfers, mostly EU-related. 4 To a limited extent, the weakening of the trade balance reflected repercussions from the crisis in Asia and other emerging market economies (Table 3). However, direct trade linkages with these countries are relatively small and almost 90 percent of Portugal’s trade is with industrial countries, mostly in the EU. Nevertheless, the crisis in emerging markets may have had important third-mark:et effects not captured in the direct trade linlkages. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-5- 1998, fell further to 4.5 percent in mid-1999 (Figure 4), one of the lowest in the euro area. With a relatively tight labor market and considerable wage drift, compensation grew by an estimated 5% percent in 1998. 7. Wage developments contributed to a rise in consumer price inflation to 2.2 percent on a harmonized basis (2.8 percent on a national basis), 1 j/4 percentage point above the euro- area average.’ Aside from several special factors -including in some food items with a relatively large weight in Portugal’s consumption basket-movements in the inflation differential vis-a-vis the euro area have been affected by divergent macroeconomic trends as well as government regulations that limited an immediate pass-through of international oil price fluctuations6 Excluding energy, the inflation rate in July 1999 remained the highest in the euro area and it was almost L/z percentage point higher than the overall harmonized CPI increase, which, at 1.9 percent, was in line with some of the other cyclically more advanced countries in the area. 8. For 1999, a slowdown in external demand, the end of Expo 98, and the gradual abatement of the effects of the earlier monetary easing are expected to moderate growth to about 3 percent (in line with Consensus rO 10 Forecasts). Most indicators (including those CONFIDENCE INDICATORS for industrial production, construction, and 5 - external trade) suggest that a slowdown began in the last quarter of 1998, as Expo 98 came ’ to an end, exports weakened, and business -5 confidence declined (as elsewhere in the euro area). Retail sales and household credit growth suggest, however, that consumption and construction have remained relatively - -15 robust into the summer, pointing to some - -20 upside risks for the GDP growth projection. Moreover, the outlook strengthened .,. . . . . . . . .: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . :.. . . . -25 following the European Central Bank’s 1996 1997 1998 1999 (ECB’s) rate cut in April and the weakening of the euro. Assuming growth in line with potential-and with staff and the authorities estimating that the output gap was essentially closed by 1998 (Figure 5)-inflation is projected to stabilize near current rates and would be some VI percentage point lower (year-on-year, national basis) than in 1998. The current account is expected to weaken somewhat further on account of divergent cyclical trends vis- a-vis major partner countries. 5 The harmonized index was biased downward in 1998 as it included sale prices in 1998 but not in 1997 (the national index was corrected to provide a comparable basis). 6 Petroleum tax rates are adjusted within pre-set boundaries to limit the pass-through of changes in international oil prices to consumers. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-6- 9. Over the medium term, the prospects appear quite bright for Portugal’s growth to exceed that in partner countries, resulting in a gradual catch-up in living standards. Staff (and the authorities’) estimates point to potential GDP growth of about 3 percent. These estimates are subject to considerable uncertainty and the speed of the catch-up will depend crucially on economic policies. III. POLICY 1s!!wEs A. Overview 10. Following participation in the third stage of EMU at the beginning of 1999, the discussions in Lisbon took place against the background of a successful policy strategy that had contributed to major improvements in the economic environment, notably historically low inflation and interest rates, relatively strong growth, and a closer integration into European markets. Nevertheless, there was also a general consensus that EMU added urgency to addressing the remaining domestic policy challenges so as to take full advantage of an increasingly competitive euro area and global marketplace. In this context, the discussions focused on: . stabilization policies, covering medium-term fiscal consolidation within the constraints of the Stability and Growth Pact (SGP), and the appropriate policy stance under present cyclical conditions, which are not well aligned with major euro-area countries; and . policies to strengthen durable convergence in living standards, addressing the role of fiscal as well as structural policies. There was broad agreement on the major policy issues, albeit not always on the precise targets or speed of reform and the authorities noted that no major policy initiatives could be expected ahead of the October general elections. B. Monetary Conditions and Macroeconomic Imbalances 11. The policy discussions were framed against present monetary conditions, as implied for Portugal by the ECB’s policy stance, and possible macroeconomic imbalances emerging at the current cyclical juncture. Monetary conditions 12. Monetary conditions have eased ,.* 0 11 markedly in the context of entry into 071 monetary union, contributing to a 0 1‘1 credit boom, strong domestic demand, ,o and a growing current account ,‘O imbalance. With the cumulative 055 0, reduction in repo rates by almost 0 50 3 percentage points since the beginning of ” 01, 1998, short-term real interest rates (deflated by the cOnSumer price increase over the preceding 12 months) declined Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Publicby roughly the same magnitude and were about zero in the second quarter of 1999 (Figures 2 and 6). Strong growth of household credit continued even after the Bank of Portugal tightened prudential provisioning requirements for consumer loans in early 1999. With enterprise credit also accelerating more recently, the nongovernment credit-to-GDP and credit-to-deposit ratios have increased by some 30 percentage points over the past two years. Banks financed the credit boom with short-term, predominantly euro-denominated, interbank loans from foreign credit institutions, accumulating net foreign liabilities equivalent to some 10 percent of GDP; and by disposing of more liquid assets with falling yields, notably government bonds. Combined with the weakening of the euro since early 1999, the staff shared the view of market participants that monetary conditions were very accommodative in view of Portugal’s relatively advanced cyclical position. The authorities, however, considered monetary conditions not inappropriate Corn a domestic perspective and consistent with an expected deceleration in inflation in 1999 relative to 1998. While concerned about the rapid growth in bank credit, they pointed out that household indebtedness ratios had just reached the EU average. In their view, the credit boom was a transitory phenomenon related to the “regime shift” to monetary union and it was likely to begin gradually unwinding in the near future; staff, though, was less certain that all the elements were in place for a gradual deceleration of credit growth (see below). Macroeconomic imbalances and cyclical juncture 13. There was agreement that the emergence of macroeconomic imbalances could call for more accelerated fiscal consolidation. In this context, the discussion focused on the persistent inflation differential vis-a-vis the rest of the euro area, at a time of low unemployment rates in Portugal, and the widening of the external current account deficit. 14. In interpreting the inflation differential vis+vis euro-area countries, the authorities cautioned that the differential was in part a by-product of the real convergence process. To the extent that productivity growth in the tradable sector exceeded productivity growth in partner countries during the convergence process-and with the tradable goods sector often being a leader in the wage-setting process- a persistent inflation differential could be expected without adverse effects on competitiveness. However, it proved difficult (for the authorities and the staff) to estimate the precise size of this effect.’ As a rough 7 For cross-country estimates, see the forthcoming Selected Issues paper for the consultation discussions with Greece; the role of total factor productivity is summarized in K. A. Froot and K. Rogoff, “Perspectives on PPP and Long-Run Real Exchange Rates,” in G.M. Grossman and K. Rogoff, eds., Handbook of International Economics (Vol. 3) pp. 1647-88 (1995). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-8” indicator, staff estimates suggest that if Portugal’s higher productivity differential in tradable goods were fully reflected in higher wage and price increases in its nontradable sector, the resulting inflation differential could be on the order of 0.3-0.6 percentage point (see table below). This suggests that, at most, half of the 1% percent inflation differential observed during the second quarter of 1999 can be attributed to the real convergence process, with the balance partly reflecting cyclically divergent positions, including some overheating in Portugal. The authorities suggested that the sustainable equilibrium differential was likely to be somewhat larger and that the remaining differential reflected not only the cyclical strength in Portugal but also the cyclical weakness in some other euro-area countries, which would not call for offsetting domestic policies. Moreover, there was some concern whether this view on the equilibrium inflation differential applied well to Portugal’s circumstances. It implies a tendency for price-based real effective exchange rates to appreciate, while the unit- labor-cost-based real exchange rate for tradables should remain broadly stable, reflecting relatively high productivity growth in the tradable goods sector.* However, the predicted divergence between price- and labor-cost-based real exchange rate indicators is not borne out by Portugal’s experience in the 1990s (Figure 3).9 Productivity Growth and Implied.InRation Differentials: Portugal versus EU l/ (In percent) Tradable versus nontradable sectors: total factor productivity differential (1990-95) 0.6 Portugal 1.3 EU 0.7 Implied estimated inflation differential, Portugal versus EU (GDP deflator, in percentage points) 0.6 Memorandum items Labor productivity differential between tradables and nontradables, Portugal versus EU (1995-98) Implied estimated inflation differential, Portugal versus EU, based on labor productivity differential during 1995-98 (GDP deflator, in percentage points) Source: Staff estimates. 0.5 0.3 l/ The tradable sector covers only manufacturing in the labor productivity calculations; in addition, it includes mining in the total factor productivity (TFP) estimates. TFP estimates exclude agricuhure and are only available through 1995, owing to capital stock data limitations. 15. Turning to the external current account, the authorities attributed its widening-from broad balance during 1986-95 to a projected deficit of about 5 percent 8 On the interpretation of different indicators of competitiveness, see L. Lipschitz and D. McDonald, “Real Exchange Rates and Competitiveness: A Clarification of Concepts, and Some Measurements for Europe,” IMF Working Paper 91/25 (March 199.1). 9 This may have reflected, in part, measurement problems, as it was difficult to incorporate newly emerging high-growth industries in the tradable sector into the unit labor cost data. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-9- of GDP in 1999-primarily to a “regime shift” emanating from monetary-union and to temporary factors. The temporary factors included a bunching of demand for imported consumer durables, notably cars, which was stimulated by an easing of liquidity constraints following the decline in interest rates; and the cyclical weakness in partner countries. While some domestic overheating may also have played a role, it was regarded as secondary. In this context, they also pointed out that traditional indicators of price and cost competitiveness had remained broadly stable and that export market shares had been maintained. The authorities expected that the waning of the temporary factors would help narrow the current account deficit in the medium term. 16. The discussions examined whether, in a currency union, a member country’s external current account remained a useful indicator of macroeconomic developments. In countries with their own currencies, current account balances of states or regions were generally not considered a policy concern (indeed, for most countries, such data were not collected). However, individual countries in EMU were, in important respects, still in a different situation than individual states in, for example, the United States or most EU countries: fiscal transfers in response to adverse ishocks were much higher within countries than across the euro area; portfolio diversification, which also can cushion the impact of adverse shocks, tended to be larger across states than across EMU countries; and inter-state labor mobility was generally higher than inter-country mobility. These features suggested that, compared to regions within single countries, the current account of euro participants remained an indicator of macroeconomic developments. However, with the elimination of exchange rate risk and the increased integration of euro-area financial markets, financing had become much less of a constraint and, correspondingly, the current account a less proximate indicator of impending trouble than in the past. 17. The authorities and the staff agreed that at least part of the increase in Portugal’s current account deficit was due to factors associated with EMU-notably, declining interest rates (and risk premia) and the integration of euro-area financial markets. Part of the shift might, however, also be attributable to more transitory and less benign factors, such as the credit boom. While these deficits were financeable, Cuther work would be needed to arrive at a more implications of the currency union. ,B recise assessment of the medium-term current account In the meantime, there was agreement that monitoring the current account deficit remained use&l. This would have to take into account whether the deficit financed primarily productive investment (rather than consumption or housing) as well as its financial sector implications, including the changing indebtedness of the private sector (see below). lo The staffprojects a deficit above 4 percent of GDP over the medium term, assuming constant real exchange rates and unchanged policies; this incorporates the expected decline (in terms of GDP) of EU structural fUnds during 2000-06 (these tinds are recorded as transfer credits in the current account balance). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- lo- C. Macroeconomic Stabilization: The Increased Role of Fiscal Policy 18. In addition to present monetary and cyclical conditions, the discussions on the appropriate stabilization role of fiscal policy took account of the requirements of a prudent medium-term fiscal balance. With these considerations in mind, there was broad consensus concerning the fiscal strategy for 1999-using higher-than-budgeted revenues for deficit reduction-which could result in l/4 percentage point smaller deficit than the original 2.0 percent of GDP target. For 2000 and 2002, staff argued for a deficit of close to 1 percent of GDP and zero, respectively, subject to economic developments; the authorities were not yet in a position to commit to a revision of the significantly higher deficit targets of the Stability Program. Prudent medium-term fiscal balance 19. The authorities emphasized that their medium-term fiscal target-a deficit of 0.8 percent of GDP in 2002, some % percentage point weaker than programmed on average in other euro-area countries (Table 4)-reflected the weighing of different demands on the budget. On the one hand, the budget had to operate within the constraints of the SGP. On the other hand, Portugal’s development aspirations called for a sufficiently high level of public expenditure, including on capital, to foster growth. And high growth, together with a low starting level of public debt, would result in relatively favorable public debt dynamics. 20. While acknowledging these considerations, including the need for adequate public investment, the staff argued for achieving budget balance by 2002, the end of the Stability Program’s medium-term horizon, and maintaining balance on average over the cycle. This would lay the groundwork for dealing with the future fiscal demands of an aging population and for the increased stabilization role of fiscal policy in monetary union. Budget balance on average over the cycle would reduce the public debt from just under 60 percent to approximately 25 percent of GDP by 2015, when the old-age: dependency ratio begins to rise more rapidly. And it is likely to allow, within the constraints of the SGP, not only for the full operation of the automatic fiscal stabilizers during most cyclical downturns, but also leave room for some discretionary measures, which may have a role to play with the loss of country-specific monetary policy under monetary union. l1 The authorities concurred that these were important factors in reviewing their Stability Program. Nonetheless, they pointed out that meeting the balance target by 2002 would require a relatively ambitious primary adjustment of some 1% percent of GDP during the three years 2000-02 (relative to the staffs estimate for 1999), versus 3/4 percent in the authorities’ Stability Program, with the l1 While cyclical fluctuations have tended to be larger in Portugal than in rnost industrial countries, the elasticity of the fiscal balance in terms of GDP has historically been relatively low (about 0.4). Although the elasticity has increased somewhat with the rising tax burden, with structural budget balance the 3 percent ceiling would not be breached by output gap fluctuations in line with historical experience. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- ll- structural primary surplus doubling to 2% percent of GDP in 2002. It remained to be seen whether this would be politically feasible after the October elections. Near-term stabilization: Fiscal policy in 1999/2000 21. In the discussions on near-term fiscal stabilization, the central issue was whether the above-noted considerations-the present cyclical strength of the economy and accommodative monetary conditions-called for additional measures to accelerate fiscal withdrawal during 199912000. In this regard, both the authorities and the staff viewed a slowdown of output growth to around potential, with the output gap remaining essentially closed, as the most likely scenario. Under these circumstances, the staff considered the risks of pursuing a steady path toward fiscal balance by 2002 as worth taking and manageable. 22. For 1999, there was broad agreement to use higher-than-budgeted revenues and possible interest savings for deficit reduction, with the staff estimating a deficit of 1.7 percent of GDP (versus a budget target of 2 percent). The authorities were less sanguine on the prospects for interest savings, and they expected a marginally higher deficit (1.8 percent of GDP). The fiscal withdrawal-of % percent and ‘/z percent of GDP in terms of the stafYs estimates of the overall structural and primary structural balances, respectively- would limit overheating; and it would lead to the first increase in the structural primary balance since 1996, to 1.5 percent of GDP. This incorporates the authorities’ expectation that, af&er having successfUlly controlled expenditure in the first half of the year, expenditure pressures in the run-up to the October elections could also be resisted. A faster-than- Fiscal Outlook for 1999-2000 (In percent of GDP) Revenues 1998 Est. 43.3 1999 2000 Budget l! Stilff Stability Staff norma- estimate program l/ tive scenario 43.7 43.9 43.9 43.5 Expenditure 45.6 45.6 45.6 45.3 44.6 Of which: interest 3.4 3.3 3.2 3.2 3.1 Overall balance primary balance structum1 primary balance 21 -2.3 -2.0 -1.7 -1.5 -1.1 1.1 1.4 1.5 1.8 2.0 1.0 0.8 1.5 1.3 1.9 Memorandum item GDP growth 3.9 3.54 3.0 3.2 3.2 Sources: Ministry of Finance; Stability Program (December 1998); and Fund staff estimates. l/ To account for GDP revisions, ratios are based on programmed GDP changes with respect to the previous year. 2/ Based on the staffs potential output estimate and a deficit-to-output gap elasticity of 0.4. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12- programmed fiscal consolidation would be in line with the recommendatio:ns of the Council of Economic and Finance Ministers (ECOFIN) in its February 1999 review of Portugal’s Stability Program, as well as with the staffs normative scenario. 23. For 2000, continuing along a path of steadily closing the fiscal deficit by 2002 would imply a deficit of just over 1 percent of GDP, compared with the Stability Program’s target of 1.5 percent. Provided that the economy developed as projected, the staff emphasized that a 1 percent of GDP deficit might represent a minimum in terms of containing inflation pressures and external imbalances. It was also less sanguine that all the elements were in place for a relatively rapid and orderly market-based deceleration in private sector credit. While linked to issues of financial supervision and regulation (see below), macroeconomic policy restraint had also a critical role to play, l2 with the onus falling on fiscal policy in monetary union. Moreover, even achieving the 1 percent of GDP target would, in the near term, leave Portugal vulnerable to breaching the 3 percent deficit ceiling should the economy experience a sharp economic downturn. The authorities indicated that these considerations-as well as the possibly better-than-originally budgeted outturn in 1999-would be taken into account in reassessing their budget target for 2000, for which preparations were still at an early stage. Past experience had also shown budget execution to be relatively flexible in Portugal compared to other EU countries, which could be used for additional fiscal tightening during 2000 if required by economic developments. D. Structural Policies to Strengthen Growth 24. Achieving durable convergence in living standards is the key economic policy challenge facing the Portuguese economy. Since joining the EU in 1986, per capita income growth has exceeded growth in EU partner countries by about 1 percent per annum. However, the speed of convergence was not far above the rate recorded for Spain and considerably slower than the 5 percent recorded for Ireland-both countries with already substantially higher per capita income levels than Portugal. Moreover, much of Portugal’s gradual catch-up since joining the EU is attributable to an increase in factor inputs, notably a rapid buildup in the capital stock, with relatively low growth in estimated total factor productivity (Box 1). This raises the issue of the durability of the catch-up process at a time when per capita income is still little more than two-thirds of the EU average. Against this background, the discussions attempted to identify policies that could contribute to maintaining, if not accelerating, the catch-up process. Fiscal policies 25. Although a relatively low tax burden has benefited Portugal’s competitive position and contributed to a growth-supporting environment in the past, revenues I2 See, for example, P.-O. Gourinchas, 0. Landerretche, and R. Valdes, “Lending Booms: Some Stylized Facts” (IMF Research Department Seminar Paper, July 1999). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13- Box 1. A Capital-Based Income Catch-Up, 1986-98 Portugal’s growth record since joining the European Union in 1986 comnares well with the United States or the countries in central Real GDP Growth and Factor Contributions Europe. However, the catch-up speed was not exceptional if compared 1986-98 with the remrd of many other countries of a similar income level, including, in Europe, Spain and Ireland. Couotry GDP TFP Capital Labor pagal 3.3 0.7 2.0 0.6 The table presents growth accounting data derived on the assumption FlUICe 2.2 1.1 0.7 0.3 of fixed labor income shares (at their respective 1998 levels). For Imhnd 6.2 3.6 1.1 1.4 France, Ireland, Spain the United States, and Portugal the shares SW 3.0 1.6 0.1 1.2 amounted to about 70 percent, 63 percent, 73 percent, 64 percent, and 55 percent respectively.’ unitcdswcs 2.7 0.9 0.8 1.0 The role of total factor productivity in Portugal’s growth stands in marked contmst to that in many other industrial countries. Not only did factor productivity account for a much smaller fraction Total Factor Productivity Growth Rates 2/ of growth, it also contributed little overall. Wtead, growth in 6 Portugal was mainly driven by capital accumulation. This can be gleaned from the investment-to-GDP ratios which consistently 4 exceeded those in its Emopean partner countries or the United 2 States. Factor-intensive growth is not an tmcommon feature of 0 real convergence and was, for example, also characteristic of the earlier growth experience in South-East Asia.’ Nevertheless, with -2 capital-h&or ratios now estimated to exceed those in countries at -4 a similar stage of development, the slow growth in total factor .6 productivity may amount to a speed brnit to convergence. EU transfers have helped sustain Portugal’s investment effort. Capital transfers averaged between 2-3 percent of GDP in recent yearsandareexpectedtoremaininthisrangeinthenearfuture (net total EU transfers remained broadly stable around 3 percent of GDP during 1995-98). Looking ahead, however, a fairly significant decline in capital transfers is likely toward the end of the Agenda 2000 horizon (in 2006). The results here suggest that Portugal could be hit harder by the gradual reduction in transfers than other European countries not only because it received relatively high support in terms of its GDP, but also because Portugal’s growth was driven largely by capital accumulation. Accordingly, economic policies in Portugal need to focus on raising factor productivity. Section I1I.D discusses a possible reform agenda. Investment-to-GDP Ratios 1986-90 1991-94 1995-98 Per Capita Real GDP Growth Rates ’ Note that in some of these countries (France and Ireland), the labor share in income dropped by over 4 percentage points during 10 the period under observation. Failing to incorporate such a decline biases upwards (downwards),the contribution of total 8 factor productivity to the extent the growth rate of capital 6 exceeded (fell short of) that of labor. 4 * Actual factor productivity growth, except for Portugal and the United States, for which labor income shares are assumed constant in the data. %e A. Young, “The Tyranny of Numbers: Confronting the Statistical Realities of the East Asian Growth Experience,” Quarter& Journal of Economics, pp. 64 l-80 (1995). 2 0 1986-90 1991-94 1995-98 ~Fraocc n Ireland 0 Spain BUS WpOflUgal Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14- (in percent of GDP) have increased steadily and, by 1998, were close to the high levels recorded in the euro area (Pigure 7). They exceeded those in Ireland by some 10 percentage points and were substantially above levels of countries with similar per capita income. Moreover, the Stability Program envisaged a further increase in the tax burden by almost 1 percentage point during 1999-2002, at a time when most euro-area countries were targeting tax reductions. As tax rates had actually declined since 1996, the authorities emphasized that rising revenues in recent years were the fruit of improved tax administration. Recent steps included computer networks linking the different tax centers (to be completed in early 2000); the creation of a single taxpayer registry; and strengthened arrears collection. Improved tax enforcement had made the tax system more equitable and equity considerations were also reflected in the personal income tax reform of the 1999 budget: the tax rate for the lowest income bracket was reduced from I5 percent to 14 percent; and many tax deductions were converted to tax credits, with ceilings on the absolute amount of credits for some spending categories adding to the progressivity of the tax system. l3 26. The authorities argued that the present tax system provided for an adequately competitive environment and envisaged no major tax reform steps in the near future. The main exceptions were plans to replace the property sales tax and the exemption-riddled local property tax with a single property tax. Outdated property assessments and remaining rent controls on many older properties could impede these reforms, and the staff argued that these issues needed to be addressed in parallel. In other areas, there was broad agreement that eliminating widespread tax exemptions (beyond those contemplated for the property tax) would improve efficiency and provide room for lowering marginal tax rates. To strengthen growth, the mission inquired about unifying the existing corporate income tax rates at a reduced average ratei and widening the personal income tax brackets, with a view to reducing the number of taxpayers subject to the higher marginal tax rates. The authorities acknowledged that such steps might be considered at a later stage; however, they also emphasized that the corporate income tax burden still remained low compared with many other EU countries, though perhaps not relative to some of the more dynamic countries. 27. Reducing the tax burden is feasible only if accompanied by decisive steps to rein in the growth in current primary expenditure. In the run-up to monetary union, Portugal was the only country with a rising primary expenditure-to-GDP ratio (Figure 8). Moreover, the authorities acknowledged that there was again a risk of overruns in some expenditure categories in 1999. The discussions focused on four expenditure areas: i3 The net effect of the conversion from tax deductions to tax credits was intended to be revenue neutral. To secure passage in parliament, however, taxpayers were given the option of filing taxes under the old system for 1999 liabilities if that resulted in a more favorable tax treatment; no reliable estimates of the budgetary costs from this change were available. l4 At present, the national tax rate is 34 percent (20 percent) for resident entities operating in (not operating in) trade, industry, or agriculture; and 25 percent for nonresident entities. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 15- . On health care, the authorities conceded that the system remained subject to considerable inefficiencies. Building on earlier measures, further savings were expected from the increased use of health identity cards; and tax benefits for some health care expenditures were curtailed in the 1999 budget, although many categories remained eligible for a 30 percent tax credit without limit. Looking ahead, additional steps are likely to be needed to prevent a further rise in public health spending in relation to GDP. The staff noted that there was room for increasing co-payments on a targeted, needs-based basis. Moreover, in line with the OECD’s recent recommendations, it supported easing entry restrictions in the pharmacy sector, with a view to reducing Portugal’s spending on pharmaceuticals (among the highest in the OECD in relation to GDP); further strengthening cost-oriented incentives for hospitals and primary health care providers; and better targeting of health care tax credits. . On pensions, the authorities were fully aware that further steps would be required to place the public pension system on a sound footing and safeguard the fiscal accounts. Plans for a more fundamental pension reform, expected to include a two-pillar system, are to be taken up by the next legislature. In the meantime, progress continued in reducing disparities in contribution rates among employees and the self-employed, with full harmonization to be achieved by 2000; and retirement ages were made more flexible. . On the public sector wage bill and employment, average wage increases of more than 8 percent and public sector employment growth had contributed to a wage bill growth in excess of 10 percent in 1998. While the authorities agreed that this had been out of line with other euro-area aspirants and had contributed to a fiscal stance that was not well attuned to domestic cyclical requirements, they explained that a large portion of the wage increases reflected earlier commitments for wage scale adjustments of specific employment categories, including teachers-adjustments that would, though on a smaller scale, continue in 1999. The staff noted that the share of public sector employment had continued to rise and was now estimated to be close to the EU average, at a time when overall labor market conditions were tight. Even though approval of new positions had become more stringent, no comprehensive employment reduction strategy had been put in place and public sector employment was expected to increase further in 1999. . On subsidies and public enterprise support, the introduction of nominal caps was expected to limit abuse of mortgage subsidies in 1999. Nevertheless, the mortgage boom was leading to subsidy payments well above the budgeted amounts. Concerning the remaining subsidy on government saving certificates, some modifications or its abolition were being debated but no changes were imminent; similarly, there were no plans for comprehensive limits on the support for public enterprises, including for transportation. The authorities acknowledged that capital injections to enterprises were, in line with EUROSTAT conventions, not recorded as budget expenditure. These injections, financed by privatization receipts, amounted to 1% percent of GDP in 1998, with much of it earmarked to support I5 For more details, see OECD Economic Surveys, Portugal, 1999 (forthcoming). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 16- public transportation and the postal service. I6 The staff nonetheless expressed concern about this less than fully transparent procedure. 28. The steady increase in revenues (and EU transfers) has in part been used to finance public capital expenditures, which- at over 6 percent of GDP-are among the highest in the euro area. The authorities explained that this had played an important role in addressing large infrastructure needs and had contributed to real convergence. This is supported by the staff’s analysis (detailed in a background study), but it also suggests that the quantity of public investment per se is not central to the catch-up process, as illustrated by the strong growth performance in several other countries (including Ireland and, more recently, Finland) with much smaller public investment. Nevertheless, the staff raised the issue of whether the Stability Program’s targeted reduction in capital expenditur+-of 0.6 percent of GDP as EU transfers decline-would be consistent with the Program’s growth targets. The authorities acknowledged that this strengthened the case for primary expenditure restraint to free up adequate resources for capital expenditure. Education 29. Improving education and job skills of the workforce are key pillars of the government’s strategy for continued real income convergence. Despite considerable progress in recent years, however, Portugal’s educational attainment levels continue to lag behind most other industrial countries, and less than 60 percent of the current cohort of students is finishing secondary school at the normal age of graduation of 18. This has coincided with the highest level of primary and secondary education spending (in relation to GDP) in the OECD, suggesting sizable inefficiencies that limit the country’s growth potential. Based on a staff background paper, the discussions covered a number of reforms to improve the efficiency of education spending (detailed in Box 2). The authorities generally concurred with the staffs assessment; they noted that several steps were already being initiated, including closing several small schools, whereas some other recommendations may be politically difficult to implement quickly, especially those dealing with the employment conditions of teachers. With respect to job training, there was a widespread perception that its quality could be improved and that it should be more closely aligned with the demands of a rapidly modernizing economy. Labor unions and other market participants suggested strengthening the accreditation requirements for job training centers and increasing the involvement of small and medium-size companies in these centers. l6 Of the 4 percent of GDP in privatization proceeds in 1998, the balance was distributed as follows: 1% percent of GDP for debt reduction and 1 percent of GDP for the State Participation Holding Company (PARTEST). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-17- . Box 2. The Portuguese Education System: Performance and Reform Agenda It is widely accepted that a highly skilled and educated workforce is necessary for attaining a high standard of living. This issue is of particular concern to Portugal (and is analyzed in more detail in a background study), where a large share of its population has failed to complete secondary education. As a result, there is a dearth of workers q&lied for intermediate, technical-level positions, which constitutes a major stumbling block to higher labor productivity. Despite recent improvements, rates of educational attainment for the current school-aged cohort still lag behind much of the OECD (see table). The percentage of the school-aged population completing secondary school with a concentration in technical and vocational studies is, at 11 percent, just one-fourth the average for other OECD countries. Low attainment r;ltes reflect several factors, among them high failure rates, which averaged 34 percent for grades 10-12 for the latest year for which data are available (1995/96). As a result, both school dropout and repetition rates are high. Scores on internationally comparable examina tions on math and science also indicate significant lags in educational performance. Portugal’s low educational performance has coincided with the highest level of primary and secondary education expenditure relative to GDP in the OECD, suggesting a large degree of inefficiency. Portugal’s relatively high spending in the public system is linked to both low student/teacher ratios and generous salaries in relation to GDP per capita. Public expenditures on capital and nonwage current outlays in public schools are well below OECD norms, however, indicating some possible misallocation in the composition of spending. Comparisons with the private sector are also suggestive of efficiency problems in the public sector: while student/teacher ratios in PottugaI’s private schools are 50 percent higher, failure rates are lower. The government’s efforts to improve educational attainment have focused on strengthening participation in preschool education and increasing the range of vocational and technically oriented courses offered to students. In time these efforts should have a positive effect on educational performance. But additional measures are necessary, especially in the area of primary and secondary education. Among the reforms that could be considered are (i) adoption of a goal-oriented management and incentive system, with school and teacher performance based on quantitative assessments of progress in achieving targets for reducing failure rates, repetition rates, and improving scores on national examinations; (ii) establishing minimum school sizes and student/teacher ratios; and (iii) reform of the curriculum to support higher academic achievement and lower failure rates. In addition, there is a need to ease employment and work rules governing public teachers, which would allow for a reallocation of experienced staff to areas of greatest need. There is also scope for raising user fees in publicly-funded higher education, matched by an increase in scholarships for poor students. Efforts to expand job training-a key element of the Employment Plan-should remain a high priority, with a view to forging stronger links between school and the workplace. Educational Performance and Expenditure in Comparative Perspective, 1995/96 Percentage of population: ftishing at least secondary school, 25-64 ftishing at least secondary school, 25-34 completing secondary education at normal age (current cohort of students) 21 Portugal Other Netherlands Ireland Spain OECD 11 (in percent) 20 64 63 50 30 32 15 72 66 50 56 86 81 79 73 (in percent of GDP) Total education expenditure (public plus private) 6.4 5.7 4.9 5.3 5.7 Public education expenditure 5.7 5.0 4.6 4.7 4.8 Public and private primary and secondary education 4.5 3.8 3.2 3.4 4.0 Source: OECD, Education at a Glance, 1998 ; Portuguese Ministry of Education; and Fund staff estimates. l/Sample size varies fi-om 19 to 24 countries. Figures based on unweighted averages. 2Ancludea over-age students in Portugal. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 18- Privatization, competition, and product market reform 30. Portugal’s wide-ranging privatization program has been a cornerstone of its efforts to strengthen competitiveness. Between 1989 and mid-1999, about 1 */z percent of GDP was realized in privatization receipts per annum and over 100 enterprises were sold in whole or in part, including firms in the financial, electricity, oil, and telecommunications sectors. Privatizations have been realized primarily through public offers of shares and direct sales. The program has accelerated in recent years, with receipts in 1998 through mid-1999 corresponding to 5% percent of 1998 GDP on account of additional divestiture in electricity, telecommunications, transportation, and cement. 31. Competition has also been enhanced by further integration into European markets and changes in the regulatory environment. The deregulation of the electricity sector began in early 1999 and electricity prices have already declined to levels close to the EU average. Even though production, transmission, and distribution remain dominated by one company, the authorities expected that the electricity authority would ensure adequate competition and quality. Concerning the agricultural sector, the authorities supported the recently approved reform of the Common Agricultural Policy and expected substantial structural adjustments in the sector in coming years. 32. To strengthen and safeguard competition, the staff suggested creating a fully autonomous and adequately funded antitrust authority with sufficient investigative powers. The authorities were prepared to review the proposal and acknowledged that having the Competition Council and the Directorate General for Trade and Competition (DGCC) integrated into the Ministry of Economy might at times have hampered investigations. On judicial reforms, there was agreement that the planned courts specializing in commerce and competition cases could strengthen the efficient operation of competitive forces; more broadly, many market participants and regulators called for further steps to shorten economic judiciary proceedings. Financial sector issues 33. A comprehensive reform program in the 1990s has made the financial sector a key element of the successtil macroeconomic performance. A background study for last year’s consultation (see SM/98/243, 10/g/98) lent support to the view that the banking system appeared basically sound and adequately prepared for competition in the euro area, even though it has been untested in a major economic downturn since its relatively recent far- reaching privatization and liberalization. The authorities emphasized that the acceleration in private sector credit growth, which contributed to the recent acceleration in property prices (Figure 9), could not be traced to prudential weaknesses. Moreover, provisioning requirements, already generous by international standards, had been strengthened for consumer loans in early 1999. With a sound regulatory framework in place, there was broad agreement that the key supervisory challenge was to ensure against a weakening in credit standards. Interest spreads on private sector credit (vis-a-vis government securities) had narrowed substantially in recent years; spreads between prime rates and government bond Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 19- yields, while not easily comparable across countries, were estimated to be smaller than in many industrial countries, raising some concern about private sector credit risk assessments. The authorities pointed out that the narrowing in spreads reflected increasing competition among banks, whose financial position had remained strong. There was broad agreement that financial institutions needed to adequately anticipate the realization of macroeconomic risks, including those emanating from future increases in interest rates and a cyclical weakening of the economy-adverse developments which could possibly hit the domestic credit market simultaneously under EMU. 34. Concerning additional reform steps, the authorities were studying proposals of a draft report by the Base1 Committee on Banking Supervision, calling for strengthening market discipline by raising disclosure requirements for banks concerning their risk management and internal control policies and practices.” Any steps in this area, though, would await similar steps in partner countries. Measures were also being prepared to allow the securitization of some private debt instruments, which would improve the liquidity of banks’ assets following the shift from public to private sector credit. Furthermore, plans were under review to strengthen and formalize the cooperation between the different supervisory agencies of the financial sector. However, the divestiture of the remaining state-owned financial institution was not on the policy agenda and the authorities pointed out that it was very competitive and subject to the same market forces as other institutions. The authorities also reafftrmed their continued commitment to providing equal access to foreign and domestic players. IV. STATISTICALANDOTHERISSUES 35. Portugal subscribes to the SDDS, posts its m&data on the Dissemination Standards Bulletin Board, and core economic data are provided in a comprehensive manner to the Fund. With respect to the real sector, however, data quality is relatively poor by industrial country standards (Appendix II). On the national accounts, data of the National Statistics Office (INE) are deemed insufficiently reliable and the Bank of Portugal produces independent estimates that differ considerably from those of INE. Methodological revisions in some data series (for example, for the labor market) are undertaken without overlapping sample periods, precluding consistent comparisons. 36. Y2K issues were widely recognized and preparations in the financial sector were reportedly advanced with ongoing work focusing on testing and, increasingly, on contingency plans. Concerning some other sectors, including electricity, insufficient information was available and market participants were more uncertain whether preparations were adequate. ” See Base1 Committee on Banking Supervision, “Best Practices for Credit Risk Disclosure” (1999). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 20 - v. STAFF &PRAlSAL 37. The successful pursuit of a well-focused policy strategy culminated in Portugal joining the euro area as a founding member. In the process, economic performance over the past several years has been impressive: strong output and employment growth; a decline in unemployment to one of the lowest rates in the euro area, helped by a relat.ively flexible labor market; and a marked deceleration of inflation to historically low levels. There are, however, also signs of emerging macroeconomic imbalances, including a continued nonnegligible inflation differential vis-a-vis euro-area countries (amid tight labor market conditions) and a rapid expansion of private sector credit. These call for a strengthening of fiscal stabilization policies within the constraints of the Stability and Growth Pact (SGP) and for increased emphasis on structural policies to support a relatively rapid convergence to EU income levels. These challenges need to be addressed decisively if Portugal is to take full advantage of monetary union and increasingly competitive global markets. 38. With currency union, monetary conditions have become very accommodative in view of Portugal’s relatively advanced cyclical conditions. This has contributed to a boom in private sector credit, with spillover effects on the external current account; and it is partly reflected in a continued, albeit a recently somewhat narrowing, inflation differential. 39. In assessing the appropriate stabilization role of fiscal policy, account needs to be taken of medium-term fiscal requirements. In the staffs view, budgetary balance over the cycle would be a prudent medium-term objective-an objective that should be achieved by 2002 if economic growth continues as currently projected. This would lead to a rapid decline in the public debt-to-GDP ratio ahead of the most adverse trends in population aging, and it would meet the requirements of the SGP. Moreover, there would be some room for discretionary measures in a cyclical downturn-measures that should assume a more important role under monetary union where, as at present, cyclical conditions may not always be well aligned with the rest of the euro area. 40. For 1999, using larger-than-budgeted revenues and possibly lower interest payments for deficit reduction should provide adequate fiscal withdrawal under present macroeconomic conditions. The implied fiscal consolidation would also be consistent with steadily eliminating the budget deficit over the four-year period to 2002. Meeting the target will require continuation of the firm expenditure control exhibited in the first half of the year. 41. For 2000, assuming that the economy expands in line with domestic capacity, a deficit of 1 percent of GDP would continue to impart an appropriate pace of fiscal withdrawal, and contribute to steadily closing the fiscal deficit by 2002. However, some additional fiscal tightening would be needed should domestic demand not decelerate as currently envisaged. Relevant indicators of domestic demand pressure would include a further increase in the external current account (and, correspondingly, in the external indebtedness of domestic residents); real estate prices and cost and price inflation more generally; and credit market developments, including a continued rapid expansion of household indebtedness and banks’ net external debt. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-21- 42. A hallmark of Portugal’s strong economic performance has been the gradual catch-up in living standards and the key challenge is securing continued, and preferably more rapid, real income convergence. To a considerable extent, the catch-up has been attributable to an increase in factor inputs, notably a large buildup in the capital stock. With investment and employment rates already high, policies need to focus on strengthening the pace of catch-up in productivity levels, that is, on strengthening incentives, factor quality, and efficiency. 43. Fiscal policy can, and has indeed in the past, contributed importantly to a growth-supporting environment. Looking ahead, key elements should include: . arresting, and gradually reversing, the rise in the revenue-to-GDP ratio, following its rapid rise toward EU levels-themselves high by international standards. As a first step, stabilizing the ratio could involve using increased revenues from improved tax administration-where progress has been commendable-for lowering marginal tax rates on incomes and corporate profits, thereby strengthening incentives and competitiveness. In addition, there is also a need to reduce widespread tax exemptions and eliminate the adjustable element of the petroleum tax, whose price stabilization effect distorts market- based incentives; . curtailing current primary expenditures. Foremost, this calls for steps to rein in the wage bill, where last year’s double-digit increase was out of step with the new economic environment in Europe. With public sector employment ratios now around the high levels observed elsewhere in the EU, ambitious multiyear targets of employment reduction should be adopted, taking advantage of the sizable attrition expected over the coming years. In other areas, subsidies on mortgages and the premium granted for the holding of savings certificates should be eliminated. Enterprise support-be it in the form of explicit cash subsidies or capital transfers from privatization proceeds- should be strictly conditional on improved performance. On health care, several recent measures have begun to strengthen expenditure control and efficiency, including the new health care identity cards. There is further room to increase co-payments on a targeted basis, taking into account social needs, and to reduce entry restrictions in the pharmacy sector. On pensions, the system remains insufficiently prepared to deal with population aging. Reforms need to focus foremost on setting the public pension system on a sound footing and strengthening its net asset position ahead of the most rapid increase in pension recipients; in addition, a second pillar should cover a sizable portion of contributions; . sustaining adequate public investment that has played an important role for real income convergence. Curtailing primary current expenditure should free additional domestic resources for investment, as EU capital transfers fall back over time. 44. Education and job skills are among the most important determinants of a successful convergence in living standards. To improve performance and the efficiency of spending in these areas, steps could include adopting a performance-based reward system for teachers Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 22 - and school administrators and establishing minimum student/teacher ratios, With respect to job training, the accreditation requirements for job training centers need to be strengthened. 45. In the financial sector, current indicators of the banking sector’s performance compare well with those of other EU countries. Nevertheless, the recent intensification of the boom in private sector credit-with household indebtedness ratios set to rise above the EU average-is not sustainable and raises concerns about the quality of the credit approval process. Supervisors need to ensure that credit standards are maintained. And market discipline should be strengthened by raising disclosure requirements for banks concerning their loan risk management and internal control policies and practices. Furthermore, effective supervision would be facilitated by the early implementation of plans to strengthen and formalize cooperation between. the different supervisory agencies of the financial sector. 46. Competition has increased in recent years with Portugal’s integration into European markets and its ambitious privatization program. The progress in implementing the privatization program remains impressive, though, as a matter of fiscal transparency and to ensure a uniform assessment across different public expenditure items, all revenues Corn privatization should in the titure be transferred to the state for debt reduction. The recent reforms in the electricity sector presented an additional important step in the deregulation of the economy; to achieve its intended impact, the electricity authority needs to assume a strong and independent role. More generally, maintaining a competitive environment would be facilitated by creating a tilly autonomous and adequately funded anti-trust authority with sufficient investigative powers. 47. With the Y2K problem widely recognized and good progress reported in most areas, additional steps should focus on developing appropriate contingency plans, including for the general government, public utilities, and infrastructure. 48. Macroeconomic surveillance and policymaking are hampered by st:atistical weaknesses, notably for national income accounts and employment statistics. Shortcomings should be addressed quickly by the Instituto National de Estathtica, supported by the requisite financial resources and aimed at creating a single, high-quality national database. 49. It is proposed that the next Article IV consultation with Portugal take place on the standard 1 %-month cycle. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 23 - Table 1. Portugal: Selected Economic Indicators, 1993-2000 I/ (ChangeJ in percenS except as otherwise indicated) 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 Domestic economy Real GDP Real domestic demand Private consumption IlWestmmt Foreign sector contribution Employment Unemployment rate Compensation per worker (manufacturing) unit labor cm (mamlfacturing) Consumer prices (national index) Consumer prices (harmonized index) GDP deflator External accounts Export volume Import volume Export unit value Import unit value Trade balance (USS billions, f.o.b.) Current transfers (net, USS billions) 2/ Current account (USS billions) 3/ In percent of GDP 31 Current account excluding capital transfers (in percent of GDP) Financial account (in p-t of GDP) Of which: inward foreign direct investment inward portfolio investment Nominal effective exchange rate 41 Real effective exchange rate (CPI based) 4/ Net official reserves (end of period, in US0 billions) General government tinances (in percent of GDP) Revenues Expenditures Of which: capital expenditures Overall balance Public debt (Maastricht definition) Of which: external debt Privatization receipts Financial variables (end of period) Harmonized M3 41 Liquidity of residents (L) Domestic credit 41 Credit to the general government 41 Credit to the private sector 4151 Interest rates (percent) 6/ ovtight rale Deposit rate, 91-180 days Lmdiig rate, 91-180 days Government benchmark bond Nonperhning loans (in percent of lotal) 71 Risk-based capital asset ratio 8/ Long-term foreign currency debt rating (S&P) 91 Long-term foreign currency debt rating (Moody’s) 9/ -1.4 2.4 2.9 -1.6 3.1 2.4 1.0 2.3 1.7 -10.1 6.5 4.4 0.3 -0.9 0.3 -2.0 -0.1 -0.6 5.5 6.8 7.2 7.7 4.8 6.0 7.7 2.8 -1.9 6.5 5.2 4.1 . . . . . 7.0 6.1 . . 5.0 3.6 3.8 3.9 3.0 3.2 3.5 5.2 6.5 4.1 2.9 2.8 3.3 5.6 4.5 2.9 6.6 12.3 10.5 4.2 3.0 -0.2 -1.8 -3.0 -1.5 -0.1 0.6 1.9 2.3 0.8 0.4 7.3 6.7 5.0 4.6 4.6 4.9 4.6 4.1 3.8 3.7 0.9 0.7 2.4 2.4 1.8 3.1 2.2 2.8 2.5 2.4 2.9 1.9 2.2 2.3 2.2 2.5 3.1 4.5 3.0 2.7 -2.2 13.2 12.9 -5.8 11.3 9.7 6.0 6.5 4.2 9.2 4.3 1.7 -8.0 -8.3 -8.9 6.7 5.4 7.1 0.1 -2.2 -0.2 0.1 -2.5 -0.2 . . . . . -3.3 0.7 1.8 1.4 5.3 4.4 -5.7 -3.4 -2.9 -1.2 21.8 21.3 . . . 3.5 0.7 2.0 1.7 2.9 21.7 12.7 10.0 8.4 13.2 -3.8 0.4 -0.3 0.3 -9.4 -10.0 4.4 3.7 -2.3 -2.8 -2.1 -2.8 -4.2 -5.4 3.6 6.2 1.3 2.5 3.9 8.3 0.2 -2.1 0.9 -1.8 21.3 18.2 7.4 6.0 15.2 6.8 0.2 1.0 -1.2 1.3 -12.2 -13.0 4.0 4.3 -4.6 -5.6 -4.3 -5.1 -6.7 -7.5 5.6 . . . 1.6 5.8 -1.1 -1.0 0.2 0.2 18.7 . . . 41.1 39.5 40.6 43.2 43.4 43.3 47.2 45.5 46.4 46.5 46.0 45.6 5.9 4.9 5.2 6.2 6.3 6.3 -6.1 -6.0 -5.7 -3.3 -2.5 -2.3 63.1 63.8 63.9 65.0 61.4 57.0 7.4 9.4 11.6 11.8 14.0 14.9 0.6 1.3 2.3 2.8 4.8 3.9 . . . 8.2 6.1 6.4 6.8 6.2 9.4 8.0 8.8 6.3 7.8 8.8 13.7 11.7 12.6 11.6 17.1 2.3 22.0 -3.3 -3.1 -28.1 .40.0 11.4 11.1 17.7 17.1 20.8 25.1 11.2 10.2 15.7 9.0 6.9 . . . AA- Al 8.9 8.6 6.7 5.1 3.3 9.3 8.1 5.5 4.6 3.3 14.7 12.7 11.0 8.4 6.0 11.6 10.0 7.0 5.7 4.1 6.5 5.9 5.1 4.0 2.8 11.6 8.5 8.4 9.1 9.1 AA- AA- AA- AA- AA Al Al Al Aa Aa 9.0 6.6 1.5 I.9 -13.4 4.5 -5.9 -5.1 -7.4 . . . . . 43.9 43.8 45.6 45.3 6.3 6.0 -1.7 -1.5 55.4 53.3 . . 1.7 . . 8.6 . 17.1 -54.3 27.7 2.6 2.6 4.8 4.6 . . . . . AA Aa . . . . . . . Sources: Bank of Portugal; Ministry of Finance; National Statistics G&e (ME); and Fund statT estimates and projections. l/ Unless otherwise noted, 1999 and 2000 data are staffestimates or projections. 21 Statistical break in 1996. Figures exclude transfers to fmance capital expenditure for 19962000. These transfers equaled USS2.2 billion in 1996. 31 Statistical break in 1996. Figures include transfers to finance capital expenditure, which equaled USS2.2 billion in 1996. 4/ Data for 1999 correspond to May or year-on-year rates of change through May. 51 Includes nonthtancial public enterprises and nonmonetary financial institutions. 61 Data for 1999 correspond to June. 7/ Includes credit unions, and encompasses activity of off-shore branches and branches abroad. 8/ Capital over risk-weighted liabilities according to BIS methodology; lowest value among the six largest banking groups (which account for 90 percent ofthe banking system). 9/ I999 ratings refer to those available as of July. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 24 - Table 2. Portugal: Fiscal Developments - 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 Budget l/ Actual Budget 11 Staff projection (General government, in percent of GDP) Total revenue 40.6 43.2 43.4 43.3 43.3 43.7 43.9 Current receipts 38.7 40.1 40.5 40.6 40.7 40.8 Direct taxes 9.3 10.0 10.3 10.6 10.1 10.8 Social security contributions 11.3 11.6 11.8 11.6 12.0 11.6 Taxes on goods and services 13.9 14.4 14.2 14.1 14.6 14.4 Nontax revenue 4.2 4.0 4.2 4.3 4.0 4.1 41.2 . . . . . . . . 1.9 3.2 2.9 2.7 2.5 2.8 2.7 Capital revenue Total expenditures 46.4 46.5 46.0 45.7 45.6 45.6 45.6 Current expenditures 41.1 40.2 39.7 39.3 39.3 39.0 39.3 Public consumption 17.7 18.2 18.3 18.4 18.5 18.3 18.7 Subsidies 1.1 0.7 0.6 0.6 0.7 0.7 . . . Interest payments 6.3 4.8 4.2 3.6 3.4 3.3 3.2 Current transfers 16.0 16.4 16.5 16.7 16.7 16.7 . . . Capital expenditures 5.2 6.4 6.3 6.3 6.3 6.6 6.3 Overall balance -5.7 -3.3 -2.5 -2.4 -2.3 -2.0 -1.7 Memorandum items: Nominal GDP (billion escudos) Real GDP growth (in percent) Structural balance Primary current expenditures Primary balance Primary structuralbalance 15,818 2.4 -4.7 34.8 0.6 1.6 16,785 17,953 19,101 19,502 3.6 3.8 3.8 3.9 -2.6 -2.2 . . -2.4 35.3 35.4 35.7 35.9 1.5 1.7 1.3 1.1 2.2 2.0 . 1.0 20,705 3.54.0 . . 35.7 1.4 0.9 20,686 3.0 -1.8 36.1 1.5 1.5 Public debt 65.9 65.0 61.4 60.0 57.0 55.7 55.4 Source: Ministty of Finance; and staff estimates. l/To account for major revisions to the national accounts, the ratios reported here are calculated on the basis of revised estimates of GDP. These estimates are based on GDP from the previous year multiplied by the nominal GDP growth assumed in the budget. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 3. Portugal and EU: Trade with Selected Advanced and Emerging Countries, 1997/98 Impxts Exports Sham in total imports, 1997 Growth in imports l! Share in total exports, 1997 Growth in exports 11 Portugal EU Portugal EU Portugal EU Portugai EU Japan 2.5 3.7 21.7 10.2 0.7 1.9 -8.7 -13.9 China, Hong Kong SAR, and Singapore 1.0 3.5 35.6 10.0 0.8 2.7 -29.0 -10.1 ASEAN- plus Korea 1.6 2.6 13.4 6.7 0.3 2.3 1.0 -36.3 Russia 21 0.0 1.5 0.0 -10.7 0.0 1.3 0.0 -20.8 Turkey 0.3 0.7 23.7 ii.7 0.4 1.2 12.5 -0.8 Argentina 0.2 0.2 143.8 7.9 0.2 0.4 77.4 2.5 Brazil 1.8 0.7 -20.0 1.9 1.0 0.8 -6.4 3.0 Total 7.4 In percent of 1997 nominal GDP 2.5 Sources: IMF, Direction of Trade Stafistics; and Fund staff calculations. 12.9 15.1 6.6 3.4 10.6 -5.3 -15.4 3.2 0.3 0.2 0.8 2.8 0.0 -0.5 I E I I/ Year-on-year growth rate, based on U.S. dollar nominal trade flow. 2/imports and exports to and from Portugal rose from zero in 1997 to USf 37 million and USS 13 million in 1998, respectively (both less than 0.1 percent of trade). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 26 - Table 4. Portugal: Comparison of Stability Programs for 1999-2002 (General government, in percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated) l/ 1998 1999 2000 200 1 2002 Revenue Portugal Ireland Spain Other euro area 21 Expenditure Portugal Ireland Spain Other euro area 21 Primary expenditure 31 Portugal Ireland Spain Other euro area 2/ Primary balance 41 Portugal Ireland Spain Other euro area 2/ OveraIl balance Portugal Ireland Spain Other euro area 21 Memorandum items Debt Portugal Ireland Spain Other euro area 2/ Real GDP (percent change) Portugal Ireland Spin 44.0 44.6 44.6 44.9 45.1 35.1 34.5 33.8 33.3 32.7 41.6 41.4 41.2 41.2 41.2 46.3 45.9 45.4 45.1 44.8 46.2 46.6 46.1 4’6.1 45.9 33.4 32.8 32.4 31.7 31.5 43.5 43.0 42.2 41.6 41.2 47.7 46.9 46.2 45.5 44.9 42.7 43.2 42.8 43.0 42.9 29.7 29.4 29.6 29.2 29.4 39.4 38.9 38.4 38.0 37.8 42.8 42.2 41.7 41.3 40.9 1.3 1.4 1.8 1.9 2.2 5.4 5.1 4.2 4.1 3.3 2.2 2.5 2.8 3.2 3.4 3.6 3.7 3.7 3.8 3.8 -2.2 -2.0 -1.5 -1.2 -0.8 1.7 1.7 1.4 1.6 1.2 -1.9 -1.6 -1.0 -0.4 0.0 -1.4 -0.9 -0.7 -0.4 -0.2 58.0 56.8 55.8 54.7 53.2 59.0 52.0 47.0 43.0 41.0 67.4 66.4 64.3 61.9 59.3 74.0 71.7 69.8 67.9 66.1 4.2 9.5 3.8 3.5 6.7 3.8 3.3 3.2 6.4 3.3 3.1 Other euro area 2/ 4.0 Source: National authorities and staff estimates, as indicated in SM/ 99f73 (3112199). 3.2 3.3 5.8 5.7 3.3 3.3 2.9 2.9 l/Figures for some years for Netherlands, France, Ireland, and Italy were estimated or projected by Fund staff; see SM 99f73 (3/12/99) for details. For Portugal, 1998 figures reflect September 1998 projections of the authorities, except for public debt. VUnweighted average for euro area excluding Portugal. 3LDefined as total expenditure minus gross interest payments. 4/Defmed as the overall balance plus gross interest payments. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public12 10 8 6 - 27 - Figure 1. Portugal: Comparison of Selected Economic Indicators, 1989-99 1/ (In percent) GDP GROWTH RATE -Portugal :, -- -Other euro area - - - - - *Ireland .’ ‘, , , - - - Spain ,‘. e ’ I ‘. ’ . ,’ ’ a’ a I’ ’ ’ ‘. : I ., ’ . , , I : 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 INFLATION 2/ -Portugal - - -0thereuroare \ . ..-.mhla.,d - - - Spain 8 . ‘I 6 - -- -.. . - 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 % 97 98 99 Source: IMP, World Economic Outlook; and staff projections. 25 20 15 10 5 0 PUBLIC INVESTMENT (In percent of GDP) I - -\ -Portugal -- - Other cur0 area - - - - - ~lreland 1-1 Spain uNE~LOY$iENT RATE t* ‘*., I b 8 \ \ /’ -Portugal ’ -- b I -0thereuroare b -II I I I I I 61~1~ *. - -‘, - - - Spain I/ Shaded areas show staff projections. 2/ Based on national consumer price indices until 1995, and harmonised price index for 1996-1999. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 28 - Figure 2. Portugal: Monetary Conditions Index, Real Interest Rates, and Credit Growth 1993:1-1999:6 108 108 MONETARY CONDITIONS INDEX 11 -PoItupl - 106 I---- Eurorrer - 104 - 102 - loo 98. 96. \ 94. *, b94 92- - 92 9. . ..~.....“.“.......“~.....‘.....;.’”.......;......“‘..~““...”..~..... go 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 14 14 REAL SHORT-TERM INTEREST RATES -Poltugal - 12 - - . . m Ellmafoa - 10 - 8 - 6 - 4 2 - 0 - -2 . . ..““....“““..“‘~ ..““’ . . . . . . “... “. ’ . : . ..# . . . . *, .:...........: . . . . . -2 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 40 CREDlT GROWTH (Year-orl-year growth rates) -Total domcatic credit - - - -Credit to howeholds ,-.*-,-., -.... . edit to Imx&ancbl corpomtiom 0 ““““‘“:“““““‘:““‘......:““:“““““’:”””””’:”””’””:““’ 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 fblrces: National statistics Office v); Bank of Portugal; and IMF staff estimates. 40 35 30 25 20 15 10 - 5 0 I/ The index (average 1993-98=100) is the weighted average of real short-term interest rates and real exchange rates (based on unit labor cost differentials); weights are 0.7 for interest rates, and 0.3 for exchange rates. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 29 - Figure 3. Portugal: External Performance and Exchange Rates, 1989-99 l/ 6 4 2 0 -2 -4 -6 -8 -10 -12 -14 CURRENT ACCOUNT AND TRADE BALANCE 2/ (In percent of GDP) -Current mount balance -----Tradebalance ------OtbereurocumnteccMlatbalance -- -----c- HI -----__----- 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 105 EFFECTIVE EXCI+Q 100 . (19!32=100: --.. *. --- . *. 95 -....bm * - I.__,’ - ..,’ E RATES ERM Euro entry StMt 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 REAL EXPORTS AND MARKET GROWTH (In percent) -RCdOXpOrtgroWtb - - - *Market growth 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 Source: IMF, Information Notice System; World Economic Outlook; and staff projections. 105 100 95 90 as 80 75 70 2s 20 IS 10 I/ Shaded areas show staff projections. 2/ To limit the effect of a statistical break in 1996, capital transfers are included in tbe current account. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 30 - 42 38 34 30 26 as a0 75 70 65 60 55 Figure 4. Portugal: Labor Market Conditions and Price Developments, 1993-l 9!J9 (In percent) \ I 16 4 /I - - - Lang-term (kft scale) 21 / FJ “J -Youth (right scale) l/3/ I - - - - - -Total (n&t scale) 4/ L jli 8 t /I ,.--.. L\ / . ..----- . . . . . . - . . . . ...--.* / *‘~~*“.----“- *.---...* / -. ..-- ‘. . __... --- . .._ 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 85 --Portugal PARTICIPATION RATE ---Male - - - - - -Female 15-64 YEARS l/ .a0 I I - OECD --- / ----- cm--- ----C-L-- ---J . 75 . 70 . 65 /s..-- .-... .** ---.._.. ---- *._I.....-....._...-- -. --.---._. ~_..~.....-..- .60 . 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 8 WAGE AND PRICE INCREASES Collective wage agracments 5/ --- Consumer price index (national) 6/ - - - - - - Consumer price index (hamonid) 6/ . 7 . 6 - 5 . 4 2 . , . . ..‘......~...“......~.‘..“.....~.’..”’.’..~.”..‘“..‘~..“....’”~..‘.’ , 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 Source: Bank of Portugal; and National Statistics Offke (INE). I/ Change in methodology starting in 1998. 2J Proportion of total unemployed who have been unemployed for a year or more. 31 Proportion of those 15-24 years of age who are unemployed. 4/ In percent of the labor force. 51 Quarterly data. 6/ Year-on-year increases. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 31 - Figure 5. Portugal: Cyclical Conditions, 1989-2000 85 80 75 70 / Other euro -1 -2 -3 -4 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 CAPACITY UTILIZATION IN MANUFACTURING 85 80 75 70 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 Source: National Statistics OffIce (INE); IMF, World Economic Outlook. l/ Shaded area shows staffprojections. 97 98 99 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 32 - Figure 6. Portugal: Official Interest Rates and Differentials with Germany, 1997:7-99:7 9 8 - OFFICIAL INTEREST RATES (In percent) Liquidity injection Eurosta;;--l 9 3 - 2 - 1 - 0 - I - 4 - 1 n Jul-97 act-97 Jan-98 Apr-98 Jul-98 Ott-98 Jan-99 Apr-99 Jul-99 DIFFERENTIALS WITH GERMANY (In percent) Repo rate IO-year government bond Jul-97 Jan-98 Apr-98 Jul-98 Ott-98 Apr-99 Jul-99 Sources: IMF, Surveillance Database; and Bloomberg. l/ Since January 1, 1999, figures refer to offkkl rates of the European Central Bank. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 33 - Figure 7. Portugal: Comparison of Fiscal Trends, 1993-99 11 (In percent of GDP) 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 55 50 45 40 35 30 25 20 ------____ 30 .-.-mm .--. - ---_ z’.=‘l-.a-.-- _.-..-_.--.-_.-I. -..-.I- -.--.- 25 20 1993 1994 1995 19% 1997 1998 1999 4 3 -c--- 2 1 0 -1 -2 -3 -4 -5 -6 -7 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 Source: MP, World Economic Outlook; and staff estimates. I/ Shaded areas refer to staff projections. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 34 - Figure 8a. Portugal: Composition of Fiscal Adjustment, 1994-1998 l/ (Cumulative change, in percent of GDP) 14 OVERALL BALANCE 12 10 8 6 t @nM -2 t 1 -4’ PRT Euro AUS BEL DNK FIN FRA DEU CRC IRL lTA LUX NET ESP SWE UK area INTEREST PAYMENTS I’ 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 0 -2 -4 -4 -5 i -6 ’ ‘-6 PRT Euro AUS BEL DNK FIN FRA DEU GRC IRL ITA LUX NET ESP SWE UK area 6 REVENUE -4 c -6 1 PRT Euro AUS BEL DNK FIN FRA DEU CRC IRL ITA LUX NET ESP SWE UK area Sources: World Economic Outlook; and staff estimates. l/ Euro area figures are unweighted averages. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 35 - 2 1 0 -1 -2 PRT Euro ALJS BEL DNK FIN FRA DEU GRC IRL. ITA LUX NET ESP SW-E UK ilea Figure 8b. Portugal: Composition of Fiscal Adjustment, 1994- 1998 l/ (Cumulative change, in percent of GDP) CAPITAL EXPENDITURE 21 -6 -8 CURRENTPRIMARYEXPENDlTURE PRT Euro AUS BEL DNK FIN FRA DEU GRC lRL JTA LUX NET ESP SWE UK area Sources: World Economic Outlook; and staff estimates. l/ Euro area figures are unweighted averages. 21 Excludes capital transfers. These increased in Portugal by 0.9 percentage point between 1994 and 1998 2 0 -2 4 -8 -10 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 36 - Figure 9. Portugal: Asset Market Indicators, 1993: l-l 999:6 340 310 280 250 220 190 160 130 100 70 -Portugal _ _ _ . _ Euro 11 11 STOCK INDEX (1.993=100) 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 340 310 280 250 220 190 160 130 100 70 28 26 24 18 16 12 10 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 130 125 - 120 - -POti&, - Real . . ” . ~ Portugal Nominal - PROPERTY PRICES (1993=100) 130 s- 125 , e-’ - 120 a- 115 - l ’ .* - 115 : ,- . 110 - .-,--. - “.-- 110 4’ 105 - *....---- __--- - 105 __.. ..- __._. “-----’ 95 - go . . . ..“..‘....“‘.““..“..‘“““~ ..“....... ;.. ‘...’ * . . . . . . . ’ ” *....:. ‘... go 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 Sources: Bank of Portugal; IFC; and staff estimates. 1/ Figures for January-June 1999 based on movements in Dow Jones Euro Stoxx Index. 2/ Differential calculated using lo-year bond rates. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-37- Portugal: Fund Relations APPENDIX I (As of July 3 1, 1999) I. Membership Status: Joined March 29, 196 1. Portugal accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4 of the Fund’s Articles of Agreement effective September 12, 1988. II. General Resources Account: Quota Fund holdings of currency Reserve position in Fund Operational budget transfers (net) SDR Million 867.40 473.76 393.65 -39.00 Percent Quota 100.0 54.6 45.4 III. SDR Department: Net cumulative allocation Holdings SDR Million 53.32 25.21 Percent Allocation 100.0 47.3 IV. Outstanding Purchases and Loans: None V. Financial Arrangements: Amount Amount Approval Expiration Approved Drawn TYPe Date Date (SDR Million) (SDR Million) Stand-by 10/07/83 2128185 445.00 259.30 Stand-by 6/05/78 6/04/79 57.35 0.00 VI. Projected Obligations to Fund: None. VII. Exchange Rate Arrangements: l Portugal entered the final stage of European Economic and Monetary Union on January 1, 1999, at a rate of 200.482 Portuguese escudos per 1 euro. l Portugal has notified the Fund of the imposition of restrictions under Decision 144- (52/5 1) vis-a-vis Iraq and the Socialist People’s Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. VIII. Article IV Consultation: Portugal is on a standard 12-month consultation cycle. The last Article IV consultation discussions were concluded at EBlW98/108, 10/26/98. Ix. Technical Assistance Year Dept. 1991 FAD 1994 FAD 1998 STA 1998 STA Purpose Treasury Management Strengthening the Tax System Finalize Metadata for DSBB Revision of Monetary Statistics Date 3191 4/94 9198 1 l/98 X. Resident Representative: None. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-38 - APPENDIX II Portugal: Statistical Issues Portugal’s economic data on the core variables needed for surveillance are at acceptable standards of quality, coverage, and timeliness. Portugal’s publication policy is characterized by a high degree of frequency and openness, with extensive use of the Internet. The National Statistics Office @NE), and the Ministry of Finance have several sites with long- and short-term economic indicators, and official documents such as the fiscal budget, the stability program, and economic laws and decrees are posted regularly. Portugal subscribed to the Special Data Dissemination Standards (SDDS), and the relevant metadata have been posted on the Dissemination Standards Bulletin Board. Statistical weaknesses remain in several areas. Fully reconciled annual national accounts are released with a delay of two years or more. Thus, the analysis of current output trends is done using a range of quantitative and opinion surveys, including the Bank of Portugal’s and INE’s quarterly national accounts based on coincident economic indicators. Furthermore, the quality of EVE’s preliminary estimates are deemed poor by the Bank of Portugal and the Ministry of Finance, which produce their own estimates of the national accounts which differ considerably from those of INE. Some improvement in the national accounts is expected after the implementation of ESA95, with 1998 data scheduled to be released by September of this year. There is also a need for a more timely and accurate index of industrial production. Unemployment data suffer from statistical problems caused, inter alia, by frequent revisions to the measurement of unemployment and sampling rotations. The failure to provide data for overlapping sample periods precludes consistent comparisons of employment, as well as developments in productivity and unit labor costs. External sector data are now provided according to the IMF’s Fifth Balance of Payments Manual. A number of problems remain, however, as the liberalization of capital movements and tax-induced capital transactions have complicated the interpretation of balance of payments flows. Problems stem from several sources, including (i) difftculties in obtaining data on residents’ capital income from abroad, which tend to bias factor income in the current account; (ii) the likely underestimation of foreign direct investment inflows following the lifting of registration requirements; and (iii) problems in interpreting flows in the financial account because of, inter alia, the rolling-over of financial positions which generate large gross inflows and outflows. Portugal has timely and good quality monetary statistics. Portugal has completely revised iis monetary statistics in order to fblfill its obligations as an EMU-member country. With the help of STA, the authorities have undertaken an extensive revision of monetary statistics published in International Financial Statistics. Portugal reports annual fiscal data for publication in the Fund’s Government Finance Statistics Yearbook; however, the IFS database could be strengthened by the provision of monthly or quarterly fiscal data. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicI: C I: F F Ii s h C F P bate of Latest lbservation 8J3 It99 7/30/99 rate Received S/31/99 3rd week of August requency of Data Daily Monthly ‘requency of !eporting Daily Monthly lource of Update 3/ Reuters, BOP Blwmberg lf3Ol99 Ird week of klgust Monthly Monthly BOP dode of Reporting Electronic Electronic Electronic :ontidentiality None None None iequency of Publication Daily Monthly Monthly Portugal: Core Statistical Indicators as of August 31, 1999 Central Bank Balance Sheet Reserve/ Base Money Broad Money Interest Rates Consumer Price Index Exports/ w- Current Account Balance Central Government External Balance I/ GDP/GNP 21 Debt 7130199 3rd week of August Monthly Monthly BOP 6/30/99 3rd week of AUgWt Monthly Monthly BOP S/31/99 July 1999 June 1999 813 II99 3rd week of 3rd week of August August Daily Monthly Monthly Daily Monthly Monthly Reuters, Reuters, BoP Bloomberg Bloomberg June 1999 3rd week of ~.cw Monthly Monthly BOP July 1999 Q4 1998 May 1999 End-July 1999 early May 1999 End-August 1999 Monthly Qu-lY Monthly Monthly Qu&lY Monthly MoF l-NE BOP Electronic Electronic Electronic Electronic Publication Publication Publication Electronic Publication None None None None None None None None None Monthly Monthly Daily Monthly Monthly Monthly Monthly Qua-lY Monthly I/ General government balance is reported on a yearly basis, in March. 2/ The release of quarterly GDP figures for 1999 has been delayed while the national accounts are converted to ESA95. 3/ BoP = Bank of Portugal; MoF = Ministry of Finance; INE = National Statistics Office. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4o- APPENDIX III Public information Notice (PIN) No. 99/X FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE xxx, 1999 International Monetary Fund 700 lgti Street, NW Washington, D. C. 20431 USA IMF Concludes Article IV Consultation with Portugal On October 6, 1999, the Executive Board concluded the Article IV consultation with Portugal.’ Background 1. Portugal’s successful pursuit of a well-focused economic policy strategy enabled the country to join the euro area as a founding member. In the process, economic performance over the past several years has been impressive: strong output and employment growth; a decline in unemployment rates to one of the lowest levels in the euro area; and a marked deceleration of inflation. In 1998, economic growth-close to 4 percent, little changed from the previous year- continued to outpace the euro-area average and was led by strong domestic demand. Declining real interest rates contributed to an acceleration of private sector credit that supported strong demand for housing and consumer durables as well as investment activity, which also benefited from the Lisbon World Exposition (Expo 98). As a result, the unemployment rate declined further. However, owing to emerging capacity constraints, inflation edged up again from the historically low levels recorded earlier, and the current account deficit widened noticeably. 2. Monetary conditions have eased markedly in the context of entry into European Economic and Monetary Union (EMU). With an almost 3 percentage point reduction in repo rates since the beginning of 1998, short-term real interest rates declined by roughly the same magnitude and were near zero in the second quarter of 1999. The EMU-related drop in interest rates has triggered strong growth of household and, more recently, enterprise credit. 13anks financed the private sector credit boom through short-term interbank loans from mostly euro-area foreign ’ Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial information, and discusses with officials the country’s economic developments and policies. On return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the country’s authorities. In this PIN, the main features of the Board’s discussion are described. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4l- credit institutions, as well as by selling or redeeming more liquid, lower-yield assets, notably government paper. 3. Following sizable cuts in the general government deficit during 1996-97, fiscal adjustment stalled in 1998. Despite a marginal narrowing of the fiscal deficit to 2.3 percent of GDP (versus a budget target of 2.4 percent), down from some 2% percent in 1997, fiscal policy contributed to domestic-demand-led growth: with output growth well above estimated potential, the cyclically adjusted deficit deteriorated by X percentage point to 2.4 percent of GDP, the weakest balance in the euro area. Supported by structural funds from the European Union (EU), public capital expenditure remained at the equivalent of some 6% percent of GDP, the highest level in the euro area. 4. The fiscal policy stance combined with the easing of monetary conditions to contribute to a widening of the inflation differential vis-a-vis other euro-area countries and a further rise in the external current account deficit. With the unemployment rate below 5 percent since the spring of 1998, compensation increased by an estimated 5% percent. This contributed to a rise in consumer price inflation to 2.2 percent on a harmonized basis (2.8 percent on a national basis) in 1998, 1 l/4 percentage points above the euro-area average. Concomitantly, the current account deficit widened by more than 1 percentage point to 4l/4 percent of GDP in 1998, one of the highest levels among industrial countries. Both strong import growth, fueled by buoyant domestic demand, and a weakening in external demand, the effects of which outweighed an Expo 98-related boom in tourism, contributed to this development. The current account deficit was financed predominantly by rising net foreign liabilities of the banking sector. At the same time, the foreign direct investment (FDI) balance turned negative as the increased intemationalization of Portuguese firms led to a surge in FDI outflows. 5. The 1999 budget targets a general government deficit of 2 percent of GDP. However, higher-than-budgeted revenues and interest savings are likely to result in a deficit of about 1% percent of GDP. This would impart a significant withdrawal of stimulus to economic activity, equivalent to some X-5/* percent of GDP. 6. For 1999, a slowdown in external demand, the end of Expo 98, the gradual abatement of the effects of the earlier monetary easing, and the renewed fiscal adjustment efforts are thus expected to moderate growth to about 3 percent. Most indicators (including those for industrial production, construction, and external trade) suggest that the slowdown began in the last quarter of 1998, as Expo 98 came to an end, and exports weakened and business confidence declined (as elsewhere in the euro area). Retail sales and consumer credit growth suggest, however, that consumption and construction have remained relatively robust into the summer. The outlook also stabilized following the European Central Bank’s rate cut in April and the weakening of the euro. With growth in 1999 in line with potential, inflation is likely to stabilize near current rates and would be some X percentage point lower (year-on-year, national basis) than in 1998. However, the current account is expected to weaken somewhat further on account of divergent cyclical trends vis-a-vis major partner countries. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-42- Executive Board Assessment <Begin Typing Here> Public lnformafion Notices (P//Us) are issued, (i) at the request of a member country, following the conclusion of the Article IV consultation for countries seeking to make known the views of the IMF to the public. This action is intended to strengthen IMF surveillance over the economic policies of member countries by increasing the transparency of the IMF’s assessment of these policies; and (ii) following policy discussions in the Executive Board at the decision of the Board. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-43- Portugal: Selected Economic Indicators 1996 1997 1996 1999 I/ Real economy (change in percent) Real GDP Domestic demand CPI (year average, national index) Unemployment rate (in percent) Gross national saving (percent of GDP) Gross domestic investment (percent of GDP) Public finance (percent of GDP) Central government balance General government balance Public debt Of which: external debt Money and credit (end-period, percent change) Total domestic credit 21 L- (M2 + treasury bills held by the nonbank resident public) 2/ Interest rate (period averages) Deposit rate, 91-180 days 31 Ten-year government bond yield 31 Balance of payments (percent of GDP) Trade balance Current account Net official reserves (in US$ billions) 3.6 3.5 3.1 7.3 22.4 24.5 -3.6 -2.8 -3.3 -2.5 65.0 61.4 11.8 14.1 12.6 11.6 8.8 6.3 6.7 5.0 3.9 2.7 8.6 6.4 4.9 4.3 -8.6 -2.1 21.3 3.8 3.9 3.0 5.2 6.5 4.1 2.2 2.8 2.5 6.7 5.0 4.6 23.5 23.1 22.4 26.3 27.4 27.5 -2.6 -2.1 -2.3 -1.7 57.0 55.4 14.9 17.1 17.1 7.8 -9.8 -11.3 -11.8 -2.8 -4.3 -5.1 18.2 18.7 . . . Exchange rate regime Euro-area member Present rate (October 1, 1999) Esc 200.482 per 1 euro Nominal effective rate (1995 = 100) 2/ 100.2 98.1 97.0 Real effective rate (1995 = 100) 2/ 100.9 99.1 99.3 98.1 99.5 Sources: Bank of Portugal; Ministry of Finance; and Fund staff estimates and projections I/ Staff projections unless otherwise noted. 2/ Data for 1999 refer to May (year-on-year growth rates for money and credit). 3/ Data for 1999 correspond to average from January to July. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public