DOCUMENT OF INTERNATIONAL MONEXARY FUND AND NOT FOR PUBLIC USE MASTER FILES ROOM C-525 0450 SM/95/223 CONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION September 5, 1995 To: Members of the Executive Board From: The Secretary Subject: Bhutan - Staff Reuort for the 1995 Article IV Consultation Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staff report for the 1995 Article IV consultation with Bhutan, which will be brought to the agenda for discussion on a date to be announced. Mr. Chopra (ext. 38801) or Mr. W. Chu (ext. 34274) is available to answer technical or factual questions relating to this paper prior to the Board discussion. Unless the Documents Preparation Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions. to the Asian Development Bank (AsDB), following its consideration by the Executive Board. Att: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicCONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND BHUTAN Staff Reuort for the 1995 Article IV Consultatioq Prepared by the Staff Representatives for the 1995 Consultation with Bhutan Approved by Anoop Singh and Desmond La&man September 1, 1995 contents Executive Summary I. Introduction II. Current Economic Setting III. Policy Discussions 1. The fiscal outlook 2. Private sector development 3. Financial sector reform IV. Staff Appraisal Text Table 1. Key Macroeconomic Indicators Charts 1. 2. 3. Boxes 1. 2. a I. Selected Economic Indicators 4a Prices and Exchange Rates 4b Medium-Term Fiscal Projection 8a Country Background Bhutan's Links with India Selected Statistical Issues m ii 1 1 6 6 8 10 11 4 2 3 15 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicBackeround and current situation . Within a framework of controlled development designed to protect Bhutan's environment and cultural traditions, progress has been made in expanding the productive base and improving social welfare. Nevertheless, underlying growth remains modest and Bhutan is a poor country with an urgent need to raise living standards. l The currency peg with India has served Bhutan well, fostering cautious policies and macroeconomic stability. Economic developments in 1994/95 (fiscal year beginning July 1) were satisfactory; growth picked up and the balance of payments remained strong. With comfortable reserves and the cautious fiscal stance planned for 1995/96. continued stability is likely in the period ahead and short-term macroeconomic prospects are favorable. Police issues l Although there are no immediate fiscal pressures, recurrent expenditures associated with recent investments are rising while revenues are likely to stagnate until planned export-oriented projects are completed. The projected temporary budgetary pressures could lead to a situation where growth-enhancing expenditures get squeezed. l Equitable growth will require a greater contribution from the private sector. HOWeVer, excessive controls and lack of transparent policies in areas such as industrial licensing, the exchange and trade regime, labor policies, foreign investment, and the financial system are hampering private: sector development. l The main challenge over the medium term is to improve living standards through more rapid and equitable growth, while ensuring that the country's ecological and cultural heritage are preserved. Staff uosition . Efforts in areas such as tax reforms, user fees and cost recovery, and setting priorities for investment, are needed to safeguard productive expenditures within a sound fiscal position. l There is considerable scope to deregulate the economy and increase the growth potential, consistent with the authorities' concern for the environment. Specifically, a reduction in pervasive controls on economic activity, and the adoption instead of transparent sectoral policies with greater reliance on market mechanisms, would provide a good foundation for a more dynamic private sector thus increasing its contribution to growth, . Private sector development will also require further steps to strengthen the financial system. Priority needs to be given to interest rate liberalization, increasing competition, and strengthening portfolios. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicI. Introduction The Bhutanese Government places significant emphasis on preserving the country's cultural and ecological heritage. Within this framework of controlled development, substantial progress has been made in the last three decades in expanding Bhutan's productive base and improving social welfare (see Box 1). Nonetheless, some policy choices have inhibited private investment and deprived the economy of valuable opportunities for growth. As Bhutan remains a poor country with an urgent need to raise the living standards of its people, the main challenge over the medium term is to improve the growth potential of the economy, while preserving the environ- ment and cultural traditions. Against this background, and in view of the generally satisfactory short-term macroeconomic situation, the 1995 consul- tation discussions focused on the impediments to faster growth and ways in which these obstacles can be progressively reduced. ~/ZJ The database in Bhutan is weak. The staff is provided with a complete set of statistics during consultation missions, but there is a lack of intersectoral consistency and the data are subject to large revisions. Very little data--especially on fiscal and balance of payments developments--are available between missions. The lag with which monetary data are published by the Royal Monetary Authority (P.MA) has been reduced, but data on GDP and consumer prices are available only with a long delay and are unreliable. The lack of comprehensive, accurate, and timely data has hampered policy assessment and monitoring. 3J II. Current Economic Setting Bhutan's economy remains very small, with GDP in 1994 estimated at US$255 million. Although most of the population is still dependent on subsistence agriculture and livestock, the share of these two activities, together with forestry, has shrunk from 57 percent of GDP in 1980 to 41 percent in 1993. By contrast, rapid development of hydropower and energy-intensive industry has raised their share in GDP from 12 percent to lJ The consultation discussions took place in Thimphu during July 17-26. The mission met with the Minister of Finance; the Minister of Planning; the Finance Secretary; the Managing Director of the Royal Monetary Authority; and other senior government officials. The staff team consisted of Mr. Chopra (Head), Mr. Chu, Ms. Parker, and Mrs. Abraham (Staff Assistant), all from CTA. Bhutan continues to avail itself of the transitional arrangements of Article XIV, Section 2. ?!/ In concluding the 1994 Article IV consultation with Bhutan, Executive Directors agreed with the thrust of the appraisal in the staff report, which emphasized the importance of strengthening public finances, as well as the need to improve the incentive structure based on market forces in order to increase the contribution of the private sector to domestic output. 3J The annex on statistical issues contains further details. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 2 - Box 1: Countrv Backeround Until recently, Bhutan followed B policy of self-imposed isolation in order to preserve political independence and a unique culture. As described in a recent book: ‘Until the 1960s. the Bhutnnese lived a medieval existence. lhere were no roads, no postal service, no telephones. no narional currency or money economy, no village schools, no hospirals, no airporfs, no towlts of any size. Families in their brightly decorated half-timbered houses grew their own food, wove the cloth for their rroditional garmenrs. and bartered what they couldfor thefew luxuries carried into their isolared mountain valZeys on the backs of traders from Tibet or India’ (Barbara Crossette, So Close to Heaven: The Vanishinn Buddhist Kinndoms of the. Himalavas. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1995). Substantial progress has been made over the last thirty years in expandiig the productive base of the economy and improving social welfare. The development strategy has focused on controlled exploitation of Bhutan’s natural resources-amble land, hydroelectricity, forest, and mineral deposits. “Run-of-the river” hydropower plants obviate the need for reservoirs and hence have a limited environmental cost. Forests are second to hydropower in terms of natural resource potential, but their exploitation has been curtailed for environmental reasons. Allied industries (such as cement and fern alloys, which are energy-intensive and utilise available mineral deposits) have also been established. The development strategy also emphasises human resource and infrastluchlre development. With a population of about 675,000 in 1994 (in a country the size of Switzerland), per capita income. is estimated to be nearly USS380, higher than many of Bhutan’s South Asia neighbors. The Government’s forceful drive to provide social services hns bestowed a better quality of life than would be expected from such low levels of income, and Bhutan has been able to avoid the extreme manifestations of poverty that are evident elsewhere in South Asia. Substantial progress has been made in providing primary education and basic health services. Infant mortality has fallen from 134 per 1,000 live births in 1989 to 70 in 1994, and matemel mortality declined from 7.7 per 1,000 in 1984 to 3.8. As a result of better health care coverage. life expectancy has risen from 48 years to 66 in less than a decade. Primary school enrollment has: more than doubled, rising from 30 percent 15 years ago to ahout 70 percent in 1994. The adult literacy rate is ncnv 54 percent. Despite these impressive gains, World Bank data show that indicators of social development in Bhutan remain well below that of countries in the lower-middle income category. 24 percent over the same period, while contributing well over half of domestic revenues. During the 198Os, GDP grew by an average of 7 l/2 per- cent per year as a major hydropower plant was launched and other industries started production. Growth slowed to about 4-5 percent in the early 199Os, es few new projects have come on stream. Prudent fiscal policies and the currency peg with India continue to foster macroeconomic stability. Based on available data, which es noted are subject to large revision, developments in 1994/95 (fiscal year beginning July 1) were generally satisfactory. u GDP growth picked up to 6 percent IJ Some of the recent revisions in the data are discussed in the forth- coming background paper, which also contains a comprehensive set of statistical tables and annexes on relations with multilateral institutions Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public(Table 1 and Chart l), aided by the strength of the construction sector. The balance of payments position remained strong, with an overall surplus close to 5 percent of GDP. Continued large disbursements of foreign aid boosted gross reserves at the end of 1994/95 to above 13 months of import cover. Net rupee reserves, however, remain negative. lJ The increase in convertible currency reserves fueled an acceleration in broad money growth to 30 percent at the end of 1994/95. 2/ Inflation, which largely reflects price movements in India, reached 8.2 percent at the end of 1994 (Chart 2; see also Box 2). u Bon 2: Bhutan’s Links with India Bhutan has close economic and financial links with India, which are underpinned by bilateral exchange, monetary, and trade arrangements. l The national currency, the ngultlum (Nu), is pegged at par to the I&ii rupee. Until 1974 the Indian rupee was the only medium ofexchange, and it continues ta circulate freely as legal tender in Bhutan. l Tbereis free movement ofgoods between the two countries,and India accounts for over 80 percent ofBhutan'stmde. l It is estimated that about 12,000 workers from India are presently employed in Bhutan, down from perhaps as many as 20,OCKI about four years ago. l India provides substantial budgetary support. financing about a quarter of public expendihtre, including grants ta tinance major investment projects. India aIs0 provides nonbudgetary support, mainly for defeoce-related activities. Sources of aid have teea diversified in recent years, and Japan, Denmark, Austria, Switzerland, the Netherlands, and the UN system are now the other leading donors. l The linkages with India leave little scope for an independent monetary policy. Inflation largely reflects price. movements in India,withwbich the RMA seeks to align administered interest rates. Fiscal policy continued to be prudent in 1994/95. The current deficit was held to 0.2 percent of GDP compared with a 1 percent deficit envisaged in the budget. Improvements in administration led to higher tax revenues, and nontax revenues (mainly profit transfers from public enterprises) were 1/ Rupee liabilities at the end of 1994/95 amounted to the equivalent of US$22 million. As imports from countries other than India are much lower than aid flows from these sources, hard currency net (and gross) reserves amounted to lJS$119 million (nearly 50 percent of GDP) at end-1994/95. u Reflecting the process of monetization, money growth in Bhutan has been high, averaging nearly 20 percent per year in the last five years. y Price statistics in Bhutan are compiled every six months; the June 1995 price index is not yet available. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4- nbl. 1. Bhutan: thy H.sro.concds Indis.tor. Est. Pro3 1991,92 19X2,93 1993,94 199.,95 1995,96 O”IPuT AND PRICLS tp.re.nt chulsa) R..l GDP .t r.ctor C0.t. 1, 3.5 4.1 5.7 6.0 7.0 c0n.lm.r pris.. ton.3 of. p.rioa 16.0 15.6 5.9 8.6 8.0 moss clrxESTIC II(pzs1w(~ tp.rcmt Of me, II Pubue 17.1 20.0 11.9 Pri”.t. 2, lb.0 27.1 26.4 smss “ATIORAL ~vI”Gs tp.rc.nt oi SDP) u 9.2 10.7 9.7. 32.7 19.5 5.5 13.3 39.3 19.4 19.9 __ -6.6 1.5 5.1 41.9 23.7 6.8 m.3 48.5 53.9 46.6 20.6 20.5 18.7 6.6 7.4 6.7 27.8 33.4 27.9 39.7 47.8 56.2 48.6 18.4 21.1 20.7 18.4 21.3 26.7 35.5 30.2 5.3 2.2 0.3 -2.5 -0.4 -0.7. 0.3 0.1 -2.4 -2.0 1.2 1.5 1.1 -1.9 0.8 0.9 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 4a - UlART I llllllThii SELECTED ECONOMIC INDICATORS, 1990/9 l- 1995/96 MlhlOyEyjI 50 (Percent change. end-of-period) -20 I -0road money --Credit lo ttw pfiuatr srclw -20 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 4b - CHART 2 BHUTAN PRICES AND EXCHANGE RATES, 1986-94 1990= 100 12.month percent change Price Developments oBhutanese inflation (right scale) ezllndian inflation (right scale) 140 - Bhutanese CPI (left scale) --Indian CPI (left scale) 60 1966 1967 1966 1969 1990= 100 .__ Exchange Rate Developments l/ 140 :, Ngultrwn/llS# fright smte, j.. .” ...... I :.....--. . . . . . --..h . . . . . . . . ...‘.... ! A. i 1 loo- i ,._.__.. .. Nominal EJJective .kchange Rate Index (left scale) 60 - ,;. ..” ;.,,,,,;& z” BO- ,. -_ 15 . . . . ‘. . . . . . . . ..I : .., ,,,,,,... . . ..’ 401- 1966 1987 19.36 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 ‘O Sources: IMF. International Financial Statistics: and staff estimates. l/ The indices are based on trade-weighted exchan~c rates vis-a-vi9 Ilhutan’s II largest trading partwrs. excluding Iudls. A decrease indicates B depreciation. 2/ The real cffcctive exchange rate is calculated from semi-annual data. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 5 also better than anticipated. 1/ Capital outlays, which are largely financed by external grants and soft loans, increased significantly, leading to a" overall budget deficit of 2 l/2 percent of GDP. Short-term prospects are also broadly favorable. With the recent commissioning of export-oriented ferro-alloy and cement projects, growth is expected to pick up to 7 percent in 1995. The cautious fiscal Stance planned for 1995/96--with a projected current surplus of 0.3 percent of GDP, and a reduction in the overall deficit to 2 percent of GDP--should be conducive to continued macroeconomic stability. Some rise in inflation may be expected in view of higher inflation in India over the past year. although more recently Indian inflation has subsided. The recent accelera- tion in the growth of broad money could lead to higher consumer imports from India; nevertheless, the boost in exports from the new projects is likely to lead to a substantial strengthening of the overall balance of payments. As regards structural policies, there has been considerable progress in financial sector reforms. With technical assistance from a resident MAE expert, this reform program has bee" designed to establish prudential norms, introduce indirect instruments of monetary policy, and tap domestic sources of financing for longer term public investments. The recent rapid monetary growth, however, has increased the accumulation of resources by financial institutions as they face limited lending opportunities due to structural distortions in the economy. Notably, excess reserves of the Bank of Bhutan (the only commercial bank) have remained high, amounting to about one-half of its deposit base, and the other institutions face similar difficulties. The authorities have been slow in reducing microeconomic distortions and much remains to be done to enhance Bhutan's growth potential, Recent output growth has been low considering the high rate of capital formation (investment averaged 36 percent of GDP per year in 1987-93) and Bhutan's stage of development. Most investment is still undertaken by the government and public enterprises, while the private sector is underdeveloped. Key features of the present system affecting private sector operations include: . discretionary trading and industrial licensing procedures; l highly restrictive foreign investment policies; . tight controls on employment of expatriate workers; and . discretionary exchange and trade controls on non-rupee transactions. lJ It is noteworthy that public enterprises in Bhutan (in both the manufacturing and service sectors) have generally been quite profitable. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 6. III. Policy Discussions The authorities' guidelines for the preparation of the Eighth Five Year Plan (covering 1997-2002) recognize that the main challenge facing Bhutan is to improve living standards through more rapid and equitable growth, while ensuring that the environment and culwral traditions are preserved. IJ Against this background, the discussions focused on medium-term issues in the areas of fiscal policy, private sector development, and financial sector reform. The staff noted that actions are required on three fronts: (i) ensuring against a deterioration in the medium-term fiscal outlook; (ii) within the macroeconomic constraints, channeling resources in the hands of the public sector into growth-enhancing activities; and (iii) reducing excessive controls (e.g., on the financial system, the exchange and trade regime, investment and labor policies) that are hampering private sector development. Determined actions on these fronts would foster greater investment in small to medium-scale private enterprises, making it feasible to raise the underlying growth rate substantially above the present 4 per- cent per year. 2/ 1. The fiscal outlook Although there are no immediate fiscal pressures, the situation a few years from now will be more difficult. The gap between domestic revenue and current expenditure is likely to widen because of the large recurrent costs associated with recent investments, particularly in health and education. The authorities also noted that civil service salaries will need to be raised, perhaps as soon as 1996/97. u At the same time, revenues are likely to stagnate until planned hydropower and cement projects are completed early next decade. Consequently, current deficits of over 1/ As many of the wildlife species and diverse flora and fauna found in Bhutan have been wiped out elsewhere in the Himalayas, the commitment to preserving forests and wildlife make Bhutan a last refuge for many important SpeCieS. Similarly, the Royal Government has felt the need for positive action to preserve and promote the unique culture and its Tantric Buddhist traditions. In part to prevent the culture from being overwhelmed, only 4,000 tourists per year are permitted. ?!/ The estimated underlying growth rate excludes the discrete jumps in the level of output due to major new projects, e.g., in the power sector. 3J Despite some increase in 1994, there has been a significant erosion in real government salaries, which had been frozen since 1988. The authorities are concerned that Bhutan's record of an unusually dedicated and incorrupt civil service, which is also relatively compact, could be compromised. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 7. 2 percent of GDP could emerge by 1999/00 (Chart 3). I/ Nevertheless, it is clear that on the basis of present plans the long-term sustainability of the fiscal situation is not in question. Temporary budgetary pressures could, however, lead to a situation where growth-enhancing expenditures--such as for infrastructure development, education, health, and general operations and maintenance--get squeezed. To ensure against a lasting deterioration in the fiscal situation and to safeguard essential expenditures and investment plans, the staff underscored the importance of actions to bolster public finances. In the staff's view, it will be important to start considering long- term measures to increase tax revenues, possibly by introducing a broad- based general sales tax on goods and services, in line with the recommenda- tions of earlier FAD technical assistance. 2/ Meanwhile, the focus should continue to be on strengthening enforcement of existing taxes, such as the "sales tax" on imports from India and taxes on income and profits. There should also be scope to introduce modest user fees (e.g., co-payments for some health services and school books), as the present system of providing all social services at virtually no charge is not sustainable in the long run. In addition, a further adjustment in domestic power tariffs to achieve full co.st recovery and the elimination of subsidies on wood products would yield budgetary savings while providing efficiency gains. As recommended by the World Bank, the Government should also allocate more resources to the preparation of forest management plans (FMPs) in order to increase the potential revenue contribution from the forestry sector. 2/ L/ Planned major investments in new hydropower and cement projects will initially lead to overall deficits that are much larger. These projects are to be financed mostly by grants and concessional foreign loans. With the diversification of aid sources, the outlook for foreign assistance to Bhutan remains quite favorable. The fiscal projections, however, are based on conservative assumptions regarding future grant financing. Thus, grants are assumed to remain about 30 percent of GDP per year during the construction phase of the major new projects, but then fall to an annual average of around 21 percent of GDP after 1998/99. u The tax/GDP ratio of 7 percent is low compared with other countries at similar income levels, and the revenue base remains narrow and inelastic. Once the manufacturing and services base has become sufficiently diversified and, in the case of manufacturing, geared more toward supplying the domestic market, a credit-type general sales tax would offer scope for raising substantial additional revenue. A/ An FMP prepared by the Government is required before forest resources can be exploited. For sustainable exploitation, it is estimated that the annual allowable cut is 3 million cubic meters, of which only 1.2 million cubic meters is accessible based on present infrastructure. However, FMPs presently cover only 0.5 million cubic meters. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicOn the expenditure side, more systematic setting of priorities and long-term budget planning, taking into account the revenue outlook and the recurrent cost implications of projects, is called for. Such an exercise would provide the authorities a better picture of whether proposed programs are affordable in the long run. In the context of the sustainable path for the deficit and government debt shown in Chart 3, the staff also noted that domestic bond financing of the projected fiscal deficits would be preferable to obtaining financing from the RMA. u Issuing government securities would also foster the development of financial markets. The authorities reaffirmed their long-term objective of meeting all recurrent expenditures out of domestic revenues. They noted that budgetary pressures will ease considerably early next century once major hydropower and cement projects begin production. Nevertheless, during the Eighth Plan they intend to examine the potential for introducing a broader personal income tax in place of the present salary tax, and thus possibly bring rental income, income from cash crops, interest and dividends, and capital gains from real estate transactions into the tax net. They observed that such a tax could substitute for some cost-recovery measures, thereby providing a more equitable manner to raise resources. Their immediate priority, however, is to use scarce manpower to strengthen administration of existing taxes. Similarly, manpower shortages have affected the preparation of forest management plans. The authorities noted that auctions of medium- term government securities would begin in the next couple of months, once technical issues have been resolved. They also stated that in the Eighth Plan they intend to focus on consolidation of existing programs, while adopting a selective approach to new public projects in all areas. Finally, the authorities plan to request that donors shift a portion of their new commitments to finance recurrent expenditures in areas such as education and health that have a high social rate of return. 2. Private sector develoument A number of special constraints--such as lack of infrastructure, a small number of entrepreneurs, labor shortages, and difficult terrain--have inhibited the development of Bhutan's private sector. Nevertheless, it is increasingly clear that the absence of transparent and liberal "rules of the game" are also having serious negative consequences for private sector operations by increasing costs and creating uncertainty. This situation has spillover effects on financial institutions as they find limited lending opportunities in the economy. The authorities have taken steps to assist potential entrepreneurs by providing training and conducting feasibility studies for projects, and have also helped to establish industrial estates. These steps should be complemented by actions in the following areas: I/ In 1994/95, domestic financing of the deficit consisted of drawing down the Government's sizeable deposits in the banking system. This source of domestic financing, however, will be exhausted in the next year or so. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- ea - CRAma BHUTAN MEDIUM-TERM FISCAL PROJECTION, 1994/95-2004/05 (In percent of GDP) 32 REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE 30. 28. Domestic revenue 26. 24. Current ozpmditwo 22. 20. I l8 war/95 1996/97 199a/99 2000/01 2002/03 2004/E 732 30 28 .28 24 122 I20 7 I8 , lo 10 FISCAL BALANCE 6. . . . . ..- . ..- . . . . . . .._______.____............. cw7ent ~isml balllnce --5 -10. -I5 1994/ffi 1996/97 " GOVERNMENT DEBT Overall ~iarn1 balance --IO lmn3/99 2009/01 2002/03 2004/05 -15 60 55. .55 60. .50 45. .45 40. 40 35. 35 30. .30 25 l%l4/95 1ssa/s7 199a/99 2000/01 2002/03 2004/05 2.5 Sources: Bhutanese suthorities and staff cstimsles, Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 10 - . Foreign investment. Foreign investment is restricted to a maximum equity participation of 20 percent, is limited to the manufacturing sector, and is allowed only on a case-by-case basis. This has been tantamount to a ban on foreign investment. A more transparent and liberal policy would provide valuable resources for development, as well as modern technology and management skills that are in short supply. The authorities, however, feel that liberalization of foreign investment should be postponed until domestic entrepreneurial capacity had been strengthened; otherwise, they see a risk of foreign domination of the economy. . Privatization. The privatization program needs to be reinvigo- rated. The authorities noted that a major constraint to rapid privatization is the limited absorptive capacity of the private sector. The staff suggested that even limited sales of shares on a more frequent basis would facilitate private sector development and contribute to capital market deepening. In addition, permitting foreign participation would help push privatization forward. Overall, the authorities reiterated their long-term commitment that any activity of a commercial nature should be undertaken by the private sector, except those projects that are too large to be financed privately. l-hey noted that although they were in broad agreement with the staff's sugges- tions, the key question cc~ncerns the appropriate pace of implementation. They pointed out that if the Government appears to be moving too slowly. it largely reflects Bhutan's level of development and limited human resources which constrains them from moving on a number of fronts simultaneously. An early priority is to establish a "legal enabling environment" for privata sector development, and work is underway to draft a commercial code, bankruptcy legislation, a real estate law, and a national environmental protection act. 3. Financial sector reform Private sector development will also require further steps to strengthen the financial system. Although significant progress has been made (e.g., regular auctions of FSlA bills are now being conducted and a government securities market is being set up), the continuing build up of excess reserves by financial institutions suggests that there are still rigidities--such as interest rate controls and lack of competition--that obstruct the efficient functioning of credit markets. With the assistance of the Asian Development Bank, operational plans have been developed to convert the Unit Trust of Bhutan (UTB) into a second commercial bank on July 1, 1996. thus increasing competition. The staff observed that to meet this timetable it will be essential to develop strategies for portfolio restructuring, recapitalization. and privatization of the UTB. In this connection--but more generally as well--legislative changes are needed to deal with the problem of nonperforming assets and loan Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public. _ 11 recovery on a more permanent basis. 1/ Efforts will also be needed to develop related financial infrastructure, especially a payments system for safe and efficient clearing among banks. The staff also pressed for deregulation of interest rates, noting that this would deepen financial markets, foster more efficient allocation of resources, and assist in the absorption of excess reserves in the financial system. Moreover, as interest rates in India have been liberalized, the risk of major misalignments has increased. The authorities agreed that increased competition through the conversion of UTB into a commercial bank and the introduction of government security auctions would facilitate the decontrol of interest rates. However, they were not in a position to make specific commitments regarding such liberalization, in part because decisions have not yet been taken regarding reform of the Government Employees Provident Fund (GEPF). The present guaranteed return of 10 percent on GEPF investments essentially sets a floor on interest rates. Moreover, it creates problems of adverse risk selection, putting the portfolio of the Royal Insurance Corporation of Bhutan (the manager of the GEPF resources) in jeopardy. The staff suggested that the rate of return be determined exclusively by the performance of the Fund, and that if guaran- teed payments are desired this be done directly as a contingent liability of the national budget. IV. Staff Awraisal The Bhutanese authorities have much to be proud of. The development of the power sector and allied industries has boosted economic growth. Revenues from these industries, along with generous donor assistance, has provided the resources required to expand the coverage of basic social services. Thus, Bhutan is well on its way to achieving the "United Nations Year 2000" goals of primary health and education for all. These accomplish- ments have gone hand-in-hand with the policy of conserving natural resources and preserving the environment. On the macroeconomic front as well, the situation has generally been favorable. As there is little scope for an independent monetary policy, preserving macroeconomic stability has depended on maintaining a prudent fiscal stance. Recognizing this, the authorities have followed a restrained fiscal policy and the burden of government debt is low. Revenue prospects will improve substantially early next century as major projects are completed. In the meantime, however, increased efforts will be needed to ensure against a lasting deterioration in the fiscal situation and to safeguard productive expenditures, including on social services and operations and maintenance. It will be particularly important to broaden the base for tax revenues, introduce user fees and improve cost recovery, 1/ A "Loan Recovery Committee" has been established, but its lack of a clear mandate has slowed progress in restructuring balance sheets. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12 - consolidate existing government programs, and adopt a selective approach to new projects. Agreement by the donor community to shift a part of their assistance away from new projects and toward recurrent expenditures would also be most beneficial. With determined efforts along these lines, the projected temporary widening of the fiscal deficit is unlikely to pose a serious risk to macroeconomic stability, especially in view of the comfortable foreign reserve position. Bhutan remains, however, a poor country and the need to raise living standards is paramount. Furthermore, although unemployment is not currently a problem in Bhutan--indeed, with a shortage of skilled workers the reverse is true--in the future unemployment among unskilled labor could emerge as the population grows faster than the increase in labor absorption by agriculture. Thus, a key objective is to improve the growth potential of the economy and develop industries that could provide additional employment opportunities in the future. There is considerable scope for this, consistent with the authorities' concern for the environment and preser- vation of Bhutan's traditional culture. Equitable growth will require a greater contribution from the private sector, especially small scale ventures. This, in turn, will require a reduction in excessive controls on economic activity, a strengthening of the incentive structure based on market forces, and greater outward orientation. A good start has been made in reforming the financial system. These reforms need to be carried further in the year ahead, focusing on liberaliz- ing interest rates, increasing competition, and strengthening of portfolios. However, in areas such as industrial licensing, foreign investment, the exchange and trade regime, and labor policies, the authorities have been slower in reducing controls and have relied instead on a case-by-case approach. Although the authorities see this approach as providing them with flexibility, it has increased costs and led to considerable uncertainty on the part of potential private investors, thus inhibiting their contribution to output. For instance, the plan for external trade reform, envisaged for implementation by the end of this year, still needs to be clearly articula- ted. With work underway to establish a legal framework consistent with Bhutan's development philosophy, the time has now come to adopt more transparent and less arbitrary sectoral policies with greater reliance on market mechanisms. As regards statistical issues, the staff endorses the statement in the authorities' guidelines for the preparation of the Eighth Five Year Plan that, well before the initiation of this Plan, the Central Statistical Organization (CSO) needs to be revitalized and strengthened in order to facilitate the process of macroeconomic programming and development planning in Bhutan. Without devoting much additional manpower to compiling statis- tics, substantial gains can be achieved simply by improving coordination between various government departments and agencies. For example, revision of the price index is long overdue, and can be completed quickly if there is better coordination between the CSO and the RMA. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public_ 13 As noted, the authorities are now beginning to prepare the Eighth Five Year Plan. Much of their initial thinking for the preparation of this Plan is consistent with the precepts outlined by the staff, especially with regard to fiscal policy, financial sector reform, and institution building. Translating these intentions into reality, coupled with efforts to establish a liberal and transparent framework for private sector operations, would be essential for increasing the dynamism of Bhutan's economy, while retaining the unique features of the country. It is recommended that the next Article IV consultation with Bhutan be held on the standard 12-month cycle. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14 - Prooosed Decision The following draft decision is proposed for adoption by the Executive Board. 1. The Fund takes this decision in concluding the 1995 Article XIV consultation with Bhutan, in the light of the 1995 Article IV consultation with Bhutan conducted under Decision No. 5392-(77/63). adopted April 29, 1977, as amended (Surveillance over Exchange Rate Policies).. 2. Tlw restrictions on the making of payments and transfers for current international transactions described in SM/95/223 are maintained by Bhutan in accordance with Article YIV, Section 2. The Fund encourages the authorities to administer these restrictions in a liberal manner and to eliminate them as soon as circumstances permit. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 15 Bhutan: Selected Statistical Issues ANNEX I Bhutan's macroeconomic data base is weak. Core data are published by the Royal Monetary Authority in its quarterly publication Selected Economic Indicators as well as its Annual Report, but there is a lack of intersectoral consistency and the data are subject to large revision. A multitopic statistical review mission last visited the country in May 1990 and established a country page for Bhutan in the International Financial Statistics. The mission identified many deficiencies in the database; however, their correction is likely to be a gradual process owing to the shortage of qualified personnel and adequate computer facilities. 1. Real sector Estimates of GDP by final expenditure and GDP at constant prices are available with significant lags and are unreliable. Data on prices are not well developed; the consumer price index--which is referenced to December 1979--does not cover housing costs and many services. Reliable data on employment and wages are not available. Data on trade values are not current and no data have been reported on trade volumes or prices. 2. Monetary statistics Banking statistics are compiled monthly for the four main financial institutions; the Royal Monetary Authority and the Bank of Bhutan's balance sheets are consolidated into a monetary survey. There have been a number of improvements in the classification of the monetary data with technical assistance from a resident MAE expert. However, the accounting of credit to Government and the treatment of unclassified assets and liabilities of the Bank of Bhutan remain unsatisfactory. 3. Public finance The quality of the budgetary data is weak. There are significant discrepancies between budgetary and monetary survey data for bank financing to Government, and between budgetary and balance of payments data for foreign grants. In addition, there are discrepancies in the nontax revenue reported by the Department of Revenue and Customs and that published by the National Budget and Accounts. Typically there are substantial revisions of budgetary data from the end of the fiscal year to the next. Technical assistance in the preparation of fiscal statistics is being provided by the Danish government. 4. External sector Bhutan's external sector data are inadequate. The MA compiles balance of payments data on a fiscal year basis. However, merchandise trade is reported on a calendar year basis. The estimates cover only a limited range of transactions and many of the key data, including aid flows, are based on the authorities' estimates. Data on external debt are not properly adjusted for exchange rate valuation effects, Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicBhutan: Reporting of Main Statistical fnclicatars .s Of .“d-July 1995 Exchan&a 1nt.v Rama “stional r.ser”eS -I June 1995 my 1995 R.S.rv., Cantral base Ba* 8Mn.y balance + ahset April April 1995 1995 Canm8m.r price i”d.X Export*, imports cvrrsnt ovecsll c.ICcount &o”sm- i ~~~~ balance ment balance *mad money April 1995 1nter.st rates P-lay 1995 GDP/GNP 1994,95 1994,95 1994,95 -+- July 1995 July 1995 Date Of latest aLxe;vatian h.ite receive.3 July 1995 J”lY 1995 July 1995 Frequency Of data Annually AnnuaLLy Annually Nonttlly Honthly Annually Annvauy AM”dlY Annually Frequluency Of reporting sovrce of data Sam- Mn”dlY Official public.- tion rliract clir.ct r*porti”& rsportl”* bY bY authx- authori- ties to ties to IFS IFS 4= Facsimile Facsimile ““rest- ““re‘t- rlctd Xir3.d lxr.st Direct reporti”~ reporting bY bY authori- authori- ties to ties to IFS IFS 4 Facsimile Facsimile unre,t- “IWeSt- r1ct.d rictaa Direct reporting bY authori- tia to IFS Tabha provided ta Nirrian Tables Table pr0”id.d provided ta t.2 Mission Hisrio” -I-- blisaion Hisrio” Official publica- ti on Direct repaIti”g bY authori- ties to IFS Facsimil. Facrimih Mission Mission Ho& Of reporting Contidsntia- 1ity unrest- ricted ““rest rictecl ““rest- ricted Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public