DOCUMENT OF INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND NOT FOR PUBLIC USE MASTER FILES ROOM HQ C-525 0450 SM/99/166 CONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION July 12, 1999 To: Members of the Executive Board From: The Secretary Subject: Ethiopia-Staff Report for the 1999 Article IV Consultation Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staff report for the 1999 Article IV consultation with Ethiopia, which will be brought to the agenda for discussion on a date to be announced. A draft decision appears on pages 26 and 27. Mr. Neuhaus (ext. 37154) or Mr. Cowen (ext. 37207) is available to answer technical or factual questions relating to this paper prior to the Board discussion. Unless the Documents Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the European Commission, following its consideration by the Executive Board. Att: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicCONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND ETHIOPIA Staff Report for the 1999 Article IV Consultation Prepared by the Staff Representatives for the 1999 Consultation with Ethiopia Approved by G.E. Gondwe and G. Russell Kincaid July 9, 1999 Contents Page Executive Summary. ._. ._._, ,., ,_. ._, ._.. ._. ,.. ,___. .__... .._... _. ._. 3 I. Introduction.. .._. ._. .__. .__. ._. . . ,., ,... ._.... . 5 II. Recent Developments ....................................................................................................... 6 III. Policy Discussions ........................................................................................................... 10 A. Macroeconomic Policies .......................................................................................... 10 B. Structural Reforms ................................................................................................. .19 C. Medium-Term Outlook ........................................................................................... .19 D. Other Issues ............................................................................................................ .21 IV. Staff Appraisal ._.. ._, ,,. ._. _. ._. ._, ._. ._.. ,_, ,.. ._. ._. ..23 Text Boxes 1. Recent Structural Reforms ............................................................................................... 8 2. Repercussions on the Program of the Conflict Between Eritrea and Ethiopia ................... 11 3. Major Findings of the 1999 Public Expenditure Review.. ................................................ .12 4. Poverty and Environmental Issues ................................................................................. ..2 2 Figures 1. Selected Economic Indicators, 1995/962001/02 ._. .__._. ,. ., ._. ._. ._. ._. ..28 2. Exchange Rate Developments ._, ., .__. ._. ._. ._. .__, ._. ._. ._, ,.. ._. ,_, ,_, ._. ._. ._. ._. ., ..30 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2- 3. Interest Rate Developments, January 1998-May 1999.. ., ._,., ..,, ,..,, ,.,_., ,., ,.,.,_._. ._.._. ._. .3 1 Tables 1. Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 1995/96-2001/02 ....................................... 32 2. Performance Criteria and Benchmarks Under the Second Annual ESAF Arrangement .... .33 3. Balance of Payments, 1995/962001/02 ......................................................................... .34 4. General Government Budgetary Operations, 1994/95-1998/99 (In millions of birr) ....... ..3 5 5. General Government Budgetary Operations, 1994/95-1998/99 (In percent of GDP)........3 6 6. Monetary Survey, 1997-99 ............................................................................................. 37 7. Medium-Term Outlook. ................................................................................................. .38 Appendixes I. Relations with the Fund. .................................................................................................. 39 II. Relations with the World Bank Group. ........................................................................... .42 III. Enhanced Bank-Fund Collaboration ................................................................................ .45 IV. Health and Education Sectors .......................................................................................... 48 V. Statistical and Computational Issues ................................................................................ 51 VI Tentative Fund Work Program for 1999 .......................................................................... 55 VII. Draft Public Information Notice (PIN) ............................................................................ .56 Appendix Tables 8. Selected Social and Demographic Indicators ................................................................... ..5 0 9. Surveys of Reporting of Main Statistical Indicators .......................................................... 53 10. Main Surveys Conducted by the Central Statistical Authority ............................................ 54 . Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3- EXECUTM~ Summ~ . Since the conclusion of the 1997 Article IV consultation, Ethiopia has managed to maintain price stability and implement important reforms, despite the challenges posed by the war with Eritrea, sizable terms of trade losses, and erratic weather conditions. Inflation has remained in the low single digits and real GDP growth is expected to recover in 1998/99 (fiscal year starting July 8) after a small contraction in the previous year. However, the external current account deficit has widened to 9% percent of GDP in 1998/99 and a loss in net foreign assets of the banking system is now projected, instead of the gain originally programmed. . Underpinning the government’s stabilisation efforts have been relatively tight fiscal and monetary policies in 1998/99, as agreed under the second annual ESAF arrangement approved by the Board in October 1998. The overall general government deficit before grants was expected to decline from around 7 percent of GDP in 1997/98 to just under 6 percent in 1998/99 (the deficit after grants was targeted to decline from just under 4 percent of GDP to 2.6 percent during the same period), and monetary aggregates were to rise broadly in line with nominal GDP. However, the intensification of the border conflict and the unfavorable external environment have also affected adversely on the public finances. Preliminary returns suggest the government deficit may now reach 6% percent of GDP, exceeding the target by % percent of GDP on account of higher military expenditure, which together with a shortfall in foreign resources will lead to considerably higher than expected recourse to domestic nonbank financing. Public sector revenue (including privatisation receipts) will likely remain flat compared to the previous fiscal year, and nondefense recurrent and capital expenditures will be considerably lower than envisaged. However, the government has taken care to protect social spending, and real spending increases are still expected in the education and health sectors. The growth in broad money has been somewhat lower than expected, and has been accompanied by a slowdown in the expansion of private sector credit associated with a slackening in nonagricultural activity.’ . Except for the floor on net foreign assets of the banking system, Ethiopia has met all performance criteria and benchmarks to date under the ESAF-supported program, and continued to undertake financial sector, exchange and trade, and other structural reforms. The independent external audit of the Commercial Bank of Ethiopia (CBE) was delayed owing to security concerns expressed by the foreign auditing firm selected in late 1998, but is now expected to start in August 1999. A framework for conducting interbank money and foreign exchange market transactions was established in September 1998, but activity in the foreign exchange market has been limited and no transactions have taken place to date in the money market. Financial system regulation and supervision are being strengthened and bank capital requirements have recently been raised. . Achievements have also been made in other areas, some of which constituted structural performance criteria under the program. The maximum import tariff rate was reduced from 50 percent to 40 percent and the number of tariff bands from eight to seven in December Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4- 1998; most restrictions on the making of payments and transfers for current international transactions were eliminated in August 1998; regulations governing foreign exchange sales and purchases of exporters and importers and verification of export and import licensing requirements were relaxed; and progress was also made in the area of privatization. . Looking ahead, the authorities face the twin challenges of staying the course of fiscal policy and protecting core outlays in the context of an adverse external environment and possible further defense spending pressures. Meeting these challenges will require prompt actions, starting with the 1999/2000 budget, to keep the fiscal deficit within the broad parameters envisaged at the inception of the ESAF arrangement: The government should embark on a major domestic tax effort and maintain close cooperation with the donor community to secure an adequate flow of concessional resources. Fiscal consolidation would need to be accompanied by deeper and faster structural reforms to raise productivity and improve the delivery of social services, with the ultimate goal of securing a rapid increase in living standards. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-5- L INTRODUCTION 1. Policy discussions for the 1999 Article IV consultation and the midterm review of the 1998/99 program supported by the second annual Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility @AF) arrangement were held in Addis Ababa during February 2-6, and at headquarters during April 19-26 and June 9-10, 1999, respectively.’ The staffmet with H.E. Prime Minister Meles Zenawi and with the Ministers of Finance and of Economic Development and Cooperation, the Governor of the National Bank of Ethiopia, the Economic Advisor to the Prime Minister, as well as other senior government officials and private sector representatives. As mentioned below, discussions on the midterm review under the arrangement are expected to resume later this year after conclusion of the Article IV consultation. 2. Ethiopia is on the standard 12-month consultation cycle and continues to avail itself of the transitional arrangements under Article XIV, Section 2. On October 11, 1996, the Executive Board approved a three-year ESAF arrangement amounting to SDR 88.5 million (90 percent of quota), and the first annual arrangement thereunder (SIX 29.5 million, or 30 percent ofquota). The first drawing (SDR 14.75 million) was made upon Board approval, but no further drawings were made as the midterm review under the arrangement could not be completed and the arrangement was allowed to lapse on October 10, 1997. In concluding the last Article IV consultation on November 21, 1997 (EBIW 97/l 12), and noting that the first annual ESAF arrangement had expired, Directors exhorted the authorities to reestablish a solid track record, implement without delay appropriate adjustment and reform measures, and work closely with the Fund toward a program that could be supported by a second annual ESAF arrangement. 3. Ethiopia pursued prudent macroeconomic policies and implemented important reforms in 1997/98, despite some delay in liberaliiing the exchange system and the financial sector.2 The major reforms adopted were the decontrol of bank lending rates, reduction in the average import tariff from 24.5 percent to 21.5 percent, revision of the investment code allowing foreign participation in the telecommunications and power sectors, and enactment of a foreclosure law. Negotiations on a program for 1998199 to be supported by a second annual ESAF arrangement were concluded in July 1998. As part of that program and before Board discussion of the arrangement, the government eliminated most previously identified restrictions on the making of payments and transfers for current international transactions; launched a framework for interbank money and foreign exchange markets; streamlined foreign trade licensing and ’ The staffteam comprised Messrs. Neuhaus (Head), Cowen (both AFR), and Masuda (PDR), and Mmes. Brixiova and Chai (EP) (both AFR). The team was joined by Mmes. Dieterich (FAD) and Khattak (assistant-AFR) in February, and by Ms. Nagy (AFR) in April and June, and it was assisted by Mr. Abdi, the Fund’s Senior Resident Representative in Ethiopia. * W/97/267 (1 I/7/97) and EBS/8/173, Rev. 1 (10/29/98) provide details on performance under the first annual ESAF arrangement. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-6- verification procedures; replaced the requirement to surrender export and services receipts to the National Bank of Ethiopia with a requirement to convert 90 percent of these receipts at the commercial banks; and extended the period for conversion of these latter proceeds from three to four weeks. 4. On October 23, 1998, the Board approved the second annual ESAF arrangement for an amount of SDR 29.5 million (30 percent of quota). The first drawing (SDR 14.75 million) was made immediately and the second one, for the same amount, was conditioned on observance of end-1998 performance criteria and completion of the midterm review under the arrangement. In the discussion of the preliminary document on the Initiative for the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) (EBS/98/173, Rev.1; 10/29/98) by the Fund Executive Board on November 6,1998, and by the Bank Board on November 10, Ethiopia was considered eligible for assistance under the Initiative. Most Directors agreed that the final decision point could be reached at the time of completion of the midterm review under the second annual ESAF arrangement, but a few Directors favored a decision point at the time of Board approval of the third annual ESAF arrangement (see the Acting Chairman’s summing up (SUR/98/128; 1 l/l 1198)). Directors encouraged Ethiopia to seek a quick and peaceful resolution of the border conflict with Eritrea that had erupted in May 1998, and underscored the need to safeguard the program’s fiscal objectives, including social spending, from unforeseen outlays arising from the conflict. 5. Ethiopia’s relations with the Fund and the World Bank are summarized in Appendixes I and II. Ethiopia has agreed to participate in a pilot project on enhanced Fund-Bank collaboration, and Appendix III reports on collaborative efforts to date and areas for future work. Key health and education indicators are discussed in Appendix IV, and statistical issues in Appendix V. A tentative work program is outlined in Appendix Vl and a draft Public Information Notice (PIN) is presented in Appendix VII. II. BECENT DEVELOPMENTS 6. The 1998/99 program supported by the second annual ESAF arrangement aimed to consolidate recent stabilization gains and deepen reforms to support rapid and sustained growth and poverty alleviation. Inflation below 4 percent and a modest buildup in foreign reserves were targeted, and real GDP was expected to grow by S-9% percent, reflecting a rebound in farm output and acceleration of the sector development programs (SDPs) for energy, health, education, and road transport sponsored by the Bank and other donors (Table 1). The general government cash deiicit before grants was targeted to fall from 6.8 percent of GDP in 1997/98 to 5.9 percent in 1998/99. This was based on the expectation that defense spending would fall to 2 percent of GDP from 4.6 percent in the previous year (the government gave assurances that any higher-than-budgeted military outlays would be covered by extraordinary resources or cuts in nonpriority spending). The monetary program was premised on a small government repayment to the banking system and no major placements of government paper, to make room for growth in credit to the private sector commensurate with the anticipated economic recovery. A widening in Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Publicthe external current account deficit stemming from the large import component of the SDPs was expected to be covered by increased donor inflows. 7. Structural reforms under the program were aimed at further liheraliiing key sectors and facilitating Ethiopia’s integration in the global economy. The authorities undertook to deepen exchange, trade, and financial sector liberalization; strengthen tax administration and expenditure control; reform the civil service; divest public enterprises; foster private sector development and export growth; and improve external debt management and the quality and timeliness of economic statistics. 8. Most program benchmarks for September 1998 and March 1999 and performance criteria for December 1998 were observed (in some cases with ample margins), except the December 1998 performance criterion and the March 1999 benchmark on the net foreign assets of the banking system (Table 2). Also, structural reforms were largely implemented as envisaged, except the audit of the state-owned CBE,3 and removal of the limit on availability of foreign exchange for the making of payments for holiday travel @ox 1). Regarding other delays, the reform of regional agricultural taxes has become fully operational only in a few regions, but other regions are expected to follow suit, subject to administrative capacity constraints. Elimination of preferences for domestic inputs has also been deferred owing to a delay in introducing a duty drawback system, which the authorities are seeking to put in place with technical assistance from India. 9. Despite good weather during the main (Meher) harvest season ended November 1998, economic activity appears to have slowed over the past several months,4 as evidenced by the downturn in leading indicators (e.g., civilian imports, tourist arrivals, private sector credit demand, and indirect tax revenue) (Figure 1). Inflation was estimated at 3.8 percent during the year ended May 1999. 10. The external current account deficit before official transfers is projected to widen from 8.4 percent of GDP in 1997/98 to 9.4 percent in 1998/99, compared with 8.2 percent in the program (Table 3). This would reflect a higher-than-expected terms of trade loss (stemming largely from an estimated 20 percent drop in coffee export prices), unforeseen military imports, and a 17 percent decline in coffee export volumes. These factors are expected to more than offset a strong performance of noncoffee exports and a decline in non-oil civilian imports. Despite larger-than-expected privatization proceeds and short-term capital inflows, the overall balance of 3 The Ernst & Young auditors hired in late 1998 have been unable to visit Ethiopia thus fat because of a U.K. travel advisory issued in February 1999, which has since been relaxed. 4 Contributing factors include crop shortfalls during the minor (Belg) harvest ended May 1999 owing to a drought, and intensification of hostilities with Eritrea in February. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-8- Box 1. Recent Structural Reforms In 1998/99, the government implemented major structural measures in B number of areas. In the tlnaacinl sector, the government established a hmework for the conduct of interbank money market operations (September 1998); reduced the minimum denomination of treasury bills o&red for sale from Br 50,000 ta Br 5,000 (September 1998); finalized the tams of reference for a comprehensive audit of the Commercial Bank of Ethiopia (November 1998); and selected an internationally reputable firm to conduct it (December 1998). With respect to the exchange sad trade system, the authorities: . eliminated foreign exchange surrender and unranunemted bid bond requirements (which were replaced with a 90 percent conversion requirement to be met over B period expanded from three to four weeks), and transfemed the responsibility from the National Bank of Ethiopia (NBE) to the commercial banks for determining compliance of foreign exchange buyers and sellers with import and export licensing requirements and foreign exchange regulations (August 1998); . replaced the weekly retail foreign exchange auction with a wholesale auction (September 1998), introdwed and made opcmtional an interbank foreign exchange market (September 1998). and pexmitted foreign exchange bureaus to engage in all approved spot/cash external current account tiansactions (September 1998); and . removed limits on external current account transactions for business travel, education, and health, increased limit on holiday travel to US.%,200 per person per trip (September 1998), and reduced the maximum import tariffrate from 40 pemnt to 30 percent and the average tarifffrom 21.5 percent to 19.5 percent (December 1998). On export promotion and development, the govemtncnt: I . ceased price verification on all nonagriculhual commodity exports (September 1998) and on noncoffez agriculhwal exports for which verifiable international prices are not readily available (December 1998); . revised the directive on foreign loans to allow manufachuing exporters (including agm-processors) to engage in foreign commercial borrowing, permit the use of suppliers’ credits and other implicit forms of credit not involving formal loan agreement, and ease debt/equity constraints on exporters (December 1998); and l replaced (i) ex ante price veritication on other noncoffee agricultural exports with ex post audits (December 1998), and (ii) ex ante single-point price wrification of coffee exports with veriticati~ within a restricted range of allowable prices (June 1999). With respect to privatization, the authorities initiated privatization of the Construction and Business Bank (September 1998); brought ten state farms, a brewery, and a cement factmy to point of sale (December 1998); and prepared amendments to privatization-related laws for parliamentary approval (December 1998). In the area of private sector development, the government made operational the foreclosure law (September 1998), and removed the minimum limit (USSZO million) on foreign investment in joint ventures and the maximum limit ’ (US%20 million) on foreign investment in sole ventures in engineering, metallurgical, pharmaceutical, chemical end fertilizcr industries (April 1999). On capacity building, governnnee, and civil service reform, the authorities issued directives on fmancial and debt management, procurement, and other budgetay responslbd~txs. and prepared budget management and control manuals (December 1998). payments deficit would be larger than programmed. This would result in a loss in net foreign assets of the banking system (instead of the net gain envisaged in the program) and an unforeseen Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Publicaccumulation of external arrears stemming from a delay in concluding rescheduling agreements with Russia and non-Paris Club creditors (Table 3).5 Cross official reserves rose to some US$450 million in mid-May 1999 (2.8 months of 1998/99 imports of goods and nonfactor services) compared to 2.7 months at the end of 1997/98. Since the beginning of the program year, the birr has depreciated by 13 percent against the U.S. dollar. In real effective terms, it has remained virtually unchanged since the approval of the ESAP arrangement in October 1996 (Figure 2). -9- , E,,,b,,k Extemd Tdc, 199W91-199W9 (In pemd of GDP) sxrcsr: Ethiopian .ulho,ties; md Fund tia#im.lu md projstim* ‘Expub and impas ofpcads and ncd.st.x aa7iS~ 6, Iiscll year aldad my 7, 11. Preliminary results for the first seven months of the fiscal year show significant deviations in the structure of general government revenue and expenditure from the original projections, confirmed by federal returns for the first 10 months of the fiscal year. Higher nontax revenue (mainly extraordinary transfers from several extrabudgetary funds) made up for sluggish domestic tax collections, while unforeseen recurrent outlays (especially for defense) were partly offset by a shortfall in capital spending that reflects implementation constraints and delays in foreign assistance, rather than discretionary cuts (Tables 4 and 5). 12. The 12-month growth in broad money has slowed from 12.7 percent in July 1998 to 6.1 percent in April 1999 (Table 6). The yield on treasury bills has edged up (Figure 3), owing largely to sizable placements to accommodate the financing needs stemming from the shortfall in foreign grants and loan disbursements to the government. Nevertheless, bank lending rates have only risen slightly, owing to weak private demand for credit and the apparent preference of ’ private banks for differentiating credit risks through higher collateral instead of higher interest premiums. No transactions have taken place to date in the interbank money market since its establishment in September 1998 (discussed below). ’ The quantitative benchmark and performance criterion concerning the nonaccumulation of external payment arrears do not apply to debt that is expected to be subject to rescheduling or a stock-of-debt operation. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-IO- 13. Following Board approval of the second annual ESAF arrangement, Paris Club creditors agreed in October 1998 to implement the second phase of the 1997 rescheduling covering maturities due in 1998. Simultaneously, they agreed to implement the third phase (maturities due through October 1999) as soon as arrears to Italy and the United States are cleared.6 Ethiopian officials have held several rounds of discussions with their Russian counterparts, most recently in November 1998, and reached agreement in principle to reschedule Russia’s claims within the Paris Club framework; moratorium interest rates and other details of the restructuring terms (including the choice of a debt or debt-service-reduction option) remain to be worked out, and the authorities expect to sign the agreement by September 1999. Ethiopia has also approached non- Paris Club bilateral creditors to seek a rescheduling agreement on at least comparable terms to those accorded by the Paris Club. III. P~LI~YDISCUSSION~ A. Macroeconomic Policies 14. The authorities underlined their efforts to firlly adhere to the 1998/99 program despite the challenges posed by the war with Eritrea (Box 2). They noted that the supplementary defense appropriations passed in January 1999 had covered the unexpected rise in defense spending through extraordinary resources and budgetary contingencies, as agreed under the program. Although they considered the impact of the war on economic activity to have been relatively limited thus far, they had scaled back the original growth target for the year from 9.4 percent to 6.7 percent, given the onset of a drought in early 1999 and the slowdown in leading economic indicators over the past months. Fiscal policy 15. During the April discussions at headquarters, the officials said they expected the general government cash deficit before grants to be about 5 percent of GDP in 1998/99, compared with the program target of 5.9 percent, counting on underexecution of the capital budget and a compression of defense outlays in the latter part of the fiscal year. During the June discussions, the authorities acknowledged that defense spending would be higher than expected, but maintained their deficit forecast. However, based on these discussions, a review of fiscal returns, 6 Ethiopia disputes the existence of these arrears, claiming they arise from miscalculation of late interest payments and incompletion of projects, which date back a number of years. Because of the nature of these claims, they are not treated as newly accumulated arrears under the ESAF- supported program. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- ll- Box 2. Repercussions on the Program of the Conflict Between Eritrea and Ethiopia At the time ofBoard approval of the second annual ESAF arrangement in Octoba 1998, Eritrca and Ethiopia were engaged in a dispute that broke out in May 1998, involving demarcation of the their border in the Badme region. The design of the program was premised on the widely held assumption that the hvo counties, which had separated pcacefidly in 1993. would be able to resolve their diierences quickly and amicably. aided by active diplomatic initiatives sponsored by the Organization for African Unity (OAU) and several third countries that maintain close relations with both Eritrea and Ethiopia. Against this backdrop, the ESAF-supported pmgram for 1998/99 envisaged a reduction in military expenditure in Ethiopia from 4% pcrccot of GDP in 1997198 to 2 parent in 1998/99. and contained assurances that any excess in dcfense outlays would be covcrcd in B tmnsparcnt fashion by etiaordinary resources or non-priority spading cuts, with a view to safeguarding the program’s ovcmll fiscal objectives and protect&g cnrc social outlays. In keeping with these undertakings, parliament approved a supplementary budget in January 1999, which included additional autbotitions amounting to Br 1,050 million (2.1 percent of GDP) for military expenditure. These higher outlays would be fmanced by additional nontax revenue (Br 800 million), transfers t?om several e-budgetary funds, and B reassignment of a Br 250 million budget contingency. Despite the representation by both Eritrea and Ethiopia that they have accepted an OAU-sponsored peace framework, the con&t escalated @to a fill-fledged ground war in mid-February 1999. Since then, hostilities have ignited periodically on at least three fronts along Ethiopia’s northan and eastern frontier. with the most recent intcnsitication of fighting coming in early June before the onset of the rainy season. While independent verification of casualties is not available, their numbcrs for both sides arc currently cstimatcd at 50,ooO (with some 15,000 fatalities). Moreover, an estimated 250,000 Eritreans and 390,000 Ethiopians have been displaced by fighting along the border. The contlict has also spread to neighboring Somalia, where Erilrean and Ethiopian support to rival clans appears to have exacerbated longstanding internal contlicts. The statrestimates that the revised annual o&al target for military expenditure (including the supplementary appropriations), i.e., 4 percent of GDP, ws exceeded by April (the government has only reported aggregate data on defcnsc spending to the staff through March 8, or the fust eight months of the fiscal year. at which time it was already equivalent to 3.6 pcrccnt of GDP). The statT now expects total military expenditure to rise to as much as 6 percent of GDP in 1998/99, although no further supplementary budget has been submitted to parliament to date. ‘IIe outlays exceeding those authorized by parliamat arc being tiianced mostly through placements of treasury bills to the nonbank public, which have risen considerably over the past few months. In addition, the substantially higher then expected military imports appear to have been-together with a sharp terms-of trade loss-a factor contributiog to the worsening ofthe external current account position in 1998/99. and the recent findings of the Bank’s public expenditure review (PER) (Box 3), the staff now projects a fiscal deficit of 6.5 percent of GDP mainly because of unforeseen expenditure. The deficit after grants would be 4.3 percent of GDP versus the original forecast of 2.6 percent, owing mainly to a shortfall in grants. 16. The statI revised projection for total revenue is only slightly below the program level; a shortfall in tax collections (especially indirect taxes) stemming from the terms-of trade loss and dampened growth prospects for 1998199 is expected to be offset by higher nontax Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12- Box 3. Major Findings of the 1999 Public Expenditure Review The 1999 public expenditure review (F’ER) for Ethiopia was conducted in May 1999. The World Bank-led exercise ncluded Ethiopian oflicials, as well as representatives &om the Ih4F, the Aliican Development Bank, the European him, the Netherlands, and the United Kingdom. Its main focus was to (i) determine whether the execution of the 1997/98 and 1998i99 budgets was consistent with the government’s stabilization and growth objectives; (ii) assess the Iirect and indirect costs so far of the war with Eritrca; (iii) review progress on existing (and identify new) measures to reprove budget implementation and execution, in particular at the regional and subregional level; and (iv) develop a mrmstive medium-term fiscal path, following completion of the frst two years of the donor-supported sector Ievelopment programs (SDPs). The main findings of the PER are summarized as follows: Repeated uadcrexecutiw of the 1997/98 and 1998i99 capital budgets (including the SDPs in education, roads, and health) needed to be -ted in the period ahead ta meet Ethiopia’s growth objectives. Optimistic assumptions on bnpkmentation capacity and shortfalla in donor assistance associated with concerns about accountability standards, and, lately, the security situation, appeared to be the main causes of the lag in capital spending. For these reasons, the implementation of the five-year SDP for roads should be stretched out, at least, for another two years. Despite lower donor assistance, the government expected to meet most of its own commibnents to social development projects and wxvxnic infrastructure; recurrent outlays for education and health were also being made as budgeted. This year’s higher-than-budgeted defenae costs had been covered so far through nontax revenue and budget contingencies, but the PER noted that that the current highly compressed level of nonsocial civilian expenditure was unsustainable over the medium term Indirect costs of the war were tied to the uncertainty arising 6om the possibility of B prolonged conflict. the costs of rehabilitation and demobilizntion, and the loss of investor confidence. Progress continued to be made in impkmentkg the expenditure management and control componenta of the civil service reform program. Budget preparation manuals (including a budget calendar) had been adopted, but work on improving internal and external auditing procedures needed to be accelerated. Budget preparation at the regional and tonal levels was generally found to be disciplined and effective, but budget impkmentrtioa would coathue to depend critically on timely and wxwate knowkdgc of federal transfers to the regions, which in ham were a&.cted by the unwrtainty surrounding the level of external assistance The public investment program, to become lily operational in 1999/2000, is expected to be incorporated into the medium-term expenditure framework. ‘evenue and privatization receipts arising from transfers from major extrabudgetary limds into the general government’s accounts. Total expenditure and net lending (net of the change in arrears on or reschedulings of external interest) would be slightly above the program level, but with a sharply different composition of expenditure. The programmed increase in capital expenditure . would not be achieved and the actual level of investment would be even lower than in 1997198, owing to implementation problems highlighted in the recent PER. By contrast, current expenditure would be sharply higher, reflecting higher defense spending (now projected by the staff at about 6 percent of GDP, compared with the original target of 2 percent of GDP and a revised target of 4 percent of GDP). Total (recurrent and capital) social expenditure, projected at 6.5 percent of GDP, would be higher than in the previous year, but fall short of the targeted level of 7.1 percent of GDP. Other recurrent spending cuts are expected to come from economic and Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13 - general services. Altogether, the primary domestic deficit would be about 1 percent of GDP, instead of the originally targeted surplus of 2.5 percent of GDP. 17. Despite the pressures created by the war and a sizable shortfall in foreign resources, the government had appropriately sought to preserve macroeconomic 7.5 stability. To that end, it M had raised extraordinary resources and curtailed non- IS defense recurrent expenditure, while seeking IO . by and large to protect core social outlays. However, 5 0 the staff observed that 19w91 1991m 1991192 199394 ww95 1993/% 1996197 1997m 195m9 continued hostilities and the -. Elhapim ,Uhrritia; Md-mndnmBulim,lrr mdpqmm likelihood that defense ‘Fhal *Y dd lvly 7. spending would exceed the levels contemplated in the original and supplementary budgets would make it more difficult to raise additional one-off nontax receipts or curtail civilian spending to cover these costs in 1998199. 18. Discussions on the 1999/2000 budget have so far remained very preliminary, although the authorities agreed to discuss it with staff after its presentation to parliament (in the event, parliament approved thefederalgovernment budget on June 30, 1999).’ During their visit to headquarters in April, the authorities had anticipated a widening in the general government deficit before grants to 8.7 percent of GDP in 1999/2000, on the basis of a sharp increase in capital outlays to be covered by a similarly sharp increase in grants. For this latter reason, the deficit after grants would increase only slightly to 3 percent of GDP. Total revenue would remain flat relative to GDP, and recurrent expenditure would increase somewhat, but the defense component would remain around 4 percent of GDP. 19. The staffmade the point that, without a further, more substantive discussion of the broad outline of the 1999/2000 budget, and given the spending pressures created by the war, it could not form a view on the adequacy of the fiscal stance, and therefore could not recommend completion of the midterm review under the arrangement at this juncture. The staff cautioned that ’ The budget for the rest of the general government will be agreed by the federal government and the regions later this year, without the need for further parliamentary review. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14- the overall general government deficit would need to be contained to a level that could be financed mainly by foreign sources, so as to continue to underpin low inflation. Since a large increase in official grants was unlikely, the authorities would need to embark on a significant revenue mob&ration effort, aided by a tapering off in defense outlays (premised on normalization of relations with Eritrea) that would permit higher social and infrastructure outlays commensurate with Ethiopia’s growth and poverty alleviation goals. More specifically, the staff recommended bolstering domestic tax revenue in order to protect priority outlays (while relying less on nontax receipts) and make room for deepening trade liberalization. (The program envisages a reduction in average import tariffs from 19.5 percent to 17.5 percent by 2000/01, and the authorities are considering a further subsequent reduction to 15 percent.) Furthermore, the prospects for resorting to extraordinary resources or nonbank domestic financing became increasingly uncertain over time. 20. Tbe government’s decisions to start preparing for introduction of a value-added tax (VAT) by June 2001 and fiuther strengthen tax administration (with the assistance of a resident FAD expert) were seen as use&l steps in the direction of strengthening the domestic tax effort. The stalf considered it necessary to support these steps with quick-yielding revenue measures, such as increasing the sales tax on goods and services (currently 12 percent); raising the excise tax on petroleum products (as had been envisaged at the time of the December 1998 tariff reform), in view of the relatively low retail fbel prices in Ethiopia by international standards; increasing excise Ethiopia and Selected Countries: Retail Gasoline Prices, May 1999’ (Regular unleaded, unless otherwise indicated)’ Sources: Intmatimal Energy Agency, and Fund staffcstimatcs. ‘As of June. 23, 1999 for Kenya. ‘Premium lcadcd gasoline for Camcrom, Scncgal, Tanzania, Francs, Italy, and the United Kingdom. Although varying from mntry to antry, the price diffcrmlial bchvccn premium and regular gasdinc is in the range afUSSO.Ol-0.15. 1 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 15 - taxes on certain luxury goods; taxing interest income; creating a presumptive tax on small and medium-sized traders; and-more generally-broadening the tax net beyond the 25 or so major public enterprises currently accounting for the bulk of domestic direct tax collections. 21. In light of the findings of the recent PER, the authorities were advised to address-in cooperation with donors-the factors that had delayed implementation of the capital budget in recent years and to stretch out the implementation period of some sectoral development programs, while continuing to build capacity and seek adequate fimding for these investments. To this end, the authorities indicated that better coordination on resource availability was being undertaken, on the one hand vis&vis donors and the Ministry of Economic Development and Cooperation (MEDAC) and, on the other hand, between MEDAC and regional and zonal agencies that account for a large share of the capital budget. More generally, progress in improving expenditure management and control would be aided by accelerating efforts to improve auditing procedures. The authorities were encouraged to seek a lasting peace agreement with Eritrea so as to permit a reduction in military spending over time. Even if a lasting peace agreement were reached in the near future, there could be significant fiscal costs ofpost-contlict reconstruction and demobilization; the fiscal drag would be even heavier if relations between Ethiopia and Eritrea remained tense and future defense expenditures stayed well above the 2-3 percent of GDP annual level envisaged in the ESAP arrangement. Financial sector issues 22. The government’s financial liberalization strategy focuses on gradually increasing competition in the banking system and strengthening the regulatory and supervisory framework. As a first step, the authorities committed themselves to an independent external audit of the CBE and the formulation of a plan to improve its operations in light of the audit’s findings. The five privately-owned domestic banks would be gven an opportunity to strengthen the quality of their loan portfolio and gain market share before foreign bank entry was allowed over the medium term. Also, the establishment of an interbank money market and the reduction in the minimum denomination of treasury bills offered for sale (to the equivalent of about US%615) were expected to enhance market determination of interest rates and increase competition in the financial sector, by allowing private banks to bid more aggressively for loanable fimds and making government securities more accessible to the public. 23. Except for the CBE audit (delayed for the reasons noted above), the authorities have introduced all the financial sector reform measures envisaged in the program. Nevertheless, I progress in securing some of the financial liberalization outcomes has been slower than expected. Private banks have made little headway in differentiating lending rates according to credit risks (the dispersion of lending rates-10.5-13 percent-is still small) and in competing directly with the CBE. Moreover, they have not tapped into the interbank money market, play a minor role in the interbank foreign exchange market, and appear to have accumulated sizable nonperforming loans, Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 16- hampering their ability to compdte.8 As a consequence, the CBE continues to play a dominant role, despite the entry of two small private banks during the past 18 months.’ 24. The authorities stated that there were no legal or institutional impediments to the conduct of interhank money market transactions, and that public enterprises were free to deposit their resources at the bank of their choice. However, they felt it might take some time for the money market to take off, noting that the banks’ reserve and liquidity holdings remained well above the statutory requirements and, more generally, that the private banking industry-like other Ethiopia: ExcessRes~ves and Liquidity ofBanking System, June 1997-April1999 1997 1998 1999 JUtle June September rJecember April (In percent of net deposits; ad of period)’ Excess merves2 Commercial Bank of Ethiopia (CBE) onlerbmks Excess liquidity’.’ CBE othatxmks Share of the CBE in banking systems’ total excess resavcs 5.4 10.0 9.5 7.9 7.1 5.6 10.5 10.0 7.9 6.8 3.9 5.4 4.8 8.1 9.2 28.3 36.4 37.3 31.2 28.0 27.4 35.9 36.6 30.4 26.6 39.5 41.7 44.2 39.3 41.2 93.7 95.0 94.7 88.4 83.8 Sources: National Bank of Ethiopia (NBE); and Fund staff estimates. ‘Net deposits defined as demand, savings, and time deposits less uncleared checks paid and less uncleared foreign effects. *Reserves are bank deposits at the ME. The current reserve requiremettt is 5 percent of net deposits. )I n pacent of net current depxils, OT net deposits less deposits that can be withdrawn aflu 30 days’ notice. ‘Liquidity is defmed as cash in vault, reserves at the NBE, and demand deposits with otha banks. The cumnt liquidity requirement is 15 percent of net current deposits. * At the onset of the conflict, several banks had considerable exposure to importers whose goods had been seized in Eritrean ports. ’ The CBE and the smaller state-owned Construction and Business Bank together account for some 90 percent of total banking system loans and deposits, the bulk of which are held by the CBE. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17- emerging sectors in the economy-suffered from limited entrepreneurial and managerial capacity. The staff suggested that the banks’ relatively high reserve and liquidity holdings (which dampened their interest in interbank money market transactions) might be associated with a number of factors, including the poor quality of the banks’ loan portfolios; the lack of private land ownership and deficiencies in enforcement of property rights, which made it difficult for banks to assess the quality of and enforce collection on collateral; and-importantly-the absence of a secondary market for government securities.‘0 The authorities added that, as Ethiopia continued its transition to a market economy (after a 17-year period as a command economy under the previous regime), there were still relatively few “bankable” private sector projects, but this constraint would be lessened over time as the privatization program unfolded (see below). On May 27, the National Bank of Ethiopia (NBE) increased the minimum capital requirement for banks, currently Br 10 million (about USSl.2 million), to Br 75 million by end-June 2002, effective immediately for new entrants. Existing banks are allowed phased annual increases over the next three years 25. The NBE has also continued to improve its regulatory and supervisory activities, with assistance from a resident MAE expert, and its Board of Directors will shortly consider the findings of on-site inspection reports for the four oldest private banks. Following the relaxation of the U.K. travel advisory in mid-May 1999, the authorities have asked Ernst & Young to initiate the CBE audit as soon as possible, and the project is now expected to start in August 1999. Meanwhile, the CBE management has continued to take interim measures to improve its operations, including recruitment of skilled personnel, innovations in information technology, and strengthening of internal controls. In addition, the NBE has enforced stricter requirements on the CBE’s capital and reserves to ensure that by August 1999 they are no less than 9 percent of total risk-weighted assets and 7 percent of total assets. Unaudited data show that intensified loan collection efforts have led to a reduction in nonperforming CBE loans from 24 percent of total loans in February 1998 to an estimated 19 percent in April 1999 (the target for end-June 1999 is a reduction to 15.4 percent). Furthermore, the state-owned Construction and Business Bank, with a paid capital equivalent to US%8 million, is to be brought to the point of sale by end-1999. Exchange and trade system 26. As noted above, most restrictions on the making of payments and transfers for current international transactions were eliminated in August 1998. The limit on availability of foreign exchange for the making of payments for holiday travel (US$1,200 per person per trip), which constitutes an exchange restriction under Article XIV, Section 2, was expected to be eliminated by end-June 1999 under the program, but the authorities have indicated that, for the moment, they plan to raise the limit but not to eliminate it completely, owing to the unexpected weakening in Ethiopia’s external accounts. Accordingly, at end-June 1999 Ethiopia maintained two restrictions on the making of payments and transfers for current international transactions, arising from (i) the lo For an analysis of private sector credit and excess reserves and liquidity in the banking system, see Section II of the companion Selected Issues paper. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-18- limit on availability of foreign exchange for holiday travel just mentioned, and (ii) regulations on the making of foreign exchange payments for education abroad, pursuant to which eligibility is based on the criterion of Ethiopian ciiizenship rather than residence. 27. Also in line with the program, the NBE’s weekly foreign exchange auctions moved from a retail to a wholesale format in September 1998. The minimum bid was raised from US.SlO,OOO to US%500,000, and participation was restricted to large importers and commercial banks. Other importers now buy foreign exchange directly from banks, and an interbank foreign exchange market has begun operating alongside the auction, albeit with limited transactions so far (averaging USS1.3 million a week during the six weeks ended in mid-April 1999). The official exchange rate of the birr against the U.S. dollar is the marginal rate determined in the weekly auctions. As noted in the policy framework paper (EBD/98/98; 9/29/98, para. 34), phased development of an interbank foreign exchange market is ultimately expected to permit replacement of the auction trading of foreign exchange. However, during the transition period, the current “Dutch” system of foreign exchange auctions may give rise to a multiple currency practice in the event spreads on foreign exchange selling rates (which vary among successfIr bidders) exceed 2 percent.” The staff raised with the authorities the possibility of taking the steps necessary to permit Ethiopia’s acceptance of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4 of the Fund’s Articles of Agreement. The authorities are keeping the matter under consideration, but no decision is expected in the near &rture. 28. Besides the reduction in import tariffs, nontariff trade barriers were also streamlined in 1998199, and there was a relaxation in export price verification (now conducted ex post and moved from the NBE to the commercial banks). Import licenses are granted liberally, and the responsibility for compliance by traders was shifted from the NBE to the commercial banks in August 1998. There are no import quotas or bans in place. Other nontariff barriers include the state monopoly on petroleum imports, as well as price and quality preferences for domestic input suppliers of exporters, the relaxation of which by end- I998 was delayed pending the introduction of a duty drawback system, as discussed above. Ethiopia has reduced duties on imports from its partners under the Common Market ofEastern and Southern Africa (COMESA) by only 10 percent, and has so far not established a timetable for joining the COMESA free trade area, which is to be established in October 2000. B. Structural Reforms 29. Besides the financial sector and exchange system reforms mentioned earlier, the authorities have continued to carry out important initiatives to improve public sector operations, foster ‘I Since the inception of the weekly wholesale foreign exchange auction, the weekly spread between the highest and lowest successtirl bids has averaged 0.3 percent and, since mid- September 1998, has ranged from O-l.3 percent (i.e., less than 2 percent). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 19- export growth and private sector development, and encourage foreign direct investment (see Box l).‘* There are currently some 160 nonfmanciai public enterprises, ofwhich 120 are expected to be privatized over the next few years. The authorities saw the privatization program developed jointly with the World Bank as broadly on course, and planned to issue tenders for the next round of asset sales comprising 24 firms by September 1999. The next tranche of divestitures would include breweries and food companies, tanneries, textile mills and garment factories, and an engineering firm, and the following one would include tea and coffee plantations and a number of marketing organizations. Looking ahead, the staff noted that an acceleration of privatization would increase the role of market forces in the economy, and as such underpin other initiatives to liberalize markets and promote exports. 30. In January 1999, the authorities introduced an export credit guarantee facility, which would require banks to subsidiie noncoffee exporters by up to 2.5 percentage points below the current lending rate in exchange for an NBE guarantee; the CBE has pledged up to US$30 million for this facility. The staff expressed concern over the potential contingent liabilities of the NBE arising from the extension of guarantees; to date, no transactions under the facility have taken place. An Export Promotion Agency established in September 1998 is expected to begin operating shortly. The authorities have also taken steps to facilitate urban and rural land leases (especially through close cooperation between the federal and regional governments for certain investment projects), and are reviewing options for joint ventures in telecommunications and energy. They noted that the telecommunications utility would need more time to complete its ongoing expansion and restructuring program before entering into a foreign partnership. The authorities added that delays in privatizing the Calub Gas Company (which might have triggered interest in thermal power generation) and in reaching agreement with Ethiopia’s riparian partners on utilization ofNile basin waters have to date discouraged formation ofjoint ventures with the state-owned power utility. C. Medium-Term Outlook 31. The staffs update of the medium-term scenario is premised on maintenance of prudent financial policies, an acceleration of structural reforms, and an early end to the current hostilities with Eritrea, although there are considerable downside risks if these hostilities were to continue. After declining in 1998199 and 1999/2000, the terms of trade would start to show modest improvements in 2000/01. Under these conditions, Ethiopia could again experience strong growth, at a rate of about 6 percent a year during the period 1999/2000-2003104. Foreign saving would stay relatively high as a return to peace would reassure donors about the prospects for pursuing broad reforms and macroeconomic stability. Domestic saving would increase in relation to GDP by about 5-6 percentage points, with public saving rising by 3 points as a result of I2 For details on the civil service reform and privatization programs, see Sections III and IV of the companion Selected Issues paper. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 20 - improvements in tax revenue and a rollback in defense spending. Private saving would also rise as a result of a tinther push to liberalise the economy in general and, in particular, to increase the availability of domestic savings instruments brought on by a more dynamic financial sector. 32. Gross domestic investment would rise from 18% of GDP in 1998/99 to 24 percent in 2003/04, with about one-half of the increase coming from the public sector. Implementation of the SDPs especially for roads and energy as envisaged in the recent PER would result in a sizable increase in public investment. This would help to create an environment conducive to rising private investment and technology transfers, especially in agriculture, telecommunications, and power generation that would be translated into important productivity gains. Over the longer term. education and health SDPs would bring broad-based improvements to social conditions and build human capital that would make it possible to sustain these productivity gains 33. Underlying the medium-term growth outlook is a baseline 4 I scenario for the balance of payments that hinges on a strong rebound in coffee export volumes in 1999/2000 (to the 1997/98 level) and moderate growth thereafter (3-4 percent a year), high-single-digit increases in noncoffee export volumes (including nontraditional exports such as light manufactures, horticulture products, and minerals), and a drop in military imports from current levels, as well as the t terms-of-trade .‘. 2 - .’ ‘. ; ‘. D - *~lnc,. &kid tranrfus, I, revisal prcjectim i : .~~~~~~~~~~~ .I2 revised projectian Farces: Ethiopian Uhaitics: and Fund sticstimatss and projections, ‘Original pmjcction firm EBs/98/169(9/28/98); for fiscal year mded July7. improvements. Food imports would also decline gradually in relation to GDP, in the wake of the productivity gains in agriculture mentioned earlier. Foreign borrowing would continue to take place on highly concessional terms, and the overall balance of payments would improve markedly starting in 2000/01, on the basis of the effective implementation of the 1997 Paris Club agreement covering 1997-99 and a stock-of-debt operation in 1999/2000, with comparable treatment for Russia and non-Paris Club creditors, Table 7 presents sensitivity analyses corresponding to possible shocks, including deviations from the baseline assumptions about coffee export prices and volumes and on oil import prices. Ethiopia: External Current Account Balance, 1992/93-2003/04’ 1 J Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-21- D. Other Issues Poverty and environmental issues Despite very favorable crop yields during the long (Meher) harvest season, the absence of rains during the short (Belg) harvest season has created a food security emergency in the Wollo region and other parts of the Ethiopian highlands. As discussed in Box 4, the government has appealed to donors and nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) for food aid for an estimated 5 million vulnerable persons, some of whom have also been affected by the war. While the government continues to improve overall food security and disseminate improved farming techniques, fertilizers, and pesticides, malnutrition is still pervasive. The major environmental problems facing Ethiopia (land degradation, inadequate or unsafe water supply, and poor sanitation) tend to fall disproportionately on the poor. In 1999/2000, the government is expected to embark on a donor- sponsored food security SDP, which together with the other SDPs would help address major deficiencies in the delivery of social services (Appendix IV). The aim over the period 1997-2002 is to substantially increase average life expectancy at birth from 43 years in 1997, reduce the maternal mortality rate from 500-700 (per 100,000 live births) to 450-500, and lower infant mortality from 1 lo-128 to 90-95 (also per 100,000 live births).” Similarly, immunization coverage for diphtheria, polio, and tetanus would be increased from 67 percent to 70-80 percent. Statistical issues 34. Progress continues to be made in improving and expanding the statistical database for Ethiopia, but many shortcomings persist (described in Appendix V). On money and banking statistics, the NBE has reduced the lag in reporting the monthly monetary survey to one month, and implemented the main recommendations of the May 1998 STA technical assistance mission. However, till reconciliation of monthly monetary and fiscal accounts with respect to the government’s domestic financing position has yet to be Lilly achieved. Improvements have been made in the timeliness and coverage of data on public finances, balance of payments, and national income accounts. Further work is needed to reduce reporting lags of up to three months for the national consumer price index (CPI), improve external debt management to facilitate reconciliation with creditor data, and expand the use of survey data in compiling the national income accounts and balance of payments, particularly for invisibles and the capital account. The authorities have begun to review the methodology for computing the national CPI and have requested STA technical assistance for that purpose. 35. Against this broadly positive trend, in recent months the authorities have reduced the coverage and frequency of information released to Fund staff regarding (i) general and federal government accounts and the composition of public spending (particularly social and defense I3 See the preliminary I-UPC Initiative document (EBS/98/173, Rev. 1; 10/29/98) Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 22 - Box 4. Poverty and Environmental Issues Poverty Ethiopia’s population is estimated at about 60 million persons, of which more than halfare younger than 20 years, reflecting high birth rates and low lie expectancy. With an annual per capita income of around USSIlO and 80 percent of its population living on less than USSl a day, Ethiopia remains one of the poorest countries in the world. Despite vmions “I- introdnccd in recent years to improve social welfare, health standards are extremely low. even when Ethiopia’s low-income stahls is taken into account (Appendix IV). A pressing health problem is malnutrition, particularly in nual areas. A study by the Central Statistical Authority has shown that the incidence of wasting (abnormally low weight) and stunting (abnormally low height) for children under 6 years is among the highest in the world (affecting 11 percent and 65 percent of all children in 1995/96). Malnutrition has been tied to the &ects on vulnerable groups of infectious diseases, recurrent droughts, conflicts (including B prolonged civil war in the 1980s and early 1990s and, more recently, the war with Eritres), and-importantly- low agricultural yields stemming from outdated pmdwtion technologies and limited use of fatiliiers and pesticides. Both chronic food tnsecurity asscciated with low living standards and fmnsitory insecurity, resulting t?om drought, displacement, and refugee idows, are severe. To improve food security, the government announced in 1994 its objectives of doubling per capita income over the next 15 years and narrowing the food gap within five years through an a~cultural development program based on diffusion of simple, already available technologies. High and sustainable agricultural growth will require upgrading farming practices and continuing the dissemination of fatiliis and improved seeds. Recently, the food supply sihlation has worsened as inadequate short season (Belg) rains in the first half of 1999 have created serious food shortages in the Wollo region and other pats of the country. The start of the main rainy season in July, while helping boost crops. could complicate the distribution of food aid by hampering road access ta needy areas. To avoid a food shortage, Ethiopia has made an international appeal for 360,000 tons of food aid for some 5 million people, including an estimated 390.000 displaced by war. On June 4. 1999. the UN World Food Program approved a USS40.5 million emergency operation to feed 1.2 million Ethiopians. The operation is expected to run corn June to December and provide more than 100,ooO tons of emergency food to the most vulnerable segments offhe population (such as pregnant and nursing mothers. children under 5 years, the disabled, and the elderly). Other focxi aid is expected to cane fium the European Union (EU), the United States, Canada, Denmark, and other donors and nongovemmental organizations. Ethiopia faces serious environmental problems, including land degradation. lack of a safe water supply, and poor sanitation and inadequate housing in the cities. In addressing these issues, domestic environmental policy is coordinated by the Environmental Protection Agency, whose work has been complemented by donor-supported projects in other .sreas. For example, the World Bank has sought to forestall land degradation by helping increase agricultural output through the National Fertilixr and the Seed System Development Projects. In addition, the United Nations Development Program and the EU have provided support to improve urban and rural water supply. Moreover. the Netherlands recently agreed on an environmental support project that will assist with the water supply master plan for the entire countxy. Finally, efforts to address urban environmental problems are being linked to measures to enhance potable water and sanitation services. outlays); and (ii) monetary and foreign reserve statistics. The staff urged the authorities to maintain fidl and timely data disclosure in keeping with the transparency expected from all member countries, adding that the detailed reporting standards agreed at the inception of a Fund arrangement should, at a minimum, be adhered to during the life of the arrangement. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 23 - Iv. STAFP .&PRAISAL 36. Over the past two years, Ethiopia has continued to make important strides in its transition to a market-based economy and has succeeded in keeping its tradition of responsible macroeconomic management, despite the shocks created by heavy terms-of-trade losses, adverse weather conditions, and the outbreak of war with Eritrea. Economic policies were broadly satisfactory in 1997/98, despite some delay in introducing structural reforms, and the authorities have demonstrated resolve in adhering to the 1998/99 program supported by the second annual ESAF arrangement, as evidenced by observance of most program benchmarks and performance criteria to date and implementation of the great bulk of reforms envisaged in the program. 37. Economic activity rebounded in 1998/99, inflation has been kept in the low single digits, and more scope has been given to market determination of interest rates and the exchange rate as part of the fbuvrciai market and exchange system liberalization package. This has been supported by initiatives to improve public sector operations, divest public enterprises, liberalize the investment code, and promote exports. Moreover, despite the fiscal pressures created by the war, the government largely succeeded in protecting the recurrent component of social spending-an important plank of its poverty alleviation strategy. 38. Against these broadly positive trends, the Ethiopian authorities continue to face daunting challenges, given the country’s very low per capita income and limited institutional capacity. The war has also imposed heavy human and economic costs, which will be compounded by future additional costs of rehabilitation, demobilization, and resettlement. Moreover, the terms .of trade are projected to decline tiuther in 1999/2000, with no subsequent major reversal in prospect over the medium term. 39. Fiscal discipline, notwithstanding the current spending pressures and the unfavorable external environment, and paying due regard to protecting core outlays, must be the top government priority in the period ahead. The authorities have expressed willingness to review the 1999/2000 budget in the context of further program discussions that are expected to resume in the near future. On the basis of the limited information it has been provided, the staff believes that prompt actions are needed to keep the general government deficit through 2000/01 within the broad parameters envisaged at the inception of the ESAF arrangement. Ethiopia will also need to work closely with the donor community to secure an adequate flow of concessional resources to finance the program. 40. Achieving sound fiscal results, while making room for the further reduction in import tariffs that is envisaged and minimizing recourse to extraordinary nontax receipts, will require a far-reaching effort to bolster domestic tax collections through a combination of new revenue measures and further substantial improvements in tax administration. On the expenditure side, it will be important to adopt the recommendations of the Bank’s recent PER aimed at enhancing implementation of strategic sectoral development programs (SDPs), tailoring the duration of these Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 24 - programs to the availability of foreign and domestic resources, and t%rther strengthening expenditure management and control. Of course, the government’s ability to execute the SDPs, even at the slower pace proposed by the PER, would be greatly facilitated by a return of defense spending over time to the levels envisaged in the ESAF arrangement (2-3 percent of GDP a year). 41. Fiscal consolidation would help the monetary authorities in continuing to aim at low inflation, while making room for adequate credit expansion to the private sector and a tinther buildup of foreign reserves. Ensuring the soundness of the financial system and increasing competition also need to rank high on the policy agenda. Every effort should be made to promptly initiate the CBE audit so as to pave the way for an improvement in its operations and private equity participation at a subsequent stage. The NBE’s supervisory and regulatory role also needs to be strengthened. While the increase in the minimum capital requirement of commercial banks is a welcome step toward putting the domestic banking system on a stronger footing, the staff would encourage the authorities to advance their plans for permitting entry of foreign banks, in the interest of increasing competition and upgrading the quality and range of financial services in Ethiopia. 42. As noted earlier, the government has shown determination in carrying out its structural reform plan. This augurs well for the adoption of further reforms required to increase the role of markets and private activity, permit rapid sustained growth, and thus improve living standards and alleviate poverty. In this regard, accelerating privatization, expediting joint ventures with the state-owned energy and telecommunication utilities, broadening the range of productive sectors open to foreign direct investment, and intensifying efforts to create a more business-friendly legal and regulatory environment would set the stage for a lasting increase in growth. 43. The authorities’ efforts to upgrade and expand the statistical database are welcome, including further improvements in the compilation of the national CPI and money and banking statistics with Fund technical assistance. Further progress is also needed in other areas, especially to broaden the coverage and reduce the reporting lag of fiscal, balance of payments, and national income accounts, fully reconcile the public sector’s domestic bank borrowing with the monetary accounts, and improve external debt management to facilitate reconciliation with creditor data. Beyond these specific improvements, the authorities are urged to resume Ml and timely reporting to the Fund of all the available data, especially in the fiscal and monetary areas, that are relevant for monitoring Ethiopia’s economic performance. 44. Ethiopia eliminated most restrictions on the making of payments and transfers for currettt international transactions in September 1998, except the remaining restrictions arising Born limits on availability of foreign exchange for the making of payments for holiday travel maintained pursuant to Article XIV, Section 2, and the requirement ofEthiopian citizenship for access to foreign exchange to cover education expenses abroad. The staff encourages the authorities to eliminate these restrictions as soon as possible. Also, the Dutch system of foreign exchange auction, which remains in place in the transition toward a fully functioning interbank foreign exchange market, at times has given rise to a multiple currency practice subject to Fund approval Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-25 - under Article VIII, Section 3 because the spreads between the various selling exchange rates during the weekly auctions conducted by the NBE may exceed 2 percent 45. In sum, Ethiopia has continued to demonstrate resolve in preserving economic tindamentals and deepening reforms, and it has coped reasonably well thus far with the economic dislocations created by the war and other exogenous shocks. However, the recent decline in public sector saving and the related weakening in the external accounts need to be reversed by prompt fiscal actions (starting with the 1999/2000 budget), which also would create the basis for higher donor flows. Fiscal consolidation should be accompanied by a greater role for markets in the economy and an acceleration of supporting reforms to raise productivity and improve delivery of social services, all of which should help raise Ethiopia’s living standards more rapidly. 46. It is proposed that the next Article IV consultation with Ethiopia be held on the standard 1Zmonth cycle. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 26 - The following draft decision is proposed for adoption by the Executive Board: 1. The Fund takes this decision relating to Ethiopia’s exchange measures subject to Article VIII, Sections 2(a) and 3, and in concluding the 1999 Article XlV with Ethiopia, in the light of the 1999 Article IV consultation with Ethiopia, conducted under Decision 5392-(77/63) adopted April 29, 1977, as amended (Surveillance over Exchange Rate Policies). 2. Ethiopia maintains a restriction on the making of payments and transfers for current international transactions described in SM/99/166, in accordance with Article XIV, Section 2, in the form of a limitation imposed on the availability of foreign exchange for the making of payments for holiday travel. Ethiopia also maintains an exchange restriction arising from the limitation on the availability of foreign exchange to Ethiopian residents who are not Ethiopian citizens for education abroad, which is subject to approval under Article VIII, Section 2(a), and multiple currency practices arising from (a) a spread of more than two percent between different buying rates at the weekly wholesale foreign exchange auctions conducted by the National Bank of Ethiopia, and (b) from the requirement that residents surrender ninety percent of their foreign exchange at the marginal exchange rate observed at the weekly wholesale auction, : which are subject to approval under Article VIII, Section 3. The Fund: (9 encourages Ethiopia to eliminate the measure maintained under Article XIV, Section 2, as soon as its balance of payments position permits, and Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 27 - (ii) in the circumstances of Ethiopia, approves the retention of the multiple currency practice arising Corn the operation of the weekly wholesale auction until the completion of the next Article IV consultation with Ethiopia or the expiration of one year from the date of this Decision, whichever is earlier, and (iii) urges Ethiopia to eliminate the exchange restriction and the multiple currency practice arising from the surrender requirement that are subject to approval under Article VIII, Section 2(a) and 3, respectively. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicFigure 1. Ethiopia: Selected Economic Indicators, 1995/96-2001/02’ Real GDP (Annual percentage change) LZ ..:: “.. :. _, , E*‘augriedm, .‘:f’; .: : :I .p:::.., ‘.:,: .:. 10 -2 1 1995196 Lo%‘97 199119% 199sm ,999mw 2mloicl 2001/02 6 4 2 0 -2 -4 -6 -8 -10 Saving and Investment Behavior percent of GDP) Co”rumeI Prices (Annual !xrcentage change) Paid wuags /’ v /- /’ .- / Endo*pe¶iod . . c .:. .;:,,:,.;,;: . . . . . . . . . . . 4 ‘:::j:,:. ., .:‘.” * ::1 .:.:::::..:..:: ..:: ,,:... ~~~* .jj:l::/,:.::).~.::.::/.:’ /:..; ::.., .:,:,. i::~::+$ . ..‘. ..,;.y::: :.:.... :.:..:... :: .:.::::j: :.:::.:: .,.. ..:>, .;::..:.,r,:::::,j:.. .-4 -5 8 10 ,99x96 195697 199,198 199sm 1999/2ooo 2000/01 *003/02 Balance of Payments2 *- 6 - 4 2 - 0 - -2 . -4. -6 - 4 c-t .cc.nml tul&lcc (includii o&id tmmks) -4 : .: .:::.: I:.:.:::::.:.: ..,,. :, .::: :.:. ..,.... .:..:.:. -‘~~ /,:+ .: :,) ,.:. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicFigure 1. Ethiopia: Selected Economic Indicators, 1995/96-2001/02’ (concluded) Fiscal Accounts Money and Credit (In pcrcmt of GDP) (Annual perc~mtagc changes) Mmsy .nd Credit (Cbangn in pwznl of bcgit&g-of+ad broad money) 15995m Is%97 1997198 1998199 ,5w2m *wol 200,,02 Sources: Ethiopian authorities; and staff cstimatcs and projections. interest Rates, 1993194.199W9 (Percent per BMUIII; at end of period) zz-=--- _:; ‘. T,emry bill rattc -\ ‘. c _ _ _ _ _ _ - * WWbillS. d auCh”) v .,I I 2 1993194 ,994/91 1995,5x ,9%97 IW7/98 1998/99 ‘Beginning 1997198, all data pertain lo the period July E-July 7; prior to that, fiscal snd manetary data MVC~ p~ricd J+ g-July 7, and all other datl the period July I-June 30. Shaded am indicates projections. 2Cumt account blmcc and coffee exports in percenf of GDP, aad gross official ICSSXVCS in months of impom of gmds and nonfactor services. ‘Change in percent oi h;gir&g-of-period broad money. ‘includes credit to the private sector. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public55 50 45 40 35 -3o- Figure 2. Ethiopia: Exchange Rate Devdopmts Trade-Weighti Exchange Rates, January 19%April1999’ (Indices, 1990=100) 55 Real effective a- - * *-_. *-.* excllange rate s I. s*. ‘. --. -. ----- - 50 ..*-. ’ . -._..... . -...- -_. ..* *. .-_.*----’ . . . . .- *. --. ,’ . . . * - 45 Nominal effective - 40 exchange rate n 35 1996 1997 1998 1999 8.5 8.0 7.5 7.0 6.5 . . Prrauel rate *. . . . _. *. - I Birrper U.S. Dollar Rates, January 19%June 1999’ @Id of period) Sources: IMF, h&m&m Notice System; National Bank of Ethiopia; and staff estimates. 8.5 8.0 7.5 6.0 ‘The marginal rate at the last foreign exchange auction each month conducted by the National Bank of Ethiqia since. May 1993; also the oficial rate 2Par&l market rate through May 1999 only. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public14 12 10 8 6 Figure 3. Ethiopia: Interest Rate Developments, January 1998-June 1999 (Percent per annum; at end of month) - I _ “. x I - x I I Lending rate (maximum) Y 6 x ?, ,, ” _ p _1 x ” _I .~ n ” I I ,< I _ _ * m n ?, > ” ” ” - * % .z .* I _ %” * ” ,, ” ., Lending rate (minimnm) Time deposit rate (12-m&h)’ ,---------w--e ____- -----~----__---_ ,’ Savings deposit rate2 ,// ‘:..;,* .:$ :.:*<.. ::..*.~.._., ,..., &/’ “X Treasury bill yield (91 day bills; at auction) ,.::.* ‘“:.- ,.:...- <,.~“. .(‘, /^ ^...lj ..,.... i . i... i ..j..... iili ,..,,..,.....,. _ _I_* .a Jan. 98 Feb Mar Apr May Jm Jui Aug Sep Ott Nov Dee Jan. 99 Feb Mar Apr May Jnn Source: National Bank of Ethiopia. 14 12 10 8 ‘Maximum rate offered on time deposits of less than Br 100,000, kfinimum savings deposit rate. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 32 - T8blC I. lza+. -Banchcd*dd I- w9yw-mlw’ 6.3 3.7 2.6 18.2 7.6 106 .>I’) :.: -3 9 -8.4 I*., 11.7 t: 255 II’) i.: -69 .1.9 .6.8 3.9 1.7 1.1 29.0 I.,., 44.3 91 z.: 11.0 9.2 II.8 -II9 43 :: -II IP.2 II.4 I.0 ,“; 11.7 II, .E -26 -1.9 :z a4 26 I ,446 w.0 :.: 1.3 18.6 7.1 11.1 -14.1 .I 1 4 I -1.6 -94 19.0 12.1 53 :.; MD :: .47 4.3 4, I.3 1.0 1.3 18 6 141.4 61 I 9.3 6.1 3.0 2lb 1;; -121 4.3 47 -3 9 -8 6 19.4 140 :i If.* 13.9 12.1 0.0 -6.1 .1.2 -6.1 1.2 33 *:.: IU.1 JJ.0 :.: ,;.: i.4 11.0 .I.., .I., -,.I -19 -100 82 ta.2 44 I.5 260 156 I05 .i.i -2.9 -5.9 2.9 1.2 2 ,479 6o.B u”nillicmlofU s dd,ollul.lullru camwiwrgci6ed, 4.4 4,. -4w -179 .4x II* 505 4% 672 519 2.7 IS.7 2 1:: :: 2::: 5343 4lPlS 48.92;” 4;:: 53.6,: ,,.a,: 6.16 7.33 2 14 6% 312 IE IE 11.3 I.1 -1.1 4.3 fi 1:: 11 ,a* 6.3 3.9 n6 IO5 110 .12.1 40 -5 3 -,.I .I 4 19, I45 4.3 *:: 13.6 I,., 0.0 .7.2 .x.2 -7.1 1.2 1.6 4.4 a, ,425 361 -219 7% *:: ,9,,2: :: I, 19 314 1,:: 21 ,.A*7 :.: O.! :; I% 10.2 1.6 6.2 5.2 1.0 10.1 1.9 11.9 -14.6 -5 I 4.9 .I 7 -9 6 10.1 151 ..I *:.z 155 11.1 0.0 -6.2 -1.1 -6.2 :: *ii II.5 40.1 .x* 702 ,:.: ,823; 6.0 :: 616 136 ,.E 1.8 lSIl :; I4 :: .ol 11.1 11.1 1.6 :.: 2: 9.4 Il.5 -3.6 .I.! -5 I -3 9 -94 20.2 15.1 I.9 2; I,. !I7 .:; -4.0 4 9 :.i .(I 1 II, ,426 221 2 2:: d Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 1. Ethiopia Pclformancc cntcnr an.4 Rcnchmrk UDdcr the Second Annual ESAF Anangcmcnt qLa”,iwvc pcrfomlvltc I‘rhrria and bcnchk (cumu,a,i”c change from my 7, 19%) NC, dmmllk YSLU Of&C b”ktig wtm 12,811 Nd Chhs .a” Lbc g.oc”I &wmmonf by the b”kfng ryrrm 9.m 12,891 777 9.372 ~51 807.1 -II.2 0.0 0.0 I.auuu Seplemk 30. ,998 DIumbcr 31. ,998 DCCCrnb” 31. 1998 DScr”lk, 3,. 19B -krll. ,998 hmr 30, ,979 263 YeA -393 Yes 196 Yes ‘00 Yes 00 Yts BCnchmvk PdOmvncs cricrim BCOCbmark Pcrfomwcs mlcnon Prqedd non.projs~t-rrlmd lOam .“d pnb psI”P thwb tic gcncd gO”-cnt LdSl (in MlhS Ofburl 276 (in millio”5iafU.S dd!ssl 39 0 145 .I31 *oo -19.0 610 148 At.62 827 591 -235 1.m 86.2 198 -664 116.9 IJ.0 41.9 115.9 ‘No new *cm will be accumul~tsd during tbc mum elk amnsmmt (cxrludiog arrcm on dck tit is cipnd IO t-z rubjcd to mshcduhg n a rfocbof&bt option) ‘Excluder rbart-tcrm vnpon “rdiu. long-arm fullnctig optionr o,EtbkQim Aidincr. 2nd. vhcrc mccrsmy, lams for rbe mfmuna~ dCii.hi debt Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 34 - T.bk 3. Ethic.+ Bdmce 0fP.ymmls, Iwsl96-2wIm’~’ (In million8 of U.S. Mlm, urksr otknvile idicdd) 199s.96 199&m 199,198 ,99&w l999!2OW 1wm IOOlm2 mimed Raised Pmpn kvid P,+dnn EBW169 rrtLn.fe EBsm!M pmjc”tia” .m -594 4.003 410 213 117 -1.411 -II5 -1.191 139 44 -84 705 111 392 166 -21 116 211 -ll9 46 -72 187 -36 36 43 -MO -219 0 0 0 21* .I33 152 0 901 6.6 -3.4 -9.5 36.1 -ml 456 -804 199 351 244 -w3 -m .1.171 133 .a. -12 481 1% *I6 7.9 44 25 161 .I16 -174 M 45 72 a001 wo1 159 3% 121 2, *I 0 -191 20 22 0 584 02 -3.6 -7.1 42.7 536 -486 -87.0 610 110 199 -IA30 -245 -,.,a4 12, -71 -1o* 533 7.83 250 -132 .132 -164 175 -131 -21 49 0 -Ied 168 25 I.5 II2 -4 0 4 -120 304 19 Ll 412 2.9 .x7 -7.6 15.0 -292 -5*2 -917 ta* .m 181 4,519 -246 -1211 139 -91 -101 578 317 x1 -152 -202 -193 119 -,,3 -7.1 I I IO 444 444 20 MI 171 .4 0 4 -I15 386 39 0 412 2.7 41 -8.4 443 -m -12 -901 176 31 *,a -1.114 434 -IZkl II7 -54 .7* I,, *97 114 -131 -I34 -132 318 -490 -I 23 0 .418 118 44 4.3 93 13 40 7 0 -1.202 I.680 0 JO5 3.1 4.3 4.2 ea.0 474 41, -1,011 494 279 21s .I.,09 -186 -1323 92 .63 42 611 312 239 -117 .I17 -XI 7.29 40 -25 59 M 0 492 192 *a .I -14 I, 20 7 *I 09 39 0 116 2.8 -1.7 -9.4 61.1 .360 -610 -1F41 I** z -1.173 -2,s 4311 II, .8X -107 654 184 169 -II4 -III -7x4 161 464 .2J IO 61 0 4,. 171 -9s -90 -133 39 II 11 0 -1.631 6.079 116 519 3.6 -1.7 -10.0 M.8 -3,s -61, 4.087 571 31. 258 -lb59 -2x -1w 131 -77 -109 614 am *72 90 90 I 302 JO, .I 12 61 0 -265 265 -110 -110 -,a II 30 14 0 0 1% 231 702 1.3 -,.I -9.6 11.2 -,.I63 61 336 300 -1.799 -248 -I>511 IS, 6, 843 ..I -5.3. -9.4 12.6 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 35 - T.bk 4. miop*: Ornerd 0wemme.a t rmdgsur/ opmtiom. 1994m.1998/99’.’ (I” milh”, Of bin, ,994.m ,5%96 159&m 1991198 1998.w Eshu* EIumtcd Revised Pmg’am RCtid Pdnmnne Es.9eJ169 C”lNlc EBsmi169 pm,ccnan IO Fehzry I ok; Cap,“, E.pldilW. 0,WhCh Lhmullul,y 6”urrd nn krdmca cap,3 tduonon Hclllh c¶h”, Cmsnc&oofdo~dek~cndo,pclicd) GDP .t~“mtmnketper~, Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-36- EBs198/169 utimtc EBS&69 pmjd~n lof&My7’ Nmm; rerenua *ddil!oNi, .n-~ P.r.tiaon raipu craw TOY, exqmdmm .d w lmdin, Cvmlnpndim w.*cl a-d .IlOl.“Eel ,e”cl”di”g mi,iYy v’pu an.3 lhics, Odl Ud rmrcl @ul”di”, dliwy equipment, Lntaulwmmu E”mNl ,schddco rznmdr SVbidlu Pcnliml SdaY ml mta”reI 0th C.Pi”I npendil”re O,“hkh c”mi tdMu Domestic DnMW bdur.’ MiEtwy cipcndi;um SC&I ryadil”re RIIVmnl Edwamn HcBllb Od C.pl”I Ed”drn ,Leah 0th”’ thr, ML ofdmncdudobi (and dpaiod, Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 37 - Tsbk 6. Ethiopia: MDacUly suvsy. 1997-w ,997 ,998 ,999 ,u,y7 Mu*,, ,“I”, September 10 DIrrnlbcr II Much,, April0 July I E%bmlle R.z.iSd Fmprm Actual Pmpm *enI Program Edrn.tr F.sbNlc Praram RWi!zd EBSmY169 pmjectim No, rMeipn alxll(in million, 0‘U.S. dolhrr, Net foreign a,* (I, pragmn ‘.hn*e nu, NC, foreign UIU (d CY”mt “xchmy~ R1C) tiltboa, Bank ofEtbiopl~ AssaJ Lilbili6Cl cc.Tmxrcia, M;r O,VhYh Net SIe”l on F..*un bank AIM Lmbili6rr NC, domulr .sxu (including ralvltion *djumnent) (txchding “sl”.don djummmt, rJomc* ncdlt aaim, 0” gwMmnm, (“at,’ Naio”*l Bti ombiopia co-Ul bank‘ Cllirn. on oh. IEUIrs NhO”d Bank ofElhiaL* co-till btil olhv itcrm mrg Net foreign u* National Brnl: 0fE9hi.+ co-Cid b* 711.5 I.469 1.x* 3.727 1.231 13,191 19.641 9,321 10.321 461 9.$18 -6.014 19.060 io,%*B 4.675 l.l.lB 6.153 8,232 -1.1 .>I., 24.1 X.1 l8.l 1h.8 21.3 II.0 6.9 22.1 11.912 11.2 32.5 8126 1.761 2,on 3.72~ 1,213 13.661 IP.719 9.086 IO.663 461 10,191 .6.089 19.111 11,018 1.84 1,118 6,217 8,344 lPd.7 5.6M 1.963 7.72. 3.878 -1.114 1,239 1,213 1L98 -1.660 12.576 12,241 18.936 8L% 7.405 L.490 IO.MI 9.:: 4.689 18,210 I5,Dli IO.619 S.Oli 1,037 I.648 3.147 7.m 6.191 919 836.1 5.927 2.200 3,7*7 1,233 14,112 20.266 9,162 11.104 102~ -6,x*4 *o,om I1.501 5,103 1.148 6,402 8,564 121.9 1.146 5.736 2.508 3.147 -1.039 1.228 1,233 1Lpo -I.M?. 13.537 12.947 20,157 9.181 8238 IZU 11.016 46J 10.611 .,.a0 18.6%3 11.348 10.940 1.172 I.037 1.169 3.063 7.70 6.80, 911 862.3 6,113 V86 3.176 -I.IPI 3,727 I.n, 14.425 20,184 9.191 11,391 ,o.z: -6,IJP 20.13* I I.470 I.038 1,148 6,412 9,069 781.6 1.w 1,971 wn -I.050 1.18. 1.233 IwdI I3IW 20,266 9,191 11.015 m.:: .6,P1 19.196 16.026 I I.189 5.395 I.031 6.094 3.236 8,107 7.041 L.Ot.2 7.3 .*a 15.7 IO.3 Ii.1 IO.5 11.6 9.3 6.2 6.8 13.1 17.403 41.3 33.9 115.8 J.5 .,x.5 11.1 11.2 IX 10.1 14.4 10.8 7.6 IS.3 18.27, 43.0 33.; 9.2 17.2 3.1 I.5 I.8 8.0 7.7 3.9 1.7 :.“, 11.,n 4I.S 38.0 116.9 4.1 -1.6 -5.0 no 19.8 31.0 11.9 17.1 15.6 19.0 18,921 42.7 34:; II 23.9 -ll.8 104 15.6 27.1 7.1 1.1 8.3 :.i 11.121 41.6 ma 489.1 -8.4 1.2 -I.., 11.1 19.9 31.3 11.6 6.1 1.8 6.1 6.2 Il.646 41.4 18.3 449.0 I.4 II.5 0.0 1x7 93 -1.9 20.4 II.0 I.8 19.9 I WPO a.2 *.I, 32.5 .,.(I 0.4 -..I 29 71 .I.9 15.9 :.: :: .I&519 41 1 r.57 38.0 126.1 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 38 - Table 7. Ethiopia: Medium-Term Chllmk’ 199,198 E¶i”*tC ww99 1%9nm *cmcdO, *cam2 *002m* *c.xwM Pmjection 1994195. 1999i2cio- 1998199 2MMll Avenge RI*, GDP gm* (at facto. cost, Real ODP prC.pifP gmwlh co- price iwkx mmd .wn*e, Terms Of In& (- dctcrirntion) Fmeigo uving N.limul uving omnr cbKdc winp Flivatc Fwis Omls domtic i”“CImr”f Private Public RUDLUeS mp 8.se1hic b.ll”W 0lp.ymc.b EXpoRI, k.b coflrc NooColIcC Impm. c.i.f Mcrehuldilr mdc bhllsc cwrmt accaml tdurc (erchding of&id mnrfcn) EXpm. L0.b. colfec NLWCOIXC Impnu. Eif M&ndk ti Lu!Mu cm1 .wlunt tdmc=. (cxcludh* omsisl mnlfm) AItcR.tfW ShockI to babce dp.ym.0 scrnmh *: Annual rue cd gr‘nvth dcdke capl “Ohmc lDIyn by me prcmu*e pin, (199912caD-2003/04, . -0.5 -3.2 3.7 18.7 8.4 9.8 6.3 3.7 2.6 18.2 7.6 10.6 -11.9 602 420 182 .I.519 -917 -552 9.2 6.4 *.8 23.1 -14.0 -8.4 602 -152 -8.1 ai”, in ounm &unt balance rdative 10 Lmchs (i” pIcent of GDP. dclenoriarion, 6.7 3.8 3.6 -17.2 9.4 9.2 4.5 2.2 2.3 18.6 7.1 11.5 -14.1 494 279 215 -1.509 -1.015 -613 7.6 4.3 3.3 23.1 -15.6 -9.4 494 -613 -9.4 494 -613 -9.4 1.504 -613 -9.4 5.0 2.2 3.7 -8.6 10.0 9.4 4.7 4.6 0.0 19.4 8.4 11.0 -14.7 528 :z -1,Yn -1.045 430 8.3 4.8 3.5 24.9 -16.5 -10.0 7.0 4.2 3.0 1.3 9.2 14.9 9.8 4.9 4.9 *4.1 10.3 13.8 -14.2 777 382 395 -2,142 -1,365 -7% 9.2 4.5 4.7 25.5 -16.2 -9.2 525 -63, -10.0 0.0 498 -659 -10.4 -0.5 -IS., 1,583 -642 -10.1 4.2 566 -632 -9.7 -0.1 540 -658 -10.1 -0.5 0.6 1.671 -641 -9.9 4.2 602 -687 -9.9 -0.5 1.4 1.812 -669 -9.6 -0.2 670 -742 -9.8 -0.5 1.3 1,977 -722 -9.5 -0.2 759 -792 -9.4 -0.2 739 -813 -9.7 -0.4 1.3 2.156 -792 -9.4 -0.2 5.6 2.5 3.0 3.0 7.8 10.5 6.4 5.0 1.4 18.3 7.6 10.7 -11.9 112 323 189 1.381 -ml 491 8.2 5.2 3.0 22.1 -13.9 -7.8 6.0 3.2 3.1 -0.8 9.5 12.7 7.7 4.9 2.8 12.2 9.3 12.9 -14.5 2 305 -1,827 -1,184 -579 9.0 4.7 4.2 25.5 -16.6 -9.5 634 -687 -9.6 .o.l 610 -71* -10.0 -0.5 -2J 1.840 -693 -9.7 -0.2 Sources: wliopim Whmities: and sPR~~timUc~ and pmjsstions. ‘For fiscal y”’ fhatends MY 7. %lwcrflc,, mmc annul, prcmu*e change in world coffee prices as in Ihe baselinr scmnrio. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 39 - Ethiopia: Relations with the Fund (As of May 3 1, 1999) L Membership Status: Joined: 12/27/45; Article XIV II. General Resources Account: SDR million Percent of quota Quota 133.70 100.0 Fund Holdings of Currency 126.61 94.7 Reserve position in Fund 7.10 5.3 III. SDR Department: SDR million Percent of allocation Net cumulative allocation 11.16 100.0 Holdings 0.01 0.1 IV. Outstanding Purchases and Loans: Structural Adjustment Facility (SAF) Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility (ESAF) arrangements SDR million Percent of quota 43.07 32.2 29.49 22.1 V. Financial Arrangements: Approval Expiration Type J&i& A&&& ESAF IO/l Ii96 10122199 SAF 10128192 1 l/08/95 Stand-by Arrangement 51818 1 613 O/82 Amount Approved Amount Drawn (SDR million) (SDR million) 88.47 29.49 49.42 49.42 67.50 67.50 APPENDIX I VI. Projected Obligations to Fund: (SDR Million; based on existing use of resources and. present holdings of SDRs): Overdue Forthcomine: 513 l/99 1999 m Jo&l JoJg 2003 Principal 0.0 3.5 9.9 9.9 12.8 10.0 Charges/interest 0.0 0.6 0.7 0.6 0.6 0.5 Total 0.0 4.1 10.6 10.5 13.4 10.5 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 40 - APPENDIX I VII. Exchange Rate Arrangement Effective July 25, 1995, Ethiopia unified its official exchange rate with the weekly auction- determined rate for the birr (Br). On July 3, 1999, the marginal auction rate was Br 8.121 =US%l. VIII. Article IV Consultations Ethiopia is on the standard 12-month consultation cycle. At the conclusion of the 1997 Article IV consultation discussions on November 21, 1997 (W/97/267), the Executive Board adopted the following decision: The Fund takes this decision relating to Ethiopia’s exchange measures subject to Article WI* and in concluding the I997 Article XIV consultation with Ethiopia, in light of the I997 Article IV consultation with Ethiopia conducted under Decision No. 5392-(77/63), adopted April 29, 1977, as amended (Surveillance over Exchange Rate Policies). Ethiopia maintains restrictions on payments and transfers for current international transactions described in SM/97/267, in accordance with Article XIV, Section 2, except for the multiple currency practice arising from the National Bank of Ethiopia’s “Dutch” system of foreign exchange auctions; the exchange restriction arising from the unremunerated bid bond requirement imposed upon the purchase of foreign exchange in the auctions; and the exchange restriction arising from limitations imposed upon the transferability of balances maintained in the nonconvertible birr accounts of nonresidents, all of which are subject to approval under Article VIII. The Fund encourages Ethiopia to eliminate the measures maintained under Article XIV, Section 2, as soon as its balance of payments position permits, and urges Ethiopia to eliminate the measures that are subject to approval under Article VIII. At the conclusion of the 1998 Article XIV consultation discussions on December 18, 1998 (EBD/98/133, Supplement I), the Executive Board adopted the following decision: The Fund takes this decision in concluding the I998 Article XV consultation with Ethiopia. Ethiopia continues to maintain restrictions on the making ofpayments for I . current international transactions under the transitional arrangements ofArticle XrC: Section 2, as described in EBD/98/133, Supplement 1. The Fund encourages Ethiopia to eliminate this restriction as soon as circumstances permit. Ix. Technical Assistance (1994-present) Department Purpose INS Macroeconomic policy Time of Delivery April 1994 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4l- APPENDIX I FAD MAE FAD FAD STA MAE MAE FAD MAE BCS MAE MAE BCS MAE STA FAD MAE MAE FAD Tax policy Treasury bill auctions Tax policy Intergovernmental relations Balance of payments statistics Foreign exchange market Bank supervision Tax administration Foreign exchange market Information technology for the NBE Termination of currency unions Securities markets Follow-up on information technology for theNBE Creation of an interbank money market Money and banking statistics Tariff reform and compensating revenue measures Interbank money and foreign exchange markets Bank supervision Tax administration X. Resident Representative Mr. Ali Abdi assumed the post in May 1998. October 1994 December 1994 March 1995 October-November 1995 October-November 1995 November 1995 July 1996-April 1998 August 1996 September 1996; February-July 1997; and February 1998 November 1996 February 1997 July 1997 November 1997 March-July 1998 May-June 1998 July 1998 August 1998 August 1998-present May 1999-present , Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-42- APPENDIX II Ethiopia’: Relations with the World Bank Group (As of June 14, 1999) 47. The Bank’s broad-based strategy for Ethiopia aims at assisting the government in achieving high rates of sustained economic growth and poverty reduction. As of June 14, 1999, the Bank had 13 active credits in Ethiopia and 62 closed loans/credits. Ofthe latter, 50 were IDA credits (including a structural adjustment credit). Projects approved by the Board in FY 1998 were the Energy II Project (December 1997); Road Sector Development Program (January 1998), which supports the government’s Road Sector Investment Program (SIP); Education Sector Development Program (May 1998) which supports the Education SIP; and Agriculture Research and Training Project (June 1998). Thus far in FY 1999, the Board has approved a project supporting the Health Sector Development Program (October 1998). No other projects are expected to go to the Board for approval in this fiscal year. 48. A revised debt sustainability.analysis (DSA) was prepared jointly by government officials and the staffs of the Bank, the Fund, and the African Development Bank (AfDB) in July 1998. Subsequently, Bank and Fund stafffinaliied a preliminary decision point document for the Initiative for Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (I-IIPC), which was presented to their respective Boards in October-November 1998. Both Boards concurred that Ethiopia should be eligible for debt relief under the initiative because of its high level of indebtedness and external vulnerability. 49. The Bank is also providing significant nonlending assistance through a close policy dialogue with the government and the preparation of various studies, including an Export Development Strategy (green cover, October 1997) Implementing the Ethiopian National Policy for Women (green cover, December 1997) a Participator Poverv Assessment (white cover, June 1998), a Social Sector Note (red cover, August 1998) aReview of Public Finances (gray cover, December 1998), and a Regiondization Study (green cover, February 1999). A two-day retreat on economic policy (with participation of two Fund staff members) was held in April 1998, in which the government team was led by the Prime Minister and the Bank team by the Chief Economist/Senior Vice President. Other major activities in FY 1998 included updating the Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) and preparation of a policy note on telecommunications. Also, the World Bank Institute has several activities in the planning and implementation stage in the areas of governance and civil society participation in Ethiopia. 50. The IFC maintains an office in Addis Ababa. In September 1998, its Board approved a US%8 million investment in the Sheba Tannery Project (producing finished leather goods for export). Proposals for the Bet-ta Construction Company and Merkel Rose Farm are under consideration. MIGA and the Foreign Investment Advisory Service (FIAS) are assisting in strengthening the capacity of the Ethiopian Investment Authority to promote inward investment flows. Also, MIGA has been asked to use its good offices to mediate the resolution of a considerable number of claims against the government as a consequence of the uncompensated Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 43 - APPENDIX II takings by the previous @erg) iegime. At present, MIGA has no investment guarantees in Ethiopia. 51. In view of the war with Eritrea, the World Bank, has informed the governments of Ethiopia and Eritrea that no new loans will be approved until there is progress toward a peaceful resolution of the conflict. For now, disbursements from projects already approved by the Bank’s Board will continue. , Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 44 - APPENDIX II Ethiopia: Rsldonr with the World Bank Group (Asofhnc 14,199% inmilliorsofUS&llan) .4 Sh~mldBRDL.anludlDA~ Lum L!dit No. Find Year BOlToW!PWpS IDA ““&lbU”Cd Cncehb Twlve (12) lant and my (50) creditI claed crmJ3 *9% Cr*M* 1990 cr 243 1993 cr 2588 1994 cr *ma 199s 0 274, 1995 cr 2841 19% Cr 2842 19% Cr 3019 1998 cr 3032 ,998 cr 3077 19% Cr 3092 ,998 Cr3L40 1999 Total (la 13 .divc wdtr) Tad &b""d (TBRD and IDA) ofwhich: repaid Tdd now hskl by IBRD al.3 DA Amomt sold ofwhrch: rcpid Td undilbuncd MvLd l&m Dsvdopmat sccmd Addi “rbm Dcvdopmml RmdRduhiihlim C.l”b Fnsrsy Dnrdapmmt Pmjcol N.,imd Falik Pm* N.W sdl PmjoE( Elhbpb Said Rclubilildim Fmd I w&a Svpply L?Mlopmalt hcrsy II Red s0;t.x DNsbprml Pm-m Ed”cuGal8cctar Iwulmat Agrioulhuc Rcleorch de Tninulg “cdl soota *ctivc Pmicot# Ckad PrciM. 283.9 1,600.7 0.0 232.7 1297.4 1.288.9 0.0 6.0 0.0 6.0 979.6 7.7 40.2 35.0 96.0 74.3 120.0 z2.0 120.0 35.7 zoo.0 309.2 LW.0 60.0 LOO.0 1.312.4 m w84.6 232.7 2.J86.3 6.0 6.0 987.3 4.0 6.6 36.7 61.1 51.8 14.9 72.9 21.1 187.4 276.6 94.7 57.9 93.7 979.6 0.0 2.3 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 12.8 0.0 Cl.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 15.1 B. sutemmt OfFC lnvslmsnls original Gras c-ilmsnu Bmwamulpas LC.M Eqw P.m,pmt Told 1965.732 1966’ 1968’ 1989’ Dke D.un (spinning wwing, and fhidlin8) 2.4 I.4 1.1 4.8 !3Lliqlivl pulp (?.h”f.otwa of pa@ ppcI md paperbcard) 0.0 1.9 0.0 1.9 Mchhua (Sup, frtonol and rei-ulcIie) 4.9 3.5 0.7 9.0 Red sea (Cnkie pclr&lm an4 rimml 8”) 0.0 7.8 0.0 7.8 Teal -ilm~~’ p* 7.3 14.6 1.7 21.6 Lean: undl~tian, LnmuUtim, nd ndm mpymcntl. 7.3 14.6 1.7 23.6 Tchl cmlmitmcrdl now held 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 TOt.1 .,P,WW.b pSn.578 CO#blt”itmCnt 5.0 3.6 Ml 8.6 1999 shebl Tulncrv 5.0 3.6 0.0 8.6 . scwcc Wald B*nk ‘DLbunsmcnt da .15 “pacd .t UK ad dlhc fin, WC& oflhs mcdl and M ourml”y ” on thy 31, ,999 pvastmntl that hwc km fully wncclcd, lam~lcd, wri”al off, ,old, rcdancd, a repid. EommitmenLI wmhtof*ppovcd dsi~cd prcjccts. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-45- APPENDJXJJJ Background Ethiopia: Enhanced Bank-Fund Collaboration 52. During the 1998 Annual Meetings, the authorities agreed to participate in a pilot project on enhanced Bank-Fund collaboration. In recent years, staffs from the two institutions had already been working together closely on ESAF-supported program discussions, public expenditure reviews (PERs), and policy framework papers (PFPs). Jn the areas identified for enhanced collaboration (discussed below), the pilot project has increased contacts between Bank and Fund staffs, which, in turn, has enhanced coordination of their efforts with the Ethiopian authorities, to achieve a proper mix of stabilization policies, structural reforms, and social measures. 53. Under this exercise, the specific areas identified for enhanced collaboration were tinancial sector reform, public expenditure management, and private sector development. Bank staffhave continued to participate in the Fund’s ESAF discussions, and Fund statTin the Bank’s annual PER.r4 Moreover, the staffs of both institutions, as well of the AtDB, jointly prepared the preliminary HJPC Initiative decision point document (including an update of the debt sustainability analysis) presented to the Bank and Fund Boards in early November 1998. 54. Bank and Fund staffs continue to maintain frequent informal contacts, including at their resident missions in Addis Ababa. Bank staff are also typically asked to comment on Fund briefing papers and staff reports, and Fund staff on Bank Special Program Assistance (SPA) and Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) documents.‘J Current areas of collaboration in the three areas targeted for enhanced collaboration 55. An important step to financial sector reform is the comprehensive financial and managerial audit of the dominant, state-owned Commercial Bank of Ethiopia (CBE). The authorities and World Bank financial experts, in consultation with the Fund’s African and Monetary and Exchange Atfairs Departments, finalized the terms of reference of the audit in November 1998; an internationally reputable firm was chosen to conduct the audit in December 1998, which was a structural performance criterion under the second annual ESAF arrangement. In conjunction with the CBE audit, the Fund is also providing the National Bank of Ethiopia (NBA) with long-term technical assistance on bank supervision and prudential regulations. I4 Bank statf had planned to join the ESAF midterm review discussions in Addis Ababa in a February 1999, prior to the early departure ofFund stafffrom Ethiopia because of security concerns. When discussions with the authorities resumed in Washington in mid-April and were continued in early June, Bank staffwere present, Fund staff participated in the Bank-led 1999 PER in May 1999. I5 Messrs. Neuhaus and Cowen (both AFR) also participated in a one-day workshop on the Bank’s Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) inMarch 1999 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 46 - APPENDIXIII 56. The annual PER continues to serve as a major input for strengthening public expenditure management. In this year’s exercise, a concerted effort among Bank, Fund, and other donor representatives and the government of Ethiopia was made to (i) examine budget execution in FY 1997/98 and 1998/99, in particular the implementation of sector development programs (SDPs) in education, health, and roads; (ii) assess the fiscal impact of the war with Eritrea; and (iii) investigate progress made in undertaking reforms at the federal and regional levels with respect to budgetary planning, implementation, and auditing (including linking the public investment program to the medium-term expenditure framework). The overall assessment was also used by Bank and Fund staffto formulate a normative fiscal path consistent with medium-term objectives of the ESAF-supported program and full-scale execution of the Bank-led SDPs. 57. On private sector development, Bank and Fund stafF have intensified their joint monitoring of the progress made by the authorities in implementing measures agreed in the latest PFP (issued in September 1998), including those aimed at export promotion and diversification, exchange and trade system and investment code liberalization, and privatization. In this latter area, Bank staff continue to provide technical assistance on streamlining the modalities for sale or liquidation of state-owned enterprises; in that connection, the sale of ten state farms, a cement factory, and a brewery was a December 1998 structural performance criterion under the second annual ESAF arrangement. The PFP is also linked directly to specific paragraphs in the letter of intent agreed by the Fund and the government under the second annual ESAF arrangement, so as to ensure better monitoring and execution of structural reforms. 58. In the context of the ESQ-supported program, Fund statT(in consultation with the Bank) continues to take the lead in establishing with the authorities an appropriate set of macroeconomic policies. Recent experience has shown a specific need for closer consultation on the fiscal stance, as the SDPs are beginning to play an increasingly larger role in the medium-term expenditure ‘framework. In view of the large, domestically fmanced component of SDP expenditure and the projected need for resource mobilization, the Fund is providing long-term technical assistance in strengthening tax administration. Possible areas for strengthened collaboration 59. Closer monitoring by the Bank of the CBE is needed if the audit is to be undertaken successfully. It would be useful if the Bank could assign an expert on financial sector reform in Ethiopia (the position has been vacant since late 1998, when the terms of the audit were agreed:) - Ernst & Young was chosen by the authorities to conduct the audit, but its arrival in Addis Ababa was delayed by security warnings issued by the U.K. government. The subsequent relaxation of these restrictions is now expected to permit commencement of the audit in the summer of 1999. The appointment of a Bank expert would be key to guiding the government through the process of reforming the CBE as the external auditor’s findings become available. 60. The recent PER mission has done considerable work in identifying a sustainable implementation path for the SDPs. However, execution of the SDPs needs to be more regularly Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 41- APPENDIX III monitored by the Bank outside the annual PER exercise. In this context, a clear and systematic presentation of the projected size of the SDPs and their sources of financing should be formulated and routinely updated, in consultation with the Fund on the macroeconomic implications of these projected large budget outlays. 61. On structural reforms, Bank and Fund staffs could benefit from setting aside a one- to two-day period to jointly focus on specific measures that could be taken to accelerate private sector-led growth, which will be featured prominently in the next PFP. The workshop would also give a chance for Fund staffto build contacts with Bank staffworking on various sector projects to stimulate private sector development. 62. In preparing the preliminary HIPC Initiative decision point document, it became evident that additional work needed to be done in linking the social and development objectives of the SDPs with the OECD’s Development Assistance Committee @AC) targets. In this context, Bank and Fund stat% need to establish more direct ties between the SDP implementation and HIPC Initiative debt relief (the savings from which are expected to cover some of the additional domestically financed expenditure arising from the SDPs) in advance of preparing the HIPC final decision point document; such a linkage will ensure that broad-based and easily monitored annual targets are developed consistent with the goal of alleviating widespread poverty. At this stage, five-year social indicator targets exist as part of the education and health SDPs. A forthcoming country economic memorandum and poverty study on Ethiopia being prepared by the Bank are expected to provide a blueprint for redressing the most critical social needs. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-48- APPENDIX IV Ethiopia: Health and Education Sectors 63. Current indicators for health and education in Ethiopia point to the need for major improvements in these areas, since the standards are among the lowest in the world, and arguably even lower than expected for a country at Ethiopia’s level of income (Appendix Table 8). At the same time, per capita government spending on health in Ethiopia was only US.Sl.83 in 1997/98, well below the average for sub-Saharan Africa (US$14). Similarly, at USS3.94, per capita government spending on education in the same year remained quite low. 64. As noted, health standards in Ethiopia are extremely poor. Nutritional deficiencies and preventable infectious diseases are the main contributing factors, together with a rapid population growth, widespread poverty, low education levels, inadequate access to clean water, and poor access to health services for the vast majority of population. Overall improvements in personal health in the last ten years have been partly offset by the rapid spread of HIV/AIDS among the general population. So far, government efforts to control the spread of HIV have suffered from a lack of adequate planning and implementation of preventive measures. The spread of the disease will impose a severe strain on the public health care system and a heavy fiscal cost.” The additional negative consequences of AIDS include lower average life expectancy, direct loss of labor, a higher incidence of poverty, and possibly lower per capita GDP growth. 65. The education sector is characterized by low enrollment and coverage rates, and poor efficiency. The gross emollment ratio is 29 percent at the primary level (24 percent for girls and 33 percent for boys), 19 percent at the junior secondary level, 9 percent at the senior secondary level, and less than 1 percent at the tertiary level. Consequently, adult illiteracy ratios are very high, at approximately 65 percent of adults above age 15. Significant urban and rural disparities exist: primary education is almost universal in Addis Ababa and other urban areas, while gross primary enrollment in rural areas is only 18 percent, 66. In recent years, the government has given a very high priority to health and education, and, in 1997198, it developed comprehensive sector development programs (SDPs) in these areas, with World Bank and other donor support. The Health Sector Development Program seeks to improve all health service activities of the federal and regional governments, from basic services to specialized referral services, with particular emphasis placed on reproductive health care, treatment and control of basic infectious diseases, control of epidemic diseases, immunization, and control of sexually transmitted diseases. The Education Sector Development Program seeks to . ” The number of people infected with HIV in Ethiopia is projected to increase from 1.45 million at present to between 2.8 and 8.6 million by 2010 (depending on per capita spending on prevention). It is estimated that the annual costs of treating AIDS patients would range from US%85 to US%628 per patient, depending on the treatment provided. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 49 - APPENDIX Iv raise enrollment rates, especially in undersewed rural areas, and improve the quality, equity, and relevance of education, As noted in Box 3, the 1999 PER has expressed concern about the lagged implementations of the capital budget for health and education sectors, and recommended the adoption of measures to address this problem.” I7 According to the 1999 PER the underexecution of the capital budget increased from 22.8 percent in 1997/98 to 42.3 percent in 1998/99 for the health sector, and from 19.7 percent to 22.2 percent for education. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 50 - APPENDIX IV Table 8. Ethiopia: Selected Social and Demographic Indicators Most R-t Year Available 1970-n 1980-85 ,!wl-97 Populatim cbuactuiaics Total populatim (millim)’ urban pqxMion (percent of total) Populatim aowth rate. (percent) TOtal lhb.n Life expxtu~cy (years) Male Fmulc BbthSp.XuamM Focd, health, and nutrition Mu of food tmzductim pa capita (1987 = *OO) Populatim w physician (thousands) Populatim pa nurse (thousmnds) Populatica pa hospital bed (dmusmdr) Aas to health services (pscent of popuhtion) Aefaa to safe water (pzcat of populkn) Total “rbln Rurd Access to sanitation (pacat of popu!atim) Adult HIV prcwlmce (pacat of popukion aged t 5 - 49) People int%ctcd titb HIV(in millions) (pacent of tots, population) I.&cm fcrce Total l&or fact (thousands) Agriculhlre(pacent) Industry (pacrnt) Fevlc @ac.mt) Education Gross cmollmatt ratio (pusmt of relevant age group) Tot., p&.,-y O/which: female Total scccmduy Ofwhich: female Total tiisry Ofwhich: femllc Pupil-hacha ratio Frimry SXCNUh~ Illiteracy ratio (percent) FCGlak Mdc 33.0 9.5 2.6 4.5 41 39 43 1 L‘l.2 86.1 3.5 14,775 90 2 24 44 34 43.4 11.7 2.8 4.6 4, 39 43 6.6 99.3 78.9 5.4 3.4 4 19,608 83 2 39 37 35 9 1 13 48 43 59.9 16.0 2.2 4.6 43 6.5 99.4 4.1 46 27 90 20 8 9.3 1.6 4.3 26,000 80 2 41 36 12 11 I 19 30 32 65 75 54 Source: Edkpim autbaitics: and World Bank+ WorldDevelopmenr Indicarorr , 1998 and 1999. and Human Developmenr .&pm, 1998. ‘For 1990-97, a mid-1998 estimate. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 51- Ethiopia: Statistical and Computational Issues APPENDIX V Statistical issues’” Real sector 67. In the context of the three-year ESAF arrangement, which calls for the adoption of better statistical practices, the authorities have improved the timeliness and coverage of national accounts. Preliminary national accounts are now available through 1997/98, but data on sectoral deflators are still being compiled. A new series of GDP estimates using a 1995/96 base is under construction, but the quality of these estimates (which previously used a 1980/81 base) still suffers from lack of continuity in conducting some surveys.” On prices, the Addis Ababa consumer price index (CPI) is now published with a four- to six-week delay, but the national CPI is still published with a two- to three-month delay and suffers from methodological problems, which the authorities will seek to correct with technical assistance from STA. In particular, because of deficiencies in the basket of goods used for construction of the national index and the urban and rural subindices, at times the trends in the national index bear no resemblance to those in its components. Publicjinances 68. Currently, monthly federal government accounts are reported with a six-to eight-week lag, and general government accounts (federal and regional governments) with a two-to three- month lag. However, the ongoing devolution of budgetary authority to regional governments has finther eroded the quality of the general government accounts, owing to a lack of a unified accounting framework. The coverage of government finance statistics is incomplete (it excludes extrabudgetary funds, i.e., the privatization, road, tire1 stabilization, and sugar development funds), and data on domestic and foreign financing of the budget deficit are inconsistent with the monetary accounts. The Ministry of Finance and the National Bank of Ethiopia (NBE) have established a joint reconciliation committee that is taking steps to synchronize the recording of fiscal and monetary data, scope of institutional coverage, and classiication of accounts. Monetary accounts 69. The monetary survey is comprehensive and, with recent improvements, is being reported with a four-week lag. Progress has been made in adopting several key recommendations of the STA technical assistance mission in May-June 1998. Changes include correcting deficiencies in the estimation of international reserves of the banking system (which were being overestimated * through the inclusion in the commercial banks’ balance sheets of several foreign assets that are not freely usable) and of broad money (which was being overestimated through the inclusion in I8 See Appendix Table 9 for a survey of reporting of main statistical indicators. I9 See Appendix Table 10 for a list of surveys that provide data sources for the national income accounts. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-52- APPENDIX V “currency in circulation” of demonetized old bii notes that were unclaimed in Ethiopia as well as of old birr notes held by the Central Bank of Eritrea). The accounts of the NBE and commercial banks are also being classified and sectorized as recommended. However, the coverage of the monetary survey to include other financial institutions (especially credit and savings cooperatives) remains to be broadened. 70. Balance of payments data still require improvements in the coverage, valuation, timing, and classification of transactions. The authorities have begun working toward the adoption of the fifth edition of the Balance of Pqments Manual, but many problems persist. In particular, key surveys recommended by the 1995 STA mission for collecting basic data have not been carried out. Import data still rely heavily on exchange control data, the quality of which has worsened in the wake of the exchange system liberaliiation in 1998 and the related shift in the determination of compliance of buyers and sellers of foreign exchange with trade licensing requirements and foreign exchange regulations (from which most trade data have been derived) from the NBE’s Exchange Control Department to the commercial banks. However, the use of customs records to generate trade data has begun with the operationalization of the ASYCUDA system at major customs stations in February 1999; use of this system should improve the timeliness and coverage of trade statistics. An export unit value index is available (with a two-year delay), but no import unit value index is being produced. Data on official and private transfers and private capital flows are also weak. The NBE, in collaboration with the Ethiopia Investment Authority and other government agencies, is preparing a database on foreign direct investment, including a reporting system for tracking new investment. Computational issues 71. The National Technical Committee (NTC), a Year 2000 (Y2K) task force chaired by the Commissioner for Science and Technology, has been established. Reporting to the Deputy Prime Minister, it oversees preparedness and proposes remedies to Y2K problems that may arise in various public sector agencies and institutions, especially in the financial, power, water, and transport sectors, including civil aviation. In the financial sector, the NBE and the Commercial Bank of Ethiopia, which controls nearly 90 percent of total bank assets, have been implementing Y2K readiness programs for the past two years, but some of their underlying computational infrastructure is still not Y2K compliant. Recently, the NBE has started carrying out a Y2K action plan drawn up by the NTC. At the diagnostic phase, this plan takes inventory of all computer 1 1 hardware and software and tests information technology equipment for Y2K compliance, and, at the remediation phase, it develops corrective modifications for in-house developed application programs, as well as for vendors’ banking application package programs. This action plan does not include retesting of critical systems or formulation of contingency plans, which are expected to be done by the NBE’s hardware and software vendors Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 8. Ethiopia: Survey of Reporting of Main Statistical Indicators (As of June 30, 1999) Exchm@ Nc,Fc,-eip Rewrvc/ cerdra Brmd wscrt J%emal Rates Aaeuofthe Base BUlk Mmey ltad DehuDcbc -g M-Y Bdmcc savia syr(an Shea Bdmce Dateoflatext June 16, obsrrvation ,999 mterscived kne 28, 1999 Samceddat. N&d z< Madeofrcpating Fu FEquclxy d publicAim WdY Cmfid No my 13. 1999 May 19, 1999 Wedy’ W&Y Bakd Eshiopia April 30, 1999 Iurs 9, 1999 Manhly MdY N&d Badcof Fax M&Y No April 30, 1999 hnc 9, 1999 MoaUlly MW BUlkof EaicQia FU MW No Apil30, ,999 he 14, 1999 tiOlUbl~ Marmy NdiCd Bulkd Elhiopia FW M&Y NO xi bY 1999 M-m M-w NdiCd B&of FU Morahly NO March 1999 ,“nC 1999 MmY MMY NUiONl Bulkof Fzhiopi. Fu MdY NO Much 1999 hmc 1999 M&Y Mmrmy NIlid Bmkof Ethiopia FZX M&Y NO June Ma” 8.1999 199798 (July 7- July 8) 19% Gmber June 30, 1998 1599 M&Y MdY puutar M-w JUWZI, 1999 oami%ial N&d Minhhyd B.&d Fbtmx E&i‘+ Onrnisim Fu Ammany AmwIly NO NO Mblisbyd -lY NO cmmksial MY NO ‘Smin~mdtimedqceilsmdlmdiiSmtcs YieldPmtrrrrurybilLafw~yludionucrrpoc(sdona~yhau,wah~la(ert~rrofMay19,1999. ‘N,tiolul CF.1 only. For AMis Ababa WI, tbc*testc.bzmtimirM.y ,999 (ncrivcd l!me.29.1999). > ‘Expat~mly(~mcNslamdrm).Impa(dauuerrofDccrmbs 199S(fmmf&pardvnge-iolp~). ‘Eff~veMay20,1999,~EthiopisnuRhaitiesbcgantorcpartdataonne(fmigrrv~d~~~to~Fundan~cnd-ormonm~~. 7 9 8 c Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 9. Ethiopia: Main Surveys Conducted by the Central Statistical Authority’ (As of April 30, 1999) Agricultural Sample Survey Milling and Qoanying smvey Date of Most Recent Date of Survey Survey Conducted Reported 199-l/98= 1999 1997/98= ongoing F~UCllCy pilot Ammal NO Amud YeS Large- and Medium-Scale h4whhhg and Electricity Industries Survey 1991/98= 1998 Ammal NO small-8cale Maaufachuillg Indostrics survey 19%/912 1998 Axmnd NO cottage and Handicraft Mamhchhg Indusrries Survey 1997 1998 Amlual No Survey of Canstmction Contmcton 1997 1998 Anmlal No Distributive and Service Trade Survey 1996 1997 Five years YCS urban hBformal sector sample survey 19% 1991 Five years No Household, Income, Consumption and Expenditure Survey 1995/96* 19%; 1998 (revised) Five years No Population and Housing Census of Ethiopia 1994 1998 Ten years No kmrcc: Ethiopian authorities ‘Ther.%ultsofthesesweysselveasdata sours for the national income accounts ‘In 1997/98, data pertain to the period July N-July 7; prior to W data pertain to the period July l-June 30, . . . Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-5s. APPENDIX VI Ethiopia: Tentative Fund Work Program for 1999 Continuation of policy discussions on midterm Review under second annual ESAF arrangement Board consideration of midterm review under second annual ESAF arrangement Negotiation of third annual ESAF arrangement Board consideration of third annual ESAJ? arrangement Staffvisit Mid-summer 1999 Late summer 1999 Late summer 1999 Early fall 1999 Late fall 1999 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 56 - APPENDIX VII international Monetary Fund 700 1 91h Street, NW Washington, D. C. 20431 USA Public Information Notice (PIN) No. FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE July --, 1999 IMF Concludes Article IV Consultation with Ethiopia On , the Executive Board concluded the Article IV consultation with Ethiopia.” Background Since the conclusion of the last Article IV consultation in November 1997, Ethiopia has continued to pursue prudent macroeconomic policies and implement important structural reforms. The government’s economic reform program has been supported since October 1996 by a three-year ESAF arrangement, and the second annual arrangement thereunder was approved by the Executive Board in October 1998. Except for the floor on net foreign assets of the banking system, all other quantitative targets under the 1998/99 program (fiscal year ended July 7) have been met to date. Economic performance in the recent past has been affected by irregular and at times insufficient rainfall, a sharp drop in the terms of trade, and the outbreak of a border conflict with Eritrea in May 1998. Inflation has remained in the low single digits, and real GDP is expected to grow by 8.7 percent in 1998ISS (after a small contraction in 1997/98), buoyed by a strong performance of the major crop season, although the initial official forecast for even more rapid growth was scaled down owing to a slowdown in nonfarm activities and the onset of drought in early 1999 during the minor harvest season. The external current account deficit, which was to have narrowed slightly to 8.2 percent of GDP in 1998/99, is expected to widen to around 9.5 percent due to a sharp drop in world prices of coffee (the main source of foreign exchange receipts), and higher-than-expected military and food imports. Together with a shortfall in , ” Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial information, and discusses with officials the country’s economic developments and policies. On return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the country’s authorities. In this PIN, the main features of the Board’s discussion are described. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 51- APPENDIX VII official loans and grants, this will likely lead to a loss in net foreign assets of the banking system in 1998/N, such that at the end of the year, gross official foreign reserves would be equivalent to 2.8 months of imports of goods and nonfactor services-only slightly higher than a year ago. The staff now projects a general government cash deficit, excluding grants, of 8% percent of GDP, versus 6 percent in the program. Total public spending is expected to be slightly higher than programmed, with an excess in defense outlays accompanied by a shortfall in capital spending that reflects implementation constraints and delays in foreign assistance, rather than discretionary cuts. Despite the spending pressures created by the war, the government has managed by-and-large to protect core spending for the health and education sectors. A shortfall in domestic tax receipts associated with the terms-of-trade loss and the slowdown in economic activity in recent months has been largely offset by extraordinary nontax receipts. During the last two years, progress has been made in implementing a wide range of structural reforms, including a further reduction in the average import tariff, modifications to the investment code allowing foreign participation in the telecommunications and power sectors, enactment of a foreclosure law, unification of several taxes on coffee exports, and administrative improvements at the Federal Inland Revenue Authority and the Customs Cffice. Restrictions on payments and transfers for all current international transactions (except for holiday travel) and the foreign exchange surrender requirement were eliminated in August 1998, with the latter being replaced by a SO percent conversion requirement (the conversion period was extended from 3 to 4 weeks). Reforms of the financial sector and modifications to the exchange system also continued, albeit at a slower pace than envisaged. In January 1998, the government decontrolled bank lending rates and introduced a floor on the deposit rate (currently 6 percent). A framework for the conduct of interbank money and foreign exchange markets was established in September 1998, but no money market transactions have taken place to date. The external audit of the state-owned Commercial Bank of Ethiopia by a foreign auditing firm selected in late 1998 has been delayed, but is now expected to start in August 1999. Executive Board Assessment <Begin Typing Here> , Public lnformaffon Norlces fprNsl are issued, (i) at the request of a member country, following the conclusion of the Article IV consultation for countries seeking to make known the views of the IMF to the public. This action is intended to strengthen IMF surveillance over the economic policies of member countries by increasing the transparency of the IMF’s assessment of these policies; and (ii) following policy discussions in the Executive Board at the decision of the Board. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 58 - APPENDIX VII Ethiopia: Selected Economic Indicators I/ 1994 1985 1998 1997 lS95 Gk- Demdk eccnemy Real GDP GDP deRatcr Consumer prices (annual average) Gross domestic investment Gross domestic saving National saving Extend ecmomy Exports, f.o.b. Of which: coffee Imports, c.i.f. Current account balance (excluding cfticial transfers) (in percent of GDP) Overall balance of payments Gross off&l reserves (In months of imports of goods and services) Debt service (in percent of axports of goods and nonfactor services) 2l External debt (in parcant of GDP) 2/ Terms of trade (- deterioration) Real effective exchange rate (end of period) 31 Financial variabks Government revenues of which: tax revenue Government expenditure and net lending Overall tial deficit (cash bask) 4/ Broad money (annual percentage change) (I” percent) 1.6 2.6 1.2 6.2 10.6 5.2 -0.5 6.7 12.7 1.0 3.2 9.7 1.9 13.4 0.9 -6.4 3.7 3.6 (In percent of GDP) 15.2 16.4 19.1 19.1 18.2 18.6 5.4 8.0 4.7 9.6 6.3 4.5 6.4 12.3 9.2 12.0 9.8 9.2 (In millions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise indicated) 260 454 410 599 602 494 156 266 273 355 420 279 -915 -1,063 -1,413 -1,403 -1,519 -1,509 -377 -236 -594 -456 -552 -613 8.8 4.1 -9.9 -7.1 -0.4 -9.4 130 126 -36 -201 -444 -492 5.6 5.6 6.6 4.2 2.7 2.6 51.6 35.1 36.5 42.7 44.3 65.6 77.4 81.1 71.6 65.3 143.5 142.4 9.4 32.0 -22.1 3.5 18.7 -17.2 -14.6 1.7 -6.2 1.2 1.1 (In percent of GDP) 13.9 17.4 18.4 19.0 16.7 19.0 10.9 11.4 12.5 12.9 11.7 12.2 25.2 24.9 27.0 24.3 25.5 25.7 -11.1 -7.3 -6.5 -5.2 -6.8 -65 14.0 24.3 a.5 3.4 12.7 5.3 Sources: Ethiopian authorities; and staff estimates and projections. l/ For fiscal ysar that ends July 7. 2/ Before debt relief and induding ruble-denominated debt and debt service to Russia beginning in fiscal year 1998. 3/ Minus sign indicates depreciation of Ethiopian birr. 41 Excluding grants. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public