DOCUMENT OF INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND NOT FOR PUBLIC USE MASTER FILES ROOM HQ C-525 0450 SMl99/244 CONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION September 24, 1999 To: Members of the Executive Board From: Subject: The Secretary Greece-StaBReport for the 1999 Article IV Consultation Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staff report for the 1999 Article IV consultation with Greece, which will be brought to the agenda for discussion on a date to be announced. Mr. Leipold (ext. 34647) and Mr Lutz (ext. 36588) are available to answer technical or factual questions relating to this paper prior to the Board discussion. Unless the Documents Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the WTO Secretariat on Monday, October 4, 1999; and to the European Commission and the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development, following its consideration by the Executive Board. Att: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicCONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND GREECE Staff Report for the 1999 Article IV Consultation Prepared by the StaffRepresentatives for the 1999 Consultation with Greece Approved by Michael C. Deppler and Leslie Lipschitz September 23, 1999 Contents Page I. Background ....................................................................................................................... 2 II. Policy Discussions ............................................................................................................ 6 A. Achieving and Sustaining Price Stability. .............................................................. 6 Administrative measures: transitory or more durable effects?. ........................ 7 The remaining contribution of monetary and exchange rate policy. ................ 8 The contribution of fiscal policy: the need to strengthen fiscal plans.. .......... 11 The contribution of wage moderation. .......................................................... 14 The contribution of structural reforms: enhancing growth, disinflation and employment.. ............................................................................................... 15 B. Other Policy Requirements ................................................................................. 18 III. Staff Appraisal ......................................... .................................................................... 19 Tables 1. Selected Economic Indicators.. ................................................................................ 23 2. Indicators of External and Financial Vulnerability ................................................... 24 3. Credit Indicators, 1994-98 ...................................................................................... 25 4. Privatization and Restructuring Developments ........................................................ 26 5. Staff Medium-Term Projections .............................................................................. 27 Text Boxes 1. Post-ERM Developments in the Real Economy ......................................................... 4 2. Household Consumption and Interest Rates-Evidence From Other Countries ........ 10 3. A Cross-Country Quantification of the Balassa-Samuelson Effect ........................... 16 Appendices I. Fund Relations ........................................................................................................ 38 II. Statistical Issues.. .................................................................................................... 39 ILL Public Information Notice ....................................................................................... 42 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2- 1. The 1999 Article IV consultation discussions were held in Athens during June 17-28, 1999. The mission* met with the Minister of NationaI Economy and Finance, the Governor of the Bank of Greece, the Offtce of the Prime Minister, other senior offtcials, leaders of the trade union and employers’ organizations, and market participants. The mission also assisted the authorities in completing a self-assessment against the IMF Code o/Go&Practices on Fiscal Transparency-Declaration on Principles. In addition to their traditional release of the mission’s concluding statement, the authorities have indicated their intention to participate in the pilot project on the voluntary release of Article IV staffreports. 2. At the conclusion of the last consultation in August 1998, Directors commended the authorities’ commitment to strengthened policy adjustment which, along with entry into the ERM, had enhanced the prospects of EMU participation by January 1,200l. At the same time, they stressed that EMU qualification was a demanding goal to be realized within a limited time span. In particular, achievement of the Maastricht criterion for inflation, while feasible with policy rigor, was not yet secure; in this regard, a number of Directors expressed reservations about the intention to limit inflation through indirect tax cuts. Directors recommended a stance centered on fiscal and monetary policy restraint, as well as ambitious structural reforms that would aid disinflation and improve Greece’s relative growth performance. 3. Prime Minister Simitis’ left-of-center Pasok government has made EMU participation its prime economic goal and, on present plans, intends submitting Greece’s request for membership in March 2000. National elections are to be held by October 2000, but would need to be brought forward if the presidential elections in March do not yield the required parliamentary majority. I. BACKGROUND 4. Greece made considerable advances toward convergence in the 1990s but, by late 1997, was finding progress under the “hard drachma” policy increasingly arduous. In the course of 1997, rapid wage growth and signs of a deteriorating current account performance underpinned assessments of drachma overvaluation and fbeled market expectations that an exchange rate correction would be unavoidable before intended EMU participation. The resulting exchange rate pressures and sharp rise in interest rates risked derailing growth and fiscal targets for 1997-98, placing the strategy toward EMU participation in peril. 5. In March 1998, the government opted for an alternative strategy of devaluation and ERM entry-an approach that has succeeded in generating the virtuous circle essential to the success of the drive to EMU. The “regime switch” represented by the drachma devaluation,. ERM entry, and the accompanying strengthening of policies was deemed essential also by the staff, both for competitiveness and confidence reasons. The virtuous circle of interest rate declines (at this stage, predominantly at the long end) that aid fiscal consolidation, and of ’ Messrs. Leipold (Head), Hahkias, Lutz, Swagel (all EUl) and Mr. Allan (FAD); Mr. Spraos, Alternate Executive Director, also participated in the meetings, and Mr. Faini, Executive Director, attended the concluding meetings. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3- subdued price expectations that help elicit nominal wage restraint, is underway-staff reservations about the balance of the policy mix and the quality of certain measures notwithstanding The pace of nominal and real convergence with the rest of the EU has accelerated: economic growth has picked up (with the economy now estimated to be operating at around potential), the fiscal deficit has fallen well below 3 percent of GDP, and the debt-to-GDP ratio is declining (Tables 1 and 2). After rising in the wake of the devaluation, inflation has moderated, albeit also as a result of cuts in indirect taxes and other administrative measures. As expected, clearing the Maastricht inflation hurdle is proving the most demanding. (Further details on developments in the real economy following ERM entry, and the administrative measures taken to contain inflation, are provided in Box 1). 6. The monetary policy stancHentered on high interest rates and a strong drachma-has been tight, contributing to the anti-inflationary effort. In its monetary policy statements, the Bank of Greece has set price stability I6 (defined as an inflation rate not in excess of 2 percent, to be achieved by end-1999) as its preeminent policy objective. To this end, the Bank has maintained high ‘4 official interest rates (keeping the key 1Cday deposit rate unchanged at 12 percent since early 1999; Figure 6) I2 and allowed the drachma to appreciate within the ERM band (in a range of 8-83/s percent above its central parity 10 since shortly after ERM entry; as from January 1999, the drachma joined ERM2 with margins of 8 +/-15 percent). Financial markets have reacted favorably and, despite the uptick observed during the summer, the IO-year government bond yield is more 6 than 400 basis points below the level prevailing before ERM entry. The 12-month moving averageused to test 4 : 1 1 i , 1 ‘, L ‘, 1 : for convergence has narrowed to some 20 basis points above the Maastricht reference value. 1. n- ,- u- ,- A- ,- v- 1. I\- 1. 97 97 97 97 98 98 9s 9s 99 99 99 I. But the effectiveness of monetary policy is diminishing in the run-up to EMU. The current level of interest rates is sustaining capital inflows, which find their counterpart in a marked buildup of foreign exchange reserves (to US% 21.4 billion in August) and in a pace of credit expansion well above its indicative range (6-9 percent). The growth of mortgage and consumer lending has been particularly brisk, raising Bank of Greece concerns about its potential inflationary impact.’ At the same time, the ability of interest rate policy to curb credit growth is * While this largely reflects an adjustment of consumer lending to financial liberalization, and the share of consumer loans in total private sector bank credit or their ratio to GDP are below those in other EU countries (Table 3), the pace of expansion is of concern. In addition, some of this lending appears to have financed stock exchange purchases, hireling a boom that has recently tinther intensified, raising related concerns (voiced also by the authorities) about overvaluation. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public. -4- Box 1. Post-ERM Developments in the Real Economy Gmwth is relatively strong, with the economy in the sixth year of an expansion that is estimated to have brought output back to potential (Figure I).’ Will the end of the Kosovo conflict, estimates of its negative impact have been scaled back, and staff now projects GDP growth at 3% percent in 1999, slightly above Consensus. This would be in excess of the EU average for a fourth consecutive year, a welcome contrast to the absence of any catch-up in the first decade of EU membership. Activity is being led by high rates of public and private investment (Figure Z), buoyed by improved absorption of EU tmnsfers. strengthened profitability, new tax allowances, lower capital costs. and a booming stock market (the sham index rose by 85 percent in 1998, and has more than doubled so far this year). Though wage moderation and stagnant employment have restrained the growth of disposable income, private consumption appears to be picking up, sustained by brisk consumer lending. Export performance has also strengthened, reversing a prohacted decline in market shares, and the current account deficit is projected to improve slightly (to 2.3 percent of GDP in 1999; Figure 3), with increased government and private sector saving rates allowing for the rise in investment. The prolonged recovery has failed, however, to dent still h&h unemployment (Figure 4). Post-devaluation inflation proved persistent, inducing the authorities to introduce a series of administrative measures aimed at observing fhe Maastricht crirerioo. Following the devaluation, inflation peaked at 5.3 percent (national index) in May 1998. and remained close to that level for the next four months (Figure 5). In the fall of 1998. amidst mounting concern about inflation prospects (in light also of the possible triggering of wage catch-up claws at end-year), the government (a) reduced indirect taxes on a range of products; (b) entered into a series of “gentlemen’s agreements” to cap price increases; and(c) limited adjustments in administered prices. All told, these measures are estimated to have reduced headline in!lation by about 1 percentage point. With the postdevahtation effect falling out of the year-on-year calculations, inflation has declined further, to 2.0 percent in August 1999-lower than in several euro-area coumies. However, the latw harmonized inflation differential with the three best EU performers on the basis of the Maastricht definition (12-month moving average) remained some 1% percentage points above the differential allowed in calculating the reference limit. But HICP Inflation Convergence _I this differential is clearly on a declining path, aided also by J- A- J- 0. J- A- J- 0. J- *- J- additional indirecr tax cuts in August and September. 97 97 97 97 98 98 98 98 99 99 99 Disinflation has been aided by a sharp moderation of labor costs. The current two-year national wage agreement (through 1999) is moderate by Greek standards and, in contrast to earlier experience, has not been undermined by higher sectoral accords--even though, as noted, the operation of wage catch-up clauses was avoided by ~eco~rsc to administrative measures. Strong gains in labor productivity, spurred by high capital growth, have contained unit Iabor costs; for 1999. ULCs in manufacfuring are projected to grow broadly in line with those of EU partners. I For a discussion of potentia1 growth in Greece, see “Potential Output and the Output Gap in Greece: A Third Face for Janus?” in IMF Staff Countty Report No. 98/100. In updating those estimates (in light also of the prospect for continued high investment under the Third Community Suppon Framework), the staff places potential growth at around 3% percent in the next few years, with appreciable upside scope depending on the pace of stmchual reforms. Technical work by the Bank of Greece and the Ministry of National Economy points to an average growth rate of potential output within a range of 3.0-4.3 percent in the period 1999-2001, with the higher figurc resulting from a “convergence scenario” (i.e., full implementation of the convergence program’s investmem plans and reforms). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-5- being undercut by the fully anticipated terminal point of interest rate convergence in the approach to EMU. In this setting, the Bank of Greece imposed temporary credit controls in mid-April 1999 (in the form of nonremunerated deposits for an amount equivalent to the growth of credit above specified rates); at end-July 1999-in the face of still rapid consumer lending-the penalty for excess lending in this category was doubled. 8. Although there was no tightening of the fiscal stance between the pre- and post-devaluation situations in 1998, the fiscal sights were raised in 1999. At the last consultation, the Board had encouraged the authorities to pursue a better-than- budgeted deficit outcome in 1998, in order to return inflation rapidly to the ambitious path required for 70 Real Credit Cbwth @event change) 60 Households x -20 L 1993 1994 1995 1996 ,997 ,998 EMU. The authorities took the view that a fiscal tightening beyond the original target for 1998 risked being too uncertain an instrument to reduce inflation rapidly by year-end, a relevant time- frame given the operation of wage catch-up clauses. They accordingly opted to offset only the direct impact of the devaluation on the tiscal accounts, retaining an unchanged deficit target (2.4 percent of GDP). The target was met (Figure 7) despite a sizable overrun in primary current spending (equal to % percentage point of GDP), offset by a commensurate overperformance of revenues (in part reflecting the higher drachma value ofEU transfers following the devaluation). The debt-to-GDP ratio declined further (to 106.1 percent of GDP), aided by high privatization revenues. For 1999, the budget set a deficit target of 1.9 percent of GDP, improving on the convergence program’s objective of 2.1 percent of GDP. Despite the costs of additional indirect tax cuts introduced in August and September (see below), and those arising from the earthquake of early September (still being assessed as this report was being finalized, and at all events likely to be financed by a redirection of EU hnds and spread over a number of years), developments to date indicate the likelihood of a better-than-budgeted outcome. 9. On structural reforms, progress has been visible with regard to privatization and some aspects of public enterprise restructuring, but much remains to be done, while broad social security and labor market reforms remain largely on hold. Upon ERM entry, the authorities announced a detailed privatization and partial flotation program, which, with a few delays, has been essentially implemented (Table 4). In the banking system in particular, these sales-along with EMU prospects-have sharply intensified competitive pressures. But other major sectors continue to be dominated by public enterprises, and liberalization is being deferred as long as permissible under EU derogations. The restructuring of loss-making public enterprises faces recurrent political hurdles, but some ground-breaking advances in key enterprises have nonetheless been recorded.3 In the labor market, measures taken in August 1998 have to date 3 Such as the conclusion of a private management contract for Olympic Airways and steps to address the Public Power Corporation’s unviable pension situation, a prerequisite to flotation. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-6- remained largely inoperative. Fundamental reform of the social security system has been deferred to after the 2000 elections; nonetheless, measures taken under a “mini” package hold the promise of both appreciable savings and increased efficiency. II. POLICY DISCUSSIONS 10. Despite the hurdle represented by the Maastricht criterion on inflation and the sustainability of price stability, a positive outcome of Greece’s drive to EMU participation by the January 2001 target date is now generally anticipated. The authorities stressed their deep commitment to this goal and their determination to see it through, including-if needed- by means of additional indirect tax cuts later in the year, as has indeed occurred. In this setting,. a shared premise of the discussions was that the EMU process will be kept on track and current market confidence in a positive outcome maintained. The authorities’ resolve is firm and market confidence (reflected also in upgradings by credit rating agencies) has proven remarkably resilient to several tests (including, most recently, the Kosovo conflict-Figure 8). 11. The discussions thus had a “pre-in” flavor and focused primarily on the policies required to secure a low inflation performance on a sustainable basis and to enhance growth prospects within monetary union, seeking responses to the following main questions: . what is the remaining contribution that monetary policy can provide to price stability, and is there any leeway to attenuate the degree of monetary easing in prospect? . what is the appropriate stance for tiscal policy that is consistent both with Greece’s medium-term requirements and with the need to ensure the sustainability of price stability, given the current cyclical position, the reliance on administrative measures to date, and the easing of monetary conditions in the run-up to EMU? . what additional elforts in the structural area are critical to tackle the supply side sources of inflationary pressures, reduce structural unemployment, and contribute to a more rapid convergence of GDP per capita to that of partner countries? A. Achieving and Sustaining Price Stability 12. The main policy challenge is to achieve and sustain price stability The authorities were working on the assumption that the Maastricht reference value for inflation would be around 2.2-2.3 percent (in terms ofthe national index, equivalent to some 2 percent on a harmonized basis) by early 2000, at the time of their request for EMU membership.4 There was 4 This implied some pickup in the average of the three lowest EU inflation rates due to recent oil price developments. The authorities thought it prudent to base policy on the assumption of a strict interpretation of the Treaty for the inflation criterion to be applied to second-round EMU entrants. Discussions within the EU’s Economic and Financial Committee on this issue have not reached a firm conclusion, but there reportedly is agreement that, should a strict interpretation entail economically questionable results, alternative approaches would enter into the assessment. The related assessment of sustainability is, by its nature, mainly of a judgmental character. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-I- agreement that, on current trends and barring further measures, inflation in Greece was likely to average slightly above this value (by 0.3-0.4 percentage points). The authorities expressed particular concern about the obstinacy of inflation (at some 56 percent) in private services and certain retail sectors, a possible indication of demand-driven pressures as well as inadequate competition in these sectors. Staff furthermore noted that inflation was set to rise again in late 1999-early 2000, as the one-off impact of last year’s indirect tax cuts dissipated. 13. The discussions thus covered the role of different policy instruments in achieving a low and sustainable price performance in the run-up to EMU and once within monetary union. These ranged from the administrative measures employed by the authorities to traditional macroeconomic policies and structural reforms, reviewed in turn below. Administrative measures: transitory or more durable effects? 14. Given the above outlook and the need to contain inflation within a certain reference period, the authorities stated their intention to resort again to administrative measures as required-and, with inflation declining more slowly than expected, they did so in August and early September 1999.’ The staffrecognized that, having eschewed what it saw as the preferable option of an immediate post-devaluation tightening of the fiscal stance, the authorities had left themselves with limited policy tools to restrain inflation within the short time span available to the Maastricht test date. But it stressed the shortcomings of such an approach. Indirect tax cuts, by their nature, have essentially transitory effects on inflation. While restraining inflation during a given reference period, they would not in themselves ensure the sustainability of price stability required under Maastricht-as demonstrated by the need for additional measures to compensate for the end of the effects of the 1998 package. With these measures having since been introduced, and the unwinding effect thus postponed to the second half of 2000, the staffs updated projections indicate observance of the Maastricht criterion for most of 2000, but an appreciable pickup in inflation in 2001-02 (Table 5).6 Furthermore, the approach inserted short- term considerations related to inflation performance that are extraneous to the setting of tax policy in the longer term. Finally, such tax relief adversely affected the fiscal accounts and, in some cases, risked ftteling consumption (as evidenced, for example, by booming car sales following the reduction in the relevant VAT rate). 15. The authorities were more positive about the enduring effect of such measures on inflation, and noted that strong revenue performance allowed for indirect tax cuts without endangering the fiscal targets. While they agreed that, from a narrow technical angle, the effect of such measures on inflation was indeed temporary, they noted that-to the extent that the measures had served, at end-1998, to avoid the adverse second-round effects of the operation of. wage catch-up clauses (and would do so again at end-1999, when such clauses would be ’ By reducing the excise taxes on gasoline, heating oil, and car purchases. 6 For 2002, the projections reflect a dissipation of the effects of the drachma’s depreciation in the run-up to EhfU and a beneficial impact on prices from the liberalization of the telecommunications and electricity sectors. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-8- triggered for inflation above 2 percent)-their impact on wage developments and on inflationary expectations was of a more lasting nature. The moderation observed in sectoral wage accords was reassuring in this respect, and the authorities suggested that an incipient, EMU-related change in wage-setting behavior was at work, with a growing realization of the consequences of the regime shift implied by monetary union. Staff observed that it was as yet premature to be confident on this score: empirical evidence suggests that Greek trade unions have tended to target real wages and incorporate current losses of purchasing power into future contracts.7 Regarding fiscal and tax policy, the authorities noted that a number of the cuts had aligned excise taxes more closely to EU averages, while others would be reversed in due course, and that the fiscal targets were in no way at risk as a result of the measures. The remaining contribution of monetary and exchange rate policy 16. The Bank of Greece intends to maintain a tight monetary stance for as long as needed in the run-up to EMU. The staff agreed that interest rate cuts would need to await clear evidence of lower actual and expected inflation on a sustained basis. A piece of evidence in this regard could be a deceleration in the pace of credit expansion in the fall of this year. 17. The Bank was however also keenly aware of the waning effectiveness of monetary policy in the approach to EMU. It noted that the conduct of monetary policy was constrained by a combination of (a) the traditional capital inflows dilemma (and related sterilization costs) faced by exchange-rate based disinflation approaches and (b) the EMU convergence process that largely predetermined expectations regarding interest rates. In this setting, the ability of monetary policy to curb credit growth was eroded, on the demand side, by the public’s widespread perception that interest rates would perforce decline in the coming period, and, on the supply side, by banks’ readiness to effect anticipatory reductions in lending rates in their vigorous pursuit of market shares. It was this set of circumstances that had induced the Bank to introduce credit controls in April 1999. Sharing staff views about the drawbacks of such measures, the Bank stressed their temporary nature, and aspects of their design that limited the degree of intervention in banks’ decisions. It remained concerned that, given the intensity of competition in the banking sector, the controls would not “bite” to the extent desired; indeed, continued excess growth in consumer lending subsequently induced it to tighten requirements in that area. The Bank had also sought to supplement its policy interventions with more vocal public pronouncements aimed at modifying behavior and shaping expectations-including, for example, a clear indication in its Annual Report that the pace of interest rate reductions would be contingent on firms and the self-employed contributing fully to the anti-inflationary effort in their price-setting behavior. 18. Looking forward, the eventual alignment of domestic interest rates with those in the euro area and the depreciation of the drachma to its central parity would entail what the staff saw as a sizable relaxation of monetrry conditions. Given the conditions prevailing in 7 See “Post-devaluation Inflation Prospects: An Empirical Investigation,” in IMF Staff Country Report No. 98/100. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-9- Greece (the drachma at some 8% percent above its central parity, and short-term interest rates 730 basis points above equivalent euro rates), such easing was set to be much larger than that experienced in other economies that joined EMU in the first wave (Figures 9 and 10). In the wake of this easing, several of these countries had been recording inflation rates appreciably above the euro average. 19. The authorities pointed to a number of factors that, in their view, attenuated the extent of monetary relaxation. First, they noted that the degree of easing would depend on the evolution of the euro/U.S. dollar rate, and pointed to some firming of the euro then underway. Second, and most importantly, they felt that the easing implied by lower interest rates would be significantly diminished by its dampening effect on household incomes. The staff thought that. the influence of this channel was being overplayed-while nonnegligible (given the large share of government debt and bank deposits in household financial assets), it was unlikely to have such a strong depressing impact on consumption as to offset the positive impulse of lower interest rates stemming from concurrent wealth and substitution effects, The authorities expressed interest in a quantification of these arguments, which however proved difficult due to data limitations; nonetheless, empirical results from other southern euro area countries indicate that the income effect on households cannot be relied upon to offset the expansionary impact of a reduction in interest rates (see Box 2 and Selected Issues paper). In addition, there was no disagreement that the exchange rate depreciation would impart an inflationary impulse. The discussions also reviewed the likely timing of the effects of the monetary easing: while such easing could, in some respects, be seen to have already largely occurred (long-term interest rates have converged substantially, and convergence at the short end is fully anticipated, influencing behavior), the Bank of Greece estimated that-given the time lags involved-the bulk of the effects of monetary easing would most likely be felt in 200 I. 20. The authorities saw no scope for containing the degree of monetary easing by opting for an exchange rate somewhat above the current ERM2 central parity as the EMU entry rate. They confirmed their intention to enter EMU at the current central parity and stressed that market expectations to the contrary (as reflected in some analysts’ commentary and in forward exchange rates, set on a rather thin market-see Figure 6) were without any basis in official intentions. They noted that the central rate implied by the March 1998 devaluation had already been chosen with a view to the exchange rate that would allow the economy to perform successfully in monetary union. It had accordingly been set at a level that took account of some intervening erosion in real terms in the period to EMU accession, such as to be consistent with the estimated equilibrium exchange rate (broadly defined as one that would keep the current account deficit close to 2 percent of GDP). 21. Staff bad sympathy for these arguments, although the evidence was not clear-cut that there was no scope for entering EMU at a slightly more appreciated exchange rate than the central parity The initial devaluation (12.3 percent) fell within a range (lo- 15 percent) that the staff had judged appropriate at the time based on a series of considerations (competitiveness indicators, medium-term saving-investment trends, and market assessments; see N/98/186, 7/15/98). Updated estimates based on the staffs macroeconomic balance Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- lo- . Box 2. Household Consumption and Interest Bates--Evidence From Other Countries he m-up to IMU participation will entail the convergence of Greek interest rates to the levels prevailing in the etx” area. While this ~rwess is already underway, a sizable further easing is in store. especially at the short end of the maturity spectrum. The impact of this Potor on household income is substantial. given lhe large share of govem”xnt debt that is held by domestic households and Ihe pmmincncc ‘f bank deposits in household financial assets Specifically, the Bank of Greece has estknated that interest rate mnvergewe will reduce ousehold interest income by about Dr I.2 trillion (or some 3 percent ofGDP). ‘he questin thus arisea u to whether (his “income effect” cm have ruch a stm depresrlng impact M wnmmption u to offset the Nositive impulse of lower buerest nter o” aggregate demand. Economic theory canmt offer a definitive mwer to this question; indeed, ven the hpact of a change in the real interest rate on consumption is not in principle unambiguous. SpxiIically. the above-noted income ffed operates along other factors that work in the opposite diction. Thus, a decline in interest rates ICSU~I.S in capital gains for bond older- “wealuI effect” that ca be expected to boost consumption. Moreover, a reduction of the real rate of interest should entail some ubstitulion of curent swing for current consumption, with this “substitution effect” having a similarly expansionary impact on demand. n the face of these ambiguities, the question at hand needs to be resoled empirically. Such an empirical investigation for the case of heece is severely hampered by data defii*ncWotably, the unavailability of household income accounts and the lack of quarterly ational accounts. Still, sane tmtativc conclusions can be drawn from a survey of the empirkal results for three southern Eumpea” out&es that currently participate in the e”ro are+IIaly, Portugal, and Spain. These countries have already undergone B process of nterest rate convergence and, to varying degrees, bear some impatant similarities lo Greece’s economic slruchue. At first glance, the xpcrience of these counties raises doubts about the relative quantitative Lnporiance of the income effect. Intcrcst rate co”vergence was mmpnid by a boom in consumer credit and private consumption in Portugal and Spain; cvcn in Italy, where there is considerable conomic slack, consumer spending has accelerated and is one of the few factors underpinning economic activity. Ve fusl present simul&ion results from the Oxford Economic Forecasting (OEF) model, which is used by EUI desks as an input to thei ~rojcctions. OEI: is a backward-looking error-correction model of OECD economies (excluding Greece. for lack of quarterly data), whose &lively small six and coruno” structure makes it suitable for international comparisons, albeit at the cost of missing some country-specifi Wures. On the question at hand, the mcdcl estimates a strong substitution effect of a change in interest rates for all three countries under onsideration, but does not explicitly include wealth as B determinant of consumption. Presented below are the estimated effects on onsumption and GDP of B permanent 100 basis point reduction in interest rates over a four-year horizon. ‘Ihe simulation results for all three ountries raise doubt about the relcvancc ofthe income effect: consumption is estimated to respond positively. and in a sustained manner, to ,ecline in interest rates, constituting a major transmission channel to economic activity. YCW I 2 3 4 si”lulatio”s usinn OEF (Percent deviations I?& baseline) ItslY POftWll Sk” CO”% GDP CO”S. GDP CO”S. GDP 0.28 0.16 0.23 0.35 0.44 0.28 0.44 0.28 0.44 0.30 0.50 0.35 0.29 0.26 0.36 0.19 0.41 0.37 0.17 0.19 0.30 0.16 0.36 0.31 L second set of simulations, based on the Batak of Italy’s quarterly model @I), was run specifiilly on Italy, which is a good omparator to Greece in terms of the debt ratio, its maturity stmchxe, and the extent to which it is held by domestic households. Compared t x OEF results, Bol specifies a much smaller substitution cffecf but at the same time explicitly intmduces a wealth effect relating to capital #ins on bond holdings as a determinant of consumption (results below again refer to a permanent 100 basis point interest rate reduction, ltematively treating the exchange rate as exogenous and endogenous). A salient difference compared to the OEF results is that the impact o n interest rate reduction on consumption eventually buns negative, reflecting the income effect. especially under the endogenous exchange ate specification. However, in cumulative terms, an interesl rate cut is estimated to boost consumption over the simulation horizon. Aorcover, and importantly for policy purposes. the income effect does not come to dominate until the fourth year after the shock. Simulations Using BoI Model (Percent deviations from baseline) YW 1 2 ExchanRe rate CXoRe”o”s Exchanae rate cndoacnous CO”*. GDP CO”S GDP 0.15 0.12 0.13 0.32 0.35 0.31 0.30 0.53 3 0.12 0.24 0.02 0.22 4 -0.13 0.09 -0.21 0.10 n summary, the empirical results presented above suggest the need for caution in relying on the income effect on households to offset the xpansionary impact of a reduction in interest rates. For ail three southern cum area counbies. an interest rate cut boosts consumption (and conomic activity), at least over a policy-relevant time horizon: there is a strong likelihood that this would hold for Greece as well. See ;clccted Issues paper for funher details. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- ll- approach tend to confirm this finding.’ The staff thus deemed the central ERM parity as broadly appropriate from a medium-term perspective-which also needed to take into account the likely decline of EU transfers from the substantial level (some 5 percent of GDP annually) secured in part under the Third Community Support Framework through 2006. Nonetheless, other indicators (including the strength of trade performance, the absence of a deflationary impulse imparted by the current level of the exchange rate, as well as a possibly telling lack of complaints by exporters), suggested some scope for flexibility in this respect-considering also the margin of error in calculations of equilibrium exchange rates. But the staff agreed that any scope for a more appreciated lock-in rate than that contemplated by the authorities was likely to be quite small and of lesser import in the overall disinflationary effort, pointing to the need to rely on other instruments-fiscal, wage, and structural policies-to ensure a sustainably competitive inflation performance in monetary union. The contribution of fiscal policy: the need to strengthen fiscal plans 22. The authorities’ convergence program for 1998-2001 provided the starting point for the discussions on fiscal policy. Under this program, the general government deficit is targeted to fall from 2.4 percent of GDP in 1998 to 0.8 percent of GDP in 2001, and the primary surplus to rise slightly over the same period (from 6.7 percent to 7 percent of GDP; with the economy operating at or around potential, actual and structural balances are similar). A review of the program’s estimates for the interest bill, conducted jointly during the mission, confirmed that these were decidedly conservative, as indeed the program explicitly recognizes (it quantifies the potential overestimation of interest payments at as much as 1.4 percentage points of GDP by 2001). The staff noted that, in these circumstances, adherence to the program’s targets for the overall deficit-on which policy is normally focused-would imply a marked deterioration of the primary surplus (by almost 1 percent of GDP in 2000), a development that was unwarranted on both medium term and cyclical grounds. * For a description of this approach, see E%IF Occasional Paper 167, Exchange Rate Assessment: Extensions of the Macroeconomic Balance Approach, 1998. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12- 23. The authorities concurred on the advisability of abiding rather to the convergence program’s targets for the primary balance (a surplus of some 7 percent of GDP in both 2000 and 2001). In the staffs calculations, a primary surplus of this magnitude would lead relatively rapidly (by 2001) to fiscal balance or a small overall surplus. The authorities, preferring to maintain their habitual caution in estimating the interest bill and in the announcement of official deficit targets, saw adherence to the primary surplus target as consistent with a somewhat slower improvement in the overall balance, but still one that would be more rapid than that envisaged in the present convergence program. Indeed, for the update of this program later this year, they were considering-but were not yet offtcially in a position to commit to-a strengthening of the deficit targets for 2000 and 2001, and achievement of fiscal balance by 2002.’ In this regard, in endorsing Greece’s convergence program in October 1998, the ECOFIN Council remarked that “a significant reinforcement of the pace of fiscal adjustment, if confirmed through the whole period of the program, would be most welcome.” 24. While fiscal balance (and, a fortiori, a small surplus) is more than would be required to ensure Greece’s observance of the Stability and Growth Pact (SGP), the staff noted that a proper assessment of the fiscal requirements depended also on an evaluation of the medium- and long-term outlook for both the assets and liabilities of the broader public sector. Taking this perspective, a number of considerations argued for an ambitious medium-term fiscal target. While Greece could count on comparatively large privatization proceeds, it was burdened by a 9 Initial working assumptions at the time of the discussions implied an overall deficit target of no more than 1% percent of GDP in 2000 (versus 1.7 percent of GDP in the present program) and % percent of GDP in 2001 (versus 0.8 percent of GDP), and of fiscal balance by 2002. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13 - high government debt ratio (a primary surplus of 7 percent of GDP would still leave this ratio at above 60 percent of GDP by 2005, when the number of pensioners begins rising steeply), the highest level of unfunded pension liabilities in the OECD, significant contingent liabilities, and a large debt accumulated by chronically loss-making public enterprises. In this vein, the staff saw merit in, and provided some preliminary suggestions on, developing a broad balance sheet/net worth approach to fiscal policy-making and -reporting, in line with trends in other OECD countries (see the Selected Issues paper, which also reviews the authorities’ self-assessment against the IMF Code of Good Praciices on Fiscal Transparency-Declaration on Principles). ” 25. Within the above medium-term framework, the staff considered that it was incumbent on fiscal policy in 1999 and 2000 to play a full role in restraining inflationary pressures arising from current cyclical conditions and the prospective monetary easing. For 1999, adherence to the budget target (a deficit of 1.9 percent of GDP) would fall short of this requirement, as it would imply a broadly neutral fiscal stance. Developments to date, however, indicated the likelihood of a marked overperformance on the revenue side, with the sustained tax administration efforts of the past years yielding tangible results (as well as significant revenues from a new turnover tax on share transactions). Although the authorities agreed that higher-than- budgeted revenues should largely be devoted to deficit reduction, they also reserved the possibility of using them in part to finance additional indirect tax cuts, which were subsequently undertaken. A better-than-budgeted result nonetheless remains within reach; the authorities’ latest estimate is of a deficit of 1% percent of GDP in 1999. 26. Looking to the 2000 budget, the staff welcomed the authorities’ recognition of the advisability of observing the convergence program’s target for the primary surplus (some 7 percent of GDP), rather than its superseded target for the overall deficit. But it cautioned that-while consistent with the above-noted medium-term requirements-such a target should be seen as a minimum when set against the cyclical and policy mix circumstances that were likely to prevail, and that greater restraint (to be assessed when formulating the 2000 budget) was likely to be needed.” ” The self-assessment indicates that significant steps have been taken toward improving fiscal transparency, and in its commentary (in a similar form to those for the United Kingdom and Argentina) the staff made a number of specific suggestions for possible further steps, particularly in terms of developing the accounting framework; improving information on various risks associated with the fiscal accounts; a more effective monitoring and analysis of the medium- and long-term effects of below-the-line capital injections to public enterprises (amounting to some 1% percent of GDP annually), and of the operations of the organization handling the proceeds of privatized assets (DEKA); and developing periodic reports on long-term fiscal sustainability. In general, these suggestions were well received by the authorities, and in some areas were seen as providing useful support to reforms under consideration. ‘i In this regard, in response to questions on the required degree of fiscal stringency in light of the prospective monetary easing, the staff estimated (as an illustrative exercise based on a structural VAR model; see Selected Issues paper) that-excluding any contribution from other (continued.. .) Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14- 21. In this setting, the staff advised the authorities to reconsider the tax reduction initiatives being planned for 2000 and 2001; the authorities took note of the stafTs concerns but remained committed to their intentions and have since gone forward. At the time of the discussions, the authorities were preparing a package of tax cuts for 2000-01, in an amount then put at some % percent of GDP over the two years. The staff expressed several reservations in this regard, pointing to the lack of detail on the offsetting expenditure cuts, the risk of higher revenue losses than those anticipated (notably from’the intended abolition of the presumptive taxation criteria introduced in the mid-1990s to assess the tax liabilities of the self-employed), the procyclical impulse that would be imparted to the economy, and the untimely signal of relaxation provided-particularly in a situation where the culture of price stability was still fragile and at a time when the negotiations for a new wage agreement would be resuming. The authorities noted the pressing need to address equity issues arising from the sizable fiscal drag of the past years, and wished also to demonstrate to the public tangible benefits from the pursuit of stability- oriented policies--they saw the strong fiscal, and especially revenue, performance as permitting it. As to the abolition of the presumptive criteria, they believed that progress in tax administration was now sufficient to advance to more sophisticated assessment methods. 28. In early September, the government announced a package of both tax cuts and benefit increases effective as from January 2000. Main measures include a raising of the level of tax-exempt income; higher tax allowances for families with children; a reduction in the corporate tax for small businesses; the abolition of the presumptive criteria; a reduction of social security contributions for new net hires; and an increase in unemployment and selected pension benefits. The package (whose total cost, inclusive of the indirect tax cuts, is officially estimated at 1.1 percent of GDP) is to be partly financed by a doubling (to 0.6 percent) of the tax on stock sales, estimated to raise about % percent of GDP. Although the 2000 budget has not yet been elaborated, the authorities see the package as compatible with a further appreciable decline in the overall deficit from the estimated outcome for 1999. The staff is less sanguine, and in particular-in the absence of finther offsetting measures-projects a sharp deterioration of the primary surplus (Table 5). The contribution of wage moderation 29. The current two-year national wage agreement will expire at end-1999 and negotiations on its renewal have yet to start, but early indications appear encouraging. Some key accords extending into next year (in public enterprises and the banking sector) have been concluded with moderate awards, and the 2000 budget is likely to incorporate wage moderation for civil servants. The staff stressed the importance that, in their negotiations, policies-fully offsetting the inflationary impact of monetary easing would require a cumulative fiscal contraction in the order of 3-4 percentage points of GDP over a two-year period. It recognized such an effort to be unrealistic, and the estimate probably on the high side, but it was seen as suggestive of the broad order of magnitude of the task at hand and indicative of the need to harness other policies (notably wage moderation and structural reforms) to securing sustainable price stability. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 15 - employers and employees appreciate frilly the consequences of the regime change implied by the ERh4 and, prospectively, monetary union, and queried the continued role of wage catch-up clauses in the new environment. The contribution of structural reforms: enhancing growth, disinflation and employment 30. The structural reform agenda remains a broad one: the discussions focused on those areas where key additional steps were likely to make a significant contribution to disinflation and growth prospects, notably by strengthening competition and raising productivity.12 There was agreement on the primary role that structural reforms would need to play to make the economy more efficient and promote a much more rapid and employment- intensive catch-up process: this was particularly the case with regard to privatization, public enterprise restructuring, liberalization of product markets, and labor market reforms. If sufftciently bold, the staff noted, the structural agenda could relieve the burden on macroeconomic policies. 31. The authorities expressed satisfaction with the implementation of the privatixation program for 1998-99, and with progress in the restructuring of loss-making public enterprises-these were jointly seen as priority areas. The authorities noted that privatization revenues under the program announced at the time of ERM entry had amounted to some 3% percent of GDP through the first quarter of 1999. They underscored in particular the ground- breaking nature of the sale of Ionian Bank, and its vital role in enhancing competition in the banking system. The staff concurred, but noted that such benefits now needed to be extended also to other key economic sectors (such as energy and transport) that remained dominated by public enterprises, Experience elsewhere (and, to a limited extent, in Greece itself, e.g., with regard to mobile telephony charges and the rates for certain liberalized airline routes) indicated the significant-and even rapid-contribution that privatization and deregulation could make to lowering prices for consumers and input costs for other sectors, thus aiding disinflation.” 32. The authorities intended to expand the scope of the privatixation and flotation program, to include, inter alia, sales of Commercial Bank, the Industrial Development Bank, I2 On the degree of required disinflation, it was noted that the catch-up of productivity in Greece’s tradables sector to the levels of main trading partners could be seen as justifying a modestly higher rate of inflation in Greece over the medium term. Box 3 sets out the results of a cross-country quantification of this effect, and confirms-subject to data limitations-the presence of an inflation differential that can be seen as a by-product of Greece’s real convergence process. ‘s The OECD, using a methodology employed in its regulatory reform project (see The OECD Report on Reguhtory Reform, 19984, estimates that a comprehensive restructuring and deregulation of the sectors dominated by public enterprises would exert an appreciable downward impact on the aggregate price level (1 percentage point off the CPI price level), while the cumulative output gain, including second-round effects in other sectors, would be of the order of 9-l 1 percent of GDP (see OECD Economic Survey of Greece, 1998). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 16- Box 3. A Cross-Country Quantification of the Balassa-Samuelson Effect Mation in Greece is intluenced in part by the catch-up of pmductivity in Greece’s tradable goods sector to the productivity levels >f its main trading partners. As discos& in several recent staf?reports (Finland, Ireland, and Spain), this “Balassa-Samuelson :ffect” comes about teausc counhies thst are expcrieacing rapid productivity growth in the txxlables sector will tend to have higher inflation rates for nonhaded goods, and thus higher inflation than would be the case were pmdoctivity growth even across ZtitXs. In Greux, the highly centralbed system of wage setting ensures that wage growth in nontmdables largely keeps pace with that in tmdables despite lower productivity growth. Figure 1 shows that the Balassa-Samuelson relationship holds reasonably well in European countries over 1990-96, with a :orrelation of 0.58 between total factor productivity growth and inflation differentials across tradable and nontradable sectors.’ As suggested by the theory, poorer countries tend to have larger productivity differentials reflecting their greater scope for productivity zatch-up, and thus larger inflation differentials across sectors. In Greece, however, the 1.9 percentage point productivity differential stems mainly from negative productivity growth in nontradables; productivity growth in tmdables, at 0.9 percent, exceeds that in Germany and France, but is below that of the other coo&es. The inflation differential of 1.2 percent behveen tradable and nontradable sectors in Greece is less than the correqmnding productivity differential, but this is due to faster wage growth in wdables. Greece is less open than the other counties examined with a smaller share of tradable goods, so that higher inflation in aonhadables has a relatively large effect on overallioflation. Figure 2 shows the prediction of the Balassa-Samuelson model for the contribution of the productivity differentials to overall inflation (non-agricultural production data are used in the calculations, so that the measure of inflation corresponds more closely to he GDP deflator rather than CPI inflation). The contribution to inflation depends on the productivity differential across sectors, the share of labor in each sector, and the share of nonhadables in each country’s output. Uneven productivity growth accounts for 1.7 percentage points of inflation in Greece over 1990-96, out of an average inflation rate of 14 percent in this period. This :ompares to a weighted average 0.5 percentage point contribution in the other coonhies (weighting by each country’s share of hadable goods production), so that the Balassa-Samuelson effect potentially accounts for 1.2 percentage points of the inflation Wferential between Greece and the other countries considered. Taking into account the higher inflation in Greece than in the rest of Europe and the depreciation of the drachma against the ECU, Greece experienced an ammal real appreciation of roughly 2% percent in terms of consumer prices during the above period; the estimated Balassa-Samuelson effect would thus account for nearly half of the real appreciation in terms of relative consumer prices-this potion can be considered as not repwenting a loss of external :ompetitiveness. This is broadly consistent with the divergence between the CPI-based real exchange rate and the measure based on relative unit labor costs in manufacturing: the latter, which does not reflect Balassa-Samuelson effects, appreciated by 9 percent versus a 15 perant appreciation of the CPI-based real exchange rate in the period examined (1990-96). While the data do not include the most recent years, the results suggest that some of the present inflation differential v&Ms the mro area counties reflects supply-side factors of productivity growth rather thao Greece’s more advanced cyclical position. Looking forward, the Balassa-Samuelson effect can be expected to remain an influence on inflation, since the level of productivity io tradables in Greece remains substantially below that of its EU partners. ’ This period was chosen to focus on the latest available data, but the relationship between productivity and inflation differentials Decomes stronger when longer time spans arc examined. See the Selected Issues Paper for further details. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17- and Hellenic Petroleum. However, majority sales of public utilities were not on the agenda; in this regard, the staff pressed for an early opening of these sectors to competition. The authorities felt however that necessary preparatory work still underway would require full use of the EU derogations to liberalization deadlines for fixed telephony and the electricity sector (to early 2001), and the gas sector (2006). In the electricity sector, for example, a resolution of the Public Power Corporation’s severe problem of unfunded pension liabilities was deemed an essential precondition to flotation, and steps along the lines proposed by an international consultant have recently been taken. Private participants pointed to various product market rigidities, in the form of barriers to entry and regulatory constraints faced by start-up companies, as thwarting the growth of potentially dynamic sectors (such as information technology) and standing in the way of related efficiency gains. In this area, the discussions suggested the need for a more proactive role of the Competition Commission, which has been hobbled by staffing constraints. 33. The performance of the labor market during the present recovery was recognized to have been disappointing, but the authorities felt that the measures taken in August 1998 needed time to exert their effects. I4 These measures had been designed to address some key rigidities (the inflexibility of working time, inadequate wage differentiation, and ineffectiveness ofjob matching mechanisms under a public monopoly) and had introduced innovations in these areas. However, the measures were subject to a web of implementation difficulties that had rendered them largely inoperative. Thus, there was no evidence that firms had availed themselves of the possibility of annualization of working time, there were no concrete cases of opt-outs from sectoral wage accords in areas of high unemployment, and the bulk of job placement activities remained in the hands of the public bureaucracy, despite the authorization of private employment agencies. While recognizing the slow start, the authorities felt that it was as yet premature to judge the effectiveness of these measures. They furthermore pointed to a series of other initiatives set out in the 1999 National &ion Planfor Employmen& including measures to address the high rate of youth unemployment. There was agreement that the 1999 plan marked a clear improvement from that of 1998: its elaboration had entailed an extensive consultation process, and its comprehensiveness allowed a useful stock-taking of the many facets of employment policy. Nonetheless, the staff queried the plan’s heavy reliance on employment subsidy programs, its skepticism regarding the efficacy of reductions in the tax wedge, and the prevalent role assigned to state-run organizations for training and placement services. It urged breakthroughs in reducing the high effective entry wage for first-time job-seekers (who account for almost half of the long-term unemployed), and in improving the quality and job-relevance of I4 For a review of the Greek labor market and some of the factors underlying the high level of structural unemployment, see Demekas, Dimitri and Zenon Kontolemis, “Unemployment in Greece: A Survey of the Issues,” IMF Working Paper 96/91; and “Implementing the OECD Jobs Strategy,” in OECD Economic Survey of Greece, 1996 (updated in subsequent surveys). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 18- vocational training.” Staff also called for a review of various anachronistic add-ons to social security contributions (such as those to subsidize low-cost housing loans) that burden labor costs. B. Other Policy Requirements 34. The discussions confirmed a broad recognition of the need for deep-seated reform of the social security system. The staff was impressed by the scope for savings and increased efficiency arising from the 1998 “mini” package (which included penalties to curtail evasion of contributions, the merger of a sizable number of supplementary social security funds, and a reduction of selected entitlements), as well as from plans to overhaul the organization of the largest basic pension fund (IKA). The authorities were well aware of the need to proceed with the “second phase” of reform that would address the system’s basic structure so as to ensure its long-term viability.‘6 They intended to do so in the next legislature, with measures including the harmonization of retirement ages across social security funds and of replacement ratios, and the introduction of fully funded supplementary schemes, The staff noted that a broad debate of the reform options in a nonpartisan spirit would be desirable, so as to permit the expeditious enactment of legislation after the elections. 35. The authorities viewed the Greek banking system as having strengthened considerably since the last consultation. The banks had taken advantage of the surge in equity prices to boost their capital base, and the consolidation of the sector was proceeding at a good pace. In response to the staffs observation that the consolidation to date had been entirely domestic, and that there were few signs that the banks were exploring cross-border alliances to better position themselves in the euro area environment, the authorities noted that domestic consolidation was a necessary first step in the process-early cross-border mergers had been rare in other European countries as well. Banks had continued to make progress in cleaning up their balance sheets. Even though the share of bad loans in total loans, at almost 14 percent in 1998, remained high, the authorities noted that the state-owned Agricultural Bank accounted for a large proportion of such loans, and a restructuring of its balance sheet was well advanced. The recent surge in consumer credit raised concerns about its possible adverse impact on the quality of the banks’ loan portfolio, and there were individual cases where the pace of credit expansion was such as to call into question the rigor of the approval process. The Bank of Greece noted that, in the past year, it had defined general criteria governing internal control systems, set out specific Is The EU Commission, in its Joint Employment Report (September 1999) found that, despite improvements in the 1999 plan, there remained a need to “develop a more comprehensive and integrated employment strategy as well as an effective monitoring and evaluation system.” l6 Many studies have highlighted, and suggested remedies to, the problems of the Greek social security system. Among the more recent, see Mylonas, Paul and C. de la Maisonneuve, “The problems and prospects faced by pay-as-you-go pensions systems: A case study of Greece,” Economic Department Working Papers No. 215, OECD: Paris, May 1999; and Committee for the Examination of Economic Policy in the Long Term, “Pensions and the Greek economy: A contribution to the public debate,” Athens, 1997. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 19- actions to be undertaken in this area, and established a quantitative framework for banks’ provisioning, along with more frequent and systematic reporting requirements. Looking forward to EMU, there was agreement that banks needed to redouble their efforts to improve efficiency and reduce their still high operating costs. In this regard, the consolidation process had yet to have an appreciable impact on statling levels or the number of branches. 36. The mission met with representatives of the Ministerial Committee, set up in November 1998, to coordinate all Y2K-related issues; the Committee is supported by a Task Force of experts (“Action Group 2000”). The staffwas provided with a review of progress to date in all main sectors (energy, transportation, telecommunications, water and sewage, public administration, and large and small private firms).i7 In all, the situation appeared to compare reasonably well with that of other EU countries; this judgement is reflected also in independent assessments (e.g., Gartner Group). In the financial system, Bank of Greece inspectors have been conducting on-site assessments, which have found a generally satisfactory level of preparedness, and identified contingency planning as the main remaining shortcoming. The central bank indicated that it would stand ready to provide additional liquidity to the banking sector if necessary to ensure normal operations in credit markets, III STAFF APPRAISAL 37. The stability-oriented economic policy pursued over the past years has succeeded in placing Greece squarely on the road to joining EMU by the target date of January 1, 2001-albeit with the recourse to indirect tax cuts to restrain inflation within the Maastricht criterion during the relevant reference period. The achievements to date are impressive: growth is strong, wage increases are moderate, fiscal developments are better than budgeted, and some appreciable advances have been recorded in the structural area. 38. At the same time, it is also evident that Greece faces both macroeconomic policy challenges and a need for further structural change to ensure the sustainability of low inflation. The reliance on administrative measures cannot ensure such sustainability. The macroeconomic policy mix would need to undergo a rebalancing, with fiscal policy being called upon to move more decisively to center stage in the disinflationary effort as the effectiveness of monetary policy diminishes and monetary conditions ease significantly-this will require a significant strengthening of current fiscal deficit targets and further measures to offset the costs of the tax and benefit package announced for 2000. On the structural front, the progress to date is beginning to reveal the economy’s substantial potential for growth when freed of its shackles, but-given Greece’s starting conditions-much remains to be done. Far-reaching structural reforms are also key to the sustainability of price stability. 39. The tight monetary policy pursued to date has been critical to the disinflation effort, but there are limits to this approach and monetary conditions will ease substantially in the run-up to EMU. The Bank of Greece’s objective of achieving price stability by end-1999, and on a sustainable basis thereafter, implies the maintenance of a tight stance as long as is feasible. ” Further information can be found on the Committee’s website at www.vear2000.m. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 20 - In this setting, the Bank’s posture of awaiting clear evidence of lower actual and expected inflation on a sustained basis before proceeding with further interest rate cuts is well-placed. Such a stance is also entirely appropriate in light of the economy’s cyclical position and other related developments, such as the boom in equity and credit markets. There are however clear limits to this approach (as shown also by the recourse to credit controls, an evident departure from practices elsewhere in Europe), and the EMU convergence process will progressively constrain the ability of an independent monetary policy to control inflation. 40. Given the constraints on an already tight monetary policy, there is a need to harness all other policy instruments--fiscal, wage, and structural policies--to the task of ensuring a sustainably low inflation performance in monetary union. It is, in the first instance, incumbent on fiscal policy to offset the effect of prospective monetary easing on inflation. The overall deficit targets of the convergence program for 200@-01 clearly fall short of this requirement. As recognized also by the authorities during the discussions, these targets are inadequate from both a cyclical and medium-term perspective: on the first count, they would imply a most untimely fiscal stimulus; on the second count, they unduly postpone the achievement of the stronger medium-term fiscal position-overall balance or a small surplus- that appears advisable and is within reach over the next two years. Though such a position would be more than required for observance of the SGP, a number of considerations regarding the medium- and long-term outlook for the assets and liabilities of the broader public sector, within a balance sheet approach to fiscal policy-making, argue for such heightened ambition. 41. In combining these short- and medium-term considerations, the better-than-budgeted outcome in prospect for 1999 is welcome and should be consolidated, with fiscal policy aiming to observe the convergence program’s targets for the primary balance in 2000-01 (a surplus of about 7 percent of GDP in both years), rather than its superseded targets for the overall deficit. Such a stance would imply no further primary adjustment from the projected outcome for 1999 and should thus be viewed as an absolute minimum from a cyclical perspective and given the large concomitant monetary easing. 42. In this setting, the tax cut and benetit package announced for 2000 entails risks that will need to be offset by appropriate counter-measures. The staff maintains its reservations about this package, other than what was requited, for equity reasons, to offset the fiscal drag experienced at the lowest minimum bracket. Besides the doubling of the turnover tax on stock transactions, the authorities are encouraged to identify offsetting cuts in current expenditures that are needed if the package is to be consistent with the maintenance of the primary surplus of 7 percent of GDP in 2000 and 2001. As noted, this is a minimum objective, and the situation will need to be monitored carefully, with the authorities standing ready to raise the sights further in elaborating the 2000 budget and to take corrective action promptly as needed in light of developments in the course of the year. It is also important to avoid handing back the hard-won revenue gains of improved tax administration, as may result from the abolition of the presumptive criteria; in order to contain revenue losses from this step, a Mher strengthening of tax assessment and control capabilities will be required. 43. The continued contribution of wage moderation to disinflation must be safeguarded in the new national agreement to be negotiated next year. In deciding wage increases, Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-21- employers and employees should look to unit labor cost developments in the euro area as a guidepost, and eschew t%ther recourse to wage catch-up clauses, whose existence clearly complicated the conduct of policies in 1998-99. 44. Progress under the privatization program to date has broken new ground, but it has yet to roll back the dominance of the public sector in key economic activities. The planned expansion of the reach of the privatization and flotation program is thus welcome, as are some important, albeit gradual, advances in public enterprise restructuring. But substantial benefits could accrue from a bolder and more far-reaching approach to liberalization and deregulation of the economy. In particular, absent majority sales of public utilities, significant early benefits for efficiency and disinflation could be obtained-as illustrated by the experience of other countries-by allowing new entrants into these markets. Wherever feasible, a more rapid liberalization than allowed under EU derogations should be pursued. A strengthening and refocusing of the activities of the Competition Commission could also help reduce the impediments faced by new entrants in many activities. 45. The benefits of privatization and liberalization have been most evident in the banking sector, though heightened competition raises challenges of its own. Greek banks have seized the opportunity provided by financial liberalization and the favorable economic cycle to expand their operations, boost their protitability, and strengthen their capital base. But progress has not been uniform across institutions and further efforts to reduce high operating costs remain needed. Furthermore, enhanced competition intensifies the risks faced by banks; the Bank of Greece’s steps to induce banks to upgrade their risk management and internal control systems are thus well-placed and their effectiveness will need to be closely monitored. 46. Despite strong economic growth, labor market performance has been lackluster, highlighting the need for further action. The measures adopted in August 1998 have been disappointing in their effects to date, and the implementation difftculties that have beset them should be alleviated. The 1999 National Action Planfor Employment is a welcome improvement over that of the previous year. It however relies heavily on a range of employment subsidy programs (whose cost and effectiveness will need to be closely monitored) and on state-run organizations for training and placement services-on the basis of other countries’ experiences, the public sector’s ability to perform these functions effectively is questionable. Furthermore, the reforms to date do not adequately address two key requirements: reducing the high effective entry wage for first-time job seekers and improving the quality of vocational training. 47. Greece commendably ranks among the few Fund member countries that have completed a self-assessment in relation to the IMF Code of Good Practices on Fiscal Transparency-Declaration on Principles. The assessment indicates that significant steps have been taken toward improving fiscal transparency in recent years, while also acknowledging areas where tinther steps are to be taken. In particular, the authorities are encouraged to develop a balance sheet approach to fiscal reporting and policy analysis-which, among other things, would involve enhanced monitoring of below-the-line support of public enterprises and of the operations of the organization handling the proceeds of privatized assets (DEKA)-as well as to improve information on risks associated with the fiscal accounts and develop periodic reports on long-term fiscal sustainability. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 22 - 48. Despite improvements in statistical data, there remain areas of weakness that complicate the assessment of economic conditions (Appendix II). Adoption of the Fifth Edition of the Balance of Payments Manual is in process, and the statistical service has recently issued an advance statistical release calendar for the first time. However, substantial work is needed with regard to the coverage, timeliness, and reliability of national accounts, and of fiscal and monetary data, before subscription to the Fund’s Special Data Dissemination Standard is feasible. 49. It is recommended that the next Article IV consultation with Greece be held on the standard 12-month cycle. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 23 - Table I, Greece: Selected Economic Indicators (Percentage cbmgss, unless otiemise indiutcd) Es,. Proj. Roj. 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 7.000 Danestir economy 2.0 -l.Z 1.0 2.0 -1.1 -1.0 -0.1 -4.0 -0.4 0.9 6.6 1.3 9.6 L.9 10.8 10.7 10.7 10.9 IL.2 -11.9 -0.5 -0.1 14.3 -6.6 -5.2 1.1 22 36.6 43.7 29.6 14.1 2.8 -7.1 4.1 4! -9 6 109.3 8.7 18.2 19.0 2.1 -1.0 4.4 2.7 5.6 7.8 5.8 14.3 a.* -2.8 0.5 9.2 LO.0 0.9 12.9 11.6 7.9 8.9 9.8 2.4 4.9 3.0 1.9 1.0 I,., 12.4 7.4 -0.8 -1.0 3.0 4.9 to.3 1.3 11.8 10.5 6.9 8.2 7.9 7.9 3.2 -0.4 3.5 2.5 -0.4 10.7 11.7 7.5 -1.3 -0.8 5.3 5.4 103 -0.5 11.0 7.0 4.5 5.5 5.4 6.9 3.6 0.6 3.2 2.1 0.0 6.8 6.0 9.0 -1.4 0.1 8.8 5.4 10.2 06 4.0 1.0 3.3 2.5 2.2 1.6 -12.8 .I26 -12.3 -2.4 -2.6 -2.6 -2.5 -3.7 -4.0 L4.6 17.3 12.4 -4. I -0.5 -2.4 -1.6 -0.4 -1.5 3.3 4.3 0.9 6.6 3.4 3.5 37.7 44.9 31.9 12.9 3.4 -10.6 2.3 2.7 -10.2 110.1 13.” 9.6 14.3 IS.5 38.0 43.0 31.” I2 0 2.5 -7.5 4.5 4.8 -7.2 I IZ.2 15.3 8.3 11.9 12.8 389 40.6 31.0 9.6 2.2 40 5.7 5.8 -3.8 109.5 7.8 11.4 10.1 103 3.7 0.3 3.3 1.8 cl.4 9.8 8.4 13.7 -1.5 -0.1 9.2 5.7 10.1 0.2 6.3 2.8 3.7 4.8 4.5 5.0 -12.7 -2.7 -3.0 17.2 -6.9 -4.6 -2.6 -4. L 39.3 40.0 30.9 9. L 17 -2 4 6.7 6.6 -2.5 106.1 9.8 10.0 11.9 11.5 -12.9 -2.4 -3.7 39.2 38.8 31.1 7.7 2.0 -1.5 6.1 5.9 -1.8 98.6 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-24- Table 2. Greece: Jndicatms ofExternal and Financial Vulnerability (In pmcmd dODP, utdeas otbmwi*e indiukd) 1991.94 ,995 1996 1997 ,998 1999 L&St CstitNtc Date 4.2 0.8 4.1 -2.3 4.6 0.6 1.9 7,918 788 4.0 32.6 24.0 mlcl 13.3 24.4 2l1.2 -0.2 5.3 0.7 -3.7 7.0 1.3 4.2 17.337 796 6.9 32.0 21.9 2.09 14.4 31.7 240.7 9,368 23.9 21,290 22.6 16.1 19.0 6.4 LO.3 -6.9 -2.0 1.0 -4.0 0.1 1.6 2.6 12,441 1,337 5.2 33.1 24.3 2.19 L2.6 34.9 273. I 109.4 7.8 15.3 9.5 3.8 1,480 2,303 8.1 7.0 9,688 24.6 29,240 29.4 L7.3 16.5 5.9 10.3 3.3 -1.7 -1.0 -3.” 7.L 6.5 2.0 17,188 0.0 6.9 26.5 106.1 9.8 ,m 12.0 6.9 2,738 5,799 9.8 8.2 13.6 3.4 Il.4 Mar-90 JUl.90 Jan-93 Mar-94 BBB BBE- BBB- BBB Negative Stable Paritivc Stable A-2 A-3 A-3 A-3 Jul.90 May-94 Baa, B2a3 et-95 BBB- MU.97 BBB- Positive A-3 DeC.96 Baa, J”“.97 Lxx-98 BBB- Positive A-3 h-99 A.2 l”l.99 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 25 - Table 3. Greece: Credit Indicators, 1994-98 (Outstanding amounts, end-of-year; in percent of GDP) 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 Greece Plivatc sector credit Consumer credit Mortgage credit Portugal Private sector credit Consumer credit Mortgage credit Spain Private sector credit Consumer credil Mortgage credit Euro area Private sector credit Consumer credit Mortgage credit 28.5 31.0 32.6 34.0 36.1 1.0 1.6 1.9 2.2 2.8 4.3 4.5 5.2 5.9 6.5 64.4 70.7 78.1 88.3 101.3 3.6 4.3 5.0 5.8 6.7 16.5 19.0 22.6 27.0 33.4 77.7 77.1 78.2 84.2 92.5 5.7 5.7 5.6 5.9 7.1 15.7 16.4 17.6 20.4 22.8 .,. 87.5 8.1 26.8 Sources: Bank of Greece, Bank of Portugal, Bank of Spain, European Central Bank. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-26- Table 4. Greece: Privatisation and Restruchtting Development8 Agency or Sector Action Taken Date Bank of Macedonia-Tluace GellmalEank Olympic Airlines public Petroleum CoIpomtlon hlkOfC~ Bank of Centml Greece Postal System Athens Urban Transport Organization Thermal Bus Company Athens-Pimeus Electric Buses Hellenic Railways Organization Hellenic Telecomnumications organization Athens Stock Exchange Ionian Bank Olympic Catering Hellenic Telecommunications Organ&ion Corinth canal SaIordki Intemalional Fair National Property Organisation Athens Water Supply Company Olympic Tourism Athens Port Authority SaIouiki Port Authority Salon&i Water Supply Company Horseracing Organ&ion Duty-Free Shops Ri~oll April 1998 Rivatization April 1998 Passage of Reform Bll April 1998 itfiz!zzgtie managwncnt conhact June 1999 June 1998 Prlvatization June 1998 Prlvatimtion July 1998 Signing of management contract July 1998 Signing of management contract, Relevant bill 1998 Signing of management contract, Relevant bill 1998 Signing of management contract. Relevant hill 1988 Signing of management contract, Relevant bill Nov. 1998 Stock Offering (third tranche) Nov. 199811 Stock Offering (second tmnche) Nov. 1998 Ptivatization Mar. 1999 2l Stock Offering April 199931 Stock offering (foti tmnche) July 1999 Privatisation early 1999 Privatization 1999 Privatization 1999 Privatization 1999 Privatization 1999 Privatisation 1999 privatimtion 1999 Privatization 1999 Privatition 1999 Privatisation 1999 41 II Tmnche size reduced to 10 percent (from planned 15 percent) of shares outstanding, 21 Postponed following unsuccesstid privatization attempt in August 1998. 3IDelayed from end-1998. 4IUnsuccessfol in July and December 1998. Majority sold to state-owned Agricultural Bank in August 1999 for subsequent disposal. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 21- Table 5. Greece: Staff Medium-Term Projections l/ (In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated) 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 StatT projections Real GDP growth (in percent) Inflation (HICP period average; in percent) Unemployment rate General government BalaINX Primary balance Structural balance Structural primary balance Debt Saving and investment Gross domestic investment O/which: capital formation Gross national saving Foreign saving (current account) 2/ 3.1 3.3 3.6 3.5 3.3 4.5 2.3 2.2 2.8 2.4 10.1 10.3 10.2 10.1 10.0 -2.4 -1.7 -1.5 -1.0 -0.8 6.7 7.0 6.1 5.7 5.3 -2.5 -1.9 -1.8 -1.2 -1.0 6.6 6.9 5.9 5.4 5.1 106. I 102.1 98.6 94.0 89.7 21.8 22.8 23.7 24.5 25.3 21.5 22.6 23.4 24.3 25. I 19.1 20.5 21.3 22.4 23.2 2.7 2.3 2.4 2.1 2.1 Source: Fund staff projections. l! Projections are based on the standard assumption of announced policies, including the tax and benefit package announced in September 1999, and known structural measures (e.g., libcralization of the telecommunications and electicity sectors in 2001). The projections are also based on the return of the drachma to its ERM2 central parity rate by end-2000 and on short-term interest rate convergence to eoro levels by that time. 2/ Data on a national accounts basis, excluding EU transfers to the investment budget. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 28 - ,,‘: 34 1; ---.. :,1 (GROSS FIXED CAPITAL FOKMA’llON (In percent of GDP) 32 ! :. -Greece ‘j> --EU REAL GDP Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-29- I "i ."'-..~- .... Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public1 ‘I 1 ,I II i 1 1 1 L -3o- Figure 3. Greece: External Developments LliNAL EFfECTIVI. EXCHANGE KAlES (EER) 3/ --REER (NW) (left scale) -RREER (CPI) (left scale) -UEtR (right scale) Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-31- Figure 4 Cl-3x12: Labor Mar!tet Deveiopments I Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-32- Figure 5. Greece: Consumer Prtce Inflation 1, 1 OVCRALL. GOODS, AND SERVICES ih,TLATION. 1997-99 1 -.",+--J-k- 3 _- ..~~_~ CORL CON'SUMCR PRICE INFLATION. 1997~99 1 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 33 - I- iicjure 6. Greece: Interest and Exchange Rates 1 45 1~0MltdAL - Lending rate I/ --Deoosit rote 2/ 351 I “’ 4 ;,.: ..’ ,,..” ,..’ .,..... ...,. ....” 3 ,,.’ I .“’ ,, Euro ‘I 1 crisis period (November 7. 1997) ;io I ERM entry (Uorch 23, 1998) ?l5 FORWARD EXCHANGE RATES 320 :X25’ t ‘.....“.“‘.““““““““.’ ‘.““““’ spot rate 330' I 235'. I\ Forword 340 1 role 345, 3x LRMll parity rate $0 30 %C 10 JI 3 31 32 32 33 33 34 31 :3!1 35 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-34- Figure 7. Greece: General Government Fiscal Developments l/ y$?~~~.q ‘C :...::..:: .:_ i-. ::: ;:..<;:,.. ::;.j: ,::.j -1 -a,{, “. 1 .: :.... ./ Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-35- Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-36- Figure 9. Greece: Monetary Conditions Index MONETARY CONDITIONS INDEX ,%+ctia 12 93 “ma. 1985 1986 1967 1968 196’9 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1996 1999 2000 90 35jRFAL THREE-MONTH INTERBANK RATE **ctim 3 30 I (1990 = 100) -3 !5 -2 !O’ 15 1 .2 .l LO- S- 0 .si-, I 1965 1966 1987 1986 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1996 1999 2000 - 105. 105. 10 10 .9s .9s 90 90 65 65 source: Staff calciulatlons source: Staff calciulatlons L - ‘5 !O 5 0 5 0 5 0 5 0 5 0 5 0 5 0 5 0 1 . ‘I Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3l- . . : I ;iqurc IO Greece: Monetary Conditzons Index Convergence lmpl~cat~ons I/ I Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 38 - APPBNDIX I I. II. III. IV. V. VI. VII. Greece - Fund Relations (As of August 3 1, 1999) Membership Status: Joined 12/27/1945; Article VIII General Resources Account: SDR Million % Quota Quota 823.00 100.0 Fund holdings of currency 529.66 64.4 Reserve position in Fund 293.34 35.6 Operational budget transfers (net) 20.00 SDR Department: SDR Million % Allocation Net cumulative allocation 103.54 100.0 Holdings 2.50 2.4 Designation Plan 9.00 Outstanding Purchases and Loans: None Financial Arrangements: None Projected Obligations to Fund (SDR Million; based on existing use of resources and present holdings of SDRs): None Exchange Rate Arrangements: Effective March 16, 1998, Greece devalued the drachma by 12.3 percent against the ECU and joined the Exchange Rate Mechanism (ERM) of the European Monetary System (EMS). Effective January 1, 1999, Greece joined the successor ERM2 Mechanism. Greece maintains restrictions on the making of payments for current international transactions vis-a-vis Iraq. These restrictions were notified to the Fund under Decision 144- (52/5 1) in EBD/90/304, g/21/90. VIII. Article IV Consultation: Greece is on a 12-month consultation cycle; the last Article IV consultation discussions were concluded on August 5, 1998 (EBlW98/86). IX. Technical Assistance: Year Dept. Purpose 1993 FAD Treasury Reform 1993 MAE Central Bank Independence in the Context of the Maastricht Treaty 1994 MAE Development of Primary and Secondary Markets in Government Securities Date June June September X. Resident Representative: None Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public. . -39- APPENDIX II Greece: Statistical Issues Efforts have been under way for several years to improve the quality and timeliness of Greece’s economic data. While there has been some progress, important weaknesses persist in a number of areas. The authorities have an open publication policy and have indicated their intention to subscribe to the SDDS. However, an STA mission in September 1997 found that a significant amount of work remained before subscription and posting of metadata to the DSBB would be feasible. This Appendix highlights problem areas and planned remedial actions. National accounts National Accounts data produced by the National Statistical Service of Greece conform to the 1979 European System of Accounts (ESA79), but are available only on an annual basis. Data in current prices exist for 1960-97, while data in constant prices of the previous year are available only for 1988-97 (the Ministry of National Economy produces estimates for 1998). The Statistical Service has provided data for 1960-97 in constant 1988 prices. Rather than working to introduce data on a quarterly basis, for which Greece has a derogation through 2002, attention has focused on producing annual regional accounts by 2000 (with EUROSTAT assistance), as a basis for determining certain EU transfers. Work is also underway to adopt ESA95. Balance of payments Balance of payments data on a settlements basis are available with a lag of about five months, while customs data on merchandise trade (upon which national accounts estimates are based) have longer lags. The former, however, are less reliable because of the effects that financial and capital account liberalization, and the rise in drachma-denominated trade with Balkan countries have had on traditional data collection and classification methods. The gap between the two measures of the trade accounts has widened since 1994, with the exception of 1998, especially with respect to exports. Settlements data seem to underestimate imports to a lesser extent, which, given their much larger magnitude relative to exports, leads to a biased picture of the trade balance compared to the customs data. The customs-based trade data are also not without problems, a feature common to customs statistics in other EU economies following adoption of the Single Market in 1993. Moreover, national accounts estimates appear to understate the current account deficit, as they do not include private drachma transfers abroad by foreign workers in Greece-which presumably finance part of the drachma-denominated export activity. In cooperation with EUROSTAT and a number of European central banks, the Bank of Greece has been engaged for a number of years in a comprehensive revision of the settlements statistics, with a view to ensure consistency with the fifth edition of the Balance ofPuymenfsManua1. The new “closed” statistical system (followed by many other European countries) has been introduced by nearly all large commercial banks with smaller banks slated to join the system in the next year. The Bank of Greece and the Statistical Service are both aiming to reduce the production lag for settlements and customs data to less than 45 days. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public. APPENDIX II Greece provides annual and quarterly balance of payments data, but these data are still in the presentation of the fourth Manual. In addition, the latest data per&ain to December 1997. (No international investment position has been provided yet). Government finance Reliable data exist for the central government, but the quality and timeliness of the data on public entities, including social security funds and local governments, are poor. As a result, the quality of the data for the general government is affected. The problem arises from inadequate accounting practices and weaknesses in reporting. In 1995, the authorities started addressing this issue through an attempt to clarify the financial relations between the central government and peripheral entities. A law adopted in 1997 introduced penalties for agencies that do not supply the required data on a timely basis, but no fines have yet been imposed. Monetary accounts There is a need for improving the timeliness of data for publication in the Zniernationul Financial Sfatisfics. At present, data for the accounts of deposit money banks and other banking institutions are reported with a lag of about ten months, and data for the monetary authorities’ accounts are usually available with a lag of about four months. Labor force survey A new quarterly labor force survey, in place since Fall 1998, uses a larger sample size and more detailed questionnaire, and allows data to be compiled on an EU-harmonized basis. There is no formal target date to shift to monthly surveys, which is the standard in other EU members. Advance release calendars The Statistical Service has announced an advance publication schedule for most statistical releases. However, this calendar is not always followed, with a substantial number of releastis-including market sensitive data such as consumer price inflation-appearing before the scheduled date. Internet Some statistical data are available on the internet, and the Statistical Service is working on providing broad access, possibly with some fee-based services. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicGreece: Core Statistical Indicators as of September 15, 1999 CeIlhal EXtanal Bank ReXWe/ COWUllCI current CdId Public Exchange International B&TU BaSZ Broad Lnterest PtiW EXptSJ Account Government GDP/GNP DebtKkM Rates ReSTVeS Sheet Money Money Rates Index tIllpOrtS B&W B&lVX Savlce Date of Latest 9115199 7130199 l/31/99 May 99 May 99 9/15/99 August 99 Jan 99 Jan 99 Oct. 98 1998 41 1998 Observation Date Received 9/15/99 81 I 2f99 s/13/99 8/l t/99 S/11199 9/15/99 9rll99 7t7l99 7i-7199 s/l 1199 sepi 99 June 99 ?? ,/Estimates exist with shorta lags. 2, Estimates can be pmduced on a daily basis with a lag of two days. 3, BOG = Bank of Greece; MNE = hktistry of National Economy. 41 Provisional. i8 F2 !z Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-42- APPENDIX III :‘. Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 991 FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE October --, 1999 International Monetary Fund 700 19’” Street, NW Washington, D. C. 20431 USA IMF Concludes Article IV Consultation with Greece On October --, 1999, the Executive Board concluded the Article IV consultation with Greece.’ Growth is relatively strong, with the economy in the sixth year of an expansion that is estimated to have brought output back to potential. GDP growth is projected at 3% percent in 1999, a rate in excess of the EU average for a fourth consecutive year. Activity is being led by high rates of investment, and consumption has been sustained by brisk consumer lending. Export performance has also strengthened, reversing a protracted decline in market shares, and contributing to a projected slight improvement in the current account deficit. The prolonged recovery has failed, however, to dent still high unemployment. The staff anticipates that growth will strengthen further, to some 3% percent, in 2000. Following the drachma devaluation and ERM entry in March 1998, inflation persisted at high levels through the summer. In response, the government introduced a series of indirect tax cuts (and other administrative measures) in the fall of 1998, and again more recently. These measures are projected to succeed in containing inflation within the likely Maastricht criterion for the relevant reference period (the year to early 2000). The other reference values required for EMU membership by January 1, 2001 are also expected to be observed. But the staff projects an appreciable pickup in inflation in the latter part of 2000 and in 2001, given the end of the effects of the indirect tax cuts and the impact of the pre-EMU monetary easing. ’ Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with. members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country collects economic and financial information, and discusses with officials the country’s economic developments and policies. On return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the country’s authorities. In this PIN, the main features of the Board’s discussion are described. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-43- APPENDIX Ill The monetary policy stance-centered on high interest rates and a strong drachma within’the ERM-has remained tight, aiding the anti-inflationary effort, Financial markets have reacted favorably, with a sharp fall in long-term interest rates and a booming equity market. But the effectiveness of monetary policy is diminishing in the run-up to EMU. In particular, lending to households has been boosted by the expected convergence of interest rates to euro area levels and by intense competition within the banking system. In this setting, the Bank of Greece imposed temporary credit controls in mid-April 1999, tightening them further at end-July. The 1999 fiscal deficit is set to come in under target (at some 1% -7 % percent of GDP, compared to a budget target of 1.9 percent of GDP), thanks to strong revenue performance. On the basis of this performance, the authorities announced a tax cut and benefit package for 2000 (for a total net cost, inclusive of the indirect tax cuts, put at slightly over % percent of GDP), which they see as compatible with a further decline in the overall deficit (the 2000 budget is currently under preparation). However, in the absence of further offsetting measures, the staff projects a notable deterioration of the primary surplus. The debt-to-GDP ratio is expected to decline further in 1999-2000, dipping below 100 percent of GDP. Progress with structural reforms has been most visible with regard to privatization, and important steps are being taken in public enterprise restructuring, but broad social security and labor market reforms remain on hold. The detailed privatization and partial flotation program announced upon ERM entry has, with a few delays. been essentially implemented. While sales in the banking system have generated intense competitive pressures, other key sectors continue to be dominated by public enterprises, with liberalization being deferred as long as possible under EU derogations. The restructuring of loss-making public enterprises has made some ground-breaking advances. Labor market measures taken in August 1998 have faced a web of implementation difficulties. Fundamental reform of the social security system has been deferred to after the 2000 elections; nonetheless, measures taken under a “mini” package hold the promise of both appreciable savings and increased efficiency. Executive Board Assessment <Begin Typing Here> Public lnformafion Notices (P/&J are issued. (i) at the request of a member country, following the conclusion of the Article IV consultation for countries seeking to make known the views of the IMF to the public. This action is intended to strengthen IMF surveillance over the economic policies of member countries by increasing the transparency of the IMF’s assessment of these policies; and (ii) following policy discussions in the Executive Board at the decision of the Board. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public;.. -44- APPENDIX III ’ ’ Greece: Selected Economic Indicators 1995 1906 1007 1908 1999 I/ Real economy (change in percent) GDP Domestic demand EU hwmonized consumer inflation (period average) Unemployment (in percent) lnvesbnent 2l Saving 21 Public finance (general government, in percent of GDP) Overall balance Primary balance Debt Of which: extemai debt Money and credit (end-period, percent change) Broad money (M4N) 3/ Domestic credit 41 Interest rates (year average) 3-month treasury bill rate 51 12-month treasury bill rate 6/ Balance of payments (national accounts, in percent of GDP) Trade balance Current account balance Foreign exchange reserves (US$billions) 71 Exchange rates 2.1 4.4 10.0 10.7 16.2 -10.6 -7.5 -4.0 2.3 4.5 5.7 110.1 112.2 109.5 23.5 22.9 24.3 13.0 15.3 7.8 9.8 7.9 9.6 a3 11.4 9.9 10.3 14.3 11.9 10.1 11.9 9.8 15.5 12.8 10.3 11.5 8.8 -12.8 -12.6 -12.3 -12.7 -12.5 -2.4 -2.6 -2.6 -2.7 -2.3 14.6 17.3 12.4 17.2 21.4 2.4 3.2 3.7 3.3 3.0 3.5 3.3 3.4 7.9 5.4 4.5 2.3 10.3 10.3 10.1 10.3 19.4 20.1 21.8 22.8 16.7 17.5 19.1 20.5 -2.4 -1.7 6.7 7.0 106.1 102.1 26.5 Exchange rate regime Member of the European monetary system Present rate (September 21, 1999) Dr 327.0 to 1 e”ro Nominal effective rate (lQQO=lOO) a/ 71.1 70.8 69.1 66.5 66.3 Real effective rate (lQgO=lOO) a/ 110.2 115.0 116.1 112.9 113.1 Sources: Data provided by the Greek authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections II IMF staff projections, except where noted. 21 I” percent of GDP. 3/Data for 1999 correspond to the 12.month change to end-July. 41 Data for 1999 correspond to the 12.month change to end-May. 51 Data for 1999 correspond to the auction of August 17. 1999. 61 Data for 1999 correspond to the aucbon of August 31, 1999 71 Data for 1999 correspond to end-August. 81 Data for 1999 correspond to June. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public