DOCUMENT~FINTERNATIONALM~NETARYFUND ANDNOTFORPUBLICUSE MASTER FILES ROOM HQ C-525 0450 sMl991151 CONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION June 30, 1999 To: From: Subject: Members of the Executive Board The Secretary Republic of Kazakhstan-Staff Report for the 1999 Article IV Consultation Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staff report for the 1999 Article IV consultation with the Republic of Kazakhstan, which will be brought to the agenda for discussion on a date to be announced. Mr. Berengaut (ext. 38773) or Mr. Desruelle (ext. 34373) is available to answer technical or factual questions relating to this paper prior to the Board discussion. Unless the Documents Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the WTO Secretariat on Friday, July 9, 1999; and to the Asian Development Bank, the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the European Commission, and the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development, following its consideration by the Executive Board. Att: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicCONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND REPUBLIC OF KAZAKHSTAN Staff Report for the 1999 Article IV Consultation Prepared by Staff Representatives for the 1999 Consultation with the Republic of Kazakhstan Approved by Oleh Havrylyshyn and Carlos Muhiz June 29, 1999 1 The consultations discussions were held in Almaty and Astana April 2%May 12 1999. 1 The staffteam comprised Mr. Berengaut (head), Messrs. Desruelle, Stern (all EUR2), Mr. Szekely (FAD), Mr. Njoroge (PDR), Mr. Andrews (MAE), Ms. Marton (BLS), and Ms. Selishev (administrative assistant, EU2). Mr. Ross, Resident Representative, assisted the team. Mr. Burnashev, assistant to the Executive Director for Kazakhstan, attended the discussions. 1 The team met with the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister ofFinance Mr. Jandosov, Chairman of the National Bank of Kazakhstan Mr. Damitov, Ministers of State Revenue, Energy, Trade and Industry, Labor and Social Protection, other senior officials, leaders of both houses of parliament, donors, and representatives of the private sector. 1 The 1998 Article IV consultation was concluded on June 24, 1998. At the conclusion ofthe last Article IV consultation with Kazakhstan (BBS/98/92 and W/98/132), on June 24, 1998, Executive Directors commended the authorities for their overall good policy implementation record. At the same time, Directors underscored that continued skillful and determined policy implementation was required in view of the external uncertainties, Directors emphasized the importance of keeping the fiscal deficit under control and reducing it significantly over the medium term. In addition, Directors expressed concerns about the delays in privatization and trade liberalization. 1 Kazakhstan accepted the obligations of Article VIII, sections 2, 3 and 4, in 1996 and maintains an exchange system that is free from restrictions on the making of payments and transfers for current international transactions. ) The principal author of the report was Mr. Berengaut. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2- I. II. III. Contents Page Executive Summary ............................................................................................. .3 Recent Economic Developments in Kazakhstan.. .................................................. 4 Performance Under the EFF-Supported Program ................................................ 10 Policy Discussions .............................................................................................. 10 A. Monetary and Exchange Rate Policies ..................................................... 10 B. Fiscal Policy ............................................................................................ 13 C. Structural Reforms .................................................................................. 17 IV. Medium Term Outlook.. ..................................................................................... 20 V. Staff Appraisal .................................................................................................... 21 Boxes 1. Accompanying Measures to the Exchange Regime Shift ...................................... .8 2. An Assessment of the Financial System.. ............................................................ 12 3. Government Arrears ........................................................................................... 14 4. Consequences of Delaying Fiscal Adjustment.. ................................................... 15 5. Transparency Issues ............................................................................................ 19 6. Foreign Direct Investment-Issues and Initiatives .............................................. 20 Tables 1. Summary of Economic Indicators, 1997-2000 .................................................... 24 2. Selected Monetary Variables, 1997-99 ................................................................ 25 3. Financial Sector Vulnerability Indicators, 1996-99 ............................................ .26 4. Selected General Government Data, 1997-99.. .................................................... 27 5. Performance Criteria and Indicative Targets, December 1998-March 1999 ......... 28 6. Structural Benchmarks for December 3 1, 1998-March 3 1, 1999 ......................... 29 Figures 1. Selected Measures of External Shocks, 1997-99 ................................................. 5 2. Selected Economic Indicators, 1997-99 .............................................................. 6 3. Exchange Rate, Inflation and Interest Rates, 1998-99 ......................................... 7 4. Public Debt and Primary Cap, 1996-2014 ........................................................... 16 Appendices I. Fund Relations .................................................................................................... 3 1 II. Relations with the World Bank Croup ................................................................ 34 III. Statistical Issues ................................................................................................. 36 IV. Medium-Term Scenarios, 1999-2004 .................................................................. 40 V. Draft Background Section for the PIN ................................................................ 46 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3- Executive Summary Recent Developments During the second half of 1998, Kazakhstan was hit by a series of external shocks, which resulted in a sharp contraction of economic activity. Triggered by weaknesses in oil and raw material markets, a disastrous grain harvest, turmoil in international financial markets, and especially the spillover effects of the crisis in Russia (including the sharp depreciation of the ruble), output contracted from the third quarter of 1998 through the first quarter of 1999 and inflation fell sharply. The fiscal stance was loosened considerably in late December in the run-up to the presidential election in January 1999, as election-related spending surged. The fiscal situation continued to worsen in the first quarter of 1999. At the same time, financing was essentially limited to receipts from one sizable privatization operation. Loss of confidence in the tenge and expectations of a devaluation led to a considerable drop in the demand for tenge-denominated assets. On April 4, 1999, the government of Kazakhstan and the NBK announced a shift to a freely floating exchange regime. Despite the current economic situation, the authorities have continued to carry out structural reforms in a wide range of areas. Policy Discussions Discussions focused on strengthening policies in three main areas: maintenance of prudent monetary policy with a view to restoring confidence in the financial system and minimizing the intlationary impact of the devaluation, tiscal adjustment, and continuation of structural reform in all sectors. Monetary Policy. The authorities indicated that they have shifted from the exchange rate to inflation as the primary target for monetary policy. They thought that it would be important initially to base the monetary program on conservative demand for money assumptions. Fiscal Policy. While the authorities agreed with the mission that, from the point of view of fiscal sustainability over the medium term, a deficit of no more than 6 percent of GDP in 1999 would be preferable, they underscored the political constraints in bringing about the required expenditure cuts as the main obstacle in achieving this deficit target, Banking sector stability. In the NBK’s opinion, the key policy priority in the period ahead will be to ensure the stability of the financial sector. The NT3K believes that the effects on the banks’ clients’ ability to service their dollar denominated debts fully and in a timely manner will require close attention. Thus, the chief instrument in maintaining stability was a reinforced regulatory and supervisory regime, Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4- 1. R.ECENT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS IN KAZAKHSTAN 1. During the second half of 1998, Kazakhstan was hit by a series of external shocks, which resulted in a sharp contraction of economic activity.’ Triggered by weaknesses in oil and raw material markets, a disastrous grain harvest, turmoil in international financial markets, and especially the spillover effects of the crisis in Russia (including the sharp depreciation of the ruble), output contracted from the third quarter of 1998 through the first quarter of 1999 and inflation fell sharply. (Table 1 and Figures 1 and 2). The decline in economic activity accelerated at the end of 1998, with real GDP for the year falling by 2% percent (compared to the program projection of -1% percent) and inflation declining to 1.9 percent at year end (compared to a program projection of 8.5 percent). According to preliminary estimates, GDP fell by close to 4 percent in the first quarter of 1999 relative to the first quarter of 1998, and consumer prices in March 1999 were 1 percent below the March 1998 figure. 2. The monetary policy framework in place up to end-March 1999 was based on a downward crawl of the nominal exchange rate against the U.S. dollar and maintenance of relatively high interest rates. As a result of the slow rate of nominal depreciation, the bilateral real exchange rate vis-a-vis the Russian ruble appreciated by some 70 percent in the second half of 1998 and by an additional 10 percent during the first quarter of 1999, while the bilateral rate against the U.S. dollar depreciated by around 5 percent from July 1998 to end-March 1999. 3. Throughout the period, loss of confidence in the tenge and expectations of a devaluation led to a considerable drop in the demand for tengodenominated assets (Table 2). Despite, real interest rates of about 25 percent per annum, pressure on the foreign exchange market ensued and the NBK intervened heavily to support the exchange rate. As a result, net international reserves of the NBK declined by almost 35 percent 6om July 1998 to March 1999, and the monetary base fell by close to 25 percent over the same period. 4. On April 4,1999, the government of Kauakhstan and the NDK announced a shift to a freely floating exchange regime (Figure 3). At the same time, the NBK reaffhmed its commitment to tight monetary policy aimed at maintaining a low inflation rate and macroeconomic stability. The authorities also announced a set of accompanying measures (Box 1). After a few days of volatility, the tenge had stabilized at around T 113-l 15 and has since depreciated steadily. As of June 25, 1999 the exchange rate was T 133=$1 compared with T 88.3 = $1 on the eve of the regime switch. At the end of May 1999, the tenge’s real effective exchange rate was estimated to have fallen to approximately 15 percent below the level that prevailed immediately before the 1998 crisis in Russia. Since the change in the ’ See EBS/98/212 for a description of developments in 1998. The fifth review under the EFF- supported program was approved by the Executive Board on December 15, 1998 (EBS/98/212). The arrangement has not been operative since then and it expires July 16, 1999. Of the total amount of the arrangement of SDR 309.4 million, SDR 154.7 million has been drawn. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public110 100 90 80 70 60 -5- Figure 1. Kazakhstan: Selected Measures of External Shocks. 1997-99 Terms of Trade (1994 cw = 1001) I 97 Q,, QlIJ QW 98 QII QUI QIV 99 QJ Ql Qf Current Account Balance 4.0 , (In percent of GDP) I 2.0 0.0 ,. ,. ,. ., ,, ,.....,..... -2.0 4.0 .a -8.0 -,o.o -*?..o rY?Y!i 97 QII QllI QI" 98 QII Q,ll QIV 99 97 QII QIII Q,” 98 Q,, Q,Il QIV 99 QI PI QI Q1 QI Q1 Real Exchange Rate Indices l/ (Dec. 1994 = 1) 1.8 ) g-r-- ,, t,, , , ,~““““, , , JMMJSNJMMJSNJM 97 98 99 Real GDP Growth 6,0 , (Over same auarter wevious war) :::I/& 0.0 ,, ., ., ., ,, ,. ,, ,, -2.0 4.0 -5.0 t \r -8.0 1 30.0 l Consumer Price Inflation (12-month percentwe change) -5.01’~“““.“~‘* ~*“~“~“*‘~’ JFMAMJJASONDJFMAMJJASONDJFMAM 97 98 99 Sources: Kazakh authorities; and Fund staRestimates and projections. I/ An increase in the index is a real appreciation. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-6- Figure 2. Kazakhstan: Selected Economic Indicators. 1997-99 IMMISNJMMJSNJM JMMJSNJMMJSNJMM 91 98 99 97 98 99 Number of Commetcial Banks. 1995-98 EXpelldihXW NIR and Intcwmtion i.h millions of U.S. dollar) 140 *xl slBmkswitbf&~c+al 100 80 60 40 20 0 30 25 20 15 10 5 0 ,995 1996 199, 1998 2.0 18 16 14 12 LO 8 6 4 2 0 199, 1998 1999 1997 ,998 ,999 FDI and Privatization Rewipts (In percent of GDP) 6.0 5.0 4.0 3.0 ;; t ~:~~zL 1997 1998 1999 Sources: Kazakh authorities; and Fund naffeaimatm and projections Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicFigure 3. Kazakhstan: Exchange Rate, Inflation and Interest Rates, 1998-99 0.014 0.013 0.012 0.011 0.010 0.009 0.008 0.007 usmenge (end-of-period, let? scale) _ ________ _ ---. ---: .- : . . . :. : *._.* : _- __-. -------_ :---- _- *. __-- . _, . . . Yield on 3-month Treasury bill l/ 2/ (right scale) - - s/ -* - -- ” -- . 1 -* -\ . . s - ..* PPI - -. -. 12-month percentage change - - ._ (right scale) - -. J98 F M A M J J A S 0 N D J99 F M A M Sources: Kazakh authorities; and Fund staff estimates l/ No comparable data for April-May owing to conversion of treasury bills to U.S. dollar denomination. 21 From March 1999 onward, yield on NEiK notes. 30 28 26 24 22 20 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 0 -2 -4 -6 -8 -10 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-8- exchange rate regime, the NBK’s intervention in the foreign exchange market has been limited and its NIR position has remained broadly stable. Box 1. Accompanying Measures to the Exchange Regime Shift On April 4,1999, together with public notification of a shitI to a freely floating exchange regime, the government of Kazakhstan and the National Bank of Kazakhstan anoounced a set of accompanying meawes, principally designed to boost individual depositors’ confidence in the banking system and to prevent instability in the foreign exchange market. These meames included: l Voluntary conversion of 100 percent of tengedenominated deposits held by individuals into dollar- denominated deposits at the pre-floating exchange rate (T 88.3 = Sl), provided that these deposits not be withdrawn during the next nine months; l Voluntary conversion of 30 percent of tengedenominated deposits held by enterprises into dollar- denominated deposits at the pre-floating exchange rate. provided that these deposits not be withdrawn during the next six months, . Temporary reduction of commercial banks’ reserve requirements from 10 to 5 percent; l Introduction of a temporary 50 percent surrender requirement on export proceeds; . Voluntary conversion of pension funds’ holdings of treaswy securities into a dollar-indexed five-year government bond at the pre-floating exchange rate; and . Maintenance of utility tarifrs at April 1.1999 levels during the next few months. The temporary reduction in commercial banks’ reserve requirements was reversed within two weeks. Depending upon assumptions as to the future exchange rate developments, the initial cost of the deposit conversion scheme was estimated to amount to behveen 0.1 and 0.25 percent of GDP in 1999 and between 0.35 and 0.65 percent of GDP in 2000. In the event, a limited number of depositors opted for participating in the conversion scheme. Given the requirement on the holding period, it is still unwtain what proportion of those participating will be able to exercise the offered option of conversion. Consequently, its cost is forecast to bc minimal. Again, depending upon the assumptions, the net present value of the cost of the security conversion scheme for pension funds e&mated to be bchveen 0.15 and 0.2 percent of GDP. In the context of the Pension Reform Adjustment Loan, the Kazakh authorities are presently cooperating with the World Bank to insure that progress in the implementation of the new pension reform is not impeded by the sccuity conversion scheme. Utility tariff changes are woally implemented every quarter. The next tariff change is scheduled to take place on July 1. According to the law, utilities had up to May 15 to submit their rquests for tariff moditications. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-9- 5. The banking system has apparently weathered the first round effects of the devaluation. Indicators of banking sector soundness (ratio of nonperforming loans to total loans, loan-loss provisioning, and credit to GDP) have remained broadly stable since July 1998 and there have been few signs of any recent deterioration (Table 3). However, significant risks of bank insolvency remain, especially as a high proportion of commercial banks’ loans is explicitly or implicitly dollar-indexed and many of the borrowers are not foreign currency earners. 6. The fiscal stance was loosened considerably in late December in the run-up to the presidential election in January 1999, as election-related spending surged (Table 4). The fiscal deficit for the genera1 government amounted to 7.7 percent of GDP in 1998, compared with a program target of 6.2 percent of GDP, primarily on account of overspending. The fiscal situation continued to worsen in the first quarter of 1999. Revenues underperformed owing to the large decline in economic activity and the expansion of informal and barter operations. At the same time, financing was essentially limited to receipts from one sizable privatization operation, as the issuance of treasury bills was only slightly above redemption. Owing to a resulting cash financing constraint, expenditures during the first quarter were basically limited to wage and interest payments; moreover, there was an accumulation of arrears, including on pension payments (which, starting in 1999, became a responsibility of the republican budget). 7. The Kazakh parliament adopted a revised budget on March 30, which envisaged a general government deficit of 7 percent of GDP. The budget was based on a level of revenues of over 20 percent of GDP, compared with an actual outcome for revenue collections of about 18 percent (on a comparable basis) for 1998. The other notable feature of the budget was a significant shift in expenditures to local authorities. 8. The external shocks and the real exchange rate appreciation which bad taken place before end-March 1999 combined to widen the current account deficit in 1998 and resulted in strong protectionist pressures. Exports fell sharply as unit values plummeted, imports fell as well, on account of depressed domestic demand, but by less than exports. Protectionist pressures were particularly strong from agricultural producers competing directly with exports from neighboring countries. In response, the government entered into a bilateral agreement with Russia that temporarily restricted certain exports to Kazakhstan, imposed tariffs of 200 percent on certain food items, tobacco, and alcohol from the Kyrgyz Republic and Uzbekistan, and quotas on imports of a few other items. 9. The authorities have continued to carry out structural reforms in a wide range of areas. In the banking sector, the lower chamber of parliament has approved a liberalization of foreign bank access to the Kazakh market by raising the limit on foreign ownership from 25 to 50 percent of total assets. Parliament adopted a revised Budget System Law that clarifies the division of tax receipts and expenditure responsibilities between central and local governments. Parliament also approved changes to the Law on Social Benefits, which included the replacement of a complex system of benefits-in-kind with a single cash benefit and an overhaul of unemployment assistance, The government submitted to parliament a law strengthening private ownership rights to land, Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-lO- II. PERFORMANCE UNDER THE EFF-SIJPP~RTED PROGRAM 10. As a consequence of a worsening of the external environment and policy slippages, the program supported by the EPP arrangement went off-track at end- December 1998 (Table 5). Several end-December 1998 performance criteria were missed, including those on net domestic assets of the NBK, net international reserves of the NBK, overall balance of the general government, and other domestic arrears of the general government. Discussions with the staff in early 1999 did not succeed in reaching agreement on policies that could bring the program back on track. As described above, pressures on both the foreign exchange market and the budget persisted in the fust quarter of 1999. Consequently, the end-March 1999 performance criteria on net international reserves of the NBK was missed, as was the indicative target on revenue of the republican and local governments. Structural aspects ofthe program were implemented broadly as envisaged (Table 6). HI. POLICY DLWUSSIONS 11. The discussions focused on the need to implement speedily a set of policies that would bring the economy back on a sustained growth path. It was noted in particular that while growth was expected to turn positive in the second half of 1999, based primarily on a more advantageous external environment and changes in the exchange rate, the sustainability of the recovery remained open to questions signaling the need for a major strengthening of the policy framework A. Monetary and Exchange Bate Policies 12. The authorities explained that delays in strengthening exchange rate policy reflected primarily early uncertainties about the size and duration of the external shocks and concerns about the stability of the Kazakh financial system.’ The initial strategy was to emphasize credibility by maintaining the pace of nominal depreciation, raising interest rates, enforcing a tight budget position and boosting the international reserves of the NBK by drawing on the previously precautionary arrangement with the Fund. The strategy proved ineffective in arresting the need for NBK intervention in the foreign exchange market as the size of the shocks became more apparent (especially, as regards the persistent real depreciation of the Russian ruble) and as the budget was loosened towards end-1998. Having ruled out additional increases in interest rates as being too costly for growth, the NElK set the stage for a radical change in its exchange rate policy-the floating of the tenge on April 5, 1999. 13. The authorities were satisfied with the initial results of the new exchange rate policy, especially the absence of instability with little NBK intervention, some ’ Atter August 1998, two factors were particularly worrisome in this context: widespread media reports of banking closures in Russia and cutoffs in foreign banks’ credit lines to Kazakh banks. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-II- remonetisation, and the quick dissipation of the post-devaluation price pressures. Against this background, they noted that the measures that were introduced at the time of the floating of the tenge were either reversed quickly (reduction in reserve requirements) or proved less important than had initially been envisaged (indexation of households’ and firms deposits). They also stressed their intention to maintain the exchange system gee of restrictions, consistent with Kazakhstan’s Article VIII status. 14. Looking ahead, the authorities did not foresee major problems in effecting the switch of the monetary policy anchor from the exchange rate to inflation as the primary target, The level of interest rates, the rate of growth of credit to the economy and the level of the NBK’s gross reserves would also be used as indicators. The authorities agreed with the mission that an inflation target of around 15 percent for 1999 and 9 percent for 2000 is reasonable in that it would accommodate the post-devaluation relative price adjustment without allowing inflationary entrenchment. The authorities saw substantial room for further decreases in interest rates. The mission warned the NBK that any further moves in the direction of reducing interest rates should await evidence of falling inflation in line with the end-year target. As regards the international reserve position of the NBK, the staff endorsed the NBK target of at least three months import coverage. The authorities thought that it would be important initially to target the growth of monetary aggregates based on conservative demand for money assumptions but nevertheless saw substantial scope for remonetixation, especially in 2000. IS. In the NBK’s opinion, the most serious challenge in the period ahead will be to ensure the stability of the financial sector. The NBK thought that, while the first round effects of the change in exchange rate policy on the banks’ balance sheets were manageable, the effects on the banks’ clients’ ability to service their dollar denominated debts t%lly and in a timely manner were more problematic. The key instrument in maintaining stability was a reinforced regulatory and supervisory regime (Box 2). 16. The mission noted the advantages of strengthening central bank independence and of increasing the transparency of NBK policies and operations. The NBK officials described their efforts to broaden the range and frequency of reporting to the markets on their operations and expected that t%rther steps in this direction will be taken in the near future. The mission discussed the merits of amending the Central Bank law to clarify the mission ofthe NBK and the circumstances under which the Governor can be dismissed. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12- Box 2. An Assessment of the Financial System Kazakhtan’s tinaneial system has been substantially strengthened in the past three years. At the same time, significant weaknesses remain; these may become more apparent following the recent devaluation of the tenge. Regress made toward a soundfinancial system The tinancial system was io a very poor state in the years immediately following independence, as a large nnmber of mostly small, poorly capitalized, aod badly managed banks had been allowed to operate. By end- 1994, loans classified as substandard or worse exceeded 50 percent of the loan portfolio. Start& in 1995, the National Bank of Kazakhstan @JBK) took action to weed out the weakest fwcial institotions. Warily as a result of the withdrawal of banking licenses for prudential reasons, the number of commercial bank.3 steadily fell from 184 at the beginning of 1995 to 71 at the end of 1998. The NBK introduced enhanced prudential requirements in 1997, which are consistent with international best practice. At end-1998, a fti grooup of 13 banks were found to have met alI enhanced prudential requirements. All banks are expected to comply by end-2000. The NBK has put in place a comprehensive off-site reporting system and a regular program of on-site examinations. Remaining challenges NotwidManding the progress made so far, the health of the financial system remains a source of real concern. In particular, the financial performance of most commercial banks has been weak, as their operating expenses are high compared to intemational standards and the quality of their loan portfolio remains low with 30 percent of loans classitied as substandard or worse at end-1998. The afermath of fhe Tenge ‘s depreciation Earoings of commercial banks will be affected by the reCent depreciation of the tenge. ln the first instance, most hanks will enjoy currency revaluation gains, as 70 percent of loans are either denominated in or indexed to a foreign currency compared to 40 percent of deposits on the liability side. However. they are also likely to suffer from a tiuther deterioration in their loan portfolio, as a large number of borrowers with foreign currency loans have little foreign currency denominated income. Faced with this situation, the staff has recommended that (a) the NBK conduct as won as possible but, in any case, not after then end-1999 on-site reviews of all domestic banks with more than 5 percent of total commercial banking assets, so as to ensure adequate loan-loss provisioning, (b) the NBK conduct a special on-site review of any bank requbing ongoing liquidity support; and (c) that, if such a review reveals that a bank is insolvent, the NBK withdraw liquidity support and place the bank in conservatorship or under liquidation. Further restruchwing of the banking sector The number of banks remains large and it is expected that the restruchaing of the banking sector will continue. The staff urges that the NBK continue to strictly follow its policy of revoking licenses of banks that do not meet the intermediary targets for adoption of strengthened supervision targets. As regards larger banks, which have been the topic of merger mmors. the staff encourages the NBK to give foil consideration to both prudential and anti-trust aspects of such hansactions. The staiT also recommends that the limit on foreign banks’ share of aggregate capital ia the banking system be lifted. (a law has been submitted to parliament). The current limit is not binding however. Regulation of non-bank$nmcial institutions In addition to commercial banks, the fmancial sector is made of a number of other institutions, including credit partncrshps. Regulations for credit partnerships are under development, Given that such financial institutions will be. able to accept deposits, the staff recommends that the NBK ensure that they are subject to a prudential regime comparable to that of commercial banks, Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13 - B. Fiscal Policy 17. The authorities acknowledged that their efforts to establish a sustainable medium term fiscal framework have not yet succeeded. They noted that, although fiscal policy was kept broadly on track through the third quarter of 1998, by tight limits on expenditures, budgetary discipline was relaxed at the year-end owing to political factors. Accordingly, the deficit outcome for the year exceeded the program target by some 1% percent of GDP. The authorities pointed out that the first revised 1999 budget proposed to parliament included revenue contingency measures, in line with previous understandings in the context of the fifth review of the EFF-supported program.’ They agreed with the mission that, as approved by parliament, this budget represented at best only limited progress towards fiscal sustainability. Following discussions with the mission, in early June 1999, the authorities submitted a second revised budget to parliament, which maintained the deficit target of 7 percent of GDP and appeared to contain somewhat optimistic revenue estimates (on the order of % to 1 percent of GDP).4 18. The authorities agreed broadly with the mission that, from the fiscal sustainability point of view, it would be preferable if the deficit was contained at no more than 6 percent of GDP in 1999. Relative to the second revised budget for 1999, this assessment implies the need for additional measures on the order of 1X-2 percent of GDP. 19. The authorities saw minimal scope for implementing additional revenue measures at this stage (either in terms of revising rates or introducing new taxes) but stressed that all efforts would continue to be made to strengthen tax administration. In this regard, they noted the recently implemented scheme to monitor electronically the 100 largest taxpayers at the federal level, plans to expand the scheme to regional levels, and special programs to improve collections of excise taxes on alcohol and gasoline and recover tax arrears. 20. As regards the scope for adjusting expenditure, the authorities were pessimistic owing to political constraints about securing the required cuts. While they thought that some cuts might be feasible, they ruled out any possibility of obtaining parliamentary approval for expenditure cuts in an amount that would be necessary to achieve the 6 percent of GDP deficit target. The mission urged the authorities to persevere in pressing parliament to accept a realistic and sustainable budget that would allow economic agents to count on government budgetary commitments and that would provide a strong underpinning for a stable monetary and exchange rate framework. The mission also urged the government to prioritize expenditures so that cuts would be implemented in those areas where they would be least disruptive to economic welfare and efficiency, such as net lending, subsidy programs for enterprises and agriculture and capital expenditure, especially the construction of the new 3 See Table 3, Attachment 1, EBS/98/212 4 A supplement to the staffreport will present detailed information on this budget .-, Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14- capital.’ The authorities noted that a huge proportion of net lending represented payments under guarantees that had been issued prior to 1997 on which there were defaults. The mission urged the authorities to implement a comprehensive strategy to resolve the problem of government arrears (Box 3). Box 3. Arrears The stock of expemWore arrears of the general government amounted to T 70 billion, approximately 4 percent of GDP, st end-March 1999.’ A strategy to resolve the problem of srrews should comprehensively combine measures to prevent the occurrence of new arrears and measures to eliminate the existing stock of arrears. Preventing the emergence of new arrears would require the following main elements: . a m&tic budget with ticdy priori&d expendihues; . a mechanism for compulsory pre-registration with the Ministry of Finsnce of contracts entered into by local governments, designed to place expenditore commitments by local governments in line with expected revenues; . improved controls by the Ministry of Finance over stafiing levels in local governments. Meawres to deal with the outstandink- stock of arrears: Eliminating the outstanding stock of arrears would require the following: . first, preps&on of a comprehensive inventory of srrears, including identities of creditors and debtors, maturity of the claim, and extent to which the creditor has debts to the state, including tax liabilities; . second, establishment of a schedule for the settlement of srresrs in the context of the 2000 budget. ‘The estimate of the stock of arrears is subject to considerable unwtainty. For instance, included in the estimates arc certain obligations of former budgetary organ&ions, which have begun to operate ss commercial entities, which are no longer considered, IegsUy, as an obligation of the government. 21. Given the constraints, the authorities felt they needed to explore other options, including accepting a larger fiscal deficit (on the order of 7% percent of GDP) that would he financed by more aggressive privatization efforts (as assumed in the current policy scenarios)6 and possibly by additional foreign financing from private fmancial markets. They felt that medium term sustainability could still be secured, despite the higher deficit in 1999, if faster progress was made in reducing fiscal deficits starting in 2000. The mission stressed the short-term risks implied by this approach such as uncertain prospects for obtaining significant additional privatization proceeds, the possibility of fire-sale conditions, and the high costs of commercial foreign financing (spreads on the Kazakh Eurobond amounted to some 600 basis points in mid-May 1999). The mission noted that such a course of action would represent virtually no adjustment from the fiscal outcome in 1998 (which caused the program to go off track) and expressed skepticism about the feasibility of much stronger fiscal adjustment in outlaying years which would be necessary to secure sustainability (see Box 4 and Figure 4). ’ These spending programs comprised about 27 percent of total expenditure in the revised budget 6 Table 4 and Appendix IV, Table 2 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 15- n discussions of fiscal policy for 1999, in addition to the fiscal adjustment scenario proposed by the mission, w other approaches with loss fiscal adjustmenfwhich were thought to bc more politically acceptable, were mxched by the authorities: one c-entered on financing a higher fiscal deficit with proceeds of more aggressive “ivatization sales; the other was based on reducing the real value of expcndihues by resort to higher inflation. 1 Phe uh&her &fiiit$i pri~w” appmach , dzakhsm mm substantial assets, pcdhdarly in the oil and gas sector, which wuld be sold to foreign twstors fairly rapidly. Thw, it might technically be Casible to finance a higher fiscal d&it in 1999, relaying - uwceds fium awcleratcd plivatization. 1 [he mission opposed such a” approach since it could not t ke maintained for long as its continued implementation v votdd lead to fiscal wwtainability. With a” acceleration c I privatization and th”s exhaustion of substantial F oivatization revenues after a few years, a high fiscal dciicit v vould have to be financed by borrowing. Public debt and d lebt sexvice would the” rise very rapidly, maldng public f inances highly vulnerable to outside shocks, such as i ncresse.5 in interat rates on emerging market debt, c ~tbacks in financing or instability in prices of oil and other c fcmuwdities. Ilrc #higher i&fion” approach [heorctically, the fiscal deficit can be reduced in proportion to GDP through higher inflation ifexpcnditws arc ixed in nominal terms and if revenue is a stable function of nominal income. The mission (and the NBK) ugwdthat Box 4. Consequences of Delaying Fiical Adjustment hUlCd.bL &pTC..ltOlODp) Source: ataffprojediona a) even if expenditwc did indeed fall faster in real tcnns than revenue, the cost of achieving a lower fiscal d&it in 1999 in this manner would be a” ““acceptably high level of inflation sigoaling the abandonment of the hard-won gains toward macroeconomic stabilisation made since; b) use of this mechanism would not result in swainable fiscal adjustnunt: pressures to re-estabtish the mal value of pensions, public wages, and other expenditore in 2000 would likely be very high; nuking tiscal adjustment over the medium term much more diiXWlt; c) the buden of adjustment would fall dispmportionately on pensioners and other beneficiaries of the social safety net who receive unindexed government payments; d) this approach is unliily to yield the desired outcome as revenue wllcction can bc wry sensitive to nwroeconomic conditions: with higher inflation, incentives to delay tax payments would bc considerably increased. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 16- 20 15 10 5 0 -5 -10 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 Figure 4. Kazakhstan: Public Debt and Primary Gap, 1996-2014 (In percent of GDP) Cmnt Policies primary gap Public debt (right scale) / (lett scale) ---- -3 Primary balance excluding privatisation (left scale) 160 140 120 100 80 60 40 20 0 Adjustment Swnario :‘g pfimiuy gap ;’ ‘yft scale) . . . , Public debt (right scale) ‘\ ,’ Primary balance 10 excluding privatisation (left scale) -1” ~~~~ 0 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 Sowccs: Kazakh authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17- 22. Another fiscal strategy for 1999 that was suggested by some offtcials involved using higher inflation to reduce real expenditure. These officials noted that if the rate of inflation were significantly higher than the NBK’s target for the year, the revenue side of the budget would increase in line with nominal GDP, while the level of nominal expenditure could be held constant by refraining from indexation. Other oflicials, including the NBK, opposed this approach vigorously mainly owing to the concerns about the effects of macroeconomic instability, including a more depreciated exchange rate, for the banking system. The mission associated itself closely with the views of the NBK. C. Structural Reforms 23. The authorities explained that the broad objectives in the structural reform program are improving the quality of the public sector and promoting favorable conditions for private sector development. 24. As regards the public sector, specific action are being planned in the areas of civil service reform, social safety net, the pension system and transparency. Building on a census of civil servants conducted in 1998, civil service reform aims at reducing its size, improving its quality by adjusting remuneration and providing training and increasing its level of professionalism by separating clearly between career and political appointments, and establishing merit-based rules for appointments and promotions. 25. In the area of the social safety net, efforts are being concentrated in making it better targeted and more effective. Thus with the 1999 budget, all social payroll contributions which had financed various extrabudgetary funds, have been converted into a single tax that accrues to the budget. The maximum monthly pension has been capped at T 13,400. A complex system of in-kind benefits and privileges has been transformed into a cash grant. Responsibility for birth and burial benefits and for assistance to unemployed has been transferred to local government and made subject to financial availability. Medical insurance has become the responsibility of employers funded by payroll deductions. 26. The implementation of a fully funded pension system-an important element of social protection and financial deepening-is proceeding apace. The share of nonstate pension funds in total cash inflows has risen to more than 30 percent by March 1999 and appropriate internationally-accepted valuation and accounting standards will be introduced in 1999. The authorities are also planning to remove the NBK from the function of asset manager of the State Accumulation Fund owing to the possibility of conflict of interest. To expand the range of possible assets for the pension timds, legislative amendments that would allow pension funds to invest in high-quality foreign financial assets are under consideration. 27. ,The authorities emphasized the importance they attached to improving the transparency of public sector operations. All extrabudgetary limds have been either abolished (e.g., “New Capital” fund) or incorporated into the budget. As noted above, the NRK has begun to publish on a monthly basis data on key aspects of its operations. The Ministry of Finance has begun to publish similar data on its operations in a monthly bulletin (Box 5). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 18- Box 5. Transparency Issues Fiscal transpwency As part of the 1999 Budget Law and the revised Budget System Law, several measures were implemented that contributed to enhancing the trans~cy of the budget process. ne most important of these were: (a) the elimination of the major extra-budgetary funds, including the road, health and pension fends, sod the htarporation of the mvenoc and expendihue streams formerly flowing to and from these funds into the government budget; (b) the abolition of the “New Capital” fund, whose purpose was to finance the development of Astana, and the publication of its financial statements; (c) the definition of a qoantifkd system of revetme. sharing and expenditure allocation between central and local governments, which should limit the scope for annual, od hoc negotiations between the different levels of government. At the same time, however, the original and revised 1999 budgets incorporated unrealistic rc~enoe estimates which virtually insured from the start that these budgets could not be implemented in the form adopted by parliament thus increasing the probability of recourse to acts detrimental to fiscal transparency such as expenditure sequestration and arrears. Over the last several years, the Kaakh authorities have signed a number of contracts with foreign partners on the exploration, production, and distribution of mineral resources. It is generally understood that initial bonuses from these contracts as we.11 as all other payments under them should flow to the state budget but publicly available information is not sufficient to verify the use. of these fends. Data provision to thepublic The Kazakh authorities are tidly aware of the importance of providing the public with comprehensive, timely, and accmate data on economic and financial developments. While torrent practices still signhicantly lag behind those of many other emerging market economies, efforts are. being made to bridge this gap. The Mini&y of Finance started publishing a [monthly] bulletin on fiscal developments and the National Bank of Kazakhstan began issuing regular press releases on its international reserve position. In addition, the Kazakh authorities have expressed inkxcst in sbengthening their data dissemination practices in the context of the General Data Dissemination System. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 19- 28. The authorities explained that initiatives in support of private sector development involved primarily the privatization program, agricultural reforms, and measures to facilitate the creation and entry of new enterprises. The privatization program has been a key element of Kazakhstan’s structural transformation as well as a major source of budgetary financing (averaging 3.3 percent of GDP in 1996-98). In the period ahead, emphasis will be placed on the development of investment funds, and large scale privatization (also known as the “Blue Chip” program closely related to efforts to promote foreign direct investment), including the complete privatization of electricity producers and distributors (Box 6). The authorities described their plans to support the ongoing structural changes in agriculture by legislative amendments that would strengthen private ownership rights; they also noted that the development of this sector has been hindered by difficulties in accessing new and keeping traditional markets owing to the availability of heavily subsidized grain from a few major producers. 29. In the area of trade policies, the mission expressed concerns about the introduction of protectionist measures since end-1998. The authorities reiterated their announced intention to remove high tariffs and other trade restrictions on imports from Russia (bilaterally agreed) and from the Kyrgyz Republic, and Uzbekistan. However, they tied the removal of these measures to the introduction of anti-dumping regulations expected for June 1999, which, they explained, would be fully WTO-consistent. The mission noted that Kazakhstan’s tariff regime had become more restrictive in the recent months with an upward drift of average tariffs and the proliferation of specific and mixed tariffs, The authorities viewed the average tariff as still quite low by international standards,’ and they explained that the increases were introduced in order to align them more closely with those prevailing in the Custom Union with Russia and other countries, and that the use of specific tariffs was motivated by the need to combat widespread underinvoicing. They also noted that the background work towards Kazakhstan’s accession to the WTO was continuing. 30. As regards the year 2000 problem, the authorities indicated that they were aware of potential pitfalls, especially in the critical area of oil and gas infrastructure, which they were addressing with the assistance of major international energy companies operating in Kazakhstan. 7 The average tariff calculated as a simple average of the tariffs at the 2-digit level, increased to 9.7 percent from 8.9 percent at end-1998. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2o- Box 6. Foreign Direct Investment-Issues and Initiatives Foreign direct investment averaged 5.5 percent of GDP in 1996-98 and forms a key element of the medium term outlook. This box examines the major issues affecting foreign investors. Taxation. Many investors have complained about the s3ructure of taxes and tax administration Major recent issues include: relations between tax payers and the Tax Police, tines and penalties, calculation of VAT liabilities, implementation of double tax treaties, and &zing bank accounts by the tax authorities. Initiatives have. been kmnched to: improve training of Tax Police, review the system of penalties and fmes, review calculation of VAT liabilities, to create a speciaiizcd unit in the Minisby of Revenue to &al with taxation treaties, and to ensure. that Court Orders are. requhtd prior to fmezing bank accotmts. Legal framework. Laws are inadequate in their scope, and laws and their implementing regulations are inadequately specified and thus not transpannt. The courts operate ineffectively and the judiciary is neither adequately trained nor sufficiently independent. The appmval of the law on joint stock companies in (June 1998) was viewed positively. Initiatives to strengthen the legal framework include eliminating potential and identified conflicts in and between laws. New laws and regulations designed to clarify existing legislation are under preparation in the arcas of: sub-soil assets, labor law, and tax administration. Reform of judicial system will include review of the qualifications ofjudges, operation of the courts, and to speed up legal procedures for cases affecting investments of more than $5 million. This work is being supported by a World Bank loan. Corruption. The. practice is seen as widespread and affecting many processes and operations of foreign invstors. The President has launched an anti-corruption initiative, creating a Special State Committee to eradicate corruption. Several public denouncements of corrupt practices by government officials have been made and legal actions are in pmccss. The anti-corruption campaign is a major plank of the President’s policies. Efforts to improve the legal system should complement these efforts, Bureaucracy. Regulatory requirements (including permits and needed appmvak), wmmnnications/relations between investors and the authorities, and pace of processing Merent govemmcnt application forms were seen as the most pressing issues. Efforts are under way to clarify and simplify regulations. A standanlizd set of investment incentives for investments u&r $10 million has been in place since summer 1998. The Foreign Investors’ Council has been moving ahead in hying to simplify and streamline this process in cooperation with the Kazakh- Investment Agency. Recently, a new initiative was announced to improve dialogue with investors facing problems with their investments. Work Permits and Labor Regulations. Cumbersome procedures and documentation rcquircments for work permits for foreigners. The Employment Law provides for a quota on foreigners that may work in Kazakhstas bmken down between specitic types of worker. The law does not indicate the allocation of the quota between employers or between type of professions or skill groups. It pmvidcs for minimum levels of employment of certain categories of underprivileged persons. The Minisby of Labor and Social Protection has stated that requirements in this area will be reduced. A recent bilateral initiative between Kazakhstan and the U.S. proposes simplifying Kazakh visa requirements. TV. MEDIUM TERM OUTLOOK 31. Despite the likely improvement in the international environment, related essentially to the positive outlook for export prices, Kazakhstan will remain vulnerable in the period ahead. Kazakhstan’s exports over the foreseeable future will continue to be concentrated in raw materials and petroleum. The country’s ability to continue to attract foreign investment and financing is subject to significant uncertainties. Lastly, doubts remain whether a political consensus can be achieved in support of a set of macroeconomic policies that would be conducive to high quality growth. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2l- 32. The statf has prepared two medium-term scenarios that assume the same external environment but differ as regards the internal policy stance (Appendix IV).The first scenario assumes that policies would be changed especially in the area of the budget consistent with medium term fiscal sustainability. Under this adjustment scenario, a stronger recovery in 1999-2000 is projected that would provide a basis for raising sustainable GDP growth to 5 percent per year while the 12-month inflation rate would stabilize at about 4.5 percent, Under the assumption of continued fiscal consolidation, the fiscal deficit would stabilize at about 3.3 percent by 2004 which together with a recovery of savings, would allow the current account to reach a surplus of 2.5 percent of GDP. Confidence of domestic and foreign investors would be maintained. The second scenario assumes the continuation of policies that were in place at the time of the Article IV consultation discussions. Greater fiscal imbalances and higher inflation over 1999-2000 would result in sluggish growth over the medium term (at about 1 percent per annum) with a weaker current account, lower reserves and greater dependence on oil exports. The staff emphasized that a positive medium term assessment requires speedy and comprehensive adjustment of fiscal policy so as to place the budget on a sustainable path. v. STAFF APPRAISAL 33. The Kazakh authorities are to be commended for their efforts, especially in structural areas, to continue the transition to a market economy despite a series of large adverse shocks which hit the Kazakh economy in 1998. However, the authorities’ macroeconomic policy response to the changed international environment has been hesitant and not fully consistent. Thus, further major strengthening of polices, especially in the area of the budget, will be needed to return the economy to a sustainable growth path. 34. In floating the tenge, the authorities recognixed the need to adjust the exchange rate regime to an international environment that is characterized by significantly greater instability of economic developments in major trading partners, commodities prices, and financial flows, The change in the exchange rate regime is expected to strengthen competitiveness, improve growth prospects and create a durable basis for financial stability by reversing demonetization. The staff agrees with the authorities that the exchange rate should henceforth be set in the market with NBK intervention limited strictly to smoothing operations. 35. The staff regards the target for monetary policy of containing (12-monthly) inflation to about 15 percent by December 1999 and to less than 10 percent by December 2000 to be appropriate; the staff also considers it likely that with tight financial policy, the demand for tenge denominated balances will continue to recover. In the meantime, the staff would emphasize that any move in the direction of reducing interest rates should await evidence of a decrease in the rate of inflation in line with the end year target and that the NBK’s gross reserve coverage should not decline below three months of imports. 36. The staff encourages the NBK to strengthen transparency of its operations in both the foreign exchange and money markets, To buttress the NBK’s reputation as an Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 22 - independent central bank, the statffavors additional legislative safeguards especially with respect to the mission of the bank and the tenure of its chairman. 37. The staff regards the NBK’s banking and regulatory regime as a key pillar of financial stability. In the period ahead, the most important requirement will be to ensure that the value of the banks’ assets is appropriately assessed and that early action is taken if capital deficiency problems arise. In this context, the staff welcomes the NBK intention to carry out on-site inspections of all major domestic banks as well as any bank requiring liquidity support and considers it important to undertake the inspections as soon as possible. The staff strongly urges the NBK to enforce strictly its schedule of bringing all commercial banks in compliance with international prudential standards by end-2000 and not to relax standards for banks that have already met them. Moving ahead with the privatization of state-owned banks (especially Halyk Savings Bank) and with relaxing limits on the operations of foreign banks will help improve the financial system in Kazakhstan. 38. The statf considers it regrettable that, since the EFF-supported program went off track at end-1998 owing to expenditure overruns, the authorities’ efforts to reestablish a credible and sustainable fiscal framework have not been successful. The key priority for the period ahead should be to submit to parliament and secure the passage of a 1999 budget that sets realistic revenue target and establishes an expenditure envelope that would limit the size of the deficit in line with the requirements of medium term sustainability (i.e., no higher than 6 percent of GDP). The authorities seemed hesitant to implement the expenditure cuts consistent with a budget deficit of 6 percent of GDP in 1999, and were considering using additional privatization proceeds to finance a larger deficit. The staff warned about the risks of this option and its unsustainability over the medium-term. 39. The staff agrees with the authorities that the scope for additional revenue measures in 1999 is rather limited; efforts should continue to improve tax administration, especially for excises, customs and tax arrears, The program of close monitoring of the largest taxpayers should also be helpful in this respect 40. While substantial expenditure cuts are required relative to the revised budget that was promulgated in March 1999, the staff would stress that it should be possible to attain them by strict prioritiaation without compressing social spending. It urged the authorities to take immediate steps to this end. The staffwelcomes the authorities’ intention to create appropriate reserve funds for future loan guarantees. The staff urges the authorities to ensure that the cost of the banking deposits conversion scheme as well as that of the conversion oftreasury bills and NBK notes held by pension Cmds be recognized in the budget. 41. A realistic budget would allow the government to ensure that no new arrears are incurred especially if the Ministry of Finance strengthens its oversight over local government’s financial constituents and staffing levels. The staff urges the government to settle ah outstanding arrears in the context of a well-defined schedule starting with the 2000 budget, with social program arrears given priority. The final step in this direction would be to prepare comprehensive inventory of arrears, Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 23 - 42. The stalf recommends that the authorities limit the 2000 budget de&it to no more than 5.5 percent of GDP and rely on realistic revenue projections. Given the needs of productive capital expenditure, and of a well targeted social safety net, the staff urges the authorities to include in the 2000 budget meaningful steps toward broadening the tax base, including to the self-employed. 43. The staff commends the authorities for their determined pursuit of structural reforms. Areas where significant progress has been achieved include privatization, pension reforms, and budgetary transparency. As regards privatization, given its close link to foreign direct investment, efforts should be concentrated in improving the business climate, especially the quality of the legal system and red tape problems at the local level. As far as the pension system is concerned, the key priority in the period ahead to ensure the success of reforms would be to widen the menu of assets that are open for the pension funds to invest in. In the area of transparency, further progress is needed in expanding the scope of information that is released to the public on a regular basis. 44. In addition to consolidating gains in the above areas, the staff agrees with the authorities that in the period ahead, emphasis should be placed on moving ahead with civil service reforms and in strengthening of private property rights in agriculture. As the government is continuing to deliberate on the scope and specific content of its industrial policy, the staff strongly warns it against recourse to subsidies, tax exemption and sectoral trade regimes and instead encourages reliance on improving the overall business environment by streamlining the regulatory framework, fostering FDI and reducing economic crimes, especially corruption. 45. The staff calls on the authorities to reaflirm their commitment to a liberal trade regime and to WTO accession. The intensification of trade restrictions, caused by protectionist measures stemming from the exchange rate misalignment, was regrettable and should be quickly reversed. The staff welcomes the authorities’ intention to remove restrictions on imports from Russia, the Kyrgyz Republic and Uzbekistan. The staff also urges the authorities to reduce the reliance on specific and mixed tariffs, 46. The staff commends the authorities effort to improve the transparency of public sector operations in Kazakhstan, especially the incorporation of social extrabudgetary funds into the budget, and improved legal clarity in what constitutes the government. Increasing further the scope of information that is released to the public on all aspects of government operations will reinforce these efforts and, more generally, make the authorities’ struggle to eradicate corruption more effective. 47. The authorities’ should continue efforts to strengthen its statistical data base in close collaboration with the Fund and other international organizations in the framework of the General Data Dissemination System. In the context, the staff welcomes the transfer of the responsibility for the compiling balance of payments data to the NRK. 48. It is recommended that the next Article IV consultation be conducted on the standard ltmonth cycle. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 24 - TIblE 1. Kazaswn: s-rry ofEso”omic Indicatom. 1997-2ooo on prcrnagr Ehlngc Owl zha Sam< prnnd 0°C ye’ ruba uncu dhcruvc tidrdcd) CoMumcr P”Eu E”d.Of.pe”od hml rnd Orpano’s YC” PInod wemgr Grw”lh Kd GDP EXIllangc ,atC 0” tengc PI’” s. dew End-ocpe”od Pened “““EC Rd cxd,sngr rat5, (c”d-or-pm~d from rnd “fPmmU Yld li ,997 ,998 ,999 2cm Jan -“SC. Ian -am la” aeo Jan -0es OmUomr mk‘m,e Cum”, Adpmd Po4F.I SCI”.“O 19 71 -2.5 X4.0 ,*q -9 * 238 15.0 94 .I 5 .77 184 XI 77 1” 14 12 l5.C 69 -I 5 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 25 - Tsbls 2. Kez-akhslan: Sslcotcd Monslary “tiabls,, 1597-w “” rnihom ‘0 Ten&c: UtlIO~ othruur now ,991 l, ,998 I, 199921 Mu lun scp rhc Mar lul sop occ DLF.2/ Mar kc Dee cvncnf Adptmcn, policiu IEcnarm 1.286 -25,017 24.399 I.535 73.339 1.533 22.903 25.557 71.346 I35294 61.419 13.777 35.780 I.424 -29.994 I I.898 6.822 80.495 1.725 16.515 16.519 70,362 142.982 67.563 75.366 2,950 1.622 -37.740 10.146 5.134 86.833 1.940 19.034 17,715 82.547 161,267 7w98 86,140 28.970 1.738 -24.382 21.327 I.393 I Oh.903 I.849 31.168 35.581 17.228 177.240 92.796 78.055 18.s.3 1,415 .I 9.422 24.259 5.150 91.983 I.590 32.965 21,187 84.228 IIf.llZ 80.022 73~018 2i:COl I.466 ~19,097 21.669 5.243 91.626 1.182 14.629 33.660 94.191 159.062 79.926 79.108 23.610 1.209 1.315 4,235 .I 7,893 30.240 26,963 5.983 -9,963 82,088 81.475 1.151 1.246 61.604 55.729 27.636 36.511 I cQ398 109.937 I48567 148.549 68.872 68,128 79,644 79,822 28.280 29.461 1,315 -76,356 26,963 -9,%3 81.475 1,246 -I ,004 36.51 I Io9.937 148,549 68.128 79,822 29,465 1,021 -57,223 21.9’” 3.413 65,328 916 10,933 28.012 I14520 128,049 55,424 12,626 30,467 1.112 -47.810 13,955 19,075 a.743 1.123 37,985 43.61 I 125,648 I12.156 81,832 90.744 1,371 -72,913 13,955 6,450 91.511 I,325 11,510 14,911 128,258 / 70.543 80,783 89,519 sourccr. NalloMl B* OfK&fan, and Fund atafT.rtimaf. I / Euahated miq ,998 prwpm u&q0 r&c md goid pica u E”,,“Ud &I& ,999 P’ognm crchsngo Ink md &Old pica Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 26 - TablC 3. KW Financial Sector Vulnmsblilty Indicators, 1996% 19% 1997 ,998 ,999 Des Dee Mar hl sep llsc Mar AP. Katmnd Bank OfKaakbstan eora htcmnfid rcseIycI (in milllO” 0ru.s. doliar) Gmrr InkmmOnal ICICrvCI O,vhlCh Fmzgl nvrcncy li Grcst reCYNCI m prcmt or b%w mancy Grart ,escwcP in pCrcC”l or broad money (MZ) NSf mUmallo”al nncrver OfNBK (m milbcm ofU.S. dollar) F.mlgn crcb*c ma!& op4rstwm (8” rnllhon, 0fll.S. &llar) u Cmmcrmn, bmk ,CYrvCS (h pcrcznt oftd deports) Cumsy boldlng. NBK &pm kid by crdir yy(lbllil)(u chsngc in Get inUmatlOrul nscrler Mb* (In rnllbors CdU s ddlar) wcrall plltlon o,f*i*: tmnmuingwilhin 3odays Cdlf 1D Ihc ecanomy (In pcrcmt or GDP) 4, B&g PCEbr soundncv rtiabirr NO”.pclfomlmg l”aM (1” prcm oftotal Imns) O,Whl& hr 5 maja hlks LOan ias p,w”mning (in pc,Cld or Loti kmm) I” pcrFL”t of*, ,_)I I” pCrcL”t Of total claui6cd lscu caped adequacy (in pcrccnt) 5, 5 major b* Wci&htcds”cragc. 4, ban!G 1.9667 1,304 7 ,807 109 I 131.1 4.0 a.9 226 0 38 106 462 9 00 462 9 313 24 0 10.3 73.8 2,212 0 1.728 0 I59 I 96 0 1.738.0 -308 7 -474.0 4.5 9.0 ,140 40 *.4 42 81 13.2 24 5 23 0 07 783 0 0.0 783 0 16 I 11.9 149 75 9 I.969 0 1.445 0 1617 97.2 1.469 0 -2814 3.819 0 5.5 10.3 1160 5.2 3.3 21 63 174 166 203 07 846 0 0.0 846 0 162 us IS2 766 1.939 0 1.4130 ,599 92. I 1.466.0 -1404 -25.0 5.3 91 44 0 54 2.3 19 5.0 164 IS.1 22.9 07 910.0 00 9100 18 I 121 14.1 77.2 I ,663.Q L173.0 153.1 84.6 I.1W.O -585.4 -4110 46 II 7 -58.0 5.1 2.8 2.3 6.3 18.2 16.9 zs.1 0.7 841.0 0.0 841 0 21.6 11.0 126 80.6 1.9670 1.460.0 182.0 99.1 1.315.0 -380.0 9526.0 5.2 98 -10.0 5.0 33 21 7.0 21.3 18.2 29.2 0.6 820.5 0.0 8205 25.8 6.7 ,I.5 84 0 1.614.0 1.121.0 2965 ISI 3 1,018.O -1090 8.445.0 4.4 8.5 140 7.5 43 3.3 8.2 12.8 188 29.5 05 26.3 10.1 II 4 88.1 1610.0 1.099 6 268.9 132.8 1.016.5 3.1 .1,ocwl 39 6.9 221.0 86 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 27 - Table 4. K.ukhtm: Sckctd Gmsml Gow”““ml D,ta. 1997-99 II an psrsm, dGDP. olunulaav. year-to-date) l”lcI& NOamrre C.plWerpm*Uur Nd k”avln Bud@ d&m u FmEVlg Damrldr rmi@ Fli”URZW” Mmwm*. 11*,“1 Rnrnvrr I!“3 plB inCl”dmp &mb”dgsfar/ fvnds Exxpn*@Jrcl md net Ikndiq il@hJ~ umbudgrtq @xl& II.4 1:: 161 IJ I 0.8 1.1 0.9 0.7 .I.8 .‘,: 06 II 108 I.! 11.1 171 II.! 0.5 140 in II -4.9 5.2 00 I.0 42 soursu Kamka *utho+m: .“d Fsmd ,uT~.bm.le. 13.4 ll.8 w3 171 I69 151 06 0.5 164 14.6 2.0 I I 1.4 O.! -70 -10 68 1.0 .:: :z 1.0 I5 193 18.0 I20 1.0 15.4 20.1 17.2 1:: 22 16 47 5.4 :.t iP I** 1:; 19.6 162 0.7 15s II II -1.3 18 I.3 27 I.8 12.4 III II 09 I,.9 IS0 21.9 172 IT.3 10 I o* 0.6 16 I 15.5 2.7 0.4 181 168 168 II II 19.9 IS.4 1;: 268 26.1 24.4 *4x *a* 21.0 I.3 I.5 1.3 233 211 211 II 0.9 09 I.8 01 -8.0 -2.1 7.7 0.7 .:.: :: -08 6.0 18 I l5.C 25.2 172 i* II 06 -70 .77 40 7.0 76 6.0 I.5 1.0 43 2.1 I.4 3.3 5.2 :.: 19.9 18.4 184 26.8 16.1 114 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 5. Kazakhstan: Performance Crifcria and lndicativs Targets, December 19% - March l999 II ~Inmllllom ofTc”gc UnbS otirrmrr “O,d) Dmanbcr3l.1598 !&mh 31, ,999 Oummc kgcr Ad,U1Drs Adpstcd Ovcrpsfiommce (‘1, O”tccmC Target Ad,lmrr Ad,us,d cm~~rmancr (+))i WC1 ud2rpe<am¶lm c-1 target hdcrpcrfonnancc (-I -17.893 1,315 138.900 0 32,896 0 971 223 0 -23 8 *37,3x -22.369 1.m ~lld,8W 0 18,ooo 50 WQ 4w 0 -21.3 23.wx 1,782 ~18.187 -IO LX9 -114.m 0 18.m 50 1,6W 4w 0 -21 3 238,400 -694 -44 -24,103 0 -14.896 50 625 ,n 0 2.5 -11,823 I.021 -1*.%x 0 0 -198 54,IW 22,231 15.866 1.381 -210 25.500 0 13,cm 0 400 1w 0 -2.3 83,300 -6.366 5,458 1,171 -IS0 -*5.*cm 12.600 0 11.c.m 0 0 400 400 100 IW 0 0 .2 3 175 83,303 -2%2M solocrs Kazlkh autbotities. and Fund staff CILLmdLl II A.3 approved by uu Eucutivc Board 0” Dccrmbci IS, 1998 2l Applicable cm a mmlwm3 bur Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 6. Kazakhstan: Structural Benchmarks for December 3 1, 199%March 3 1, 1999 Benchmark Date Due Status Banking se&r reform 1 Phase in the full provisioning of nonperforming exposures December 3 1,199s Done. by commercial banks under the three-year amortization rule for banks cm first back to international standard. . Adoption by parliament of amendments to the banking December 3 1,199s In progress. Amendment approved by the lower house law, which increases the limit on foreign-owned banks’ of parliament and introduoxl in the uppx house. share in aggregate capital of the commercial banking sector from 25 percent to 50 percent from end-1998. RivaIization m Sign conhacts with lead managers for at least 5 “Blue Chip” companies in addition to the contmcts already signed for four companies. Tax administration l In the context of the gradual mrwe to a full self-assessment system for all taxes, all VAT returns should be self- assessed by end-1998. Expenditurepolicy Expenditurepolicy . Based on results of phase I of the census of government employees (to be completed by June 1998), reduce 10,000 positions in the 1999 budgei. . Based on results of phase I of the census of government December 31, 1998 The 1999 budget stipulates reduction of 8,771 positions employees (to be completed by June 1998), reduce 10,ooO in state bodies, ministries, embassies, and courts that psitions in the 1999 budgei. are financed from the republican budget. These cuts represent 17 percent of all such positions at end-1998. The 1999 budget stipulates reduction of 8,771 positions in state bodies, ministries, embassies, and courts that are financed from the republican budget. These cuts represent 17 percent of all such positions at end-1998. December 3 1, 1998 December 3 1, 1998 Bids have been received for management of the sale of shares in four “Blue Chip” companies. Tender winners have not yet been announced. DOW Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 6. Kazakhstan: Structural Benchmarks for December 3 1,1998-March 3 1, 1999 Benchmark Date Due Status 1 Design the main elements of a stable system of revenue- December 31,199s Done. sharing responsibilities and expenditure assignments between different levels of government to replace the annual negotiations. . Taking international market conditions into consideration, revise the “Blue Chip” program, identifying new objects to be privatized and setting a calendar for preparation and sale of enterprises included in the program. Enterprise reform n Complete a review of the effectiveness of the new bankmptcy law. Expendiiurepotiq = Discontinue all budgetary support to entities identified for elimination in the recently completed timctional review of all budget-financed organizations. March31,1999 March 31, 1999 March 31, 1999 . Design and implement a mechanism for the treatment of March 31,1999 In progress. A system of pre-regishation of conhacts expendihxe arrears of all entities to be classitied as issued by local governments is being set-up. A survey budgetary organizations under the revised definition of the of the stock of arrears of both centi and local budgetary sphere, p&ding for their elimination by end- governments has been launched. December 1999. The 1999-2000 privatization program is being tinalized The exact timing of the sale of the nine large enterprises slated for privatisation by end-December 2000 will be chosen considering changing market COnditiOnS. In progress. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3l- APPENDIX I Kazahhstan-Fund Relations (As ofMay 31, 1999) I. Membership status: Joined: 07/15/92; Article VIII II. General resources account: SDR million Percent of quota Quota 365.70 100.0 Fund holdings of currency 792.36 216.7 Reserve position in the Fund 0.01 0.0 III. SDR department: SDR million Percent of Allocation Holdings 254.77 N/A IV. Outstanding purchases and loans: SDR million Percent of quota Stand-by arrangements 174.00 47.6 Extended arrangements 154.70 42.3 Systemic transformation facility 97.97 26.8 V. Financial arrangements: Amount Approved Amount Drawn Type Approval Date Expiration Date (SDR million) (SDR million) EFF 7117196 7116199 309.40 154.70 Stand-by 6/05/95 6104196 185.60 185.60 Stand-by l/26/94 5J3 l/95 123.75 74.25 VI. Projected obligations to the Fund: (SDR million; based on existing use of resources and present holdings of SDRs): Overdue 4/30/99 1999 Forthcoming 2000 2001 2002 2003 Principal -- 91.5 96.0 38.0 20.6 46.4 Charges/interest -- 7.8 11.7 8.6 7.5 6.5 Total -- 99.3 107.7 46.6 28.1 52.9 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 32 - APPENDIX I VII. Exchange rate arrangements: The currency of Kazakhstan is the tenge, which was introduced in November 1993. On April 4, 1999 the exchange rate regime was changed from a managed float to a free float. The central bank ceased to target the rate and allows it to be determined in the market, though it may intervene for smoothing purposes. Foreign exchange is traded in the Kazakhstan Stock Exchange (KASE) and the interbank markets; most of the trade is vis+vis the U.S. dollar. The rates at the two markets are very close, and the spread between buying and selling rates also small. On June IO,1999 the rate in both the KASE and interbank markets was T 130 against the U.S. dollar, compared to T 88.3 per U.S. dollar on April 2. The central bank also quotes official exchange rates which follow the rates that are set in the market and are used for accounting purposes, primarily for customs valuation purposes. A 50 percent surrender requirement applies on all export earnings and a 1.0 percent tax applies on all foreign exchange purchases by individuals. VIII. Resident representative Mr Paul Ross is the Resident Representative since June 1998 IX. Consultation cycle Kazakhstan is on the 12-month consultation cycle. X. XI. Staff visits and policy discussions since 1998: 1. February 25-March 9, 1998: Use of Fund Resources. 2. May 4-8, 1998: Use of Fund Resources. 3. May 28-29, 1998: Managing Director’s Visit. 4. July 24-31, 1998: St&Visit. 5. October 20-November 4, 1998: Use of Fund Resources. 6. January 20-February 3, 1999: Use of Fund Resources. 7. April 28-May 12, 1999: Article IV Consultation and Use of Fund Resources. Technical Assistance: Kazakhstan has received considerable technical assistance and training by the Fund in virtually every area of economic policy, including through about seventy-five technical assistance missions provided during 1993-98 by FAD, MAE, STA, LEG, and the IMF Institute. In addition to short-term missions, the Fund has provided resident advisors to the National Bank, to the State Committee for Statistics (Goskomstat), and to the Ministry of Finance. Other international agencies and governments, including the World Bank, EU TACIS, EBRD, UNDP, OECD, also are providing a wide variety of technical assistance. The authorities have been receptive to the technical assistance that has been provided, however, some of the recommendations have been implemented at a slow pace, partly owing to inadequate training of staff Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 33 - APPENDIX 1 The following list summarizes the technical assistance provided by the Fund to Kazakhstan since 1998. Monetary and Exchange Affairs Technical assistance has enabled steady progress to be made in a number of arrears related to monetary and exchange affairs, including banking legislation, central bank accounting, payments system reform, central bank organisation and management, foreign operations and reserve management, banking supervision, monetary statistics, currency issuance, monetary operations and money-market development. Fiscal Affairs The Fiscal Affairs Department of the lMF has given comprehensive advice to Kazakhstan in the areas of tax and expenditure administration, the establishment of a Treasury system, and the introduction of a social safety net. Technical assistance missions to Kazakhstan since 1998 have included: I. October 1998: Treasury System Statistics The Fund’s technical assistance program in statistics has focused on the development of the institutional framework appropriate to the needs of a market economy. The assistance has concentrated on establishing procedures for collecting and compiling monetary, government finance, balance of payments (including external trade), national accounts, and consumer price statistics in accordance with international standards. Since 1998, missions by the IMF’s Statistics Department to Kazakhstan have included the following: 1. May-June 1998: Balance of payments statistics. 2. September 1998: Money and banking statistics IMF Institute Kazakh offtcials have participated in courses in Washington and at the Vienna Institute in the areas of macroeconomic management, expenditure control, financial programming, taxation, statistics and other areas. In addition, the Fund’s Institute has conducted courses in the region. Seminars and training sessions have also been conducted by MAE and STA technical assistance missions. XII. Resident Advisors At present, there are no resident advisors in Kazakhstan, Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 34 - APPENDIX II Kazakhstan-Relations with the World Bank Group Kazakhstan became a member of the Bank and the International Development Association (IDA) in July 1992 and of IFC in September 1993. The Bank’s lending program is designed to support the government’s efforts in the transition to a market economy through balance of payments support for macroeconomic stabilization; structural reforms through enterprise resttuctuting, financial sector reforms, and privatization; protection of vulnerable groups through an effective social safety net; and sectoral reforms, through operations in energy, agriculture, infrastructure, and environment and through institution building and reinforcement of the government’s implementation capacity. To date, the Bank has approved US%1679 million for 20 projects in Kazakhstan. These include five adjustment operations, three technical assistance loans and twelve investment loans. Three of the adjustment operations and one project have closed, with the other 16 projects remaining active. About US$937 million has been disbursed. During the fiscal years 1998, and 1999 the Bank has approved seven operations. They include the most recent adjustment operations, a US%230 million loan for Public Sector Management Adjustment and a US$300 million Pension Reform Structural Adjustment Loan. In addition there were a US%158 million loan for Treasury Modemization, a US%109 million loan for Uzen Oil Fields Rehabilitation, a US.Sl5.0 million loan for Agricultural Post Privatization Assistance, a Road Transport Restructuring loan for US%100 million, a Health Restructuring loan for $42.5 million, a loan for $16.5 million for Legal Reform and a Water Supply and Sanitation loan for $16.5 million to the city of Atyrau. The World Bank’s Board of Directors approved in August 1997 a Country Assistance Strategy which had been jointly prepared by the Bank and lFC. This CAS proposed a shill in Bank lending from adjustment and technical assistance loans to project lending, with an emphasis on private sector development, social protection, and social service delivery. In addition, a range of non-lending services where the World Bank has a comparative advantage would be provided. The Bank has provided Kazakhstan with policy advice in the agriculture, financial and energy sectors, and is helping with petroleum legislation, taxation reform, and legal reform and training. In addition, five activities financed by the World Bank’s Institutional Development Fund are providing training and technical support for coordination and management of external assistance for strengthening the country’s statistical system, and organizing a study tour of industrial countries for government offtcials and managers of industrial enterprises. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-35- APPENDIX II The Bank is actively coordinating with international efforts to reverse the severe environmental degradation of many areas of the country. More specifically, the Bank is supporting implementation of projects coming out of the recently approved National Environmental Action Plan, IPC has approved thirteen operations, totaling US$236 million. Eight of these are in the financial sector, one in industry, one in oil and gas and three in the Reach Program. About USS45 million has been disbursed. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-36- APPENDIX III Statistical Issues 1. In recent years, Kazakhstan has received considerable technical assistance and training from the IMF, EUKOSTAT, the OECD, the World Bank as well as from Germany, Turkey, and the U.S.A. in the area of national accounts. From 1995 onwards, the National Statistical Agency (NSA) has discontinued calculating net material product and has begun to compile GDP estimates according to the 1993 System of Notional Accor&s. A recent STA national accounts mission (March 1999) found that the compilation of annual and quarterly national accounts is already a part of the routine work of the NSA. However, very little progress has been achieved in improving the estimates mainly due to lack of adequate staffing and financial resources. The quality of annual GDP estimates by industry is affected by the poor coverage of production and financial statistics, particularly concerning small enterprises and informal activities. The constant price estimates of annual GDP by industry need some methodological improvements, especially for service industries. Substantial improvements are needed in the area of annual GDP estimates by expenditure categories. The quarterly source data are also of poor quality. The NSA initiated work on the compilation of supply and use tables that can be used to derive more consistent GDP estimates. The NSA, together with the March 1999 mission, developed a work program for compiling supply and use tables. 2. The consumer price index, which measures inflation in urban areas, is now calculated according to international standards. The basket comprises 275 goods, and the weighing system has been revised using the 1998 Household Budget Survey, with an improvement in coverage. The authorities intended to update the weights annually. The index covers 19 regions (oblasts) and is calculated on a monthly basis; in addition, a provisional index is compiled weekly, based on a smaller basket of consumer goods. 3. The previous producer price index, which suffered from a number of deficiencies, has recently been replaced by a new index based on the Laspeyres formula and the index has been retroactively calculated for 1994. However, the quality of the underlying price information received from enterprises needs improvement. Also, the weights need to be updated to account for shifts in the structure of production. 4. Data on average wages from an enterprise survey covering agriculture, industry, and services are reported on a monthly basis, Coverage has been expanded to include collective farms and joint ventures; however, as this has not been done retroactively, comparability over periods has become more difficult. 5. Data on employment cover the industrial, agricultural, and service sectors and coverage has been expanded to also include collective farms and joint ventures. Monthly data on unemployment cover only those who are officially unemployed and receive benefits. The Ministry of Labor has, however, also been collecting some data on hidden unemployment, comprising workers on compulsory leave or on enforced part-time status. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 37 - APPENDIX III 6. Most real sector data are published in a monthly statistical bulletin issued by the NSA, which is made available to other government authorities, Fiscal accounts 7. As a result of extensive technical assistance, a number of improvements have been made to the fiscal data, including the consolidation of most formerly extrabudgetary fhnds into the fiscal accounts and provision of more detailed expenditure data on a quarterly basis. Progress also has been made in the establishment of a classification of the fiscal accounts consistent with the Funds government finance statistics (GFS) methodology. The 1997 Republican budget was presented in a GFS format (in addition to the traditional format). The authorities report quarterly data for publication for publication in ZnternutionuI Financial Sratistics. As a result of the reorganization of the public sector, including the re-definition of budgetary units, difftculties have arisen with regard to the recording of expenditure arrears. Money and banking statistics 8. The National Bank of Kazakhstan (NBK) and all commercial banks have switched to new charts of accounts. The NBK implemented a new chart of accounts in 1998 and is currently in the process of revising it to include new financial instruments and to distinguish between convertible and non-convertible currencies. 9. Beginning in October 1997, commercial banks started using only the new chart of accountsfor commercial bunks. While the new chart of accounts for commercial banks has many desirable features, money and banking statistics missions by the Fund’s Statistics Depariment (STA) have concluded that the four-digit chart of accounts for commercial banks is inadequate for compiling monetary statistics. Following the recommen&ions of these missions, the authorities developed supplementary reporting forms which are being used by the commercial banks to report data to the NBK. These report forms enable the NBK to compile monetary statistics, but are being implemented via a mapping table, which is unsatisfactory because of problems relating to accounting procedures for general and subsidiary ledgers. The chart of accountsfor commercial banks is being revised and is expected to be approved by the NBK’s board and&Q implemented by mid-1999. 10. The authorities have been reporting monetary data to STA on a regular basis. These data re being compiled according to the methodology proposed in the forthcoming Manual on Monetary and Financial Statistics. The April 1999 issue of IFS shows data for the monetary authorities and the deposit money banks through November 1998. Balance of payment statistics 11. Kazakhstan has made significant progress in the compilation of balance of payments statistics, since the responsibility of compiling the statistics was transferred in April 1997 from the NSA to the NBK. In January 1999, the NBK also received the responsibility for collecting data on services, Quarterly data are prepared on time and provided to the EU2 and Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 38 - APPENDIX III the Statistics Departments. Despite improvements in the compilation of balance of payments statistics, a number of serious deficiencies remain. These relate to customs statistics, transportation and travel services, and foreign direct investment, and the statutory definition of residency. 12. Customs data have substantial coverage and valuation problems reflecting weakness in customs controls. The international trade statistics which are prepared by the NSA on the basis of customs statistics, also exhibit a number of shortcomings, such as trade data being compiled as of the time when customs forms are received rather than when goods clear customs. In addition, data are compiled on a cumulative basis without identification of revisions to past data. 13. The coverage of transportation and travel services is incomplete. The statutory definition of residency, which differs from that in BPMS (as well as in the SNA93 and in the Guide to Money and Bunking Srbtistics). makes identification of direct investment enterprises ditlicult. The NBK has drafted and is currently seeking administrative approval for revised set of BOP report forms, intended for introduction in September 1999. The NBK has also been training personnel in its regional branches to process the revised forms. It is expected that some of the current weakness in BOP coverage and classification will be alleviated following the acceptance of the new forms by reporting firms and agencies. 14. In October 1995, a Republican Working Commission on Coordination of National Economic Statistics was established to coordinate and strengthen the links between the various agencies involved in the collection and compilation of statistical data, as well as to provide official statistical data on various statistical areas, such as the balance of payments statistics. This commission should help to improve the quality of the economic statistics and to allocate resources more efficiently between the statistical agencies. 15. The status of reporting to the Fund of the core statistical indicators is shown in the attached table. 16. Starting in September 1996, Kazakhstan has been publishing statistical data in International Financial Statistics (IFS). Balance of payments data were published for the first time in the March 1998 issue of IFS. Monetary data through November 1998 were published in the April 1999 issue ofZFS. No data through November 1998 were published. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicKazakhstan: Core Statistical Indicators (As of June 1, 1999) Date of Latest Observation Date received Frequency of Data Frequency of RepoW saln% of Mode of Repoti~ Contidentiality Frequency of Publication II Exchange rates May 31, 1999 June 1, 1999 D D A C C D International Rem.5 May 28, 1999 June 1,1999 W W A C B M Bank Balance Sheet , I I April 30, May 28, April 30, March 1999 1999 M IWlMl” -G+-++- May 1999 March 1999 + June 1, MSY 1999 1999 M I Q M I Q A 1 A C C El! C C M I M cumnt OVd Account Govem’t Balalnce Bal.¶Ce GDP 21 March March March 1999 1999 1999 May May May 1999 1999 1999 Q Q Q Q Q Q A A A C C C C C C N/A N/A A I/ Some data are p&ally published by the authorities but cannot be used in the format in which they are being published 2/ Data on GDP is calculated on an annual basis, monthly data are available on production. Explanation of abbreviations: Frequency of data, reporting end publication: D-daily, W-weekly, M-monthly, Q-quarterly, V--irregularly in conjunction with staff visits Source of data: A-direct reporting by National Bank, Minishy of Finance, Ministry of Statistics and Analysis 01 other otlicial agency. Mode of reporting: C-cable or facsimile; F-floppy provided. Most data are provided to the Resident Represntative’s office and then f&w&d to headqu.stex Confidentiality: B-for use by the staff and the Executive Board, C-unrestricted ue Extanal Debt Mznch 1999 fiY 1999 Q Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 40 - APPENDIX IV Kazakhstan: Medium-Term Scenarios, 1999-2004 The underlying common assumptions relate to a large extent to the impact of the Russian crisis, access to pipelines for oil exports, the recovery of commodity prices, and foreign direct investments, The Russian crisis is assumed to continue to depress external trade through mid-1999, though a general recovery follows which continues into the medium-term. The initial deflationary effects of the ruble devaluation since mid-1998 are assumed to have worked themselves through the Kazakh economy. The real effective exchange rate is assumed to remain constant in the medium-term. Since the volume of oil exports is constrained by access to pipelines, conservative assumptions have been made based on the most recent information, including the impact of the Caspian Pipeline Consortium (CPC), scheduled to start operation in mid-2001. Oil prices are assumed to recover moderately over the medium term.’ A gradual strengthening of other commodity prices is also assumed as a moderation of inflows of foreign direct investments (PDI). A. Adjustment Scenario (Appendix Tables 1 and 2) This scenario is based on a sustained improvement in the conduct of macroeconomic policies and a continued momentum in structural reform. Through the early strengthening of the budget by implementing expenditure cuts in 1999, the deficit will be kept at 6 percent of GDP in 1999 and reduced gradually further to a sustainable level of 3.3 percent of GDP over the medium-term. This tiscal adjustment will enhance investor confidence and increase private I’D1 inflows. Assuming that public sector investment will remain constant at about 2.5 percent of GDP over the medium-term, total investment is anticipated to increase from 10.5 percent of GDP in 1999 to 15 percent of GDP by 2004, due to an increase in private investment. Under this scenario of strong growth-oriented macroeconomic policies, the growth of real GDP is expected to reach to a sustainable level of 5 percent per year, consistent with a gradual reduction of inflation to 3.5 percent on an end-year basis, The current account balance is expected to reach a surplus of about 2.5 percent of GDP in 2004, together with a gradual accumulation of international reserves. B. “Current Policies” Scenario (Appendix Tables 3 and 4) In the near-term, the weaker stance of fiscal policies would lead to lower donor financing, which would have to be replaced by increased privatization proceeds and domestic financing. Eventually, however, lower level of PDI inflow to the private sector would arise in view of weaker confidence and uncertainty about the medium-term, yielding a moderation of imports in the short-run and a weaker performance of non-oil exports over the medium-term. The ’ The projections follow the WE0 baseline prices for crude oil, recovering from $10.41 per barrel at end-1998 to $14.60 per barrel in 2004. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4l- APPENDIX IV higher privatization proceeds are assumed to match the decline in FDI inflow to the private sector in 1999 and therefore total FDI inflows as captured in the BOP is constant compared to the adjustment senario. At the same time, continued low public savings would lead to a crowding-out of the private sector. Consequently, a sluggish recovery and lower rates of growth in the medium-term would result, with a weaker external current account, lower non- oil exports and a lower levels of international reserves. The fiscal stance would become unsustainable over the medium-term as public debt soars when the scope for privatization dwindles. Under this scenario, inflation would remain higher, declining only to around S-10 percent in the medium term, and growth would be lower, about l-2 percent over the medium term. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 1. Kazakhstan: Savings, Investment and Growh, 1996-2004 kjustment Scenario 1996 1997 1998 1999 -proj. Proj. 2000 Proj 2001 Pmj 2002 Proj. 2003 Proj. 2004 Proj Investment Gross capital formation Public sector Of which Budget Private Ii Change in stocks Einanccd by: Total savings National savings Budget 21 31 PriV&C Foreign savings 41 Real GDP 0.5 1.7 Memorandum items: In5ation (CPl. end-of-period) 28.5 11.3 Fiscal deficit (percent of GDP) 31 -4.7 -6.8 Rcvenucs (in pacent of GDP) 31 13.2 13.4 Erpendihlrcs (in percent of GDP) 18.6 20.4 11.8 12.9 11.5 10.7 11.9 10.5 3.7 3.7 3.0 1.7 2.0 2.0 7.0 8.2 1.5 I.1 I .o I.0 11.8 12.9 11.5 8.2 9.3 5.8 -3 .o -4.8 -5.7 II.2 14.1 II.5 3.6 3.6 5.7 -2.5 1.9 -7.7 13.9 21.9 (In percent of GDP) 10.5 10.5 12.0 9.5 9.5 11.0 3.0 3.5 3.5 2.0 2.5 2.5 6.5 6.0 7.5 1.0 1.0 1.0 10.5 10.5 12.0 5.9 7.1 10.2 -4.0 -3.0 -1.2 9.9 10.1 11.4 4.6 3.4 1.8 (Percent change over previous year) -1.5 3.0 4.0 15.0 9.0 4.5 4.0 3.5 -6.0 -5.5 -3.7 -3.5 -3.3 IS.4 18.6 18.8 19.0 19.2 24.4 24.1 22.5 22.5 22.5 13.0 14.0 12.0 13.0 3.5 3.5 2.5 2.5 8.5 9.5 1.0 I.0 13.0 14.0 12.1 14.9 -1.0 -0.8 13.1 15.7 0.9 -0.9 4.0 4.5 15.0 14.0 3.5 2.5 10.5 I.0 15.0 17.5 -0.8 18.3 -2.5 5.0 3.5 -3.3 19.4 22.7 Sources: Kazakh author&s and staff estimates and projections. 11 This reflcds in part reclassification of the public sector to the private SC&X due to privatisation. 2i Government savings equal rwmun minus cwrent expenditures, equivalent to d&b (from above the line) plus investment. 3, Excludes privatition proceeds from revenue. 41 Foreign savings equal the cunent ~ccwnt d&it. R Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-43 - TabIs 2. KdhPtan: Mcdiun-Tam Balance 0fPaymentb Adjwtmcnt Sosntio 19%2004 (hmiuiom 0fll.S. dollon) APPENDIX IV -803 -276 6,899 5,228 1.671 -7.176 -7,009 -166 -601 75 1,513 713 1,320 404 485 -440 -22” 49” -490 -490 22,466 -3.6 2,244 3.2 7,257 32.3 692.4 8.9 -1,248 -80, 5.774 4,123 1.650 -6.575 -6,428 -147 -525 78 1,007 632 ,,*3* 62 -410 -369 -18, -423 423 423 21,903 -5.7 1.967 3.1 7.331 33.5 W3.8 39.8 -736 -367 5.477 3,723 1,755 -5,844 -5,697 -147 -439 70 768 668 L,OSO -*cm -4oll -350 6 38 -38 -38 16,157 -4.6 1,834 3.1 7,228 44.7 1,330.4 20.4 -53, -119 5,897 3,819 2,078 -6,016 -5,870 -147 42 70 679 304 1,050 25 -350 -350 148 -148 -148 15.m -3.4 1.855 3.1 7,om 45.6 1.159.3 16.6 -291 91 6S72 4,201 2.371 -6.481 -6.334 -147 -433 50 639 139 1,050 0 -3lw -250 348 -348 -348 I5.987 -1.8 2,153 3.3 6.870 43.0 803.6 10.5 -148 251 7,233 4,516 2,717 -6,982 -6.83J -147 -449 50 228 78 1.000 -350 -250 -250 so -8” -80 16,626 -0.9 2,206 3.7. 6.321 38.0 1.1882 14.2 152 568 7,wJ 4,764 3,125 -7,321 -7,174 -147 -467 50 454 54 90” 0 -250 -ml 605 -605 -605 17,418 0.9 2,734 3.7 6,047 34.6 8!m.8 9.8 452 866 8,542 5,002 3,540 -7,676 -7,529 -147 -464 50 378 78 800 0 -250 -250 831 -831 -831 18,330 2.5 3,490 4.6 5,800 31.6 857.5 8.8 Sowcss: Far&h auUloritics and Pun.4 slaiTprojcctio~. I/ lnoludea impact of UC sdcmsnt ofmulua, chim3 bcwesn Ruria and Kam!dMLul OfS1.691.7 million in cd 1998 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 3. Kazakhstan: Savings, Investment and Growth 19962004 Current Policies 1996 1997 1998 1999 Proj. 2000 Proj. 2001 Proj. 2002 Proj. 2003 Prcj 2004 Proj. Gross capital formation Public sector Of which Budget Private 11 Change in stocks Financed by: Total savings National sawn@ Budget 21 31 PriWtc Foreign savings 41 Real GDP 0.5 2.0 Memorandum items: hflatian (CPL end-of-period) 28.5 II.3 Fiscal deficit (percent of GDP) 31 -4.7 -6.8 Rcvcnucs (in pxent of GDP) 3/ 13.2 13.4 Expenditures (in percent of GDP) 18.6 20.4 11.8 12.9 Il.5 10.5 10.5 11.0 II.5 12.0 12.5 10.7 11.9 10.5 9.5 9.5 IO.0 10.5 11.0 11.5 3.7 3.7 3.0 3.0 3.5 3.5 3.5 3.5 3.5 1.7 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.5 2.5 2.5 2.5 7.0 8.2 7.5 6.5 6.0 6.5 7.0 7.5 8.0 1.1 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 I .o 1.0 11.8 12.9 11.5 8.2 9.3 5.8 -3.0 4.8 -5.7 11.2 14.1 II.5 3.6 3.6 5.7 -2.5 1.9 -7.7 13.9 21.9 (In pwcent of GDP) 10.5 10.5 II.0 6.1 8.1 9.9 -5.5 -5.0 4.5 11.6 13.1 14.4 4.4 2.4 1.1 (Percent change over pnvious year) -1.5 1.0 1.0 15.0 25.0 20.0 15.0 10.0 -7.5 -7.0 -7.0 -7.0 -7.0 18.4 18.6 18.8 19.0 19.2 26.1 26.0 25.8 26.0 26.2 11.5 12.0 12.5 11.6 12.8 13.7 :: 4.5 4.5 4.5 16.1 17.3 18.2 -0.1 -0.8 -I .2 1.5 1.5 2.0 8.0 -7.0 19.4 26.4 F2 Smrccs: Kadh authorities and staff estimatcr and projections. 2 Ii This reflects in part re&ssification oftbc public sector to the private sector due ta privatilation. 21 Government savings equal revenues minus cuncnt cxpcnditures, equivalent to deficit (from above the line) plus investment 31 Excludes privatization pmceeds from revenue. 4, Foreign savings equal tk current account defmit. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 45 - Table 4. Kazakhmn: Msdium-Tam Balamc o*Prymsnta da Current Policisr, 1997-2004 (In millim Of”.?. dollars) APPENDIX IV ,997 ,998 ,999 moo 2001 2002 2003 2004 knml Pd. A. <:lJRRENr ACCOUNT 1. Tds bnlsnce Eqxm (f0.b.) *on-or, cxpo* oil-cxpo* Impma. (f.0.b.) Non4 impcds Oil-impoN 2. servicer and income brhnce 3. current Tr*nskn 8. CAPlTAL & FINANCLAL ACCO”NT 1. Medium .“.A long-tern louIs and credii, net 2. iYe* ereign direct iwertment, net 3. POrmiO inmtmmt. net 4. Short-*mn md odler capital. net 5. C.pbd tmnsfer~, “d &mm .“d mnimnn 0”ERAL.l. BALANCE FINANCING Net i”knu*;onal mewe oflhs NBK (inc- -) Mcmors”d”m ilsm: GDP (an V.S. dolhr, c-l ~CC~lmt (in percent of GDP, NBK ponr intcmatimml cs*cwcs (in Mllion of U.S. dolh) (in mmllba of imp&s of G&WS) Stock ofcxtomd debt (in million of US. dollar) li (In pelvnt of GDP) Exlrmd debt mvics hillims Of”8 dollars) li (Jn pSrEC”t of cxparta of good rnd non-factor a&cc*, -803 -276 6.899 5,228 1,671 -7,176 -7.009 -166 -601 75 I.513 713 1,320 404 -485 -440 -220 490 -490 -m 22466 -3.6 2.244 3.2 7,257 32.3 692.4 8.9 -1.248 -801 5,774 4,123 1,650 -6,575 -6,428 -147 -525 78 1,007 632 I.132 62 -450 -369 -ISI -423 423 423 21.903 -5.7 I.967 3.1 7,331 33.5 2353.8 39.8 -661 -292 5,477 3,723 1.755 -5.769 -5,622 -147 -439 70 493 393 I.050 -200 -400 -350 6 -162 I62 I62 15.188 -4.4 1,635 2.8 6,953 43.0 1.330.4 20.4 -331 80 5.847 3,769 2.078 -5.767 -5,620 -147 -482 70 444 I19 1,050 25 -400 -350 -I 13 -113 13.846 -2.4 1.621 2.8 6.571 42.8 1.159.3 16.8 -1% 227 6,272 3,901 2.371 -6,045 -5.898 -147 -433 50 129 29 700 0 -350 -250 -27 27 27 14.261 -,.I 1,544 2.5 6,199 40.0 803.6 10.9 18 418 6,755 4,037 2,717 -6,336 -6.189 -147 450 50 -380 -30 600 -350 -350 -250 -362 362 362 14,832 0.1 I.155 1.8 5,442 34.6 1.188.2 15.1 12” 538 7,303 4.179 3,125 -6,765 -6,618 -147 -468 50 -26 -76 600 0 -300 -250 94 -94 -94 15,573 0.8 1,171 1.7 4,988 31.2 890.8 10.5 192 608 7,864 4,3x 3,540 -7.257 -7.lIO -147 466 JO -55 -55 550 0 -300 -x0 137 -137 -137 16,352 1.2 1,234 I.7 4.m 28.0 857.5 9.5 Sources: Kazzkb dhitiss *nd Ftmd slaiipmjsctiolu. Ii lncludca impct of the scttlcment ofm”hut &iM bmuccn Rwai. sd Kamkhstr” ofS1,69L.7 million in 0.2, ,998. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-46- APPENDIX V Kazakhstan-Draft Background Section for the PM 1. By early 1998, Kazakhstan was showing the effects of the progress made in transforming its economy into a market-based system. Output was growing, following upon the trend started in mid-1996. Annual inflation had fallen to less than 10 percent. The external account deficit, though large, was primarily financed by large foreign direct investment intlows, mainly in the oil and gas sectors. 2. In mid-1998, Kazakhstan was hit by a series of large shocks: a decline of commodity prices, resulting in a deterioration of Kazakhstan’s terms of trade of 14 percent during 1998; a sharp nominal depreciation of the Russian ruble, leading to a real effective appreciation of the Kazakh tenge of more than 10 percent between early August and late September; turmoil in emerging markets, which temporarily cut off Kazakh borrowers from international financial markets; and a severe drought. 3. These shocks had a profound impact on domestic economic developments. Real GDP fell by 2.5 percent in 1998. Intluenced by the decline in import prices, consumer prices fell in March 1999 to a level 1 percent below that of March 1998. The current account deficit widened from 3.6 percent of GDP in 1997 to 5.7 percent of GDP in 1998, as the impact on exports of the fall of commodity prices exceeded the influence on imports of the decline in activity. 4. In reaction to external developments, the National Bank of Kazakhstan (NBK) accelerated the rate of crawl ofthe Tenge vis-&vis the U.S. dollar, s&Wing in June 1998. It also twice rose its refinance rate, fust to 20% percent in August and then to 25 percent in November. Interest rates on treasury bills and NBK notes rose in parallel, reaching 26 percent at the end of the year. Nevertheless, due to repeated pressures in the foreign exchange market, the NBK conducted sizable interventions in 1998 and the first quarter of 1999, resulting in a measurable fall in international reserves. Faced with this situation and the degradation in the country’s external competitiveness, the government of Kazakhstan and the NBK jointly announced a shift to a floating exchange rate regime on April 4, 1999. Inflation rebounded in the immediate wake of the April 4, 1999 shift to a freely floating exchange rate regime (see below) but price pressures started to abate again a few weeks later. 5. Fiscal developments in 1998 were heavily influenced by the declining level of economic activity, which resulted in weaknesses in tax collection. Despite efforts to reduce expenditure, the budget deficit of the general government widened to 8 percent of GDP in 1998 from 7 percent of GDP in 1997. Expenditure arrears slightly decreased during 1998. The deficit was primarily financed with large privatization receipts, amounting to more than 4 percent of GDP, and borrowing from multilateral financial institutions. The difficult budgetary situation continued in the first quarter of 1999 primarily owing to weak tax collections. 6. Substantial progress was made in 1998 and early 1999 in the area of structural reforms. The deterioration in the external environment did not affect in general the die&on Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-47- APPENDIX V or pace of reforms, except the privatization of very large enterprises which was adversely affected by condition8 in international financial markets. A number of initiatives were taken to strengthen the budgetary process. The 1999 Budget Law introduced important changes to the fiscal system, including the elimination of the major extra-budgetary funds, which contributed to increasing its transparency. The adoption of the Budget System Law created a systemic foundation for financial relations between different levels of government. A Ministry of State Revenue was created in October 1998 to strengthen tax administration. In addition, important steps were taken to reform the public sector, the civil service, public provision of health and education services, and the banking sector. In the latter area, the number of bank8 was further reduced to 72 during 1998, and progress was made toward the implementation of strict prudential norms, with 13 banks in tbll compliance by December 1998. Development of the new pension system, launched on January 1, 1998, was marked by a steady increase in the market share of private pension funds, which reached 27 percent at end-January 1999. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public