DOCUMENT OF INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND NOT FOR PUBLIC USE MASTER FILES ROOM HQ C-525 0450 sM/99/93 CONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL. INFORMATION April 21, 1999 To: Members of the Executive Board From: The Secretary Subject: Zimbabwe-Staff Report for the 1999 Article IV Consultation Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staff report for the 1999 Article IV consultation with Zimbabwe, which will be brought to the agenda for discussion on a date to be announced. A draft decision appears on page 35. Mr. Nowak (ext. 38969) or Mr. Khatri (ext. 35494) is available to answer technical or factual questions relating to this paper prior to the Board discussion. Unless the Documents Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the WTO Secretariat on Thursday, April 29, 1999; and to the African Development Bank and the European Commission, following its consideration by the Executive Board. Att: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public. CONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND ’ . ZIMBABWE Staff Report for the 1999 Article IV Consultation Prepared by the Staff Representatives for the 1999 Consultation with Zimbabwe Approved by Anupam Basu and Leslie Lips&i& April 20, 1999 Contents Page ExecutiveSummary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .._............................ 3 I. II. III. IV. V. Background and Recent Economic Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .5 Report on Policy Discussions .................................. A. Strategy .Overview ........... ; ......................... B. Financial and External Sector Policies .................. I ... C. Structural Policies .................................... External Financing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29 A. Balance of Payments Outlook and Financing Requirements, 1999 . . 29 B. External Debt Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30 Statistical Issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Staff Appraisal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Text Tables 1. Use of Fund Credit, 1996-2005 ................................. 2. Selected Economic Indicators, 1995-2001 ........................ 3. Quantitative Performance Criteria Under Stand-By Arrangement., 1998 4. Structural Performance Criteria Under Stand-By Arrangement, 1998 .... 5. Central Government Budget, 1995-200 1 ......................... 6. Monetary Survey, 1997-2001 ................................. 7. Balance of Payments, 1994-2004 ............................... 8. Indicators of Debt-Servicing Capacity, 1994-2005 .................. 14 14 15 21 31 31 . . . 36 . , 37 . 38 . . 39 40 . . 42 . . 43 . . . 44 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2- Contents Page L Figures 1. Real and Nominal Effective Exchange Rates, January 1990-December 1998 ...... 7 2. Real Per Capita Remuneration in the Civil Service, 1989/90-l 998 ............. 23 Text Boxes 1. 2. 3. 4. Chronology of Recent Events, August 1997-March 1999 .................... 8 Summary of Policy Implementation Under Stand-By Arrangement, 1998 ........ 11 Repercussions of the Asian Crisis ...................................... 12 Land Reform in Zimbabwe ........................................... 25 Appendixes 1. Relations with the Fund ............................................. 45 II. Statistical Issues ................................................... 49 III. Relations with the World Bank Group ................................... 53 IV. Press Information Notice ............................................ 56 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3- Executive Summary 0 In response to acute balance of payments pressures experienced in late 1997, Zimbabwe adopted a stabilization program, which was supported by a Stand-By Arrangement approved in June 1998. The program sought to bring inflation under control, reconstitute international reserves, and provide a sound and stable financial platform upon which growth could be enhanced and’poverty alleviated. 0 Performance under the Stand-By Arrangement has been mixed. On the positive side, the budget deficit was cut in half to 4.3 percent of GDP in 1998, and monetary growth was curtailed. In addition, the external current account deficit was reduced, and the process of rebuilding foreign reserves begun. Financial restraint, however, has not translated into exchange rate and price stability. The Zimbabwe dollar lost one-half of its external value in 1998, and inflation rose to 53 percent in March 1999 from 20 percent at the end of 1997. Economic growth fell to 1.6 percent in 1998, which was well below the rate of population growth. 0 To a significant extent, these disappointing trends reflected a sharp contraction in export demand and large shortfalls in foreign assistance. Most important, however, they were also attributable to sagging market confidence as a result of a variety of factors, including the collapse of a small indigenous bank; the imposition of price controls on maize-meal; concerns over the economic impact of Zimbabwe’s military involvement in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC); and uncertainties surrounding the direction of the land reform program. In addition, the national oil and electricity companies incurred large losses because of delays in passing through the impact of the currency depreciation to retail energy prices. 0 On the basis of discussions held with Fund staff, the government has adopted an , economic program for 1999 that seeks to reduce inflation to 24 percent, restore external viability, and provide a basis for a rebound in economic growth to over 3 percent. In fighting inflation, monetary policy will be tightened further, while maintenance of a strong fiscal stance will help preserve much of the recent improvement that has taken place in international competitiveness. Energy prices have been increased, and more adjustments are planned, with a view to returning the state energy companies to financial viability. 6 If inflation is to be lowered quickly and the currency stabilized, a number of confidence-building measures will also need to be taken. The government therefore intends to roll back emergency trade and exchange measures, remove price controls on maize-meal, and provide full public disclosure of the cost of Zimbabwe’s military involvement in the DRC. The government is also paying for farms acquired under its land reform program on the basis of fair market compensation. , Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4- 0 A number of banks have been experiencing financial difftculties over the past year, but the problem does not appear to be systemic at present. To ensure that the situation remains under control and to strengthen overall regulation of the financial system, capital adequacy requirements have been tightened, guidelines for dealing with troubled banks are being prepared, and new banking legislation is about to be introduced that will permit on-site inspections by the Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe. 0 The staff has been informed that the cost to Zimbabwe’s military budget of the campaign in the DRC has been limited and manageable, largely because the bulk of the expenses incurred have been covered by its allies in the conflict. Clearly, however, any escalation in hostilities or major change in the cost-sharing arrangements with theaallies could seriously undermine implementation of the economic program. i The review under the Stand-By Arrangement could not be completed at the present time because issues in the areas of price controls and import restrictions remain unresolved. The staff nevertheless believes that Zimbabwe would be well served if its economic program were to be supported by a Fund arrangement. Such an arrangement would help sustain the momentum of fiscal adjustment and provide a disciplined framework for macroeconomic policy implementation. It would also catalyze the resources needed to meet Zimbabwe’s substantial external financing requirements. In the absence of Fund support, the risks of backsliding on fiscal consolidation and of f%ther recourse to administrative controls would be considerable. The staff therefore intends to submit to the Executive Board a request from the authorities for a new Stand-By Arrangement once clear understandings have been reached on price controls and the emergency trade-restrictions. 0 In pursuing its stabilization program, the staff encourages the authorities to not lose sight of important structural objectives. In particular, tariff reform will be necessary to remove the strong anti-export bias from the trade regime, while more needs to be done.to attract foreign investment. Without such resources, Zimbabwe will ‘. not be able to meet its external financing requirements and economic growth objectives. Pushing ahead quickly with the privatization program would contribute significantly to this effort. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-5- 1. BACKGROUNDANDRECENTECONOMICPERF~RMANCE 1. Discussions for the 1999 Article IV consultation and first review under the Stand-By Arrangement with Zimbabwe were held between August 1998 and February 1999.’ For reasons indicated below, however, the review could not be completed at this time.2 Zimbabwe has made only one purchase under the program (Table 1). 2. Zimbabwe is on the standard 12-month consultation cycle, although the most recent Article IV consultation was concluded on May 21, 1997. On that occasion, Executive Directors noted that, while economic growth had rebounded and inflation eased, the underlying economic situation remained fragile. They noted in particular the continued difficulties in restoring fiscal discipline and the absence of any significant recovery in private investment. Directors therefore urged the adoption of a strong budget for 1997198 and a comprehensive structural reform Economic Growth program, which would include moving ahead forcefUlly with privatization and 15 fUlfil!ing the trade liberalization -Real growth tin petosntb commitments under the Cross-Border Initiative (CBI). ---- Tsrmr offradslohsngain 10 _ A. percent, 3. Zimbabwe’s economic reform program, which was launched in 199 1, made impressive progress in removing structural and administrative impediments to economic growth. Little headway was achieved, however, in bringing the fiscal deficit under control, and a Fund- supported program veered irretrievably off track in 1995. Policy implementation -5 - ‘The dates of the discussions with the authorities and the staff members involved are summarized in Appendix 1. The staff teams met with the Vice President, Mr. Muzenda; a number of cabinet ministers, including Mr. Murerwa, the Minister of Finance; Dr. Tsumba, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe; and other senior government officials and representatives of the private sector, labor movement, and donor community. Mr. Mafararikwa, Assistant to the Executive Director for Zimbabwe, attended many of the meetings. World Bank staff also participated in the discussions. 2The Executive Board approved the Stand-By Arrangement for Zimbabwe on June 1, 1998 in an amount equivalent to SDR 130.65 million (50 percent of old quota, or 37 percent of new quota). The first program review under the arrangement was scheduled to have been completed by end-November 1998. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-6- was Cuther complicated by the impact of two serious droughts. As a consequence, between 199 1 and 1996 inflation remained well above 15 percent, Zimbabwe’s external competitive position deteriorated progressively (Figure l), private investment flagged, and real per capita income shrank at an annual average of over 2 percent per year. 4. Despite persistently large fiscal imbalances, Zimbabwe enjoyed a relatively healthy external current account position during 1993 -96, and by end- 1996 international reserves had climbed to ‘the equivalent of External Sector about three months of import; of goods and services (Table 2).3 The unsustainability of the external position became evident during the second half of 1997, when the uncertainties surrounding the government’s IO I -Er,e,".lc",rcntacco"nr Id" peIce"to‘ - GoP.Islrrcslsl Overall balance ,I" million* 0, ".S.doHal*. 5 government decided to grant generous benefits to war veterans totaling 2 percent of GDP and monetary policy became increasingly lax. The value of the tiptl, *cs,e, 8. I \ *j-;m I \ I \ \ J \ I II V I' \ ' t' \ 't \ 'r ! i I I ; I Zimbabwe dollar was tirther weakened by land reform program, weak tobacco and gold 500 300 100 -100 -300 .500 -700 exports, and fears of another drought. -15 I I -900 Matters came to a head in November and 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1999 1997 1998 December 1997, when the currency came under intense selling pressure and lost one- third of its value in foreign currency terms. By the end of the year, gross reserves had declined to the equivalent of 0.8 month of imports. 5. The government adopted a package of policy measures to address the foreign exchange crisis between November 1997 and January 1998 that included tax hikes and expenditure cuts, increases in intereSt rates, and the closure of corporate foreign currency accounts (Box 1). The Reserve Bank also drew on its short-term credit lines, and balance of payments support was secured from the World Bank and the European Union4 These actions brought a measure of stability to the foreign exchange market and were subsequently reinforced during the first half of 1998 by the adoption of a comprehensive ‘The coexistence of large budget deficits and relatively small current account imbalandes is largely explained by the maintenance of high real interest rates, which encouraged private savings and dampened import demand; and by capital controls, which limited inflows of private capital. 4This support represented undisbursed aid that had been withheld in 1995 when the economic program went off track. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-7- Figure 1. Zimbabwe: Real and Nominal Effective Exchange Rates, January 1990-January 1999 (Period average; 1990=100) OI~~~~~~~.~..I~.,....~~..I.......~~..I......LIY.I...........l~........,.~...........~~.~........~...~......~~.~ 1990 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 w" 110. 110 100 - - 100 90 - - 90 80 - -80 70 - - 70 60 - - 60 50 - - 50 40 - -40 _____Y----‘--._ 30 - -..-._“.“.____._----_l__l_ -- ..I.. ~.- __ Nomind effective - 30 --.- . . ezctige rate 20 - ---.. _.-- . ..- ------------.._ _______._ _ --.. - 20 ‘-.* *-._ 10 - -. ---------.-_____ -' 10 O"'~'~"~~~I~"'~'~'~.~~, 0 1997 1998 1999 Sources: IMF; Information Notice System; and staff estimates. 1/ Based on rslotive consumer price Indices. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-87 Box 1. Chronology of Recent Events, August 1997- March 1999 August 1997 Announcement of unbudgeted pensions for war veterans (2.6 percent of GDP). November 1997 Gazetting of I,47 1 farms designated for compulsory acquisition; public remarks by senior government officials suggest confiscation or only partial compensation. Depreciation of Zimbabwe dollar of nearly 15 percent in foreign currency terms during the second half of the month. Increase in rediscount rate from 25.5 percent to 28.5 percent and suspension of corporate foreign currency accounts. December 1997 Renewed pressure on Zimbabwe dollar, which depreciated a further 30 percent. Increase of rediscount rate from 28.5 percent to 3 1.5 percent. Announcement of package of tax and expenditure measures, January 1998 Civil disturbances, sparked by increases in prices of basic foodstuffs. Exertion of moral suasion on maize millers by government not to increase prices. February 1998 Speech by the Minister of Lands and Agriculture to donors, affirming that land reform would involve fair compensation and proceed in line with available budgetary resources. Launch of program for economic and social transformation (ZIMPREST) after discussions in National Economic Consultative Forum. March 1998 April 1998 Organization of two-day strike against high taxes and food prices by trade union movement, Opening of tobacco auction floors with sharply lower prices. Closure of United Merchant Bank by regulators and discovery of serious fraud. June 1998 Approval of Stand-By Arrangement by Executive Board. Conclusion of private sector collective wage bargaining with increases of 30-35 percent. Conclusion of six-month wage agreement in civil service with 12 percent average increase. Sharp depreciation of South &can rand. Imposition of price controls on maize-meal. August 1998 Increase in prices of petroleum products of 12-22 percent. Increase in rediscount rate to 35 percent and reduction in maximum maturity of forward cover contracts. Public release of independent report on the abuse of the War Victims’ Compensation Fund. Launching of military operations in the DRC. Cumulative depreciation of currency since beginning of year of 30 percentin foreign currency terms. September 1998 International conference on land reform. Agreement by government to withdraw the development levy and the tax on pensions to avert a threatened strike. Response of government to renewed foreign exchange pressure comprising increasing import tariffs; suspending provision of forward cover contracts; reducing net open position of authorized foreign exchange dealers; and increasing banks’ reserve requirements. Increase in electricity tariffs of 20 percent, and announcement of further quarterly increases of 15 percent through 1999. Cumulative depreciation of currency since beginning of year of 45 percent. October 1998 Adoption of new prudential regulations and minimum capital requirements for banks. Increase in minimum capital holding of foreign exchange bureaus from US$ 10,000 to us$100,000. Increase in controlled prices for maize meal after consultation with millers. Increase in prices for petroleum products of 67 percent. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-9- Box 1. Chronology of Recent Events, August 1997- March 1999 (Concluded) November 1998 Eruption of widespread civil disturbances in protest of petroleum price increases. Issuance of acquisition orders to 841 farms remaining on the original list of gazetted farms. Replacement by Reserve Bank of rediscount and overnight lending rates with floating bank rate. Issuance of decree banning strikes for six months. Approval by cabinet of banking legislation. December 1998 Announcement of further increase in minimum capital holding of foreign exchange bureaus from US% 100,000 to US$150,000. Cutting of exporters’ surrender requirement from 180 to 90 days. Cumulative depreciation of currency since the beginning of year of 50 percent. January 1999 Issuance of statement by Reserve Bank indicating it would take action against banks “artificially pushing” the exchange rate. Increase in electricity tariffs of 15 percent. February 1999 Issuance of public statement clarifying government’s position on land reform. Withdrawal of land acquisition notices on legal grounds. Renewal of uncertainty following Authorities’ statements to the press on land reform and price control issues. March 1999 Three-day rail workers’ strike. Rebound in stock market; industrial index up by about 35 percent since end- 1998. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- IO- stabilization program,’ supported by a Stand-By Arrangement that was approved in early June 1998. 6. Performance under the Stand- By Arrangement has been mixed (Box-2 and Tables 3 and 4). As a result of healthy revenue collections and success in containing expenditures, the central government budget deficit (excluding grants) was cut in half to 4.3 percent of GDP in 1998-well below the program target of 5.5 percent of GDP (Table 5). This allowed the Reserve Bank to keep within its broad money supply targets (Table 6). Despite extremely soft export market conditions, the external current account deficit narrowed from 10 percent bf GDP in 1997 to 6 percent in 1998 (Table 7). 7.. The tightening of financial policies, however, has not yet translated into exchange rate and price stability. The Zimbabwe dollar came under renewed pressure in the second half of 1998 and, by the end of December, it had lost about one-half of its external value during the year. Inflation jumped to 47 percent (on an end-of-period basis) in 1998 from 20 percent in 1997 and rose further, to 53 percent, in March. High inflation and real interest rates, in conjunction with weak overseas demand, also dampened the pace of economic activity, and real GDP is estimated to have grown by less than 2 percent in 1998. 8. To a significant extent, the disappointing currency and inflation trends reflected external factors. The Fiscal Position 6 q Overallfisc~l balance Impercentot GDP1 4 - q Primarybslance (in percent of GDP1 0 -2 -4 -6 -8 -10 -12 I 1990 1991 1992 1993 1894 1996 1996 1997 1999 Money and Prices 50 ~Consumstprioe inflation Isndofperiodb 1x/ .~ ._.._. 1 ~ , , , I , Broadmonsy~~owth linpsroentl ,990 1sg1 ,902 1963 ,904 ,995 1996 1997 1998 impact of the slowdown in global economic activity and the Asian crisis contributed to a drop in gold and ferrous alloy shipments, and exports fell by 26 percent in 1998 (Box 3). Capital Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicPolicy Area Box 2. Zimbabwe: Summa? of Policy hnplementation Under Stand-By Arrangement, 1998 Status of Performance Criteria Comments End-June End-Septetiber End-December 1998 1998 1998 Domestic financing of the budget Reserve money Net international reserves External debt Medium and long term Short term External payments arrears Injunction against trade restrictions Divestiture program Banking legislation National Revenue Authority Size of civil service ,Observed Observed Observed Observed Observed Not observed Observed Observed Observed Observed Observed Observed Observed Not observed Not observed Not observed na. n.a. Not observed Not observed Observed Observed Not observed Not observed Not observed Observed 3/ Not observed Observed Not observed Not observed Observed Not observed Observed Nonobservance owing to shortfall in external financing. I/ Deviation temporary and corrected in first week of January 1999. Broad money targets met. Nonobservance owing to shortfall in external financing. 2/ Deviation technical and small. To be reversed upon disbursement of IMF funds. Nonobservance owing to fall in stock market prices and problems in incorporating satisfactory indigenization safeguards. Technical problems. Draft legislation presently on cabinet agenda. l/ End- 1998 target was missed by 2$3,559 million, which compares with a shortfall in foreign financing of the budget of 2$4,932 million. 2/ End-1998 target was missed by US$142 million, which compares with a shortfall in external financing of US$338 million. In addition, there was an export shortfall of US$6 17 million in 1998. 3/ Based on highly tentative data and may possibly be revised. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12 - Box 3. Repercussions of the Emerging Markets’ Crisis The unfolding of the Asian crisis accentuated the fundamental weaknesses of the Zimbabwean economy over the course of 1998. Zimbabwe has a well-developed financial system, and international trade accounts for more than one-third of its GDP. It was, therefore, vulnerable to the sharp decline in commodity prices, the loss of export markets, and financial market contagion. The following table provides some highly tentative estimates of the effects of developments in commodity prices and export markets, as well as the financial market contagion, which triggered higher interest rates in defense of the Zimbabwe dollar and contributed to the decline in the value of the Zimbabwe Stock Exchange by 36 percent between April and September (58 percent in U.S. dollar terms). Impact of Selected Factors in 1998 (Annual change in percent, unless otherwise indicated) Decline in Decline in Loss of Higher Total Effect Import Export Export Real Inter- Prices Prices Markets est Rates Real GDP 0.0 0.0 -0.8 -0.8 -1.6 Real GDP adjusted for terms of trade 0.1 -0.6 0.0 0.0 -0.5 Terms of trade -8.7 -11.5 0.0 0.0 -3.1 Current account (in millions of U.S. dollars) 231 -279 -98 . . -146 (in percent of GDP) 4.1 -4.9 -0.8 -1.6 Overall fiscal balance (in percent of GDP) 0.0’ o.02 0.0 -1.4 1 ./ Petroleum duties are assessed at specific rates, and therefore the price decline has no impact on the budget. -1.4 1 ~ 2.1 Given Zimbabwe’s narrow export base, the impact of low export prices on.corporate profits, and thus on tax revenues and the fiscal balance, is assumed to be minimal. Other events and policy slippages that were also of importance but whose impact is difficult to disentangle from that of the Asian crisis are the following: . the litigation against tobacco companies in the United States, which adversely affected tobacco prices; . the adverse market reaction to the imposition of price controls on maize meal; and . the expectation of larger budget and balance of payments deficits owing to military operations in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13 - inflows were discouraged by general uncertainties surrounding emerging markets, and the depreciation of the South African rand further weakened sentiment in the Zimbabwe dollar. * These problems were exacerbated by shortfalls in external support resulting from delays in putting together a package of structural reforms, Despite these developments, the Reserve Bank was able to reconstitute its international reserve position to the equivalent of 1.1 months of imports by the end of 1998. 9. Very importantly, economic performance also reflected difficulties experienced , by the government in establishing public confidence in its reform program. The stability of the banking system was shaken by the collapse of a merchant bank in May and the discovery of serious fraudulent practices by the bank. Public confidence was further hurt at the end of June when price controls were imposed on maize-meal in response to concerns over the social impact of rising food prices. This action triggered fears that controls would be extended to the exchange and trade regime and thus served to further intensify foreign exchange pressures. Market sentiment was also weakened by Zimbabwe’s military operations in the DRC and concerns about the potential fiscal and balance of payments repercussions. Uncertainties were heightened by fears over the government’s intentions in the area of land reform. In addition, the government was slow in allowing the pass-through of the currency depreciation to energy prices, and the financial positions of the state oil and electricity supply companies deteriorated sharply as a result; these developments served to offset the favorable impact of the reduction in the government budget deficit. 10. The authorities took a series of emergency steps in August and September 1998 to dampen foreign exchange demand. Capital controls were tightened, import duties raised, the rediscount rate hiked, and banks’ reserve requirements increased.’ 6 In addition, oil prices were hiked by 100 percent between August and October in an effort to return the financial operations of the state oil company (NOCZIM) to a break-even point. Electricity tariffs were raised by 40 percent between October 1998 and January 1999. ‘The capital control measures included the suspension of all forward cover contracts between banks and their clients, a reduction in the limit on the net open position of foreign exchange dealers (from US$5 million to US$2 million, or 10 percent of capital, whichever is lower), and an increase in their capital requirements from US$lO,OOO to US$lOO,OOO. ,Import duties were raised by between 20 and 55 percentage points on a range of products that are either of a luxury nature or can be produced locally. In addition, the coverage of the import surcharge was extended to all imports, except capital and intermediate goods, and the surcharge was increased from 10 percent to 15 percent. “The increase in import duties represents a breach of the program injunction against an intensification of import restrictions for balance of payments purposes. None of the measures taken involve exchange restrictions subject to approval under Article VIII of the Fund’s Articles of Agreement. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14- II. REPORT ON POLICY DISCUSSIONS A. Strategy Overview Immediate challenges 11. The first program review under the Stand-By Arrangement could not be completed as scheduled, largely because of mixed signals from government over its policy intentions in the areas of land reform and price controls. However, extensive discussions were held and understandings reached on an economic program fo.r 1999 that could provide a basis for financial support from the Fund in the near fi.tture. This program targets a reduction in inflation to 24 percent and anticipates a rebound in economic growth to just over 3 percent on the expectation of a normal crop this year. Three broad areas were identified as critical in the effort to bring inflation under control, stabilize the currency, and rebuild international reserves. 12. First, it was agreed that money should continue to be used as the nominal anchor of the financial system and monetary restraint remain the primary instrument for bringing inflation under control. Interest rates would therefore be allowed to rise further if necessary to deliver the monetary targets, while the exchange rate would remain flexible and act as a safety valve in absorbing swings in foreign exchange demand. The stabilization program would, nevertheless, need to be reconfigured, since the continuing flight out of Zimbabwe dollars indicated that money demand was much lower than had been previously envisaged. Monetary policy would therefore be further tightened in 1999. 13. Second, Zimbabwe’s external current account diffkulties and the impact of high real interest rates on investment pointed to the need to maintain a tight fiscal stance and to address the financial position of some of the public enterprises. In view of the weak state of economic activity, the authorities were, however, anxious that fiscal restraint did not unduly dampen demand pressures; moreover, they were aiming to improve the quality of social services and extend the social safety nets. 14. Third, and most fundamentally, the authorities recognized the importance of reestablishing public credibility in their economic program as a means of dampening inflationary expectations and sustaining the adjustment effort. The restoration of confidence would involve a number of important steps, including establishing greater transparency with regard to the cost of Zimbabwe’s military involvement in the DRC, liberalizing the exchange and trade regime, and adopting concrete structural policy actions. These actions included the removal of price controls, acceleration of the divestiture program, and implementation of a land reform program that involved fair compensation for land acquired. Certain governance issues also needed to be addressed. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 15- Medium-term strategy 15. The authorities believe that real per capita income would need to grow by at least 3 percent a year over the next five years to make a substantive impact on living standards, reduce unemployment, and enhance social welfare. After taking into account population growth, this translates into an average real GDP growth rate of 6 percent, compared with less than 4 percent over the past five years.’ In view of Zimbabwe’s resource endowments and policy biases, which protected capital-intensive industries, the adjustment strategy must be labor-intensive and outward-looking. 16. The authorities understood that the starting point for higher sustainable economic growth was the restoration of a sound and stable financial environment within which businesses could invest and individuals save with confidence. Fiscal discipline was central to achieving these goals, and most of the fiscal adjustment needed would take place in the near term in order to help bring inflation down to the level of Zimbabwe’s trading partners by 2001 and to strengthen external viability. In addition to sustained fiscal consolidation, necessary complementary measures included a reduction in the burden of direct taxation, removal of the anti-export bias from the protective regime, privatization, and enhanced regulation and supe,rvision of the financial sector. 17. The authorities were keenly aware that domestically generated resources alone would not be sufficient to generate the savings necessary for a recoveryin investment. Moreover, in the present global environment of shrinking donor support, Zimbabwe would not be able to rely on significant inflows of foreign aid. Hence, a growing share of Zimbabwe’s external financing requirements would need to be met by direct foreign investment. Promoting both foreign and domestic investment therefore constitute the core challenge facing Zimbabwe’s structural adjustment efforts. B. Financial .and External Sector Policies Fiscal policy 18. The authorities felt that it would not be feasible to sustain the fiscal effort achieved in 1998. The government’s program for 1999 targets an overall deficit of 4.9 percent of GDP, which is equivalent to a primary surplus of 2.5 percent of GDP. At. 28 percent of GDP, Zimbabwe’s tax burden is relatively heavy, and the 1999 budget includes a range of measures that would reduce revenues by about 2 percent of GDP. The development 7The growth target takes into account the risk of drought. If moderate drought conditions occur every four years, growth will need to average over 8 percent in the nondrought years. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 16- levy has been abolished,8 income tax thresholds raised sharply and bands widened, and tax incentives provided for exporting enterprises. The budget also includes suspension of the surcharge of 2% percent on regular sales tax, which was introduced on a temporary basis earlier in 1998 to cover the cost of the war veterans’ payments. Additional revenue declines reflect the possibility that the collection of income tax arrears in 1998 may not be repeated this year; revenue projections are also highly conservative. On the other hand, excise duties have been increased and withholding taxes on capital gains introduced. Customs duty collections should continue to benefit from the further real exchange rate depreciation that is expected in 1999. 19. A reconstitution of certain expenditures will be necessary this year. The capital budget was trimmed to unsustainable levels in 1998, and it needs to be expanded if the quality of the country’s social and economic infrastructure is to be maintained. In particular, spending on health and education, including capital investment, will be raised to 9.8 percent of GDP from 8.5 percent in 1998. Additional funds have also been earmarked for social safety net programs, such as the Rural Development Fund and land resettlement. In other areas, however, continued expenditure compression is called for. The 1999 civil service pay award, in conjunction with ongoing retrenchments, will enable the government to cut its wage bill further to 11.5 percent of GDP from 12.3 percent in 1998. In addition, direct budgetary support for the public enterprises wiI1 continue to be confined primarily to honoring called-up loan guarantees, which are expected to amount to about ‘/2 of 1 percent of GDP in 1999. Interest payments should decline in response to several factors, including the large primary budgetary surplus, the prospect of lower interest rates as inflation subsides, and the receipt of concessional foreign aid, which is contingent upon adoption of a Fund program. The recurrent budget incorporates an unallocated contingency reserve equivalent to 0.8 percent of GDP; this may prove important in the event that the external financing does not materialize or that the cost of borrowing do not decline to the extent anticipated. 20. Zimbabwe’s military involvement in the DRC began in August 1998, and as of mid-February 1999 between 4,200 and 5,200 troops were deployed there. The Zimbabwean authorities were unable to provide an estimate of the total cost of their operations in the DRC because the bulk of the expenses, notably for fuel, transport, and munitions, have been incurred and paid for by Zimbabwe’s allies in the conflict. Information provided to the staff indicates that the expenses borne by the Zimbabwean budget in 1998 was about US%1.3 million per month (or 0.4 percent of GDP at an annual rate); this is considerably less than amounts that have been reported in the press. Nearly one-half of the costs represented a daily allowance payable in U.S. dollars for personnel deployed in the D’RC. The remainder largely comprised repairs, maintenance, and munitions. *A 5 percent development levy had been applied to prevailing rates of income tax; abolition of this levy will reduce collections by about 0.5 percent of GDP per year. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17- 21. The data provided to the staff on military spending are consistent with available fiscal financing data and with information on foreign exchange transactions reported by the Reserve Bank and the commercial banks.g The staff was told that no extrabudgetary defense spending had taken place. For 1998 as a whole, military spending amounted to 2.7 percent of GDP, which is well below the level of 3.8 percent of GDP recorded in 1994/95. For 1999, a total of 2.8 percent of GDP has been allocated, of which 0.4 percent relates to the cost of DRC operations. The authorities said that any excess defense spending over budgetary appropriation would be covered by enforced savings within the military budget. Monetary policy 22. In designing the original stabilization program, the Reserve Bank recognized t.hat, because of the deeply ingrained nature of inflationary expectations, it would take some time for inflation to respond to monetary restraint. In the event, the disinflation process has been even slower than anticipated, and a further tightening of monetary policy is , warranted. Arguably, if the Reserve Bank had done this during the course of last year, inflationary pressures would not have been as intense. For 1999, the Reserve Bank is targeting a cut in M3 growth to 10 percent from 14 percent in 1998. 23. Reserve requirements were raised in September 1998 from 20 percent to 25 percent . for the commercial banks, and from 4 percent to 5 percent for finance houses. During the discussions, the staff expressed reservations about the use of reserve requirements as an instrument for achieving monetary objectives. The higher reserve requirements represented increased taxation of financial intermediation and as such discouraged saving and investment.” In addition the requirements had not been applied to financial sector institutions in a uniform manner and’therefore encouraged greater liquidity expansion among the building societies, which were not subject to reserve requirements or to mandatory supervision by the Reserve Bank. The Reserve Bank said that it intended to reduce reserve requirements once the overall fiscal situation had improved.” It would instead rely on open market operations, , including the use of repurchase agreements, to meet its monetary targets. The effectiveness of - open market operations would be enhanced by the planned expansion of the primary dealer system to include commercial banks. ‘Al1 spending has taken place on a cash basis. According to the authorities, no foreign credit arrangements, which require parliamentary approval, have been entered into. “The spread between the three-month deposit rates offered by the commercial banks and their prime lending rates was about 15 percent at the end of March 1999. “The reserve money targets under the program will be adjusted downward in the event of a reduction in reserve requirements. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 18- 24. In May 1998, the license of a small indigenous merchant bank that had experienced acute financial difficulties was suspended, and in the process fraudulent practices were uncovered that involved the issuance of fake government-guaranteed bills; the bank has since been closed and is being liquidated. As a result of these developments, a number of financial institutions, especially some of the newer banks, have experienced investment losses and a drain on deposits. The Reserve Bank has extended temporary liquidity support to certain of the banks and injected equity equivalent to 0.2 percent of GDP into a building society; the Reserve Bank intends to sell this equity stake once the viability of the institution has been restored. 25. Data for end-December 1998 indicate that the share of nonperforming loans in total loans outstanding averaged 9 percent for the commercial banks and 19 percent for merchant banks. All eight deposit money banks were observing the Basle guidelines on minimum capital adequacy at the end of December, as were all but two of the seven merchant banks. The Reserve Bank has issued corrective orders for these two banks aimed at bolstering their financial position. l2 At present, the problems faced by the troubled banks do not appear to be systemic in nature, but important steps are being taken to ensure that the situation is contained and that supervision and regulation of the financial sector is strengthened. I3 0 Under a draft Banking Act, which is presently before parliament, the Reserve Bank will, for the first time, have the legal authority to supervise banks (including undertaking on-site inspections) and enforce prudential guidelines stringently. The issuance of new bank licenses, which is a function of the Ministry of Finance, will be governed by objective criteria.i4 Separate legislation, which is expected to come into effect before mid-2000, will be drafted to further “level the . playing field” in the financial sector by subjecting the building societies to regulatory and supervisory requirements similar to the banks’. l5 12These orders include restrictions on new lending and changes in management practices. 13The assessment of the state of the banking system is based in part on information obtained from technical assistance provided by both the Fund and the Bank. An MAE team is scheduled to visit Harare in May 1999 to assess the situation more firlly. “During the discussions, the staff indicated that it would have been preferable for this Cmction to be located in the Reserve Bank. “While the Banking Act will not directly cover the building societies, it does empower the Minister of Finance to require that any or all of its provisions apply to the building societies. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 19- 0 Some institutions do not make sufficient provision for loan losses, and, consequently, their reported capital asset ratios tend to be biased upward. In October 1998 the Reserve Bank therefore introduced new guidelines on loan classification and provisioning and increased minimum capital adequacy requirements.“j Banks have until August 1999 to comply with these guidelines and requirements. The minimum paid-up capital requirement for all financial institutions has also been raised. 0 Guidelines are being drawn up, with technical assistance from MAE, to render ’ procedures for dealing with troubled banks speedily, more transparent, and consistent across banks. The guidelines, which include use of the.“CAMELS” rating system, will be fully implemented by September 1999.17 0 Any bank found to be insolvent would, according to the authorities, be restructured or closed;..no public funds would be used in the process, other than for the provision of short-term collateralized liquidity support. Exchange and trade policies 26. The Reserve Bank officials said that it did not intend to intervene in the foreign exchange market other than to smooth out exchange rate fluctuations and meet the Banks’ international reserve targets. They believed that the exchange rate had overshot its equilibrium level and that the key to stabilizing the rate was the restoration of market confidence. Endorsement by the Fund Board of Zimbabwe’s economic program would contribute substantially to the strengthening of market sentiment, but this would need to be part of a broader confidence-building package. Consequently, the authorities said that, upon the disbursement of assistance from the Fund, they would roll back part of the emergency increases in import duties and surcharges announced in September 1998. Corporate foreign currency accounts would also be reopened. Forward currency contracts would be reestablished once the balance of payments situation had improved sufficiently. While the staff supported’this overall strategy, it argued that the beneficial impact on confidence would be much greater if all the emergency import restrictions were lifted at the same time. 27. Recently, there have been reports that the Reserve Bank has applied moral suasion to foreign exchange dealers in order to avert a depreciation of the currency. In response to these reports, the Bank restated through the press that it would “neither fix the exchange rate nor 16Existing financial institutions have been asked to increase capital to a minimum of 10 percent of their risk-weighted assets. ‘7CAMELS is a standardized rating system based upon an evaluation of six critical dimensions of a bank’s operations: Capital adequacy, Asset quality, Management and administration, Earnings and reserves, Liquidity and funds management, and Sensitivity to risk. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 20 - sell foreign exchange in defense of the exchange rate.” In any event, the commercial banks have reported very short delays, of perhaps a day or so, in satisfying foreign exchange demand. 28. Zimbabwe has made only limited progress in reforming its tariff structure and, as indicated above, introduced emergency trade measures in 1998 that reversed much of this pr0gress.u’ ,At present, the trade regime is significantly restrictive. The arguments for trade liberalization are clear-the existing system gives rise to a strong anti-export bias and protects a range of capital-intensive activities in which Zimbabwe has no competitive advantage. The recent real depreciation of the Zimbabwe dollar provides a good opportunity to embark on a trade liberahzation program and, in this connection, the staff recommended that the authorities strive to meet the CBI tariff targets within the three-year period of an Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility (ESAF) arrangement. 29. The authorities were concerned, however, that Zimbabwe’s largest trading partner, South Africa, maintained quotas on a range of exports from Zimbabwe. South Africa’s quotas on some of the more sensitive commodities, notably textiles, could remain in place until after 2003, by which time South Africa had indicated that it would remove tariffs on imports from Southern African Development Community (SADC) members. Against this background, the authorities considered that, without reciprocity of treatment from South Africa, there could be considerable domestic resistance to major cuts in tariffs, particularly for textiles, footwear, and fertilizer. The staff, nevertheless, pointed out that realizing the benefits of free trade were not dependent upon the pace of trade liberalization in South Africa. In the meantime, a Tariff Commission has been established with the responsibility of implementing trade reform. 30. Promoting foreign direct investment is of pivotal importance if Zimbabwe is to meet its medium-term financing requirements and growth goals. In the past, cumbersome regulations-in addition to the unstable macroeconomic environment-have discouraged foreign investment. It will therefore be important to consider raising the limit of foreign ownership in local companies from the present level of 40 percent; streamlining the regulations and process governing the granting of work permits; and soliciting more foreign’ participation in the privatization program. ‘*During 1994-96, all quantitative restrictions on imports were dismantled and replaced by tariffs. The number of tariff rates, however, remained large (about 30) and the dispersion wide (from zero to 85 percent). The government indicated in 1993 that it would adhere to the timetable under the Cross-Border Initiative (CBI), which calls for the adoption of four tariff rates (zero, 5, 15, and 20 percent) by October 1998. In March 1997, certain adjustments were made to the tariff schedule involving a reduction in the number of tariffs rates (to 20), but the maximum tariff was kept at 85 percent and protection levels for several manufactured products raised. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2l- 31. Zimbabwe accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2,3, and 4 of the Fund’s Articles of Agreement in February 1995. The authorities are in the process of eliminating the remaining restrictions that are subject to Article VIII, Section 2 (a) and Section 3. Blocked corporate dividend and interest payments accrued on investments made prior to 1993 are to be cleared by December 3 1, 1999, and the multiple currency practice arising from existing contracts under a discontinued scheme for forward foreign exchange cover will be eliminated by the end of 200 1. 32. The Reserve Bank indicated that it was reviewing the capital control regime, with a view to adopting full currency convertibility once the foreign exchange situation had returned to normal. The staff supported this strategy in principle, but cautioned that any fLrther liberalization of the exchange control regime should be undertaken only after considerable progress had been achieved in liberalizing trade and improving the health and supervision of the banking system. Such sequencing could also help minimize the impact on external competitiveness of potentially destabilizing capital flows, C. Structural Policies 33. The current economic program includes structural reform measures that impinge directly upon the effort to stabilize the economy and restore confidence. Major structural impediments to growth, however, remain, and the government intends to address them in the context of a three-year structural adjustment program, to be supported by an ESAF arrangement and a new structural adjustment credit from the World Bank. An outline of government intentions in the area of structural policies is contained in ZIJGPREST.‘g Budget restructuring and civil service reform 34. Once suffkient progress has been made in reducing the deficit, Zimbabwe’s medium-term structural adjustment effort will need to focus on the structure of the budget and its implications for growth and international competitiveness. It will be desirable for the authorities to reduce the incidence of direct taxation; in addition, import duty collections are likely to fall over the medium term as the process of trade liberalization moves forward. The prospect of reductions in income tax rates and import duties underscores the need for Zimbabwe to strengthen the efficiency of its revenue collection machinery. With this in mind, the government will shortly establish a National Revenue Authority and, in mid-2000, introduce a value-added tax (VAT).2o igZIMPREST (Zimbabwe Programme for Economic and Social Transformation, 1996-2000). 20The authorities have been receiving donor technical assistance in implementing the VAT. A consultant’s report has been submitted, and the government is now preparing for extensive consultations with the public on the introduction of the tax. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 22 - 35. The desirability of reduced tax revenues in the medium term places the burden of deficit-reduction on expenditure cuts. The sources for realizing major savings, however, are limited since capital expenditure and much of the nonwage recurrent budget have been unduly squeezed over the past year, and increased outlays in these areas are probably warranted. Large economies have already been realized in reducing support for the public enterprises, and there is unlikely to be any additional savings from this source in light of the present financial position of the larger enterprises. 36. Civil service reform represents the most important discretionary source of potential fiscal savings in the medium term and, in addition, has a role to play in promoting prospects for employment growth. The civil service (including uniformed personnel, but excluding local government) employs about 2 percent of the population. At over 12 percent of GDP, Zimbabwe’s civil service wage bill is large by international standards. Moreover, the average civil servant’s pay increased in real terms by 20 percent between 1990 and 1998 (Figure 2), at a time when real wages in the private sector contracted sharply. 37. In recognition of the need to restructure the civil service, the Public Service Commission has developed an embryonic plan to reduce the number of establishment posts by about one-third over a period of three years. The bulk of the cuts would come . from the devolution of functions to local governments and other public entities, and the . remainder from a program of subcontracting work to the private sector. The plan also includes a reduction in the number of ministries and an elimination of functions duplicated by different ministries. In addition, it will be important that any indexation of civil service wages based on past inflation be eschewed and that the government succeed in keeping civil service pay in line with expected productivity gains. The staff is of the view that the retrenchment goals envisaged under the plan are somewhat ambitious, and that further work on the issue is required. In the meantime, the government intends to make modest personnel cuts amounting to 4 percent of the civil service in 1999. Price controls 38. The authorities explained that they had reluctantly resorted to the imposition of price controls on maize-meal because of the adverse social impact of rapidly rising food prices and a desire to avoid a recurrence of the serious civil disturbances earlier in the year. They had also been concerned about ohgopohstic practices in the marketing of basic foods. The authorities were aware that price controls had given rise to artificially low prices for maize farmers and that significant redundancies had already occurred in the milling sector. The staff felt, however, that the authorities had not anticipated that the imposition of controls would be interpreted in the market as a signal of the government’s readiness to resort to exchange and trade restrictions. 39. Controlled maize prices were subsequently raised in October 1998 to levels at or near market-clearing levels, and a further catch-up adjustment is expected to be undertaken in the Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public140 80 60 40 20 0 1 q Index Figure 2. Zimbabwe: Real Per Capita Remuneration in the Civil Service, 1989/90 (Index, 1989/90=100) I I I I I I I -~- loo 111 96 85 80 86 85 102 1 ./ July-June fiscal years through 1997/8; 1998 on calender-year basis. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 24 - near future. The staff has recommended that, on the expectation of a normal crop and a subsidence of inflationary pressures, price controls be removed by the end of June 1999.’ This timing would correspond to the end of the harvest season and allow for completion of a World Bank-sponsored study on food marketing. The removal of price controls should also help strengthen the financial position of the Grain Marketing Board. The action would be accompanied by social safety net measures (see below). The government has not yet made a firm decision on the timing of the decontrol of maize prices. Land reform*’ 40. Land reform in Zimbabwe is a highly charged and sensitive political issue. But the government has moved a long way toward building consensus among all parties concerned on a workable land reform strategy. A task force, which includes members of the commercial farming sector, has been established under the auspices of the National Economic Consultative Forum (NECF) to help develop, in conjunction with the Ministry of Lands and Agriculture, a comprehensive policy framework on land reform that will address poverty in rural areas while safeguarding agricultural productivity. The task force developed a blueprint for land resettlement, which was discussed at an international conference on land reform in Harare in September 1998. 41. The consensus developed at the conference yielded the outline of a land reform strategy that was based on the payment of fair compensation for land acquired, as required by the law, and on the application of transparent criteria for the acquisition and distribution of land. The program has begun with a two-year “inception phase” that will allow various models of land resettlement to be assessed and provide time for the introduction of a land tax. The priority during this phase will be the resettlement of those farms, the acquisition of which had not been contested by the owners.. In recognition of limited domestic budgetary resources, the pace of reform will proceed in line with the availability of donor support. . 42. In November 1998, the government announced that it would acquire a large number of farms. This action gave rise to considerable uncertainty over the pace and direction of land reform. The government subsequently issued a statement in February 1999 explaining that this action was purely technical and reafftrming its commitment to the strategy set out at the international conference. In addition, a number of farms have been purchased on the basis of fair compensation, as called for under the law, and, to comply with certain legal requirements, acquisition notices were withdrawn from all contested farms. During this period, however, the government indicated that land might be acquired with compensation made in the form of “IOUs.” This has not happened, and in April cabinet approved the inception phase of the program. The Commercial Farmers’ Union has expressed satisfaction with the manner in which land reform is being implemented. *lFor a fuller description of land reform in Zimbabwe,. see Box 4. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 25 - Box 4. Land Reform in Zimbabwe Land reform has been an enduring and contentious policy issue in Zimbabwe. Government policy has sought to iddress problems arising from a highly uneven pattern of land ownership, while maintaining agricultural 3roductivrty and food security. A broad consensus on tbe need for land reform has now emerged, but much still needs to be done in elaborating an action program that can tackle poverty in rural areas within realistic fiancial constraints. Initially, land purchases for resettlement were undertaken on a “first-option-to-buy” basis at market prices and were largely funded by donors. Retween 1980 and 1990, land purchases totaled 3.5 million hectares, compared with a target 8.3 million hectares, and were used to resettle 66,000 households (the target was 162,000). An assessment by the Overseas Development Administration of the United Kingdom in 1988 found that the program had made “impressive strides” in meeting its objectives of augmenting the opportunities available to hc rescttlcd families. Keccnt studies by the World Bank and UNICEF, however, found poverty problems were nore serious in some of the resettled areas than on communal farms. They found that recipients were often ill-equipped to take full advantage of the land received, or that they had moved to their land before adequate physical and social infrastructure had been put in place. The Land Acquisition Act of 1992 made the compulsory purchase of land easier. To be acquired under the act, he farms have to meet one of four criteria: (i) they are derelict; (ii) located on underutilized land; (iii) owned by absentee landlords; or(iv) surrounded by communal areas. The act also requires “fair compensation” to be paid LO the landowners and allows them to appeal the decision. In November 1997, 1,47 1 commercial farms, covering 5 million hectares, were gazetted for compulsory purchase (but the number was subsequently reduced to 1,436). The gazetted farms included half of all commercially farmed land and 40 percent of the acreage devoted to tobacco, which is Zimbabwe’s primary source of foreign exchange earnings. In September 1998, nowever, owners of 5 10 of the gazetted farms were informed that their lands would not be acquired, following a review that revealed they did not meet the acquisition criteria. In June 1998, the government prepared a set of proposals on land reform that aimed to resettle at least 9 1,000 families within a five-year period, during which at least 1 million hectares would be acquired annually. To mobilize support for land reform, the proposals were discussed by interested parties, including members of the Commercial Farmers IJnion and donor communities, at an international conference in September 1998. The conference arrived at a consensus in favor of an inception phase to land reform, which would be implemented over a period of two years and focus on acquiring and settling 118 farms (200,000 hectares), whose acquisition had not been contested. The inception phase would provide an opportunity to assess alternative models of land reform and allow time to implement a land tax, which would form a major clement of the final expansion phase. Technical assistance and limited financial support would be provided by donors. To ensure macroeconomic stability, the pace of the program implementation would proceed in line with the availability of donor funding; the pace would be accelerated if good progress were made in implementing the inception phase. The conference agreed to appoint a task force, constituted of representatives from government and the donor commtmity, to work out details of the inception phase of the land reform program and beyond In November 1998, the government issued land acquisition orders to the 84 1 farm owners who had contested the gazetting of their land for compulsory purchase. This action raised concerns that there might be a departure from the agreed strategy of the September land reform conference. The government described the action as simply a technical matter, as these orders needed to be issued within a year of the initial gazetting. The land acquisition orders have since lapsed for legal reasons. In February 1999, the Chairman of the Land Reform Committee of Ministers issued a statement on the status of the land reform program, reconfirming the government’s commitment to the letter and spirit of the consensus reached at the 1998 conference. The program would be carried out in a transparent manner and involve payment of fair compensation for the acquired land, as stipulated by law. The acquisition of the uncontested farms in this phase of land reform began with the purchase of 11 farms between mid-November 1998 and mid-February 1999. The pace of acquisition has increased more recently, bringing the total number o farms purchased since rmd-November to around 40. Purchases have been in cash on the basis of “fair compensation” and the pricing and transferring of land has gone smoothly, with the courts arbitrating in a few cases where the parties could not initially agree on a price. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 26 - Public enterprises and divestiture 43. The parastatal sector in Zimbabwe is relatively small, employing between 5 percent and 10 percent of the formal sector labor force. Losses incurred by the parastatals, however, have diverted bank credit away from the rest of the economy and offset the favorable impact of the reduction in the central government budget deficit. Various steps, including price adjustments, are being taken to help bring the parastatals onto a firmer commercial footing. * 44. The retail prices of petroleum products in Zimbabwe are regulated, and NOCZIM has a monopoly over the importation of petroleum. This arrangement operated reasonably well until mid-1996, when the government began delaying the pass-through of the full impact of the depreciation of the Zimbabwe dollar to pump prices. As a result, NOCZIM has made cumulative losses through end-1998 equivalent to 3.9 percent of 1998 GDP.** Large increases in petroleum prices allowed NOCZIM to break even in its operations, but additional price increases are contemplated over the next 18 months to recoup most of the past losses. Adjustments may also need to be made in response to recent international price developments. 45. Cumulative losses of the power utility.(ZESA) through end-1998 amounted to 1.6 percent of 1998 GDP. Under a proposed World Bank power sector loan, these losses will be covered by quarterly tariff increases of 20 percent through June 2000. The government has decided to privatize the Hwange power station, and the World Bank has been providing technical assistance for this operation. The government has agreed that the sale of the station will proceed only with the concurrence of the Bank. 46. Privatization of the public enterprises began in earnest in 1997 when several of the larger parastatals, such as the Commercial Bank of Zimbabwe, the state cotton company, and the Dairyboard, were sold. The state steel company (ZISCO), which has been the largest recipient of government support, was also tendered for sale, but no buyer expressed interest because it was considered that the net worth of the company was negative; the steel plant is now being rehabilitated. As part of the program supported by the Stand-By Arrangement, the government also drew up plans to sell its shares in a number of public and private companies. The sale of these shares, however, has proceeded rather slowly. While prospective buyers of public assets had been identified and tentative prices agreed, the cabinet subsequently expressed concern that insufficient safeguards were in place to ensure the eventual purchase of some shares by the indigenous community. It was also realized that the legislation . incorporating the public enterprises would need to be modified before privatization could proceed. Meanwhile, stock market prices fell sharply. “These losses also include some I percent of GDP that the government claims has been siphoned off through corruption. The entire management team of NOCZIM has been removed. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 27 - 47. The cabinet has since agreed on a “warehousing” mechanism to address indigenization objectives. This mechanism will be complemented by the establishment of a National Investment Trust (NIT), which will be responsible for the purchase of shares. Funding for the NIT will initially be limited, and only 0.1 percent of GDP has been allocated for this purpose in 1999. 48. The government recently sold shares in ZIMRE (an insurance company) and intends to sell its interests in additional enterprises in 1999. Looking further ahead, the government will sell all remaining public enterprises whose functions are better handled by the private sector, including the telecommunications wing of the Post .and Telecommunications Corporation, Air Zimbabwe, AFFRETAIR (the national cargo airline), Rainbow Tourism, the Hwange power station, and the Cold Storage Company. Labor market 49. Real wages in the formal industrial sector are estimated to have declined by about 35 percent between 1990 and .1998. This estimate includes an increase in nominal wages in the private sector of 35 percent that would result from a new collective bargaining agreement concluded in June 1998. Despite the decline in real wages and the removal of rigidities in the labor market,23 official data indicate that employment in the formal sector has been flat since 1991, with unemployment in this sector estimated at about 25 percent.24 In addition to weak investment and low rates of economic growth, these labor trends reflect high rates of direct taxation of companies and workers and a protective trade regime that has encouraged inefficient, capital-intensive activities., Reducing the direct tax burden and liberalizing trade, in conjunction with implementing growth-oriented macroeconomic policies, therefore, remain the key elements in the strategy to raise employment levels in the medium term. Social issues 50. Falling real incomes in the early 1990s contributed to a marked increase in poverty. According to World Bank staff, the percentage of households classified as poor rose from 20 percent in 1991 to 50 percent in 1995. While poverty is an important indicator of development, a broader measure, the UNDP’s human development index (HDI), improved by 7 percent between I992 and 1995. The HDI includes dimensions, such as access to health 231n 1990, the government initiated a number of reforms to deregulate the labor market, including the decentralization of wage-setting procedures. New regulations governing termination of employment were also introduced to replace the previous arrangement, under which ministerial approval was required. 240fficial formal sector data mainly capture traditional industries and omit emerging sources of employment, particularly small businesses. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-28 - care and education, that are areas in which Zimbabwe has made significant progress.25 Any gains, however, remain fragile, particularly in light of the AIDS epidemic.26 51. The social impact of decreasing real incomes and employment has been exacerbated by the large increases in prices of basic food items, which is partly due to supply shortages in neighboring countries and the sharp depreciation of the Zimbabwe dollar. The promotion of economic growth and efftciency in a low-inflation environment is of course a necessary basis for effective poverty alleviation in the medium term, and the structural measures that the authorities have been discussing with Fund and Bank staffs reflect this objective. However, in January 1998, serious civil disturbances in protest against rising prices prompted the adoption of temporary measures, such as additional sales from the strategic grain reserve to depress market prices, the imposition of price controls on maize-meal, and a freeze on the price of paraffin. To provide further support for some of the poorer groups in society, the 1999 budget provides for an increase of 155 percent in the minimum income tax threshold; a more generous allowance for medical expenses; a 900 percent increase in tax credits for the elderly; and increases in expenditure on social sectors relative to GDP. To cushion the impact of anticipated increases in maize prices on residents in the poorest regions, additional funds have also been earmarked for the Rural Development Fund to provide credits for the purchase of maize. The authorities are not favorably disposed to the use of price subsidies as a substitute for price controls because of . the considerable targeting problems involved. 52. The large disparity in the distribution of land and the concentration of poverty in rural areas underscore the importance of the land reform program in addressing rural poverty and promoting social stability. This program will focus on developing social infrastructure on resettled land and targeting families in congested communal areas and vulnerable groups, such as displaced farm workers. Economic governance 53. The government is taking a number of steps to improve the transparency of its economic activities and provide better quality information on the implementation of its 25The adult literacy rate in Zimbabwe in 1995 was 85 percent, compared with a developing country average of 70 percent. 26The HIV/AIDS epidemic poses a major impediment to meeting social objectives in Zimbabwe. Although progress in health and education has been significant, life expectancy has actually decreased (from 61 years in 1990 to 56 years in 1996) and is considerably below the developing country average of 65 years. Furthermore, as HIV/AIDS affects people in their most productive years, the epidemic undermines the sustainability of the social safety nets through the impact of spiraling health care costs and increasing social security expenditures. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 29 - economic policies. It is also strengthening the procedures by which it sells public assets, tenders public contracts, and tackles corruption. 54. Market perceptions that the cost of Zimbabwe’s military involvement in the DRC is imposing an undue strain on the economy has intensified foreign exchange pressures. To correct these perceptions, the government has said that it intends to make public information indicating that the expenses incurred in the DRC have in fact been limited. This action complements the decision to issue a comprehensive bulletin of economic data each quarter, beginning in December 1998. . 55. A semiautonomous Privatization Agency has been established with donor technical assistance to oversee the sale of public assets in accordance with established criteria and guidelines. In addition, government procurement procedures and mechanisms will be strengthened under new legislation that is being prepared, while the Central Tender Board is being made into a semiautonomous body and its operations rendered more transparent. A Commission of Inquiry to investigate serious abuse of the War Victims’ Compensation Fund has completed its work, and abusers are now being prosecuted in the courts. The government is strengthening enforcement of the Prevention of Corruption Act (1985) which provides stiff penalties for those convicted of corruption; this legislation was invoked in closing down the merchant bank in April and will be used in addressing the corruption uncovered in NOCZIhJ. III. EXTERNAL FINANCING Al Balance of Payments Outlook and Financing Requirements, 1999 56. Zimbabwe’s balance of payments prospects point to only a limited improvement in performance in 1999. Tobacco shipments are expected to be adversely affected by depressed prices, but other exports should recover strongly. In particular, mineral production , will be boosted by the opening of a large platinum mine, while manufacturing exports, particularly ferrous alloys, should benefit from the modest recovery anticipated for the global economy. The recent real depreciation of the Zimbabwe dollar, in conjunction with the maintenance of financial restraint, should help contain import demand. The current account deficit, excluding official transfers, is therefore expected to narrow to less than 6 percent of GDP in 1999. Some capital outflows may take place in response to the reopening of corporate foreign currency accounts and forward foreign currency contracts; overall, however, the cgpital account should register a larger surplus as domestic credit conditions remain tight and confidence returns to the foreign exchange and stock markets. 57. The government’s program targets a buildup in gross official reserves to 1.8 months of imports by the end of 1999. However, additional financing of over US$450 million would be needed to meet this target. The World Bank and the African Development Bank have indicated that, in tandem with an arrangement from the Fund, Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 30 - US$200 million and US$SO million, respectively, could be made available in 1999. Other multilateral and bilateral funds may also be forthcoming. B. External Debt Management 58. Zimbabwe’s external debt position remains reasonably manageable, although some of the key debt indicators worsened in 1998 because of continuing balance of payment pressures (Table !!I).” The short-term external debt situation remains vulnerable. The ratio of short-term external nontrade debt to total banking system foreign reserves stood at 68 percent at end-December 1998; meanwhile the central bank’s external short-term debt (which consists mainly of the use of credit lines from commercial banks) although still high, fell to 114 percent of its gross foreign reserves by end-December.28 It is intended that much of the short-term debt incurred by the central bank over the past 18 months will be paid.off in 1999. 59. Zimbabwe’s external debt dynamics point to a reasonably stable and sustainable outlook through the medium term. The “primary” current account moved into a deficit position of 5 percent of GDP in 1997, but shifted to a surplus of 1 percent of GDP in 1998; the surplus should rise in 1999 and beyond.29 In addition, the.average interest rate on debt is expected to fall below the rate of GDP growth, owing to an increase in the concessional element of Zimbabwe’s external debt. As a consequence, after peaking in 1999 at 167 percent of exports, medium- and long-term debt should decline to just over 106 percent of exports by 2005. The debt-service ratio should fall to 10 percent over this period. The decline in debt would be accompanied by an increase in international reserves to over three months of imports by 2002. Zimbabwe has a very good debt-repayment record gnd does not intend to seek debt relief. Zimbabwe is expected to discharge its obligations to the Fund in a timely . manner. 27Zimbabwe’s medium- and long-term disbursed external debt (public and publicly guaranteed) is estimated to have risen from 138 percent of exports of goods and services at the end of 1997 to 163 percent at the end of 1998, or about 115 percent on a net present value basis. This jump primarily reflects the decline in exports in 1998; the nominal value of medium- and long-term debt remained at about US$4.5 billion during the year. The debt-service ratio increased to 21 percent in .1998 from 17 percent in 1997. 28The Reserve Bank also has outstanding obligations under a discontinued forward cover scheme equivalent to about 6 percent of its gross reserves. 29The primary current account is defined as net exports of goods and services, excluding interest, plus transfers and foreign direct investment. As a general principle, the debt-GDP ratio will decline over time if the primary current account is in surplus and the average real interest rate on debt is equal to, or less than, the rate of GDP growth. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-31- IV. STATISTICALISSUES 60. Weaknesses remain in the quality and availability of economic data, but they have not interfered substantively with the conduct of surveillance or with the design and monitoring of Zimbabwe’s economic program. In particular, problems persist in certain areas of the balance of payments (the reliability of short-term capital data and the timeliness of trade statistics), labor market data, the functional classification of government spending, and external financing of the budget (Appendix II). It is also still not possible to compile a reliable consolidated public sector budget; the problems in this area have been particularly acute in the case of NOCZIM, and an audit of its financial operations is under way. V. STAFFAPPRAISAL 61. In a number of respects, Zimbabwe’s performance under its economic program in 1998 was impressive. The fiscal deficit was reduced to levels well below that envisaged under the program, the broad money targets were met, and the Reserve Bank began the process of rebuilding its international reserves. Financial restraint, however, has not yet translated into currency stability or lower inflation. 62. Certainly, the external financial environment has not been conducive to the success of the stabilization program. The Zimbabwe dollar has been adversely affected by weakening global sentiment in emerging markets, and a steep fall in commodity prices contributed to a contraction in exports of 15 percent in 1998. 63. At the same time, domestic difficulties have served to undermine the credibility . of the economic program and contributed to weakened demand for Zimbabwe dollars. Confidence in the banking system was damaged by the collapse of a merchant bank and the discovery of serious fraudulent practices. The reimposition of price controls in June spawned fears that exchange and trade restrictions would be intensified, and these fears proved self- fulfilling. Market sentiment was also hurt by uncertainties over government intentions in the area of land reform and by anxieties that Zimbabwe’s military intervention in the DRC could escalate into a protracted and expensive campaign. Large losses made by the state oil and electricity companies served to counteract the benefits of fiscal consolidation. In addition, delays in assembling a package of structural reforms led to large shortfalls in balance of payments assistance. 64. Rising inflation, in conjunction with financial austerity, has dampened prospects for any significant revival in economic activity and exacerbated social strains. The staff would urge the government to persevere with its economic program, which has the potential to lower inflation substantially, if implemented in conjunction with steps to rebuild confidence. These steps should include the steadfast pursuit of the land reform strategy set out at last year’s donors’ conference, the removal of price controls, the lifting of emergency Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 32 - exchange and trade measures, and full public disclosure of the fiscal costs of the DRC campaign. 65. The staff supports the use of monetary policy as the primary instrument for bringing inflation under control. By maintaining a tight rein over financial policies, the authorities should also be able to achieve greater exchange rate stability without intervening in the foreign exchange market other than to meet their international reserve objectives. Any use of moral suasion to influence the exchange rate should be avoided. Continued fiscal discipline will help restore viability to the external current account, but it is imperative that the financial position of the parastatals be strengthened if this effort is not to be undermined. The provision of bank guarantees to cover the cash-flow problems of the parastatals should not be used as a substitute for allowing them to make appropriate price adjustments. 66. A number of banks have been experiencing financial diffkulties, but the problem does not appear to be systemic at present. To ensure that the situation remains contained and to strengthen overall regulation of the financial system, capital adequacy requirements have been tightened, guidelines for dealing with troubled banks are being prepared, and new banking legislation is about to be introduced that will permit on-site inspections. In the meantime, the authorities intend to confine assistance to the banking system to the provision of short-term collaterized liquidity support. The staff considers these steps to be an appropriate response to the situation. 67. With regard to Zimbabwe’s military involvement in the DRC, the government said that any excess defense spending would be met by enforced savings from within the military budget. Clearly, however, any escalation in hostilities or major change in the cost- sharing arrangements with Zimbabwe’s allies in the conflict could seriously undermine implementation of the economic program.’ 68. It had originally been intended that the 1999 Article IV consultation would be undertaken in conjunction with the review under the Stand-By Arrangement. However, the staff felt that the review could not be completed at the present time since issues relating to price controls and import restrictions remained unresolved. It was also considered important to complete the consultation without further delay. The staff nevertheless remains of the view that Zimbabwe would be well served if its economic program were to be supported by a Fund arrangement. Such an arrangement would help sustain the momentum of fiscal adjustment and provide a disciplined framework for macroeconomic policy implementation. It would also catalyze the resources needed to meet Zimbabwe’s substantial external financing requirements. In the absence of Fund support, the risks of backsliding on fiscal consolidation and of f-brther recourse to administrative controls would be considerable. The staff would therefore intend to submit to the Executive Board a request from the authorities for a new Stand-By Arrangement once clear understandings have been reached on price controls and the emergency trade measures. It is hoped that this can be accomplished in the near future. The Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-33 - staff would also expect Zimbabwe to implement its land reform strategy in accordance with the principles set out at the September 1998 donors’ conference. In this connection, it welcomes the endorsement recently by cabinet of the inception phase of the land reform program and the progress that is being made in implementing the program through the payment of fair compensation for land acquired. It is also heartened by the expression of support for the program by the commercial farming community. 69. Ultimately, Zimbabwe would be advised to seek concessional support from the Fund in the form of an ESAF arrangement. In the meantime, the staff encourages the government to push ahead in articulating its medium-term structural policy strategy. 0 Tariff reform will be necessary to remove the strong anti-export bias from the trade regime and reduce the protection of inefficient, capital-intensive activities in which Zimbabwe has no comparative advantage. 0 The promotion of foreign investment is of pivotal importance if Zimbabwe is to meet its external financing requirements and growth objectives. Raising the limits on foreign ownership, streamlining the granting of work permits, and inviting more foreign participation in the privatization program would be important steps in this process. The staff does not, however, believe that tax incentives represent an appropriate means of attracting foreign investment or stimulating exports. 0 Privatixation offers numerous benefits. Recourse to government support would be lowered, government debt reduced, and companies managed more efficiently. Most important, privatization sends a clear signal on the integral role the government expects private enterprise to play in promoting Zimbabwe’s economic development. Needless to say, the privatization process should be transparent and market-based. 0 The direct tax burden in Zimbabwe is too heavy and the budget unduly dependent on trade taxes. Civil ,service reform can help generate the funds needed to fund lower taxes, while continuing the deficit-reduction process continues. Much more work needs to be done, however, in elaborating a viable program for restructuring the civil . service. The government also needs to push ahead vigorously in its plans to establish a National Service Authority and introduce a VAT. 70 Certain weaknesses remain in the quality and availability of economic data. Consolidated public sector finances cannot be prepared until improvements are made to the data reported by the public enterprises. Moreover, the timeliness of data on national accounts, the balance of payments, and external debt should be improved. The St&urges the authorities to intensify their work in addressing these data shortcomings. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 34 - 71. As indicated in paragraph 3 1, a timetable is in place for removing the exchange restrictions that are subject to Article VIII, Section 2 (a) and Section 3. The staff therefore recommends approval of these restrictions until end-March 2000 or the next Article IV consultation, whichever is earlier. 72. It is recommended that the next Article IV consultation with Zimbabwe be held on the standard 12-month cycle. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 35 - VI. PROPOSED DECISION The following draft decision is proposed for adoption by the Executive Board: The Fund takes this decision relating to Zimbabwe’s exchange measures subject to Article VIII, Sections 2 (a) and 3. Zimbabwe continues to maintain an exchange restriction, subject to Article VIII, Section 2 (a), arising from the blocking of dividend and profit payments accrued on investments made before May 1993, and a multiple currency practice, subject to Article VIII, Sections 2 (a) and 3, arising from existing contracts under the forward foreign exchange scheme of the Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe. The Fund welcomes the steps taken to eliminate the restriction arising from the blocked dividend and profit payments by December 3 1, 1999. The Fund also notes Zimbabwe’s decision to discontinue offering, . effective January 1, 1994, any new contracts under the forward foreign exchange cover scheme and to terminate the scheme by end-December 2001. In the circumstances of Zimbabwe, the Fund grants approval for the retention of the exchange restriction and multiple currency practice until March 2000 or the conclusion of the next Article IV consultation with Zimbabwe,. whichever is earlier. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 1. Zimbabwe: Use ofFund Credit, 1996-2005 1996 1997 1998 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 Ql 42 43 44 Pr0g. Projections Pr0grWl Total transaction (net) F’urchascsidisbmemmts Stand-By kangement Extended Fund Facility (EFF) Enhanced Stmctual Adjustment Facility (E&W) Repurchmes/rcpayments Stand-By Arrangement EFF ESAF Total Fund credit outstandmg (end of psnod) Under Stand-by Arrangement Under EFF Under ESAF Total Fund credit outstandmg (end of period) Under Stand-by Arrangement Under EFF Under ESAF -5.9 00 00 0.0 00 5.9 0.0 59 0.0 304 1 0.0 1522 151.9 116.4 00 58.2 58.1 -18 5 -14.0 37 7 -15.6 -4.5 (In milhons of xX.9) 3.6 -45.1 392 0.0 392 0.0 0.0 00 00 0.0 -53 4 -66.5 -70.4 -34 1 -148 -4.9 00 00 392 0.0 00 00 00 39 2 0.0 0.0 00 00 00 00 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 00 00 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 0.0 0.0 0.0 00 00 0.0 0.0 155 14 0 15 156 45 35 6 45.1 53 4 66.5 70 4 34.1 14.8 49 00 0.0 0.0 00 00 00 0.0 00 9.8 196 9.9 00 00 185 as 15 10 1 I5 21 6 24 8 26.4 26.4 20.4 7.8 4.8 16 0.0 55 00 55 30 140 20.4 27.0 304 30.4 164 100 33 285 5 271 5 309 3 293.7 289.2 00 00 392 392 39.2 133.6 125 1 1236 1135 112.1 151 9 146.4 1464 141 0 137.9 289 2 244.1 392 39.2 112.1 87.3 1379 117.6 (In percem of quota) 1 / 1907 124.1 53 7 19.6 4.8 39.2 29.4 98 -0 1 -0.1 61 0 34.6 14.2 6.4 16 90.5 60 1 29 8 134 3.3 I -0 1 -0.1 w 0.0 m 00 I 109.3 1039 118.4 1124 110.7 1107 69 1 54 0 35.1 15.2 55 14 00 0.0 .lS.O 150 150 150 il.1 11 1 83 28 00 00 51 1 472 47 3 43 4 42.9 42 9 24.7 17 2 9.8 40 1.8 0.5 58 I 56.0 56 0 53 9 52.8 52 a 33.3 25 6 17.0 84 3.8 09 0.0 0.0 00 00 Sources. D&F Treasurer’s Department; and estimates and pro,ectmns. I I Zmbabwe’s W quota was raised born SDR 261 3 to SDR 353 4 in the fmt quarter of 1999. , Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 2. 7.imbabwe: Selected Economic Indicators, 1995-2001 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 Pr0g. Est. hog Rev. Prog Pry GDP Nominal GDP (market pnces, in ZS bdlions) 61 8 Real GDP (market pnces; percentage change) -0 7 R&l per capita GDP (percentage change) -3 9 Savmgs and mvcstment (m percent of GDP) Gross national savmgs (excluding grants) 199 Gross mveslment 25 I Prxes (percentage change) Consumer prices (annual average) 226 Consumer prices (end of penod) 260 GDI’ deflator (market pnces) 107 Central government budget (in percent of GDP, fiscal-year basis) I/ U Reventie, excluding grants 24 I Expendlhtre and net lending 347 Balance. excludmg grants -106 Balance, mcludmg grants -8 6 Pnm.ry balance. excluding grants -3.2 Central government budget (m percent of GDP; calendar-year basis) I/ 21 Revenue, excluding grants 29 4 28 6 30.3 28 I 269 25.3 25 0 ExpendLure and net lending 38 2 34 I 346 32.3 31 9 28.8 274 Balance. excluding grants -8 8 -5 5 -43 42 49 -3 6 -2 4 Balance. mcludmg grants -7 7 -3.8 -2.8 -3 I -3. I -2 3 -1 3 Primary balance, excludmg grants -I 5 3.5 5.3 I3 2.5 I4 09 Money and credlt (percentage change, end of penod) 3/ Broad money (M3) Domestx credit Credit to the prwate sector Velocity of broad money 22.7 290 294 .27 7 34.9 I60 14.0 170 10.0 170 170 362 42 7 126 22 6 I05 78 67 45 49 I 35 6 220 27 5 18.0 26.0 I50 120 -0.3 -128 8.0 23.0 -I I 27.6 29 -5.8 Interest rates (m percent, end of penod) 9Lday treasury bills Diierence wth consumer pnce mdex 4: 28 0 24 5 314 20 5 35 2 13 0 200 10.0 88 20 8.2 II 3 I.9 -11.4 49 -4 0 01 43 External trade (percentage change) Export volume Import volume Terms of trade 07 5.9 00 16.8 4.5 60 76 II 9 85 122 89 22.9 -0 4 -18.8 63 4.3 70 84 59 97 IO -3.3 -3 I -I 9 -3 2 -3.6 05 Balance of payments (in US$ mrlhons. unless otherwise mdicated) Exports LmPOrls Current account balance (excludmggrants) (I” percent of GDP) Overall balance 2,216 2,496 2,424 2.718 2.047 2,879 2,160 2,394 2,645 .2,128 -2,247 -2,654 .2.585 -1,968 -2,797 -2,080 .2.284 -2.508 -368 -179 -821 -382 -344 -396 -349 -313 -258 -5 2 -2 I -9 9 -49 -6 I 43 -5 8 43 -3 2 255 43 -75 I -189 -69 -23 -92 -17 I25 Gross ofiaal reserves (gold valued at 100 percent of market price) Gross reserves (end of period, m US$ mdlions) (m month of Imports ofgoods and serwces) 882 830 272 479 296 626 486 33 29 0.8 15 I.1 1.8’ 18 874 27 External debt Total external debt (in percent of GDP; end of period) 74.8 63.1 63 6 699 964 61.0 95 5 Debt serwce (m percent of exports of goods and services) I87 I67 172 I69 20 8 I5 I 20 5 640 21 79.8 188 74. I I62 Exchange rate Nommal rate (Z$ per 1JS$. end ofpenod) Effeclwe exchange rates (percentage change; end of period) 51 Nommal Kc.31 931 10.84 -10.6 45 71 60 1861 -29.9 -21 5 37.0 -36.9 -36 9 84 8 99 7 1340 1399 153.5 1965 236 5 260 5 7.3 32 3.0 I.6 53 32 44 . 44 39 -0 I -0.2 -1.6 2.1 01 I2 I.3 23 2 160 194 17.2 21.7 17.3 207 243 25 3 25 8 242 23.2 25.9 23.1 25 0 27 5 214 190 23 8 31 5 73 38 6 17.3 58 16.3 20 I 18.6 466 81 24.0 9.9 45 27.9 140 22 8 38. I 8.8 36.0 I53 56 24 I 26.7 28 I 29 0 28 2 349 343 37.1 36 5 324 -10.8 -7 6 -9.0 -7.5 4.2 -9.5 -6 4 -7.4 -6. I -3 I -1.5 03 -0.3 12 34 Sources ZImbabwean authonties, and staffestimates and proJect,ons I/ I+scal years (July-June) end I” the calendar year mdrcated 2f Central government budget will revert to a calendar-year basis from 1999 31 Begmung m 1995, based on rewsed monetary survey 41 Shouid not necessarily be mterpreted as the real rate of mterest 5: From LMF. Informatton Notlce System Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 3 Zimbabwe Quantitatwe Performance Crirena Under Stand-By Arrangement 1998 1997 1998 end-December end-March end-June end-September end-December Actual Indicahve Estimate PWfO”“eIW Actual Perfon”.mce Actual Performance Tentahve Target5 critena criteria critena Esbmate A Quantitative performance critena Ceiling on net domeshc financing of the central govcrnmcnt budget, includmg receipts from asset sales 1: 21 UnadJusted Ar+.ted 5,657 ceding 0” reserve money 31 8,059 Floor on net international reserves of the Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe 4151 UnadJusted -364 Adjusted Ceihg on new nonconcessmnal external borrowmg con&acted or guaranteed by the public sector (one year or mars matuity) Z/6171 34 Ceiling on stock of short-term external borrowing by tie public sector or guaranteed by the public rector (less than one year) 6171 247 ChrrStanding external paymen- arrears B/ B Adjusten for quanbtahvc pcrfommnce c&a Set external financmg of the government budget 2’ Reduction L” the reserve money celling for each 1 percentage point reduction m the statutory requued reserve ratm for deposit money banks 0 1,094 7,913 8,300 -475 300 425 0 909 69 6,184 7,421 8,659 9,485 8,884 7,563 10,235 8.609 8,048 9,282 (In rrulbons of US dollars) 8,626 8,461 7,807 8,807 - 11,777 9,577 11,052 -434 -439 -344 -474 -407 -389 -395 -269 -319 -411 95 300 130 300 300 298 367 0 424 342 387 0 0 0 (In milltons of Zimbabwe dollan) 294 307 337 0 0 0 1,767 1,848 1,624 2,816 1,621 6,210 1,278 237 0 256 0 264 0 (In rndhons of U. S dollars) 28 74 140 82’ 203 94 443 105 (In millions of Zimbabwe dollars) Cash and commodity balance of paymentc support 2/ Ii To be adJusted downward (or upward) by the excess (or shortfall) of “et external !i”anclng of the ccnWal government budget (loans and grants), as show” III Section B The cumulative upward adjushnent is not to exceed L6500 tion at end-June 1998,25750 million at end-September 1998, and 261,000 rmllion at end-December 1998 2; Cumulative from July 1, 1997, when the value was zero 31 For each 1 percentage pant reduction in the mirumum reqwed reserve ratio for deposit money banks, the reserve money target will be lowered by the amount mdicated in Secbo” B Rcsewe money is defined to exclude the Reserve Bank’s foreI@ currency liabilihes to residents 41 To be adJusted upward (or downward) to the extent that cash and commod~ry balance ofpa)me”ts support at (he end of the same quaner exceeds (or falls shon of) the programmed amount shown m Section B The cumulahve downward adJusbnent shall not be larger the” US635 milbon at end-June 1998, US645 millron at end-September 1998, and USSSO rndhon at end-December 1998 51 Gold valued at full market prices of end-February 1998; forclg” currency assets and liabilities valued at bilateral U S dollar exchange rates of end-February 1998 6’ Pubbc sector coi-wsts of the Reserve Bank, centi govemme”~ and local authonhes 7! Erclndmg normal u”po?-related credm RI Co”tmuous perforl”a”cc cntenon Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 39 - Table 4. Zimbabwe: Structural Performance Criteria Under the 1998 Stand-By Arrangement Action Test Dales Actual ( Raising of funds from the divestiture of public assets l/ 2/ %$1,960 million Z$3,160 million %$3,360 million End-June 1998 End-September 1998 End-December 1998 Approval by cabinet of draft banking legislation 31 End-September 1998 Approval by cabinet of legislation to establish a National Revenue Authority End-September Civil service Cap on size 41 167,100 164.100 End-June. 1998 163,470 End-September 1998 163,416 End-December 1998 164,096 164,100 Z$761 million Z$76 1 million Z$76 1 million Satisfied Not satisfied l/ These targets are to be achieved through the selling interests in Delta, ASTRA, Olivine Holdings, Wankie Colliery Ltd., ZimRe, Rainbow Tourism, and Zimbabwe Development Corporation, 21 Cumulative from July 1, 1997, when the value was zero. 3/ Will include objective criteria for the issuing of bank licenses and the provision of statutory supervisory powers for the Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe. 4/ Quarterly average of end-month data. The average for the fourth quarter of 1997 was 167,100. Excludes military, police, and prison personnel, as well as personnel of the following self-financing funds: the Central Mechanical Equipment Department, Printing and Stationery, National Park Service, and Medical Stores. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 40 - Table 5. Zimbabwe: Central Government Budget, 1995 - 2001 l/ 1995196 1996197 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 Actual Actual Actual Prog. Est. Prog Rev. Prog. Projections (ln millions of Zimbabwe dollars) Total revenue 18,201 25,372 29,324 Tax revenue 16,121 23,219 26,934 Income and profits 2/ 8,147 11,777 13,965 Customs duties 3,050 4,371 5,105 Excise duties 896 1,070 1,241 Sales tax 3,730 5,079 5,688 Other taxes 2/ 299 923 930 Nontax revenue 2,081 2,153 2,390 Total expenditure and net lending 26,316 32,636 38,136 Current expenditure 23,044 28,418 33,443 Goods and services 12,261 16,316 18,912 Wages and salaries 7,737 11,111 13,528 Other 4,524 5,205 5,385 Interest on debt 6,955 7,511 7,271 Foreign 1,120 1,201 1,294 Domestic 5,836 6,310 5,977 Subsidies 93 88 40 Transfers 3,735 4,504 7,220 Capital expenditure and net lending 3,272 4,218 4,693 Capital expenditure 1,764 2,193 2,840 Net lending 1,507 2,025 1,852 Revenue and expenditure measures 0 0 0 Budget balance, excl. grants -8,115 -7,264 -8,812 Of whrch : primary balance -1,159 247 -1,541 Grants 973 1,180 1,105 Budget balance, incl. grants -7,142 -6,084 -7,707 Proceeds of asset sales 558 541 761 Debt takeover 0 0 0 RBZ transfer 3/ 712 898 898 Financing 5,872 4.645 6,048 Foreign tinancing 69 271 482 Borrowing 1,837 2,450 3,010 Repayments -1,768 -2,179 -2,528 Domestic financing 5,803 4,374 5,567 Uncommitted foreign financing 0 0 0 38,294 42,406 35,576 39,447 18,651 20,461 6,432 7,106 1,461 1,757 7,825 8,868 1,207 1,255 2,719 2,960 45,727 48,393 41,402 45,221 22,672 23,645 16,521 17,138 6,151 6,507 12,150 13,465 2,256 2,307 9,895 11,158 3 5 6,578 8,106 4,325 3,172 3,712 2,799 613 372 0 0 -7,433 -5,986 4,717 7,479 2,300 2,070 -5,133 -3,916 2,600 0 0 106 167 131 2,366 3,891 -1,353 -1,886 2,155 2,972 -3,508 -4,858 -874 5,778 4,593 0 43,052 52,920 59,756 65,149 39,973 49,645 55,886 60,847 21,826 24,625 27,976 30,667 6,415’ 10,000 9,828 10,255 1,693 2,400 2,889 3,183 8,580 10,600 12,757 14,053 1,458 2,020 2,436 2,689 3,080 3,275 3,870 4,302 49,525 62,646 68,178 71,455 42,369 55,953 59,172 59,949 26,139 32,687 37,182 40,405 17,778 22,674 25,100 26,960 8,361 10,013 12,082 13,445 8,487 14,700 11,681 8,544 2,456 3,574 3,832 3,582 6,032 11,125 7,849 4,963 0 0 0 0 7,143 8,566 10,309 11,000 7,156 6,693 9,006 11,506 6,019 5,485 7,261 9,199 1,137 1,208 1,745 2,306 0 0 0 0 -6,473 -9,725 -8,422 -6,306 2,015 4,974 3,259 2,238 , 1,719 3,588 2,912 2,930 -4,753 -6,137 -5,510 -3,376 750 1,999 900 900 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4,003 4,138 4,610 2,476 -175 -1,799 -1,266 -580 3,121 5,815 6,131 6,596 -3,297 -7,614 -7,398 -7,176 743 -2,976 3,415 1,101 3,436 8,913 2,462 1,955 Sources: Zimbabwean authorities; and staff estimates and projections. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public?A. - Table 5. Zimbabwe: Central Government Budget, 1995 - 200l(concluded) I/ 1995196 1996197 1997. 1998 1999 2000 2001 Actual Actual Actual Prog. Est. Prog Rev. Prog. Projections Totai revenue 24.1 26.7 29.4 28.6 30.3 28.1 26.9 25.3 25.0 Tax revenue 21.4 24.4 27.0 26.6 28.2 26.0 25.3 23.6 23.4 Income and profits 2/ 10.8 12.4 14.0 13.9 14.6 14.2 12.5 11.8 11.8 Cusloms duties 4.0 4.6 5.1 4.8 5.1 4.2 5.1 4.2 3.9 Excise duties 1.2 1.1 1.2 1.1 1.3 1.1 1.2 1.2 1.2 Sales tax 4.9 5.3 5.7 5.8 6.3 5.6 5.4 5.4 5.4 Other taxes 2/ 0.4 1.0 0.9 0.9 0.9 1 .o 1.0 1.0 I.0 Nontax revenue 2.8 2.3 2.4 2.0 2.1 2.0 1.7 1.6 1.7 Total expenditure and net lending 34.9 34.3 38.2 34.1 3.4.6 32.3 31.9 28.8 27.4 Current expenditure 30.5 29.9 33.5 30.9 32.3 27.6 28.5 25.0 23.0 Goods and services Wages and salaries Other Interest on debt Foreign Domestic Subsidies Transfers 16.2 17.1 19.0 16.9 16.9 17.0 16.6 15.7 15.5 10.3 11.7 13.6 12.3 12.3 11.6 11.5 IO.6 10.3 6.0 5.5 5.4 4.6 4.7 5.4 5.1 5.1 5.2 9.2 7.9 7.3 9.1 9.6 5.5 7.5 4.9 3.3 1.5 1.3 1.3 1.7 1.6 1.6 1.8 I.6 1.4 7.7 6.6 6.0 7.4 8.0 3.9 5.7 3.3 1.9 0.1 0.1 0.0’ 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 4.9 4.7 7.2 4.9 5.8 5.0 4.4 4.4 4.2 Capital expenditure and net lending 4.3 4.4 4.7 3.2 2.3 4.7 3.4 3.8 4.4 Capital expenditure 2.3 2.3 2.8 2.8 2.0 3.9 2.8 3.1 3.5 Net lending 2.0 2.1 1.9 0.5 0.3 0.7 0.6 0.7 0.9 Revenue and expenditure measures 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Budget balance, excl. grants -10.8 -7.6 -8.8 -5.5 -4.3 -4.2 -4.9 -3.6 -2.4 Ofwhrch : primary balance -1.5 0.3 -1.5 3.5 5.3 1.3 2.5 1.4 0.9 Grants 1.3 1.2 1.1 1.7 1.5 1.1 1.8 1.2 1.1 Budget balance, incl. grants -9.5 -6.4 -7.7 -3.8 -2.8 -3.1 -3.1 -2.3 Proceeds of asset sales 0.7 0.6 0.8 1.9 0.0 0.5 1.0 0.4 -1.3 0.3 ’ Debt takeover 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 RBZ transfer 31 0.9 0.9 0.9 0.1 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Financing 7.8 4.9 6.1 1.8 2.8 2.6 2.1 1.9 1.0 Foreign financing 0.1 0.3 0.5 -1 .o -1.3 -0.1 -0.9 -0.5 -0.2 Borrowing 2.4 2.6 3.0 1.6 2.1 2.0 3.0 2.6 2.5 Repayments -2.3 -2.3 -2.5 -2.6 -3.5 -2.1 -3.9 -3.1 -2.8 Domestic financing 7.7 4.6 5.6 -0.7 4.1 0.5 -1.5 1.4 0.4 Uncommitted foreign financing 0.0 0.0 0.0 Memorandum items: Health spending Education spending Military spending GDP (in ZS millions) 2.7 2.7 2.6 6.8 7.4 8.3 3.2 3.4 3.5 75,470 95,202 99,737 3.4 . . . 133,953 0.0 2.2 4.5 1.0 0.8 1.9 . 6.7 2.1 . 139,899 153,467 1.9 . 7.8 . 2.8 2.4 196,502 ’ 236,493 2.3 260,531 (In percent of GDP) Sources: Zimbabwean authoritics; and staff estimates and projections. 11 Fiscal years (July - June) for 1995-96, calendar years from 1997 onwards. 2/ The tobacco levy is classified under other taxes. The government of Zimbabwe classifies the tobacco levy under income and profit taxes. 3/ Transfers of revaluation profits from the Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe (RBZ). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 6. Zimbabwe: Monetary Survey, 1997-2001 (In millions of Zimbabwe dollars) 1997 1998 1998 Dec. Jun. Sep. Pro& Act. Prog ACL 1998 1999 2ooo 2001 Dec. Dec. Dec. Prog Act. PIog. Rev. hog. Projections Mmewy aulhorilies Net foreign us& of Reserve Bank II -6.869 -8.224 -7.439 Net dmwstic as~els of Reserve Bank 14,928 16.833 15.487 Crcdh 10 govcmmml WI Credit 10 nonfinaocial public mwprises credit 10 private seclor Credit to depmil money banks CrediL to nonbank privivale IeCtOI 6,939 a,3 10 6.677 188 157 152 1,764 2.881 3,863 1.403 2,262 3,365 361 619 498 Other ilexus (net) 21 6.037 5,485 4,795 Reserve money currency in ChcuhLion Nonbank depcks Other bankii imtimhn resenes Deposit money bank reserves Depcht money bdnk ani other bank@ iz.tiNlions 3/ Net foreign welS Net credit from the rcsewe bank (rsscl + ) Total credil CIedil 10 govermnent (nel) Credit 10 nonhmcial plbtic m~erpriscs CEdil LO privale Seclot Other ilcms (nel) Total deposiv, Net foreign asseW Net domeslic lsscls Domestic credit Claim on govemnlent @et) Claims on nmfumcial public enlerprisa claims ix! private sector Otbcr ilam he0 ojtich : adjwnmt for differenca in records of reserve b& & dqnsil monry banks Of which : adjusunent for differences in ~eeonlr of mw-ve bank aJd olhn hnkii instiNLims Breed mmw (M3) CUICWY 49,652 3,396’ 0 51.777 3.478 Depxifs 46.256 48.300 I / Gold valued ill IW percen,. LntenWional Finnnciol Starirticr (IFS) data rcpoit gold valued N 50 percmL 2/ The large increase in “other ikms net” in Seplember 1998 reprcsenlr B valuation adjusLmmL 31 The monetary survey was expanded to cover “tier banking insdutiom” bcgi December 1995. 8.059 8.609 8.049 3.396 3.478 3,458 37 39 .50 335 350 305 4.291 4,743 4,236 -5,832 -7JM -7,614 4,614 5.093 4.540 -951 -1.451 -3.365 54.786 58.902 56,998 9.000 11.349 7.837 1.702 1,702 2,335 44.084 46,661 46,826 -5,398 -7,119 -7.056 46.219 48.261 43,X)3 -12.701 -15,388 -15.053 62,354 67.165 62.063 62,274 68.798 64.325 15.939 19.659 14,514 I.890 1,859 2,487 44.445 47,280 47,324 80 .I,634 0 -2,262 440 -6.651 -14,751 15,933 23.21 I 7.910 6.768 157 610 2,381 3,032 2,012 2.506 369 526 5.485 12,801 9.282 a.460 3,749 3.599 42 a3 377 316 5.114 4,462 -5,432 -16,677 -2,377 -10,618 -5,498 2,981 15.009 27,729 13.582 22.780 19.727 13.667 6.986 7.216 5.559 4,429 I.626 -3,934 157 674 157 674 674 674 2.381 - 5,181 2.381 2.279 2.029 1,529 2.012 4,373 2.012 1,798 1,548 1,048 369 808 369 481 481 481 5.485 9.577 3.868 43 389 5.276 14.658 5,485 15.398 11,205 12.161 4.526 4.693 50 196 455 512 6.173 6.761 15.398 15,398 11.052 4.265 178 465 6,144 14,229 16.648 5.491 6,424 229 268 599 700 7.910 9,255 -6.566 -11,276 5,491 4,735 -951 -2,494 61.178 65.P2.l 9.710 8,277 1.702 2.724 5026 Y.923 -7.119 -10,259 52.033 46.635 -5,445 -8,489 -6.038 -12,3X .12,354 5,665 6.512 8,509 9,955 -951 -4,198 6,628 -951 61.534 67.630 70.290 7.039 8.997 6.035 1,702 2,776 1,702, 53.854 55.857 63,614 -12.343 7,272 -1.798 76.736 3.043 2.776 70.917 -12.444 57,423 -1.548 -1,048 85.023 94.498 620 242 2,776 2,776 81.627 91,479 -7.119 -9.269 -7,119 -12.444 -12,444 53,685 52.185 62.811 67,185 78.607 -13,217 -26.027 69.041 76,343 70,614 73.828 17,620 15.045 1,859 3,334 51.195 55,449 -1,634 2,515 0 336 0 -363 55.824 M.316 3,749 3,599 -10.877 -25.166 -8.415 -22.962 -17.852 -9,374 68,473 81.794 75.803 85.274 90.758 94.673 70.107 16,328 77.436 82.319 87.803 91,719 14,MS 16.213 I 1 s94 7,471 2,246 -3,692 1.859 3.450 1 .a59 3.4M 3.4M 3.450 54,223 56.665 63,983 71.398 82.108 91.960 5,466 -1,634 2.9% 2.954 2,954 -9 -1.634 0 75 0 0 0 0 8 0 2 0 0 0 0 47,010 3,458 57,596 56,628 67.388 62.312 72.905 85,299 3,868 4,265 4.526 4,693 5,491 6,424 43,553 52.074 46,718 53,728 52,363 62,862 57.619 67.414 78.875 . . Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 7. Zimbabwe: Balance of Payments, 1994-2004 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 Prog. Est. Prog. Rev. Prog. Projections Current account (excluding official transfers) -3 la -368 -179 -827 -382 -344 -396 Trade balance 169 89 249 -230 133 79 a3 Exports, f o b. 1,947 2,216 2,496 2,424 2,718 2.047 2,879 Imports, f o b -1,778 -2,128 -2,247 -2,654 -2,585 -1,968 .2,797 Nonfactor services Receipts Paylltetlh -277 -252 -259 -314 -278 -171 -254 -199 -176 -134 -90 -39 17 416 502 612 659 687 584 745 616 700 809 919 1,038 1,170 -693 -754 -87 i -973 -965 -755 -999 -815 -876 -943 -1,008 -1,077 -1,153 lnvcsment income lnterest ReccipB Payment other -296 -325 -319 -409 -365 -382 -357 -365 -380 -393 -444 -492 -551 -177 -150 -144 -1Sl -145 -162 -115 -145 -145 -146 -164 -I55 -152 27 40 34 33 25 15 37 37 43 43 25 33 37 -204 -191 -178 -184 -170 -177 -152 -182 -188 -189 -189 -188 -189 -119 ~175 -175 -258 -220 -220 -242 -220 -235 -247 -280 -337 -399 Private tmnsfers 86 120 149 126 128 130 132 134 133 133 133 135 135 Capital account (including officld transfen) official trmfcrs Direct lnvestmenl PortfolNJ mvesbnent Long-tern capml Short-term capital Errors and omi?mons Ovefall balance Gross offinal merw (- mcrcarc) i-A ue of Fund ~eswrces Drawmgs Repayments Other short-term liabllihes (net) Unidennfied fmancma II Memorandum items. Gross official reserves 21 h months of rmports of goods and scnwe.s Current account balance (in percent of GDP) 264 481 a7 90 193 212 373 258 296 383 385 440 509 181 167 85 a5 129 77 105 90 90 90 90 90 90 30 98 35 110 93 88 135 135 163 190 193 213 235 50 64 -3 35 51 11 78 25 48 58 68 86 107 69 135 67 5 -55 45 18 a -4 45 34 51 77 -66 ia -97 -145 -24 -a 36 0 0 0 0 0 0 69 142 50 -14 0 62 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 17 255 -43 -751 -189 -69 -23 -92 -17 125 180 288 380 -17 -255 43 751 189 69 23 92 17 -125 -180 -288 -380 25 -298 52 558 -208 -24 -146 -191 -153 -234 -287 -155 -291 73 77 -9 -27 58 s 10 -64 -75 -80 -72 -34 -21 73 77 0 0 106 53 71 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 -9 -27 -4a -48 -61 -64 -75 -80 -72 -34 -21 -115 -34 0 224 40 88 -80 -111 -70 -50 -26 0 0 0 0 0 0 299 0 240 457 315 239 205 -99 -68 584 882 830 272 479 2% 616 486 640 874 1,162 1,317 1,608 25 33 29 08 1.5 11 1.8 18 21 2.7 33 35 4.0 -4.6 -5 2 -2 1 -9.9 -4.9 -6.1 -4 3 -5.8 -4.3 -3 2 -2.3 -1.6 -1.2 (In millmu of U.S. d&n. unless othetwise mdmted) al 2,160 .2,080 -313 -258 -205 -152 -129 110 137 196 244 270 2,394 2.64s 2,894 3,129 3,348 -2.284 -2,508 -2,697 -2,885 -3,078 Sources Zmbabwean authonhes, and staff estimates and pro,c.chom 11 Includes projected repaymen+ of tinancma asp loans 2! Gold valued at full market prices Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 8. Zimbabwe: Indicators of Debt-Servicing Capacity, 1994-2005 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 200 1 2002 2003 2004 2005 m ES hog Rev Prog PrOp.CtlOnS External debt outstandq 69 8 74 8 63 1 63 6 69 9 96 4 Me&urn- and long-term debt 60 5 62 8 53 1 53 2 58 4 79 6 Ojwhxh : Fund 54 66 5.2 47 58 6.9 other mulhlaterals 23 6 24 3 207 21.4 20 5 31 5 Short-term debt 93 119 10 0 10 4 115 16.8 Of whrch. non-bade related 09 05 03 30 3.1 59 Debt setice 1’ 84 75 64 67 78 10.2 Ojwhrch Fund 0.2 02 02 0.4 08 10 other multilaterals 1.2 12 11 14 1.7 21 ’ External debt outstanding 194 1 185.3 163 7 164 6 151.7 196 7 Mednm- and long-term debt 1683 155 1 137 8 137 8 126.8 162 5 Ofwhich. Fund 149 16 3 13.4 12 1 125 14 I other mulfilaterals 65.6 60.3 53.8 55 4 44.4 64 3 Shoa~tenn debt 25 9 29 6 25 9 26.9 24 9 34 3 Of which : non-bade related 25 13 07 77 81 12.1 Debt sen~ce 11 23 3 18 7 16 7 17 2 16 9 20 8 Ojwhxh Fund 05 04 0’6 11 1.7 21 other mulhlatemls 33 30 28 35 36 42 Debt service due to Fund PIinctpal Interest and charges Rabo of outstanding Fund cre&t to Quota 2/ Total debt Ratio of debt serwce due to Fund to Quota 21 Total debt senvx Gross official reSetYeS 31 Memorandum Items Raho of short-term debt to goss reserves 4/ of whrch non-eade related 91 0.0 91 98.5 77 35 22 2.2 70.7 67 75 00 75 118.6 8.8 2.9 21 13 73 6 3.2 61 0 95 5 79 8 74 1 517 81.5 69 3 65 1 50 57 37 24 19.8 33 8 27 8 25 3 9.2 14 0 10 5 90 2.3 38 21 13 6.3 10 0 8.4 74 0.8 12 1.1 1.2 1.5 2.0 17 1.6 (In percent of cxpoN of goods and scmces) 69.1 62.6 51 1 52.5 61.2 55 4 so.5 46.5 1.3 09 06 00 23 1 20 7 18.3 16 2 79 7.3 66 6.0 0.9 08 08 0.7 6.2 55 46 4.4 1.2 0.5 0.2 0.1 13 1.2 1.0 09 146 8 195 0. 124 5 166.5 120 11.7 47 7 69.0 22.2 28.5 5.5 7.7 15.1 20 5 2.0 25 3.6 42 (In nullmm of SDRs) 178 3 163 2 152.1 138 0 128 0 119.9 154.7 143.4 134 7 122 0 113.2 106.2 8.2 52 3.0 19 13 0.0 62 2 55 7 50 8 45 5 41.1 37.0 23.5 19.8 17 5 16.0 14 8 13.7 4.8 2.9 20 18 17 16 1X 8 16 2 13 7 12.1 10 3 100 2.5 28 26 11 05 01 3.9 35 28 25 23 21 14 3 25 8 44 1 42 9 59 185 35 6 35 6 84 73 85 7.3044 55 7 51 8 45 1 45 1 10.6 6 692 (In percent) 58 9 708 72 9 35 1 15 3 5.3 53 4 66.5 70.4 34 0 14.8 49 5 508 4.262 2 526 1 09 0 546 0.4 116.4 109.3 125 7 110.7 8.2 7.4 8.3 72 55 99 16 9 16.4 38 64 10.0 10.1 2.5 13 1 12 5 197 128 4 69 I 8.2 60 21.3 14 7 13 2 12 1 12 1 150 54 0 37 9 23 5 lb 7 12 5 0.0 4.6 32 1.9 14 1.0 00 16 7 20 0 20 6 99 43 1.5 13 4 16.9 18.9 9.4 45 1.5 12 9 114 89 38 1.3 04 75 4 148 4 111 6 191 1 89 7 1220 91 5 66 9 50.9 45 7 38 3 31.5 2.1 42 4 36.4 67 1 22.3 32 8 18.5 99 5.9 53 44 3.6 (In percent of GDP) Sources Zunbawean autbonties, and staff estimates and prOJ’ZCtiOIU 1’ principal on mednm- and long-term debt plus uSerest payments on all debts 2’ Zmbabwe’s quota was wed from SDR 261 3 m&on to SDR 353 4 million in 1999 Rgures for the rewed program are calculated using the new quoia 31 Go!d valued at ful! market prices 4, Ofliaal reserves plus reserves of deposit money banks Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicI. II. III. IV. V. VI. -45 - APPENDIX I Zimbabwe: Relations with the Fund As of January 3 1, 1999 Membership Status: Joined: 09/29/1980; Article VIII General Resources Account: SDR Million Quota 261.30 Fund holdings of currency 406.44 Reserve position in Fund 0.19 %Quota 100.0 155.5 0.1 SDR Department: SDR Million %Allocation Net cumulative allocation 10.20 100.0 Holdings 4.35 42.6 Outstanding Purchases and Loans: Stand-By Arrangements Extended Arrangements Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility Arrangements SDR Million %Quota 39.20 15.0 106.13 40.6 137.92 52.8 Financial Arrangements: Approval Type Date Stand-By 6/01/1998 Extend Fund Facility 9/11/1992 ESAF 9/l l/l 992 Expiration Date 6/30/1999 9/10/1995 9/10/1995 Amount Approved (SDR Million) 130.65 Amount Drawn (SDR Million1 39.20 114.60 86.90 200.60 151.90 Projected Obligations to Fund:(SDR million; based on existing use of resources and present holdings of SDRs): Overdue Forthcoming 01/30/1999 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 Principal 0.0 39.2 53.4 66.5 70.4 34.0 Charges/interest 0.0 6.3 51 . 3.9 - 23 0.9 Total 0.0 45.5 58.5 70.4 72.7 34.9 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 46 - APPENDIX I VII. Exchange Rate Arrangement On July 2, 1994 the official rate of the Zimbabwe dollar was unified with the market- determined interbank rate. From that date onward, the exchange rate has been determined by market forces. On January 3 1, 1999, the exchange rate quoted by the Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe was US$l=Z$38.01. Zimbabwe has an independently floating exchange rate and accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4 of the Fund’s Articles of Agreement on February 3, 1995.’ VIII. Article IV Consultations Zimbabwe is on the standard 12-month cycle for Article IV consultations. The last Article IV consultation was concluded (%4/97/l 15; 5/7/97) and discussed on May 21, 1997. The Board was notified of the delay in completing the Article IV consultation most recently in EBD/99/43 (3/l l/99). IX. Technical Assistance During the past 12 months, Fund technical assistance to Zimbabwe has been varied. An MAE-sponsored long-term advisor has been with the Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe since August 1996, providing technical assistance in the area of banking supervision. Another MAE expert on monetary operations provided advice and trained staff in the implementation of open market operations and the use of repurchase agreements. He also advised the Reserve Bank on the array of monetary instruments to be used to monitor and manage liquidity in the financial sector. Technical assistance is summarized in the attached table. X. Resident Representative ’ A resident representative oflice was opened in Zimbabwe in July 1993. Mr. Robert France, the second holder of this office, took over in September 1996. ‘The monetary authorities still maintain, with the approval of the Fund, two restrictive measures that are subject to Article VIII, Section 2 (a) and Section 3: (i) a multiple currency practice arising from outstanding contracts under a discontinued scheme for forward foreign exchange cover (to be cleared by end-2001); and (i) blocked corporate dividend and interest payments accrued on investments made prior to May .1993 (to be removed by April 1999). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 47 - APPENDIX I XI. Staff Contacts with Zimbabwean Authorities, May 1998-March 1999 Discussion Dates Location Staff Members August 4-20, 1998 Harare, Zimbabwe Mr. Nowak (AFR), Mr. Bell (AFR), Mr. Klingen (FAD), Mr. Sekine (PDR), Mr. Srinivasan (AFR), ,Mr. Yousef (EP-AFR), Mr. Franc0 (IMF Resident Representative in Harare). ‘October 5-9, 1998 Washington Mr. Nowak (AFR), Mr. Bell (AFR), Mr. Moumouras (FAD), Mr. Sekine (PDR), Mr. Srinivasan (AFR), Mr. Khatri (EP-AFR), Mr. Franc0 (IMF Resident Representative in Harare). January 4-12, 1999 Harare, Zimbabwe Mr. Gondwe (AFR), Mr. Nowak (AFR), Mr. Franc0 (IMF Resident Representative in Harare) February 4-l 9, 1999 Washington Mr. Nowak (AFR), Mr. Bell (AFR), Ms. Guin-Siu (FAD), Mr. McDonald (PDR), Mr. Moumouras (FAD), Mr. Srinivasan (AFR), Mr. Khatri (EP-AFR), Mr. Franc0 (IMF Resident Representative in Harare). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 48 - APPENDIX I Table 1. Zimbabwe: Technical Assistance from the Fund (Since the inception of the ESAF/EFF arraneements in Sentember 1992) Date November 1992 April 1993 Spring 1994 Spring 1995 Spring 1995 Winter 1995 January 1996 August 1996 October 1996 January 1996, November 1996 November 1997 Department STA Purpose Revise monetary statistics. MAE Liberalize foreign exchange system. LEG Revise the Reserve Bank Act and the Banking Act. FAD Improve the system of budgeting and public expenditure control. STA Harmonize the reporting system for monetary statistics. STA Provide training in balance of payments methodology. STA Improve foreign trade statistics. MAE (long-term) Strengthen banking supervision. STA Improve national accounts. MAE Improve monetary and foreign exchange operations. Improve monetary Result Revision initiated. Comprehensive reforms launched; completed in July 1994. Still to be implemented. Initial steps taken. Harmonization ’ completed. Seminar provided. Advice being implemented. Some of the advice being implemented. Advice being implemented. Some of the advice being implemented. Some of the advice operations. being implemented. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 49 - APPENDIX II Zimbabwe: Statistical Issues The statistical database in Zimbabwe is broadly adequate. The monetary data are of high quality, budgetary data are reported to AFR in a timely fashion, and the Central Statistical Office (CSO) conducts and updates regularly a wide array of sectoral surveys. There are, however, still some shortcomings in the areas of national accounts, public finance, and external trade data. Prices, production, labor A monthly consumer price index with a 1990 base is produced. There is also a monthly manufacturing index with a 1980 base, but this is produced with a lengthy lag. Quarterly data on employment and wages are also published, albeit with a long lag and a limited coverage. Producer price and wage data are not supplied to STA. A comprehensive labor market survey is long overdue. National accounts Having benefited from substantial technical assistance from the Fund, the World Bank, and the. United Kingdom’s official development assistance in 1996 and 1997, the CSO published in late 1997, revised national accounts, covering the period 1985- 96, with 1990 as the base year for constant price estimates. While the revised national accounts are a significant improvement over the previous estimates, the coverage of economic activity in the informal sector remains inadequate.’ Public finance The reporting of central government budgetary data is generally adequate for program and surveillance purposes. However, a number of key weaknesses continue to impair the analysis of fiscal developments and the formulation of appropriate adjustment policies.. Monthly revenue and expenditure data pertaining to the central government are now available with a lag of four to six weeks. In the 1997/98 (July-June) budget, some headway was made in improving the transparency of the fiscal accounts. Also, an exercise to reconcile the fiscal and monetary accounts has been satisfactorily completed. However, a number of weaknesses remain to be addressed. A significant part of donor-financed development expenditure is off ’ Greater statistical coverage of the nonformal sector of the economy, especially activity in the communal farm areas, is required, as well as the development of statistics on a wider range of topics (for example, intra-Zimbabwe regional statistics, and data on environmental and gender issues). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 50 - APPENDIX II budget, the economic classification of expenditure is insufficiently disaggregated, and a functional classification of expenditure is not available. Also, the operations of the social ’ security fund and several self-financing funds under the purview of the central government escape the coverage of the reported data. Furthermore, although operating targets for public enterprises are provided on a regular basis, it is still not possible to compile a reliable public sector budget since financial operations of public enterprises are not regularly audited. The fiscal accounts of local governments become available only with a lag of many years, while consolidated general government accounts are not compiled. ’ There has been a lapse in the reporting of data for purposes of the Government Finance Statistics Yearbook. The latest published data pertain to 1993. The quality of previous submissions suggests that reviving the reporting of data will require significant effort, including substantial consultations with the Fund and, most likely, further technical assistance. External sector Merchandise trade statistics are still being reported with a four- to five-month lag, even though, following the installation of the new’ ASYCUDA computer system at the customs department, customs data are being provided from the customs department to the CSO within seven days of the end of each month. Compilation of financial account transactions suffers from a considerable delay, and as a result the CSO has published the entire balance of payments statistics only through 1995. In addition, there is a significant lag in reporting balance of payments data to the Fund. STA has received data only through 1994. While the Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe provides reasonably reliable estimates of the balance of payments for program and surveillance purposes, measures are needed to shorten the lag in the compilation and reporting of such data. External debt . Data on short-term external debt (including forward contracts), consistent with Bank International Settlements (BIS) statistics, are reported to the Fund by the Reserve Bank with a one-to two-month lag. Comprehensive external debt data (including breakdowns of maturities, debtors, and creditors) are forthcoming only with a considerable lag. There is a pressing need for the authorities to provide the data on a more timely basis. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-5l- APPENDIX II Monetary accounts Significant progress has been made in developing a unified system for reporting monetary statistics to the Fund based on international standards of data classification,* and in improving the collection and reporting of financial data. However, there continues to be some difficulty in reconciling the balance sheet of the Reserve Bank provided in the monetary control program, which is produced within two weeks of the end of each month, with the monetary survey, which is produced within six weeks of the end of each month. *Previously, separate formats had been used for program monitoring and the reporting of monetary data to the International Financial Statistics (IFS). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDate of latest observation Date received Frequency of data Frequency of reporting Source of update Mode of reporting Confidentiality Frequency of publication Zimbabwe: Core Statistical Indicators (as of January 3 1, 1999) Central Overall External Interna- Bank Reserve/ Consumer Current Govem- Debt/ Exchange tional Balance Base Broad Interest Price Exports/ Account ment GDP/ Debt - Rates Reserves Sheet money Money Rates Index Imports Balance Balance GNP Service 01/30/99 01/22/99 01122199 01122199 1 l/98 01/30/99 12198 9198 9198 1 l/98 1997 1997 01/3 l/99 01/30/99 01/30/99 01/30/99 01/99 01/30/99 01/99 12198 12198 12198 3198 3198 D W M W M D M Q Q M Y Y D W M W M W M V V M V V C A A A A A A A A A A A E C C C C c‘ c V V c V V C A A A A A A A A A A A D W M W M W M V V M V V I Ln N I Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 53 - APPENDIX III ‘Zimbabwe: Relations with the World Bank Group The second structural adjustment loan was closed on December 3 1, 1997. The third tranche was released in December 1997. A third structural adjustment is under preparation. In January 1999, there were nine ongoing investment projects in Zimbabwe. Railways II focuses on rehabilitation. Urban II deals with the supply of low-cost housing and related services in the country’s major urban and economic centers. Agricultural Services and Management Project provides for improved services. Power III supports the upgrading of the Hwange station and provides assistance in improving the performance of the power utility (ZESA). The Sexually Transmitted Infections Project aims at arresting the spread of STDs and AIDS in Zimbabwe and providing care for those already infected with the HIV virus. The Enterprise Development Project (FY96) aims to promote exports and industrial growth. The Pilot RDC Project (FY97) provides support to local governments. The Community Action Project (FY98) is aimed at alleviating structural causes of poverty in rural areas, and the Park Rehabilitation and Conversation Project (FY98) is focused on transforming the management of national parks. Planned support for investment projects include projects for health, land reform, road maintenance, and local governments. IFC’s investment portfolio in Zimbabwe represents one of its largest exposures in Africa, with commitments of US$70 million (loans of US$54 million and equity of US$l6 million) and. an outstanding portfolio of US$48 million (loans of US$33 million, and equity of US$l5 million). These IFC investments cover over 25 companies in a wide range of sectors. IFC’s specific strategy for Zimbabwe is to assist the development of the private sector by (i) helping to enhance export-generating activities; (ii) assisting in corporate restructuring, privatization (subject to GoZ’s majority divestment, IFC would consider participating in the , privatization of the insurance company ZIMRE) and modernization; (iii) strengthening the financial sector; and (iv) supporting small-to medium-sized enterprises. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 54 - . lBRD/IDA Status of Operations* (In millions of U. S. dollars, net of cancellations; as of December 3 1, 1998) Commitments IBRD IDA Agricultural service/ Management 0.0 8.8 Enterprise development 0.0 70.0 Power III 90.0 0.0 Health (STI) 0.0 64.5 Railways II 38.6 0.0 Urban II/Rural District Councils 80.0 12.3 Community Action Project 60.0 Pilot Local RDC 12.2 Park Rehab. & Construction 62.5 208.6 290.3 Loan/Credit Summary (millions of US dollars) Original principle 896.2 Cancellations 47.4 Disbursed 793.0 Undisbursed 55.8 Repaid 326.2 Due 466.8 Disbursements IBRD IDA 0.0 0.0 0.0 25.0 61.4 0.0 0.0 52.4 32.7 0.0 59.7 0 0.5 2.0 0.5 0.0 . 79.9 153.8 IDA Total 656.9 1,553.2 28.2 75.6 433.4 1,226.4 200.5 256.3 4.5 330.8 442.4 909.2 ‘The table is only indicative of active’loans. The total outstanding loans from the IBRD and IDA are US$896 million and US$675 million, respectively. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 55 - APPENDIX III Zimbabwe: Country Assistance Strategy Policy Goals and Instruments Zimbabwe’s Dcvelopmcnt Objectives: l Achieving sustained growth and employment expansion l Expanding Indigenous participation in the economy Objectives/ Issues Initiatives/Policy Goals Instruments and Timing’ Macroeconomic management Reduce the fiscal deficit to sustainable level while maintaining key social invcstmcnt, and fret savings for private sector investment through expenditure reductions. PFPs SAC III. Structural reform of public enterprises to improve efficiency and reduce their burden on public finances. Market incentives and scrvicc provisions Reform tr-ade and tax policy to support exports, remove quantitative imports controls, and rationalize tariff protection. SAC III (FY98). Relax controls on subdivision, remove subsidies that increase the.value of commercial farmland, increase the cost of holding underutilized land, and help small-scale farmers purchase land. SAC III O;Y98), Land Reform Project (FY98). Broaden access to pi-oductive assets, know-how and infrastructure. Increase income-taming opportunities. Ensure that development is environmentally sustainable: Infrastructure Reform ZESA (power utility) to improve efftciency, Energy Sector Project (FY98), Roads mo’ve to economical pricing and increase self Rehabilitation (FYBS)), SAC III (FY98). financing. Strcngthcn transport infrastructure, especially in rural ai-eas. Expand telecommunications capacity. Expand water capacity and improve management. Human resource investments and safety net provisions Maintain high lcvcl of investment in human resources. Maintain safety net provisions with resources and targeting. Improve civil service cfficicncy and help it adjust to a private-sector- oriented economy. PFPs, Health Sector Project (FY99). ESW on poverty. ‘This is a list of activities that would be included in the high-lending-case scenario. What subset would remain in the base or low case scenario depends very much on where opportunities for investment lending arise. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicAPPENDIX IV - 56 - Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 99/ - FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE April -, 1999 International Monetary Fund Washington, D. C. 20431 USA IMF Concludes Article IV Consultation with Zimbabwe On May 5, 1999, the Executive Board concluded the Article IV consultation with Zimbabwe’-. Background Zimbabwe’s economic situation worsened considerably in 1997, and problems emerged as a result of a decision to grant generous pension payments to war veterans, lax monetary policy, and uncertainties surrounding the government’s land reform program. During the last two months of the year, the currency lost over 30 percent of its value in foreign currency terms. In ‘Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial information, and discusses with officials the country’s economic developments and policies. On return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the country’s authorities. In this PIN, the main features of the Board’s discussion are described. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 57 - APPENDIX IV response to the foreign exchange crisis, the government adopted a package of policy measures, between November 1997 and January 1998, that included tax hikes, expenditure cuts, increases in interest rates, and the closure of corporate foreign currency accounts. These actions were subsequently reinforced during the first half of 1998 by the adoption of a comprehensive stabilization program supported by a Stand-By Arrangement, which was approved in June 1998. Performance under the Stand-By Arrangement in 1998 was mixed. The budget deficit was cut sharply and monetary growth successfully curtailed. However, financial restraint did not translate into exchange rate and price stability; the Zimbabwe dollar lost one-half of its external value during the year and the 12-month inflation rates rose from 20 percent in December 1997 to 53 percent in March 1999. Real per capita GDP declined by 1.6 percent. A sharp contraction in export demand and large shortfalls in foreign assistance contributed to the pressures on the Zimbabwe dollars, but confidence was also adversely affected by the collapse of a small local bank; the imposition of price controls of maize-meal; concerns over the economic impact of Zimbabwe’s military operations in the Democratic Republic of the Congo; and continued uncertainty about the land reform program. The fiscal situation improved markedly in 1998. Reflecting an intensified effort to strengthen tax collection and success in containing expenditures, the government budget deficit, excluding grants, was cut by one-half to 4.3 percent of GDP, which was well below the program target of 5.5 percent of GDP. However, the favorable impact of fiscal consolidation Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 58 - APPENDIX IV on aggregate demand was partly offset by exchange rate-related losses incurred by the national oil and electricity companies. In an effort to stabilize the economy, the Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe tightened credit conditions and reduced broad money growth to 14 percent in 1998, from 35 percent in 1997. Within the financial sector, several banks have experienced financial difficulties over the past year, but the problem does not appear to be systemic in nature. To help ensure that the situation is contained, new guidelines on loan classification and provisioning have been issued and additional steps, including the passage of new banking legislation, are planned. Balance of payments pressures intensified in 1998 as a result of sharp declines in commodity prices and global concerns over emerging markets. To dampen foreign exchange demand, the government sharply increased import duties and surcharges in September 1998. This action, in addition to the impact of financial restraint and the depreciation of the currency, contributed to a reduction in the current account deficit to 6 percent in 1998, from 10 percent in 1997. There was a modest increase in international reserves from 0.8 months of imports at the, end of 1997 to 1 .I months at the end of 1998. Zimbabwe has made some progress in implementing structural reforms. The government has divested its interests in a number of private and public enterprises, while large retail energy price adjustments were undertaken to help strengthen the financial position of the state oil and electricity-supply companies. Cuts have been made in the size of the civil service Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 59 - APPENDIX IV and legislation has been prepared to establish a National Revenue Authority. Consensus was reached between stakeholders and donors on a strategy for land reform in September 1998, and the land reform program has been implemented in accordance with this strategy, with farms purchased on the basis of fair market compensation. Executive Board Assessment I I Public Mormation Notices (PINS) are issued, at the request of a member country, following the conclusion of the Article IV consultation for countries seeking to make known the views of the IMF to the public. This action is intended to strengthen IMF surveillance over the economic policies of member Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-6O- APPENDIX IV Zimbabwe: Selected Economic Indicators 1995 1996 1997 1998 Est. Real economy (change in percent) Real GDP (market prices; percent change) Consumer prices (end-of-period) Governmentfinances (in percent of GDP) l/2/ Revenue, excluding grants Expenditure and net lending Balance, excluding grants Primary balance, excluding grants Money and interest rates Broad,money (M3) (end-of-period; percent change) 9 l-day treasury bill yield (average for fiscal year) Balance of payments (in lJS$ millions, unless otherwise indicated) Exports Imports Current account balance (excluding grants) (in percent of GDP) Overall balance Gross reserves (end-of-period) 31 882 830 272 296 (in months of imports of goods and services) 3.3 2.9 0.8 1.1 Total external debt (in percent of GDP; end-of-period) 74.8 63.1 63.6 96.4 Debt service (in percent of exports of goods and services) 18.7 16.7 17.2 20.8 -0.7 7.3 3.2 1.6 26.0 16.3 20.1 46.6 24.1 24.1 29.4 30.3 34.7 34.9 38.2 34.6 -10.6 -10.8 -8.8 -4.3 -3.2 -1.5 -1.5 5.3 22.7 27.7 34.9 14.0 28.0 24.5 31.4 35.2 2,216 2,496 2,424 2,047 -2,128 -2,247 -2,654 -1,968 -368 -179 -827 -344 -5.2 -2.1 -9.9 -6.1 . 255 -43 -751 -69 Sources: Zimbabwean authorities and staff estimates. l/ Fiscal years (July-June) are reported for 1995 and 1996; calendar years reported otherwise. 2/ Central government budget will revert to a calendar-year basis from 1999. 3/ Gold valued at 100 percent of market price. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public