DOCUMENT OF INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND NOT FOR PUBLIC USE MASTER FILES ROOM HQ C-525 0450 SM/99/283 CONTAINS CON-FIDENTIAL INFORMATION December 1, 1999 To: Members of the Executive Board From: The Secretary Subject: Guatemala-Staff Report for the 1999 Article IV Consultation Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staff report for the 1999 Article IV consultation with Guatemala, which will be brought to the agenda for discussion on a date to be announced. Mr. Arbulu-Neira (ext. 37685), Mr. Espejo (ext. 37152), and Ms, Coronel (ext. 34330) are available to answer technical or factual questions relating to this paper prior to the Board discussion. Unless the Documents Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the WTO Secretariat on Thursday, December 9, 1999; and to the European Commission, the European Investment Bank, and the Inter-American Development Bank, following its consideration by the Executive Board. Att: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicCONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND GUATEMALA Staff Report for the 1999 Article IV Consultation Prepared by The StafFRepresentatives for the 1999 Consultation with Guatemala Approved by Miguel E. Bonangelino and G. Russell Kincaid November 30,1999 l Discussions for the 1999 Article IV consultation were held in Guatemala City during August 2-19, 1999, and Washington D.C. during September 25-30, 1999. l The staff team comprised Mr. Arbulu-Neira (Head), Mr. Bindley-Taylor, Mrs. Coronel, Mr. Espejo, and Ms. Zermefio (all WHD). Mr. Carstens and Mrs. De1 Cid-Bonilla, Executive Director and Advisor to the Executive Director for Guatemala, respectively, participated in the final discussions with the authorities in Guatemala and in the discussions in Washington. l The mission met with the minister of finance, the president of the central bank, the chairman of the assembly’s finance committee, the minister of energy, other senior government officials, and representatives of the private sector, NGOs, civil society, and academics. The staff also had discussions with the members of the commission of the fiscal pact and coordinated its work closely with the UN verification mission in Guatemala (MINUGUA) and the staff of the World Bank, IDB, and UNDP. l Guatemala is on the standard 1Zmonth cycle and has accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4 of the Articles of the Agreement, and maintains an exchange system that is free of restrictions on current payments and transfers. Relations with the Fund, the IBRD, and the IDB are summarized in Appendices I, II, and III, respectively. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2- Contents Executive Summary.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .4 I. Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5 II. Background and Recent Economic Developments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6 III. Policy Discussions 11 . .................................................................................................... A. Fiscal Policy.. ...................................................................................................... 11 B. Monetary Policy.. ................................................................................................ 13 C. External Sector ................................................................................................... 13 D. Implementation of Peace Accords and Poverty Alleviation .................................. 17 E. Structural Policies, Environmental Problems, and Other Issues.. .......................... 18 IV. Medium-Term Outlook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .._....... 19 V. Staff Appraisal.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . , . . . . . . . . . .20 Text Boxes 1. Financial System Supervision and Regulation in 1999 ............................................... 10 2. Budget Inflexibilities: Earmarking of Revenues ......................................................... -14 3. Financial System Supervision and Regulation: Pending Measures., ............................ 15 Figures 1. Latin America and the Caribbean: Central Government Expenditure on Education and Health and Total Revenues, 1996 ................................................................... .23 2. Real GDP Growth Rates, 1991-98 ........................................................................... .24 3. Public Sector Indicators ........................................................................................... .25 4. Monetary Sector Indicators.. ..................................................................................... 26 5. External Sector Indicators ........................................................................................ .27 6. Exchange Rate Developments.. ................................................................................ .28 7. Medium-Term Macroeconomic Indicators, 1996-2006 ............................................. .29 Tables 1. Comparative Social Indicators ................................................................................. .30 2. Selected Economic Indicators .................................................................................. .3 1 3. Operations of the Combined Public Sector ............................................................... .32 4. Central Government Expenditure by Function.. ........................................................ .33 5. Summary Accounts of the Monetary Authorities ....................................................... 35 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3- Tables 6. Summary Accounts of the Banking System.. ............................................................ .36 7. Summary Balance of Payments ................................................................................ .37 8. Summary of the Structure and Performance of the Financial Sector .......................... .38 9. Summary of Public External Debt ............................................................................ .39 10. Indicators of External Vulnerability.. ........................................................................ .40 11. Medium-Term Projections - Current Policy Scenario: Low Tax Ratio ..................... .41 12. Medium-Term Projections - Improved Policy Scenario: High Tax Ratio .................. .42 Appendices I. Fund Relations.. ....................................................................................................... .43 II. Relations with the World Bank Group ..................................................................... .45 III. Relations with the Inter-American Development Bank ............................................. .47 IV. Statistical Issues ...................................................................................................... .49 V. Press Information Notice (PIN) ................................................................................ 52 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4- EXEC-CJTMCSUMMARY Background: In 1997 demand policies began to switch to an expansionary stance to try to promote faster economic growth. The combined public sector balance deteriorated as efforts to raise tax revenue-as agreed under the peace accords-remained elusive while government expenditure increased, reflecting additional social and infrastructure programs. Moreover, the central bank reduced domestic interest rates and sold foreign exchange to counter the resulting downward pressures on the quetzal. At the same time, a number of financial institutions overlent and diminished the quality of their portfolio. Developments in 1999 point to a slowdown in economic growth to 3% percent of GDP (from over 5 percent of GDP in 1998), mainly because of a reduction in banana and sugar production and weakening in private investment. Inflation has picked up since May and the 12-month rate is estimated to reach 6-7 percent at year-end. The combined public sector deficit has widened to 2.8 percent of GDP, reflecting the implementation of social programs and a 10 percent general wage increase to civil servants. Monetary policy has continued to be expansionary (the central bank reduced legal reserve requirements and extended emergency credits to financial institutions) and the central bank continued its foreign exchange sales. Despite a substantial loss in international reserves (gross reserves are estimated at 2’/ months of imports of goods and services at end-September), the quetzal has depreciated by 17 percent in real effective terms from its peak in June 1998. Policy discussions: The present strategy aimed at stimulating economic growth through expansionary fiscal and monetary policies has become unsustainable, as the external reserve position is already weak. Thus, the staff emphasized the importance of fiscal consolidation and monetary tightening while limiting intervention in the exchange market. a In the fiscal area, the staff recommended to limit the combined public sector deficit to about 1 r/4 percent of GDP in 2000. An up-front increase in taxes based on a few strong and permanent measures would boost the tax ratio from the current 9.3 percent of GDP to about 11 percent of GDP in 2000 setting the stage for achieving the target of 12 percent of GDP by 2002, as agreed in the peace accords. On the expenditure side, unproductive spending and the wage bill should be kept under control. l The objective of monetary policy should be to reduce 1%month innation to about 6 percent in 2000 while allowing a recovery in international reserves. Interest rates on open market paper should be attractive enough to rollover the stock of paper outstanding at end-1999. Moreover, the authorities should be ready to increase interest rates as needed to achieve the inflation objective. l On banking supervision and regulation, the staffurged the authorities to build on recent measures to establish an expeditious exit mechanism for financial institutions, introduce consolidated supervision of financial groups, and strengthen regulations to limit unhedged exposure to liquidity and exchange rate risk. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicL INTRODUCTION 1. During the 1990s Guatemala recorded rising per capita income and some progress in improving social conditions, but extreme poverty continues to be widespread. Nearly 60 percent of the population live below the national poverty line (Table 1 and Figure 1) and income distribution is highly skewed (second only to Brazil in Latin America), with the income received by the richest quintile being equivalent to 30 times that of the poorest. 2. With the signing of UN sponsored peace accords in December 1996, the authorities outlined a program to mobilize domestic resources to address social problems and raise human capital and productivity, thus creating conditions to place the economy on a sustainable growth path. However, the government’s social program has moved at a slower-than-anticipated pace mainly because of insufficient domestic resources. 3. At the general elections held on November 7,1999, Mr, Alfonso Portillo, the candidate of the opposition Guatemalan Republican Front (FRG) narrowly missed securing the 50 percent of the votes needed to win the presidential election-a second round of voting is scheduled for December 26, 1999 and the new administration will assume office on January 15,200O. Mr. Portillo won 48 percent of the votes; in the December runoff he will be facing Mr. Oscar Berger of the ruling National Advance Party (PAN) who, in the first round, obtained 30 percent of the votes. There seem to be no key differences between the economic policies advocated by the two candidates. 4. At the conclusion of the last Article IV consultation with Guatemala on May 29, 1998, Executive Directors emphasized that a stronger tax effort, including substantive tax measures and improved tax administration, together with increased donor support were key to accelerate implementation of the social programs committed under the peace accords.’ Directors also recommended that the authorities tighten credit policy to help maintain single- digit inflation and preserve an adequate level of international reserves. They called for further improvements in Guatemala’s financial legislation and supervision. 5. Guatemala provides the minimum core data to the Fund, and the statistical information permits reasonably adequate monitoring of economic and financial developments. However, important data deficiencies exist in the areas of public finance, balance of payments and national accounts statistics, and the periodicity and timeliness of certain data, particularly in the public finance and banking sector areas, could be improved (Appendix IV). ’ The 1999 Article IV consultation was delayed because in the first half of the year the authorities were still framing their policies for 1999. Discussions continued during the Annual Meetings in late September 1999 following the consultation mission in August. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-6- II. BACKGROUND AND RECENT ECONOMIC DEVE~PMENTS 6. Following a period of uneven performance, the macroeconomic setting improved in 1995-96 reflecting the pursuit of prudent fiscal and monetary policies, supported by financial sector reform and trade and exchange system liberalization (Table 2).2 However, in 1997 the authorities began to shift to expansionary focal and monetary policies in an attempt to promote faster economic growth. On the fiscal side, rising social expenditure was not matched by increased revenue and the combined public sector balance (including the losses of the ’ central bank) shifted progressively to a deficit of more than 2 percent of GDP in 1998 (Tables 3 and 4). Monetary policy was eased initially through net redemption of open market paper, and a gradual reduction in legal reserve requirements from 25 percent in December 1997 to 18.6 percent in December 1998 (Table 5). As a result, the 1Zmonth rate of growth of bank credit to the private sector rose Corn 7% percent in 1996 to 19% percent in 1998 (Table 6).3 Following an increase in net international reserves (NlR)4 associated with large privatization proceeds’ to a record US$1,280 million in mid-September 1998, NTR declined to US$1,200 million at end-1998 owing to central bank intervention in the foreign exchange market (gross reserves fell to the equivalent of 2.8 months of imports of goods and services and 80 percent of base money). 7. The increase in domestic demand associated with lax fiscal and monetary policies led to an increase in real GDP growth from 3 percent in 1996 to more than 5 percent in 1998, but also to a widening of the external current account deficit from 3 percent of GDP to 5% percent during the same period (Table 7). Meanwhile, import prices fell (which was compounded in 1997 by a real appreciation of the quetzal) and the 1Zmonth inflation rate slowed fiom about 11 percent in 1996 to 7% percent in 1998. Gross domestic investment rose markedly because of higher public investment and an increase in private sector ’ Since 1994 the exchange rate in Guatemala has been determined in the interbank market where the central bank is supposed to intervene only to moderate fluctuations, to purchase foreign exchange on behalf of the public sector, and to service its own external debt. However, since end-September 1998 the central bank has intensified intervention in the market by selling foreign exchange to counter downward pressure on the quetial. 3 Unless otherwise specified, all percentage change of monetary variables are expressed in relation to the banking system liabilities to the private sector at the beginning of the period. 4 International reserves exclude claims on Nicaragua (USS145 million, or equivalent to 0.8 percent of 1999 GDP), which are included in the official statistics. The coverage in months of imports refers to estimated imports of the next year. ’ Privatization proceeds amounted to US$580 million, equivalent to 3.1 percent of GDP. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-7- investment associated with the pick up in bank credit. At the same time, gross national savings rose slightly notwithstanding the weakening in public sector savings (Figure 2). Pressures in the foreign exchange market intensiied beginning in the last quarter of 1998 because of a substantial curtailment of banks’ external credit lines in the wake of turmoil in international financial markets, declining prices for Guatemala’s main exports, and the adverse effects of Hurricane Mitch. 8. Developments in 1999 point to slower real growth of 3% percent, owing mainly to the negative impact of Hurricane Mitch on banana production, a weather related reduction in ’ sugar production, and lower private sector investment.6 After declining to 3.7 percent in May 1999 because of a marked drop in food prices, the la-month rate of inflation picked up to 7% percent in October 1999, as a result of continued lax monetary and fiscal policies. End- year inflation, however, is expected to be in the 6-7 percent range. The external current account deficit widened significantly in the first half of 1999 reflecting the effect of the decline in the international price of coffee, increased competition from Asian exporters in the U.S. market, and lower demand from the Central American neighbors hardest hit by Hurricane Mitch. 9. The overall position of the combined public sector (including the losses of the Bank of Guatemala (BOG)) weakened further during the first eight months of 1999 as the central government recorded a deficit of 1% percent of GDP on an annual basis, compared with a small surplus a year earlier. For the year as a whole, the staff estimates that the combined public sector deficit would widen to 2.8 percent of GDP (from about 2 percent of GDP in 1998). Tax revenue relative to GDP is estimated to increase to 9.2 percent of GDP as the effects of a tax amnesty and improved tax administration would more than offset lower receipts from the tax on oil derivatives attributable to lower consumption, while expenditure rose with the implementation of programs envisaged under the peace accords and a general wage increase of 10 percent.’ The increase in expenditure also reflected a one-time reduction in the lag between the approval and the execution of budgeted outlays, due to the introduction of an Integrated Financial Management System (IFMS) (Figure 3). 6 The impact of Hurricane Mitch on Guatemala’s economic infrastructure, exports and income, although significant, was less severe than in other countries of the region. The number of deaths is estimated at about 270, while 110,000 people were displaced (out of a total population of 11.8 million). The cost of infrastructure repairs is estimated at US$410 million (2 percent of GDP over 1998-99), while damage to banana crops is estimated at US$83 million (0.5 percent of GDP over 1998-99). ’ The Superintendency of Tax Administration (SAT), an autonomous agency covering internal and custom revenue, began operations in October 1998. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-8- 10. Monetary policy has continued to be expansionary during 1999. The authorities’ efforts to balance the objectives of sustaining growth and supporting the currency have led to large losses of international reserves. Reserve requirements were reduced further to 14.6 percent in July 1999, and the central bank extended emergency loans to several small- and medium-size banks and financial companies that were confronting liquidity or solvency problems. At the same time, the growth of broad money slowed, reflecting a weakening confidence in the quetzal, while the 1Zmonth rate of growth of credit to the private sector declined only marginally.* Interest rates on bank loans rose because of a perception of ’ increased currency risk and a more stringent application of prudential regulations (Figure 4). 11. To moderate downward pressures on the quetzal, in the year through September 1999, the central bank sold some US%700 million in the foreign exchange market. NIR declined by US$225 million to US$l,OO7 million at end-September (gross international reserves stood at 2.3 months of imports) (Figure 5). Despite significant central bank intervention, the quetzal depreciated by 22 percent in nominal effective terms and by 17 percent in real effective terms between the real exchange rate peak in June 1998 and September 1999.’ This depreciation offset most of the real appreciation that had taken place since mid-l 996 (Figure 6). lo 12. The quality of bank portfolios has been adversely affected by the slowdown in economic activity and by the increase in real domestic interest rates. Nonperforming loans are now estimated at more than 12 percent of banks’ loans, compared with 7.8 percent in December 1998 mainly because of the deterioration in underlying conditions and a more stringent application of existing prudential regulations. The bankruptcies of-five brokerage firms and the three most important coffee traders in late 1998 have added to the weakness of * In January 1998 residents and nonresidents became eligible to hold accounts in foreign exchange. However, Guatemalan banks have not yet offered these accounts to the public because prudential regulations on foreign exchange operations are still under consideration by the authorities. ’ The staff has prepared some preliminary calculations of the real effective exchange rate using annual relative unit labor cost for Guatemala and its main trading partners (only information available). These calculations show a real depreciation of 3 percent in 1998, slightly lower than the 4% percent based on relative consumer prices for the same year. This result should be interpreted with caution because of the liited reliability of labor statistics in some of the trading partners and in Guatemala. lo In 1996-97, the high growth in export volume, especially of nontraditional exports, suggests that the potential loss in competitiveness related to the currency appreciation may have been offset in part by productivity gains resulting from the trade reform, and technological improvements in banana and coffee production. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-9- banks’ portfolios. Also, some commercial banks have had difficulties in meeting their clearing obligations and have incurred shortfalls in required reserves at various times since September 1998. Although the reported weighted average capital adequacy ratio (over 13 percent in June 1999) appears high, it needs to be interpreted with caution as the calculation does not include off-balance sheet operations, such as trust operations and portfolio sales;” loan classification is weak; and accounting practices are not transparent (Table 8). Average spreads between deposit and lending rates have declined since 1996 owing to the reduction in legal reserve requirements, but they are still high in part due to limited competition, high administrative costs (including for security purposes), and excessive investment in fixed assets. l2 13. On banking supervision and regulation, the national assembly approved a law in February 1999 providing for the establishment of a deposit insurance scheme for small depositors and a framework to deal with insolvent banks. In addition, the assembly approved reforms to the banking law in August 1999 strengthening prudential regulations and supervisory oversight, although some deficiencies remain to be corrected (Box l).r3 14. In the structural area, the authorities made progress in privatization and public sector modemization, although the pace of the reforms has slowed in 1999. On privatization, 80 percent of the state power company, the telephone company, and the national power distribution company were sold for a total of US$570 million in 1998 (0.8 percent of GDP). On public sector modemization, the authorities have been implementing a computerized financial management framework (IFMS) aimed at modernizing key areas of budgeting, cash management, auditing, and procurement, which has resulted in significant cost reductions in several areas, including security, health, and public works. l1 In some cases, off-balance sheet operations entail associated commitments on the part of the bank and, therefore, represent unrecognized risks. I2 There are no legal constraints for the entrance of new banks in Guatemala and the capital requirement for new banks is relatively low (equivalent to US%7 million). However, new banks have been reluctant to operate in Guatemala reportedly because of market segmentation (both large debtors and depositors have established long-standing links, including of ownership, with existing financial institutions). l3 These laws are currently under a constitutional appeal. The authorities are confident that the constitutional court will uphold the laws before the end of 1999. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-lO- Box 1. Financial System Supervision and Regulation in 1999 The Deposit Insurance Law (FOPA).’ Approved by the national assembly in February 1999, FOPA creates a Deposit Insurance Fund @IF) and establishes a general framework to deal with insolvent banks. 0 The insurance covers saving deposits, up to a limit of Q 20,000 per account (about US$2,500), in the event of liquidation of a bank (see below). The DIF is constituted by monthly contributions from private banks (each bank contributing l/12 of 1 percentage point of its saving deposits until an amount equivalent to 10 percent of banks’ saving deposits is accumulated). If needed to meet the DIF insurance obligations, the government may extend a credit to the DIF to be repaid with future DIF contributions by private banks. . The process to deal with insolvent financial institutions begins with the decision of the monetary board (MB) to intervene the institution on the basis of a superintendency of banks (SB) report indicating possible solvency problems. Once the decision to intervene is made, the MB is to appoint a three- member intervention committee to assess the financial situation and decide on the liquidation of the intervened institution within two years-which can be extended by two additional years. In case of insolvency or capital deficiency, the SB and the MB decide whether a financial institution should be liquidated or whether it could be recap&a&d. Liquidation is to be sanctioned by the judicial system. When the institution is to be recapitalized, it should present a program, which will be supervised by the SB. The law specifically stipulates that as part of the recapitalization program, the intervened institution could receive credit from, and sell equity and fixed assets to, the central bank without limits. Reforms to the Banking Law.’ In August 1999 the national assembly approved a law: (i) increasing the capital adequacy ratio from 8 to 10 percent and empowering the MB to increase this ratio in the future without setting limits; (ii) reducing the maximum period to recapitalize financial institutions showing deficiencies on the capital adequacy ratio from two to one month when the deficiencies are of 10 to 25 percent, and from four to two months when the deficiencies are of 25 to 50 percent; (iii) limiting the maximum amount of credit to a single individual or corporation to 20 percent of capital and reserves of the financial institution, and credit to two or more related parties (by ownership or management) to 40 percent of capital and reserves of the financial institution (or 50 percent if the excess over 40 percent is backed by qualified collateral, such as real estate or highly liquid paper); (iv) making the deposit taking by unauthorizd institutions a criminal offense subject to a prison term of 3-5 years and a maximum fine of Q 1 million, and (v) increasing fmes for certain other actions, such as nonobservance of SB regulations in general and presentation of false financial statements. Other reforms. The MB issued resolutions during 1999: (i) regulating the opening and management of overseas branches of Guatemalan banks; and (ii) improving transparency and governance by requiring the SB to publish data on credit concentration, reserve requirement position, and capital for each individual bank, and requiring financial groups to publish consolidated balance sheets. ’ The laws are currently under a constitutional appeal. ‘Ihe authorities are confident that the constitutional court will uphold the laws before the end of 1999. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- ll- IIL POLICY DIXU~IONS 15. The authorities have been attempting to stimulate economic growth through expansionary fiscal and monetary policies. These policies were accompanied by significant foreign exchange sales by the central bank in reaction to downward pressures on the quetzal. The staff advised that such a strategy was not sustainable and that prompt corrective measures were required to protect the external position and avoid a further worsening of conditions in the banking system. Moreover, the continuation of present policies would make the eventual necessary adjustment in fiscal and monetary policies more diicult and costly.14 16. The discussions focused on the policies that were needed to recover some of the loss of reserves, reduce inflation, and set the stage for sustainable economic growth. The staff emphasized the importance of prompt action to achieve fiscal consolidation and implement a tighter monetary policy, while limiting foreign exchange sales. The authorities did not dispute the staff recommendations on economic policy, but because of the political calendar saw little scope for immediate fiscal action, except for rolling back some of the expenditure approved a&r the adoption of this year’s budget. l5 In the monetary area, the authorities indicated that they would tighten monetary policy, but only enough to stem the loss of international reserves. The authorities stressed that actions for the year 2000 were dependent on the outcome of the elections, as the current administration could not make commitments beyond its tenure. A. Fiscal Policy 17. In discussions with the authorities and with the commission of the fiscal pact, the staff stressed the need to prepare a strong revenue package that could be implemented by the new administration, with the aim of reducing the combined public sector deficit to about I4 The staEdeveloped a scenario for 2000 assuming the continuation of current fiscal and monetary policies (see Tables 3 and S-7). The scenario shows that the fiscal deficit would remain at 2.8 percent of GDP and that government spending on social programs and infrastructure would be constrained by limited domestic and external resources. At the same time, gross domestic investment would fall below 14 percent of GDP because of the impact of high interest rates on private investment. As a result, output growth would exceed population growth only slightly implying no improvement in the living standards. Inflation would rise and gross international reserves would decline to 2.1 months of imports of goods and services and 72 percent of base money. l5 In September 1999, the national assembly approved the roll back of these expenditures (equivalent to 0.8 percentage point of GDP). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12- 1% percent of GDP in 2000.16 An upfiont increase in taxes should be based on a few, strong and permanent measures as a significant step toward achieving a tax ratio of 12 percent of GDP by 2002, which was the objective agreed in the peace accords.” Specifically, the staff proposed an increase in the tax ratio to about 11 percent of GDP in 2000 through the following: increase the VAT rate by 5 percentage points to 15 percent (this would yield 1%2 percentage points of GDP on an annual basis); broaden the base of the VAT by elimi- nating most exemptions and zero rated items, except for export products (0.2-0.3 percent of GDP); raise fuel taxes by Q 1 per liter (0.5 percent of GDP);‘* and eliminate the VAT credit against income tax (0.5 percent of GDP).” In addition, the s&indicated that some revenue gains could be achieved by including import duties in the VAT base and curtailing tax incentives and duty exemptions. The staff recommended that the privatization proceeds in 2000 (projected at 0.8 percentage point of GDP) be deposited in a capital Curd and that only the interest be used to finance social expenditure, and reform of the social security system. The authorities concurred with this view and indicated that they might also give consideration to repaying high-cost debt or capitalizing the central bank. 18. The staff indicated that if revenue were increased as recommended, social and infrastructure outlays agreed under the peace accords could be raised from 7.3 percent in 1999 to 8.3 percent in 2000. In addition, the staffemphasized the importance of reducing unproductive spending and keeping the wage bill under control. Following general increases of 20 percent in 1998 and 10 percent in 1999, it was necessary to avoid additional general wage increases, limiting any adjustments to merit increases. The number of civil servants in education, health, and security has been increasing with the implementation of the peace accords. The staff argued that current efforts to reduce employment in the ministries of transportation, agriculture, and finance should be complemented with reductions by attrition in other ministries. In addition, it was necessary to improve the quality and targeting of I6 The commission of the fiscal pact was set up by the peace commission-which oversees implementation of the peace accords-to, inter alia, propose specific tax measures to the administration that is to take office in January 2000. The sttimet with the commission of the fiscal pact on two occasions to discuss possible measures. ” The difliculties of raising revenue to the levels envisaged in the original peace program (an increase in the tax ratio to 12 percent by 2000) led the authorities to revise their plans in order to achieve the objective by 2002. ‘* Equivalent to about 7% percent increase in the price of gasoline which is currently at Q 13.6 a gallon (equivalent to US$l.7 a gallon) and about 11 percent in the price of diesel which is currently Q 9.4 a gallon @X$1.2 a gallon). lg Payments on VAT can be credited against the income tax up to the equivalent of 10 percent of net taxable income. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13 - expenditure, while phasing out some revenue earmarking to reduce expenditure rigidities (Box 2). 19. The authorities were aware that strong efforts to raise tax revenue would help increase external financing from multilateral and bilateral sources. In turn, this would allow the central government to increase social expenditure as well as its deposits at the central bank, which would help rebuild international reserves. Based on the fiscal projection the public sector external debt is projected to increase from 17.8 percent of GDP in 1999 to 19.4 percent of GDP in 2000 (Table 9). B. Monetary Policy 20. In the discussions with the authorities, the staff stressed the need to tighten monetary policy as required to avoid Cuther losses of international reserves until appropriate fiscal measures could be put in place. The authorities indicated that they were ready to raise interest rates on open market paper as needed to protect the external position. To guide the discussions, the staff prepared a monetary program for 2000 under the assumption that the fiscal deficit is reduced as recommended. The program assumes that broad money grows slightly faster than nominal GDP and targets a reduction in inflation to less than 6 percent, while increasing gross international reserves to 3.3 months of imports of goods and services and more than 100 percent of base money. Based on this program, interest rates on open market paper should be raised as needed to roll over in 2000 the entire stock of paper outstanding at end-1999 (equivalent to about 10 percent of base money) and the authorities should be prepared to place additional paper in case inflation were not to decline as projected. 21. Although the immediate systemic risks facing the Guatemalan financial system were not large, a relatively high number of institutions holding a sizable share of deposits confront significant financial problems.” The stafftherefore urged the authorities to strengthen fiuther the powers of the superintendency of banks and improve the mechanisms to identity and address promptly problems with financial institutions (Box 3). C. External Sector 22. Assuming the recommended stance of fiscal and monetary policies, the staff projects a decline in the current account deficit to 4% percent of GDP in 2000. Exports would grow by around 11 percent in U.S. dollar terms supported by the recovery of banana 20 A report prepared by MAE in May 1999 indicates that eight small- and medium-size financial institutions (accounting for 14 percent of total financial system deposits) have a substantial insolvency risk and eight additional financial institutions (about 35 percent of deposits) have a higher-than-normal insolvency risk. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14- Box 2. Budget Inflexibilities: Earmarking of Revenues Central government expenditure in Guatemala has a significant degree of rigidity stemming from the earmarking of revenue. Earmarking is specified in the constitution and in several laws. l Constitutional provisions establish that out of the revenue projected in the budget at least 10 percent must be transferred to municipalities, 5 percent to The University of San Carlos, 2 percent to judicial organisms, 1.5 percent to the National Sports Committee, and 1 percent to the National Committee for Alphabetization. l The main earmarking provisions contained in several laws are the following: 30 percent of the VAT revenue must be transferred to municipalities, social funds, and the national committee for development; 34 percent of petroleum tax revenue must be assigned to maintenance of road infrastructure and transfers to municipalities; and of the revenue projected in the budget 5.5 percent must be transferred to decentralized agencies, and 2.3 percent to the national assembly. The estimated total earmarking for specific expenditures is equivalent to about 40 percent of government revenue or close to 4 percent of GDP in 1999. Taking into account other inflexible expenditure items, such as interest payments and wage outlays (equivalent to 4% percent of GDP), total nondiscretionary expenditure would be on the order of 8% percent of GDP. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 15- Box 3. Financial System Supervision and Regulation: Pending Measures’ Legal reforms . The central bank and the superintendency of banks (SB) should be made independent. Regarding central bank independence, members of the monetary board should be appointed for fured terms by the president of the republic and confirmed by congress. The authorities should consider making the SB independent of the monetary board. l The process established in the FOPA Law to deal with insolvent financial institutions (Box 1) should be made more expeditious by (i) establishing a clear exit mechanism for banks and other financial institutions; (ii) making the SB (instead of the intervention committee, as indicated in Box 1) the only responsible for the intervention of financial institutions; and (iii) reducing to a maximum of six months the period to decide whether the financial institution should be liquidated. l It is imperative to define clearly the terms and conditions of the central hank’s credit as lender of last resort. The Bank of Guatemala should (i) provide only temporary assistance to financial institutions with liquidity problems within limits (with respect to capital and reserves); (ii) lend at maturities of up to 90 days (or up to 180 days when the rediscount is part of a restructuring program); (iii) charge punitive interest rates (well above market interest rates); and (iv) require high quality collateral. The lender of last resort operations should not result in quasi-fiscal costs for the Bank of Guatemala; this would require to phase out the provision contained in the FOPA Law, whereby the central bank may acquire equity and f=ed assets from institutions under a restructuring program (Box 1). The Banking Law needs to be reformed further to (i) establish that all financial institutions be under the oversight of the SB; (ii) require consolidated supervision of financial groups including offshore operations; (iii) increase the amount of capital required to establish a new bank (currently it is the equivalent to US%7 million); and (iv) subject owners and managers to “fit and proper” tests. Improvement of prudential regulations. The SB should: (i) set up new criteria to evaluate asset quality taking into consideration the debtor’s capacity to repay rather than the duration of assets classified as nonperforming; (ii) enhance regulations that limit u&edged exposure to liquidity and exchange rate risk (e.g., by setting minimum ratios between liquid assets and sight liabilities, and limits on u&edged positions in foreign currency); and (iii) update audit procedures to ensure efficiency and independence of external auditors. Diagnosis of the financial system. A clear assessment of the health of the financial system should be done without delay, through a proper evaluation of assets and measure of the solvency of each financial institution. Following such assessment, insolvent and capital-deficient financial institutions should be given a reasonable maximum period to increase capital, merge with other institutions, or liquidate. ~ ’ These measures are recommended by h4AE and LEG and are contained in Guatemala: Estrategiapara Fortalecer el Sistema Financiero, May 28, 1999. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 16- production after the hurricane and the recent real effective depreciation of the quetzal. Imports are projected to increase somewhat faster than GDP especially for investment-related goods, most of which would be financed by direct foreign investment. The capital account surplus would increase to 6% percent of GDP in 2000 largely on account of private sector inflows, reflecting improved investor confidence. As a result, the overall balance of payments would shift to a surplus of about 2 percent of GDP. 23. The real effective depreciation of the quetzal in the 15 months through September 1999 has helped bolster competitiveness during a period when structural reforms have slowed and the terms of trade have worsened. The staff advised the authorities to permit the exchange rate to reflect market conditions, and to discontinue the large interventions that have taken place recently in the foreign exchange market. The maintenance of a flexible exchange rate policy should be backed up by tighter monetary and fiscal policies, wage restraint, and structural reforms to increase private investment and labor productivity. 24. Guatemala maintains a relatively open trade regime; the siiple average tariff is estimated at 8.3 percent in 1998 and is expected to decline to 8 percent in 1999. In line with Guatemala’s obligations under the Central American Common Market (CACM), in January 1999 the maximum common external tariff was lowered further from 12 percent to 10 percent on intermediate goods and from 17 percent to 15 percent on consumption goods.21 Guatemala’s obligations under the CACM have been fulfilled and no further tariff reductions are envisaged.” Based on the relatively low tariff and moderate incidence of nontdbarriers, GuatemaIa’s trade restrictiveness rating is 4 out of 10, roughly similar to other countries in the region. The incoming administration is well advised to consider reducing reliance on bilateral and regional trade arrangements and advance with further trade liberalization. 25. Following an improvement in 1998 associated with large privatization proceeds, indicators of external vulnerability are estimated to have worsened slightly in 1999 21 Tarif& higher than 15 percent account for 27 percent of total tariff lines. In 1999, these apply to some food products (including dairy products), textiles, and shoes. Quantitative restrictions in the form of tariff quotas apply to beef, poultry, apples, rice seed, yellow corn and wheat. Guatemala signed a trade agreement with the Dominican Republic in April 1998 (approval by the national assembly is still pending), and with Cuba in February 1999. Agreements with Chile and Mexico are being negotiated (the latter in conjunction with El Salvador and Honduras). With other members of the CACM. Guatemala is also engaged in preliminary discussions with Mercosur, the Andean Group, and Mexico on a possible trade arrangement, and is seeking an enhancement by United States of the special treatment under the Caribbean Basin Initiative. 22 In late August 1999, the average tation dairy products was increased from 15 to 39 per- cent. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17- owing mostly to the weakening in the fiscal position and the loss in international reserves. Net international reserve coverage of M2 is projected to decline from 26% percent in 1998 to about 26 percent in 1999 and the ratio of NIR to short-term external debt on a remaining maturing basis would fall from 122 percent in 1998 to about 119 percent in 199g” (Table 10). D. Implementation of Peace Accords and Poverty Alleviation 26. The peace accords’ social strategy focuses on programs aimed at strengthening human capital, expanding substantially the country’s infrastructure, and integrating gradually the large indigenous population into the market economy. This strategy calls for the government to strengthen literacy and primary education and extend the coverage of preventive health care among the rural poor and the indigenous population. A substantial part of the investment effort on social infrastructure is being carried out through nine social investment funds, which are coordinated and monitored through a technical secretariat chaired by the vice-president of Guatemala.” 27. In education, the peace accords plan initially to provide primary education to all children; this would be followed by efforts to raise the coverage of secondary education. This plan will be pursued by rehabilitating school buildings, distributing books and teaching materials, and increasing teacher salaries. At the same time, a literacy program (CONALFA) initiated in 1995 already has contributed to a decline in illiteracy from 35.8 percent in that year to 32.6 percent in 1998, more than halfway toward the targeted 30 percent for 2000-2001.2s As a result of the community participation school program, the World Bank estimates that gross enrollment in primary schools increased from 84 percent in 1996 to 89 percent in 1998, but will fall short of the targeted 100 percent for 1999. The World Bank estimates that reaching 100 percent by 2007 would require a major effort including the enrollment of a minimum of 75,000 new students a year and construction of some 1,500 schools during the next six years. 28. The peace accords’ health policy focuses on strengthening primary and preventive care services and epidemiological control. As a result of the implementation of the Integrated Attention to the Health System (IAHS) program, infant mortality declined from 39.9/1,000 in 1995 to 37/1,000 in 1997 and is projected at 32/1000 in 2000 (the peace accords target a decline to 20/1,000 in 2000). The World Bank &&estimates that IAHS 23 Includes debt of the public sector and the financial system. 24 For a description of the social and institutional expenditure under the peace accords, see Guatemala: Recent Economic Developments, S&l/98/95, Supplement 1 of May 13, 1998. 25 With respect to the 15-year and older population. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 18- would need to continue expanding its coverage by 100,000 new beneficiaries a year to reach this target by 2007. 29. The peace accords include programs to reduce the short-term effect of the adjustment on the poor and to begin dealing with unemployment as a means of reducing the incidence of poverty. The National Statistical Institute estimates that the unemployment rate averaged 4*X percent and the underemployment rate 42 percent in 1995-98. Programs are focused on employment creation, resettlement of displaced persons in former conflict areas, provision of land in rural areas to the landless poor, and financing for the improvement of ’ housiig and sanitation. E. Structural Policies, Environmental Problems, and Other Issues 30. Discussion of structural policy focused on public sector modernization, privatization, and the social security system. The staff encouraged the authorities to move ahead with plans to reform the civil service, including by reducing its size and setting new procedures for recruitment and promotion based on efficiency considerations. The authorities plan to extend the computerized financial management framework (IFMS) to other public sector entities and include the public debt in the system. With respect to privatization, in 2000 the government will receive a second instalhnent of US$150 million, corresponding to the privatization of the telephone company. A final installment (US$350 million) would be paid in 200 1. The authorities indicated that they would recommend to the incoming administration the signing in 2000 of management contracts for the ports and airports. 31. The cash flow position of the social security system is currently positive, reflecting mainly favorable demographics and the fact that the pension system is relatively new and has few obligations (it was established in 1977). Furthermore, the cash flow is expected to improve as a result of approved reforms to be implemented in 2000.% However, the latest official analysis of the long-term prospects of the social security system indicates that, in the absence of additional measures, the system will begin to register cash flow dficulties by 2010. The Social Security Institute is studying the introduction of mandatory individually funded private pension funds that would substitute the existing pay-as-you-go system. Staff calculations of this alternative suggest that the fiscal cost would remain moderate. 32. Guatemala is facing several serious environmental problems mostly stemming from pervasive and extreme poverty, which have resulted in indiscriminate disposal of solid waste, degradation of water courses, and deforestation. To arrest environmental degradation, the authorities plan to step up efforts to implement the action plan introduced by the National Commission of the Environment. In particular, they would (i) promote the adoption of 26 Contribution rates were increased from 4.5 percent to 5.5 percent, the retirement age was extended from 60 to 65 years and the collection system was improved. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 19- technologies that conserve natural resources; (ii) improve the legal framework governing fisheries, forestry, mining, and biodiversity; and (iii) increase the oversight of protected areas. In addition, the Fund for Peace (FONDAPAZ) has been providing resources for the reforestation of several areas, and the government has established several biodiversity zones, and has taken steps to protect Mayan sites. Moreover, social investment programs have been addressing one of the major causes of pollution by providing better housing and drainage facilities. 33. In December 1998, the government established the National Commission for Informatic Emergency 2000 to coordinate efforts to deal with Y2K issues. The commission was of the view that, as of October 1999, the ministry of finance, the central bank, the national institute of energy, the civil aviation authority, and the superintendency of banks, were 80-90 percent Y2K compliant. In addition, the social security system is expected to be ready to deal with Y2K without major disruptions. Testing of computer systems in banks and finance companies was completed in September 1999, and the superintendency of banks is confident that the financial sector would not experience major problems. No information is available regarding the degree of preparedness of the nonbank private sector. The staff does not foresee Y2K-related balance of payments needs. Iv. MEDIUM-TERM OUTLOOK 34. Economic prospects over the medium term hinge critically on the success in strengthening macroeconomic policies and improving social conditions. The staff has prepared both a passive and an active scenario for 2000-2006. The passive scenario is based on present macroeconomic policies and slow progress in the social area. The active scenario assumes the mobilization of additional tax revenue to finance social programs, the implementation of reforms to the social security system, and an investment effort on the part of the public sector to increase both physical and social infrastructure while strengthening the external reserve position. 35. Under the passive scenario, the tax ratio is assumed to remain at about 9 percent of GDP during the projection period (Table 11). Government spending in social programs and basic infrastructure would be constrained by limited domestic resources and, because of slow implementation of the peace accords, limited access to external financing. The fiscal deficit would be financed largely by domestic credit, which would put pressures on interest rates and the international reserve position. Gross domestic investment would stagnate at less than 14 percent of GDP in reflection of sluggish private investment, and GDP growth would remain at about 3 percent a year. Export growth would be constrained by infrastructure bottlenecks and low labor productivity, while import growth would slow reflecting limited investment. Official capital would fall and private capital inflows would remain subdued. The import cover of gross usable international reserves would fall to 1% month of imports at end of the projection period. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 20 - 36. The active scenario is based on the staff recommendation to raise government revenue to the level agreed in the peace accords, so as to help sustain higher outlays on social and basic infrastructure, as agreed in the accords, and help finance the reform of the social security system over the long run. The economy would benefit importantly Tom the support of the international community, which is tied to the implementation of the peace accords, including greater mobilization of domestic resources. In turn, the external support would be a key factor behind the acceleration of economic growth and the achievement of the agreed social targets. 37. The active scenario assumes the adoption of strong tax measures in 2000, to set the stage for reaching the tax ratio of 12 percent of GDP agreed under the peace accords by 2002. Beyond that year, the scenario incorporates additional measures to maintain the buoyancy of tax revenues and achieve a tax ratio of 14 percent of GDP by 2006 (‘Table 12). Domestic investment is projected to rise strongly due to higher public investment in basic infrastructure and an increase in private investment associated with better social conditions and lower domestic interest rates, the latter being induced by a reduction in the public sector’s domestic debt. The external current account deficit relative to GDP would be higher than in the passive scenario but would narrow steadily throughout the period as productive capacity and external competitiveness improves (Figure 7). Such deficit would be more than financed by a combination of private capital inflows and disbursements from multilateral and bilateral resources. Gross usable international reserves would rise to 3% months of imports by 2006. V. STAFF APPRAISAL 38. Since 1997, Guatemala’s macroeconomic policies and performance have deteriorated. The fiscal position has weakened as efforts to raise taxes have remained elusive, while government expenditure has risen on account of social programs envisaged in the peace accords, pressures in the run-up to the general elections, and reconstruction efforts in the wake of Hurricane Mitch. Monetary policy has been relaxed and the central bank has sold dollars in the foreign exchange market by a sign&ant amount to counter the resulting downward pressures on the quetzal. Signs of stress also have begun to emerge in the financial system. The impact of weaker policies has been compounded since the last quarter of 1998 by difficulties faced by domestic banks to renew external lines of credit following the turbulence of international financial markets and a decline in traditional exports. Inflation has picked up in recent months, while real GDP growth has slowed. 39. There is an urgent need to reverse the course of macroeconomic policies to protect the international reserve position and reduce pressures on the financial system. In particular, fiscal and monetary policies should be tightened considerably, and the central bank should allow for greater exchange rate flexibility. Against this background, a critical challenge facing the authorities that will assume office in January 2000 is to carry out corrective fiscal measures promptly, while implementing the social and institutional reforms embodied in the peace accords. Adherence to the peace accords is essential for the mobilization of adequate external resources to finance social programs and much needed infrastructure. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-21- 40. Given Guatemala’s low tax ratio, efforts on the focal front should focus on increasing tax revenue. Tax initiatives by the new administration should center on a few strong and permanent measures to raise the tax ratio to about 11 percent of GDP in 2000, thereby making credible the achievement of the tax ratio of 12 percent of GDP targeted in the peace accords for 2002. In this regard, it is crucial that the commission of the fiscal pact presents to the incoming administration a set of substantive measures and that the authorities give priority to achieving the necessary political consensus for their implementation, The authorities’ efforts to improve tax administration through the creation of the Superintendency of Tax Administration (SAT) and actions to increase import valuation are commendable, and efforts in this area should be continued. 41. Important elements of a credible tax effort would include a significant increase in the VAT rate and a widening of its base by phasing out zero rates and exemptions, as well as an increase in the fuel tax rate and the elimination of the VAT credit against income tax. In addition, the authorities would be well advised to include import duties in the VAT base and curtail most tax related incentives and duty exemptions. To facilitate the reorientation of spending toward social programs that have been agreed under the peace accords, it also will be crucial to eliminate the existing practices of revenue earmarking, and to exercise tight control on government wages. The sizable privatization proceeds that are in prospect should be used to be deposited in a capital fund and that only the interest be used to finance social expenditure, recapitalize the central bank, buy back high-cost external or domestic debt, and finance the planned reform of the social security system. 42. A tightening of fiscal policy would ease the burden on monetary policy and allow the central bank to achieve its objective of reducing annual inflation to less than 6 percent by end-2000, while significantly rebuilding its net international reserve position. A reasonable aim would be to raise gross usable reserves to the equivalent of 3.3 months of imports by the end of 2000 and more than 100 percent of the monetary base. The authorities should raise interest rates as needed to protect the external position by ensuring the required absorption of liquidity and the rollover of outstanding open market instruments. Once domestic financing of the public sector has been eliminated, the conditions may be established to allow reductions in domestic interest rates. In any event, the authorities would need to monitor monetary developments closely. At the same time, the exchange rate should reflect market conditions, with the central bank refraining from intervening in the foreign exchange market, except for market smoothing. 43. The authorities’ recent moves to strengthen banking supervision and regulation are steps in the right direction, but much remains to be done to put the system on a sounder basis. A proper evaluation of assets and solvency of each financial institution should be done without delay. In addition, a clear and expeditious exit mechanism for financial institutions should be established. It is also necessary to define the terms and conditions of the central bank’s credit as lender of last resort, reform banking regulations by introducing supervision of financial groups on a consolidated basis (including offshore operations), put all institutions under the oversight of the superintendency of banks, and subject owners and managers to “fit Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 22 - and proper” tests. Moreover, strengthening of prudential regulations is needed to limit unhedged exposure to liquidity and exchange rate risk, improve evaluation of assets, and ensure efficiency and independence of audit procedures. 44. Progress made over the last two years to privatize public companies, modernize the public sector, and open the trade sector is commendable. The sttiwould encourage the authorities to move ahead with their plans to privatize services of ports and airports and to reform the social security system by allowing private sector participation in the pension system. 45. Guatemala’s statistical system is broadly adequate for surveillance and analysis, but problems remain in certain areas. In particular, there is a need to reduce delays and correct deficiencies in the provision of information on public sector revenue and expenditure, on balance of payments, and on the banking sector. Efforts should continue in addressing problems in the national accounts with help from the Fund’s Statistics Department. 46. It is proposed that the next Article IV consultation with Guatemala be held on the standard 12-month cycle. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 23 - Figure 1. Latin America and the Caribbean: Central Governmeut Expenditure on Education and Health and Total Revenues, 1996 (In percent of GDP) 12 10 -’ A Panama w 8- Bolivia Mexico 4 4 * Argentina 4 Belize 4 Honduras Jamaica 6- Chile % Costa Rica Paraguay 4 PerU Ecuador 4- 4. w El Salvador l Brazil UWPY e Guatemala l Venezuela 2- 0 1 I I I I I I I 6 5 10 15 20 25 Central Government Total Revenues 30 35 Sources: FAD statistics; and Fund staff estimates. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicFigure 2. Guatemala: Real GDP Growth Rates, 1991-1998 (In percent) f# GDP El Agriculture q Manufacturing El Services 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 I I;= I Sources: Bank of Guatemala; and Fund staff estimates. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 25 - Figure 3. Guatemala: Public Sector Indicators lombid Public Sector Balance In percent of GDP) 16 14 I2 IO 8 6 4 2 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 3 Combined Public Sector Balances (In percent of GDP) 2 -1 ,Central Government ‘ublic Sector External Debt h percent of GDP) ’ P (1 4’ 9’ I 5 -I I I I I , I I I , O 1 \ Total debt 991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 Sources: Central Bank of Guatemala; and Fund staff estimates. l/ In percent of exports of goods and nonfactor services. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 26 - Figure 4: Guatemala: Monetary Sector Indicators 30 - Monetmy Aggregates 25 - (12-month growth percentage rate) 20 - Jan-95 May-95 Sap95 Jan-96 May-96 Sep96 Jan-97 May-97 Sep-97 Jan-98 May-98 Sep-98 Jan-99 May-99 - Broad Money = Ml + !&wings + Time Deposits + Financial Obligations -cllrrency Issue 50 - Credit to the Private Sector (12-month growth percentage rate) 40- -Credit of lhe Banking System to tie Private Sector - Interest Rate for Loans 30 - 10 - 0 -I Jan-95 Nay-95 hp.95 Jm-96 May-96 Se996 Jul-97 May-97 sep-97 ha-98 thy-98 sql-98 JW-99 May-99 28 12 8 (In percent per annum) -BfUlkLoans -...-. Tie Dqmaits -Open Market Paper -I Jan-95 May-95 Sep-95 Jan-96 May-% Sep-96 Jan-97 May-97 S-97 Jan-98 May-98 Sep-98 Jan-99 May-9 Sources: Bank of Guatemala; and Fund staff estimates. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 27 - Figure 5. Guatemala: External Sector Indicators (In millions of U.S. dollars) 1400 1200 1000 800 600 400 200 Net lntemational Reserves (NIR) l/ - - - NIR excl. privatization proceeds -NIR 0 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 l/ Excluding the central bank’s credit position with neighboring countries. 5000 4500 4000 3500 3000 2500 2000 1500 1000 500 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 O Sources: Central Bank of Guatemala; and Fund staff estimates. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicFigure 6. Guatemala: Exchange Rate Developments l/ (1990=100) 180 180 170 170 Real effective exchange rate 160 160 150 140 Nominal effective exchange rate Nominal effective exchange rate 130 120 110 100 90 80 4 80 Jun-94 Dee-97 Jun-98 Dee-98 Jun-99 I N co I Source: Information Notice System. l/ An increase (decrease) means appreciation (depreciation) Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 29 - Figure 7. Guatemala: Medium-tern Macroeconomic Indicators, 1996-2006 1998 2004 1 ( ( I , , 2 19% 1998 ktemal cumt A h percmt ,,f G~~~~ i;‘i;liiii’i:i’f~ie . . . ..___._.. A.. -5 1996 1598 2000 2002 2004 2006 -b 19% 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 Sources: Central Bank of Guatemala; and Fund sttiestimates and projections. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 30 - Table 1. Guatemala: Compamtive social Indicators l/ Glutada CostaRica ElSbador Honduras Nicaragua theCaribbeau Rank in UNDP Human Dovelopmcnt Index (out of 174 Lxxmtrk) (1999) People not expected tc Iwvive to age 40 ( In percent of populaticul) (1997) Life expccawy (1997) Infkutmortality (per 1000 live bittb) (1997) Pcpulation without acccas to aafk water (1990-97) Pcpulation without accmn to health seavices (1981-92) Population wittlout - to z?lmitdon (1990-97) Primtuyscboolnetcnmllmcnt(1P97)31 secondery school net ulrollmcnt (1997) 31 Ratio ofthe per capita inallne ofthe richest 20perccnttcthcpacapitaincomeofthe poorest 20 parent ofthe pcpulation Pcrccnbge of pcpulation below the poverty line (1989-1994) 41 117 45 107 15.6 4.0 10.9 64.0 76.0 69.1 43.0 12.0 31.0 23.0 4.0 34.0 40.0 17.0 33.4 73.8 34.9 30.0 12.7 15.1 13.1 3.0 16.0 4.9 91.8 55.8 10.0 23.0 89.1 36.4 58.0 11.0 38.0 53.0 50.0 . . . 114 121 11.5 12.4 69.4 67.9 36.0 42.0 24.0 38.0 38.0 . . . 26.0 65.0 *.. 36.6 87.5 78.6 36.0 50.5 9.9 69.5 33.0 22.0 . . . 29.0 12.8 93.3 65.3 Source: UNDP Human Dwclopmcnt Repcat 1999. l!~figurrsmightdiffa~~C~ldata~someofthemuntria~ofdiffamar indcfmition. ~Paeentageofpopuldionl~~mdowr~donotbKnvtorerda~. 31 Rtgistcmd students -pondii to a spccifk school grade as perceatage oft&l population oftbe same age group. 41 Povelty line is d&cd 81) a lcvcl of iucomc insu5cimttopurchnsesomaprrddcrmiaed basicquantity Of@3OdSMdS8fVices. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-31- Table 2. Guatemala: Selected Economic Indicators Avsrage Prel. Est. Proj. 2000 1989-1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 Passive Active outpedP* GDPatco&antprices GDP deflator GDP per capita &osumcrprices(endofpcriod) lllves8mf!nt and savbqs Gross national savings Glussdomcsticinvestmmt PllbltcfbMnce Comb&l public sector balance (- deficit) 11 Overall balance of the non6naocial public s&or (deficit -) Foreignthncing Domestic tinming Not&Guancial public sector savings central govemm altlwalue Qfwhich Tax rcvmue Central government expenditure Public debt Extemal public debt (end of period) Domestic public debt (end ofperiod) Extemal sector Ew of goods and nonfactor savices Impoh of goods sod nonfhctor services Cunellt amount oftk balance of payments Gross ma-vea (in months of next-year’s imports of goods and services) 21 Money and credit Liabiliiicatoprivatesmtor(lmkingsystcm) Net domestic assets of&e ba&ingsyTtem Ofwhich hdit to nonfmancial public scotor cdii ta private sector 3.9 4.9 2.9 19.9 8.7 8.9 1.0 2.0 0.0 21.2 8.6 10.8 In percent of GDP, unhs otherwise specified 10.4 11.0 9.8 15.4 15.1 12.7 -2.5 -0.9 -0.1 -1.3 0.1 1.1 1.2 -0.2 0.1 0.1 0.2 -1.2 2.0 3.0 4.3 8.7 8.6 9.2 7.5 7.9 8.7 10.1 9.5 9.4 24.7 17.9 18.5 23.5 16.0 15.2 1.2 1.9 3.3 10.5 10.5 14.0 16.0 -0.6 -2.1 0.2 -1.7 1.9 1.6 -2.1 0.1 4.4 3.7 9.2 9.9 8.8 8.9 9.3 10.1 12.2 12.9 18.1 17.5 20.3 14.7 15.2 17.8 3.4 2.3 2.5 18.5 19.1 17.6 -24.9 -25.4 -22.5 -5.1 -4.1 -2.9 . . . 1.8 2.0 Auoual pcwntage changes 3/ 17.9 18.2 -23.6 -26.5 -3.5 -5.5 2.2 2.8 25.9 14.7 13.7 15.5 13.3 16.7 17.2 10.8 9.1 9.7 -2.2 -3.5 4.4 -6.7 -11.1 11.8 19.9 7.5 13.5 19.4 4.4 5.1 3.4 3.0 4.0 8.2 6.8 6.6 7.3 5.5 1.5 2.2 0.5 0.1 1.1 . 7.1 7.5 6.6 9.0 5.6 9.4 9.1 11.4 14.6 13.7 15.9 -2.8 -2.8 -1.3 -2.5 -2.4 -1.1 2.3 1.3 1.8 0.2 1.1 -1.1 2.7 2.2 4.4 9.8 9.6 11.9 9.0 11.3 12.7 13.6 . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19.2 20.4 20.3 -26.9 -27.3 -29.5 -5.2 -4.5 -4.5 2.4 2.1 3.3 10.0 9.5 13.6 10.7 11.9 6.4 0.5 1.8 -6.3 11.6 10.3 13.3 sourc$s: FkulkofGUtMlal a; Minishy of Finance; and Fund &&mates and projections. l/ Includes central bank losses. 2/ Excludes claims on Nicaragua (K&l45 million, or equivalent to 0.8 percent of 1999 GDP), which arc included in the official statistics~ 31 In relation to the stock of liabilities to the private sector at the begitming ofthe period. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-32- Table 3. Guatemala: Operations of the Combined Public Sector (In percent of GDP) plol. Bet. Pmj. 2000 1995 19% 1997 1998 1999 P&U Act& Total revenue TiUC- Direct taxes Ill-t taxeJ TaXUNXSUed Nartu-d- TOW expawJlturea cmwlturpcndihtra WSgOS.SlldIhlh Goodear~dwrvicea Illtcmst TlXNfkl cspanlwrpendi- Of which FiXCd@hlfomUhIl Current mcomt balance (deficit -) Overmll balaace (deficit -) l/ Flnsnclng Extcmal (net) Domatic (net) sale of aswa Comblned public rectar bhnce cuKcntoccoutlt N-pllbllCrsctor celltralgovummcllt Rest of the mnhancirl public sector BankofGuatcnUlaloslct Comblned publlc cector lhnchg Exlcmal (n*) Foreign loam (net) Fomign grenta ~-(n~chmgc) Boll&d debt Dotllcstic (net) BMryrtan Bmkoft3uetm& Commer&be& Bonded debt Chngc in floahng debt sac of eesb Memorendum Itenx GDP (in million of quazek.s) I. catral calv ennlaltopantkllu U6 9.2 9.2 1.9 8.7 8.8 1.7 21 22 6.3 6.6 6.7 0.7 0.5 0.4 9.5 9.4 10.1 6.8 6.7 62 3.0 2.8 2.7 0.8 0.8 0.9 1.3 1.2 0.8 1.7 1.9 1.8 2.1 2.7 3.9 1.3 1.3 1.7 1.8 2.5 3.0 -0.6 -0.2 -0.5 0.6 0.2 0.5 0.1 0.5 2.1 0.5 -0.3 -1.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 II. Combined Public Skctor Operathr -0.9 -0.1 -0.6 2.1 3.1 3.1 0.1 1.1 0.2 -0.6 -0.2 ‘-0.5 0.7 1.3 0.6 -0.9 -1.2 -0.8 0.9 0.1 0.7 -0.2 0.1 1.9 0.1 0.3 0.5 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.2 -0.1 0.0 -0.5 -0.1 1.4 1.1 0.0 -1.3 0.3 0.0 -0.6 0.3 -0.6 -1.5 -0.1 0.5 1.0 0.4 0.9 -0.4 0.4 -0.9 -0.3 0.0 0.0 0.0 9.9 8.9 2.0 7.0 9.8 9.3 2.2 7.1 1.0 0.6 9.6 11.9 9.0 11.3 20 2.0 7.1 7.2 0.0 21 0.6 0.6 12.2 12.9 12.7 13.6 7.5 8.2 8.5 8.6 3.1 3.0 3.2 3.2 1.1 1.7 1.7 1.7 1.1 1.4 1.5 1.5 2.2 22 2.1 2.1 4.7 4.6 4.1 4.9 1.8 2.5 1.7 2.6 2.4 1.6 1.1 3.2 -2.5 3.1 -3.0 -1.7 2.5 3.1 3.0 l.7 1.6 2.4 1.6 2.1 -2.2 0.7 0.7 -1.2 3.1 0.0 0.8 0.8 -2.1 -2.8. -2.8 -1.3 3.0 2.1 1.6 3.8 -1.7 -2.5 -2.4 -1.1 -2.5 -3.1 -3.0 -1.7 0.7 0.5 0.6 0.6 a.3 -0.2 -0.3 -0.3 2.1 2.8 2.8 1.3 1.6 2.3 1.3 1.8 1.2 1.4 0.9 1.3 0.1 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.3 0.5 0.0 0.0 -2.7 0.4 0.6 -1.3 -2.9 0.3 0.8 -1.2 -2.6 0.5 1.5 -0.8 -0.3 -0.1 -0.7 -0.4 0.3 0.1 -0.1 -0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 3.1 0.0 0.8 0.8 85J56.7 95.495.0 107.873.4 121J27.3 133.511.8 147,X?2.2 1*489.1 Sources: Minkby of Fiie; Bank of Guaknudq end Fund staff estimatea and projections. l! InchIdea mriatical dhcrcpmcy. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-33 - Table 4. Guatemala: Central Government Expenditure by Function 1995 1996 1997 Prel. 1998 Est. 1999 (In millions of quetzales) Total 8,096.g 8Q36.6 10,916.g 14,828.0 17,202.8 Internal security 353.1 13.6 418.4 561.3 968.9 Defense 779.0 1,060.6 801.3 894.3 844.6 . social sectors 3,699.9 4,042.7 5,725.7 8,224.5 9,694.5 Current 2,440.4 2,539.6 3,144.4 4,174.8 5,871.4 Capital 856.4 1,096.6 1,668.6 3,221.5 2,267.7 Education 1,411.9 1,504.6 1,899.9 2,697.9 2,991.2 Health 750.5 805.6 1,105.8 1,859.8 2,115.5 Social security and welfare 599.8 632.5 782.1 1,218.4 1,608.5 Housing and community services 534.6 693.5 1,025.2 1,620.2 1,423.9 Social funds 403.1 406.5 912.7 828.2 1,555.4 Education 60.1 67.9 190.3 339.4 453.3 Health 31.7 81.9 181.0 219.7 294.0 Other expenditures through social funds 311.3 256.7 541.4 269.1 808.1 Economic services 1,224.3 1,517.3 2,257.3 2,747.9 3,147.g Agriculture 141.7 141.7 141.7 141.7 141.7 Transportation and communications 224.9 224.9 224.9 224.9 224.9 Electricity 3.2 3.2 3.2 3.2 3.2 other 21 13.3 13.3 13.3 13.3 13.3 Other 302.1 225.1 97.1 120.0 90.9 (In percent of GDP) Total 9.5 9.4 10.1 12.2 12.9 Internal security 0.4 0.0 0.4 0.5 0.7 Defense 0.9 1.1 0.7 0.7 0.6 Social sectors 4.3 4.2 5.3 6.8 7.3 Current 2.9 2.7 2.9 3.4 4.4 Capital 1.0 1.1 1.5 2.7 1.7 Education 1.7 1.6 1.8 2.2 2.2 Health 0.9 0.8 1.0 1.5 1.6 Social security and welfare 0.7 0.7 0.7 1.0 1.2 Housing and community services 0.6 0.7 1.0 1.3 1.1 Social funds 0.5 0.4 0.8 0.7 1.2 Education 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.3 Health 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.2 0.2 Other expenditures through social funds 0.4 0.3 0.5 0.2 0.6 Economic services 1.4 1.6 2.1 2.3 2.4 Other 0.4 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.1 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 34 - Table 4. Guatemala: Central Government Expenditure by Function PrYA. Est. 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 (In percent of total) Total 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 Internal security 4.4 0.2 3.8 3.8 5.6 Defense 9.6 11.9 7.3 6.0 4.9 social sectors 45.7 45.2 52.4 55.5 56.4 cnrrent 30.1 28.4 28.8 28.2 34.1 Capital 10.6 12.3 15.3 21.7 13.2 Education 17.4 16.8 17.4 18.2 17.4 Health 9.3 9.0 10.1 12.5 12.3 Social security and welfare 7.4 7.1 7.2 8.2 9.3 Housing and community services 6.6 7.8 9.4 10.9 8.3 social fimds 5.0 4.5 8.4 5.6 9.0 Education 0.7 0.8 1.7 2.3 2.6 Health 0.4 0.9 1.7 1.5 1.7 Ok expenditures through social funds 3.8 2.9 5.0 1.8 4.7 Economic services 15.1 17.0 20.7 18.5 18.3 Other 3.7 2.5 0.9 0.8 0.5 Sources: Ministry of Finance; and Fund stafT estimates. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-35 - Table 5. Guatemala: Summary Accounts of the Monetary Authorities 1995 19% 1997 Pd. 1998 Est. Proj. 3000 1999 Pa&e Active Exchange rate (Quetzales/U.S. dollars) 6.0 6.0 6.0 6.0 7.0 7.0 7.0 Net oftkid reserves II (In millions of U.S. dollars) Netdtirrseg NCtCiSlh~-Cid public sector -govennnent Rcsl of nonhncial public sector Esank of Ghanala losses Netcmdittobanh Of which Resaves 21 Open mruket operations 31 Medium -and long- term foreign liabilities 0th asset.9 (net) Currency hue Net officinl reserves II (In millions 0fU.S. dollars) -1,412 -1,232 -976 4,534 4,837 4,512 4,459 4V=o 5,476 (Flows in milliom of quciAes) -943 Loss 1,721 -157 176 287 1,456 -630 243 -90 Net do& auetr Net claims on nonfmancial public sector Bank of Guahnala losses NetCPXlittObdS of which Reserves 21 Open market operations 31 Medium - and loag- term foreign liabilities otba assets (net) 1,324 -698 -1,06!3 -625 1,417 -613 -1,496 -2,736 -2,247 357 1,682 794 1,139 a32 409 277 503 128 -463 -1,244 1,159 1,164 -269 180 -437 -1,228 1,009 806 -369 -600 676 -360 2,150 -144 -552 0 0 305 180 257 182 33 303 -324 16 Currency hsse 381 361 656 831 (Stocks in millions ofquekales) 2,961 4,019 s741 494 670 957 1,498 800 -265 -1,6OJ -3,100 -5,836 -8,083 -7,725 -6,044 -9,335 285 -629 -2,692 -5,979 -5,622 -3,940 -7,23 1 -1,889 -2,472 -3,144 -2,104 -2,104 -2,104 -2.104 5,844 6,983 7,815 8,223 8,501 9,003 8,908 -3,83 1 -4,294 -5,538 -4,379 -3,215 -3,484 -3.815 -3,954 -4,392 -5.620 -4,611 -3,805 -4,174 -4,405 -2,032 -2,392 -242 -387 -943 -943 -943 7,191 7.767 w@ 10531 1,200 1,110 915 1,462 -890 -673 15% -2J21 -794 -755 -602 -602 4,528 3,466 3,466 3,466 w7 7,094 7,804 7310 -1559 -194 2,069 2,465 352 -1,649 -1,609 407 -600 171 153 153 0 0 0 787 710 816 (12-month perccotage change over the stock of currency issued at the beginning of the period) Net domestic assets Net claims on nonfiicial public sector Bank of Guatemala losses 32.5 -17.1 -22.1 -11.4 22.5 -15.0 -36.7 -56.8 -41.0 5.7 19.5 27.9 17.3 7.5 4.4 29.2 -23.2 23.7 -22.7 7.1 5.7 Currency issue 9.3 &8 13.6 15.2 12.5 10.0 11.5 Sourcca: Bank of Guatemala; and Fund siafTestimates and projections. 1/ Excludes claims on Nicaragua (USS145 million, or equivalent to 0.8 percent of 1999 GDP), which are included inthe official stat&tics. 2/ Iocludes ca& deposih and remunerated reserves. 3/ includes open market placements with the fuurncial and nonfinancial private sector. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-36- Table 6. Guatemala: Summary Accounti ofthe Baking System 1995 1996 Prel. Est. Proj. 2000 1997 1998 1999 MW Aotiw Exdunge rate (~al/u.S. dollam) Net for&n an& l/ NcLlhlW!dCuwg NOtClSiUkSOIl- pubhaecku -govamaad Rest ofne&mncid public Be&of-losses creclittoprivatesectorand othmilnMmds2/ --bw Medlvm-uwllon@am fonipl llabllltle!s L&bult&s to the prhte sector M-Y Qu- Net fore&n aimeta I/ NC4dOlWJtkSSWtS Net clsims on nonfmancial publicsector Bankof-losses cdittoprivatesector mxlotkh~2/ 0th assets (net) Medium- and losq-tenn foldgnlhblutiea Lhbilitles ta the pdvate sector Molly 6.0 6.0 6.0 (StO&illdliOMOf~) 1,714 2,167 3,567 22399 24,616 26,922 -1,493 -2,475 4182 528 10 -1,193 -2,021 -2Ja5 -2,989 J,= 6983 7,815 15,601 17J68 20,700 26,395 30,269 34.032 3s.146 2,247 2,840 2,589 W-Q 1.235 658 603 1458 1,361 1,120 a395 25&2 29,369 7,670 8,764 11,293 14,686 16,658 18,076 (Flowa iu millions of quatzales) -043 452 1,- 3943 &417 a3045 -677 -982 -1,707 -3,254 182 794 1,139 832 409 277 3,886 1.667 3,432 5,695 3.874 3,762 4.876 -660 593 -25 1 13 -784 -576 -632 -366 -197 -241 2,866 3,066 3947 761 1.094 2,529 2,105 1,973 1,418 6.0 7.0 7.0 7.0 4407 29,786 32,7Sl 3,783 37.115 7591 3w99 -7,436 -7254 -6,579 -9,558 -5,028 -4,183 -2989 -5,792 -2,407 -3.071 -3J90 -3,766 8,223 8.501 9,003 8,908 903 955 802 802 =J90 36m &M 4&5@3 12,914 14,257 15,731 15g10 20,376 22.365 24,365 25,677 840 2,863 315 3849 -1,044 4464 675 503 -2,304 407 -217 -90 3920 3332 1,621 1,343 2900 1,989 -153 -153 3474 4I966 1.474 1,654 2,000 3,312 11.9 6.4 (12-month percentage change over initial &ock of liabilitim to the private sector) Net dome& asseta 17.2 10.8 9.1 9.7 10.7 Net claims a~ nonfiicial public sector -3.5 -4.4 -6.7 -11.1 0.5 cdittopriwtesedor 19.9 7.5 13.5 19.4 11.6 Liabilitie3tothc@mtes&or 14.7 13.7 15.5 13.3 10.0 g?LOIEY 10.8 3.9 4.9 8.8 9.9 5.6 7.8 5.5 6.0 4.0 Munonuuhm~itant (l2-m~pe-W -1 cTedittoprivatesectorand otberin- II 33.2 10.7 19.9 27.5 14.7 12.4 16.1 1.8 -6.3 10.3 13.3 9.5 13.6 4.0 4.5 5.5 9.0 l! Excludes claim an Niuragua (USS145 million, or +ivdd to 0.8 pawat of 1999 GDP), which an included in the official misti= 21 blcbJdescwdittotbepriwtesector8ndmnbank6Mtxial-es. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-37- Table 7. Guatemala: Summary Balance of Payments Pd. 1995 1996 1997 1998 Eu Proj. 2000 1999 Purive Active cmTent8eeomlt Tradebalmce y-&O;, Qfwhtch NCQltditiOMl sz 0i9 Fac4or semioa (net) Qfwhkh I&rat on publio debt otbu Nonhar WI TOlKhfOXipt8 Tourimueqenditum 0th Trenrpat otller Current traders (net) w&z Public sotor Dii .kwrtvAion Elands (Ila) Private sector 11 Bolanee of pymcnb ‘upport ovelnllbolanee Chmgcinnetoffioial-(-in -(-de=-=) Exports, f.o.b. Ofwhich Nohmditional lxnprta, 0.i.f. cluTentawount Trade mount Expor& f.o.b. lmpor& 0.i.f .smicu Interest ca public debt Plivatetnnders Capital aocwunt caicial trensfm public rector RiwtccqJitalintlowslI Memorradum Items: Grossracrvu Y Debt sewiw ratio 31 Interest -13: 21158 1.043 450 -914 2,232 955 -1zs is98 1.170 ::E is47 1.167 -931 -1,657 2m 1,022 -1% 3:110 1.107 579 473 616 581 572 554 554 1,114 1,277 1.428 1,680 1,785 1,852 2m3 -3,292 -3,146 -3,852 -4,651 -4.464 -4,464 4687 43 -64 13 63 48 -211 19 -172 -211 -228 -169 -230 -286 -286 -132 -141 -140 -41 -71 -a8 216 147 241 213 217 266 -141 -135 -119 144 65 94 27 40 52 117 26 41 491 528 611 -136 -32 231 314 -157 74 78 -4 705 1~49 71 234 326 -157 66 944 -170 -203 -203 -60 -83 -83 279 266 305 346 372 372 -166 -169 -172 98 64 105 73 78 80 25 -15 25 677 700 730 380 590 59 59 -145 -71 a4 92 -143 -149 -86 -13 466 602 35 -185 157 28 48 188 -176 -11 a89 a5 223 144 -171 250 581 30 289 -281 -2 30 243 -243 0 811 630 1.180 75 80 90 298 169 243 331 295 369 -128 -125 -125 96 0 0 438 381 847 30 0 0 -90 -194 352 90 194 -352 0 0 0 (~~P--%e~hP) 27.9 3.4 16.4 9.6 -1.4 5.4 lo.8 13.2 14.6 la.4 4.4 (In penmt of GDP) -4.1 -2.9 -7.7 -5.8 14.7 14.2 -22.5 -20.1 0.3 -0.4 -0.9 -0.9 3.4 3.4 2.8 4.1 0.4 0.4 -0.7 -0.1 3.2 3.8 ii.8 17.6 6.3 3.8 122 22.4 20.7 -4.0 0.0 5.0 -3.5 -5.5 -5.2 -4.5 -4.5 -7.1 -9.5 -9.2 -8.2 -8.6 14.6 15.0 15.6 16.1 16.9 -21.7 -24.5 -24.8 -24.3 -25.5 0.1 0.3 0.3 -0.1 0.1 a.8 -0.7 -0.9 -1.1 -1.1 3.4 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.0 5.2 6.7 4.7 3.4 6.4 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.5 1.4 1.4 1.8 0.9 1.3 3.3 5.0 2.4 2.1 4.6 1.8 2.0 14.3 10.9 4.7 5.1 9.6 5.9 2.2 2.8 16.s 14.4 4.4 3.9 Amorthtion 12.0 10.4 2.4 2.1 3.3 11.6 13.6 13.4 4.9 5.5 5.4 6.7 8.1 8.0 Sourom: Centxal Bank of Guakmala; and Fund staff c&m&s and projections. l/ includes - and omikns. In 1998 includea privatizatiomelatcd flow equivalent to 3 p-t of GDP and in 2000 equivalent to 0.8 percent of GDP. 2/ Excludu ohii on Nicaragua (USSl45 million, or equiyakntto 0.8 peroat of 1999 GDP), which (UT inoluded in the official atatistico. 31 Witbrqeottocxportsofgoodsandscwiocs. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-38- Table 8. Guakmah: Suxnmaxy of the Structure and Performance of the Financial Sector I/ Rd. Prd. JUIW 199s 19% 1997 1998 1999 NldWOfbMkS Majoritycitaowd(iopaomtoftotalasscls) Majority foreign~wncd (in percat oftotal assets) Forcigo blndlca (as a percent oftotal assets) Numbexofbanksacauhgforathst 15paantoftota.la.Wta 75 penxnt of total M6cta Banlc loam to the private sector 2/ 13.36 13.25 13.30 14.21 14.43 Credit to private s&or 2131 16.04 17.21 17.60 19.44 18.87 For+ currency-denominated assets (in percent of total assets) Tyhand off-balance shat accounts ( in percent oftotal assets) Forcigucurrcnoyden~d(inpercentoftotalassets) 12.30 13.13 13.45 13.07 10.70 4.14 5.38 3.69 4.38 3.47 Chtmlbankcredittobanks(cndofpaiod)2/ 0.16 0.12 0.08 0.13 0.15 Averagcprctaxrctumontotalasscts(inperccnt) Average financial spread 41 Merest rate spread in interbank market (in percent) LoaostbatareampelfbllIliqsubetandard,oroflowcr quality (in percent oftotal losns) Total provisions for loan losses (speciiic plus general) In percent ofnonpufolming loans hplXCUltotl0t?llloanS Risk-weighted capitalhct ratio 14.32 13.80 13.27 12.44 13.02 33 33 6.34 6.11 2.97 3 3 3 4 3 16 15 15 15 15 24.84 24.94 26.05 27.62 26.60 7.72 10.11 9.24 10.41 9.16 1.74 10.00 9.02 9.20 11.65 19.37 45.80 46.72 36.99 1.07 1.84 2.96 3.63 4.42 2.49 35 34 34 5.07 2.92 3.36 0.08 031 0.44 2.60 2.85 2.91 1.54 1.26 1.04 0.78 11.60 10.50 9.20 . . . 11.91 7.97 7.12 5.50 9.49 6.46 7.76 12.40 Foreign cumncy debt rating 5/ Ba2 Bs.2 . Souroes: Superintendency of Banks, Bank of -a, and Fund shffcstimatcs. l! The Guatemalau financial system cansi& ofthe central bank, 34 commcmial banks-including two branches offoreign banks and one majority fonigu-owned bank-sod 44 nonbank hancial intermediaries. In addition, there are credit unions, leasing, and hotming companies, and edit card companies. 2/ In percent of ammal nominal GDP. 31Includesbankloanstothcpaivatsssctor,seourities, andotherin~cnt5. 4 Spread between lending and deposit inter& rates calculated hmihe iname statement and the Wence sheet data of commercial banks. 5I Moody rated Guatemala for the fm time in July 1997 far long-term foreign cumncy bonds placed in the Euromaht Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 39 - Table 9. Guatemala: Summary of Public Extemal Debt Pd. Est 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 (In millions of U.S. dollam) Outstanding debt I/ hkdiim- and long-term debt Public sector Of which Bonds CGRFINA Bank of Guatemsla sht-term debt Public rector 21 Bsnk of Guatemala Am?amofintemst Debt fhn Dra* Public sector Bank of Guatemala BGP support Scheduled debt obligations Public sector CORPINA Bank of Guatemala Principal Public sector CGRPINA Bank of Guatemala Memorandum items: Stock of amxrs, end of period 31 bltmst Principal Outstanding debt Medium term Shortterm Of which BsnkofGuatemala Debt flows DraWitlgS Scheduled debt obligations blterest Principal Memorandum items: Stock of atrears, end ofperiod Total debt service Interest ZJ47.7 2379.9 2,620.2 t,g76.1 3304.3 2J43.9 2,200.4 2.369.1 2558.8 . . . 1,507.g lJ81.9 1.820.8 2,030.g . 38.3 39.4 189.4 189.4 . . . 379.1 378.8 377.8 377.8 . . . 256.9 239.7 170.5 150.1 . . . 203.8 179.5 251.1 317.3 .*. 85.4 70.0 163.1 239.1 . . . 44.1 30.3 9.8 0.0 . . . 74.3 79.2 78.2 78.2 . . . 158.4 123.4 0.0 35.0 399.7 131.5 86.6 20.3 24.6 268.2 213.4 2.3 52.5 139.5 91.5 0.0 48.0 302.9 140.6 99.8 20.2 20.6 162.3 114.7 1.7 45.9 635.5 624.3 559.4 604.1 594.1 529.4 1.3 0.0 0.0 30.1 30.2 30.0 522.7 496.5 401.2 140.2 136.4 170.0 119.4 121.9 160.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 20.8 14.5 9.5 382.5 360.1 231.2 297.1 305.9 205.4 2.0 0.0 0.0 83.4 54.2 25.8 115.8 73.2 42.6 (In percud of GDP) 16.0 14.6 1.4 104.3 103.2 103.2 . . . 78.3 78.1 78.1 . . . 26.0 25.1 25.1 . . . 14.7 15.2 17.8 13.3 13.5 . . . 1.4 1.7 . . . 2.3 15.2 14.0 1.1 2.0 0.9 1.9 0.9 1.0 0.7 0.5 0.2 1.4 1.2 1.1 2.7 0.9 1.8 3.6 3.3 2.9 2.6 0.8 0.7 2.2 1.9 0.8 0.5 0.3 0.6 0.4 0.1 0.5 0.4 0.1 14.4 3.9 . . . 3.1 2.2 0.9 1.3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . (In percent of exports of goods and nonfactor services) 14.3 10.9 4.7 5.1 9.6 5.9 16.5 4.4 12.0 10.4 Principal Sources: Table 50; and Fund staEcstimatcs. 11 includes aRears and valuation adjustments. 21 lmludes bonded debt. 3/ Includes CORFINA (Spain). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4o- Table 10. Guatemala: Indicators of Extend Vulnerabili~ PA. EaL 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 manddindkaton ~dmateyl2~paoolltyDDohagc) Privaausor0ralit(12montllpcroaab(gonhmgc) cadTalbmkpaparyield(mmilml)1/ CmtnibmkPqmqield(rul)I/ Danatiopublioamtordabt(inporocntofGDP)Z’ 14.7 13.7 15.5 13.3 9.4 33.2 10.7 19.9 27.5 14.6 22.2 18.0 9.2 11.8 22.0 12.6 6.5 2.0 4.0 14.2 5.4 5.7 3.3 2.4 3.4 . Eatandlndhton -npmb(12-mollthpa#lmpcbaee) -impab(l2QordhP==w4=t?a Tamsuftnds(12-maathpawntqeo4mgc) Chmtwoountbahoc(ipaumtofGDP) C+almountbahoe(iipawntofGDP) Net intandonsl nacrvca 31 Inmiuiom 0fu.s. dohl IllpWClltOfh,f2 ~P=-of~moasy InporcmtofbslsmollGysndcultrslbankpqla lnpawatofbawnlocuy,ocntrilbank~end golmmmtdcbtwitb~~ lnpercmtdlborttama&btonaRmmining~tybslil Gromilhlmtiavl~3/ InnKmlthofncxt-y&~imparIs0fgoodBandrcrvicu ccmlmema baokl foreign auetl (ii miIli0r.u 0fu.s. dollan) Cosmwmisl bmh foreign liabiitiw (ia milliona of U.S. dolh) Publio motor atonal debt (ii paocnt of GDP) 41 Extamalintsrostpeymcntlinpwcultofaxpo~ ofgood!4andtarviMa 27.9 3.4 16.4 9.6 -1.4 18.4 -4.4 22.4 20.7 -4.0 15.4 -9.8 6.8 6.0 -10.4 -4.1 -2.9 -3.5 -5.5 -5.1 2.8 4.1 5.2 6.7 4.6 493.5 669.9 956.8 1.199.5 1.109.5 15.1 18.3 21.9 26.4 25.9 36.8 46.9 56.4 78.8 85.7 29.3 36.7 55.1 7s.9 78.8 27.3 34.6 49.4 65.5 64.7 81.6 93.5 115.2 122.1 118.8 1.8 2.0 2.2 28 2.4 56 16 70 59 72 266 385 421 474 449 16.0 15.2 14.7 15.2 17.8 4.6 5.0 4.8 3.8 4.8 eJmlthtion~ymcntsiQpcnxnt0fcxpoti ofgoodsandmvicu 9.3 5.7 13.1 10.1 6.5 Public rector and fumoial a&or external debt (in paucnt of GDP) 18.8 17.7 17.3 17.2 19.9 Red @wtivc oxohmgc rate dqweoiation (-) 51 -4.6 128 8.1 -4.5 -14.4 l/Eadofpaiodiater&ratafor18Odaybon&. For1999,cnd-Septemkrintenltntcfor90-&y~ds(~ 18O-daybmdswm di8conbucd). 2/ Inohda caltd govammlt dcbtwithrai~~g&bt,~dopennurkctpapcroftheBunkof~ 3/ Exoh&a ohinn on Nioarqna (f-M145 million, or equivaknt to 0.8 m of 1999 GDP), whioh am inohbd in the 05ohl at&h. 4/Inohpdcr oenhl gowmmcnt, pllblio antapircq adB&llkOfG&UDh. SI End of period 12-month pcrcaage obmge. For 1999,12-amtb pcrcenttgo ohangc ending in Sqtcmbm. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 11. Guatemala: Medium-Term Projections - Current Policy Scenario: Low Tax Ratio Rd. Est. Ro+tcd 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 Red GDP growth Inlhtion rate ICOR sdngsandfavedlment Gl-OSSdOXW#iCillVCSMUlt Public Ofwhkh ccntralgovcmmcnt Rivate National savings Public Ofwhich -govmnnna Private Public mctor Overall balance combiicd public sector FiIXWhg Extad (4 Domestic (net) sale of &9scts Centml govenunent Revenues Of which Tax revenues EXpCIlditWCS Of which Social and other peace related Extend sector current accouxlt Of which Expotts, Eo.b. Impotis, c.i.f. capitalaccount oflicialcapital Privateseetor Gros.sintemationalrescrvesl/ 2.9 4.4 5.1 3.4 3.0 3.0 2.9 2.9 2.9 2.9 2.9 10.8 7.1 7.5 6.6 9.0 9.5 10.0 9.8 9.5 9.2 9.0 4.4 3.2 3.1 4.3 4.6 4.7 4.8 4.8 4.8 4.8 4.8 (In percent ofGDP) 12.7 14.0 16.0 14.6 13.7 14.0 13.7 13.7 13.7 13.9 13.9 3.2 4.1 5.1 4.9 4.4 4.7 4.3 4.1 3.7 3.4 3.1 2.7 3.9 4.7 4.6 4.1 4.5 4.0 3.8 3.5 3.2 3.0 9.5 9.9 10.9 9.7 9.3 9.3 9.4 9.6 10.0 10.5 10.8 9.8 10.5 10.5 9.4 9.1 9.2 9.5 9.8 10.2 10.7 11.2 3.1 3.1 3.0 2.1 1.6 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.5 3.0 2.4 1.6 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.5 1.8 2.0 2.3 6.7 7.4 7.5 7.3 7.5 7.5 7.6 7.7 7.9 8.2 8.5 4.1 -0.6 -2.1 -2.8 -2.8 -3.0 -2.4 -2.0 -1.4 -0.9 -0.4 0.1 0.6 2.1 2.8 2.8 3.0 2.4 2.0 1.4 0.9 0.4 0.1 1.9 1.6 2.3 1.3 1.7 1.6 1.1 0.7 0.2 0.0 0.0 -1.3 -2.7 0.4 0.8 -0.6 0.8 0.9 0.7 0.7 0.4 0.0 0.0 3.1 0.0 0.8 1.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 9.2 9.2 9.9 9.8 9.6 9.6 9.5 9.6 9.7 9.9 9.9 8.7 8.8 8.9 9.3 9.0 9.0 8.9 9.0 9.1 9.3 9.3 9.4 10.1 12.2 12.9 12.7 12.9 12.2 11.9 11.4 11.1 10.6 4.2 5.3 6.8 7.3 7.8 7.9 7.8 7.7 7.5 7.2 6.9 -2.9 -3.5 -5.5 -5.2 -4.6 -4.8 -4.2 -3.9 -3.5 -3.2 -2.7 14.2 14.6 15.0 15.6 16.4 17.0 17.3 17.9 18.2 18.6 18.9 -20.1 -21.7 -24.5 -24.8 -24.7 -25.4 -24.8 -24.6 -24.3 -24.3 -24.2 4.1 5.2 6.7 4.7 3.5 5.1 4.1 3.6 3.2 2.8 2.5 0.3 1.9 1.6 2.3 1.3 1.7 1.6 1.1 0.7 0.2 0.0 3.8 3.3 5.1 2.4 2.2 3.4 2.5 2.5 2.5 2.6 2.5 2.0 2.2 2.8 2.4 2.1 2.2 2.1 1.9 1.7 1.4 1.3 Sounx Fund s&&&mates and projections. I/ In months of imports of goods and services. Excludes claims on Nicaragua (uSS145 million, or equivalent to 0.8 percent of 1999 GDP), which arc included inthe official statistics. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-42- Table 12. Guatemak Valium-Tam Projections - Improved Policy Scenario: High Tax Ratio FA. Eat. Projected 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 RmlGDPgmuth 2.9 4.4 5.1 3.4 4.0 4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.8 Iunauonntc 10.8 7.1 7.5 6.6 5.6 5.1 3.7 3.3 3.0 2.7 2.5 ICOR 4.4 3.2 3.1 4.3 4.0 3.6 3.6 3.5 3.4 3.4 3.3 ssvinpuIdfnvutaDmt GlWldOUK4C- Public Ofwhich -govarrment Private 12.7 14.0 16.0 14.6 15.9 17.1 17.5 17.8 18.2 18.6 19.0 3.2 4.1 5.1 4.9 5.1 5.7 5.7 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 2.7 3.9 4.7 4.6 9.5 9.9 10.9 9.7 National savings Public Ofwhich -gownrmeslt Rivak 9.8 10.5 10.5 9.4 3.1 3.1 3.0 2.1 4.9 5.2 5.2 5.2 5.4 5.6 5.9 10.8 11.4 11.8 12.1 12.3 12.5 12.7 11.4 12.4 13.0 13.5 14.2 14.8 15.5 3.8 4.1 4.5 4.8 5.2 5.6 6.0 2.5 3.0 2.4 1.6 3.2 3.3 3.8 4.2 4.5 5.1 5.7 6.7 7.4 7.5 7.3 7.6 8.3 8.5 8.7 9.0 9.2 9.5 F+ubIkleetor Gvuallbalanceannbinal public scdor Financiog Extmlal (net) Dc4ncstic (act) Sale ofassets -0.1 -0.6 -2.1 -2.8 -1.3 -1.6 -1.2 -0.9 -0.9 -0.5 -0.3 0.1 0.6 2.1 2.8 1.3 1.6 1.2 0.9 0.9 0.5 0.3 0.1 1.9 1.6 2.3 1.8 1.8 1.7 1.6 1.2 0.8 0.5 0.0 -1.3 -2.7 0.4 -1.4 -2.1 -0.5 -0.7 -0.3 -0.3 -0.2 0.0 0.0 3.1 0.0 0.8 1.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 cMtdgcwerlmlmt RCVCEllJa Ofwhich Tax revenues E- ofwhkh SOCidMdOtb~pC&X&td 9.2 9.2 9.9 9.8 8.7 8.8 8.9 9.3 9.4 10.1 12.2 12.9 4.2 5.3 6.8 7.3 11.9 12.4 12.8 13.2 13.4 13.9 14.3 11.3 11.8 12.2 12.6 12.8 13.3 13.7 13.6 14.2 14.2 14.2 14.3 14.4 14.5 8.3 8.7 9.2 9.6 10.0 10.3 10.6 Extendaector chnTaltaocount Ofwhtch Expoh, Eo.b. Import& 0.i.f. capiw- GfEcialcqitalandtransik Privateff&or -2.9 -3.5 -5.5 -5.2 4.5 4.7 -4.5 -4.3 4.0 -3.8 -3.5 14.2 14.6 15.0 15.6 16.9 16.6 17.6 18.5 19.3 20.1 20.9 -20.1 -21.7 -24.5 -24.8 -25.5 -24.7 -25.3 -25.6 -26.1 -26.6 -27.0 4.1 5.2 6.7 4.7 6.4 7.5 5.0 5.1 4.8 4.6 4.3 0.3 1.9 1.6 2.3 1.8 1.8 1.7 1.6 1.2 0.8 0.5 3.8 3.3 5.1 2.4 4.6 5.7 3.3 3.5 3.6 3.8 3.8 GWSiflhll&oMlnssrvcSlI 2.0 2.2 2.8 2.4 2.3 3.1 3.0 3.1 3.1 3.2 3.5 Source: Fund staEcstim&s and projections. II ln months of imports of goods and aervices. Excludes claims on Nicaragua (USSl45 million, or equivalent to 0.8 percent of 1999 GDP), wilich am inobided in the o&ill ltatisticl. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-43- APPENDIX I Guatemala: Fund Relations (As of October 3 1, 1999) I. Membership Status: Joined: December 28,1945 Status: Article VIII II. General Resources Account: SDR Million Percentage of Quota Quota Fund holdings of currency 210.20 100.00 210.21 100.00 III. SDR Department SDR Million Percentage of Allocation Net cumulative allocation 27.68 100.00 Holdings 8.31 29.40 IV. Outstanding Purchases and Loans: None V. Financial Arrangements: Type Approval Expiration Date Date Amount Amount Approved Drawn (SDR Million) (SDR Million) Stand-by 12/18/92 03/l 7194 54.00 0.00 Stand-by 1 O/26/88 02/28/90 54.00 23.16 Stand-by 08/3 l/83 1213 l/84 114.75 57.38 VI. Projected Obligations to the Fund (SDR million; based on existing use of resources and present holdings of SDRs): Overdue Forthcominp 09/30/99 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 Charges/interest 0.0 0.2 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 Total 0.0 0.2 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-44- APPENDIX I VII. Exchange Rate Arrangements In March 1994, Guatemala abolished the system of daily foreign exchange auctions and direct surrender of export proceeds to the central bank, and adopted a system based on an interbank foreign exchange market in which authorized financial institutions buy and sell foreign exchange at market-determined rates. Financial institutions author&d to operate in the foreign exchange market include commercial banks, finance companies, and exchange houses. The central bank is supposed to . intervene in the market only to moderate exchange rate fluctuations as well as to purchase foreign exchange to service its own external debt and in behalf of the public sector. As of October 3 1,1999 the exchange rate in the interbank market was Q 7.8 1 per U.S. dollar. VIII. Last Article IV Consultation The last Article IV consultation was concluded by the Executive Board on May 27, 1998 (EBIW98/57; the relevant documents were W/98/94 and Z&4/98/95). Guatemala is on the standard 12-month consultation cycle. IX. Technical Assistance In September 1998, an STA mission assisted the Bank of Guatemala to improve the methodology and procedures for compiling the analytical accounts of the banking system. In March 1999, an STA mission provided technical assistance on national accounts and price index. In May 1999, an MAE mission assisted the authorities on assessing banking soundness, and followed up on implementation of previous MAE recommendations on prudential regulations, and offered views on the advantages and risks of greater dollar-i&ion of the economy and the needed conditions for moving to a currency board arrangement. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-45- APPENDIX II Guatemala: Relations with the World Bank Group I. FINANCIALRELATIONS (In millions of U.S. dollars) A. IBRD/IFC Operations (as of October 31,1999) Agriculture Education Electric power and other energy Of which chixoy Environment Finance Structural adjustment Public sector management Social protection Telecommunications Transportation Urban development Water supply and sanitation Total Of which Repaid principal’ Debt outstanding* IFC Investments3 Disbursed Undisbursed 4.0 23.0 61.3 22.1 194.8 0.0 116.6 0.0 0.0 31.0 16.8 0.0 120.0 0.0 18.1 81.2 37.7 62.3 69.2 0.0 64.9 61.7 34.1 0.0 3.6 0.0 624.5 281.3 384.9 230.7 68.4 14.3 ’ Including amounts sold to third parties (US$5.8 million). * Including valuation changes (-8.9 million). 3 Includes only loans and equities currently held or to be held by the International Finance Corporation as of July 1999. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-46- APPENDIX II B. IBRD Loan Disbursements 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 Total net disbursement -15.3 -26.3 55.9 4.3 15.2 27.8 Gross disbursements 28.9 13.3 68.9 16.5 29.5 38.6 Principal repayments 44.1 39.5 13.0 12.2 14.3 10.7 II. RECENT IBRD ACTMTIES As of October 3 1, 1999, the IBRD portfolio in Guatemala contains 11 investment projects for a total commitment of US$355.1 million, of which US$28 1.3 remains undisbursed. Four of these projects (Fonapaz, Judicial Reform, Social Investment Fund, and the Land Administration Project) were approved during 1998 and the most recent one (the Land Fund Project) was just approved in January 1999. All projects are rated satisfactory. In addition, three new loans are currently being prepared: the Low Income Urban Settlements Improvement Project (US$l O-20 million), the Basic Education Reform IV (US$25-35 mil- lion), and the Competitiveness Enhancement Project (US$7-12 million), The Country Assistance Strategy Report (CAS) was presented to the Board of Directors on June 1998 (Report No. 18036). The most recent report prepared was the “Financial Markets in Rural Areas” study, circulated to the Board on January 1999 (Report No. 18853) and a public expenditure update is expected to be published at end-1999 on “Expenditure Reform in a Post-Conflict Country.” Future economic and sector work is anticipated in different areas, such as Poverty Reduction (based on a LSMS Poverty Assessment) and Environmentally Sustainable Development (from a Natural Resources Management Study). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 47 - APPENDIX III Guatemala: Relations with the Inter-American Development Bank (As of October 3 1, 1999) I. IDB CURRENTPORTFOLIO (In millions of U.S. dollars) Sector Approved Social sectors 420.2 246.4 Community development 278.1 164.7 Credit to micro-enterprises 11.8 5.8 Environment 54.6 50.5 Housing 60.3 15.1 Education 15.4 10.3 Physical infrastructure 155.0 28.4 Agriculture 33.8 33.4 Reform loans 172.7 56.8 Infrastructure and investment 107.5 29.3 Health 38.6 3.1 Customs 1.4 0.7 Justice 25.2 23.7 Emergency Assistance 40.0 6.7 Technology development 10.7 10.6 Total 832.4 Undisbursed 382.3 A. IDB Loan Disbursements 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 Disbursements 50.2 18.3 23.1 114.1 42.8 37.3 100.9 146.6 Amortization 77.2 26.8 29.1 33.3 36.2 50.1 42.6 45.5 Interest and charges 42.3 27.5 29.1 29.4 30.0 36.0 31.7 33.7 Net cash flow -69.3 -36.0 -35.1 ‘51.4 -23.4 -48.8 26.6 67.4 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-48- APPENDIX III II. RECENT ECONOMIC AND SECTOR MISSIONS In 1998, the Bank approved a justice sector reform program loan (US%25 million), a social investment fund loan for the eastern regions (US$90 million), an agriculture reconversion loan (US$33 million), and a natural disaster emergency loan (US$40 million). About 98 percent of projects have no major execution problems, and are expected to meet their development objectives. For 1999, the Bank has approved a loan to support technology development, and is preparing operations to modern& the road system, to support municipal development, and to improve health services. For 2000, the Bank is preparing operations to support financial reform, pension reform, education reform, electricity transmission, and programs to improve environment in the Lake Atitlan area and to promote sustainable watershed management. The operations tentatively scheduled for approval in the period 1999-2000 amount to US$804 million. A. Tentative Schedule of Disbursements 1999 2000 2001 2002 Disbursements 163.6 193.9 221.9 154.8 hnortization 47.5 43.7 39.0 40.4 Interest and charges 48.6 63.3 76.9 88.5 Net cash flow 67.5 86.9 106.0 25.9 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 49 - APPENDIX IV Guatemala: Statistical Issues In general, Guatemala’s statistical information petmit a reasonable monitoring of economic developments. The authorities are very cooperative in providing data to the Fund in a timely fashion, in some cases on a daily basis (see the Core Statistical Indicators). However, recently, important delays have emerged related to commercial banks statistics. In addition, there are important deficiencies in the area of national accounts and prices, and in the information on public finances. The authorities are addressing some problems in national . accounts, monetary accounts, and balance of payments statistics, in line with the recommendations of recent STA missions in 1998 and 1999. National accounts statistics Guatemala’s national accounts are produced by the central bank based on the 1953 UN System of National Accounts methodology and using 1958 as the base year. National accounts statistics are limited in coverage to calculations of (1) GDP at constant (1958) prices by sector of origin, and (2) GDP at both constant and current prices by final demand components. Data are published annually with preliminary results available with a lag of about three months. With the assistance of a UN statistical advisor, the central bank is implementing the 1993 SNA methodology and changing the base year to 1998. STA provided technical assistance in August 1997, a follow-up mission on national accounts during January 1998, and March 1999 to review progress in implementing the 1993 SNA methodology. Further assistance from STA is planned. Alternative CPIs are compiled by the Bank of Guatemala (BG) and by the National Statistics Institute (NSI). STA has recommended to suspend the compilation of the CPI by the BG because of its low representativeness and to avoid confusion among users. The CPI compiled by the NSI uses weights based on consumer expenditure surveys undertaken in 1979 and 1981 and it has a coverage limited to Guatemala city. Weekly and monthly data are available on a timely basis. The introduction of new CPI weights based on consumer expenditure surveys conducted in 1999 is in process. Monetary statistics Monetary authorities’ data are being compiled on a monthly basis and sent regularly to the Fund for publication in IFS. In January 1995, the superintendency of banks introduced a new accounting system for commercial banks and nonbank institutions. Monthly monetary data for commercial banks and other banking institutions are also sent regularly to the Fund for publication in IFS albeit with a longer lag. The BG has received technical assistance from the Fund to improve the compilation of data for the banking system, and the authorities are implementing these recommendations. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 50 - APPENDIX IV Government finance statistics There are recurrent problems in reconciling the fiscal balance from above the line with the information on financing flows. More recently, the lag in the reporting of statistics on revenue and expenditure of the central government has decreased but significant corrections to preliminary figures lack substantiation. Overall, public sector statistics are not compiled on regular basis by the ministry of finance because data on revenues and expenditure of the major public enterprises (INDE and GUATEL) and the Social Security Institute (IGSS) are available with long lags. While progress has been made in adopting the new accounting framework for the budget, little work has been made in improving statistics of the social security and public enterprises. Balance of payments Balance of payments data are prepared quarterly and compiled to the extent feasible according to the principles of the fifth edition of the Balance of Payments Manual (BPMS). Estimates are recorded in U.S. dollar terms to address the coverage gaps in the foreign exchange records. The central bank has designed a number of enterprise surveys for merchandise trade, services, direct investment, and private capital flows. These surveys have gradually supplemented and, in some cases, replaced the information obtained through the banks’ foreign exchange records. Overall Guatemala’s balance of payments statistics present a more detailed breakdown since 1995, but coverage of the financial account is still incomplete. The authorities are implementing the recommendations of the 1997 STA technical assistance missions. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicGuatemala: Core Statistical Indicators (As of October 3 1,1999) Central Bank BahutCe Sheet Broad Money Overall External Current Govern-ment Debt/ Resend Base Money Interest Rates Consumer Price In&x Exchange tional Rates Reserves Exports/ Account Imports BalarICe BalallCe GDP/ Debt Service GNP 10l29i99 11/01/99 D I o/07/99 8l99 =F 11/02/99 1 omf99 I o/07/99 I o/07/99 F 1 l/02/99 11/02@9 Date of Latest Observation 10129199 1 l/01/99 W 9i99 9/13/99 M 1 o/29/99 11/0209 D D A E/C C D Date Received I W I W Frequency of Data M A 0 0 A A C C D D Q A D W M & A A W W A A + C C Frequency of Reporting M A C D A W A C D M A A A A C/E civ C D A A Source of Update A E/C D Mode of Reporting C C D D !k M M C C L D M Confidentiality Frequency of Publication M I/ D-daily, W-weekly, M-monthly, Q-quarterly, A-annual, or O-other (only when requested). 2/ A-direct reporting by central bank, ministry of fmance. 3/E-electronic data transfer, C-cable or facsimile, T-telephone, M-mail, V-staffvisits, or O-other. 4/ (A) for use by the staff only, (B) for use by the staff and the Executive Board, (C) for unrestricted use, (D) embargoed for a specified period and are thereafter for unrestricted use, or Q subject to other use restrictions. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 52 - APPENDIX V Public information Notice (PIN) No. FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE International Monetary Fund 700 lgth Street, NW Washington, D. C. 20431 USA IMF Concludes Article IV Consultation with GUATEMALA On ----, the Executive Board concluded the Article IV consultation with Guatemala.’ Background During the 1990s Guatemala has recorded growing per capita income and some progress in improving social conditions, but extreme poverty continues to be widespread and the income distribution is highly skewed. With the signing of the UN sponsored peace accords in December 1996, the authorities outlined a program to mobilize domestic resources to address social problems and raise human capital and productivity, thus creating conditions to put the economy on a higher growth path. However, the governments social program has moved at a slower- than-anticipated pace because of lagging mobilization of resources and problems of implementation capacity. The macroeconomic setting improved in 1995-96 reflecting the pursuit of prudent fiscal and monetary policies, supported by trade and exchange system liberalization and by financial sector reform. By contrast, in 1997 the authorities shifted to expansionary fiscal and monetary policies in an attempt to promote faster economic growth. On the fiscal side, rising social expenditure was not matched by increased revenue and the position of the combined public sector shifted progressively from equilibrium in 1996 to a deficit of more than 2 percent of GDP in 1998. Monetary policy was eased first by the nonrollover of maturing open market paper, and in 1998 by a gradual reduction of reserve requirements. Nonetheless, as a result of an increase in public sector deposits at the central bank associated with privatization proceeds, net ’ Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial information, and discusses with officials the country’s economic developments and policies. On return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the country’s authorities. In this PIN, the main features of the Board’s discussion are described. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-53 - APPENDIX V international reserves rose to US$1,200 million (gross reserves were 2.8 months of imports) in December 1998. From 1996 to 1998, the expansion in domestic demand resulted in an increase in the rate of real GDP growth (to more than 5 percent in 1998), but also in a widening of the external current account deficit (to XX percent of GDP in 1998). Downward pressures on the quetzal intensified beginning in the third quarter of 1998 because of the curtailment of banks’ external credit lines in the wake of the turmoil in international financial markets, declining prices for Guatemala’s main exports, and the adverse effects of Hurricane Mitch. Developments in 1999 point to a slowdown in economic activity to 3% percent, while the 12- month inflation rate is projected at 6-7 percent by year’s end, the current account deficit is estimated to remain at about 5’% percent of GDP, and the deficit of the combined public sector is expected to widen further. Monetary policy has continued to be expansionary as the central bank reduced reserve requirements further and extended loans to several banks and other financial institutions confronting problems. To moderate the resulting downward pressure on the quetzal, in the year through October 1999 the central bank sold some US$700 million in the market. Despite this intervention, the quetzal depreciated by 17 percent in real effective terms between June 1998 (when the real effective exchange rate peaked) and October 1999. This depreciation offset the real appreciation of the quetzal that had occurred during the previous two years. In the structural area, 60 percent of the state power company (EEGSA), the telephone company, and the national distribution company were privatized in 1998. In addition, the authorities are implementing a computerized financial management framework (IFMS) aimed at modernizing key areas of budgeting, cash management, auditing, and procurement in the public sector. The national assembly approved a law creating a deposit insurance scheme for small depositors and establishing a general framework to deal with insolvent banks, and reformed the banking law to strengthen prudential regulation and supervisory oversight; however, these laws are currently under a constitutional appeal. Executive Board Assessment <Begin Typing Here> Pub//c /Nonnation Notices (PINS) are issued, (i) at the request of a member country, following the conclusion of the Article IV consultation for countries seeking to make known the views of the IMF to the public. This action is intended to strengthen IMF surveillance over the economic policies of member countries by increasing the transparency of the IMF’s assessment of these policies; and (ii) following policy discussions in the Executive Board at the decision of the Board. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 54- APPENDIXV Guatemala: Selected Economic Indicators l@Bti 1998 1907 Pd. 1Baa Est. lfiag Output and prices (annual percentaqe chanqas) GDP at constant p&es GDP deflator GDP per capita Consumer prices (end of period) 4.9 2.9 4.4 5.1 3.4 8.7 8.9 8.2 8.8 8.8 2.0 0.0 1.5 2.2 0.5 8.8 10.8 7.1 7.5 6.6 investment and savings (in percent of QDP) Gross national savings Gross domestic investment 11.0 9.8 10.5 10.5 9.4 15.1 12.7 14.0 16.0 14.8 Public finance (tn percent of GDP) Combined public sector balance (defklt ) ll Overall balance ofthc nonfinancial public sector (def=it -) Foreign financing Domestic financing Nonfinancial public sector savings Central government revenue Of which Tax revenue -0.9 -0.1 -0.8 -2.1 -2.8 0.1 1.1 0.2 -1.7 -2.5 -0.2 0.1 1.9 1.6 2.3 0.2 -1.2 -2.1 0.1 0.2 3.0 4.3 4.4 3.7 2.7 8.8 9.2 9.2 9.9 9.8 Central government expenditure 7.9 8.7 8.8 8.9 9.3 9.5 9.4 10.1 12.2 12.9 Extsmal sector Exports of goods and nonfactor servkes Imports of goods and nonfactor services Current account of the balance of payments External public debt (end of period) Gross liquid reserves (in months of next year’s imports of goods and services) 2/ 19.1 17.6 17.9 18.2 19.2 -25.4 -22.5 -23.6 -26.5 -26.9 4.1 -2.9 -3.5 -5.5 -5.2 18.0 15.2 14.7 15.2 17.8 1.8 2.0 Money and credit {annual percentage changes) 3/ Liabilttles to private sector (banldng system) Net domestic assets of the banklng system Of which 14.7 13.7 17.2 10.8 Credit to nonfinancial publk sector -3.5 -4.4 Credit to private sector 19.9 7.5 2.2 15.5 9.1 -6.7 13.5 2.8 2.4 13.3 9.7 -11.1 19.4 10.0 10.7 0.5 11.6 Sources: Bank of Guatemala; Mink&y of Finance; and Fund staff estlmstes. II Includes central bank losses. 21 Excludes claims on Nicaragua (USSl45 mllllon, or equivalent to 0.8 percent of 1999 GDP) which are included in the official staBtics. 31 In relation to the stock of liabilities to the private sector at the beglnning of the period. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public