DOCUMENT OF INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND NOT FOR PUBLIC USE MASTER FILES ROOM HQ C-525 0450 sM./99/101 CONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION ’ May 5,1999 To: Members of the Executive Board From: The Secretary Subject: Togo-Staff Report for the 1999 Article IV Consultation Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the stti report for the 1999 Article IV consultation with Togo, which is tentatively scheduled for discussion on Friday, May 21, 1999. Mr. Harris (ext. 36621) or Mr. Dark (ext. 34021) is available to answer technical or factual questions relating to this paper prior to the Board discussion. Unless the Documents Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the WTO Secretariat on Thursday, May 13, 1999; and to the African Development Bank, the European Commission, and the West African Economic and Monetary Union, following its consideration by the Executive Board. Att: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicCONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND TOGO Staff Report for the 1999 Article IV Consultation Prepared by the Staff Representatives for the 1999 Consultation with Togo (In consultation with the Legal, Monetary and Exchange Af%irs, Policy Development and Review, Statistics, and Treasurer’s Departments) Approved by Amor Tahari and Jesus Seade May 4, 1999 l Consultation discussions were held in LomC during February 3-17, 1999. l The principal government representatives were the Prime Minister, Mr. Kwassi Klutse; the Minister of State responsible.for Finance and Privatization, Mr. Barry Moussa Barque; the Minister of Planning, Mr. E.H. Tidjani-Dourodjaye; the Minister-Delegate in the Ministry of Finance and Privatization, Mr. Assiba Amoussou-Guenou; the Minister of Economic Restructuring and Administrative Modernization, Mrs. Essivi DjokpC; and Mr. Ayewanou Gbeasor, National Director of the BCEAO. l The mission team consisted of Messrs. Harris (head), Briancon, DorC, Mathisen, and OssiC (all AFR), and Mrs. Kabedi-Mbuyi, Fund Resident Representative in Togo. Mr. Kpetigo, Advisor to the Executive Director for Togo, participated in the meetings. l During the 1998 Article IV Consultation, Executive Directors expressed concern about the weakness in treasury procedures and expenditure control. They urged the authorities to ensure effective management of the cash-flow situation and cautioned against any recurrence of domestic or external arrears. They also called for expeditious implementation of the privatization program and the planned reforms in the financial sector, and of the legal and regulatory framework. * Togo’s outstanding use of Fund resources was equivalent to SDR 67.4 million (91.8 percent of quota) at end-March 1999. Togo has accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4, and has formally consented to the increase in its quota to SDR 73.4 million under the Eleventh General Review of Quotas. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2- Contents List of Acronyms BCEAO Central Bank of the West African States CIMA Inter-African Conference on the Insurance Market CIPRES Inter-African Conference on Social Security CNSS National Social Security Fund FINSAC Financial Sector Adjustment Credit (World Bank) OI-IADA Organization for the Harmonization of Business Law in Africa OTP Togolese Phosphate Offrce PAL Autonomous Port of Lom6 PAGED Support Program for Management of Education PAREP Support Program for Public Enterprise Restructuring PNASA National Support Program for the Agricultural Sector SOTOCO Togolese Cotton Society SYSCOA West African Accounting System WAEMU West African Economic and Monetary Union Page Executive Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 I. Introduction.. . . . . . ,.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , , . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ._. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5 II. Background to the Discussions and Recent Developments .......................................... .6 A. Macroeconomic Developments ............................................................................ 6 B. Fiscal Developments ......................................... .;. ............................................... .8 C. Developments in Money, Credit, and the Banking System.. ................................. .9 D. Structural Measures ........................................................................................... 11 III. Report on the Policy Discussions ............................................................................... 13 A. Macroeconomic Outlook for 1999 ..................................................................... 13 B. Public Finance.. .................................................................................................. 15 C. Financial Sector and Banking Issues ................................................................... 19 D. Structural Issues ................................................................................................ 21 IV. Statistical Issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22 V. Staff Appraisal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ,....., . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ._. .., . . . . . . .._. 23 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3- Boxes 1. Components of the PAREP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ,.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .., . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .12 2. Medium-Term Outlook-An Indicative Scenario .,.................................................... 14 3. Togo’s Position Relative to WAEMU Convergence Criteria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .17 4. Fiscal Transparency and Governance in Togo.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18 Figures 1. Selected Economic Indicators, 1992-2000 . . . . . . . . . . , , . , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .26 2. Investment and Savings, 1992-2000,. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , _. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .27 3. Effective Exchange Rates and Terms of Trade, January 1992-December 1998 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ,_. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ._. ._, . . . . . 28 Tables 1. Education and Health Spending, 1996-98 ................................................................ 16 2. Fund Position During Period of Arrangement, 1996-98.. .......... ............................... 29 3. Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 1996-200 1 ........................................ .3 0 4. Investment-Savings Balance, 1990-2001 ................................................................ .3 1 5. Central Government Operations, 1996-200 1 .......................................................... .32 6. Central Government Revenue, 1996-200 1 ............................................................... 33 7. Monetary Survey, 1996-98 .................................................................................... .34 8. Balance of Payments (In billions of CFA francs), 1996-2001 ................................. ..3 5 9. Balance of Payments (In millions of U. S. dollars), 1996-200 1 ................................ .3 6 10. Indicators and Fund Credit, 1995-2007 .................................................................. .3 7 11. External Debt Outstanding and Scheduled Debt Service, 1996-2000 ...................... .38 . Appendixes I. Relations with the Fund .......................................................................................... 39 II. Relations with the World Bank Group .................................................................... 41 III. Statistical Issues .................................................................................................... .43 IV. Selected Demographic and Social Indicators ........................................................... 47 V. An Analysis of Structural Budget Balance.. ............................................................ .48 VI. Public Enterprise Restructuring and Privatization, 1998-99 .................................... .50 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Publica . . . , -4- EXECUTMC SUMMARY A. Background Real GDP contracted by 1 percent in 1998 (after expanding by 4.3 percent in 1997), reflecting poor weather conditions, the energy crisis from February to May, political uncertainty, and the deteriorating ’ fiscal position. Average inflation dropped from 5.3 percent in 1997 to 1 .O percent in 1998 as most food prices fell more than usual. The external current account deficit (excluding official transfers) remained at 7.3 percent of GDP in 1998; however, with a deterioration in the capital account, the overall balance of payments registered a substantial deficit in 1998, that was financed in part by the accumulation of external payments arrears. The a ti & ublic finance situation deteriorated significant1 tenin r in 1998 as revenue shortfalls were not countered by 1997 to a t of current expenditures. The primary ba ante moved from a surplus of 0.5 percent of GDP in eficit of 1.3 percent in 1998, and the overall budget deficit (on a payment order basis) rose to 6.7 percent of GDP, compared with the program target of 3.5 percent. The situation of the banking system worsened alarmingly in 1998 as a deepening liquidity crunch was compounded by a deterioration in the quality of the loan portfolio, particularly in the claims on some of the ublic ente bar&wasin&! rises, and bank profitability declined. At end- 1998, only one of the seven commercial 1 compliance with the prudential ratios established by the regional banking commission. The implementation of structural reforms was mixed. The privatisation program has stalled, and reforms in other areas, such as administrative and civil service reform, are still in the preparatory stage. B.. Outlook for 1999 A considerable strengthening of the fiscal situation is required to avoid further burdening the banking sector, and to prepare for the eventual resumption of external assistance. In particular, urgent action IS required to bring public expenditure in line with available resources. Immediate action is also required to bolster the situation of the banks in the short term, pending more fundamental reforms in the context of the World Bank-supported financial sector adjustment credit, which is under preparation. Steps must be taken to reinvigorate the structural reform program, particularly in the areas of pnvatization, and administratrve and civil service reform, and in the preparation of the financial sector reform. C. Staff Position A considerable effort will be needed to bring the fiscal situation back under control; in particular, the authorities should meticulously manage the cash flow, establish a suitable track record over the next few months, and meet the conditions for initiating discussions on a new Fund-su conditions include a significant strengthening of treas arrears, and the avoidance of new domestic and extema “y management, the P ported program. These c earance of multilateral payments arrears. The authorities must avoid any developments that could precipitate a full-fledged banking crisis and should reach agreement on the financial sector restructurmg program as soon as possible, so as to launch the necessary rehabilitation of the banking sector. A considerable strengthening of ground, build private sector co np erformance in the area of structural reforms is needed to make up lost rdence, and create an environment conducive to investment and growth. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public. -5- I. INTRODUCTION 1. The 1998 Article IV consultation, together with the midterm review of the third annual arrangement under Togo’s Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility (ESAF)-supported program, was completed on January 21, 1998. At that time, it was expected that discussions on a successor three-year ESAF arrangement would be initiated soon after the current ESAF arrangement expired at end-June 1998. However, the weaknesses in treasury procedures and expenditure control noted by Executive Directors deepened during the first quarter of 1998, in part owing to the preoccupation of the political authorities with the preparation of the presidential elections scheduled for June 1998. At the same time, Togo’s economy suffered from the effects of the energy crisis that occurred during the first quarter of 1998 and adversely affected revenue performance, as well as from a slowdown in activity caused by the political uncertainty surrounding the presidential elections. 2. A staff team that visited LomC in May 1998 to assess the economic impact of the energy crisis assisted the authorities in designing an action plan aimed at rectifying the weaknesses in treasury management. The staff stressed that a marked improvement in this area, and in overall fiscal performance, would be necessary to facilitate the prompt initiation of discussions on a new program and urged the authorities to take immediate steps to avoid further slippages. 3. In the event, the policy response to the energy-related revenue shortfalls was not firm enough to prevent a deterioration of the public finance situation. Moreover, as key external donors have not yet resumed budgetary assistance to Togo, the rising fiscal deficit was financed in large part through borrowing from banks and public enterprises, as well as through accumulation of domestic and external payments arrears. These developments further weakened the commercial banking sector, which in 1997 had begun to show signs of improvement. A liquidity crunch . deepened into a severe crisis of confidence in the banking sector. 4. The 1999 Article IV discussions took place against the backdrop of political uncertainty in the run-up to the legislative elections, which has distracted attention from the conduct of economic policy.’ In the circumstances, the staff considered that it would be premature to begin discussions on a new program. However, with relatively poor prospects for the prompt resumption of external aid, the Togolese economy faces a very difficult public finance situation in the coming year, and great care will be needed to avoid further damage to the banking system in 1999. A major focus of the consultation discussions was thus the strengthening of the policy implementation needed to facilitate the start of program discussions as soon as possible. ‘The ruling party gained 79 of the 81 parliamentary seats in the elections, which were held on March 21, 1999 and were largely boycotted by the opposition in protest of the conduct of the presidential election in June 1998. As a result, discussions with the European Union on an eventual resumption of budgetary assistance, suspended since 1993, were not resumed. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-6- IL BACKGROUND TO THE DIWUSSIONS AND RECENT DEVELOPMENTS A. Macroeconomic Developments 5. After three consecutive years of strong growth, real GDP is estimated to have contracted by 1 percent in 1998 (after expanding by 4.3 percent in 1997). This contraction , reflected the adverse impact of poor weather conditions during the last half of 1998 on food crop production, as well as the effects of the February-May energy crisis on activity in the secondary and tertiary sectors.’ Not all branches of activity were equally affected, as larger firms were quickly able to reactivate or expand their own electricity-generating capacity.3 Phosphate production dropped by almost 15 percent owing to technical difficulties and the lower mineral content of the mines presently under exploitation. Some firms were able to take advantage of new export opportunities in the subregion, and activity in the free trade area remained satisfactory. However, the financial sector difficulties and the political uncertainty, as well as the run-up of domestic arrears by the government, hindered the recovery of activity in the second half of the Ye=* Sectord Growth, 199598 (In percent, 1978 prices) -5.0 J 1995 19% 1997 1998 0 Primcay Seder m Secondary Se&x [3 Ta&y Sector 6. Average inflation dropped from 5.3 percent in 1997 to 1 percent in 1998 as most food prices fell more than usual during the fall of 1998, owing to easing of cereal supply constraints Corn neighboring countries. Prices of transport, housing, and utilities were also relatively stable. The change in the 1998 GDP deflator showed a similar trend and is estimated at 2.7 percent in 1998, compared with the revised estimate of 11.4 percent for 1997). beginning in February 1998, Togo, Benin, and Ghana suffered from serious shortages of electricity, because of the effects of a regional drought on the production of hydroelectric power. Togo imports most of its electricity from Benin and Ghana. 3A limited customs exemption was granted in April to imports of generators. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-7- Togo: Mlatlon, January 1997-December 1998 (1996-100) 90 Jan-97 Apr-97 lul-97 act-m J.Sl-98 Apr-98 J&Y8 act-98 -m--Food products -+-Housing, wa~cr, and e@tricity -Consluncr Price Index 7. On the demand side, gross domestic investment declined from 14.9 percent of GDP in 1997 to 14.2 percent in 1998, as the higher rate of execution in the public investment program was outweighed by lower private investment. By contrast, consumption is estimated to have increased as a share of GDP in 1998 because of higher government spending, and gross domestic saving thus continued its downward trend to an estimated 7.5 percent of GDP from 8.4 percent in 1997. Consequently, the overall domestic savings-investment gap is estimated to have widened slightly from 6.5 percent of GDP in 1997 to 6.7 percent in 1998. -- A deterioating currentfkal position absorbs more of the private sector surplus . . . ;;;, 5 t 0 -- .---e...... _.- _ -5 I .------------ .- Govnnmrm .- swing .- 10 t . ...*- __-- 15 -! I 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 . . . while higherpublic investment cannot compensate the fall in private investment (In percent of GDP) Nqcwmmed invcs~~~nl -5 10 t 15 I 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-8- 8. Revised data indicate that export performance weakened in 1998, after a considerable improvement the previous year, reflecting the falloff in volumes of the major exports (with the exception of cotton). Import volumes rose by 3.6 percent,4 but the impact on the trade balance was limited by an improvement in the terms of trade of 2.8 percent, resulting from declining world market prices for petroleum products. The real effective exchange rate continues to fluctuate moderately around a relatively flat trend (see Figure 3). With a corresponding deepening of the , deficit of the balance of services, the external current account deficit (excluding official transfers) remained at 7.3 percent in 1998. 9. The capital account surplus was much smaller in 1998 (CFAF 9.5 billion compared to CFAF 54.5 billion in 1997), because of the lower level of external financial assistance.5 The balance of payments thus moved from a surplus of CFAF 11 billion in 1997 to a deficit of CFAF 34.3 billion in 1998. The deficit was financed in part by a reduction in Togo’s contribution to the international reserves of the regional central bank (BCEAO), which contracted by CFAF 11.3 billion (from the equivalent of 3.2 months of import cover in 1997 to 2.8 months in 1998), and by the accumulation of external payments arrears, including to multilateral institutions6 B. Fiscal Developments 10. Following a period of consolidation in 1997, the public finance situation deteriorated significantly in 1998 (Table 5). Revenue shortfalls were not countered by a tightening of current expenditures, so that the primary balance moved from a surplus of 0.5 percent of GDP in 1997 to a deficit of 1.3 percent in 1998. With substantially higher capital spending, the overall fiscal slippages relative to the program thus amounted to almost 3.2 percent of GDP, as the overall budget deficit (on a payment order basis) doubled to 6.7 percent of GDP compared with the program target of 3.5. percent. 11. Revenues were some 8 percent lower than projected (2 percent of GDP), in part owing to exogenous factors that weighed on economic activity. Receipts from taxes on salaries and on personal income declined due to the frequent enterprise closures and technical layoffs in some areas caused by the energy crisis. Fiscal contributions from the main public enterprises (at CFAF 6.4 billion) were only half the programmed level, owing to their cash-flow difficulties that resulted in part from the nonreimbursement of the value-added tax (VAT) payments due to the phosphate company (OTP). By contrast, indirect tax receipts were in line with projections, except for a shortfall in petroleum taxes, and customs duties performed reasonably well, reflecting the 4The import volumes in 1998 include additional imports of petroleum and electrical generators as a result of the energy crisis. ‘The surplus of 1997 also included the one-off inflow (CFAF 36 billion) related to the sale of OTP’s holdings in a foreign company. 6The multiyear Paris Club rescheduling arrangement expired in June 1998. Since then, Togo has accumulated arrears to Paris Club creditors. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-9- effects of recent measures aimed at reducing exemptions and strengthening customs administration. 12. Despite the weakness in revenue collections, overall expenditure exceeded the revised projections by 3.8 percent (0.6 percent of GDP) in 1998. The civil service wage bill was kept within program limits,7 but current expenditures exceeded budgetary appropriations, owing to poor control and monitoring of budget operations. A considerable amount of budgetary spending circumvented normal treasury channels, and there was also some election-related extrabudgetary spending equivalent to 0.5 percent of GDP.’ Capital spending rose by 50 percent from the low level of 1997, though there is still room for improvement in the rate of execution of the public investment program. 13. Management of the difficult cash-flow situation was further complicated by the use of current cash resources to clear outstanding arrears, so as to ensure the continuation of supplies. However, this led to the accumulation of new domestic arrears (1.7 percent of GDP), as well as external payment arrears9 The deficit (on a payment order basis and excluding grants) amounted to 6.7 percent of GDP, which was financed primarily by substantially greater recourse to domestic bank financing (see section C below). Domestic nonbank financing was negative, as. the anticipated privatization proceeds from the partial sale of OTP did not materialize.” External financing was low, as assistance from the European Union and key bilateral creditors (suspended in 1993 because of concerns about the democratization process) was not resumed. C. Developments in Money, Credit, and the Banking System 14. On the basis of revised data, Proad money expanded by 0.7 percent during 1998, although deposits in the banking system declined by 3 percent, reflecting the contraction of economic activity, as well as the loss of private sector confidence (Table 7).” Bank credit to the ‘Salaries to auxiliary teachers under the PAGED program, which are not included in the wage bill, rose above projections because of a surge in recruitment. ‘The stock of expenditures committed without corresponding payment orders (dkpenses engu@es non ordonnanckes, or DENOS) totaled CFAF 8.6 billion at end-1998, including CFAF 4.2 billion in identified extrabudgetary spending. As of end-March 1999, this amount had been regularized and imputed to the various budget categories. %ew external arrears (principal and interest) amounted to some CFAF 15 billion at end-1998 (1.7 percent of GDP), of which CFAF 3.5 billion to multilateral creditors. The arrears to the World Bank were cleared on April 12, 1999. The stock of domestic arrears is estimated at 3.4 percent of GDP. “At end-December, an exceptional transfer of CFAF 5.4 billion from the OTP and an advance tax payment of CFAF 1.8 billion by the cotton company (SOTOCO) were used to help pay civil service wages. There was also a considerable reduction in obligations to the utilities sector. “However, difficulties inherent in estimating the circulation of banknotes in a member of a monetary union still lead to considerable revisions of estimates of broad money. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- lo- private sector rose by 4.8 percent relative to end-December 1997,” while net bank credit to the government increased by 19.8 percent. In particular, the advances of the central bank, which had been considerably reduced at the end of 1997, again rose above the statutory ceiling. However, the resulting increase in the net domestic assets of the banking system (5.1 percent of beginning- of-period broad money) was partly compensated by a sharp decline in the net foreign assets of the banking system (4 percent of beginning-of-period broad money), resulting primarily from lower, export receipts and external financing. l3 15. The situation of the Togolese banking system deteriorated alarmingly in 1998.14 The energy crisis, together with the fall in export revenues, caused an increase in credit to the private sector, and, with a drawdown of private bank deposits, considerable pressure was exerted on the liquidity situation of the banks. These effects were compounded by the government’s difficulties in meeting its financial obligations toward private sector suppliers and by its own increasing recourse to bank financing. Faced with a deepening liquidity crunch, the banks resorted increasingly to refinancing from the central bank, until the BCEAO began to limit their access to the refinancing facility in August. I5 In this difficult context, there was a considerable deterioration in the overall quality of the loan portfolio, particularly in the claims on some of the public enterprises, which have not been fully serviced (loans to public enterprises comprise some 22 percent of total nongovernment credit). As a result, despite margins of 7-10 percent on lending rates, the profitability .of the banks declined, preventing them from constituting the necessary provisions for nonperforming loans. By end- 1998, only one of the seven banks was in full compliance with the prudential ratios established by the regional banking commission.r6 16. In view of its concerns about mounting inflationary pressures in the WAEMU, as well as the excess liquidity in the regional banking system and indications of rising capital outflows during the course of the year, the BCEAO tightened the stance of its regional monetary policy, increasing the auction of central bank bills, raising interest rates, and introducing country-specific changes to the reserve requirements. In August, the repurchase rate was raised from 5.5 percent to 5.75 percent, and the discount rate from 6.0 percent to 6.25 percent; meanwhile, the reserve ‘*At the same time, the relative share of medium- and long-term credit increased; however, this primarily reflected the reclassification of some doubtful short-term loans (see paragraph 34). r31n addition, speculation about a renewed devaluation of the CFA franc in the context of the introduction of the euro led to placement of funds outside the franc zone. r4See Chapter I of the forthcoming selected issues paper for a detailed description of developments in the banking sector. “The stock of BCEAO refinancing to Togolese banks rose from CFAF 4.2 billion at end-December 1997 to almost CFAF 11 billion in June 1998 before declining again to CFAF 5.2 billion at end-December 1998. 16Two of the banks failed to observe the own funds ratio, and four were not in compliance with the minimum average liquidity ratio. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- ll- requirement for Togolese banks increased from 1.5 percent at the start of the year to 9 percent. l7 The repurchase and discount rates were subsequently reduced in January 1999 to 5.25 percent and 5.75 percent, respectively, and the reserve requirement was brought back to 1.5 percent in December 1998. D. Structural Measures 17. Progress in the structural reform agenda on the whole was slow. The World Bank’s multifaceted Support Program for Public Enterprise Restructuring (PAREP) was launched in 1998, but the implementation of its various components was uneven, often reflecting delays in setting up the required administrative structures, hiring the necessary consultants, and completing preliminary studies and evaluations (see Box 1). There has been progress in the post and telecommunications component, particularly in the regulatory aspect, and in the area of public enterprise restructuring, with the preparation of performance contracts for the PAL (Port of LomC) and the CNSS (social security).” In the financial sector component, long-awaited diagnostic studies were completed, strategies for divesting from the financial institutions were defined, and considerable progress was made in the area of microfinance. Also, the analysis of the present judicial framework has been completed; and local texts are being harmonized with those of the OHADA. However, the privatization program stalled, as the partial sale of the OTP could not be completed,1g and tenders for bids of other enterprises, including the state-owned hotels, remained unsuccessful (see Appendix VI). Further activity in virtually all these areas had been blocked by the suspension of World Bank activities in Togo at end-December owing to arrears in excess of the 60-day limit.*’ “Coinciding with the BCEAO’s decision to reduce the access of the Togolese banks to the refinancing window, this exacerbated the liquidity situation of these banks. The tightening of monetary conditions in Togo reflected also the BCEAO’s concern over Togo’s deteriorating external position. “The authorities intend also to undertake an actuarial study of the social security system, in consultation with the CIPRES, in preparation for a fundamental reform of the entire system. lgThe bidder selected in early 1998 could not mobilize the necessary financing, and the initial offer of the second bidder was rejected as it implied granting substantial fiscal benefits. 2oUS$3.4 million was needed to clear the arrears to the World Bank at end-February, 1999. The full amount due was repaid on April 12, 1999, and the Bank lifted the suspension on April 14, 1999. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12- 18. Box 1. Components of the PAREP The PAFEP consists of four main components: . completing and extending the privatization program; . reforming the postal and telecommunications sector (establishment of the regulatory framework and the hberalization and partial privatization of the services); b restructuring the enterprises remaining in the portfolio; and 0 reforming the financial sector (including the privatization of banks and financial institutions, the transfer of the management of the public debt to the treasury; the promotion of microfinance institutions; and the development of a legal and judicial framework). The financial sector component is intended to serve as the basis for a financial sector adjustment credit still to be negotiated between the World Bank and the Togolese authorities. The authorities expect soon to complete their analysis of the structure of the public administration, which will aid in the formulation of a strategy for administrative decentralization and civil service reform.*l The authorities are reflecting still on revisions to the legislation to permit greater flexibility in recruitment procedures, a redefinition of the legal status of civil servants, and changes to the system of remuneration and advancement to include merit-based considerations. Provisions for voluntary early retirement are in place but have not led to significant numbers of departures. In other areas, the agricultural restructuring program supported by the World Bank &AsA) was successfully launched in the second half of 1998. The successful interim management contract of the electricity company drew to an end, and the authorities are evaluating the bids for the privatization of the company; meanwhile outstanding government arrears were settled by compensation. Similarly, the performance contract with the water company and the introduction of payment for water consumption at public taps in Lome, managed under concession by private individuals, has considerably improved that company’s financial situation. Finally, the mechanism for the adjustment of retail petroleum prices came into play, with two reductions in pump prices during the year.** Moreover, the structure of retail prices was changed to provide for a levy of CFAF 5 per liter, paid into a special account at the central bank and used to repay the arrears of the government to the petroleum distributors. At end-1998, CFAF 1.2 billion out of a total of CFAF 4.5 billion had been repaid in this fashion. : *lA law on decentralization has already been adopted by the parliament. The budgets of the local authorities will be based on a common nomenclature, with effect from the new budget year, and their oversight will be shifted from the Ministry of the Interior to theprkfectures. **The pricing structure is reviewed quarterly to determine if import price changes warrant varying the price at the pump. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13- III. REPORT ON THE POLICY DISCUSSIONS 20. The policy discussions took place against the backdrop of the severe deterioration of the public finances in the second half of 1998 and the loss of momentum in the structural reform program. The accumulation of domestic payments arrears and the resulting loss of private sector confidence have had a nefarious impact on the already weakened banking sector, Moreover, the, substantial new external payments arrears have complicated efforts to secure the necessary financing assurances for an eventual new program. The key policy challenge facing the authorities in the near term is to manage their domestic resources with extreme prudence, so as to avoid any further weakening of the public finances and the domestic financial sector. Over the medium term, a major improvement in the economic climate is required to shore up the confidence of Togo’s external partners and the domestic private sector, and to encourage the investment needed to accelerate and sustain growth. 21. The authorities were concerned about the difficult financial prospects for 1999 and strongly expressed the need for early agreement on a new Fund arrangement, arguing that Togo’s special circumstances should be taken into consideration. The staff noted that the conditions necessary for initiating discussion on a successor ESAF arrangement had not yet been met. In particular, the treasury action plan agreed on with the staff in May 1998 had still not been fLlly implemented, and a substantial improvement in budgetary procedures would be required to demonstrate the capacity to fully execute a program. Moreover, the authorities would also need to secure the necessary external financing assurances; This would entail establishing a plan to clear the outstanding arrears to multilateral creditors, and reaching agreement with the World Bank on the financial sector adjustment credit (FINSAC). A. Macroeconomic Outlook for 1999 22. For 1999, the authorities expect real GDP growth to rebound to 6.7 percent, as food crops should recover from the poor harvest in 1998. However, this projection is based on the assumption of no further accumulation of domestic arrears; a stabilization of the banking system; and the maintenance of the public investment program. Should any of these assumptions fail to materialize, the level of activity (and investment) in the secondary and tertiary sectors and, thus, overall growth, would be considerably lower than projected. This recovery is expected to have a relatively minor impact on the current account deficit (excluding grants), which is projected to deteriorate further to 7.8 percent of GDP in 1999 from 7.3 percent in 1998, owing to falling prices of the main export commodities (Box 2). Consumer price inflation is projected to remain modest, averaging 2.5 percent in 1999, while the change in the GDP deflator is expected to be only 1.1 percent, as the public utilities prices should be stable and industrial sector and export crop prices are projected to decline. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14- Box 2. Medium-Term Outlook-An Indicative Scenario In the absence of understandings on a strong policy framework that could be supported by an arrangement with the Fund, the staff made indicative projections based on some internal adjustments, particularly in the public finances. This indicative scenario is considerably less optimistic than that set out in the policy framework paper updated at the time of the third annual ESAF arrangement. The key features of this scenario are the following: . an average annual growth rate of 4.5 percent, well below the original target of 5.7 percent; . gross domestic investment of some 15 percent of GDP, . gross domestic savings that slowly rises from 8 percent of GDP in 1999 to about 11 percent in 2004; and . an external current account deficit that improves from 7.8 percent of GDP in 1999 to 4.2 percent in 2004. 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 Real GDP growth (in percent) 6.7 5.6 4.9 4.6 4.6 4.6 Gross domestic investment l/ 14.6 14.6 15.0 15.0 15.0 15.0 Gross domestic savings I/ 8.1 8.7 9.8 10.4 10.6 10.8 External current account I/ -7.8 -6.8 -5.5 -4.6 4.4 -4.2 A substantial share of the projected overall growth in this scenario is assumed to be in the secondary and tertiary sectors. Export growth is constrained by the narrow export base (principally cash crops and phosphates), while import growth would be moderate given the relatively low level of investment. This scenario assumes that the deterioration of the public finances is halted, and the banking sector stabilii. However, in the absence of a significant strengthening of policy, even this modest scenario would likely be unachievable. The projected growth is predicated on an investment ratio of 15 percent of GDP, one-third of which is public investment. To achieve this level of public investment under current policy settings, characterized by low external financing and weak confidence would imply either a drastic cut in other priority spending (which is neither politically nor economically sustainable), or a build up of arrears, which would prevent the private sector from realizing the assumed rate of investment, and thus reduce growth. However, if public investment is reduced, it is unlikely that private investment would reach the assumed 10 percent of GDP, given the complementarily of public capital outlays and private investment. The staff therefore considers that this illustrative scenario would be an insufficient base for the substantial increase in investment that Togo needs over the medium term to achieve sustained high growth rates. A more realistic medium- term scenario for higher and sustained growth would require a diversification of the export base and an increase in production in the secondary sector, implying a much higher investment. However, given the relatively low income levels, a substantial increase in domestic savings would be difficult to achieve in the absence of a considerabie improvement in the public finance situation- a strengthening of the financial sector would also be essential. Moreover, most of the additional investment should be from the private sector, which is generally more efficient at generating growth than public investment. Therefore, structural reforms need to be accelerated and intensified to create a conducive environment for private sector investment, and to mobiliae private capital from abroad to supplement domestic savings and investment. A policy environment thus strengthened is also more likely to garner the necessary support of the international donor community. Key elements of a policy package aimed at improving macroeconomic conditions would include the implementation of the treasury action plan to strengthen treasury management, a reduction in public expenditure to prevent the accumulation of new domestic arrears, the implementation of the planned reform of the civil service, the prompt application of the provisions of the OHADA treaty and other regional initiatives to foster private investment and consolidate economic security, the acceleration of the second phase of the privatization program, and the implementation of the financial sector adjustment program. 11 In percent of GDP. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 15- 23. The trade balance is projected to weaken in 1999, reflecting, inter alia, a deterioration ’ in the terms of trade of some 8 percent. Higher export volumes are expected to hold export receipts relatively stable, despite lower world market prices for the principal export commodities; meanwhile imports should register a modest increase, and the balance of services and transfers is expected to be broadly unchanged. The current account deficit, excluding official transfers, is thus projected to widen by 4i of 1 percentage point to the equivalent of 7.8 percent of GDP in 1999. In the absence of budgetary assistance, and with substantial private capital inflows unlikely, the capital account is projected to move into deficit, and the overall deficit of the balance of payments should thus widen by some CFAF 27 billion to CFAF 61 billion in 1999. Based on the projected variation of reserves and the scheduled net repayments to the Fund in 1999, a financing gap of CFAF 63.6 billion is projected. With the expiration of the multiyear Paris Club rescheduling arrangement in June 1998, the financing gap will be in part covered through arrears unless exceptional financing can be mobilized.23 B. Public Finance 24. The discussions focused on the fiscal outturn in 1998 and the revised outlook for revenues and expenditures relative to the 1999 budget. The authorities acknowledged that the budgetary situation had worsened considerably from a year ago but noted that this had resulted in part from exogenous factors (notably the energy crisis and the nonresumption of bilateral budgetary assistance). 25. The authorities attributed the revenue underperformance primarily to the energy crisis, which had worsened the cash-flow situation of firms. Part of the revenue shortfall could also be traced to the lower-than-expected yield from the newly introduced professional tax (TPU), which had replaced the payment of income tax (IRPP) for small taxpayers, and the new urban tax. The staff concurred with the authorities that the administrative reforms under way had began to bear fruit, as evidenced by the solid performance of VAT collections and customs revenues. However, in view of the low revenue buoyancy experienced during the program period, the staff noted that structural factors had also contributed to the .weak performance, namely, the shift in the tax structure that has occurred as a result of the recent tax reforms.24 There were also still problems in ensuring the reimbursement of the VAT to exporting enterprises, including the OTP. Moreover, it would be advisable to extend the system of treasury checks to all remaining tax exemptions. The staff encouraged the authorities to pursue their efforts to widen the tax base, and to reflect on ways to more effectively tax the informal sector, including the possibility of bringing agricultural value added or incomes into the tax net, to lighten the burden on enterprises in the formal sector and raise the tax-to-GDP ratio. 23A decision on Togo’s eligibility for assistance under the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Initiative could be reached in the context of the Board’s consideration of a request for a successor ESAF arrangement, possibly in the third quarter of the year. 24See Chapter II of the forthcoming selected issues paper. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 16- 26. On the expenditure side, the authorities conceded that not enough had been done to restrain spending in the face of the revenue shortfalls, but they insisted the effective expenditures had not exceeded the budgetary limits, with the exception of the identified election-related extrabudgetary outlays. They noted that the overshooting of nonwage primary expenditures relative to program limits primarily reflected increased outlays in the priority areas of education and health (Table l), as well as election-related spending. Personnel expenditures , remained within program targets, although the cash flow difficulties had delayed wage payments during the last quarter of the year.*’ The staff commended the authorities on their success in controlling the growth of the wage bill. However, in light of its size relative to current tax resources and given the need to comply with the regional fiscal convergence criterion on the wage-to-tax ratio (see Box 3), a comprehensive overhaul of the wage and compensation structure was required in the context of the planned global strategy for civil service employment. The mission encouraged the authorities to continue to exercise prudence in recruitment under the PAGED, noting that the entire cost of the program would revert to the budget when the contribution of the World Bank came to an end in 2001. Table 1. Education and Health Spending, 1996-98 1996 1997 1998 I/ Budget outturn Budget oumlm Budget OUthU-Il (In percent of total primary spending) Education (World Bank norm: 3 1 percent) Total 25.7 28.6 28.4 29.2 31.1 24.4 Of which: wage costs 16.6 19.6 19.6 21.0 22.7 18.9 Health (World Bank norm: 12 percent) Total 8.2 6.8 9.4 8.1 11.5 6.6 Of which: wage costs 5.1 4.7 5.1 4.9 6.0 4.2 (In percentage of GDP) Memorandum items: Education spending 3.97 4.40 3.92 4.04 4.60 3.61 Health spending 1.26 1.05 1.29 1.11 1.71 0.98 Sources: Togolese authorities; and staff estimates. l/Based on available information on payment orders issued through November 1998. Excludes health and education spending that remained to be imputed to budget categories at the end of the fiscal year. *‘The authorities explained that the arrears to PAGED teachers were primarily due to delays in properly registering the new recruits. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17- Box 3. Togo’s Position with Respect to WAEMU Convergence Criteria Togo’s position relative to the WAEMU’s fiscal convergence criteria at end-1998 stood as follows: l A ratio of the wage bill to tax revenue of 5 1 percent, against the norm of 50 percent or less. l A primary basic fiscal deficit equivalent to 10.3 percent of tax revenue, against the norm of a primary basic fiscal surplus exceeding 15 percent. l A level of public investment financed by domestic resources equivalent to 6.8 percent of tax revenue, against the norm of 20 percent or more. l An accumulation of new domestic arrears of CFAF 15.1 billion and external arrears of CFAF 15 billion, against the norm of a declining or unchanged level of domestic and external arrears. 27. In view of the difficulties encountered in 1998 in controlling and monitoring expenditures, considerable attention was devoted to treasury management (see Box 4). The authorities considered that substantial progress had been made in strengthening treasury management and interdepartmental coordination but conceded that some weaknesses remained. They agreed that the continued use of exceptional payment procedures complicated cash-flow management; however, they observed that this was in part due to technical breakdowns in the directorate responsible for issuing payment orders, and insisted that the regularization of these outlays had been done on a continual basis immediately thereafter. It would be impossible to eliminate completely such payments, but the authorities would limit their use to cases foreseen in the legislation. 28. The staff observed that the action plan to strengthen treasury procedures and budget monitoring established in May had yet not been fully implemented, despite progress made in adhering to proper procedures and in producing accounts on a more timely basis. In particular, the weaknesses in interdepartmental coordination continued to prevent an effective monitoring of actual monthly payments, Actual expenditures could thus not be fully consistent with the expenditure priorities established in the budget, particularly as regards outlays in the social sectors and the implementation of the public investment program. Given Togo’s pressing need to improve its social indicators (see Appendix IV) and the continuing constraints on available resources, the effective execution of planned budget&y outlays would be critical. Moreover, the accumulation of domestic arrears would also have an adverse impact on the level of private sector activity and investment, and thus on overall growth and incomes. The stafFalso noted that the numerous correspondent accounts at the treasury rendered its cash-flow management more opaque and advised the authorities to promptly set up a repayment plan for those accounts with positive balances, such as the utility companies, with a view to phasing them out. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 18- Box 4. Fiscal Transparency and Governance in Togo On the revenue side, progress has been made toward strengthening the efliciency of the tax administration and expanding the tax base through a reduction and strict control of exemptions. Recent reforms (such as the unification of the VAT at a single rate, and the introduction of the TPU) have contributed to creating a more transparent and efficient tax system and reduced the incentive to tax evasion. The tar-B structure was simplified in 1995, and the share of fully and partly exonerated imports has been considerably reduced. Steps have been taken to enhance the collaboration between the customs and the preshipment inspection agency, and to strengthen the monitoring of transit operations and other customs exemptions (rc’g;nes suspensjfs). Nonetheless, difficulties in ensuring VAT reimbursements to exporting enterprises give rise to tax credits that are seldom refunded in cash but rather compensated against current and future tax liabilities, thereby complicating the management of the tax system. Moreover, it would be administratively more efficient to reduce the scope for unjustified exemptions to import tariffs by extending to all other existing exonerations the new tax regime for foreign-fmanced public procurement, consisting of payment of duties at import and issuance of refunds through treasury checks, as recommended by the recent Fund technical mission. On the expenditure side, the main problems are related to (i) a generalized recourse to the use of exceptional payment procedures (t&grammes-lettres, and ordres de paiement) with expost budgetary reguhuizations; (ii) the practice of earmarking certain resources for use outside the usual treasury channels; (iii) the lack of regular external audits of treasury operations; (iv) the frequent use of compensation operations, which cause a substantial reduction of liquid receipts; and (v) the problem of reciprocal arrears between the government and the public utility companies, which is made possible and compounded by the system of correspondent accounts maintained at the treasury by these and other entities, including the social security system. . Moreover, the planning, execution, and monitoring of current and capital expenditures are currently split between the Ministries of Finance and Planning and the coordination mechanisms between the two agencies are inadequate. In addition, owing to the still limited computerization of procedures and transactions in the treasury, the timely production of reliable accounts is still problematic. Finally, regular external expost audits of treasury operations are not performed because the accounting offke (cow des cumptes) is not yet functional. Thus, there is a considerable lack of transparency in the management of public resources. Moreover, the nonobservance of established budgetary procedures and the lack of independent expost verification of budget execution have tended to limit accountability, as well as the efficiency and effectiveness of public spending. 29. The staff stressed the importance of measurable progress toward greater transparency in the management of public resources as a key step toward reestablishing private confidence and facilitating the resumption of multilateral and bilateral assistance. The authorities noted that the 1999 budget had been prepared in the spirit of transparency. Steps were being taken to eradicate fraud and abuse in the consumption of public utilities and water, and adequate provisions had been made for these outlays in 1999. Although the unified budget was not being introduced in 1999, raising the rate of implementation of public investment was envisaged. Strengthened budgetary procedures had been put in place, with a view to keeping spending under control, including through the computerization of the operations of the treasury, and measures had been taken to avoid the recurrence of extrabudgetary spending. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 19- 30. The staff observed that the major slippages in 1998 would continue to weigh heavily on the pubIic finances in 1999. The revenue projections of the 1999 budget would have to be recast to take into account the projected recovery of economic activity, but the scope for increased revenue would be constrained by the introduction of the new classification system for imports and the reduction in the rate of the statistical tax,26 which would more than offset the projected increases in revenue from the TPU and petroleum taxes. Moreover, projected effective tax receipts in 1999 would have to be reduced by the amount of advance tax payments already collected, in 1998. The mission also encouraged the authorities to implement as soon as possible the new WAEMU import classification scheme. 31. The authorities shared the staffs view that urgent action was required on the expenditure side in 1999. They noted in that context that the 1999 budget already foresaw a virtual freeze on spending in real terms. Nevertheless; the authorities concurred that a very careful management of the cash flow to limit spending to available cash resources would be essential because the fragility of the domestic commercial banking system left no margin for additional borrowing, and because mobilizing external budgetary assistance would still be difficult. An analysis of effective net revenues and priority expenditures in the 1999 budget revealed an underlying deficit of about 0.1 percent of GDP),27 which leaves no resources to cover other expenditure categories (see Appendix V). However, the authorities observed that major decisions on restructuring expenditures were unlikely until after the legislative elections on March 21, 1999.*’ C. Financial Sector and Banking Issues 32. The staff stressed its deep concern about the deterioration of the commercial banking sector, which had been aggravated by the financing of the budget deficit and some key public enterprises. Caret51 management of the government’s cash flow and of the financial situation of the public enterprises was required to avoid a further burdening the banking system, which could well drive the weakened banks into insolvency.29 Indeed, immediate action was required to bolster the situation of the banks in the short term, pending more fundamental reforms. The staff therefore urged the authorities to request an urgent inspection of the entire banking system by the regional banking commission to determine the appropriate measures for full 26The 1999 customs revenue projections assume the introduction of the new classification scheme only at end-June--this delay has been caused by difficulties in adapting the software system used by customs to the new scheme. 271ncluding personnel, materiel and supplies, essential subsidies and transfers, interest on domestic debt, and external debt service to multilaterals only. *%ince the election, there have been no specific decisions on restructuring expenditures. However, spending authorizations have been limited to 25 percent of budget amounts (50 percent for health and education). 292.5 percent of the increase in credit to the nongovernment sector in 1998 was accounted for by credit to the OTP and Togo-Telecom. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 20- and immediate implementation. It also recommended that the government withdraw from involvement in the management of the banks, particularly the two largest banks (which are majority owned), and accelerate the preparations for disengaging from the banking sector. These steps were needed to reestablish private sector confidence and to stem the withdrawal of deposits from the banking system, as well as to encourage the return of capital placed abroad, including in other countries of the WAEMU. 33. The authorities shared the staffs concerns regarding the health of the banking system. A full inspection by the banking commission is already in prospect. They noted that they had already accepted the principle of limiting government holdings in financial institutions to a maximum of 20 percent; however, attracting suitable partners would be very difficult in the present context. The banks noted that the perception of Togo as a risky market had limited their access to fimds on the regional interbank market and deepened their dependence on central bank refinancing. The central bank authorities were aware that limiting this refinancing and raising Togo’s reserve requirement had sharpened the liquidity crisis, but considered it necessary to restrain the growth of credit in the context of a weakening external and domestic situation. 34. In this regard, the staff indicated its unease with some unsound practices in the commercial banking sector. In particular, some banks had capitalized unpaid interest and reclassified doubtful short-term loans as medium- and long-term loans, so as to avoid loan provisioning consistent with the prudential requirements, which would require a considerable increase in the capital of many of the banks. Changes in management practices thus seemed necessary. Moreover, efforts to recover loans continued to be complicated by the weak judicial system. There was broad agreement that it was now critically important to finalize the preparations for the World Bank-supported financial sector adjustment program as soon as possible.30 35. Finally, the mission noted the further development of the system of microfinance in Togo. It was important that the ongoing efforts be intensified to provide appropriate training to those active in the sector, to apply effectively the regional law on cooperative and mutual credit institutions, and to deepen the link between the microfinance institutions and the more established financial institutions. The microfinance subcomponent of the PAREP would be an effective lever for these efforts31 30Details of the objectives of the FINSAC are presented in Chapter I of the forthcoming selected issues paper. 3’Mutual credit institutions and microfinance institutions in the rural areas are providing an increasing amount of the credit needed in the noncotton agricultural sector, partially filling the void left by the 1996 liquidation of the state marketing agency (OPAT). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-21- D. Structural Issues 36. The authorities noted that the loss of momentum in structural reform was in part due to the claims of the electoral process on the attention of senior officials and concurred that it had contributed to the wait-and-see stance assumed by the private sector. The mission observed that the delays in implementing the planned reforms sent the wrong signals to , the private sector and contributed to the general loss of confidence. Given the critical role played by the World Bank in virtually all aspects of structural reform (including in the planned restructuring of the banking sector), the mission urged the authorities to normalize their relations with the Bank as an absolute priority. 37. The authorities reaffirmed their commitment to completing their privatixation program. They noted that the delays in completing the OTP sale had been beyond their control and underscored that they would not be pressured into granting unreasonable fiscal concessions, though they were willing to be flexible with regard to the negotiated price. While not taking issue with this approach, the mission pointed out that the noncompletion of the OTP operation could delay new adjustment lending from the World Bank. 38. The mission commended the authorities for using the margin for maneuver created within the petroleum pricing structure by declining oil prices to find an acceptable solution to the problem of their petroleum arrears. The authorities noted that they would continue to administer the system with due flexibihty and would adjust retail prices as often as required by the mechanism. Similarly, the financial situation of the water and electricity companies had continued to improve under tighter management. The staff encouraged the authorities to ensure that budgetary provisions covered the full extent of public sector use of these public utilities, including by the local administrations, and that the structure of tariffs set in the performance contracts covered costs and also facilitated needed improvements in the infrastructure. 39. The staff urged the authorities to avoid making ad hoc reductions in the wage bill in response to the fiscal constraints in 1999, as this would at best defer the problem and at worst might lead to the accumulation of arrears. Instead, any changes in the wage bill should be part of a fundamental reform of the system of remuneration and advancement in the civil service. The authorities concurred with this approach but observed that such reforms would have to be prepared very carefully. The staff also took note of the ongoing analysis of the administrative structure and the adoption of a decentralization law. It stressed the importance of ensuring both the adequacy of budgetary resources for the expenditure responsibilities of the local administrations and a stringent oversight of their budget execution. It advised the authorities to reflect also on the need for some form of interregional transfer mechanism, and to consider imposing a balanced budget rule on the local administrations, at least initially. 40. The staff took note of the steps taken to implement the provisions of the OHADA treaty, and welcomed the expected introduction of a court of arbitration during 1999 as part of the process of strengthening the judicial framework. Similarly, the introduction of the regional accounting system (SYSCOA) and the gradual introduction of the regional reforms of the Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 22- insurance sector (under the auspices of CIMA) should contribute to strengthening corporate governance and transparency and facilitating both the access of Togolese firms to bank financing and their integration into the larger regional market. The authorities confirmed their commitment to proceed apace with these reforms, and also to deepen their contacts and consultations with the private sector on the formulation of economic policy. 41. Togo’s import tariff system is already very close to the common external tariff structure.of the WAEMU, and the country is likely to experience a noticeable net revenue loss only from the reduction of the rate of the statistical tax from 3 percent to 1 percent. The staff therefore urged the authorities to effectively implement the new WAEMU import classification scheme as soon as possible, and to continue working with their WAEMU partners to advance the other regional initiatives under way, such as the harmonization of domestic indirect and petroleum taxation, and the public finance nomenclatures, as well as the adoption of the common investment code. The staff also urged the authorities to strengthen their efforts to comply with the regional convergence criteria (Box 4). The Togolese representatives expressed concern that the regional common investment code would prevent the extension of fiscal advantages to enterprises in the export processing zone that export to WAEMU markets and argued for exceptional treatment, at least during a transitional period. The mission stressed that such treatment would be inconsistent with the principle of a regional common market. Furthermore, exports to member countries of the WAEMU were already favored by the preferential tariffs on intraregional trade. IV. STATISTICAL ISSUES 42. The authorities have generally provided the core macroeconomic indicators to the Fund and these data are broadly suitable for surveillance; however, greater efforts could be made to ensure access of all concerned services to the data, and to transmit them to the Fund on a more timely and regular basis. Some progress has recently been made in improving the quality and timeliness of the data, notably in the areas of national accounts and external sector statistics. However, weaknesses in these areas and in the monetary and public finance statistics remain (see Appendix III). The staff urged the authorities to press ahead with their efforts to strengthen the compilation of economic and social statistics, and to look to the Fund’s General Data Dissemination Standards as a framework for statistical improvement. Preparations for the resolving the Year 2000 (Y2K) problem are well advanced in the financial and private enterprise sectors; the central bank and the commercial banks expect to complete testing their new systems by the third quarter of 1999. Most of the economic and financial administrations of the central government and the social security system are working to ensure Y2K compliance; however, the software used for managing the payroll system will have to be replaced, and the entire data management system in the Ministry of Employment Promotion and the Civil Service is obsolete. The authorities are seeking financial and technical assistance to solve these problems. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-23- V. STAFFAPPRAISAL 43. In 1998, the economic and structural adjustment program supported by the ESAF arrangement went seriously off track. This development reflected in part the authorities’ preoccupation with the presidential election gnd the political uncertainty in its aftermath; however, the negative effect of the serious energy crisis during the first quarter, as well as the lower-than: anticipated production and exports of phosphates and cotton also played a role. These factors help to explain the weaker economic performance registered for the year as a whole.’ Nonetheless, the policy response to these exogenous factors was inappropriate. The relaxa’tion of expenditure control in the face of revenue shortfalls widened the overall deficit, and the government’s recourse to domestic bank credit and the accumulation of new domestic arrears fLtther weakened the already fragile banking system, limited the private sector’s ability to recover fi-om the energy crisis, and contributed to a severe loss in confidence. 44. The authorities’ growth projections for 1999 are implicitly based on the assumptions of a stabilization of the banking system, no fi.uther accumulation of domestic arrears, and the maintenance of public and private investment. However, the staff considers that these assumptions are likely to prove too optimistic if Togo does not promptly regain access to external financing. In any event, an exceptional effort will be required to prevent the overall situation from deteriorating too rapidly in the interim. In the present circumstances and, in particular, with the noncompletion of the action plan to strengthen treasury management, discussions on a new ESAF arrangement could not be initiated. Given the dim prospects for the prompt resumption of external assistance and the frailty of the banking system, the challenge now facing the authorities is to establish and maintain a meticulous management of their cash flow, so as to avoid any further deterioration of the fiscal situation, which could precipitate a full-fledged banking crisis. Achieving this objective will be very difficult, inasmuch as the recovery from the revenue slippages of 1998 is likely to be only gradual, but it is a necessary step toward discussions on a new program. Moreover, the authorities must strive to avoid accumulating further external payments arrears, which would fi,n-ther complicate the normalization of relations with Togo’s external partners. In particular, it will be necessary to remain current on new debt-service obligations to the extent possible and, at a minimum, to begin to settle the outstanding arrears, particularly to multilateral creditors. 45. The authorities have stressed, and the staff agrees, that it would be essential to reach agreement on a program that could be supported by a new ESAF arrangement as soon as possible. The staff, however, emphasized that, in view of the considerable slippages over the last year, the authorities would need to establish a track record of several months of considerably improved performance before discussions on a successor ESAF arrangement could be initiated. Moreover, a resolution to the present impasse in relations with bilateral creditors of the European Union, stemming from concerns about the democratization process, would be essential if Togo is to mobilize the necessary assurances of external financing. 46. A considerable effort will be needed to bring the fiscal situation back under control. On the revenue side, the authorities should pursue their efforts to widen the tax base, reduce Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 24- remaining exemptions, and further strengthen tax administration. They should also introduce as soon as possible the new WAEMU import classification-which is likely to be revenue neutral, at worst-so as to ease the transition to the full common external tariff on January 1, 2000. Their primary concern, however, must be to reestablish control over expenditures. Given the limited resources likely to be available for most of the year, the overall level of expenditures will have to be reduced. It is thus essential that the remaining shortcomings in treasury management be removed; that spending be effectively monitored on almost a daily basis; and that the abuse of exceptional payment procedures finally be halted. 47. The reductions necessary to align spending to available resources should not be undertaken in an ad hoc manner, however, as this will only build up the pressures to spend later on and may well give rise to new arrears. Rather, the stat?’ urges the authorities to establish and adhere to precise expenditure priorities in order to, inter alia, maintain critical outlays in the social sectors. The staff considers that a formal revision of the 1999 budget to take account of these realities would greatly facilitate the management of the cash flow and would lend credibility to the authorities’ efforts to consolidate the public finances. 48. Nonetheless, as the analysis of the deficit in 1999 shows, the structure of Togo’s budgetary expenditures leaves little room for maneuver. Although the authorities have kept a tight rein on the wage bill, it continues to represent too large a share of overall expenditure and is well out of line with the relevant convergence criterion of the WAEMU. A fundamental reform of the civil service, both in terms of the gradual reduction in its size and the restructuring of the remuneration system, assumes pressing importance in this context. Similarly, the preparations for the decentralization for the public administration should proceed apace,. but the authorities must ensure that local administrations have the management capacity, as well as the necessary resources, to meet their obligations and are subject to tight budgetary discipline. 49. The failure to implement earlier recommendations of the banking commission and to ensure compliance with the prudential ratios has left the Togolese banking system particularly vulnerable to the shock of the energy crisis; this situation has been compounded by the deterioration of the public finances and the loss of private sector confidence. The government must now avoid further burdening the banks directly or indirectly, and must implement any new recommendations of the banking commission fully and as quickly as possible. To this end, the authorities should avoid interference in the personnel and management decisions of the state-owned banks, and exercise close supervision over the financial management of the public enterprises. Beyond these immediate measures aimed at preventing further deterioration, the need for a fundamental restructuring of the banking system has become critical. In this context, the long-planned FINSAC is of central importance, and the authorities should spare no effort to reach agreement with the World Bank on the details of this program as quickly as possible. Moreover, the reforms of the legal system envisaged under the PAREP to facilitate loan recovery should be put in place promptly, and some of the banks may need considerable recapitalization. 50. The slippages of the past year have also greatly undermined the confidence of the private sector and of Togo’s external partners in the predictability of government policy. This means that Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-25- a great deal of effort is required on all fronts to make up lost ground and establish an environment conducive to increasing investment and strengthening growth, fighting poverty, and reducing the economy’s vulnerability to exogenous shocks. It is thus essential that the authorities reestablish the momentum of structural reform, and press ahead in such key areas as privatization, transport and telecommunications, judicial reform, and agriculture. More prudent and transparent management of the public finances will also help to prepare for an eventual _ resumption of the domestic debt-restructuring program, which is important for strengthening the private sector, particularly the commercial banks. In this regard, the staffurges the authorities to deepen their efforts to inform and consult with the private sector on economic policy. 51. Finally, the staff reiterates its concern about the deterioration of Togo’s relations with external creditors. Togo needs the broad-based support and technical assistance of the international community, including its bilateral partners, to meet its development challenges. The staff therefore welcomes the authorities’ success in normalizing relations with the World Bank and urges the authorities to continue to make every effort to regularize relations with their bilateral and other multilateral external partners, so as to facilitate the resumption of normal budgetary and development assistance as soon as possible. 52. The next Article IV consultation is expected to be held on the standard, 12-month cycle. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public25 8 - 26 - Figure 1. Togo: Selected Economic Indicators, 1992-2000 Xeal GDP Growth and Prices @mal Average percent changes) :I ’ I ’ \ ’ I ’ s 40 Central Government Fiscal Balance (In percent of GDP) 30 Revenue 10 Overall deficit (right scale) 0 Consumer Price Jnd.& ___--- (Annual avaage) *. _-* _ ’ R~“B~ 0 -10 -17 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 -lo -%92 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 ZOtit?’ 60 External Current Account 15 60 (In percent of GDP) Imports of goods and services 10 40 , - _ .C -..-- - -- . ,_ - - - ._. / - -- _ ,’ / Experts of goods and services 5 50 40 Current account (right scale) 0 20 0 -5 10 -20 -10 0 I ( , / / / / Monetary Survey ‘In percent of GDP) Net domestic assets \ \ \-- -_--- . . *. . . .---------- L Net foreign assets -. -. -. ---___ - . 45 40 35 30 25 -lo 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 -1’ %92 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 198 Sources: IMF, World Economic Outlook, March 1999; and staff estimates and projections. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public18 - 27 - Figure 2. Togo: Investment and Savings, 1992-2000 Sross Domestic Investment / / / --.-- \ /-. Government , ’ \ / \--_’ ‘. / \ 1-j I 1 ! I I I I 18 8 fk’92 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2Od?l -‘it’92 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 200-d2 25 National Savings 19 ,~ ,’ I. ,’ . . ,’ .\ ,’ I. -\ 14 ,*’ . . . Nongovemment .__.. --._ 8 2 Government /’ \ / ‘\/I’ -- / -\ /--1 -4 \ / \ / \ / \ / / - \ -9 \ / \ /’ L’ I ,-’ I 25 19 14 3 2 .4 .9 -f992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 200-d’ -%92 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 200-d’ 20 20 Domestic Savings #I. I . >\ 15 ‘\ 15 Nongovemment 6 2 Gov-ent ,/\ ,--- \ r--/ \ / -\ / -3 \ -3 \ /I \ / \ / -7 \ /I \ / -7 r’ I I / I I , I Investment-Savings Balance Qy-$ /--- Overall , _ ‘, I\ *’ I / \ /’ ; ,\ / ‘L- Y , -. I \ \ , I,\ ,,’ -- \/ lyp’ s-_.--. 15 10 5 D -5 Sources: IMF, World Economic Outlook, March 1999; and staff estimates and projections. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 28 - \ / \ \ 8 ’ ; /I .2 / a\ s \ ‘3 \ 3 !z 1 ) I l ) ,\ . Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 29 - Table 2. Togo: Fund Position During Period of Arrangement, 1996-98 1996 1997 1998 Jau- July- Jan.- July- Jan.- July- June Dec. June Dec. June Dec. Tramactions under trauche policies (net) -0.2 0.0 0.2 0.0 0.0 Purchases Repurchases 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Structural Adjustment Facility (SAF) -0.8 -0.8 -0.8 Loans 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.8 0.8 0.8 Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility (ESAF) -3.1 -3.1 7.8 Loans Repayments 0.0 3.1 0.0 3.1 10.9 3.1 Total Fund credit outstanding, end of period 66.4 62.5 0.0 0.0 3.1 2.3 63.3 60.2 69.6 . Tranche policies SAF ESAF 11 0.0 1.5 68.0 Total Fund credit outstanding, end of period Tranche policies SAF ESAF I/ 122.2 0.0 5.7 116.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 -0.8 -0.8 0.0 0.0 0.8 0.8 -3.8 7.0 0.0 10.9 3.8 3.8 64.9 71.2 0.0 0.0 0.8 0.0 64.2 71.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 -3.8 0.0 3.8 67.4 0.0 0.0 67.4 (In percent of quota) 115.2 128.1 119.6 131.1 124.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 4.2 2.8 1.4 0.0 0.0 110.9 125.3 118.2 131.1 124.0 (Iu millions of SDR) Source: IMF, Treasurer’s Department. 11 Including ESAF Trust Account. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 30 - Table 3. Togo: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 1996-2001 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 Pmg. Pmj. ht. Rev. Proj. Natimd income and priooa GDP at constant prices GDP deflator CoNuma plico in&x (amlual worago) Conurma price index (cod of period) 9.7 4.3 5.7 5.2 -1.0 6.7 5.6 4.9 5.1 11.4 2.7 3.2 2.7 1.1 1.9 1.0 4.6 5.3 3.5 3.s 1.0 2.5 2.8 3.0 4.9 3.0 . . . 3.7 -1.3 3.3 2.9 3.0 -1 wctor (rm tho basis of CFA iian@ Expntr, f.0.b. Exchldmgrccxpola lmpmts, f.o.b. Export volmno Excluding rooxports import volume Tcmw. of trade (dotaioration -) Nominal oEoctivo oxchango nto l/ Real off&iv0 oxchmgc r&c I/ 8.7 28.8 13.7 33.4 22.5 24.2 2.4 10.8 4.8 12.0 21.1 28.7 4.8 20.3 0.6 -3.6 2.6 2.8 10.6 8.9 -1.3 -0.2 10.8 8.6 -3.3 -1.9 8.6 8.9 -0.8 3.4 8.9 6.9 -0.1 5.8 9.2 6.7 -1.9 3.6 7.2 7.3 3.6 0.5 0.8 0.6 2.8 -7.9 . . . 1.. 3.8 . . *.. . . . 9.3 . . . 4.8 7.6 4.5 8.2 3.7 3.4 3.4 4.7 2.5 4.8 3.7 2.2 1.5 1.4 . . . . . . . . . Consolidated 8 OVON”lO,lt 0,lO”tiON Rcvcnuc 21 Total expcndihuc 14.6 16.4 7.8 13.5 -0.7 3.3 3.6 6.2 7.1 0.8 6.2 14.5 17.9 5.1 1.9 1.7 Monoy and crulit Not domutic ass& 3141 Qfwhich : credit to govommont 41 Credit to tho private sector O/which : to public wlca hhoy and quasi money (M2) Velocity (GDP rclativo to avcrqc M2) -6.0 7.1 . . . 3.1 -5.4 . . . 2.8 8.8 . . . -1.4 -20.9 . . . -9.9 8.1 . . 3.7 4.0 . . . -12.2 1.5 4.6 . . . 7.2 3.6 5.1 6.9 5.9 -5.1 3.4 3.5 . . . . . 0.7 3.1 4.2 4.3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (lo pcrcmtagc of GDP, onlcsa othcrwiso indicrtcd) Ovorall govcmmcot deficit (-) Z S/ including pnts E.xcluding grants Primaryfirulblmco2/ Gmas domestic invcstmcnt Of which: govommont Goss domestic rrvinga Gmss national savinp 6/ Of which: public swing 61 currant account balance Including &&I 8rurtr Excluding offtcial grants Overall balrnco of paymcnta (millions of U.S. dollars) NPV oftotal cxtcmal debt ootstmding tc GDP NPV of debt to exports (GNFS) Public dobt scrvico ratio (including IMF) 7/ lnpcrocntofc%portsofgoods8ndnonfaor8crvicca ln porcont of govcmmcnt rcvmuo ExtoNal payments - (ond of period) 81 -5.8 -2.1 -25 -2.0 -5.0 -5.5 -4.9 -4.1 -6.3 -3.5 -3.5 -4.0 -6.7 -6.5 -6.0 -5.2 -1.4 0.5 1.6 1.5 -1.3 -1.4 -1.3 -0.7 16.4 14.9 16.4 16.9 14.2 15.2 15.3 . 15.0 2.8 2.0 3.1 3.8 4.0 3.8 3.7 3.7 8.4 8.4 11.7 13.0 7.5 8.1 8.7 9.8 8.8 9.1 12.9 15.0 8.3 8.8 8.7 9.9 -3.0 -0.1 0.6 1.9 -1.0 -1.7 -1.2 -0.4 -7.1 -9.2 -47.9 60.3 184.1 -5.0 -3.5 -1.6 -4.9 -5.4 -7.3 -6.1 -5.2 -7.3 -7.8 18.8 -51.5 22.4 -58.2 -108.6 57.7 . . . . . 57.9 52.3 166.2 . . . . . . 171.6 165.8 -5.4 -4.0 -6.8 -5.5 -105.6 -86.3 47.2 43.1 153.1 138.5 19.2 42.9 6.2 13.7 15.6 15.7 15.0 15.9 13.1 12.9 32.4 32.2 34.1 33.4 35.8 30.1 29.8 0.4 0.0 0.0 1.7 . . . . . . Memorandum items: Nominrl GDP (in billions of CFA frmcs) 733.7 876.0 862.1 894.9 890.6 960.7 1,033.6 1,095.5 Nominal oxchango rata (CFA francs per U.S. dollar) 511.6 583.7 528.4 584.7 NO.0 560.6 560.6 560.6 (Amwal pcrccntago change, u&as othcrwiso indicrbzd) Sourcea: Togolcsc ruthoritia; and staff cstimatcs and projections. I/ From IMF, lnfomution Noticc System, rdjwtcd for infornul trade with Ghana and Nigeria. Real cxchmgo r&c based on consmncr price data. ?I Excluding rocoipts from privatization. 31 Domestic credit and other itcms (net). 4/ Changes in pcrccnt of broad money at tho beginning of period. 5/ On a paymont order basis. 61 Excluding project grmts in tho program. 71 Bcfors new rcschcduliig but z&r rcschoduliig &cady obtained in wtimatcs and projections. 8/ Including the rrrcan to the commcmial banks for which a buyback oporation took plrco in 1997. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 4. Togo: Investment-Savings Balance, 1990-200 1 (In percent of GDP) 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 199s 1996 1997 1998 Est. Est. Pmj. 1999 2000 2001 Projections Gross domestic investment 26.6 17.1 15.7 7.5 15.0 16.1 16.4 14.9 14.2 15.2 15.3 15.0 Government investment 7.3 4.5 3.5 2.3 2.3 3.5 2.8 2.0 4.0 3.8 3.7 3.7 Nongovemment investment 19.3 12.6 12.2 5.1 12.8 12.6 13.7 12.9 10.1 11.4 11.6 11.3 Domestic savings 14.7 9.0 6.5 -0.2 11.3 11.9 8.4 8.4 7.5 8.1 8.7 9.8 Government savings 4.0 -0.6 0.2 -9.7 -5.7 -1.2 -1.2 0.5 -0.6 -0.7 -0.8 -0.1 Nongovemment savings ’ 10.7 9.6 6.3 9.5 17.0 13.1 9.6 7.9 8.1 8.8 9.4 9.9 Investment-savings balance 11.9 8.1 9.2 7.7 3.7 4.2 8.0 6.5 6.7 7.2 6.6 5.2 I Govemment 3.3 5.1 3.3 12.1 7.9 4.7 4.0 1.5 4.6 4.5 4.5 3.8 E Nongovemment 8.6 3.0 5.9 -4.4 -4.2 -0.5 4.1 5.1 2.0 2.7 2.1 1.4 I National savings 18.2 12.2 8.7 0.6 8.6 11.3 8.8 9.1 8.3 8.8 8.7 9.9 Government savings 4.3 -2.0 -0.6 -13.3 -9.4 -2.9 -3.0 -0.1 -1.0 -1.7 -1.2 -0.4 Nongovemmeut savings 13.9 14.2 9.2 13.9 18.0 14.3 11.8 9.2 9.3 10.5 9.9 10.2 Memorandum items: Unrequited transfers Of which : project grants Net Income from abroad Of which : net interest on external debt 5.3 5.1 3.8 3.0 2.5 2.8 2.6 2.2 2.3 2.2 1.1 1.2 2.2 1.5 1.5 0.3 0.7 0.6 0.5 0.9 1.0 1.0 1.1 1.1 -1.9 -1.9 -1.6 -2.1 -5.2 -3.4 -2.1 -1.5 -1.5 -1.5 -1.0 -1.1 -2.9 -2.9 -2.5 -3.8 -5.1 -3.1 -2.3 -2.0 -2.0 -2.0 -1.5 -1.4 Source: Togolese authorities; and staff estimates and projections. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 32 - Table 5. Togo: Contral Government Operations, 1996-200 I 1996 1997 1998 1999 2cao 2001 Progll Prcj. Est. Projections (In billions of CPA francs) RevenUe 110.4 128.5 138.5 145.9 127.6 134.4 139.2 147.8 Tax rewnuc 98.1 115.7 125.7 132.5 115.4 118.4 122.7 130.1 Public enteqwises 11.4 11.2 14.7 14.1 6.4 5.9 6.5 7.2 ahordiilvms 22.7 23.2 24.2 29.2 23.7 24.9 25.5 26.8 Tpxa on intemationrd trade 45.5 56.9 58.4 58.1 57.4 56.8 56.0 57.9 otherindiitsxu 18.5 24.4 28.3 31.1 27.9 30.8 34.6 38.3 Nontax rwenuc 12.3 12.8 12.9 13.3 12.2 16.0 16 5 17.6 Expenditure cumnt expmdihrc Primry current expendilure PCtZ.oIUWl 157.7 159.0 168.9 182.1 187.5 197.2 201.0 136.9 141.4 141.9 147.8 151.1 160.7 162.7 116.5 121.1 120.2 124.4 132.0 139.3 143.3 53.6 57.0 58.0 58.9 58.9 60.8 62.6 62.9 64.2 62.2 65.5 73.2 78.5 80.7 31.7 29.3 37.2 36.6 38.5 41.5 42.3 20.5 28.8 22.4 25.6 26.3 32.6 33.6 2.6 3.8 2.7 3.3 4.4 4.4 4.7 8.2 2.3 0.0 0.0 4.0 0.0 0.0 17.4 17.6 17.8 19.6 18.1 19.4 15.6 3.1 2.7 3.8 3.8 1.0 2.0 3.8 20.8 17.6 27.0 34.2 35.9 36.5 38.2 4.3 3.3 4.9 8.0 7.3 8.5 9.6 204.4 163.9 145.0 Other primary apendihrrc MaterisIs and supplies Tmnsfm Social and educational funds Exbahuw expenditure Interest on cxtcmal debt Interest on domestic debt In-tcxpcndihlre Ofwhich : Iirmd by domestic resources Rimmy halsNc2l 64.5 80.5 44.9 35.6 0.0 0.0 15.1 3.8 40.5 10.1 -10.4 4.1 13.4 13.4 -11.7 -13.4 -13 7 -7.3 cmrenl b&Ice -26.5 -12.9 -3.3 -2.0 -23.5 -26.3 -23.6 -16.1 Chwdl deticit (-). payment order basis @.o.b.) -47.3 -30.5 -30.3 -36.2 -59.4 -62.8 -61.8 -56.6 Pqnwnts - (net; decrePrc -) -2.6 -28.0 0.0 -20.3 9.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 Domestic (bmswy) 3.6 -2.3 0.0 -9.6 6.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 Oher domestic arrears -1.7 -11.5 0.0 -10.7 -4.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 interest cn oxtemd debt (net) -4.5 -14.3 0.0 0.0 7.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Ofwhich : London Club 0.1 -14.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Ovemll d&it (-). cash basis -49.9 -58.5 -30.3 -56.5 -50.4 -62.8 -61 8 -56.6 Financing Domestic fiicing Bpnlrinesystrm Net UC of Fund mscurces Advances tirn the central bank other domestic bank fmancing Nonbsnk fhmcing Ofwhich : advances from public cnteprises proceeds from sale of asrels External fmancing Granls (project and program) Of which : project Disbumemmts (project and program) Ofwhich : project Amottitiion due Rescheduling already obtained 3/ Debt cancellation from France Arrears on amortirntion O/which : London Club Financing 9~ Memorandum items: 499 58.5 -2.9 35.9 50.3 -0.8 3.2 1.5 5.7 11.1 -6.1 -2.8 11.5 -7.9 -5.0 -6.5 1.5 -12.9 -7.8 -16.0 14.5 -7.9 -5.7 -6.5 -6.1 2.6 -7.8 -6.5 2.4 -6.8 -5.7 -6.5 4.7 -17.4 0.0 -6.6 5.6 -1.1 0.0 0.0 2.9 1.9 0.0 -2.9 6.5 00 0.0 0.0 4.2 24.0 1.7 13.2 -3.0 0.0 0.8 0.0 7.4 0.3 0.0 0.0 2.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 14 23.8 1.7 13.2 0.1 0.0 0.8 0.0 44.1 47.4 3.1 38.6 38.8 7.1 8.2 8.0 3.9 11.9 8.8 18.5 14.7 9.9 11.5 12.2 3.7 7.7 8.8 14.5 8.7 9.9 11.5 12.2 41.3 29.5 13.3 30.1 28.7 18.1 172 18.2 12.8 6.6 13.3 11.8 18.4 18.1 17.2 18.2 -239 -17.5 -18.9 -20.4 -20.6 -21.9 -20.5 -22.4 20.7 15.6 0.0 10.4 8.1 I.1 0.0 0.0 1.0 37. I 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 00 0.0 1.1 -29.2 0.0 0.0 7.9 0.0 00 0.0 3.0 -26 0 0.0 1.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 00 0.0 0.0 33.2 20.6 0.0 63.6 58.6 55.1 (In percentage of GDP, unless otherwise indicated) Total revenue Total expenditure and net lending Primary cut-rent expenditure lmstment expenditure Rimmy balance (deficit -) Cutrent balance (deficit -) Overall balance. p.o.b. (cxcludii foreign-fin. invest; deticit -) Overall balance. p.o.b(deticit -) 14.6 20.9 15.5 2.8 -1.4 -3.5 -4.1 13.5 19.4 13.9 31 -1.3 -2.3 -3.2 13.5 18.7 13.2 3.1 -0.7 -1.5 -2.4 Including @ants -5.8 Excluding grants -6.3 Nominal GDP (ii billions of CFA francs) 753.7 14.7 16.1 16.3 14.3 14.0 18.2 19.6 20.3 21.1 20.5 13.8 13.9 13.9 14.8 14.5 2.0 3.1 3.8 4.0 3.8 0.5 1.6 1.5 -1.3 -1.4 -1.5 -0.4 -0.2 -2.6 -2.7 -1.8 -1.0 -1.1 -3.5 -3.6 -2.1 -2.5 -2 0 -5.0 -5.5 -3.5 -3.5 -4.0 -6.7 -6.5 876.0 862.1 894.9 890.6 960.7 -4.9 -4 1 -6.0 -5.2 1,033 6 1,095s Sources: Togolcse authorities; and staff estimates and projections II The program numbers hew been rcdefmed to exclude proceeds from the sale of government awets. which arc classlficd BS domestic financing. 21 Defmcd as reverw minus wcpmdihare. excluding interest payments and foreign-financed investment. 3/ In 1997. refleti the buyback operation reducing the stock of commcrcisl benk debt at B discount, Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 33 - Table 6. Togo: Central Government Revenue, 1996-2001 (In billions of CFA francs) 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 Est. Proj. Est. Projections Tax revenue 98.1 115.7 132.5 115.4 118.4 122.7 130.3 Direct taxes Taxes on income and profits of individuals 11 Ofwhich : salaries Taxes on enterprises Direct contribution and taxes of public enterprises OTP Offtice des Produits Agricolcs du TogoBOTOCO Petroleum Fund Other direct taxes 2/ Indirect taxes Domestic taxes on goods and services General sales tax (turnover and value-added tax) Excise taxes (on fuel consumption) Other taxes on goods and services Taxes on international trade Import duties 3/ Export duties Other taxes on international trade Other indirect taxes (registration and stamp duties) 1.8 Nontax revenue 12.3 Property income 4/ Net income from fees and charges of autonomous entities and organizations Other nontax revenue 5/ Total revenue 110.4 34.1 34.4 43.3 30.1 30.8 32.0 34.2 8.6 11.3 12.7 9.9 10.7 11.5 12.2 1.3 1.8 1.9 1.8 2.0 2.1 2.3 6.7 8.4 8.8 7.8 8.4 9.0 9.6 11.4 11.2 14.1 6.4 5.9 6.5 7.2 4.0 5.0 8.2 1.8 1.9 1.8 1.9 4.0 3.5 5.9 4.6 4.1 4.7 5.3 3.4 2.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 7.3 3.5 7.7 6.0 5.7 5.0 5.2 64.0 81.3 89.3 85.3 87.6 90.6 96.1 16.8 22.6 29.1 26.0 28.8 32.4 35.9 8.4 12.8 14.1 13.7 14.8 15.9 18.0 6.8 8.4 13.0 10.4 11.9 14.3 15.6 1.6 1.4 2.0 1.9 2.1 2.2 2.4 45.5 56.9 58.1 57.4 56.8 56.0 57.9 37.2 48.1 48.4 49.2 50.3 51.9 53.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 8.3 8.8 9.7 8.2 6.5 4.1 4.3 1.8 4.8 5.7 1.8 2.0 1.9 12.8 13.3 12.2 1.9 2.7 2.6 5.8 5.7 6.1 5.1 5.0 3.6 128.5 145.9 127.6 2.1 16.0 2.8 6.5 6.7 134.4 2.2 2.3 16.5 17.6 3.0 3.1 7.0 7.4 6.5 7.1 139.2 147.9 Sources: Treasury of Togo; O&e Togolais des Phosphates (OTP); and staff estimates and projections. l! Includes taxes on wages and salaries, business income of individuals, rental income, and professional income. Also includes national solidarity tax. 2/ Includes receipts from previous years and various other direct taxes. 3/ Inchrdcs the turnover tax (TGA) and value-added tax applied to the value of imports. 4/ Includes dividends from public enterprises and the Central Bank of the West African States (BCEAO), interest income on treasury deposits, including shares in public enterprises, and other revenue. 5/ Includes contributions to government investment by autonomous agencies. From 1990, includes the contribution of seven key public enterprises to their debt service. Does not include receipts from the salts of assets. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 7. Togo: Monetary Survey, 1996-98 13% 1937 hkcb Jom Sep. Dec. Mmdl Rev. Rev. En Jw3. -Ro6 Nst fomign sseb chtikaok CQmmcrciaIbanh Net domestic assets Net credit to govmnnent Nauedittocatmlgov.nmnent~l Rojcctdepaii Other credit Credit to the private sector Credit to key public enteqxk ymhmy Agrid~~ du Tog0 (O~AT) SociLti Toaolaise de Cotm (SOCOTO) C6ce To&sise da Plmqhtes (OTP) other 0th items (net) Broad money clnrmcy m cirmlation Depoxits SDR ahcation Medium- and larg-term fore& liabilities Revalua~ acccuot Memorandum items: Net ~CSMS~~C auctr of Ccnti BE& (SXCI. project deposits) z Short term credit to private sectof 31 Doubttid or litigioln cxdita 3/ Net foreign awets -4.1 Net dmneatic ur,ts -6.0 Credit to tbe government 3.1 Credit to the economy 2.8 credit to the ecmmy Broad money 15.0 15.8 14.5 41.1 -0.8 52.4 -4.8 63.7 -18.0 5.9 -2.8 17.8 19.9 17.4 24.1 -1.5 35.1 -4.1 -2.9 17.1 0.7 17.3 192.8 26.9 4.0 11.5 5.4 15.3 -1.3 203.6 219.9 9.1 46.1 -13.9 17.6 -2.5 -15.5 6.1 -0.2 231.3 210.2 215s 220.1 200.8 235.0 184.7 226.9 221.2 69.6 67.5 77.8 77.8 76.1 79.0 79.0 -8.6 -1.2 -1.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 152.8 150.5 145.7 58.7 81 .P 81.5 78.0 74.6 86.4 74.2 71.6 73.0 -10.1 0.8 67.3 82.9 80.3 79.0 -8.6 -1 .o 0.0 -1 .o 0.0 0.0 1.2 0.0 79.9 87.4 79.5 -7.5 -1 .o -7.6 2.1 0.0 2.3 79.0 -9.6 2.3 137.6 155.2 155.5 165.3 156.5 154.5 163.2 75.0 57.1 17.8 182.1 82.5 83.5 -1.0 0.0 161.2 162.6 39.5 1.2 4.4 0.1 33.8 Pa.2 .., -16.7 -8.4 222.8 216.5 72.0 65.5 150.8 150.9 31.2 37.1 0.5 0.5 5.9 6.8 0.0 0.0 24.9 29.9 124.0 155.5 128.1 156.5 42.9 0.0 a.2 3.3 31.4 128.7 154.5 35.2 0.0 6.8 0.3 28.1 128.0 36.9 0.0 6.3 0.0 30.6 125.7 -11.4 7.8 -3.8 -21 9 -26.7 -33.7 -56.3 200.9 59.7 141.2 239.7 217.2 248.5 212.3 245.1 63.8 60.1 85.4 57.6 81 .o 175.9 157.1 163.1 154.7 164.1 240.2 78.2 162.0 -10.5 201 .o 58.7 142.3 -13.1 218.7 66.4 152.3 8.2 8.2 a.7 8.7 a.7 3.4 1.2 0.5 0.5 0.5 -1.7 -1.7 -1.7 -1.7 -1 .l 76.3 71.1 68.2 70.8 60.8 56.4 59.3 54.9 59.1 62.3 4.3 3.4 3.8 4.9 5.1 a.7 1.2 -1.7 75.8 a.7 8.7 0.0 1.2 -1 .l -I .l a.7 1.2 -1.7 8.9 0.8 -1.7 161.2 -61.6 248.9 79.9 169.0 8.7 1.2 -1.7 a.9 1.2 -1.7 68.7 60.3 57.8 5.3 -11.1 222.5 72.5 150.0 a.7 0.7 -I .l 70.9 57.2 5.0 46.3 72.0 31.7 . 53.6 6.1 70.7 54.8 5.4 e percmt of l=ghiwgol-pcriod broad money, udess othenvisc specised) 41 5.9 -10.2 5.5 -0.3 4.9 -12.7 9.7 -4.1 14.6 3.9 7.3 5.3 7.1 2.2 7.6 -4.1 7.0 -11.1 -1 .o 4.6 0.0 -5 4 1.2 6.4 -0.5 -1.5 3.2 7.6 -1 .o -2.2 8.8 2.2 5.7 2.6 9.7 1.7 (bwl perantagc ChEtlge) -15.6 19.4 -4.0 -2.0 -12.2 5.1 -1.7 1.5 s.9 a.1 4.6 3.4 4.7 11 1 12.2 7.3 128 3.3 a.1 4.0 14.0 2.7 -9.9 10.9 12.0 7.2 7.1 4.8 14.5 8.1 7.1 -4.7 5.6 2.8 3.5 -I 6.2 7.2 0.7 (In biii of CFA fmna) Saurrer: Central Bank of the West Ahcan States (BCEAO); and staE&imates and project&s. I / Jncklden the secrnioatm of central bank -1idated claims on bankx. which &came a liability of the government. 2/ Gdculated fa the centi bank net credit to gowmmeot axcludina project deposits, plus centml bank gross claim on domestic bnking s@em, plus oomterpart of SDR allomtions, plus other items net of the ocortral bank. 3/Inpamtofthetotiuedittopiivatessctor 41 Relative to -pondingpuiod of pmious year Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-. 35 - Table 8. Togo: Balance of Payments, 1996-2001 (In biUio~ of CFA fraoca, unless o&wise indicated) 19% 1991 1998 1999 200 2001 ReV. Pmg. Rev. frog. Pmj. Est. Pmjcctions Trade balance -21.3 0.4 -17.1 192.6 208.2 248.0 152.6 153.7 203.6 49.4 43.1 62.9 4.6 13.8 18.9 8.2 1.2 14.3 46.9 53.9 64.3 43.5 35.1 43.2 40.0 54.5 44.4 -213.9 -207.8 -265.7 36.9 47.6 36.9 -55.2 -60.3 -53.2 -39.1 -44.1 -39.6 -16.1 -16.1 -13.5 -17.4 -16.9 -17.6 23.0 25.6 27.4 6.9 1.2 7.2 16.1 18.4 20.2 3.7 7.1 7.7 -53.5 -34.3 -43.5 -69.6 -52.7 -63.7 29.0 13.7 54.5 17.4 1.7 12.0 41.3 23.1 29.5 12.8 13.9 6.6 28.5 9.8 22.9 -23.9 -16.0 -17.5 2.5 2.6 2.6 12.0 5.5 11.1 1.4 0.0 36.0 2.9 -2.0 -20.7 -7.3 0.0 13.5 -24.5 -20.6 11.0 24.5 -42.9 -11.0 6.2 -9.3 -20.2 -6.1 9.9 2.6 -3.4 -46.5 -43.5 1.1 -30.6 -29.2 -4.5 -15.9 -14.3 20.1 12.9 15.6 1.0 0.0 37.1 0.0 63.5 0.0 4.5 2.9 230.3 240.1 170.3 196.1 52.4 61.5 14.0 17.2 8.2 11.9 58.2 59.2 37.5 46.4 60.0 44.0 -18.6 -28.3 -26.5 244.2 256.0 193.1 201.9 53.4 61.0 19.7 20.4 10.0 12.7 56.5 55.2 53.6 52.7 51.1 54.1 .272.5 -282.5 47.2 49.9 -54.6 -52.2 -40.7 -41.8 -14.0 -10.3 -19.4 -15.6 30.9 22.7 7.7 8.0 23.2 .14.7 9.9 11.5 -52.0 -55.9 -75.2 -70.6 -8.9 -3.3 -3.9 -3.3 18.1 17.2 18.1 17.2 0.0 0.0 -21.9 -20.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 -5.0 0.0 -16.8 Total exports Domestic exports Cotton coffee COCM Phoaphatcs OthSr 244.8 196.9 60.0 22.3 10.5 53.9 50.2 275.5 218.4 69.1 '21.6 14.3 57.5 55.9 Reexports 47.9 57.0 imports, f.o.b. Of which : For reexports Scticcandkomc (net) -225.8 -237.2 51.4 38.4 -63.8 -57.7 -45.6 -37.8 -18.2 -19.9 -17.9 -19.6 28.9 40.3 6.8 8.4 22.1 31.9 8.8 14.5 -30.4 -14.5 -52.5 -46.4 3.2 21.6 -5.6 9.7 13.3 30.1 13.3 11.8 0.0 18.3 -18.9 -20.4 2.2 2.2 7.6 14.8 0.0 0.0 -1.0 0.9 0.0 0.0 -21.2 13.1 -6.1 -33.7 -6.1 -44.1 -7.8 -6.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 10.4 0.0 0.0 33.3 20.6 -263.4 44.2 q292.3 52.6 -54.2 -52.2 scrviccs (net) Income (net) Of which : iotcreat on extcmal debt Unrcquitcd traosfers (net) Private Public Of which : project graots Cement account balaocc (excluding official giants) -40.8 -13.4 -18.1 -40.5 -11.7 -15.1 29.0 7.4 21.6 8.7 24.8 8.4 16.4 12.2 -43.8 -65.4 -44.2 -60.6 Capital movements (net) 9.5 -4.1 Public, medium and long term Disbunements Project loans Nonproject loans Amortization Public enterprise borrowing Long-term private capital Portfolio inwstmcnt 11 Commercial banks Shott-term private capital and errors sod omissions 21 8.1 28.7 18.4 10.3 -20.6 2.6 0.4 0.0 2.7 -4.1 18.2 18.2 0.0 -22.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 -4.3 Overall balaocc -34.3 0.0 0.0 -60.9 -59.2 -7.0 -30.4 -2.7 0.6 -6.8 -5.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 63.6 58.6 -48.4 Financing 34.3 48.4 Change in net fore&t wets (- increase) 3/ Ofwhich : net use of Fond resources change in arlurs (reduction -) Priocipal Interest Rescheduling obtained Debt cancellation from France 41 11.3 2.4 14.9 7.9 7.0 8.1 0.0 -6.8 -6.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Financing gap 0.0 55.1 Memorandom items: Corrcnt account deficit, excluding official graota (percent of GDP) -9.2 -6.6 -7.3 -6.1 -5.2 -7.3 -7.8 -6.8 -5.5 Exchange rate (CFA f&mcs per U.S. dollar) 511.6 526.1 583.7 528.4 584.7 590.0 560.6 560.6 560.6 Cotton prices (in CFA fiaocs per kilogram) 884.2 825.2 950.8 859.9 850.2 826.0 718.9 778.9 838.8 Volume of cotton exports (ii thowaods of tons) 55.9 52.9 66.1 60.9 72.3 72.6 74.2 78.3 82.4 vohc of phosphate cxportp (in ,,,i”iON of tons) 2.7 2.7 2.1 2.9 2.7 2.2 2.5 2.4 2.5 ,Soorces: Central Baok of the West African States (BCEAO); and staff cstima~cs and projections. I/ Proceeds from the. sale of the capilal participation of the phosphate company, OTP, in a foreign tirm. 21 Includes short-term capital, other private capital, and errors and omissions. 31 Central bank. 4/ ln 1997, reflects the huyback operation reducing the stock of commercial hank debt al a discount. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 36 - Table 9. Togo: Balance of Payments, 1996-2001 (In millions of U.S. dollars, unless otberwiae indicated) 19% 1997 1998 1999 200 2001 Rev. Rev. hg. hJ. Iist. RoJectlons Trade balaoce -41.7 -30.3 8.5 4.9 -31.6 -50.4 -47.3 -30.0 Total expotts Domestic expotts Cotton co&e cocoa Phosphates Other 376.5 424.8 435.8 410.6 414.9 298.3 348.8 322.3 335.4 333.7 96.6 107.7 99.1 105.2 101.6 9.0 32.3 26.4 29.4 37.8 16.0 24.5 15.6 20.3 17.8 91.7 110.2 110.1 101.2 91.4 85.0 74.0 71.1 79.4 85.1 491.3 389.6 li3.3 38.6 25.5 102.5 99.7 Reexports 78.2 16.1 113.5 75.2 81.2 101.8 Irnpoti, f.o.b. -418.2 -455.2 427.3 405.7 -446.5 435.6 456.7 344.5 360.2 95.2 108.7 35.1 36.4 17.8 22.7 100.9 98.4 95.5 94.0 91.2 96.5 -486.1 -504.0 -521.3 Services and income (net) -107.9 -91.1 -120.7 -98.7 -91.8 -93.1 Sew&a (net) lncotne (net) Ofwhich : interest on external debt -76.5 47.9 -86.4 -64.7 -69.1 -31.4 -23.2 -34.4 -34.0 -22.7 -33.9 -30.1 -33.8 -33.5 -30.7 -72.3 -20.8 -26.9 Uomqoited traasfera (net) Private Public Of which : project grants 45.0 46.9 54.8 68.9 49.2 13.5 12.3 12.9 14.4 12.6 31.6 34.6 41.9 54.5 36.6 7.2 13.2 16.7 24.7 14.7 -97.4 -93.0 -72.5 -74.6 -24.9 -18.4 -34.6 -27.9 55.1 40.5 13.7 14.4 41.4 26.2 17.1 20.5 -92.8 -99.8 -134.2 -125.9 44.2 15.0 29.2 21.7 Current account balance (excluding official grants) -104.5 -74.5 -57.5 -24.8 -74.2 -136.1 -109.1 -99.4 -79.4 -110.8 -78.9 -108.1’ Capital movements (net) 56.6 93.3. 6.0 47.3 16.0 -7.4 Public, medium and long term Disb-enta Project loans kyroject loans -Amortization public enteqwise borrowing Long-term private capital Portfolio investment l/ Commercial banks Short-term private capital and ermn and omissions 2/ 34.1 20.5 -10.6 16.6 13.7 80.8 50.6 25.2 51.5 48.6 25.0 11.3 25.2 20.1 31.1 55.8 39.3 0.0 31.4 17.5 -46.8 -30.1 -35.8 -34.9 -34.9 4.9 4.4 4.2 3.8 4.4 23.5 19.0 14.3 25.3 0.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 5.7 -35.5 -1.9 1.5 4.6 -7.4 32.5 32.5 0.0 -39.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 -14.2 23.1 0.0 0.0 -7.3 0.0 Overall balance -47.9 18.8 -51.5 22.4 -58.2 -15.8 -5.9 -6.9 -5.9 32.2 30.7 32.2 30.7 0.0 0.0 -39.1 -36.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 -8.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 -108.6 -105.6 -86.3 Financing 47.9 -18.8 -11.6 -s7.7 58.2 -4.7 1.1 -4.7 1.1 -12.1 -10.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 113.4 104.5 -12.1 Change in net foreign assets (- increase) 31 ofwhich : net use of Fund resources Change in amam (reduction -) Principal interest Reachedulii obtained Debt cancellation from France 41 12.1 -34.6 -11.6 -75.5 19.2 -11.9 4.5 -14.7 -11.1 4.1 -6.7 -74.5 0.0 0.0 25.3 2.2 -50.0 0.0 0.0 13.4 -8.9 -24.5 0.0 0.0 11.9 40.4 26.7 0.0 17.8 13.7 2.0 63.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 -12.1 -11.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Financing gap 0.0 0.0 63.1 98.3 Memorandum items: C-t accoont deficit excluding offkial grants (percent of GDP) -9.2 -7.3 -6.1 Exchange rate (CFA kancs per U.S. dollar) 511.6 583.7 528.4 35.3 -5.2 584.1 0.0 -1.3 590.0 -7.8 -6.8 -5.5 560.6 560.6 560.6 Sources: Central Bank of the West African States (BCEAO); and staff estimates and projections. 11 Proceeds Emm the sale of the capital participation of the phosphate company, OTP, in a foreign fum. 2/ lncluda short-term capital, other private capital, and enws and omissions. 3/ Central bank. 4/ Jn 1997, reflects the buyback operation reducing the stock of commercial bank debt at a discount. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 10. Togo: Indicators of Fund Credit, 19952007 1995 19% 1997 1998 1599 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 (In mib indicated) Ootstmclmg Fund credit In millions of SDRs In billions of CFA finncs Inpcfcentofquota In pcrccnt of GDP III pero~nt of exports of g& and nonfactor services Debt service to the Fund In millions of SDRs 7.7 8.3 9.1 8.4 9.2 7.4 8.1 7.3 9.8 10.9 7.6 4.3 5.4 In billions of CPA francs 5.6 6.2 7.3 6.8 7.5 6.0 6.6 5.9 7.9 8.8 6.1 3.5 4.4 I In pcnxnt of quo(a 14.2 15.2 16.7 15.5 16.9 13.6 14.9 13.4 18.0 20.1 14.0 7.9 9.9 w In percent of GDP 0.9 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.6 0.6 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.4 0.2 0.3 4 III percent of exports of goods and nonfactor services 2.5 2.5 2.4 2.2 2.5 1.9 1.9 1.6 2.1 2.2 1.4 0.7 0.9 , Inpercentof&btsewicedue 11.3 13.2 16.9 14.6 16.2 14.3 13.8 12.1 15.6 17.9 17.1 10.7 13.0 In percent of gross official reserve 8.8 8.3 8.0 5.0 5.0 3.7 3.8 3.2 4.0 4.2 2.7 1.4 1.7 Memorandum items: Nominal exchange rate (U.S. dollar per SDR; end of period) Nominal exchange rate (CFA fkancs per U.S. dollar, end of period) Quota (in millions of SDR) Nominal GDP Exporta of goods and nonfactor services Scheduled debt service due before rescheduling Gross official reserves 70.4 62.5 64.9 56.5 49.6 42.5 34.4 27.2 18.5 9.8 4.3 22 0.0 51.3 47.1 52.2 45.4 40.6 34.6 27.9 21.9 14.9 7.9 3.5 1.8 0.0 129.7 115.2 119.6 104.0 91.3 78.2 63.4 50.0 34.0 18.0 8.0 4.0 0.0 7.8 6.2 6.0 5.1 4.2 3.3 2.5 1.9 1.2 0.6 0.2 0.1 0.0 22.7 19.1 17.2 15.1 13.4 10.9 8.2 6.1 3.9 2.0 0.8 0.4 0.0 1.487 1.438 1.378 1.375 1.407 1.407 1.407 1.407 1.407 1.407 1.407 1.407 1.407 490.0 523.7 583.0 584.7 581.8 578.7 575.9 572.9 572.9 572.9 572.9 572.9 572.9 54.3 54.3 54.3 54.3 54.3 54.3 54.3 54.3 54.3 54.3 54.3 54.3 54.3 653.6 753.7 876.0 890.6 960.7 1,033.6 1,095.5 lJ72.8 1.255.7 1.344.4 1439.8 15420 1651.5 226.1 247.0 304.1 300.3 303.2 318.4 341.3 358.6 381.6 401.5 435.2 463.7 495.0 49.9 47.3 43.2 46.2 46.3 42.1 47.5 48.7 50.5 49.2 35.9 32.5 33.4 63.9 75.3 91.1 135.2 150.2 162.3 172.0 184.1 197.1 211.1 226.0 242.1 259.3 (In billions of CFA francs, unlcsa otherwise indicated) Sources: lMF, Trcaswcfs Department; and st&projections. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 11. Togo: External Debt Outstanding and Scheduled Debt Service, 1996-2000 (In billions of CFA francs) End-l 996 1997 1998 1999 2000 Debt which: Pnnctpal Interest Total Prmcqral Interest Total Principal Interest Total Principal Interest Total outstanding arrears Total external debt 741.8 Existing contracted debt 11 741.8 Multilateral creditors 461.0 Of which : Fund 46.8 Paris Club postcutoff date 0.0 Paris Club precutoff date 221.9 Other bilateral creditors 18.2 Commercial banks 40.6 Debt service on new financing 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.2 0.0 0.0 0.8 0.8 0.0 0.9 0.9 0.0 1.0 Multilateral creditors 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.8 0.8 0.0 0.7 0.7 0.0 0.8 Bilateral creditors 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.2 0.2 0.0 0.3 Others 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 46.7 23.9 18.8 42.7 27.1 18.1 45.2 30.1 17.6 47.7 33.5 16.4 46.7 23.9 18.7 42.6 27.1 ‘17.3 44.4 30.1 16.7 46.8 33.5 15.4 6.0 12.9 4.6 17.5 15.7 4.0 19.7 15.3 3.9 19.2 15.5 3.6 0.0 6.6 0.7 7.3 6.5 0.3 6.8 6.8 0.7 7.5 5.7 0.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 9.1 13.8 22.9 10.3 13.1 23.4 13.8 12.6 26.4 16.9 11.6 0.0 1.9 0.3 2.1 1.1 0.2 1.3 1.1 0.2 1.3 1.1 0.1 40.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 49.9 48.9 19.1 6.0 0.0 28.5 I.2 0.0 1.0 0.8 I 0.3 ifi 0.0 I Sources: SociCte Nationale d’ Investissemen~ and staff estimates and projections. II Debt setvice due before rescheduling Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicI. II. III. Iv. V. VI. -39- APPENDIX I Togo: Relations with the Fund (As of March 3 1, 1999) Membership Status: Joined August 1, 1962; Article VIII General Resources Account: SDR million Quota Fund holdings of currency Reserve position in the Fund SDR Department: Net cumulative allocation Holdings Outstanding Purchases and Loans: SDR million Percent of quota Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility (ESAF) arrangements 67.36 91.8 Financial Arrangements: Approval TYPe Date ESAF 09/16/94 ESAF OS/3 l/89 SAF 03116188 Expiration Date 06/29/98 02128193 05/30/89 73.40 73.15 0.25 SDR million 10.98 0.05 Percent of quota 100.0 99.7 0.3 Percent of quota 100.0 0.5 Amount Approved Amount Drawn (SDR million) (SDR million) 65.16 54.30 46.08 38.40 26.88 7.68 Projected Obligations to the Fund: (SDR million; based on existing use of resources and present holdings of SDRs) Overdue Forthcoming 3/3 111999 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 Principal 6.9 7.1 8.1 7.3 9.8 Charges/interest 0.6 0.7 0.6 0.6 0.5 Total 7.5 7.8 8.7 7.9 10.3 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4o- APPENDIX I VII. Exchange Arrangement Togo is a member of the West African Monetary Union (WAMU). The exchange system common to all member countries of the WAMU is free of restrictions on the making of payments and transfers for current international transactions. The WAMU’s common currency, the CFA franc, had been pegged to the French franc at the rate of CFAF 1 = F 0.02. Effective January 12, 1994 the CFA franc was devalued and the new parity set at ’ CFAF 1 = F 0.01. On April 27, 1999, the rate of the CFA franc in terms of the SDR was SDR 1 = CFAF 835.05. VIII. Article IV Consultations Togo is on the standard 12-month Article IV consultation cycle. The 1998 Article IV consultation was completed by the Executive Board on January 21, 1998 (EBS/98/5; l/12/98). Ix. Technical Assistance Department Type of Assistance Time of Delivery Purpose FAD FAD FAD FAD FAD FAD Resident advisor Resident advisor staff Staff Staff Staff 1997 July 1996 February 1995 September 1994 February 1992 November 199 1 Tax administration Customs administration Tax reform Public expenditure Management Tax reform Budgetary reform X. Resident Representative A Fund resident representative has been assigned to Togo since July 1, 1996, when Mrs. Kabedi-Mbuyi took up the assignment. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-41- APPENDIX II Togo: Relations with the World Bank Group (As of March 23, 1999) Commentary on World Bank lending operations 1. As of March 23, 1999, IBRD/IDA lending to Togo totaled 49 loans/credits amounting to US%756 million, of which US%629 million was disbursed, IBRD lending amounted to US%60 million. IDA credits have financed projects in agriculture (cocoa, coffee, cotton, and foodcrops), transport, water supply, power, education, private enterprise development, and grassroots development. In addition, IDA has supported technical assistance in the Ministries of Planning, Rural Development, Industry, and State Enterprises. Togo has also benefited from Bank Group support for regional operations, including two credits to the West African Development Bank (BOAD). It has also received a health sector adjustment credit and five structural adjustment credits, the latest an economic recovery and adjustment credit (ERAC) approved in April 1996. 2. IDA’s medium-term strategy is designed to promote private sector-led growth and alleviate poverty. A Transport Sector project, a National Agriculture Services project and a Commercial Debt Reduction program were approved by the Board in September 1997, and a Public Enterprises Restructuring and Privatization project was approved by the Board in March 1998. Four projects are under preparation: Health, Water Sector, Power and Regional Centers Rehabilitation. Key objectives include: improving access to financial services in rural communities, improving the coverage and quality of health services, assistance for water resources management, a social fund project with a regional decentralized approach, and power transmission and distribution. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 42 - APPENDIX II Togo - Relations pith the World Bank Group (In millions of U.S. dollars, as of March 23, 1999) I/ Original Principal 21 Disbursed IDA IBRD Total IDA IBRD Total Fully disbursed loans and credits 5 12.0 60.0 572.0 5 12.0 60.0 572.0 All disbursing credits 184.0 0.0 184.0 56.9 0.0 56.9 Power rehabilitation and extension 15.0 0.0 15.0 LomC urban development 26.2 0.0 26.2 Education 36.6 0.0 36.6 Road transport 50.0 0.0 50.0 Nat. agriculture services 26.2 0.0 26.2 Public enterprise restr. & priv. 30.0 0.0 30.0 14.0 17.3 15.0 9.4 0.1 1.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 14.0 17.3 15.0 9.4 0.1 1.1 Grand total for all loans . 0.0 60.0’ 60.0 0.0 60.0 60.0 Grand total for all credits 696.0 0.0 696.0 568.9 0.0 568.9 568.9 60.0 62i.9 Grand total for all loans and credits 696.0 60.0 756.0 Source: IBRD and IDA Summary Statement of Loans and Credits. 11 Discrepancies between original and disbursed amounts are due to fluctuations in US$/SDR exchange rates in the period of disbursement. Credits denominated in SDRs are shown in U.S. dollar equivalents based on the monthly exchange rate in effect at the time of negotiations. 2/ Original amounts net of any cancellations. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 43 - APPENDIX III Togo: Statistical Issues The authorities have generally provided the core minimum statistical indicators to the Fund (see attached table). Weaknesses in the areas of national accounts, balance of payments, and public finance statistics increased in the early 1990s with the disruption in government services related to social disturbances, but these are gradually being corrected. Economic and financial information in Togo is provided mainly by the Ministry of Finance and Privatization, the Ministry of Planning, and the Central Bank of West African States (BCEAO). National accounts Comprehensive annual national accounts data, both from the production and the use of resources side, are prepared by a GDP Committee composed of representatives of the Department of Statistics, a component of the Ministry of Planning, the Ministry of Finance and Privatization, the Ministry of Agriculture, and the BCEAO. These data are based on estimates of agricultural production and exports, and on surveys of private and public enterprise activity in the secondary and tertiary sectors. The degree of coverage varies; however, there remain weaknesses in the estimates of gross fixed investment and the changes in stocks, as well as in the estimation of sectoral and overall deflators. The data, whose quality has improved over the last year, are discussed in detail with Fund missions. A new series on income distribution is also being compiled. In mid-1997, the authorities undertook a major revision of GDP estimates for the period 1994-97, based on revised estimates for agricultural production. Prices, employment, and wages The Department of Statistics prepares only one consumer price index (CPI) based on the capital city, LomC. The series was discontinued during the period of strikes, and no data were collected from January to March 1994. A new household survey was undertaken to update the base of the CPI (currently 1987) and take into account changes in consumption patterns resulting from the January 1994 devaluation of the CFA franc, and a new regionally harmonized CPI, based on this survey has been designed. The main weakness of the price statistics is the absence of a general index that covers the main towns of the country. There are no official periodic statistics on wages and employment. Data on employment in the formal sector are provided by the Caisse Nationale de la SCcuritC Sociale (CNSS), and the Ministry of Employment Promotion and the Civil Service provides information on civil servants and permanent government e’mployees. Public finance The latest government finance statistics (GFS) data reported by the authorities were for 1987 and were last published in the 1992 Government Finance Statistics Yearbook (GFSY). The authorities do not provide monthly or quarterly data for publication in International Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 44 - APPENDIX III Financial Statistics (IFS). However, quarterly data on government operations, which are compiled by the Economics Department of the Ministry of Finance and Privatization, have been made available to the African Department through December 1998. A unified budgetary presentation using the same nomenclature has been prepared with Fund technical assistance and was used during the preparation of the 1998 budget. The 1999 budget incorporates capital spending financed by domestic resources but not investment financed by foreign resources. The data on the government’s operations include that of the central government and autonomous agencies. Data on the social security agency are also available. The Ministry of State Enterprises maintains a database, including data on the balance sheets and operating results, turnover, value added, tax payments, investments, debts, and employment of the main public enterprises; data through end-1997 have been communicated to the Fund. Despite the quicker preparation of the treasury accounts and their improved reliability, the quality of the public finance statistics is still unsatisfactory, and the treasury is still unable to monitor effectively movements in the government’s bank accounts, making it difficult to keep track of the financing of the budget. Moreover, little up-to-date information is available on the key social and demographic indicators. Balance of payments and international trade statistics External sector statistics have improved, though the compilation of the balance of payments still suffers from some deficiencies in the estimates of services and transfers, and particularly, in the registration of private capital flows. Balance of payments statistics are prepared by the national agency of the BCEAO on the basis of international trade statistics provided by the customs administration; information on the public sector external financing; surveys concerning private sector operations in factor and nonfactor services; and capital transactions settled through the central bank’s and the commercial banks’ external position. The statistics have been published in IFS through 1994. The main weaknesses concern (a) the data on reexport trade, which are transmitted mostly through informal, nonbank channels; (b) the failure of the BCEAO to process and use the information contained in the commercial banks’ foreign exchange report forms; (c) the low response rate or nonresponse to specific private sector surveys; (d) the uncertainty of data on workers’ remittances; and (e) the difficulty, inherent in the monetary union, in determining the central bank’s external position. Summary annual balance of payments data are provided to Fund missions on a regular basis-there are no quarterly data-but these are subject to major revisions as more detailed data become available. Fund missions frequently adjust certain aspects of the data provided by the authorities to ensure consistency with data from other sources. The quality of customs data is being improved owing to the upgrading of the computerized customs data system, SYDONIA. In this regards, technical assistance has been provided by STA. The BCEAO is also strengthening the balance of payments unit, both in terms of personnel and electronic equipment. The Fund has provided substantial technical assistance in balance of payments statistics to the headquarters of the regional central bank in Dakar. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-45 - APPENDIX III There is also a need for greater cooperation between the central bank and the Department of Statistics to ensure consistency between balance of payments and national accounts data. Monetary data Monetary data are provided by the BCEAO to the Fund on a regular basis. The April 1999 issue of IFS included data for the monetary authorities and the deposit money banks through November 1998. Problems that appear in the monetary statistics for Togo are not specific to that country, but concern all seven countries of the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU).’ The main statistical problem arises from the difficulties the BCEAO has encountered in estimating currency in circulation in each WAEMU member country because of the large backlog of unsorted banknotes held by the central bank in its various national agencies. The BCEAO is working on measures to accelerate the sorting operations in order to resolve this problem. In addition, the official monetary surveys reported for publication in the IFS still include banks in liquidation that have ceased banking operations. Since 1994, monetary data in staff reports have excluded these banks and reflect only active banks. Finally, the revaluation of the BCEAO’s assets and liabilities has not been completed in all WAEMU member countries, After transitional difficulties linked to the 1996 introduction of the new reporting system for banks, the monetary accounts are now more reliable and produced with shorter delays. Data on interest rates on deposits, loans, and money market operations are provided to Fund missions on an ad hoc basis. ‘Benin, Burkina Faso, C&e d’Ivoire, Mali, Niger, Senegal, and Togo. Guinea Bissau joined the WAEMU on May 2, 1997. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTogo: Core Statistical Indicators (As ofMarch 31, 1999) Central Bank Reserve/ Consumer Cutrent Overall Exchange International Balance Base Broad Interest Price Exports/ Account Government GDP/ External Rates Reserves Sheet Money Money Rates Index Imports Balance Balance GNP Debt Date of latest observation Current l/99 l/99 l/99 l/99 l/99 l/99 l/99 1998 12/98 1998 1997 Date received Current 3199 3199 3199 3199 3199 2199 3199 3199 2/99 3199 3199 Frequency of data Daily Monthly Monthly Monthly Monthly Variable Monthly Quarterly Ammally Quarterly Ammally Annually I Frequency of Monthly Monthly Monthly Monthly Monthly Variable Monthly reporting Variable Variable Quarterly Variable Variable $ Source of update 11 EIS/TRE BCEAO BCEAO BCEAO BCEAO BCEAO Direction BCEAO BCEAO de la Ministry Ministry SNI of Finance of Statistique Finance Mode of reporting Online Staff StatT SW Staff Staff staff staff St&T staff staff staff Confidentiality No 21 21 21 21 No No 2/ 21 21 21 21 Frequency of publication Monthly Monthly Monthly Monthly Monthly Monthly Monthly Semi- Monthly Annually Quarterly -dY hdY l/ EIS = IMF Economic Information System; TRE = IMF Treasurer’s Department; BCEAO = CentraI Bank of the West African States; and SNI = Soci&e Nationale d’Investissement. 2/ Preliminary &ta for staff use only; actual data unrestricted. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 47 - APPENDIX IV Togo: Selected Demographic and Social Indicators Most Recent Sub- Latest Single Year EStimate Saharan ACica 1970-75 1980-85 1990-96 Population (In units indicated) Total population (thousands) 2,285 3,028 4,200 596,400 Annual growth rate (in percent) 2.5 2.9 3.0 2.7 Urban population (in percent of total) 16.3 26.5 31.2 31.7 Life expectancy @ears) 45 52 50 52 Infant mortality rate (per 1,000 births) 129 99 87 91 Labor force (In percent of labor force, unless otherwise indicated) 1,020 1,301 1,605 229,480 39 37 36 36 72 67 . Labor force (age 15-64, thousands) Female participation rate Agriculture Education (In percent of population age 15 and over) 84 62 57 . . . 75 69 50 62 Illiteracy Female (In percent of schoolage population) Primary school enrollment ratio 99 93 111 Male 130 114 134 Female 68 71 87 Secondary school enrollment ratio 19 21 23 Of which: Female 9 10 12 67 74 60 18 . . . (In units indicated) Education expenditure In percent of government expenditure Iu percent of GDP Real expenditure index (1980=100) 19.6 19.9 6.2 6.5 116 149 . . . . . . Health 28,938 8,725 1,592 1,239 . . . Number of persons per physician Number of persons per muse Health expenditure In percent of government expenditure In percent of GDP Real expenditure index (1980= 100) . . . 5.6 5.2 . . . 1.8 1.7 . . . 109 126 Nutrition Per capita calorie intake 2,130 2,133 Food production per capita index (1987=100) 126 106 113 . Sources: World Development Report; and World Bank staff. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 48 - APPENDIX V Togo: An Analysis of Structural Budget Balance A major constraint facing many developing countries in their adjustment efforts is limited tax revenue. While Togo is no exception, its public finances are characterized by a relatively large share of incompressible expenditures, which has contributed to the reemergence of fiscal pressures in recent years. With personnel spending alone representing about 50 percent of total tax revenue and the external debt service claiming a similar share, there is little room for ’ maneuver in the structure of budgetary expenditure. The analysis of the structural budget deficit presented in this appendix highlights the nature of the constraints facing the authorities. For the purpose of this analysis, expenditures are subdivided into two categories: those that are incompressible, in the sense of being essential or unavoidable; and all remaining expenditures, including the debt service to nonmultilateral creditors. The first category includes personnel, some materials and supplies, essential subsidies and transfers, interest on domestic debt, and the debt-service obligations to multilaterals only. ’ The structural balance (Balance I) represents the gap between available resources and expenditures that cannot be compressed. As such, it represents the budgetary resources available to meet all other expenditures. A structural budget balance excluding debt service (Balance II) is also presented to gauge the scope of fiscal maneuver in the absence of any debt-service obligations. Three conclusions can be drawn from this analysis. First, as shown in the table, the amount of resources available after incompressible expenditures are covered is very limited in relation to other budgetary spending needs, even excluding the effects of the debt-service payments. Second, over the program period shown in the table, an increasingly larger share of revenue is consumed by these “priority” spendings. Third, relatively small revenue shortfalls or a weaker revenue mobilization-such as expected in 1999 in view of the outstanding tax credits from 1998 to be compensated against tax obligations in 1999-could easily give rise to domestic arrears on these incompressible outlays (e.g., wages and salaries), even if the government drastically cuts back on nonessential expenditures. The implications of this analysis are that a prioritization of expenditures, while necessary, is not sufficient in the present budgetary context. A fundamental change in the structure of public expenditure is essential if the government is to have any room for maneuver in public expenditure policy. For example, a reduction in the share of effective revenues absorbed by personnel costs to below 50 percent (as required by the WAEMU convergence criterion) would generate savings that can used elsewhere (e.g., capital spending or higher current spending on material and supplies in education and health). Exercising this option would, however, require making some politically sensitive choices. First, given its limited resources, Togo’s current wage bill (over 50 percent of overall tax receipts) is not sustainable. Consideration should therefore be given to ways of permanently reducing the wage bill. Measures could include: the abandonment of the automatic system of advancement and the introduction of a merit-based compensation ” ‘Debt service to multilaterals is included because it is not reschedulable and because Togo draws a substantial share of its external financing from multilateral sources. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-49 - APPENDIX V system. A reduction in the size of the civil service over time would also appear unavoidable. An outright reduction of nominal salaries, though politically extremely difficult, may prove necessary if a reduction in the size of the civil service is unfeasible. Second, given that subsidies and transfers from the central government budget are essential to the functioning of local administrations, hospitals, the university, etc., it may be necessary to introduce more user fees, so as to share the costs of provision of these services. Togo: Structural Balance 1996-99 11 1996 1997 1998 * 1999 Revenue 21 110.4 (In billions of CFA francs) 128.5 127.6 127.2 31 Incompressible expenditure 105.9 114.1 119.1 127.8 Personnel 53.6 57.0 58.9 60.8 Material and supplies 20.3 22.1 24.2 23.2 Essential subsidies and transfers 11.7 14.7 16.0 20.0 Interest on domestic debt 3.1 2.7 1.0 2.0 Debt service to multilateral creditors (incl. IMF) 17.2 17.5 19.0 21.8 Interest 3.8 4.5 4.5 6.1 Principal 13.4 13.0 14.5 15.7 Balance I (structural balance) 4.5 14.4 8.6 -0.6 In percent of GDP 0.6 1.6 1.0 -0.1 Balance II (excluding external debt effects) 21.7 32.0 27.5 21.2 Other expenditures 4/ 38.5 48.6 58.1 65.7 Other current expenditures 11.4 7.2 14.3 18.3 Other subsidies 8.7 14 10.3 12.6 Domestically financed capital spending (BIE) 4.3 3.3 7.3 8.5 Debt service to other external creditors 30.2 24.1 26.2 26.3 Interest 13.6 13.1 13.6 13.3 Principal 16.6 11.0 12.6 13.0 Balance III 51 -50.1 -34.2 -49.5 (In percent) -66.3 Memorandum items: Incompressible expenditures/ total revenue Personnel/tax revenue External debt-service/tax revenue 96.0 88.8 93.3 100.4 54.6 49.3 51.0 52.2 51.4 40.9 36.1 38.1 Sources: Togolese authorities; and staff calculations, l/ The analysis excludes foreign-financed capital spending, as well as external budgetary assistance and the variation of domestic and external payments arrears, so as to focus on the underlying structural balance. 2/ Overall revenues, excluding foreign grants and privatization receipts. 3/ Effective revenues in 1999 are lower than budget projections owing to the netting out of tax advances made in 1998. 4/Defined as total expenditure less foreign-financed investment spending, less “incompressible expenditures,” but excluding variations of arrears. 51 Overall balance (p.o.b. excluding foreign-financed investment). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTogo: Public Enterprise Restructuring and Privatization, 1998-99 Enterprise Sector of Activity Date status OTP SATAL TOGOGAZ TOGOPHARMA HOTELS Sarakawa Fazao La PaixlLe Lac Tropica& aoGt/ Le RocI CentmY Kara 2 fkvrier EDITOGO Hotel Ecole le B&n LONATO ODEF ONAF SALT SOTOCO Ongoing Operations under the Revised Divestiture Program, 1994-Present Phosphates Agriculture foodstuffs Gas Pharmaceutical distribution 1997 - 1997 - 1997 - 1997 - Forty percent of the state’s shares in OTP offered for sale in early 1998, as foreseen. However, the sekcted bidder unable to mobilize the necessary fmancing, and the initial offer of the second bidder unacceptable; continuing discussions. Proposal made to cede state’s shares to the foreign partner on condition that the latter present a five-year investment plan and assume responsibility for wage taxes, social security contributions, and other debts. No response from pa~Wer sine May 1998. Completion of operation expected at end-March 1999 with cession of remaining state shares to employees and other nationals. Proposal of Privatkation Committee to liquidate still under study by government. Printing and publishing Hotel training school State lottery Forestry Agriculture Airport of Lomb Cotton 1998 Commercial lease. 1997- Commercial lease under negotiation. 1996 - After failure of initial teuder for sale in 1997, new tender for lease launched at end-February 1999. 1996 - 1996 - After failure of initial tender for sale in 1997, divestiture of the hotels envisaged by end-2000. Continuing reflections by government on the appropriate strategy. New Phase of Divestiture in Context of the PAREP 1998- A revised proposed strategy received in October 1998 for disengagement kom the Privatization Commission presently m&r study by govemment 1998 - Divestiture strategy proposed by F’rivatization Commission in July 1998; inquiries on interest by hotel management groups without result; proposal at end-l 998 to launch a tender for bids for the cession of the whole complex or of the hotel alone. 1998 - Proposal by Privatization Commission in early November 1998. 1998 - Still in phase of defiuing an appropriate strategy. Oct. 1997 - Privatization launched prior to PAREP in view of expressed public interest, but collapse of negotiations in October 1997. Envisaged strategy of putting the e&zprise up for lease. 1998 - Submission by Privatization Commission of a proposed strategy in September 1998. 1998 - Proposal to create a national committee to define the liberalization strategy for the cotton sector. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTogo: Public Enterprise Reshcturing and Privatization, 1998-99 Enterprise Sector of Activity Date Status TOGO-TELECOM Telecommunications UTBIBTCUBTD Commercial banks SNI Financial institution CET Savings institution GTA SLAB hlsurance Financial institution CNSS SPT PAL Social security Postal services Autonomous Port of Lomt? 1998 - 1998 - 1998- 1998- 1998- 1998 - Government to prepare document outlining the orientation of the divestiture strategy by end-March, preparation of financial audit. Privatization strategy proposed in June 1998 (retention of a maximum share of 20 percent; diagnostic studies). Strategy still to be presented to the Council of Ministers afIer nonobjection of the World Bank; then selection of privatization counsel. Terms of reference for diagnostic studies submitted for Bank approval. Final report of diagnostic study received and its conclusions accepted by government at end-1998. Terms of reference for study of modalities for redefining the SNI’s dictions and transftig the management of the external debt to the Mini&y of Finance delayed to 1999. Final report of diagnostic study received in June 1998 with a plan of action for reinforcing the CET’s capital and limiting government ownership to 20 percent of the shares. Intention to request the status of commercial bank for CET. Consultant’s report being fmalized, to be followed by preparation of a social plan for the enterprise. Action plan for implementing the privatization strategy to go before the National Assembly in April 1999. Restructuring of Enterprises Remaining in the Portfolio CCI w I 1998- Process of technical evaluation of consultants for the preparation of a five-year performance contract submitted to World Bank for nonobjection at end-January 1999; envisaged effectiveness of performance contract end-June 1999. Actuarial study of the contribution rates, sectoral equilibria by branch, and legal and institutional framework to be undertaken. 1998 - Law on postal seryices adopted by National Assembly in February 1999; Members of Executive Committee of Regulatory Authority nominated in March 1999; evaluation of technical offks for consultants to define a liberalization strategy submitted to World Bank for approval in February 1999; consultant selected in July 1998 for preparation of a management contract for the SPT and the franchising of post off&s. 1998- Process of technical evaluation of consultants for the preparation of a five-year performance contract submitted to World Bank for nonobjection at end-January 1999; envisaged effectiveness of performance contract end-July 1999. Source: Ministry of Finance and Privatization. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public