DOCUMENT OF INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND NOT FOR PUBLIC USE MASTER FILES ROOM I-IQ c-525 0450 SMl991253 CONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION October 6. 1999 To: Members of the Executive Board From: Subject: The Secretary El Salvador-Staff Report for the 1999 Article IV Consultation Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staffreport for the 1999 Article IV consultation with El Salvador, which will be brought to the agenda for discussion on a date to be announced. Mr. Di Tata (ext. 34403) and Mr. Dehesa (ext. 36141) are available to answer technical or factual questions relating to this paper prior to the Board discussion. Unless the Documents Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the WTO Secretariat on Friday, October 15, 1999; and to the European Commission, the European Investment Bank, and the Inter-American Development Bank, following its consideration by the Executive Board. Att: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public, CONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND EL SALVADOR Staff Report for the 1999 Article IV Consultation Prepared by the StafFRepresentatives for the 1999 Consultation with El Salvador Approved by Claudio M. Loser and G. Russell Rincaid October 5, 1999 Contents Page Executive Summary ............................................................................................................. 3 I. Introduction.. ........................................................................................................... 4 II. Background and Performance Under the 1998-99 Program ..................................... 4 III. Policy Discussions ...................................................................................... ._, ........... 9 A. Fiscal Policy.. ................................................................................................. 10 B. Credit Policy .................................................................................................. 12 C. The Financial System ...................................................................................... 13 D. External Sector Policies .................................................................................. 14 E. Discussions on a Currency Board ................................................................... I6 F. Structural Policies, Poverty Alleviation, and Other Issues .............................. .17 IV. Medium-Term Outlook.. ........................................................................................ .19 V. Staff Appraisal ,.,., .._.........., ,.., ,..,.. ..,.. .: 20 Figures 1. Selected Economic Indicators ,, ,.. ., ., ,, ., ._., ,._, ._,. ..__. .__. ,.., ..23 2. Financial Indicators, ._. ., .., ,,, ,., ,. ,_.. ,.. ._, _. ,. ..__. ,__. .,. ._. ., ,,.. _. ,., ._. .24 3. Exchange Rate Developments ,_. .._. ._, ._, ., _, . ..25 Text Tables 1. 2. Macroeconomic Flows.. ......................................................................................... .26 Nonfinancial Public Sector .................................................................................... ..2 7 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2- 3. 4. 5. 6. 7 8 9. IO. 11 12 13. 14. 15. Central Government Consolidated Operations ........................................................ .28 Operations of the Financial System .......................................................................... 29 Financial System Credit: Origin, Destination, and Financing ................................... .30 Balance ofpayments.. ............................................................................................ .31 Public External Debt and Debt Service by Creditor ............................................... ..3 2 Indicators of External Vulnerability ........................................................................ .33 Medium-Term Fiscal Projections.. ........................................................................... 34 Summary of the Structure and Performance of the Financial Sector ......................... 35 Comparative Social Indicators. ............................................................................... .36 Medium-Term Macroeconomic Framework ............................................................ 37 Medium-Term Balance of Payments Projections (Passive Scenario) ......................... 38 Medium-Term Balance of Payments Projections (Active Scenario) .......................... 39 Public External Debt and Debt Service .................................................................... 40 Appendices I. Fund Relations ....................................................................................................... .4 I II. Selected Economic and Financial Indicators ........................................................... .43 III. Summary of Performance Under the Stand-By Arrangement ................................... 44 IV. Statistical Issues. ..................................................................................................... 45 V. Relations with the World Bank Group. .................................................................... 48 VI. Relations with the Inter-American Development Bank ............................................. 50 VII. Public Information Notice (PIN) ........................................................................... ..5 2 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3- Executive Summary Recent economic developments: Macroeconomic performance through September 1998 was broadly in line with the program supported by the present Stand-By Arrangement. However, the fiscal program went off track in the last quarter, and the performance criteria on NDA and NIR were missed owing in part to central bank assistance to cover withdrawals of deposits from an intervened bank. Real GDP grew by 3.2 percent in 1998 (4 percent in the program), while consumer prices rose by 4.2 percent (3% percent in the program) due to the impact of Hurricane Mitch on agricultural output and prices. Developments in 1999 point to a slowdown in real GDP growth to 2-2% percent, mainly because of a sharp decline in coffee export receipts. Consumer prices remained virtually unchanged in the 12 months through August, and may increase by 1 percent for the year. The authorities seek to contain the fiscal deficit at 3 percent of GDP in 1999 (2’% percent in the program), with public savings declining finther owing to significant wage bill overruns. Liquidity conditions were tight through June 1999; more recently the central bank relaxed somewhat the credit stance, and pressures on interest rates have eased. NIR have increased by USS240 million to US%2 billion (120 percent of base money) since end-1998, aided by privatization proceeds and a bond placement in international markets. In June the authorities submitted to the assembly a tax package to broaden the base of the income tax and the VAT. So far, only part of this package has been approved. Policy discussions: El Salvador has maintained its record of macroeconomic stability, notwithstanding the political transition to a new administration and adverse exogenous developments. However, the tax effort (at less than 10% percent of GDP) continues to be relatively low, and large wage increases to public employees are absorbing resources at the expense of public investment. The staff stressed the need to strengthen tax revenue and adopt a policy of wage restraint to reduce the deficit to a sustainable level while increasing investment and social spending. The authorities indicated that they would continue to seek prompt approval of the remainder of the tax package and would adopt other fiscal measures following the congressional elections scheduled for March 2000. Subsequently, a further increase in tax revenue, together with reforms to smooth the pressures associated with the public pension system, would be required. The authorities intend to proceed gradually with further reductions in reserve requirements while placing increased reliance on indirect monetary instruments. Regarding exchange rate policy, the present peg to the U.S. dollar will be maintained. In the financial system, the staff stressed the need to proceed promptly with the implementation of a new banking law that introduces supervision on a consolidated basis and further improves prudential regulations. Also, there is need to continue monitoring bank portfolios closely and strengthen loan provisions. The authorities are considering adopting a currency board arrangement. However, a substantial strengthening of the fiscal position and the financial system would be required as preconditions. Although the conditions for completing the review under the arrangement are not met at this time, approval of the remaining measures submitted to the assembly would pave the way for discussions on a program for 2000 that could be supported by a new arrangement. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4- 1. INTRODUCTION 1. Discussions for the 1999 Article IV consultation and the first review under the 17- month Stand-By Arrangement approved on September 23, 1998 were held in San Salvador on November 17-December 4, 1998 and May 24-June 4, 1999, and were followed by several contacts in July-September 1999.’ The authorities have treated the arrangement, which is for SDR 37.68 million (30 percent of quota), as precautionary, and El Salvador has no out- standing purchases from the Fund. El Salvador has accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4 of the Articles of Agreement, and maintains a system that is free of restrictions on the making of payments for current international transactions. Fund relations with El Salvador are summarized in Appendix I. 2. The last Article IV consultation with El Salvador was concluded by the Executive Board on February 20, 1998 (EBS/98/19). At that time, Executive Directors emphasized the importance of keeping the public finances under control while tightening credit policy. They cautioned against granting increases in public sector wages in excess of targeted inflation and stressed the need to address the issue of declining tax revenue with a view to achieving a sustainable fiscal position over the medium term. Directors welcomed the resumption of privatization of public utilities and the authorities’ initiative to strengthen bank supervision. 3. In June 1998 El Salvador subscribed to the Fund’s Special Data Dissemination Standard (SDDS). The coverage, timeliness, and quality of economic data provided by El Salvador are generally adequate. A number of weaknesses in the statistical database are being addressed with technical assistance, including from the Fund (Appendix IV). II. BACKGROUND AND PERFORMANCE UNDER THE 1998-99 PROGRAM 4. Following a satisfactory economic performance in 1997, the economic program for 1998-99 supported by the Stand-By-Arrangement sought to ensure an orderly transition to the Flores administration, which took ofice in June 1999. The program aimed at maintaining high rates of output growth while keeping inflation low in the context of a fixed exchange rate. The program was based on real GDP growth of 4-4% percent in 1998899 and sought to contain inflation to about 3% percent while strengthening net ’ The staff team consisted of J.C. Di Tata (Head), J. Bailen, M. Dehesa, F. Frantischek, and M. Garza (all WHD). The staff met with President Flores, former President Calderon Sol, the present and former members of the economic cabinet, other senior government officials, and representatives of the private sector. Mr Guzman and Mr. Rodriguez, at the time Executive Director for El Salvador and Advisor to the Executive Director, respectively, also participated in the discussions. The Managing Director visited San Salvador on November 20, 1998 for discussions with the authorities in the wake of Hurricane Mitch. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-5- international reserves (NIR). The overall deficit of the nonfinancial public sector (after grants) was projected to increase to 2.7 percent of GDP in 1998, from 1.8 percent in 1997, and to decline only slightly in 1999, mainly on account of across-the-board wage increases granted to public sector employees,’ following a freeze that had been in place since July 1995. 5. Economic performance under the program was broadly on track in the period through September 1998, but there were significant deviations toward the end of the year. Ah the performance criteria for end-September 1998, with the exception of the floor on public savings, were observed, but several performance criteria for end-December were missed (Appendix III). Real GDP grew by 3.2 percent in 1998, reflecting the effects of Hurricane Mitch on agricultural output in the last quarter, while consumer prices rose by 4.2 percent owing to the impact ofthe hurricane on food prices (Table 1 and Figure 1)’ 6. Public sector savings declined by more than anticipated in the program, to 1 percent of GDP in 1998, notwithstanding a significantly better-than-expected revenue performance. Pressures on noninterest current expenditure intensified in the last quarter owing to higher- than-programmed selective wage increases prompted by the government’s strategy to minimize labor unrest in the period leading up to the presidential elections; unplanned severance payments by the state electricity company (CEL), which restructured its operations; and emergency assistance provided after Hurricane Mitch.4 Wage overruns in the health and education sectors, in particular, were significant because of lax implementation of the merit and regrading exercise and the spillover to other health workers of an 8 percent wage increase granted after a strike to physicians employed by the Social Security Institute. The overall deficit of the nonfinancial public sector (after grants) was contained at 2.7 percent of GDP in 1998, in line with the program, as the shortfall in public savings was largely offset by delays in the execution of investment projects (Tables 2 and 3). * A 6 percent general increase effective January 1998 and an additional general increase of 6 percent effective December 1998. 3 The effects of Hurricane Mitch on El Salvador were significant but less so than in Honduras and Nicaragua. The number of dead is estimated at 260; 84,000 people (out of a total population of 6.1 million) were displaced; and damage to some crops (corn, sorghum, red beans, coffee, and sugar) and infrastructure was substantial. The total direct damage inflicted by the hurricane was estimated at USS282 million (2.4 percent of 1998 GDP), while the cost of reconstruction and preventive measures against damage from future disasters was calculated by the government at US.Sl.7 billion (14% percent of GDP), to be spread over a 20-year period. The authorities did not request emergency assistance from the Fund. 4 Severance payments by CEL were close to 0.2 percent of GDP. Current outlays related to emergency assistance after Hurricane Mitch amounted to less than 0.1 percent of GDP. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-6- 7. Monetary developments in 1998 were characterized by a slowdown in the rates of growth of broad money and credit to the private sector, and were affected by the intervention of a financial institution in the last quarter. The rate of growth of broad money declined to 9% percent in 1998, from 12.3 percent during 1997 (Figure 2). Following a substantial reserve accumulation associated with large privatization proceeds, NIR dropped from mid-October to early November because of the turmoil in emerging markets’ and central bank financial assistance to cover withdrawals of deposits from a medium-size bank (CREDISA), which was intervened by the superintendency of the financial system (SFS) due to capital deficiencies. To reverse the reserve loss, in early November the authorities announced a phased increase of 3 percentage points in reserve requirements (remunerated) to an average of 24 percent, which was completed in March 1999. At the same time, interest rates on central bank paper were raised somewhat to discourage capital outflows. Pressures in the foreign exchange market eased following these measures, and NIR recovered. For 1998 as a whole, NIR increased by US$300 million to US$1,770 million (5.7 months of imports of goods and services and 110 percent of base money), compared with a reserve accumulation of US$400 million envisaged in the program (Tables 4 and 5). 8. Mainly because of a decline in coffee export volumes, the external current account shifted from surplus to a deficit of 0.7 percent of GDP in 1998, which was however somewhat smaller than programmed. Coffee export receipts were seriously affected by El Niilo and the decline in international prices in the second half of 1998, while nontraditional exports to other Central American countries hit by the hurricane were lower than projected. Partly offsetting factors were a substantial increase in remittances from Salvadorans abroad in the months following the hurricane and lower payments for oil imports, reflecting the sharp decline in world oil prices. In the capital account, proceeds from privatization equivalent to US%8 10 million (about 6.8 percent of GDP) were partially used to prepay high cost external public debt (Table 6). 9. Developments in 1999 point to a further slowdown in economic activity, owing mainly to an additional decline in coffee export receipts and slower growth in the manufacturing sector, with real GDP growth projected by the staff at 2-2s percent for 1999 as a whole (the authorities are of the view that it could be somewhat higher). Consumer prices were virtually stable in the 12 months through August 1999, reflecting a drop in food prices; the 12-month rate of increase is projected to be 1 percent by year’s end. Several performance ’ Dollar-denominated loans fimded mostly through external borrowing expanded significantly through September 1998, encouraged by an interest differential of around 500 basis points vis-a-vis col6n rates, but in the last quarter commercial banks reduced their foreign exposure in light of prevailing uncertainties and a decision adopted previously by the authorities to tighten regulations on commercial banks’ external borrowing (see Figure 2). These regulations lowered the limit on banks’ external borrowing from 2.5 times to twice capital plus reserves, and to short-term external borrowing from 1.5 times to the equivalent of capital plus reserves. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-l- criteria and indicative targets under the program were missed during the first two quarters of 1999.6 10. Public sector savings continued to weaken in the first half of the year, falling significantly short of the program’s indicative target. Notwithstanding an improvement in income tax collections, tax revenue increased by only 3 percent in the first seven months of 1999 (relative to the same period of 1998), as VAT and customs receipts were affected adversely by the slowdown in economic activity and import growth. At the same time, noninterest current expenditure rose by almost 10 percent, mostly on account of tirther wage bill increases.7 (In all, the public sector wage bill is expected to rise from 7 percent of GDP in 1997 to 8.8 percent in 1999.) The overall fiscal deficit turned out to be lower than programmed in the first half of 1999 owing to a sharp reduction in capital outlays, as several projects were delayed by the late approval of the 1999 budget by the assembly. 11. Broad money growth declined to 8 percent in the 12 months ended June 1999, and credit growth to the private sector slowed further. Liquidity conditions were tight in the first half of 1999, partly because of difficulties encountered by four banks that assumed CREDISA’s remaining deposit liabilities without a proper counterpart on the assets side.8 As a result, bank deposit and lending rates rose further, to 11.6 percent and 15.9 percent in June, 6 The end-March 1999 performance criteria on public savings, the net domestic assets of the central bank, and NtR were missed, while the ceilings on the net borrowing requirement of the nonfinancial public sector and its domestic financing were observed. Regarding the indicative targets for end-June, the floor on public savings and the ceiling on the outstanding stock of short-term public external debt were missed, while all the other targets were observed (see Appendix III). In view of delays with a planned placement of bonds in international markets, in the first half of 1999 the government resorted to placements of short-term external debt with foreign banks, to ease pressures on domestic interest rates. ’ These reflected mainly the 6 percent general increase that became effective in December 1998, the full-year effect of selective wage increases granted in 1998, and a fiuther wage adjustment of 5 percent for health workers employed by the Social Security Institute effective May 1999. ’ Following the intervention ofCREDIS& the central bank extended financial assistance equivalent to US$80 million to cover withdrawals of deposits (in effect, the central bank provided a guarantee on all CREDISA deposits because of possible systemic repercussions). Subsequently, the board of directors of CREDISA decided to proceed with the liquidation of the institution. CREDISA’s remaining deposits were assumed by four banks, which accepted as a counterpart payments certificates issued by CREDISA LIQLJIDACION, an entity created to manage CREDISA’s closing. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-8. notwithstanding the decline in inflation, In April-August the authorities reduced reserve requirements in steps to an average of 22.6 percent, and the central bank extended an additional credit to regularize the situation of the four banks involved in the liquidation of CREDISA, with the monetary effects being partially offset through placements of open market paper.’ Pressures on interest rates have eased somewhat following these actions. At the same time, aided by proceeds ofUS. million from the privatization oftwo thermal plants and a US$l50 million bond placement in international markets, NIB have risen by a further USS240 million to about USS2 billion (120 percent of base money) so far in 1999.” 12. The external current account position has weakened thus far in 1999. The value of coffee exports dropped by 33 percent in the first seven months of the year, reflecting the effects of Hurricane Mitch and a continuing decline in international prices, while the growth of nontraditional and maquila exports has slowed owing to the recent depreciation of the Guatemalan quetzal and increased competition from third countries in the U.S. market. At the same time, imports dropped by 1 percent reflecting the slowdown in economic activity. The col6n appreciated by 2.7 percent in real effective terms from December 1997 to June 1999, mainly on account of the appreciation of the U.S. dollar relative to other major currencies (Figure 3). 13. Substantial progress has been made over the last two years in implementing the structural reform agenda. In 1998 the authorities completed the privatization of the electricity distribution companies, sold 51 percent of the government’s shares in the state telephone company (ANTEL) and the cellular company (INTEL), and carried out a comprehensive pension reform introducing private pension fimds.” In 1999 the government ’ The central bank extended an additional net credit of US$70 million to CREDISA LIQUIDACION, which was earmarked to cancel the certificates issued to the four banks. The assistance provided by the central bank is expected to be repaid in part through the recovety of a substantial part of CREDISA’s loan portfolio. However, the authorities are of the view that there could be a net loss to the central bank of about US$35 million, distributed over several years. The liquidation of CREDISA contemplates the Ml loss of equity by share- holders. lo Bonds have a seven-year maturity and were placed with a yield of 11.13 percent (about 500 basis points over comparable U.S. treasuries). ii The pension reform introduced in April 1998 replaces the pay-as-you-go system by privately managed individual capitalization accounts subject to regulation and supervision by the superintendency of pensions. Participation in the new system is compulsory for persons under 36 years of age and optional for the age group between 36 and 50 for women, and 36 and 55 for men. The cohort over 50/55 remains in the old system. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-9- has sold 71 percent of its shares in a state-owned sugar mill, most of its remaining shares in INTEL, and the two thermal electricity plants (referred to above). Moreover, the assembly passed legislation establishing a special fund with the proceeds obtained from the privatization of ANTEL; the fund’s interest income (but not the principal) is to be spent in the social sectors and in the development of information centers at the communal level. 14. Indicators of external vulnerability improved during 1998, following the use of privatization proceeds equivalent to 3% percent of GDP to repay relatively high cost external debt. In all, the external public debt stood at about 22 percent of GDP at end-1998, with the short-term component being equivalent to 1 percent of GDP (Table 7).‘* (The recent bond placement in international markets is expected to be used to reduce the short-term external public debt to about 0.2 percent of GDP by end-1999). External debt of the banking system is equivalent to 4.4 percent of GDP (with the foreign assets of the system being equivalent to I percent of GDP), while gross corporate external debt is estimated at about 6 percent of GDP. The ratio of gross international reserves to short-term external debt on a remaining maturities basis was 540 percent at end-1998 (Table 8).13 lI1. POLICY DISCUSSIONS 15. In the past year .Kl Salvador has maintained its record of macroeconomic stahility, notwithstanding the uncertainties associated with developments in emerging markets, the political transifion, the adverse effects of Hurricane Mitch, and the sharp decline in international coffee prices. However, the tax effort (equivalent to less than 10% percent of GDP) continues to he inadequate, and the unsustainable wage increases granted to public sector employees over the past two years are absorbing resources at the cost of much needed public investment. More importantly, the counq continues to face the chalIenge of attaining higher rates of economic growth; improving productivity and external competitiveness; and achieving a sustainable jscal position over the medium term while allowing room for reducingpoverty, improving securiq conditions, and covering the increasing costs of the health andpension systems. In addition, thejinancial system needs to be strengthened, including hy intensifying efforts in the area of hank supervision andprudential regulation. 16. Against this background, the discussions with the authorities focused on the outlook and policies for 1999 and the medium term, with particular emphasis on the measures and reforms required to move toward a sustainable fiscal position in light of spending needs. There was general agreement on the need for a stronger savings effort on I2 The domestic public debt (including that of the central bank) is equivalent to 6 percent of GDP, and is mostly short term. I3 This ratio excludes external debt to the nonbank short-term private sector because of a lack of maturity data. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-lO- the part of the public sector to preserve macroeconomic stability, ease pressures on domestic interest rates, modernize the country’s infrastructure, and increase investment in human capital to improve labor productivity and attract foreign investment. Progress in these areas would speed reductions in poverty and underemployment. 17. Both the previous and present administrations have made efforts to strengthen the revenue base. Specifically, in December 1998 the outgoing authorities reached under- standings with the stafT on several revenue measures, but they were unable to build the required political backing for the measures. Following this attempt, in June 1999 President Flores submitted to the assembly a revenue package. In late September the assembly approved part of the package, but the remainder has been delayed because of insufficient political support. So far the reduction in investment outlays relative to 1998 levels has prevented a major deterioration in the fiscal position, and the authorities intend to exercise strict control over both current and capital expenditure during the remainder of the year. However, the authorities are fully aware that the continuation of a policy that neglects public investment is bound to be detrimental to El Salvador’s growth performance over the medium term, and have underscored that they will persevere with their efforts to obtain prompt approval of the remaining measures in the revenue package, complemented by a policy of wage restraint in the public sector. Furthermore, they have expressed their willingness to consider other revenue measures after the congressional elections scheduled for March 2000. 18. In view of the authorities’ diffkulties in getting approval of the needed revenue measures, the midterm review under the Stand-By Arrangement could not be completed at this juncture. The authorities remain hopeful that the remainder of the tax package could be passed before April 2000, and have expressed interest in resuming discussions early next year on a new Stand-By Arrangement for 2000. In the meantime, the staff remains in close contact with them regarding macroeconomic developments and policy responses. A. Fiscal Policy 19. Shortly after taking office, the new administration submitted to the assembly several revenue measures to broaden the base of the income tax and the VAT. In late September the assembly approved part of the proposed measures by modifying the mechanism for taxation of dividends, limiting income tax deductions, and discontinuing VAT credits for some expenses that are not business related. In addition, the assembly passed a law establish- ing new procedures to combat smuggling and evasion at the customs level. However, other drafl legislation involving the elimination of most remaining VAT exemptions, the introduc- tion of a simplified VAT system for small enterprises, the elimination of the income tax threshold for corporate tax purposes, and a new tax code aimed at strengthening control procedures has not been approved. The staff estimated that the yield of the whole revenue package would be about 0.8 percent of GDP on an annual basis, with the measures already approved accounting for 0.3 percent of GDP (the impact of the approved measures would be minimal during the remainder of 1999). In view of the difficulties encountered by the revenue Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-ll- package, shortly after assuming office the authorities decided to cut expenditure relative to the 1999 budget by the equivalent of 0.6 percent of GDP. 20. Taking into account the expenditure cuts, the overall deficit of the nonfinancial public sector would be contained at 3 percent of GDP in 1999 (2% percent in the original program), with the savings position weakening to approximate balance, compared with a surplus of about 1 percent of GDP both in 1998 and in the 1999 program. Part of the shortfall in savings would be offset by the reduction in capital outlays, with the costs of reconstructing infrastructure damaged by Hurricane Mitch being accommodated by reallocating project loans from multilateral institutions and bilateral creditors (see Table 2). The public sector financing requirement would be covered with net external borrowing equivalent to 0.8 percent of GDP (including disbursements of project loans and the recent placement of bonds in international markets); privatization proceeds equivalent to 1.4 percent of GDP; and net domestic bank financing of 0.8 percent of GDP. 21. Tax revenue would remain virtually unchanged at 10.3 percent of GDP in 1999, while nontax revenue would increase substantially due to higher interest income and receipts from car registration fees which are to be introduced later this year. Despite the budgetary cuts, central government expenditure would rise markedly owing to large wage bill overruns, notwithstanding some decline in outlays on goods and services and interest payments, the latter reflecting the prepayment of public debt effected in 1998 (see Table 3). 22. In the rest of the nonfinancial public sector, the position of the Social Security Institute would shift from virtual balance to a deficit of 0.3 percent of GDP in 1999, owing to large wage increases for health workers and higher outlays on pensions attributable to the retire- ment of a large number of individuals who are reaching the 30-year minimum contribution requirement (the Institute was established in 1969). The overall deficit of the public enter- prises would widen slightly in 1999, as the disappearance of ANTEL’s surplus, following its privatization, would be partially made up by a small improvement in the financial position of CEL, whose investment program has been scaled down in line with the objective of increasing private sector participation in the sector.‘* 23. In the discussions the staff stressed the need for a stronger savings effort to reduce the fiscal deficit to about 1% percent of GDP over the medium term while allowing for increased investment.” The staff prepared a preliminary scenario showing that I4 Electricity tariffs were reduced by 10 percent effective January 1999, but the decline in revenues would be roughly offset by savings in operating costs resulting from increased reliance on less costly hydroelectric generation and the restructuring measures implemented in the last quarter of 1998. I5 This deficit would be consistent with debt sustainability and could be covered largely with disbursements from multilateral institutions and bilateral creditors. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12- in the absence of finther measures (except for the adoption of a more restrained wage policy, in line with the authorities’ policy intentions discussed below), the overall deficit of the nonfinancial public sector would decline slightly to 2.8 percent of GDP in 2000, before increasing gradually to more than 4 percent by 2004 owing to the rising cost of the public pension system (Table 9). 24. The authorities indicated that in addition to the remaining measures currently in the assembly, after the congressional elections scheduled for March 2000 they intend to eliminate the existing subsidy on electricity consumption, which is not properly targeted to low income groups, and would submit draft legislation introducing a tax on gasoline and diesel to establish a road repair fund. (The staff estimates that the net yield of these measures could be about 0.6 percent on an annual basis.) Moreover, they underscored that the draft 2000 budget does not contemplate any general wage adjustment for central government employees. Assuming that these additional measures, together with the remainder of the tax package, are imple- mented after the March elections, the staff has estimated that the fiscal deficit could be reduced to 2.3 percent of GDP in 2000, with public investment moving back to its 1998 level, which would be a reasonable fiscal effort (see Tables 2 and 3). The staff emphasized the need to complement the wage freeze for the central government with the adoption of a policy of restraint regarding selective wage increases. 25. Looking beyond 2000, the staff prepared a medium-term fiscal scenario assuming an increase in the VAT rate from its present level of 13 percent to 15 percent effective early 2001, wage restraint, and the implementation of certain reforms to smooth the costs associated with the public pension system (see discussion in paragraph 36 below). This scenario would be consistent with achieving a deficit of about 1% percent of GDP in 2001, and maintaining it at that level thereafter (tax revenue would rise to above 12% percent of GDP in 2001) (see Table 9). The authorities said that they would give serious consideration to the medium-term measures recommended by the staff. They indicated that other possible options included a reduction of the subsidy on diesel consumption and the restructuring of the ministry of public works to streamline outlays (road maintenance would be given in concession to private companies). The authorities have requested technical assistance from FAD on tax policy and administration. B. Credit Policy 26. The staff has prepared credit projections for 1999, which are consistent with a fiscal deficit of 3 percent of GDP, assume broad money growth of 8 percent, and aim at a reserve accumulation of US%100 million, in line with the authorities’ target. (NR would decline during the remainder of the year mainly because the public sector would need to drawdown deposits at the central bank to cover its financing requirement.) Assuming the financing of the deficit described above, these projections suggest that there would be room for expanding bank credit to the private sector by 7 percent during 1999 (see Tables 4 and 5). The authorities contemplate a further reduction in reserve requirements to an average of 21 percent by year’s end (the level prevailing before the November 1998 increase), with the Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13 - monetary effects associated with such reduction being sterilized in part through additional placements of open market paper. The interest cost of CREDISA’s liquidation is estimated at 0.1 percent of GDP a year, and the operating surplus of the central bank is projected to decline slightly to 0.1-0.2 percent of GDP in 1999. 27. As has been explained in previous reports, the present system of high and differen- tiated reserve requirements complicates monetary management, encourages disintermedia- tion, and contains a bias in favor of financial intermediation in foreign currency.r6 In the discussions, the staff stressed the need to continue in 2000 with steps toward a system of lower and uniform reserve requirements by placing more reliance on indirect instruments of’ monetary control while allowing greater interest rate flexibility in the primary market for these instruments. In recent months the authorities have been standardizing the paper used for open market operations, which is a positive step for the development of a secondary market for these instruments. Looking ahead, in line with MAE recommendations, they intend to reduce the number of maturities offered in the central bank auctions, as well as the frequency of auctions (currently conducted daily), and to hold separate auctions for specific maturities.” C. The Financial System 28. The Salvadoran financial system has a relatively high degree of concentration, with four banks accounting for about 60 percent of outstanding credit.” With the system remaining fragile, substantial efforts have been made over the last two years to improve bank supervision and the prudential regulatory framework. In particular, two rounds of comprehensive audits of financial institutions have been completed, and all banks are in compliance with the minimum capital adequacy ratio. (In January 1999 this ratio was raised from 8.9 percent to 9.2 percent of risk-weighted assets.) Also, the SFS has been putting pressure on banks to improve loan classification and increase loan provisions, and several small institutions have been merged. The quality of banks’ portfolios has deteriorated in recent l6 Presently, reserve requirements range between 3 and 32 percent, depending on maturity and currency denomination. In October 1998 the central bank modified the measurement and holding periods for reserve requirements in order to reduce the volatility of reserves and enhance their use as an automatic liquidity regulation mechanism. ” Recently the authorities introduced a credit line at subsidized interest rates (6 percent below market rates) for the coffee sector. The fiscal cost of this subsidy is small and is included in the fiscal accounts. ” The system comprises 14 domestic private banks, two state banks, a second-tier state bank, one branch of a foreign owned bank, and three financial companies, of which two are completing liquidation procedures initiated years ago. Off-balance sheet and offshore operations are small. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14- months owing to the slowdown in economic activity and the increase in real interest rates,” and the volume of related lending appears to be higher than reported, partly because of inadequate regulations for identifying related loans. 29. In early September 1999 the assembly approved a new banking law that constitutes a useful instrument to further strengthen the financial system. The new law introduces the consolidated supervision of financial conglomerates; improves procedures for the liquidation of financial intermediaries; increases the capital adequacy requirement gradually to 12 percent; raises the minimum capital that is required to establish a banking institution; lowers the limit on related loans from 15 percent of a bank’s capita1 to 5 percent while introducing clearer criteria for their identification; and establishes an explicit but limited deposit insurance scheme under a risk sharing arrangement with banks. (Currently a limited explicit deposit insurance guarantee is provided by the government.) In the discussions, the staff underscored the need to move expeditiously with the implementation of this legislation, monitor bank portfolios closely, and further strengthen loan provisions? It also encouraged the authorities to scale down the operations and reduce the administrative costs of the Banco de Foment0 Agropecuario, a state bank specialized in lending to the agricultural sector that has accumulated a large proportion of problem loans, and to reflect the fiscal cost of the liquidation of CREDISA transparently in the budget, The authorities are working on introducing regulations to limit maturity mismatches in bank operations, and intend to tighten those concerning open foreign exchange positions and revaluation of fixed assets. In addition, the assembly passed legislation to combat money laundering in late 1998, and is considering a draft law to regulate the activities of nonbank financial intermediaries that puts them under the supervision of the SFS. D. External Sector Policies 30. The external current account deficit is projected to widen to 1.8 percent of GDP in 1999. Export receipts from coffee and sugar would drop markedly, while the growth rate I’) Loans in arrears reported by financial institutions have increased from 3 percent of total loans at end-1997 to 4.3 percent in June 1999. However, as noted above, these figures are not reliable because loan classification is deficient. Provisioning as a proportion of total loans classified in arrears is equivalent to 77% percent (Table 10). LO In particular, the staff encouraged the authorities to strengthen off-site supervision, move ahead with their plans to introduce a generic provisioning requirement of 1 percent on the total stock of bank loans outstanding, and establish a more appropriate scale of provisioning requirements by loan quality. The authorities were in basic agreement with the staff but said that they needed to proceed with caution in this area, as some banks were not in a position to build large provisions within a short-time frame. Bank profitability has declined markedly in 1998-99, reflecting the worsening in bank portfolios and the increase in loan provisions. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-IS- of nontraditional and maquila exports would slow to 5% percent, compared with an average of 15’% percent a year in 1996-98, partly because of increased competition from Mexican and Asian producers of textiles and clothing in the U.S. market. The external current account deficit would be more than covered by the capital account surplus, which is projected at 2.6 percent of GDP, including project loans, the recent bond placement, and privatization proceeds. The private capital account would shift to surplus in 1999, following the easing of the uncertainties associated with global market tensions and last year’s political transition. 31. The authorities noted that the exchange rate peg to the U.S. dollar has been effective in reducing inflation to that of trading partners and that they intend to maintain it. They observed that the real effective appreciation of the currency that had taken place in recent years (equivalent to about 35 percent since the peg was adopted in January 1993) had not prevented a satisfactory export performance, together with moderate import growth.*’ They also noted that in their view the exchange rate was broadly in line with the fimdamentals as large inflows of private remittances in recent years had resulted in an appreciation of the equilibrium real exchange rate. The authorities recognized that recent developments in the world economy and the region were having some temporary adverse effects on El Salvador’s competitive position, but thought that the best way to deal with these pressures was by increasing productivity through the development of human capital and investment in infrastructure. The staffgenerally agreed with the authorities’ strategy, but emphasized that a substantial strengthening of public savings together with the planned adoption of a tighter wage policy in the public sector were essential to free resources for investment and help restrain wage demands in the private sector to support competitiveness. 32. El Salvador maintains a relatively open trade regime, with the simple average tariff estimated at 10 percent. Based on the relatively low average tariff rate and no more than a moderate incidence of nontariff barriers, El Salvador’s trade restrictiveness index is rated at 4 out of 10, and is comparable to other countries in the region. In line with commit- ments under the Central American Common Market (CACM), during January 1998-July 1999 tariffs on imports of intermediate goods from outside the Central American region were lowered fiuther in semiannual steps from 9-14 percent to 5-10 percent, and those on consumption goods from 19 percent to 15 percent, respectively.22 As a result, El Salvador’s *’ The staff has prepared some preliminary calculations of the real effective exchange rate using relative unit labor costs in manufacturing for El Salvador and some of its main trading partners. These calculations show a real appreciation of about 20 percent since the peg was adopted, or significantly lower than that measured by using relative consumer prices. However, this figure should be taken with caution because labor statistics for some of the countries, including El Salvador, are not reliable. ‘* Tariffs rates above 15 percent account for 4.2 percent of the total tariff lines. They include the tariff rates for milk, chicken, textiles, clothing, shoes, cars, cigarettes, and alcoholic beverages, which range between 20 percent and 40 percent. The authorities indicated that (continued.. .) Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 16- obligations under the CACM have been fulfilled, and no huther tariff reductions are envisaged. Looking ahead, the authorities should consider reducing reliance on bilateral and regional trade arrangements and proceeding unilaterally with finther trade liberalization. E. Discussions on a Currency Board 33. The authorities are giving consideration to moving eventually to a currency board, on grounds that such a move would contribute to lowering the interest differential relative to dollar rates by reducing currency riskz In view of the country’s long tradition with a fixed exchange rate and its relatively flexible labor market,** such an arrangement has potential merits, although the associated interest rate reduction is difficult to quantify. However, given the restrictions imposed on the lender of last resort timction and recent weaknesses in the financial sector, the staff is of the view that the necessary precondi- tions in the financial system are not presently fithilled. Moreover, a sustainable fiscal position should be restored to add credibility, and the appropriafeness of the present level of the peg would need to be reexamined based on developments in external competitiveness before adopting a more rigid arrangement. there were no quantitative trade restrictions, except for those applied on certain agricultural products for sanitary purposes. In April 1998 El Salvador cosigned a regional trade agreement with the Dominican Republic. In addition, together with other Central American countries, El Salvador is involved in regional negotiations with the Andean Group, Chile, Mexico, and Panama, and is seeking an enhancement by the United States of the special treatment under the Caribbean Basin Initiative. u The authorities indicated that the full dollarization of the economy was not a priority of the new administration. Reasons against full dollarization were its irreversibility, the need to have a more substantial participation of foreign banks with strong financial links to the United States, and the relatively low degree of dollarization (only 8 percent of deposits and 15 per- cent of bank loans are denominated in foreign currency). An MAE mission visited San Salvador on June 21-July 2, 1999 to discuss with the authorities preconditions and technical aspects concerning the establishment of a currency board. 24 The authorities were of the view that there were no major obstacles to contracting or shedding labor, and that severance payments and union activity in the private sector were relatively low by Latin American standards. Although in general there are no major rigidities in the labor market, there is nonetheless room for improvement, including by eliminating some legal barriers to temporary contracts (current legislation limits the probation period before permanent employment to 30 days); relaxing regulations by which employers must pay at least the minimum daily wage for more than five hours of work; and reducing the compensation for overtime established by law, which looks excessive by Latin American standards. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17- 34. The staff made some calculations to determine the level of NIR that would be required to provide a solid backing to a currency board arrangement. Ideally; NLR should be sufficient to cover base money, working balances of the government at the central bank, and the out- standing short-term debt of the government and the central bank, and should also provide a cushion to perform adequately the lender of last resort tlmction. On this basis, NTR would need to be on the order of USS2.7 billion, compared with the present level of US$2 billion. The authorities recognized the need to improve the reserve position but thought that a lower cover (about US%2.2-2.3 billion) would be sufftcient. They indicated that they would continue working on strengthening the fiscal position and the financial system with a view to reeval- uating within a year the possibility of moving toward a currency board. F. Structural Policies, Poverty Alleviation, and Other Issues 35. Discussions in the structural area focused on the authorities’ plans to complete the privatixation process and modernize the public sector, reduce the tiscal cost of the public pension system in the coming years, and strengthen the financial sector. The authorities indicated that next year they intend to sell a portion of the government’s remaining stake in ANTEL to residential customers, and to negotiate a concession with the private sector to operate geothermal plants. They also have submitted to the assembly a draft investment law that compiles existing regulations and establishes a National Investment Office to simplify procedures for foreign and national investors and to set up a database; a new charter law giving greater autonomy to the central bank; and a procurement law aimed at increasing transparency. In addition, they are preparing a new legal framework for the civil service. 36. The staff stressed the need to take prompt measures to address the medium-term fiscal costs of the public pension system. The authorities indicated that they would give considera- tion to increasing the minimum retirement age and/or the minimum contribution period.” In addition, they are studying redeeming “recognition certificates” of retirees who transferred to the private pension system with bonds, rather than in cash, to reduce the liquidity impact of these operations. 37. The incidence of poverty has declined in the 1990s owing to the economic expansion related to post-civil war reconstruction and an increase in external funds for social expenditure. Nevertheless, based on official household surveys, 45 percent of the population was still below the poverty line in 1998, with 19 percent living in extreme *’ Currently, the minimum retirement age is 60 years for men and 55 for women, but workers could retire before the minimum retirement age if they contribute to the system for at least 30 years. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 18- poverty.26 At the same time, social indicators for education and health remain below the average for Latin America (Table 11). Open unemployment and underemployment were estimated at 7.6 percent and 3 1.8 percent of the labor force, respectively, in the last quarter of 1998. 38. Poverty alleviation programs have focused increasingly in the rural areas, where poverty is more widespread and social services are less developed. Main social programs in recent years have included the EDUCO school program financed by the World Bank, which has encouraged community participation in basic education with good results and is now being extended to secondary education; and the Social Investment and Local Development Fund (FIS-DL), which has funded 250 social infrastructure projects a year at the municipal level since 1992, with IDB participation. Looking ahead, the authorities recognize that progress in reducing poverty and underemployment will depend crucially on mobilizing adequate domestic resources through the tax system to finance investment in human capital and improve health services. Their plans include increasing decentralisation in the delivery of basic services through the involvement of the local communities in the prioritization of projects, which would also require the development of adequate sources of finance at the municipal level. 39. El Salvador is facing several serious environmental problems, including soil erosion due to deforestation and intensive use of fertilizers, deterioration of marine resources, and inadequate disposal of solid waste, particularly in urban areas. Following the creation of the ministry of environment in mid-1 997, in May 1998 the assembly enacted a new Law of the Environment. Several steps are being taken to address the main environmental problems. In particular, the IDB is supporting projects to reduce water contamination, establish a sound management of coastal areas, and improve solid waste disposal; and efforts are being made to encourage the development of the “shade coffee variety” to stem laud degradation and enhance reforestation in coffee-growing areas. In addition, the authorities intend to work closely with Honduras on the sustainable management of the Lempa River Basin. 40. In May 1998 the Presidential Commission for the Modernization of the Public Sector was assigned the task of coordinating efforts to deal with Y2K issues. The authorities were of the view that the central government and CEL were relatively well prepared and would not experience serious disruptions. However, work is still in progress in the internal tax and customs offices, and problems could be expected in the pension and healthcare system, given the inadequate level of preparedness of the Social Security Institute. In the financial system, the central bank has been working on contingency plans since 1997 and appears to be well prepared, but some financial institutions have experienced difficulties in complying with Y2K requirements issued by the SFS. Little information is available regarding the degree of preparedness of the nonbank private sector. 26 Figures for 1990 indicate that 60 percent of the population was below the poverty line, with 28 percent living in conditions of extreme poverty. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 19. 41. As noted above, El Salvador’s statistical system is relatively sound, allowing for a reasonable surveillance of macroeconomic developments, However, the legal statistical framework needs to be updated on the basis of recommendations by past technical assistance missions, and the statistical institutions do not have adequate resources to carry out their activities effectively. In addition, a number of weaknesses remain to be corrected. In particular, lack of reliable information on banks’ loan and deposit transactions by residency status creates problems for the interpretation of monetary data and banking supervision; information on the operations of the municipalities is very limited; labor statistics are not reliable; and the balance of payments data for services and the composition of private capital flows needs to be strengthened substantially. To address these issues, the authorities intend to introduce a new system of accounts for commercial banks in early 2000 and are working on improving the labor statistics with technical support from the AID and ILO. In addition, surveys are being conducted to improve the data on services and capital flows, including foreign direct investment. IV. MEDIUM-TERM OUTLOOK 42. The staff has prepared medium-term scenarios consistent with passive and active policies. Under the passive scenario, the overall deficit of the nonfinancial public sector would increase gradually from 2.8 percent of GDP in 2000 to more than 4 percent by 2004, mainly owing to the rising cost of the public pension system. Because of continued high real interest rates and the low level of investment in infrastructure, real GDP growth would slow from 3 percent in 2000 to about 2 percent in 2004, with inflation rising somewhat (Table 12). The external current account deficit would widen to 2% percent of GDP in 2004, reflecting the weakening in the savings position of the nonfinancial public sector (Table 13). In the capital account, net external financing equivalent to about 2% percent of GDP, including large placements of bonds and short-term debt in international markets, would be required to cover a substantial portion of the financing needs of the public sector (the short-term external debt would increase gradually to 5 percent of GDP by 2004). However, with this policy stance and given the high degree of uncertainty faced by emerging economies in international markets, obtaining such financing might be difficult. 43. The active scenario assumes the implementation of the revenue and expenditure measures incorporated in the staffs active medium-term fiscal projections (paragraph 25). Under these assumptions, real GDP growth would be somewhat lower than in the passive scenario in 2000 owing to the initial impact of fiscal adjustment, but would increase gradually to 5 percent a year by 2003, stimulated by the higher level of public investment and lower interest rates. Inflation would be higher than in the passive scenario in 2000 and 2001 because of the one-time impact of the proposed modifications to the VAT and to gasoline and diesel taxes on consumer prices, but would drop to about 2 percent subsequently (see Table 12). 44. The external current account deficit would decline to 1.2 percent of GDP in 2002, as a result of improvements in external competitiveness. The capital account projections assume net disbursements of project loans from multilateral and bilateral creditors for the equivalent Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 20 - of 1% percent of GDP (in line with the envisaged increase in public investment), which would be enough to cover the financing requirement of the public sector. Private capital inflows would increase gradually over the medium term as conditions for foreign direct investment become more attractive, with NlR rising to about six months of imports of goods and services by 2004 (Table 14). Because of lesser reliance on external borrowing, the external debt and debt-service indicators would be more favorable than in the passive scenario, with the short- term external debt being fully repaid in 2001 (Table 15). V. STAFF APPRAISAL 45. El Salvador has maintained macroeconomic stability over the past year notwith- standing developments in emerging markets, the political transition, the adverse effects of Elurricane Mitch, and the sharp decline in international coffee prices. However, the country continues to face the challenges of attaining higher rates of economic growth and reducing poverty, strengthening external competitiveness, and achieving a sustainable fiscal position while increasing the resources available for public investment and basic services. 46. Economic developments in 1998-99 were however characterized by a weakening of the fiscal position and the external current account. Real GDP growth was lower and inflation somewhat higher than programmed owing to the impact of Hurricane Mitch on the agricultural sector in the last quarter of 1998 and the sharp decline in coffee export receipts. Inflation has subsided in 1999, reflecting a drop in food prices, and the international reserve position has strengthened over the past year and a half, mainly on the basis of privatization proceeds. 47. Fiscal developments over the last two years have been characterized by a marked weakening of the savings position of the nonfinancial public sector owing largely to a combination of large general wage increases and selective adjustments to the health and education sectors. At the same time, little progress has been made in increasing tax revenue, which at less than 10% percent of GDP is inadequate to the country’s economic and social requirements. Against this background, a pressing need exists to strengthen public sector savings in order to preserve macroeconomic stability on a sustained basis; ease pressures on domestic interest rates; and free resources for the development of infrastructure. At the same time, the revenue effort needs to be boosted to reduce poverty levels and improve the delivery of basic services, as well as security conditions. 48. The authorities have submitted a revenue package and recently the assembly approved part of the package involving mainly a broadening of the income tax base and procedures to reduce customs evasion. Prompt approval of the remaining measures in the package, including the elimination of most VAT exemptions and the introduction of a new tax code, is essential to put El Salvador on the way to a sustainable fiscal position with improved growth prospects over the medium term. Also important are the authorities’ plans to eliminate the subsidy on electricity consumption and establish a tax on gasoline and diesel to finance a Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-21- road repair fund after the congressional elections scheduled for March 2000. Avoidance of general wage increases in 2000 and restraint in selective wage increases are also crucial. 49. Additional fiscal pressures are expected to develop over the medium term owing to the rising costs of the remaining public pension system. Under these circumstances, achieving a sustainable medium-term fiscal position would require an additional increase in tax revenue, wage restraint, and reforms to smooth the fiscal pressures associated with the pension regime. In this respect, active consideration should be given to increasing the minimum retirement age and/or the minimum contribution period, as well as to raising the VAT rate from its present 13 percent. 50. The present system of high and differentiated reserve requirements complicates monetary management and encourages disintermediation. The staff welcomes recent steps to lower these requirements, as well as the authorities’ plans to proceed gradually with further reductions and with their eventual unification, while placing increased reliance on indirect instruments of monetary control. Also, the authorities are encouraged to allow for interest rate flexibility, as required to meet their international reserve target. In addition, efforts should be continued to standardize the instruments used for open market operations, and the efficiency of monetary management should be strengthened by implementing MAE’s recommendations to improve the central bank auction mechanism and further develop a secondary market. 51. Substantial progress has been made in recent years in improving bank supervi- sion and prudential regulations, but much remains to be done to put the system on a sound footing. In this respect, the recent approval of a new banking law constitutes a usefir instrument to further strengthen the system. The authorities should proceed promptly with the implementation of this legislation, continue monitoring bank portfolios closely, and further strengthen loan provisions. They also should move ahead with the introduction of regulations to limit maturity mismatches in bank operations and the tightening of those concerning open foreign exchange positions and revaluation of fixed assets. The fiscal costs associated with the liquidation of CREDISA should be reflected transparently in the government budget. 52. The exchange rate peg to the U.S. dollar has been effective in achieving price stability, and the staff supports its maintenance. However, recent developments in the world economy and the region have affected adversely El Salvador’s external competitiveness, and the staff is of the view that the sustainability of the peg over the medium term will require efforts to increase productivity through the development of human capital and investment in infrastructure. In this connection, a substantial savings effort on the part of the public sector, including through the adoption of a tight wage policy, is essential to restrain wage demands in the private sector and improve competitiveness. 53. The authorities are considering adopting a currency board arrangement in light of a potential reduction in the currency risk premium on interest rates, and the long- standing de facto exchange rate peg. However, the preconditions for such an arrangement Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 22 - are not yet in place. In particular, a substantial strengthening of the fiscal position and the financial system is required. Moreover, a further significant increase in international reserves would be needed to provide an adequate backing for the currency board and the lender of last resort function. 54. The progress made over the past two years in privatizing public companies, introducing private pension funds, and further liberalizing trade is welcomed. The authorities are encouraged to move ahead with their plans to increase private sector participation in road construction and electricity generation through the operation of geothermal plants. Prompt approval of legislation to increase transparency in procurement practices, reform the civil service, and give greater autonomy to the central bank is also important. 55. El Salvador’s statistical system is broadly adequate for macroeconomic surveillance and analysis, but there are some areas of weakness. The authorities are encouraged to improve the legal statistical framework, provide additional resources to statistical institutions, and intensify efforts to address remaining statistical problems. 56. Although the conditions for completing the review under the existing Stand-By Arrangement are not met at this time, approval of the remaining measures submitted by the authorities to the assembly would pave the way for discussions on a program for 2000 that could be supported by a new arrangement. 51. It is recommended that the next Article IV consultation with El Salvador be held on the standard 12-month cycle. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 23 - Figure 1. El Salvador: Selected Economic Indicators Inflation and Real GDP Growth 1 L Fiscal Indicators (In percent of GDP) Sources: El Salvador Central Reserve Bank; and Fund staff estimates. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicFigure 2. El Salvador Financial Indicators Interest Rates nnd Inflalion Interest Rate Differentials (III percent per amlm) (In percent per nlmum) 9 Spread between colon and dollar - 24 - Credit and Money Growth (III percent per annum) 1 1 Margin between lending and deposh rates in colones 0 I , ,--_-.,. - Dollarization of Deposits and Lonns (III perce,,tage of tolid ) Sources: Central Reserve Bank; and Fund staff estimates Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public. . Figure 3. El Salvador. Exchange Rate Developments (1990=100) 150 140 130 120 110 100 90 80 70 60 Real effectiv e exchange rate 11 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 Source: lMF Information Notice System. I/ Trade-weighted index of nominal exchange rates deflated by seasonally adjusted relative consumer prices. An increase (decrease) indicates appreciation (depreciation). 160 140 w 80 70 60 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 26 - Table 1. El Salvador: Mat-nomic Fhvs 1998 1999 ,995 1996 ,997 Pm& I/ Pro,. Pmg. I/ Roj. Nombul GDP ka, GDP GDP dc”*tar co-er prtces End of period Period wcrage 17.6 9.0 8.0 6.3 1.8 4.0 10.6 7.0 3.9 11.4 7.4 1.9 10.1 9.8 4.5 (In percat of GDP, unless otherwise indiwed) -1.8 -19.5 10.6 -30.0 -1.0 12.6 5.2 4.3 1.7 2.5 -1.5 10.0 3.6 15.2 1.3 17.1 3.2 14.0 2.8 -0.9 4.1 -0.5 0.3 0.3 0.0 0.1 L.3 0 .I.2 -0.2 83.1 -1.d -15.9 9.9 -25.8 -0.9 11.5 3.7 3.2 3.2 0.0 -1.6 1s2 4.2 12.0 -1.) 13.6 1.9 11.7 1.6 -2.7 -2.5 -2.0 0.2 cl.2 .0.7 2.5 2.7 cl -0.3 Il.1 90.6 0.9 -14.4 12.1 -26.5 -0.8 11.7 4.4 2.4 2.2 0.2 -3.2 14.9 3.7 12.6 -1.4 15.8 L.9 13.9 -0.9 -2.0 -1.8 -1.1 0.3 0.1 .a7 1.8 2.0 0 -0.3 0.3 97.9 7.9 4.0 3.7 3.5 2.5 -1.1 -15.9 10.7 -26.6 -0.4 II.5 3.8 4.4 5.8 -1.4 -33 16.8 3.9 12.7 0.2 15.7 1.2 14.5 1.1 -2.9 -2.7 -2.4 -0.2 -0.2 -0.1 2.7 -0.6 6.8 -3.5 0.3 ,063 6.0 3.2 2.6 4.2 2.5 -0.7 -15.6 10.6 -26.2 -0.6 12.5 3.0 3.3 6.2 -3.0 -2.6 16.6 3.7 13.2 -0.3 15.9 1.0 14.9 8.7 -2.8 -2.7 -2.5 0.3 0.1 -0.4 2.7 -0.4 7.0 -3.9 0.3 103.9 '1.1 4.5 2.5 3.0 2-2.5 1.0 3.0 3.3 1.0 1:4 -0.9 -1.8 -15.8 -17.0 10.4 9.5 -26.2 -26.4 -0.4 -0.5 Il.5 12.3 3.8 3.4 1.8 2.6 1.4 1.8 0.5 0.8 -0.9 16.8 3.6 13.0 0.2 159 1.1 14.8 0.9 -2.8 -2.5 -2.0 -0.1 -0.2 4.5 2.5 1.2 ,.I 0.2 113.8 6.8 16.0 3.1 12.9 0.0 14.2 0.1 14.L IS -3.1 -3.” -2.3 -0. I -0.3 -0.6 3.0 0.8 1.4 0.8 02 107.0 (in million ofUS. dollars) 9,501 10,359 Sourccr: Central Resuvc Bank: Ministry of Finann: and Fund Mffstimks 11,192 12.148 11,870 ,3,W7 12.229 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 21- Table 2. El Salvador: Nonfinancial Public Sector On pewat of GDP) 1998 1999 2000 1995 1996 1997 Prog. 11 Prel. prop. II Proj. Passive Active Revenue and grants 16.8 16.5 14.7 14.7 15.1 14.5 14.8 14.9 15.6 Current revenue 15.9 16.3 14.4 14.5 15.0 14.2 14.6 14.8 15.5 Taxrevenue2l 11.3 10.6 10.2 10.2 10.3 10.5 10.3 10.7 11.4 Nontax revenue 3.1 3.7 2.9 2.9 3.3 2.8 3.7 3.6 3.6 Operating surplus of public enterprises 1.5 2.0 1.3 1.4 1.4 0.9 0.7 0.5 0.5 Capital revetlue 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Ofticial grants 0.8 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.1 Expenditure and net lending 16.9 19.0 16.4 17.4 17.8 17.0 17.8 17.8 18.0 Current expenditure 12.7 14.5 12.6 13.3 14.0 13.1 14.6 14.5 14.2 Consumption 9.7 10.6 9.5 10.0 10.5 10.0 11.2 11.0 11.0 Wages and salaries 7.1 7.5 7.0 7.4 7.9 7.5 8.8 8.5 8.5 Goods and services 2.6 3.1 2.6 2.5 2.6 2.5 2.4 2.5 2.5 Interest payments 1.6 1.8 I.5 1.6 1.5 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.4 Current transfers 1.4 21 1.5 1.8 2.0 1.8 2.0 2.0 1.7 Capital expenditure 4.2 4.5 4.0 4.1 3.8 3.9 3.2 3.3 3.8 Fixed capital formation 3.6 4.2 3.7 3.9 3.7 3.6 3.1 3.2 3.7 Capital transfers 0.6 0.3 0.3 0.2 0.1 0.3 0.1 0.1 0.1 Net lending 0.0 0.0 -0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Overall balance @fore grants) Overall balance (after grants) Financing External tiiancing Disbursements Amortization Short term Other Privathation proceeds Domestic tiiancing 31 Memorandum items: Nominal GDP (in billions oCcolones) (in millions of U.S. dollars) 3.2 1.9 1.9 1.2 1.0 -0.9 -2.1 -2.0 -2.9 -2.8 -0. I -2.5 -1.8 -2.7 -2.7 0.1 2.5 1.8 2.7 2.7 1.3 2.7 2.0 -0.6 -0.4 2.0 3.3 2.3 1.7 2.3 -1.5 -1.2 -1.3 -1.1 -1.3 0.8 0.6 1.0 -1.1 -1.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 -0.2 -0.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 6.8 7.0 -1.2 -0.3 -0.3 -3.5 -3.9 83.1 90.6 97.9 9,501 10,359 11,192 106.3 103.9 L?,I48 11,870 1.1 -2.8 -2.5 2.5 1.2 3.5 -1.0 -1.3 0.0 1.1 0.2 113.8 13,007 0.1 0.3 1.3 -3.1 -3.0 -2.4 -3.0 -2.8 -2.3 3.0 2.8 2.3 0.8 1.x 1.7 2.7 2.7 2.8 -1.0 -0.9 -0.9 -0.9 0.0 a.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 1.4 0.7 0.7 0.8 0.4 -0.1 107.0 III.9 113.0 12,229 12,784 12,910 Sources: MinIstry of Fmance; Central Reserve Bank; and Fund staff estimates. I/EBS/98/163 (9/11/98). 2/The figures for tax revenue are net of tax reimbursements. 3/ Includes statistical discrepancy. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-28- Table 3. El Salvador: Central Government Consolidated Operations (31 percent of GDP) 1998 1999 ZCOO 1995 1996 1997 hog. II Prel. Pmg. I/ Pmj. Passive Active Revenue and grants 13. I 12.8 11.7 11.4 11.4 11.7 12.5 Curreat rwenue Tax rewnue 21 Nontax revenue Current transfers fram public enterprises Capital rew2Lue omchi gmntl 12.2 12.7 11.5 11.3 10.6 10.2 0.7 0.9 0.7 0.2 1.2 0.5 11.2 11.2 11.6 12.3 10.5 10.3 10.7 11.4 0.6 0.9 0.9 0.9 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.0 0.8 0.0 0.2 0.0 0.2 11.2 11.2 11.0 11.1 10.2 10.3 0.7 0.6 0.1 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.1 13.6 13.7 10.4 10.8 6.9 7.3 5.5 5.7 1.4 1.5 1.3 1.3 2.2 2.2 3.3 3.0 2.2 2.0 1.2 1.0 -0.1 -0.1 0.6 0.3 -2.5 -2.6 -2.4 -2.5 2.4 2.5 -0.6 -0.2 5.6 5.7 0.0 0.2 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.1 Expenditure and net lending 13.6 14.9 12.8 13.4 13.7 13.9 14.4 Current expenditure 10.4 11.7 10.5 Consumption 7.0 7.3 6.9 Wages and salaries 5.4 5.5 5.4 Goads and services 1.6 1.8 1.5 Interest payments 1.4 1.5 1.4 current transfers 2.0 2.8 2.2 Capital expenditure 3.0 3.2 2.6 Fixed capital formation 2.3 2.6 2.2 Capital transfers 0.7 0.6 0.4 Net leading 0.2 0.0 -0.2 10.4 11.1 11.1 11.0 7.0 7.6 7.5 7.5 5.6 6.3 6.1 6.1 1.4 1.3 1.4 1.4 1.2 1.2 1.3 1.3 2.2 2.2 2.3 2.2 3.0 2.6 2.8 3.3 1.7 1.6 1.8 2.3 1.4 1.0 1.0 1.0 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.1 Central gwernmeot savhlgs Overall balance (before grants) Oven11 balance (after grants) Financing External fiiancing Privatization proceeds 1.8 -1.4 -0.5 0.5 1.2 0.0 1.0 -2.2 -2.0 2.0 2.2 0.0 1.0 -1.3 -1.1 1.1 1.7 0.8 -2.2 -2.0 2.0 0.8 0.9 0.2 0.6 -2.4 -2.3 -2.3 -2.2 2.3 2.2 0.3 1.3 1.3 -2.0 -1.9 1.9 1.2 0.7 0.0 1.2 0.7 Domestic f%ancing 3/ -0.7 a.2 -0.6 -3.2 -3.0 0.4 0.8 0.2 0.0 Sources: Ministry of Finance; Central Reserve Bank; and Fund staff estimates. l/ EBS/98/163 (9/l 1198). 2/ l-be figures for tax revenue are net of tax reimbursements 31 Includes statistical discrepancy. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 29 - Table 4. El Salvador: Operations of the, Financial System l/ 1998 1999 ,997 Prog. 21 Prel. Pmg. 2.1 PIOJ. 16.5 -2.2 2,.3 2.7 12.7 30.6 38.6 3.7 8.2 28.2 2.5 1.9 17.3 12.3 lhperceld of GDP) 34.4 37.3 40.7 43.2 3.4 3.2 8.3 8.3 29.3 30.7 -1,908 1,360 -3,267 44,794 -3.885 3,860 49.023 8,708 34.893 2.5 -9s 11.6 1.1 9.5 40.6 45.1 3.3 8.1 32.1 17243 1,932 -12,057. -ll,cm 548 1s 1,072 764 324 -749 -12.414 -10,385 0 1.939 -12,414 -12,324 -186 -713 1,498 3,794 1,481 14,719 43,558 -946 1.982 -2,928 49,666 -5,162 14,580 42,661 -1,791 1.332 -3.123 47,948 -3.496 54,447 9,273 38.175 7.3 -0.6 9.5 1.9 7.5 41.6 45.3 3.2 7.9 32.4 4,314 52,928 9,149 37.682 7.5 0.2 6.4 0.9 8.0 41.0 45.1 3.2 7.9 32.1 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3o- Table 5. El Salvador: Financial System Credit: Origin, Destination, and Financing 1998 1999 ,995 1996 ,997 Pmg, I/ FM. Rag I/ Fmj. -1.7 -3.0 -7.2 18.2 17.3 I%, -2.2 0.7 6.4 23.3 13.1 15.5 -4.6 0.5 -7.1 1.2 -5.5 63 2.7 2.5 1.9 12.7 17.3 12.3 (Annml permdage cbangu) 31 20.1 16.3 9.1 -16.5 -28.1 -62.5 19.7 17.6 15.4 -22.1 9.7 -6.5 32.0 15.4 18.5 2,729.4 -,3.0 229.5 5.9 -32.0 -32.3 86.5 49.8 29.5 12.7 17.3 12.3 (Cbmgcs in perca" &GDP) 6.0 Lx4 3.2 -0.6 -1.1 -2.9 6.6 6.5 6.2 -0.8 0.2 d.2 8.4 4.9 6.3 -1.7 0.2 -2.9 0.4 -2.1 -1.6 1.0 I.0 0.8 4.6 6.5 5.0 4.6 2.5 7.3 7.5 -8.7 -6.7 -1.5 -1.3 13.2 9.2 9.7 8.8 -6.9 -9.5 -0.6 0.2 11.9 11.6 9.5 6.4 -0.5 0.4 -1.6 0.8 -7.6 -8. I -2.1 -1.4 1.1 1.1 1.9 0.9 11.1 9.5 7.5 8.0 5.4 3.0 9.1 9.4 -52.2 13.1 -40.2 9.1 -6.5 8.3 -5.3 8.7 .,25.8 -MO.8 -50.2 -6.1 13.5 L3.1 10.6 7.0 5.2 -4.8 18.2 -10.0 53.3 -35.3 -7.7 -5.0 14.7 14.6 24.9 II.8 11.1 9.5 7.5 8.0 1.9 32 33 -3.7 5.6 4.6 -0.6 3.8 3.8 -3.2 5.0 -0.2 0.1 2.8 0.3 -3.2 0.5 4.7 1.1 -2.9 4.0 -4.1 S.0 0.2 -3.5 0.5 4.1 -0.3 4.2 -0.7 -0.9 0.8 3.3 4.6 0.4 3.5 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3l- Table 6. El Salvador: Balance of Payments, 1995-99 ,995 ,996 (In millions 0fU.S. dollars) -262 457 -1,851 I.005 362 64 579 -2.856 -2.745 -11, 296 174 122 -96 1.024 339 76 610 -2,671 -2.550 -122 314 214 IO4 -91 121 1.195 113 1.193 194 62 409 334 126 281 79 0 74 210 147 -147 65 III 0 0 5, 2* 2 19 166 363 -165 .363 96 -129 -83 -1.70 -215 41 -166 -114 -161 -260 -1.614 -1,930 -1.1149 -2.056 -2.073 L.359 1,295 1.263 I.349 1,161 518 359 322 3L2 210 86 89 99 82 73 756 847 842 955 877 -2,973 -3.225 -3,112 -3,405 -3,234 -2,853 -3,095 -3.026 -3,265 -3.LO4 -120 -L30 -87 -140 -129 434 47.2 323 455 368 291 347 339 392 371 143 76 -16 63 -3 -87 -53 -66 -51 -64 119 146 177 143 170 1,308 1.395 I.478 I.491 1,509 55 37 31 41 45 267 99 386 240 315 219 -76 -43 161 93 -130 810 -32 -173 400 -400 -136 810 -26 .3JS -110 125 2 96 303 -303 -165 0 20 59 120 -I20 loo -100 -2.8 -1.6 0.9 -1.1 -0.7 -0.9 -1.8 -4.8 -t.?. 0.4 -1.4 -1.0 -1.2 -2.1 -19.5 -15.9 -14.4 -15.9 -15.6 -15.X -17.0 3.1 3.0 3.9 3.5 2.7 3.5 3.0 -1.0 -0.9 -0.8 -0.4 -0.6 -0.4 -0.5 12.6 11.5 11.7 Il.5 12.5 L1.5 12.3 2.0 0.6 0.5 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.4 4.3 3.2 2.4 4.4 33 1.X 2.6 1.3 2.7 2.0 -0.6 -0.4 1.2 0.8 0.8 0.6 1.0 -,.I -1.1 -1.3 -0.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 6.7 6.8 0.0 1.0 0.8 0.5 0.3 -0.3 -0.2 0.2 0.0 2.2 0.0 0.2 -1.4 40 0.5 0.8 1.5 1.6 3.2 3.3 2.6 0.9 0.8 9,501 10.359 935 L.100 3.6 5.3 23.7 24.3 15.4 16.7 Ll,ZLI 1,462 4.9 23.9 12.148 11.870 1,862 1.766 6.0 5.7 21.3 22.2 15.7 16.8 13,007 L2.229 L.982 1,866 6.2 5.8 21.3 22.4 13.2 11.4 12.3 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-32- Table 7. El Salvador: Public External Debt and Debt Service by Creditor, 1995-99 1995 1996 1998 1999 1991 mg. II PA. Pmg. I/ Pmj. (In millions of U.S. dollars) External debt outstanding 2,248 2,517 2,679 IMF 0 0th.~ multilateral 1,447 1.62: 1,69Z Offkial bilateral 580 614 627 Commercial banks and suppliers 123 99 85 BOIld.9 0 0 Short-Icrm debt 99 182 2no Debt service 250 285 263 lMF 0 0 other multilateral 148 16; 185 Ofkial bilateral 63 2 46 Commercial banks and suppliers 21 38 32 Bond.5 0 0 0 E-iw other multilateral Official bilateral Commercial banks and suppliers BOIIdS Interest IMF Other multilateral Offkial biiateral Commercial banks and suppliers 2/ BOnds other multilateral Official bilateral Commercial banks and suppliers BOlldS Short-tam debt Memorandum Items: GDP Export of goods end services Private transfers 148 171 148 0 0 71 8: 106 42 20 26 36 71 17 0 0 0 102 114 115 7: 8! 0 80 22 19 20 3 12 15 0 0 0 (lo percent of GDP) 23.7 24.3 23.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 15.2 15.7 15.1 6.1 5.9 5.6 1.3 1.0 0.8 0.0 0.0 0.0 1.0 1.8 2.4 2,617 0 1,785 625 42 16: 2.640 2.799 2.735 1,807 1,88i 1,84; 673 690 681 31 26 35 0 200 150 136 0 26 309 0 190 79 41 0 34s 21: 46 82 0 *: 175 39 18 1 205 233 134 11: 13: 9: 61 25 21 33 70 16 0 0 0 184 0 79 17 8 0 21.5 0.0 14.7 5.1 0.3 0.0 1.4 112 0 5 12 0 22.2 0.0 15.2 5.7 0.3 0.0 1.1 99 118 0 0 78 81 18 I8 2 12 1 7 21.5 22.4 0.0 0.0 14.5 15.1 5.3 5.6 0.2 0.3 1.5 1.2 0.0 0.2 Debt service EL multilateral Offkial bilateral Commercial banks and suppliers 2 Bonds Amarlization payments Interest p.¶yments 2/ 8.9 9.9 7.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 5.3 5.7 5.6 2.2 1.4 1.4 1.4 2.8 1.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 5.3 5.9 4.5 3.6 4.0 3.5 (In millions of U.S. dollars) 9,501 10,359 11,211 12,148 11,870 13,007 1,621 I.696 2,017 1,982 2,004 2,061 1,195 1,193 1,308 1,395 1.478 1,491 6.6 0.0 4.9 1.1 0.5 0.0 3.8 2.8 249 0 176 48 19 7 131 0 ;; i 7.2 0.0 5.1 1.4 0.5 0.2 3.8 3.4 12,229 1,935 1,509 Sources: Central Reserve Bank; and Fund staff estimates. llEBS198/163 (9/11198). 2/includes interest payments on short-tem~ debt Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-33 - Table 8. El Salvador: Indicators of External Vulnerabilty 1995 1996 1997 1998 ProJ 1999 Finmcisl indicators Broad money (12.month percentage change) 12.7 17.3 12.3 9.5 8.0 Private sector credit (12month percentage change) 32.0 15.4 18.5 13.1 7.0 Central bank paper nominal yield (in percent) II 11.7 13.2 11.9 9.3 10.2 Domestic public sector debt (in percent of GDP) 4.4 5.0 6.1 6.0 6.7 External indicators Merchandise expmts (12~month percent change) Merchandise imports (12month percent change) Terms of trade (percentage change) Current hccount balance, after grants (in percent of GDP) Capml account bahce(m percent ofGDl’) Central bank net international reserves In millions of U.S. dollars In months of imports of next year’s gwds and services In percent of base money In percent of base money and central bank paper In percent of base money, shal-term central bank and government paper In percent Of M2 Gross oflicial ~esewes In months of next year’s impons of goads and services 22.7 2.0 32.7 -7.1 -8.1 26.8 -6.5 11.3 4.7 3.9 18.7 -10.4 9.8 -0.2 -7.7 -2.8 -1.6 0.9 -0.9 -1.8 4.3 3.2 2.4 3.3 2.6 935 1,100 1,462 1,766 1,866 3.6 5.3 4.9 5.7 5.8 74.2 80.5 98.2 109.2 112.7 66.9 67.5 75.2 84.6 79.9 61.6 59.6 55.0 30.0 30.2 33.5 77.3 35.4 5.7 544.1 121 517 22.2 16.8 5.4 11.4 1.3 72.8 34.9 3.6 5.3 4.9 5.8 In percent of short-term external debt on a remaining maturity basis 21 Commercial banks foreign assets (in US% million) Commercial banks foreign liabilities (in USS million) Public sector external debt (in percent of GDP) External debt service (in percent of exports of goods and service) External interest payments External amortization payments REER appreciation (+) (end of period) 31 229.0 257.2 213.3 113 II3 112 365 399 534 23.7 24.3 23.9 809.4 121 587 22.4 15.4 16.7 13.2 6.3 6.7 5.9 9.1 10.1 7.4 8.4 5.6 3.9 12.3 5.9 6.4 1.3 Sourcer: Central Bank of Costa Ku. and Fund statl’estimatcs I/ Annual average ofmonthly interest rates, for 1999 avemgc of the fust semester. 2/ includes short-term debt and external maturities falling due in the coming year. Excludes nonbank private external debt owing to lack of data on its mahnity 31 For 1999, data refers to the period December 1998~June 1999. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-34- Table 9. El Salvador h4edium-Tan Fiscal Projections Overall primary balance (ddicb - ) Ovcr,U ddictt (after grants) OverlO lblmdnp External Dome& Privntization pmceeds (In pcnxnt of GDP) 15.1 14.8 to.3 10.3 17.8 17.8 14.0 14.6 7.9 8.8 2.6 2.4 1.5 1.4 2.0 2.0 0.8 1.0 3.8 3.2 1.0 0.1 -1.2 -1.6 -2.7 -3.0 2.7 3.0 -0.4 0.8 -3.9 0.8 7.0 1.4 14.9 10.7 17.8 14.5 8.5 2.5 1.5 2.0 1.0 3.3 0.3 -1.4 -2.8 2.8 1.8 0.3 0.7 15.0 14.9 14.9 10.7 10.7 10.7 17.7 18.5 18.6 19.0 14.5 15.2 15.3 15.7 8.3 8.2 8.0 7.9 2.5 2.3 2.5 2.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.1 2.9 2.9 3.4 1.0 1.8 1.9 2.3 3.3 3.3 3.3 3.3 0.3 -0.4 -0.5 -1.0 -1.2 -1.8 -1.9 -2.2 -2.8 -3.5 -3.6 -4.1 2.8 3.5 3.6 4.1 2.0 2.8 2.9 3.1 0.8 0.7 0.7 1.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Erpendihve and net lending Current expenditure Wages and salaries Goods and scrviccs Intorest curmn transfers Of which Pensions Capital cxpsndilure Nonlttandd pdAic sector ravings Overdl primary balance (detldt -) Gverau dslicit (after grants) overau rmmldng EXtMnUl Domcdic Privatization pmcceds (In percent of GDP) 15.1 14.8 10.3 10.3 17.8 17.8 14.0 14.6 7.9 8.8 2.6 2.4 1.S 1.4 2.0 2.0 0.8 1.0 3.8 3.2 1.0 0.1 -1.2 -1.6 -2.7 -3.0 2.7 3.0 -0.4 0.8 -3.9 0.8 7.0 1.4 15.6 16.9 16.9 16.9 16.9 11.4 12.6 12.6 12.6 12.6 19.0 18.4 18.6 18.5 1.9.4 14.2 14.2 14.5 14.3 14.3 8.5 8.4 8.2 7.9 7.6 2.5 2.5 2.5 2.5 2.5 1.4 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.4 1.7 t.9 2.3 2.4 2.7 1.0 1.0 1.6 1.6 1.8 3.8 4.1 4.1 4.2 4.1 1.3 -0.9 -2.3 2.3 1.8 -0.1 0.7 2.5 2.3 0.0 -0.1 -1.5 -1.6 1.5 1.6 1.6 1.6 -0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 2.4 -0.1 -1.6 1.6 t.6 0.0 0.0 2.5 -0.1 -1.5 1.5 1.5 0.0 0.0 Sources: Central Bank of Costa Rica; Mini* of Fii and Fund staff estimates Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-35- Table 10. El Salvador: Sumtnary of the Structure and Performance of the Financial Sector 1995 December June 1996 1997 1998 1999 1. Number of licensed banks la. State-owned (number) 1 .a.i. As a percent of total assets 1.b. Foreign-owned (number) 1 .b.i. As a percent of total assets l.c. Branches of foreign banks (number) 1.c.i. As a percent of total assets 2. Nonbank deposit taking institution (number) 2.a. As a percent oftotal assets 2.b. As a percent of GDP 3. Number of banks accounting for 3.a. 25 percent of total assets 3.b. 75 percent of total assets 4. Total assets as a percent of GDP ‘ta. Foreign currency-denominated 4.a.i. Assets (as percent of total assets) 4.a.ii. Liabilities (as percent oftotal assets) 5 Contingent and off-balance sheet accounts (as percent of total assets) Ofwhich Foreign currency denominated (as percent of total assets) 6. Profit after tax (as percent of total assets) 7. Loans in arrears l/ (as a percent of total loans; end of pcriodj 8. Provisions COI loans in arrears (as percent of loans in arrears; end of period) 9. Risk-weighted capital/asset ratio 9.a. Required 9.b. Actual 10. Credit to related panies (as percent of nel worth) 10.a. Required 10.b. Actual 21 2 8.6 0 0.0 1 1.5 1 0.9 0.5 2 7 56.1 11.0 6.9 5.4 3.6 1.9 2.4 81.5 8.0 9.9 50.0 31.5 21 2 7.7 0 0.0 1 1.2 1 0.9 0.5 2 7 59.9 12.1 7.4 5.3 4.3 1.7 3.0 71.5 8.3 9.8 35.0 21.0 20 19 16 2 2 2 7.0 7.0 6.2 1 2 2 0.8 5.9 7.7 1 1 I’ 1.4 1.1 1.5 1 I 1 1.0 1.0 0.3 0.6 0.6 0.2 2 2 2 7 7 6 62.5 64.8 66.0 14.7 13.7 8.8 7.2 3.8 4.0 3.2 3.7 1.3 0.3 0.6 3.0 3.4 4.3 82.9 84.7 77.5 8.6 9.7 9.2 10.3 25.0 12.6 8.9 10.0 15.0 9.3 15.0 8.5 Source: Superintendency of the Financial System. l/Loans in arrears for 90 days or more. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-36- Table 11, El Salvador: Comparative Social Indicators GDP capita (in U.S. dollars) per Primary enrollment 11 Secondary enrollment l/ Tertiary enmllment l/ Youth illiteracy 2/ Male Female Infant mortality rate 3/ Life expectancy at birth (years) Safe water 4/ Latin America and El Salvador the CarMean 1980 1997 1980 1997 777 1,909 2,171 4,229 75.0 93.0 105.0 113.0 24.0 34.0 42.0 52.0 13.0 17.0 14.0 19.0 19.0 12.0 11.0 7.0 24.0 14.0 11.0 6.0 84.0 32.0 60.0 32.0 57.0 69.0 65.0 70.0 51.0 53.0 73.0 75.0 Sources: World Development Indicators 1999, World Bank. 11 Gross enrollment ratios in percent of school age population, Information available for 1996 rather than 1997. 21 In percent ofpopulation between 15-24 years old. 3/Per one thousand live births. 4/ Comparisons for this indicator are available only for the years 1982 and 19%. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 12. El Salvador: Medium-Term hhxceconomic Framework PrCl. 1998 Projections 1999 2ocfl 2001 2002 2003 2004 Real GDP lntlation rate (end of period) NonGnmctaI public sector Overall primary balance (deficit -) Overall deficit (after grants) Ovcmtt financing Extcmal Domestic Privatization proceeds Ertcmd debt afthe pubtic sector Real GDP Inflation rate (end of period) Nonfinancial public sector Overall primary balance Gvcrall deficit (a&r grants) Overall financing External Domestic Privatizatian proceeds External debt ofthe public sector External current account deficit (-) Gross domestic investment Public sector Private sector Gras national savings Public sector Private sector I. Pas&e Sccnnrko (Annual pcrecntagc change) 3.2 z-2.5 3.0 4.2 1.0 1.5 (In percent of GDP) -I .2 -1.6 -1.4 -2.7 -3.0 -2.8 2.7 3.0 2.8 -0.4 0.8 1.8 -0.7 -1.8 -1.5 16.6 16.0 16.1 3.7 3.1 3.2 12.9 12.9 12.9 15.9 14.2 14.6 1.0 0.1 0.3 14.9 14.1 14.3 (In months of imparts of goods and services) 5.7 5.8 5.6 Ii. Active Gcmuio (Annual psrccntagc change) 3.2 2-2.5 2.5 3.0 4.0 4.5 5.0 4.2 1.0 3.0 2.5 2.0 2.0 1.5 (In pcrccnt ofGDP) -1.2 -1.6 -0.9 -2.7 -3.0 -2.3 2.7 3.0 2.3 -0.4 0.8 1.8 -3.9 0.8 -0.1 7.0 1.4 0.7 12.1 22.4 11.9 -0.7 -1.8 -1.3 16.6 16.0 16.5 3.7 3.1 3.7 12.9 12.9 12.8 15.9 14.2 15.2 1.0 0.1 1.3 14.9 14.1 13.9 (In months of imports of goods and services) 23.2 23.4 23.5 23.5 -1.0 -1.2 -1.3 -1.2 18.1 18.7 19.3 20.0 4.0 4.0 4.1 4.0 14.1 14.7 15.2 16.0 17.1 17.5 18.0 18.8 2.5 2.3 2.4 2.3 14.6 15.2 15.6 16.3 5.7 6.0 5.8 5.8 5.8 5.9 5.9 3.0 2.5 2.5 2.0 2.5 2.5 3.0 4.0 -1.2 -1.8 -1.9 -2.2 -2.8 -3.5 -3.6 4.1 2.8 3.5 3.6 4.1 2.0 2.8 2.9 3.1 0.8 0.7 0.7 1.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 23.1 24.7 26.3 27.8 -1.5 3.0 -1.1 -2.5 16.1 16.1 16.0 16.0 3.2 3.2 3.2 3.2 12.9 12.9 12.8 12.8 14.6 14.1 13.9 13.5 0.3 -0.4 -0.5 -1.0 14.3 14.5 14.4 14.5 5.4 5.4 5.3 5.2 0.0 a.1 -0.1 -0.1 -1.5 -1.6 -1.6 -1.5 I.5 1.6 1.6 1.5 I .6 1.6 1.6 1.5 -0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Sources: Central Bank of Costa Rica, Ministry ofFinance: and Fund staffestimates. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 38 - Table 13. El Salvador: htedium-Term EMmce. of Payments Pmjeclions, 1999-2004 (Passive Scenario) 1999 (In millions ofU.8. ddhrs) (In percent of GDP) -1.8 -1.5 -2.1 -1.8 .*7.0 -16.8 12.3 12.4 0.4 0.3 2.6 1.7 0.8 0.2 12.229 12,784 -7.7 0.1 5.8 5.6 -197 -277 -319 398 -227 507 -349 -a* -2,243 -2,386 -2,521 -2,663 1,317 1.380 1,445 1,517 230 239 246 263 86 90 95 101 1,001 1,051 1.103 L.153 -3.560 -3.766 -3967 4,180 -3,421 -3,623 -3,816 4.021 -139 -143 -LSl -159 422 430 447 454 423 444 466 489 -87 -109 -130 -I54 187 206 233 261 1,682 1,757 1,856 1.936 30 30 30 30 316 326 352 395 276 400 436 499 295 415 330 360 -125 -135 -144 -15, 106 L20 250 290 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 -10 -14 -14 -14 0 0 0 0 -10 -*4 -14 -14 -50 -60 -70 -90 59 -59 99 -99 93 -93 76 -76 -1.5 -2.0 -2.1 -2.5 -1.7 -2.2 -2.3 -2.7 -,6.6 -16.8 -16.8 -16.8 12.5 12.4 12.4 12.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 1.6 2.3 2.4 2.5 0.4 0.7 0.6 0.5 13,497 I.2 5.4 14.1*0 0.1 5.4 .a.1 5.3 15.881 0.5 5.2 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 39 - Table 14. El Salvador: Medium-Term Balance of Payments Projections, 1999-2004 (Active Scenario) Swfs Active Roiedions 1999 loflo *oilI ZOO* 2003 2w4 -215 -170 -2E4 -103 -2.073 -2.132 1.161 1,238 210 221 73 73 877 944 -3.234 -3,370 -3.104 -3,228 -129 -143 368 412 -139 -169 -7.215 1;333 23, 86 1,015 -3.548 -3,410 -139 453 -173 -197 -7.03 -203 327 -233 -2.366 a.52 1 -2,655 1.429 1.533 I.644 248 265 282 90 95 101 1,091 ,,I73 1,261 -3,795 -4,054 -4,300 -3.651 3,899 -4,131 -143 -15, .I59 498 546 599 371 409 450 495 544 599 .64 "52 .a9 -93 -100 -107 0 0 0 0 0 0 170 170 186 198 212 227 LSO9 1,579 1.682 I.759 1.847 1,930 45 33 30 30 30 30 31s 7.50 294 323 353 353 93 226 214 229 253 25, 326 365 340 365 400 410 -123 -117 -126 -136 -147 -I59 -110 -11 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 I15 0 0 0 0 0 2 -10 -10 -14 -14 -14 10 0 0 0 0 0 -8 -LO -10 -*4 -*4 -14 96 34 90 108 114 L16 IO0 .I00 80 -80 15s -155 1sn -150 15s -155 IS0 -I50 (In ,mx" of GDP) .,.a -1.3 c.1 -1.6 -17.0 -16.5 12.3 12.2 0.4 0.3 2.6 1.9 0.8 0.6 12229 12,910 -7.7 0.1 6.0 5.8 -1.0 -1.2 -*.3 -,.2 -12 -1.4 -1.5 -1.4 -16.3 -16.4 -16.4 -16.2 12.3 12.2 12.0 11.8 0.2 02 cl.* 02 2.2 2.2 2.3 2.2 1.1 L.0 1.0 0.9 13.630 14.459 L.2 0.1 5.8 5.8 15,412 -0.1 5.9 16,425 0.5 5.9 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4o- Table 15. El Salvador: Public Extcmal Debt-and Debt Sctvice, 1999-2004 Projections 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2cO4 L ParrIve scennrio (In percent of GDP) Ertaml debt outstanding 12.4 22.2 23.1 24.7 26.3 27.8 IMF 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 olher multilateral IS.1 IS.1 15.1 15.4 15.5 15.6 Official bilateral 5.6 5.6 5.5 5.4 5.3 5.2 Commercial banks and suppliers 0.3 0.2 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.5 Bonds 1.2 I.2 I.1 1.8 1.7 1.6 Short-term debt 0.2 0.2 1.0 I.8 3.4 5.0 Debt service 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.1 2.2 2.3 Amotition payments I.1 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 Interest payments II 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.1 1.2 1.3 Debt service 7.2 7.1 7.0 7.4 7.9 8.4 Amotilion payments 3.8 3.5 3.5 3.6 3.6 3.6 bltere?.t pqmcnts I/ 3.4 3.6 3.5 3.9 4.3 4.8 (In percent of exports of goods, services, and private transfers) Exterad debt outstanding 22.4 21.9 IMF 0.0 0.0 o(her multilstcra1 IS.1 15.0 Offkial bilateral 5.6 5.6 Commercial hanks and supplim 0.3 0.2 B0Ild.Y I.2 2.0 Short-term debt 0.2 0.0 Debt service Amoriimtion payments Interest payments I/ 2.0 2.0 I.1 I.0 I.0 I.0 ll. Active Sceonrio (In percent of GDP) (In percent 01 exports of goods, services, and private transfers) Debt service 7.2 7.0 7.0 7.1 7.1 7.1 Amortization payments 3.4 3.5 3.5 3.6 3.6 3.6 Interest payments I/ 3.4 3.5 3.5 3.6 3.6 3.6 23.5 23.5 0.0 0.0 16.0 16.2 5.5 5.4 0.3 0.3 I.7 1.6 0.0 0.0 2.0 I.0 1.0 2.0 1.0 1.0 Sources: Central Reserve Bank; and Fund staff estimates. l/Includes interest payments on short-tmn debt. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4l- APPENDIX I I. Il. III. N. V. El Salvador: Fund Relations (As of August 31, 1999) Membership Status: Joined: March 14, 1946 Status: Article VIII General resources Account: SDR Million Percent of Quota Quota 171.30 100.0 Fund holdings of currency 171.30 100.0 SDR Department: SDR Million Percent of Quota Net Cumulative allocation 24.99 100.0 Holdings 24.98 100.0 Outstanding Purchases and Loans: None. Financial Arrangements: Approval Expiration Amount Approved Amount Drawn *we Date Stand-by 09/23/98 Stand-by 02128197 Stand-by 0712 1195 Date (SDR Million) (SDR Million) 02/22/00 37.68 0.00 05/30/98 37.68 0.00 09/20/96 37.68 0.00 VI. Projected Obligations to the Fund: None. VII. Exchange Rate Arrangement: On June 1, 1990, the exchange system was unified. Since January 1993 the central bank has intervened in the foreign exchange market to maintain the value of the col6n at C 8.75 per U.S. dollar. VIII. Recent Executive Board Discussions: On February 20, 1998, the Executive Board concluded the 1997 Article IV consultation, and on September 11, 1998 it approved a 17- month Stand-By Arrangement which the authorities have treated as precautionary. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 42 - APPENDIX I Ix. Technical Assistance: Department Dates FAD April-June 1995 November 1997 March 1996 INS LEG March 1995 MAE February 1995 STA Purpose Strengthening fiscal monitoring Tax structure Regional financial programming course in Guatemala Legal framework for central bank restructuring Monetary and prudential measures to support a dollar-based currency board April 1997 Monetary operations and lender of last resort August 1998 Monetary programming and indirect instruments of monetary control June-July I999 Further considerations of issues for the implementation of a dollar standard July 1998 November-December 1998 Multisector statistics Balance of payments statistics Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 43 - APPENDIX II El Salvador: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators 1998 1999 19% 1996 1997 prog. PA. F-x+ Proj. 6.3 10.6 11.4 10.1 22.4 0.6 26.7 23.9 28.3 19.1 I.9 3.2 4.4 8.4 23.2 15.9 16.5 -2.2 23.3 12.7 2.7 16.4 1.8 7.0 7.4 9.8 2.0 9.7 -6.4 -9.8 -7.1 -10.4 4.1 3.2 8.1 5.6 11.3 21.7 L4.3 0.7 13.1 17.3 2.7 12.0 (In ,,erccnt ofGDP) -0.1 -2.5 3.2 1.9 4.2 4.5 20.0 I52 17.2 13.6 -2.8 -1.6 -4.8 -2.2 4.0 3.9 L.9 4.5 32.6 18.8 11.3 9.2 11.9 9.6 5.0 5.7 5.0 3.9 -3.1 -5.4 8.0 -0.4 15.5 12.3 2.6 12.7 -1.8 1.9 4.0 14.9 15.8 0.9 0.4 4.0 3.7 3.5 2.5 -4.1 -5.7. 8.5 7.8 8.5 -0.1 8.6 14.6 4.6 -6.9 11.9 11.1 2.5 -2.7 1.2 4.1 KS 15.7 -1.1 1.4 400 -400 1,862 3.2 2.6 4.2 2.5 -7.1 -7.3 4.7 4.1 6.0 -0.3 3.6 1.4 2.9 1.3 9.9 14.6 2.5 -9.5 11.6 9.5 2.4 10.7 -2.1 1.0 3.8 16.6 L5.9 6.7 -1.0 303 -303 1,766 4.5 2.5 3.0 3.3 4.2 6.1 5.6 2.8 5.5 49 5.2 4.5 7.3 -0.6 9.5 7.5 2.5 -2.5 1.1 3.9 16.8 15.9 -0.9 -L.Z no -120 1.982 2.0-2.5 1.0 1.0 1.4 -8.1 -2.8 3.9 I.5 2.6 -7.7 5.2 1.3 0.5 2.9 7.5 02 6.4 8.0 2.3 11.0 -3.0 0.1 3.2 KC 14.2 -1.8 -2.1 100 -100 1,866 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 44 - El Salvador: Summary of Performance Under the Stand-By Arrangement hlluary 199sJune 1999 l/ 3,1clcl 530 770 2,164 219 420 336 311 350 1,210 520 1.405 1,060 362 955 -150 -158 450 -3.475 -4,020 545 -1 L,?m -10,427 -843 1.855 L.765 -90 170 209 -39 85 46 39 0 0 0 170 138 4.50 -72 532 850 7 843 -11,755 -11,790 35 1,860 1,870 10 270 520 227 260 43 260 185 205 46 61 139 144 105 0 105 170 158 105 0. 105 50 145 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 45 - APPENDIX IV El Salvador: Statistical Issues El Salvador has a relatively sound statistical system~compared with other countries in the region and the central bank makes data available to the public through regular official publications. However, a number of weaknesses need to be addressed. Money and banking statistics Despite important improvements achieved in terms of periodicity, timeliness, coverage, and quality of data, some problems still remain. In particular, the money and banking statistics compiled from financial institutions do not discriminate between assets and liabilities vis-a-vis residents and nonresidents, and the information on the transactions of the foreign branches of Salvadoran banks is consolidated with that of the head offices. Given that Salvadoran banks apparently have been active in lending elsewhere in the region and some onlending abroad has been detected, the lack of reliable information on transactions by residency status and on foreign branch activity has created problems for the interpretation of the monetary and credit aggregates, as well as for banking supervision. In addition, central bank procedures for the valuation of gold holdings and the sectorization of public sector accounts in the monetary surveys should be improved further. Public sector statistics The multisector statistics mission that visited El Salvador in July 1998 found that the definition of central government excludes a large number of autonomous agencies, and that information on the activities of local governments is very limited. As local governments do not need authorization to resort to debt financing, this is a problem from the standpoint of having a comprehensive and accurate picture of fiscal developments. The staff has recommended extending the coverage of data for central government operations according to the methodology of the 1986 Fund’s Manual on Government Finance Statistics and suggested that the policy analysis unit of the Ministry of Finance (GAMA) be made responsible for the compilation of data on local government operations Real sector statistics The basic data to produce these statistics, in particular national accounts and labor market statistics, suffer from incomplete coverage and, in many instances, are produced only with long lags. Also, there are problems with the compilation of quarterly national accounts data. Moreover, although the consumer price index has a sound methodological basis, its coverage is confined to the San Salvador metropolitan area and three departmental capitals; and the weights used from the National Urban Household Income and Expenditure Survey of 1990191 require updating. The authorities have recently begun Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 46 - APPENDIXIV compiling a Laspeyres producer price index, which replaces the wholesale price index. This index is confined to the San Salvador metropolitan area and the departments of La Libertad and Santa Ana and uses weights from the 1993 economic census. External sector statistics The compilation of external trade statistics follows international guidelines, but does not include estimates of informaVillegal transactions. There has been a significant improvement in the coverage and timeliness of balance of payments data in recent years. Weaknesses in services and foreign direct investment data are being addressed by the central bank with assistance from STA. It is expected that the new surveys on services and foreign direct investment will result in improvements in the quality and coverage of these transactions. External vulnerability indicators The central bank has started to compile information about the external indebtedness of the nonbank private sector. . Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicEl Salvador: Core Statistical Indicators (A.7 of *“gust 1999) Mode ofReporting 4s 7199 7199 7’99 3,99 5799 81V99 7/31,99 6m,99 w M M M W M M M A A A A TIE/C TluC 1 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-48- APPENDIXV El Salvador: Relations with the World Bank Group I. FINANCIAL RELATIONS (In million of U.S. dollars) A. ILtRD/IDMlFC Lending Operations by Sector (as of July 31,1999)’ IBRD/IDA Agriculture Education Tranqwnation Electric power and other energy Structural adjustment Urban development and housing Telecommonication Environment Industry Public sector management Health, population and nutrition 26.4 61.3 36.5 82.1 17.4 121.9 19.5 16.3 32.2 58.4 25.8 Total JBRD IDA Of which Repaid IDA ELttdi& 563.8 273.0 535.8 273.0 28.0 0.0 246.6 10.6 236.0 308.1 IFC investments3 60.6 Loans 57.3 Es@ 3.2 Disbursed Uadisburscd B. IBRDKDA Loan Disbursements (Calendar Year) 13.6 150.3 0.0 58.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 33.1 1.8 15.6 0.0 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 Gross disbursements 11.4 51.1 70.3 25.8 20.6 35.4 34.4 Ammtization (cash) 13.3 17.8 19.1 21.7 22.4 24.4 28.5 Net Disbursements -1.9 33.3 51.2 4.1 -1.8 11.0 5.9 ‘Net of cancellations. ‘Excluding amounts sold to third parties. ‘IFC commitments consist of disbursed and ottdisbursed investments as of January 1999 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-49. APPENDIX V C. Recent IRRD Activities World Bank staff will discuss the Bank’s assistance strategy with the new administration within the next few months, including support to address reconstruction following the damage inflicted by Hurricane Mitch. Subject to identification and agreement on titure priorities, total Bank assistance over the FY 1999-2002 period (July 1999 through June 2002) could amount to up to US$300 million. Two new loans have been approved by the Board since the last CAS was presented on March 1997: the Secondary Education Project (US$SS million) in August 1997, and the Education Reform Project (US$88 million) in May 1998. The latter is a Program Loan to support expansion of the EDUCO program, according to Phase I of the Government’s Ten Year Education Plan. A rural development study was issued on August 7, 1997 (No. 16253-ES).and a Rural Finance Study on April 10, 1998 (No. 17689 ES). World Bank assistance to El Salvador in response to Hurricane Mitch includes the restructuring/reprogramming of existing projects in the portfolio through appropriate amendments to the respective Loan Agreements in order to provide short-term and medium- term assistance for rehabilitation of physical and social infrastructure. In addition, at the request of several governments, the World Bank established the Central America Emergency Trust Fund (CAETF). Donors make contributions to this fUnd to help hurricane-affected countries cover their multilateral debt-service obligations. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- so - APPENDIXVI El Salvador: Relations with the Inter-American Development Bank I. FINANCIAL RELATIONS (In miUions of U.S. dollars) A. Operations (a~ of August l&1999) LOtMS Total Disbursed lJ16.3 539.1 Energy 254.4 142.5 Transportation and communications 389.0 259.5 Education 146.6 28.2 Health and sanitation 83.4 18.4 Environment 30.0 3.9 Social investment and microenterprise 94.1 63.1 F&form and public sector modemization 111.9 16.2 Preinvestment and other 7.0 6.8 B. Loan Disbursements Undisbursed 577.2 111.9 129.5 118.4 65.0 26.1 30.4 95.7 0.2 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 Net disbursements 30.6 83.0 59.6 102.0 210.8 171.2 74.0 143.2 Gross disbursements 62.8 107.6 122.7 124.5 234.2 198.4 132.3 110.7 Amortiration 32.2 24.6 63.1 22.5 23.4 27.2 58.3’ 32.5 ‘Extraordinary payment of X$29.7 million Recent activities For 1999, the lending programs include four new projects in an amount ofUS$57.8 million. These programs focused on public sector modemization and the environment. The estimated lending program for 1999 is as follows: Decontamination of critical areas 45.0 Modernization of the Legislative Assembly 5.0 Modemization and strengthening of the Court of Accounts (Corte de Cuentas) 4.0 Technical Cooperation to support the financial sector 3.8 Total 57.8 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-51- APPENDIX VI Futurephns The operations pipeline for 2000 include projects for approximately US$302 million, as follows: Support to deposit insurance institute Housing program Technological development Peaceful coexistence program Coastal management program Modemization of the Municipality of San Salvador Agricultural modernization program Local development program II Program to strengthen the municipal sector 100.0 80.0 6.0 30.0 30.0 6.0 10.0 10.0 30.0 Total 302.0 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-52- APPENDIX VII Public information Notice (PIN) No FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE IMF Concludes Article IV Consultation with El Salvador On -----, the Executive Board concluded the Article IV consultation with El Salvador.’ Background El Salvador has maintained its record of macroeconomic stability over the past year, notwithstanding the uncertainties associated with developments in emerging markets, the political transition to a new administration, the adverse effects of Hurricane Mitch, and the drop in coffee prices, Economic performance in 1998 was broadly in line with the authorities’ projections in the period through September, but there were deviations in the last quarter, The overall fiscal deficit was contained at 2.7 percent of GDP, as projected, but public sector savings were lower than envisaged because of higher outlays on wages and transfers. The external current account deficit shifted from surplus to a deficit of 0.7 percent of GDP in 1998, as coffee exports were seriously affected by the El Nitio weather phenomenon and the decline in international prices. Following a substantial reserve accumulation, net international reserves (NIR) declined from mid-October to early November owing to the turmoil in emerging markets and central bank assistance to cover withdrawals of deposits from an intervened commercial bank (CREDISA). In November the authorities announced a phased increase in reserve requirements (remunerated) to an average of 24 percent, which contributed to easing pressures in the foreign exchange market. For 1998 as a whole, NIR increased by US$300 million to US.$1,770 million, compared with a targeted accumulation of US$400 million. Real GDP grew by 3.2 percent in 1998 I Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial information, and discusses with officials the country’s economic developments and policies. On return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which fons the basis for discussion by the Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the country’s authorities, In this PIN, the main features of the Board’s discussion are described. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-53- APPENDIX VII (compared with 4 percent envisaged originally), mainly because of the effects of Hurricane Mitch on the agricultural sector, while consumer prices rose by 4.2 percent (3% percent in the authorities’ projections), due to the impact of the hurricane on food prices. Developments in 1999 point to a slowdown in economic activity associated with a further decline in coffee export receipts; real GDP growth is projected by the staff at 2-2% percent for the year as a whole. Consumer prices rose by only 0.1 percent in the 12 months through August 1999, reflecting a drop in food prices, and are expected to increase by 1 percent during 1999. The authorities intend to contain the fiscal deficit at 3 percent of GDP in 1999, with public savings weakening to approximate balance, from a surplus of 1 percent of GDP in 1998, owing to a further increase in the wage bill. Liquidity conditions were tight in the first half of 1999, resulting in some increase in interest rates, notwithstanding the decline in inflation. In April- August the central bank reduced reserve requirements in steps by 1.4 percentage points and extended an additional credit related to the liquidation of CREDISA, which has contributed to some decline in interest rates subsequently. The external current account position has weakened because of the drop in coffee exports and slower growth in the nontraditional and maquila sectors. NIR strengthened further by US0240 million to almost US$2 billion (about 120 percent of base money), from end-1998 through mid-September 1999, aided by proceeds from the privatization of thermal plants and a government bond placement in international markets. In June 1999, the authorities submitted to the assembly a tax package that strengthens the revenue base and introduces a new tax code. In September the assembly approved part of the package, involving mainly a broadening of the income tax base and procedures to reduce customs evasion. <Begin Typing Here> Executive Board Assessment <Begin Typing Here> Public lnformaflon Notices (PINS) are issued, (i) at the request of a member country, following the conclusion of the Article IV consultation for countries seeking to make known the views of the IMF 10 the public. This action is intended to strengthen IMF surveillance over the economic policies of member countries by increasing the transparency of the IMF’s assessment of these policies; and (ii) following policy discussions in the Executive Board at the decision of the Board. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-54- El Salvador: Selected Economic Indicators APPENDIX VII Proj. 1986 1986 1as7 18W 1sss Real economy (chw?gc in percent) Real GDP GDP deflator CPI (end of psrtod) Unemployment rd. (in percent) Gross national savings (in percent of GOP) Gross dome&k tnveatment (in percent of GDP) Public fhuncs (in percent of QDP) Overall balance of the nonf,nancial publk sector (sRer granls) Savtngs position of the nonfinancial public sector Money and credlt (end-year, percml change) l/ Net domestk 888&s Of which NonfinancIal public sector (net) Private sector Broad monay Inter*st ran ,.“d 0, psrtod, 2, Six-month deposit rate Six-month government bonds Prime lending interest rate External sector (in percent MGDP) Trade balance Private transfers current account (after 0Kltial transfers) Overall balance of payments position (deficit -) Net InternatIonal reserves (In rMlO”s Of U.S. dollars) (In months of imports of goods and services) External public debt Real effective exchange rate 3 6.3 1.6 4.0 3.2 2.0 10.6 7.0 3.9 2.6 1.0 11.4 7.4 1.0 4.2 1.0 7.7 7.7 6.0 7.6 7.6 17.2 13.6 15.6 15.9 14.2 20.0 15.2 14.9 16.0 16.0 -0.1 3.2 16.5 -2.2 23.3 12.7 16.4 14.5 200 -19.5 -15.9 14.4 -15.6 -17.0 12.6 11.5 11.7 12.5 12.3 3.5 -1.6 0.9 -0.7 -1.6 1.5 1..6 3.2 2.6 0.5 935 1,lW 1,462 1,766 1.665 3.6 5.3 4.9 5.7 5.6 23.7 24.3 23.9 22.2 22.4 -2.5 -1 .B -2.7 -3.0 1.9 1.9 1.0 0.1 14.3 5.0 2.5 7.5 0.7 -0.4 -9.5 0.2 13.1 15.5 11.6 6.4 17.3 12.3 9.5 a.0 12.0 12.3 16.7 12.7 10.7 15.7 15.1 10.9 9.9 15.4 (percent change. and of period. depreciation -) 6.4 5.6 3.0 1.3 1.3 Sources: Central Reserve Bank; Ministry of Finance; and Fund Staff &tr”imates. V In relation to the stock of lkblttties to the prtvate sector at the beginning 01 the period, 2/ In 1 W9 data refer to July. 3/ In 1999 data refer to the period January-June. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public