DOCUMENT OF INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND NOT FOR PUBLIC USE MASTER FILES ROOM HQ C-525 0450 FOR AGENDA sMl99/141 CONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION June 16. 1999 To: Members of the Executive Board From: Subject: The Secretary Malaysia-Staff Report for the 1999 Article IV Consultation Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staff report for the 1999 Article IV consultation with Malaysia, which will be brought to the agenda for discussion on a date to be announced. Ms. Meesook (ext. 38364) or Ms. Kochhar (ext. 38770) is available to answer technical or factual questions relating to this paper prior to the Board discussion, Unless the Documents Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the WTO Secretariat on Thursday, June 24, 1999; and to the Asian Development Bank, following its consideration by the Executive Board. Att: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicCONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION i INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND MALAYSIA Staff Report for the 1999 Article IV Consultation Prepared by the Staff Representatives for the 1999 Consultation with Malaysia Approved by Margaret R. Kelly and Carlos G. Muiiiz June 16, 1999 ) The consultation discussions were held in Kuala Lumpur during April 20-May 4, 1999. ) The mission met with Minister of Finance Dato Mustapa Mohamed; Secretary General to the Treasury Datuk Dr. Aris Othman; Bank Negara Malaysia (BNM) Deputy Governor Dato Dr. Zeti Akhtar Aziz; BNM Advisor Dato Nor Mohamed; Tan Sri Noordin Sophiee, Member ofNational Economic Action Council; other senior officials; and private sector representatives ) The staffteam was led by Ms. Kelly and Ms. Meesook, and included Ms. Kochhar, Mr. Roger, Mr. Tzanninis (all APD), Mr Johnston, Mr. Moore, Ms. Otker (all MAE), Ms. Banerji (PDR), and Ms. Tan (APD, Administrative Assistant) Mrs. Hetrakul, Executive Director for Malaysia, joined the policy discussions during May 3-4; and Mrs. Siti Mariam Yusof, Assistant to Executive Director, attended a number of meetings. b The discussions focused on short-term macroeconomic policies required to foster sustained economic recovery, the use of the breathing space afforded by recent capital and exchange controls to expedite structural reforms, and a medium-term policy framework that could strengthen the resiliency and shock-absorptive capacity of the economy. b Malaysia has accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4, and maintains an exchange system free of restrictions on the making of payments and transfers for current international transactions. Controls are applied to a number of capital account transactions (Annex IV). . The principal author of the staff report was Ms. Meesook. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2- Contents Page Executive Summary .............................................................................................................. 4 1. Introduction and Background ....................................................................................... .5 II. Recent Economic Developments and Outlook .............................................................. 6 A. Key Economic Developments ......................................................................... .6 B. Short-Term Outlook ........................................................................................ .7 III. Policy Discussions.. ...................................................................................................... 8 A. Macroeconomic Policies in the Short Term. ..................................................... 8 B. Financial and Corporate Sector Reforms-Use ofthe “Breathing Space”. ..... .15 C. Medium-Term Policies. .................................................................................. 18 D. Other Issues ................................................................................................... 21 IV. Staff Appraisal ............................................................................................................ 21 Boxes 1. Major Economic Policy Measures, 1998-99 ............................................................... 25 2. Strengths and Vulnerables .......................................................................................... 26 3. Exchange and Capital Control Measures, September 1998-February 1999.. .............. .27 4. Summary of Financial and Corporate Sector Restructuring, 1998-99 ........................ .28 5. Prudential Risk-Based Framework for Cross-Border Transactions.. ........................... .29 6. Toward Consolidated Supervision of Financial System ............................................. 30 7. Recent Key Corporate Governance Reforms. .............................................................. 3 1 Text Figure 1. Interest Rates and Spread, 1997-99 ........................................................................... 11 Charts 1. Indicators of Activity and Prices, 1995-99 ................................................................. 32 2. External Sector Developments, 1995-99 ................................................................... .33 3. Exchange Rates, 1995-99 .......................................................................................... .34 4. Financial System Indicators, 1995-99 ....................................................................... .35 5. Selected indicators for Five Asian Countries, 1999 ..................................................... 36 6. Fiscal Developments, 1995-99 .................................................................................. .37 7. Monetary and Interest Rate Developments, 1995-99 .................................................. 38 8. Exchange Rate Developments and Export Performance Since July 1997 ................... .39 Tables 1. Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 1995-2000.. .......................................... 40 2. Balance of Payments, 1995-2000.. ............................................................................ .41 3. Indicators of Financial Institution Soundness, 1995-99 .............................................. 42 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3- 4. Selected Indicators for Five Asian Countries .............................................................. 43 5. Stock of Short-Term Debt and Liabilities at End-Period, 1997-99 ............................. .44 6. Summary of Public Sector Operations, 1995-99 ......................................................... 45 7. Financing Needs, 1998-99 ......................................................................................... 46 8. Banking Survey, 1995-2000. ...................................................................................... 47 Annexes I. Asian Crisis Countries: A Comparative Review of Economic Developments and Policies, 1996-Present ...................................................................................... 48 II. Alternative Medium-Term Macroeconomic Scenarios.. .............................................. 60 III. Statistical Issues ......................................................................................................... 63 IV. Fund Relations .......................................................................................................... .66 V. Relations with the World Bank Croup ........................................................................ 69 VI. Relations with the Asian Development Bank .............................................................. 70 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4- EXECUTIVE SKY . Malaysia’s economy has come under increasing stress over the past year. Notwith- standing Malaysia’s comparatively strong initial conditions, the impact of the crisis on output, investment, and the financial sector has been broadly as severe as in the other affected countries. In these circumstances, it has gradually shifted from relatively tight macroeconomic policies adopted in early 1998 to a more expansionary stance. . In September 1998, Malaysia imposed selective capital controls and pegged the exchange rate to the U.S. dollar. The measures were aimed at deterring speculation against the ringgit, regulating short-term capital flows, providing market participants with some certainty, and insulating monetary policy from external instability. These measures were accompanied by more direct instruments to stimulate credit and output, and accele- rated financial and corporate reforms, In February 1999, quantitative restrictions on repatriation of portfolio investments were replaced by an exit levy. l There have since been increasing signs of output recovery and a return of capital inflows. The authorities attributed the improved performance to the pegged exchange rate regime and capital controls. However, other regional currencies have also stabilized during the past few months, and market sentiment for Asia has turned more positive. It is likely that the more favorable outlook for the Malaysian economy reflects the better external environment, as well as Malaysia’s prudent macroeconomic policies and rapid progress in restructuring the financial sector and strengthening the regulatory framework. The stronger economic outlook nevertheless remains uncertain, both for the near term and beyond. In view of the downside risks to growth prospects, the staff supports the forceful use of fiscal and monetary stimulus to revive output. l A key theme of the discussions was the way in which more flexible macroeconomic management could help underpin the recovery, and bring about a higher growth path with lower inflation over the longer term. In the staffteam’s view, a strong output revival this year and effective demand management in general would require a more responsive fiscal policy and a less rigid interest rate structure. l Looking forward, the current policy mix-with the fixed exchange rate and limited interest rate flexibility-is not expected to cause problems any time soon, but is likely to become inconsistent if capital inflows start to pick up. The adoption of a more flexible exchange rate regime would help achieve an efficient adjustment of the real exchange rate toward its long-run equilibrium. l Malaysia’s orderly exit from capital controls would require a solid foundation for the financial and corporate sector, and an effective prudential risk-based framework for the financial system. The staffteam reviewed the financial restructuring program and the supervisory and regulatory framework, and found that Malaysia has made considerable progress in putting in place the critical elements required for managing cross-border transactions. Corporate restructuring, however, needs to be expedited and strengthened. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-5- 1. INTRODUC~IONANDBACKGROUND 1. The Asian crisis has had a severe impact on the Malaysian economy. The authorities’ initial responses included tighter macroeconomic policies aimed at stabilizing the exchange rate, which had been allowed to float after an early attempt to defend it. In early 1998, with output growth projected to slow considerably, a comprehensive policy package was adopted, entailing an easier fiscal stance to support growth, monetary policy that focused on stabilizing the exchange rate and restraining inflation, and financial sector reforms. At the conclusion of the last Article IV consultation with Malaysia in April 1998, Directors endorsed the rebalancing of macroeconomic policies and the emphasis on strengthening the financial system, and underscored the need for improved corporate governance and fiscal transparency. 2. Policy emphasis shifted more forcefully to avoid a recession when the output effects of the financial crisis became clear. Since mid-l 998, interest rates have been progressively lowered, and fiscal policy has moved to targeting a deficit instead of a surplus (Box l).’ The evolution of policy goals has been broadly in line with the pattern observed in the other crisis countries, and the outcome has also been similar, as analyzed in Annex I.’ 3. Malaysia’s approach departed from the other crisis countries in September 1998 when it introduced selective capital controls and an exchange rate peg (Box 3). The approach reflected the authorities’ concern about the continuing volatility in financial markets and the major role they believe speculators played in that context. Monetary easing was stepped up, including through the use of administrative measures. At the same time, financial and corporate reforms were accelerated. In early 1999, some of the capital controls were modified, with the 12-month restriction on repatriation of portfolio capital replaced by a graduated exit levy. 4. Against this background, the 1999 Article IV consultation discussions focused on three main issues: (i) short-term macroeconomic policies necessary to foster a strong economic recovery; (ii) the use of the “breathing space” afforded by the capital controls and exchange rate peg to implement the needed structural reforms; and (iii) alternative policy frameworks that Malaysia could adopt in the medium term to strengthen the resiliency and the shock-absorptive capacity of the economy. ‘The authorities’ policy agenda to promote economic recovery was articulated in July in National Economic Recovery Plan, prepared by the National Economic Action Council, established in January 1998 as a consultative body to the Cabinet to deal with the crisis. *Economic performance depends not only on the policy measures in place but also the points of vulnerability and other features of the economy. Box 2 is designed to illustrate some of these factors. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicIL RECENT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS AND OUTLOOK A. Key Economic Developments 5. Developments in 1998 were marked by a severe output decline, a sizable external current account surplus, and limited rise in the CPI (Chart 1 and Table 1). Real GDP contracted by 6% percent in 1998, reflecting sharp falls in domestic demand, especially investment.’ The manufacturing and construction sectors were hardest hit, although industrial production has begun to pick up with improved exports of electronics. CPI inflation increased in 1998. Reflecting depressed domestic demand and excess capacity, the extent of the increase (from 2% percent in the preceding year to 5% percent) was more limited than implied by the extent of the depreciation of the ringgit. Wage pressures were moderated by the increase in unemployment, pay cuts, and temporary layoffs. Nevertheless, the social impact of the crisis has been relatively limited. A collapse of imports led to a sharp turnaround in the current account (from a deficit of 5 percent of GDP in 1997 to a surplus of 13 percent of GDP), which more than offset a worsening capital account (Chart 2 and Table 2). Exports in dollar terms declined through most of the year before manufacturing exports rebounded in the last quarter. Foreign direct investment flows were moderated by financial problems in major investing countries (such as Japan and Korea) and global excess capacity, and short-term capital outflows were sizable until the imposition of capital controls in September. Ollicial reserves were also boosted by government borrowing, including some financing under the Miyazawa initiative. At end-May 1999, reserves stood at $29.8 bil- lion (4% months of imports of goods and services). The real effective exchange rate (REER) of the ringgit, which had depreciated by 23 percent from June 1997 to the time the currency was fixed at RM 3.8 per U.S. dollar in September 1998, has remained broadly stable through March 1999 (Chart 3). Stock prices declined to a low point in August, but have since recovered markedly. The surge in September was due, in part, to domestic institutional buyers, and the more recent increase has been due to renewed interest by both domestic and foreign investors. However, portfolio investment flows to Malaysia-compared to other Asian destinations -have been moderated by the removal in September 1998 of Malaysia from the bench- mark international investment indices on the grounds that restrictions on repatriation of capital and profits had reduced the liquidity of investments in Malaysia. 3Major revisions in the national income accounts are scheduled to be announced at end-June 1999. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-7- . Financial and corporate sector situations deteriorated through 1998, adding to the difficulty in rekindling economic activity. The deterioration was manifested in a slow growth in bank deposits, rising nonperforming loans (NPLs), declining bank capital levels, and corporate bankruptcies (Chart 4 and Table 3). B. Short-Term Outlook 6. After about a year of steady declines, there are now some indications of a recovery. Stronger export prospects have contributed to an increase in industrial production; business confidence indicators have shown signs of a pickup; and loan approvals are slowly rising. Foreign market sentiment has also shown signs of improvement: international rating agencies have upgraded Malaysia’s credit ratings; and, recently, Malaysia successfully issued a sovereign bond, although the interest spread, at 330 basis points, was somewhat higher than those of Korea, the Philippines, or Thailand. The general outlook for Malaysia is broadly similar to that projected for these countries (Chart 5 and Table 4). 7. For 1999, the staN now projects output growth of 2-3 percent, inflation to remain at the current level of 3 percent, and a substantial accumulation of international reserves. Factors contributing to the strengthening of the economy include improved export demand, an expansionary 1999 budget, the impact of lower interest rates on corporate finan- cial positions, and the easing of the credit crunch as financial restructuring proceeds. The speed of the recovery in the near term, however, could be moderated by a number of factors, including a smaller-than-planned fiscal and monetary stimulus and foreign investors’ remaining reticence to return to Malaysia. Despite the downside risks, the staffteam expects positive growth, with the upturn gathering pace as the year progresses, provided the economy is not subject to f+ther adverse shocks. The staffs output projection is somewhat higher than those of the authorities (l-2 percent, which they consider conservative) and the private consensus (I % percent) because, unlike those, the staff forecast incorporates the more favorable output trends evident in the latest industrial production data (April 1999). 8. The expected reserve buildup reflects both a continued current account surplus and an improved capital account. The latter reflects the staffteam’s view that portfolio outflows in September (at the anniversary of the introduction of capital controls) will be limited by the return of optimism about the region, relatively low interest rates in industrial countries, and the general view that Malaysia has progressed well in its banking and regula- tory reforms. Foreign direct investment flows are conservatively assumed to remain low at 1998 levels, whereas official capital flows are projected to pick up somewhat. 9. Malaysia’s otlicial reserves are expected to cover adequately its short-term external liabilities, which remain moderate as a result of prudent debt management (Table 5). Reserves at end-1999 are expected to cover some 135 percent of total short-term liabilities (by remaining maturity), or some 120 percent of total claims on reserves including potential portfolio outflows. Market estimates of the size of these outflows vary with the outlook for Malaysia and the region as a whole, as well as technical factors such as inclusion in benchmark investment fimd indices. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-8- IIL POLICYDISCUSSIONS A. Macroeconomic Policies in the Short Term 10. Given the continued weakness in economic activity, the discussions centered around policies to stimulate output recovery in a timely manner, in particular, the degree of flexibility in fiscal and monetary policy to ensure its effective implementation. In addition, they focused on the impact of the capital controls and the pegged exchange regime on investor confidence and external competitiveness. Fiscal policy 11. The federal government deficit in 1998 amounted to 1% percent of GDP com- pared with the target deficit of 2% percent of GDP set under the revised budget adopted in July (Chart 6 and Table 6). The lower deficit reflected delays in project implementation and higher-than-budgeted collection of direct taxes. The execution of off-budget infrastructure projects introduced in July was also slow to get started. 12. The authorities are aiming for a stronger fiscal stimulus to generate economic growth in 1999. The federal government budget plans for a deficit of 5% percent of GDP, implying an impulse equivalent to 4 percent of GDP.’ Additional stimulus is designed to come from off-budget spending. Allocations to social sectors have increased; additional programs to assist those affected by the economic downturn will be supported, in part, by the World Bank’s education and social sector loans, 13. While agreeing that the authorities’ fiscal stance, as contained in the budget, is appropriate, the staff team expects the actual impact to be considerably less expansion- ary than planned. The federal government budget is based on very conservative estimates for direct tax collection,’ and significant shortfalls in development expenditures can be envisaged. Implementation of off-budget activities are also likely to be slow. Unless external demand improved beyond the current outlook the actual stimulus would likely be insuffi- cient to generate the estimated output growth. 4The extent of the calculated fiscal impulse needs to be interpreted with caution. The measure is designed for the relatively stable environment of industrial countries, whereas Malaysia has faced many abrupt changes and the relationship between fiscal parameters and economic activities are not well established. 5Based on the first quarter outturn, the authorities have underestimated taxpayers’ ability to pay the assessed tax, while the estimate of tax obligations (based on 1998 incomes) is roughly accurate. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-9- 14. The staff team recommended that if, by midyear, economic recovery has not taken hold to the extent expected, steps should be taken to ensure that the federal deficit objective of 5% percent of GDP would be met. To this end, it would be appropriate to rely on measures that would have a more immediate and direct impact on domestic demand, such as temporary tax relief or cuts, or higher operating expenditures. The team advised against accelerating development spending or launching new projects, as the implementation and transmission lags could result in their impact being felt after the economy has recovered, thereby jeopardizing domestic and external balances. In this regard, reactivation of large projects postponed in 1997-98, for which financing was yet to be identified, would be inappropriate. 15. The authorities thought it was too early to judge the extent of the fiscal stimulus. While they shared some of the team’s assessment of the situation, they were more confident that the various means already put in place, including closer monitoring and procedural changes in disbursing funds, would help expedite project execution and thus achieve their planned deficit In order to make sure that the deficit is reached, however, if project execu- tion were much behind plan, they would consider either raising operating expenditures or providing some form of tax relief, but only if revenues turned out stronger than expected. Tax relief could be provided possibly to tourism activities so as to promote the sector as well. However, the authorities did not favor the option of temporary tax cuts, on the grounds that tax rates were already low, and that it would be difficult to raise taxes once they had been reduced. In early June, a bonus to civil servants-previously withdrawn-was reinstated, adding about 0.2 percent of GDP to the 1999 expenditure. 16. Financing for the public sector does not currently appear to be a constraint, and there is little danger of crowding out the private sector given the very weak credit demand. Total public sector financing needs for 1999 are estimated at about I3 percent of GDP (Table 7). Much of these needs are for financial restructuring, to be met largely through long-term domestic bond issuance, at market-related interest rates. The debt profile of the public sector is projected to continue to be manageable (para. 48); and, provided that restruc- turing agencies make early exits as planned (paras. 37-38), the fiscal costs of tinancial restructuring will be recouped within the next ten years. Monetary policy 17. Stated objectives of BNM are to promote sustainable growth with price stability. The instruments toward these objectives include: (i) direct borrowing or lending by BNM in the interbank market, with the immediate policy target being the 3-month interbank market rate (KLIBOR); (ii) setting of the BhMintervention (or policy) rate, at which BNM stands ready to lend to financial institutions; (iii) setting of the formula for the base lending rate (BLR) for commercial banks and finance companies, allowing some margin over their costs of timds (the latter being defined as the BNM intervention rate) after taking into account the statutory reserve requirements (SRR); (iv) setting of the maximum spread ofloan rates (applicable to each loan) over the BLR; and (v) lending directives or guidelines. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-IO- 18. Initiatives were taken in 1998 to make interbank market operations more trans- parent and bank liquidity management more efficient. BNM now provides daily forecasts of, and key factors affecting, the financial system’s cash flows. A maturity ladder approach for liquidity management was introduced (to be completed in early 2000), to give financial institutions greater flexibility in managing their liquidity positions without compromising prudential standards. It is intended that, as more institutions adopt the new framework, the liquid asset ratio (LAR) will be fiuther reduced. 19. The focus of monetary policy since mid-1998 has been to support the economic recovery while preserving price stability. Measures taken toward this objective have included: . Successive reductions in the SRR, from IO percent in July to 4 percent by September. + Successive cuts in BNM intervention rate, from 11 percent in August to 6 percent by early May 1999 (Chart 7). l Revision in the BLR formula-specifying a contemporaneous (instead of a lagged) relationship between BNh4 intervention rate and the BLR-in order to transmit monetary policy changes to the lending rates more rapidly; and the reduction in the maximum spread over the BLR from 4 percentage points to 2% percentage points, intended to induce banks to become more efficient, and prevent them from taking undue risks or making excessive profits. . Minimum annual loan growth targets of 8 percent for both 1998 and 1999; the establishment of a rehabilitation fund for small and medium industries at BNM; and increased limits on loans to some sectors and prohibition of new loans to some others. 20. In implementing these measures, BNM has been constrained by the need to accommodate other objectives as well. It has been BNM’s policy to prevent the deposit rates from becoming negative in real terms. Thus, while signaling an easing of monetary policy by reducing the SW BNh4 has been absorbing the liquidity released by the actions so as to support the KLIBOR above a certain threshold. Additionally, in order to protect protit- ability of banks that have been locked into high-cost deposits while being restricted from raising lending rates above the maximum allowable, BNM has maintained the intervention rate at a level that is significantly higher than the KLIBOR; consequently, the BLR has been kept relatively high (Figure 1). In the present environment in which BNM only absorbs (and does not inject) liquidity through the interbank market, the direct impact of any changes in the BNM intervention rate has been felt mainly on lending rates through the BLR formula, with its influence on the KLJBOR being minimal. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 11 - Figure 1. Malaysia: lntercst Rates and Spread, 1997-99 L2 t r---‘\ I 12 .-. ‘PI*5 1: .____.. 1: 6 - -Klibor _ _ _ - BLR ~ BLR-Klibor 4 i \;6 Avsrags Lsnding Rats-Klibor ~ 4 _- -.. _ .’ ..:~._---~,___~, 2 i _..-_. p..‘--?.;yp- 2 ” 4 “I,...............,.......,~ 0 21. Under these circumstances, aggregate credit to the private sector remained almost flat in 1998 (Table Q6 M3 fell by 1% percent, and BNM liquidity mop-up operations resulted in a sharp decline of base money. The staff stated that the SRR reductions have eased the implicit tax burden on banks, and that the interest rate cuts have been appropriate to spur output growth. However, the rigidities in the implementation of monetary policy and the interest rate structure appeared to have weakened the transmission of the intended monetary easing and constrained the recovery of private sector credit. 22. Discussions on monetary policy centered around the most eflkient way to promote credit growth in the period ahead while ensuring that banks remained sound. With improved market sentiment and signs of a nascent recovery, banks would now be more willing to make loans and compete for market share, provided that they could price risks appropriately. In the staffteam’s view, the interest rate structure has constrained banks’ ability to set prices consistent with the degree of underlying risks, especially as banks can find alternative investments in risk-free lending to BNM or government-guaranteed papers. Directed lending and minimum loan growth targets, in combination with caps on interest rates, may also lead to further deterioration in asset quality. 23. With a view to accommodating credit demand in this still uncertain environ- ment, the staff team recommended that the intervention rate be lowered so as to bring it more in line with the KLIBOR, and that the restriction on the spread over the BLR be lifted. This could provide the same expansionary impact that the authorities desired, but with less distortion. Banks should be given greater scope in managing their portfolios as long as they remained within prudential guidelines. The objective of preventing banks from exces- sive risky lending practices should be accomplished through vigilant supervision, whereas that of promoting priority sectors was already being met through special-purpose funds. The team also recommended the authorities to indicate clearly that the minimum credit growth target in 1999 would be indicative-not applicable on a bank-by-bank basis-and that, in connection with a newly announced plan to assess performance of bank managers regularly, 6Banking system lending, which excludes holdings of securities, fell 1.8 percent in 1998 Including NPLs sold to Danaharta, lending expanded by 1.3 percent. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12- achievement of the target in itself would not be a criterion for the assessment and renewal of their licenses. 24. The authorities defended the current monetary policy stance, including the interest rate framework, as appropriate in safeguarding a better distribution of liqui- dity and the efftciency in the intermediation process, noting that the matter was in any case under constant review. While open to a reevaluation of the maximum lending rate spread, this would be on the basis of principle rather than in response to the slow credit growth. The reluctance of BNM to bring the intervention rate close to the KLIBOR-which had declined rapidly since late 1998-and efforts to maintain the latter positive in real terms were intended to prevent capital outflows and financial disintermediation. The authorities reiterated that the 8 percent credit target was directed only at institutions judged to have the capacity to lend, and that the periodic performance reviews of bank managers would be based solely on already established criteria for “tit and proper” bankers as stipulated in the Banking and Financial Institution Act (BAFIA) and not on whether the credit target was met. External sector policy 25. According to the authorities, the pegging of the ringgit was intended to provide market participants with some certainty, and the capital control measures were designed to achieve the specific objectives of reducing the intemationalixation of the ringgit and regulating short-term capital flows. Restrictions introduced in September 1998 were directed at the external transactions of nonresidents not physically present in Malaysia, and currency of settlement of trade transactions; these would reduce access to the ringgit by speculators. Foreign direct investment flows and payments and transfers related to current account transactions-including repatriation of profits, interest, and dividends-were not subject to restrictions.7 26. Since the introduction of these measures, the ringgit has not come under pres- sure, widespread circumvention of capital controls has not been identified, and some portfolio inflows have resumed following the introduction of the exit levy. Overall, the measures do not appear to have had serious detrimental effects on the Malaysian economy. Given these developments, the authorities considered the approach to be successful, explaining that the controls were introduced under conditions and circumstances favorable for the achievement of their objectives. They said that the fundamental balance of payments constraints were not too severe, official reserves were strong, and short-term external debt was manageable. The controls were implemented under subdued inflationary pressures and, therefore, there was little risk of the fixed exchange rate becoming overvalued. The authori- ties stressed that they were not relying on the controls to avoid addressing macroeconomic ‘See more detail of the control measures and further analysis of this issue in Chapter 1 “Malaysia: Use of Capital Controls and Evolution of the Capital Control Regime,” of the upcoming Selected Issues paper. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13 - imbalances; rather, the measures were to complement other monetary and fscal actions to bring about sound and balanced development. 27. In the staff team’s view, the containment of capital outflows following the imposition of the exchange and capital controls also reflected a number of other factors. In addition to the effective implementation of the controls, these factors included the timely return of international investor confidence to the region, the “ex-post” undervaluation of the ringgit (para. 30), and Malaysia’s large current account surplus, all of which have reduced pressures for capital outflows. Importantly, prudent macroeconomic policies and the rapid progress made in financial sector reforms (paras. 3540) has given credibility to Malaysia’s overall policy agenda. 28. The staff team emphasized that, looking ahead, the key objective would be to implement further measures to minimize resource misallocation and restore fully investor confidence. These measures would include the immediate elimination of the exit levy on profits on portfolio investment for mnds brought in after February 15, 1999, and early resolution-in an equitable and transparent manner-of the dispute over the CLOB shares, which have been frozen since September 1998 (see Box 3). These actions would signal to the markets that the controls were indeed intended to be temporary, and would facilitate Malaysia’s reinstatement in the benchmark investment fund indices and the narrowing of the sovereign interest spread. 29. The authorities pointed out that the exit levy was intended to encourage investors to take a long-term view of their investments in Malaysia, but that BNM would keep this issue, as well as the impact of further relaxation of controls on short- term capital flows, under review. The staff team observed that the levy impacted mainly on portfolio equity investment, and would not protect the economy from the volatility of short- term flows in general. The team noted the substantial progress that Malaysia has made in establishing an effective prudential framework (para. 41), which would help reduce the risks involved in such flows. Therefore, the benefits of eliminating the levy would likely exceed any protection that it could provide. The team also noted that the reemergence of the offshore ringgit market would depend on the institutional and market incentives of conducting business in Malaysia, rather than offshore; moreover, offshore ringgit transactions of the type that bad destabilizing effects could be avoided if consistent monetary and exchange rate policies were pursued. 30. Regarding the exchange rate, the real effective rate of the ringgit depreciated by about 24 percent between July 1997 and end-1998. About one-third of the depreciation is estimated to reflect a shift in the equilibrium BEE& with the remainder representing gains in Malaysia’s price competitiveness.’ Unlike the experience of other crisis countries, the peg- ‘See detailed analysis in Chapter II, “Malaysia: Exports and Competitiveness,” of the upcoming Selected Issues paper. The estimate, based on a backward-looking econometric assessment, is indicative and should be interpreted with caution. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14- ging of the ringgit since September 1998 has prevented the currency from appreciating and consequent partial correction of the overshooting that had earlier taken place. This could imply a potentially robust response of exports and gains in Malaysia’s market shares (Chart 8)’ The impact of the undervalued ringgit on the cash flow position of the financial and corporate sectors appeared small, in line with the relatively modest level of their foreign debt and lower nonexport-related imports. 31. A resumption of capital inflows on a significant scale, combined with a large current account surplus, would generate an upward pressure on the exchange rate. The staffteam noted that, faced with increased liquidity, the authorities would need to consider some combination of allowing the interest rate to fall or the exchange rate to strengthen, in order to avoid inconsistent policies. There seemed scope for lower interest rates, but these might not remain a feasible option beyond the short term. Given Malaysia’s openness, the real level of the ringgit would adjust over time; in the absence of a nominal appreciation, this would occur through higher inflation. Moreover, an undervalued ringgit could attract volatile capital inflows, and sustained undervaluation of the exchange rate would deter productivity improvements and induce a misallocation of resources, with adverse long-term repercussions. 32. The authorities responded that there was no near-term plan to modify the exchange rate peg, although the nature of the regime and the level of the peg were open to modifications over the longer term (pars. 55). The fixed rate had aimed to provide certainty while managing the crisis and reforming the banking system, and had not been intended to foster gains in Malaysia’s price competitiveness. Nevertheless, the authorities acknowledged that the undervalued ringgit may have helped revive the export sector, with implications for economic recovery. Overall, they considered it important to maintain policy credibility by not introducing any changes unless warranted by significant and fundamental changes in the economic environment. Under the current regime, large-scale capital inflows could be addressed, in the first instance, through sterilized intervention, which-at the present level of interest rates-would not be overly costly. 33. Malaysia has continued to make progress toward meeting its commitments to the WTO and the ASEAN Free Trade Area (AFTA). Trade reform measures have included tariff reductions, enhanced commitments in the financial services sector, relaxation in foreign equity participation in the telecommunication sector, and amendments to anti- dumping legislation and regulations, Despite the progress to reduce both tariff and nontariff barriers, however, Mal;{sia’s trade system remains more restrictive than in some other countries in the region. ‘To the extent that the undervaluation of the ringgit persists, there are risks that other countries would respond with competitive devaluations. “In particular, there remain a number of nontariff barriers in the form of import licensing requirements. As measured by the Fund’s index of trade restrictiveness (see “Trade Liberali- (continued.. .) Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-IS- B. Financial and Corporate Sector Reforms-Use of the “Breathing Space” 34. Structural reforms have been aimed at sound and resilient financial and corporate sectors. Restructuring efforts have so far placed much emphasis on the speed of NPL acquisition and bank recapitalization, in order to preempt a further deterioration of the banking sector by forcing early debt restructuring, whereas operational restructuring of the corporate sector has lagged behind. The reforms have also placed high priority on upgrading and modemizing the regulatory and supervisory framework, including ways to enable Malaysia to manage the risks associated with cross-border financial transactions in a more integrated global environment. Financial and corporate restructuring 35. The government’s four-prong approach to restructure the corporate and banking systems consists of: l The purchase of NPLs by Danaharta, an asset management agency vested with special legal powers to restructure or otherwise rehabilitate distressed assets; the aim is to reduce NPLs of each bank to no more than a manageable level of 10 percent of total loans. l The recapitalization of banking institutions through Danamodal, which would inject capital into viable institutions to restore their risk-weighted capital ratio to above regula- tory minimum of 8 percent, while requiring management changes and other reforms of the institutions through its role as a strategic shareholder. . The Corporate Debt Restructuring Committee (CDRC), which provides a platform- based on London rules--for borrowers and creditors to work out debt restructuring schemes without having to resort to legal proceedings. l A consolidation of the finance companies; the goal is to reduce their number through the absorption of bank-owned companies by their parent banks and other market-based mergers. 36. Rapid progress has been made by Danamodal in bank recapitalization, and by Danaharta in NPL purchase (Box 4). The strong momentum achieved by the agencies has benefited from their good design. In particular, its legislation allows Danaharta to force the restructuring of acquired NPLs so as to return them more quickly to productive use, with positive spillover effects on other creditors, conditions for the use of public funds to recapita- lize banks are well defined; and the regulatory and supervisory framework has been tightened as part of the overall process. The complementary aspects of Danaharta, Danamodal, and the ration in Fund-Supported Programs” (EBS/97/163)), Malaysia scores 5 (on a scale of 1 to 10). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 16- CDRC, as well as their strengthened coordination under the auspices of BNM, have contri- buted to the ability to take swift and credible actions.” 37. While recognizing this progress, the staff team noted the importance of plans for early exit by Danaharta, so as to minimize risks of it becoming an NPL warehouse. If timds were not soon recycled back from asset sales or foreclosures, financing to purchase NPLs and staff required to manage the growing assets could become a constraint. In this connec- tion, the team stressed the need for conducting proper due diligence prior to loan acquisition. The authorities did not believe that funding or staffing constraints would become a bottle- neck to Danaharta’s effective operations, but agreed that the agency needed to dispose of any assets it purchased without undue delay. 38. The authorities recently announced that foreign banks that acquired troubled finance companies would, in return, be permitted to expand their branch networks. The policy is consistent with the staffs recommendation to resolve the NPL problem of finance companies (which tends to involve numerous small-sized loans) through Danamodal recapi- talization or other market-based solutions, including mergers or liquidation. The policy will serve to ease restrictions on foreign banking activities as well. In time, the 30-percent limit on foreign ownership of financial institutions should also be reviewed as Danamodal endeavors to sell the stakes of the institutions that it has acquired. 39. The Danaharta and Danamodal framework provides a reasonable degree of transparency in their activities. However, there are support arrangements outside the framework in the form of loans from BNM at below market rates to restructuring institutions, which impose undue costs and risks to the central bank It would be preferable for any assistance to banking institutions (including in the context of recognizing contingent liabili- ties arising from guarantees of deposits in the institutions that have been merged or closed down) be financed explicitly from the budget. In this connection, the authorities are studying various options for replacing the blanket guarantee on deposits, in effect since January 1998, with a deposit insurance scheme. 40. Parallel efforts are being made to facilitate the recovery of the financial and corporate sector through debt restructuring under the CDRC, but the process should be made more rational and transparent. The staff advised that clearer guidelines be issued for debt workouts under the CDRC, which handles many of Malaysia’s largest corporations, and that the process ensure a proper balance between interests of the large borrowers and creditors. In addition, the authorities recognized that it would be critical for each debt work- out to be linked to operational restructuring of the corporation, a step that has so far lagged “See further assessment of trends in financial sector conditions and the restructuring efforts in Chapter III, “Malaysia: Financial Sector Issues,” of the upcoming Selected Issues paper. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17- behind, so as to safeguard against recurring problems that could adversely affect the health of the banking system.” Regulatory and supervisory framework, and corporate governance 41. Further progress has been achieved in reforming the regulatory and supervisory framework of the banking system under BAFIA. In addition to establishing a new liquidity management approach, prudential limits related to single and large borrowers, and connected lending were tightened. Following a review of the prudential regime for cross- border transactions, the staffteam recommended: (i) enforcement of the incorporation of derivative and other off-balance sheet activities in the loan classification, provisioning, and disclosure requirements, including those of the Labuan Offshore Center; (ii) a smaller limit on banks’ overnight open position in foreign currencies; and (iii) requirement that banks manage liquidity risk for each currency separately within the new liquidity framework (Box 5). 42. In the authorities’ view, the relaxation in September 1998 in the loan classifica- tion and disclosure requirements for banking institutions has been misinterpreted by markets as regulatory forbearance. The staff team concurred that the changes did not impede the effectiveness of BNM’s supervision, as the more rigorous standards of regulatory reporting and provisioning introduced in January 1998 now applied. Nevertheless, the weaker disclosure requirements, by disguising the situations of individual banks, could impede market discipline. Accordingly, BNM should return immediately to the 3-month disclosure requirement for individual banks, and readopt as soon as feasible the more stringent 3-month NPL classification, The authorities responded that tighter requirements would be reconsidered as more stability returned to the financial sector. 43. Supervisory staff has been expanded, and frequency of on-site examinations has been increased. BNM’s well-established off-site monitoring systems continue to comple- ment the on-site examinations. The newly introduced system of prompt actions to correct breaches of prudential limits should enable BNM to resolve potential problems in a timely manner. Supervision over affiliates of banking institutions has been tightened with a view to reducing overleveraging in-and overexposure of-the banking system. Further measures to strengthen supervision of the system on a consolidated basis are being considered. In this regard, the authorities were open to the staff team’s suggestion to make the design of this scheme more effective (Box 6). 44. Significant measures have been taken to improve corporate governance, including through the strengthening of the securities industry. Special attention has been ‘*See further analysis of the development and reform issues of the corporate sector in Chapter IV, “Malaysia: Issues in Corporate Sector Restructuring,” of the upcoming Selected Issues paper. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 18- given to the protection of minority shareholders; corporate disclosure standards especially regarding bank borrowing, shareholding, and share-trading activities; the enhancement of listing requirements on the Kuala Lumpur Stock Exchange; and prudential measures to strengthen stock-brokerage companies (Box 7). More transparent information on corporate financial positions would facilitate credit-risk management by banking institutions. Also, restrictions linking corporate ownership to export contents were waived for manufacturing projects commencing between mid-1998 and end-2000. C. Medium-Term Policies 45. Discussions on the medium-term outlook focused on the policy strategy neces- sary to reduce the future vulnerability to shocks, while maintaining the economy’s openness. Experience of the past year has made it evident that there was lack of automatic stabilizers-as well as overly rigid rules-in fiscal management, and that increased respon- siveness of fiscal policy to changes in demand conditions would be desirable.‘s Regarding the monetary and exchange policy framework, the present exchange regime would likely come under increasing pressures over the next few years, and a more flexible system would be able to cope better with cyclical swings, The alternative of maintaining the pegged exchange rate would need to be accompanied by a more flexible interest rate policy, com- bined with the use of fiscal and other instruments, in order to manage capital flows and to deal with other disturbances. On the whole, a review of Malaysia’s experience over the past decade suggests that a more flexible exchange regime is more suitable for the country. Fiscal policy 46. The key fiscal issues for the medium term are greater flexibility in policy formu- lation, and ways to improve effectiveness and transparency of fiscal operations. While the long-standing fiscal prudence in Malaysia is commendable, the staff team made a case for greater flexibility in applying the rule of maintaining a surplus in the operating budget. This would require allowing an operating deficit during an economic downturn-provided the public debt profile is favorable-such as in the present circumstance. The influence of fiscal policy in demand management would also be enhanced by a greater role for automatic stabilizers. The shift of income tax assessments to a current year basis (planned for 2000) would serve this objective, but additional built-in stabilizers on the expenditure side should also be considered, as well as the introduction of a value-added tax (VAT) to improve the efficiency of the tax system. 47. The authorities argued against breaking away from the rules that had provided fiscal discipline and served them well in the past, but were more open to the alternative of achieving an operating balance over the course of a business cycle instead of each year. They i3See Iinther analysis in Chapter V, “Fiscal Policy in Malaysia: Issues and Challenges Ahead,” of the upcoming Selected Issues paper. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 19- observed that certain revenue measures had been taken with built-in stabilizing effects, such as reductions of tax exemptions, while the introduction of a VAT was not imminent. They saw limited scope for adding automatic stabilizers on the expenditure side of the budget, but agreed to consider linking certain social safety nets to economic, as well as social, criteria, and substituting price controls with targeted in-kind transfers, However, they ruled out the introduction of unemployment benefits on the grounds that these would impede labor market flexibility. 48. Public debt is expected to remain sustainable over the medium term, provided that liscal consolidation is pursued following this year’s stimulus package. Staffprojec- tions envisage that federal government and public sector debt will peak in 1999 at 39 percent and 57 percent of GDP, respectively, then return quickly to pre-crisis levels by 2002. This course of debt dynamics calls for achieving a federal government primary surplus of 3 per- cent by the year 2001. While this level of surplus had been attained before the crisis, its achievement would require an adjustment of 3% percentage points from the current level. Given the authorities’ fiscal prudence, such an adjustment can reasonably be expected. The projected rapid progress in lowering the debt-to-GDP ratio would allow smaller interest payments. 49. The authorities made a case against integrating off-budget operations into the budgetary process, reasoning that such activities were largely financed on commercial terms, providing thereby some control over the level of government spending. The staff team recommended the alternative of preparing a transparent and comprehensive account incorpo- rating in- and off-budget activities, including quasi-fiscal and contingent accounts, which would allow for a better analysis of the comprehensive role of fiscal policy in the context of both macroeconomic management and medium-term development. Monetary and exchange policy framework-exit strategy from capital controls 50. In introducing capital and exchange controls in September 1998, the authorities stated that these would be temporary, and that Malaysia would in time modify the capital controls and return to more flexible management of the exchange rate. As part of the strategy for an orderly exit, it is essential that Malaysia move toward a robust prudential regulatory framework that can handle risks of cross-border flows, a strong foundation for the corporate and financial sectors, and a consistent monetary and exchange rate policy frame- work. These elements will help reduce incentives for short-term and volatile capital flows. 51. Malaysia has already made considerable progress toward putting in place some key ingredients required to facilitate such an exit. These include an adequate regulatory framework for the tinancial and corporate sectors, the restructuring program that is expected to generate a stronger financial system, and a good strut to corporate sector reforms, although further improvements and refinements are needed in these areas. In addition, if the pegged exchange rate regime is to be maintained, interest rate policy needs to be conducted in a flexible manner, especially as the economy experiences a cyclical upswing or capital inflows pick up over the next few years. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 20 - 52. The emphasis placed on maintaining a stable exchange rate over the past decade has provided a nominal anchor for the economy, but has limited the ability of BNM to pursue domestic stabilixation objectives. This has been due to the openness of the Malaysian economy and the types of shocks that it faced, I4 as well as the authorities’ reluc- tance to allow the interest rates to adjust freely. The use of other measures such as direct credit allocations and temporary capital controls has not been effective as substitutes for exchange rate flexibility, except as short-term measures. As a result, Malaysia has been more prone to cyclical swings than would have been the case with a more flexible exchange rate regime. Against this background, the staffteam made a case for moving toward a framework more directly focused on achieving the authorities’ inflation objective, including the abandonment of subsidiary objectives.‘5 53. The staff team has prepared two medium-term scenarios to illustrate that the current exchange rate peg is likely to be untenable and that adjustment to the long-run equilibrium will be more efftcient under a more flexible exchange rate framework.r6 The baseline scenario assumes an unchanged peg of the ringgit vis-a-vis the U.S. dollar. Given the starting position of significant slack in the economy, and a real exchange rate well below its long-term equilibrium level, rapid growth is projected in the near term. Beyond 2002, however, real exchange rate correction would be forced through higher domestic inflation, and output growth would be slowed by restrained investment in the nonexport sector. In the alternative scenario, nominal exchange rate flexibility would lead to a more moderate recovery in the near term; but lower inflation would help boost savings and investment, with positive implications for long-term growth. The alternative scenarios are described in more detail in Annex II. 54. Experience suggests that the best time for an orderly exit from the pegged system is when the foreign exchange market is calm or when the exchange rate is under pressure to appreciate. The staffteam recommended that the authorities take advantage of the current, favorable circumstance, and begin to prepare for an alternative framework- 14Malaysia has been prone to shocks originating in external markets or in the domestic goods markets, more so than shocks originating in the domestic money market (which would have argued for maintaining the fixed regime). In addition to the most recent crisis, Malaysia also experienced crises in 1993-94 as a result of large capital inflows, and in 1985-86 as a result of large terms of trade shocks. “See a more comprehensive review of this topic in Chapter VI, “Malaysia: Monetary and Exchange Rate Policy Options,” of the upcoming Selected Issues paper. “Both scenarios assume that private capital inflows will be restored and the remaining capital controls will not be a major issue. This is because, in implementing the controls so far, the Malaysian authorities have taken a pragmatic approach in order to ensure adequate flows of capital, including through the February 1999 modification of the controls. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-21- involving greater exchange rate flexibility-that could be put into operation quickly in case either capital reflows were more rapid or the recovery were stronger than presently expected. 55. The authorities noted that, as emphasis shifted away from crisis management, they have indeed begun to deliberate alternative monetary policy options for the medium term, including a move toward a more flexible exchange regime. Technical groundwork for inflation targeting was also being examined. However, no change in the exchange system should be expected before the regional crisis was over, and the remaining exchange and capital controls would not be removed until the global financial structure was transformed and means put in place to regulate movements of speculative funds. D. Other Issues 56. Malaysia has subscribed to the Fund’s Special Data Dissemination Standard (SDDS), and its metadata are posted on the Data Standards Bulletin Board. In 2000, national accounts, monetary, and balance of payments statistics are expected to continue to benefit from technical assistance from Statistics Department. BNM is actively managing the Y2K challenges for the banking system, and a World Bank technical assistance loan on Y2K readiness covers essential public services as well. IV. STAFF APPRAISAL 57. The impact of the regional crisis on Malaysia’s output and investment in 1998 has been severe, but a number of strong features of the economy at the onset of the crisis--limited external exposure, a well-developed regulatory framework for the financial system, a strong fiscal position, high private savings rates, and relatively low poverty-have helped Malaysia avoid the extreme financial difiiculties experienced by some others. Initial policy responses of allowing the ringgit to depreciate also helped contain reserve losses, while sharp but brief hikes in short-term interest rates (in July 1997) may have helped limit the overshooting of the exchange rate. 58. Malaysia’s strategy shifted from relatively tight monetary and fiscal policies to a more expansionary stance in mid-1998, accompanied by structural measures geared to strengthen the financial and corporate sectors. In September 1998, as severe output decline became evident, Malaysia set out on a distinct policy course compared to the other crisis countries when it imposed selective capital controls, pegged the exchange rate to the U.S. dollar, and made use of direct instruments to stimulate credit and output. The measures were intended to reduce speculation against the ringgit, control short-term capital flows, and insulate domestic monetary policy from externally induced volatility. 59. The September policy package was viewed with skepticism by the international community, especially initially, as the rationale behind it and its various elements were unclear. Of special concern was whether Malaysia would rely on the controls to pursue inappropriate macroeconomic policies and avoid addressing weaknesses in the financial and corporate systems. In this context, the experience of other countries suggested that the Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 22 - effectiveness of administering such controls was likely to erode over time in the presence of inconsistent policies. Beyond these concerns, the retroactive nature of certain controls raised questions regarding Malaysia’s policy predictability more generally. 60. In the event, the authorities used the breathing room provided by the capital and exchange controls judiciously to push forward with structural reforms. Significant progress has been achieved in bank restructuring, and in the strengthening of supervision and regulation of financial institutions and stock exchanges. However, in the face of the many rigidities in fiscal and monetary policy instruments, the attempt to revitalize the economy has been less successful. The recent recovery in economic activity can better be attributed to the rapid progress in the financial sector reform process, improved export prospects, and the return of foreign investors to the region. 61. The staff supports the expansionary macroeconomic policies, but recommends more flexibility in their implementation to ensure effective and timely results. The authorities should be prepared to take fast-acting budgetary measures if, by midyear, produc- tion remains weak. The staff would advise against launching large projects that require long implementation periods and substantial funding. For monetary policy to be Cdly supportive of the output recovery while preserving asset quality, banks should be given the latitude to price risks appropriately. The staff recommends avoidance of bank-by-bank credit targets, more responsive adjustments of the policy interest rate to market conditions, and the removal of the maximum lending margin. More flexible implementation of monetary policy will also permit the authorities to modify the policy stance as the economy recovers. 62. Looking ahead, greater flexibility in fiscal management will serve to provide the economy with improved shock-absorptive capacity. The staffcommends the authorities for their resolve to maintain fiscal discipline, but encourages flexibility in the application of the rule that disallows an operating deficit, as long as the rule is observed over the course of a business cycle and the debt profile permits. The staff also recommends additional built-in stabilizers in the budget, early introduction of the VAT, and the incorporation of off-budget and quasi-fiscal activities in the overall assessment of fiscal policy. In this connection, all assistance to restructuring banks should be financed explicitly from the budget and not through subsidized lending from BNM. 63. Success of the bank and corporate restructuring program will be critical for the long-term health of the financial system. The authorities’ program has been well designed and effectively executed, and has generated a strong momentum in relieving the banking system of NPLs and providing needed capital to viable institutions. In this process, however, it is critical to conduct proper due diligence exercises, strive for quick disposal of acquired NPLs, and consider all options for subsequent divestment of the government’s stakes in the recapitalized institutions, including through relaxing foreign ownership restrictions. The staff supports the authorities’ intention to allow foreign banks to acquire finance companies in exchange for the ability to open up new branches. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 23 - 64. Corporate restructuring needs to he reinforced to avoid undermining the overall restructuring efforts. The staff recommends more transparent guidelines for the debt workout under the CDRC, a proper balance of creditors’ and borrowers’ interests in the process, and clear linkage between each debt workout and requirements for operational restructuring of the concerned corporation. The staff supports the large number of measures taken to improve corporate governance, and the recent relaxation of ownership requirements applicable to manufacturing projects, 65. Further progress has been made to tighten the banking system’s regulatory and supervisory framework. The staff endorses the recent move to a new, forward-looking liquidity framework, and actions to increase the frequency of BNM on-site examination and augment supervisory staff. While recognizing that supervision standards have not been com- promised by the more lenient rules related to public disclosure and loan classification, the staff recommends an early return to the more stringent requirements, in order to allow better market discipline. The staff strongly supports the initiative toward consolidated supervision, which will play an important role in the control of over-leveraging by financial institutions, and believes there is scope for enhancing its design. 66. The staff supports the authorities’ intention to use capital and exchange controls only as temporary measures, and recommends an early exit from a position of strength. Although the measures have not produced serious adverse effects so far, persistent controls will have a distortionary impact on resource allocation and Malaysia’s ability to access capital markets over the medium term. Therefore, the staffrecommends immediate removal of the exit levy on profits on portfolio capital flows. In the current environment, a consistent exit plan within a comprehensive macroeconomic framework will likely boost investor confi- dence in Malaysia and bring back long-term capital. Malaysia’s prudential framework to handle the risks associated with larger volumes of capital flows is sufftciently robust, although the staff recommends a number of ways to bolster it prior to full liberalization of the capital account. 67. The exchange rate appears to be undervalued, and offtcial reserves are more than adequate to cover Malaysia’s relatively modest short-term external liabilities. As economic conditions improve, the undervaluation could lead to continued large current account surpluses and attract increasing capital inflows. The current peg is unlikely to remain compatible with maintaining low inflation over the medium term. In order to achieve infla- tion objectives on a sustained basis, the staff considers a more flexible exchange rate better suited to Malaysia than the present peg regime, given the types of shocks that it is likely to face. The staff recommends that an alternative monetary policy framework be prepared early so that it can be put in place whenever warranted. 68. The impact on the vulnerable groups of the ongoing adjustment in Malaysia has been alleviated by the significant degree of labor market flexibility. Nevertheless, a modification of the social safety net program so that it is based on economic factors will ensure that it is appropriately targeted to those most affected, and will add to the stabilizing effects of fiscal policy. The staff advises that consideration also be given to substituting Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-24- in-kind transfers for price controls. In this context, it is important that social sector expendi- tures not be crowded out by higher debt service arising from tinancial and corporate restructuring. 69. The overall quality of the statistics in Malaysia is broadly adequate for the monitoring of economic developments and analysis. The staff welcomes progress made toward meeting the requirements ofthe SDDS, and in increasing disclosure and transparency in financial sector data and information on policy implementation in various areas. Some important data weaknesses remain, however, particularly in the national income account and price statistics; and information on the government’s off-budget activities and contingent liabilities is lacking. 70. It is proposed that the next Article IV consultation with Malaysia be held on the standard 12-month cycle. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 25 - January 1998 Box 1. Malaysia: Major Economic Policy Measures, 1998-99 * Government announced guarantee of deposits at all financial institutions in Malaysia. February * BNM intervention rate raised by 100 b.p. to 11 percent and SRR cut from 13.5 percent to 10 percem * The government announced increased social expenditores (of % percent to 1 percent of GDP), reversing earlier cuts. . Risk-weighted capital requirements for banks and face companies raised to international standards and higher miniman capital standards set for finance companies. * BNM set guidelines to ensure credit lo priority Bomiputm, housing, and small business sectors. . BNM began to provide daily reports on its money market operations. Information includes BNM forecasts of financial system cashflow, BNI4 liquidity operations, and money market tender results. July * SRR reduced from 10 percent to 8 percent. * Danahmta established to buy nonperforming loans of financial institutions (see Box 4). . Additional budgetary and off-budgetary expenditare measures inlmduced to provide fiscal stimulus. August * BNM intervention rate reduced in three steps from 11 percent to 9.5 percent. * Danamodal established as a vehicle to recapitalize banks, and Corporate Debt Restmctwing Committee established to encourage informal arrangement for debt restructuring (see Boxes 4 and 5). September * Capital controls introduced and exchange rate fixed at 3.8 ringgit per U.S. dollar (see Box 3). . BNM eased policy stance. Measures included: reduction of intervention rate by 150 b.p. to 8 percent; modilication of Banl Lending Rate formula linking policy and retail lending rates; cut in SRR in two steps from 8 percent lo 4 percent; reduction in the Liquid Asset Ratio requirement for banks f+om 17 percent to 15 percent; relaxation of (April 1997) reshictions on bank lending for residential property and share purchases; and setting of individual bank 1998 loan growth targets of 8 percent. * BNM relaxed prudential regulations regarding NPLs and disclosure requirements October * Announcement of federal government budget for 1999, aimed to stimulate economic activity - BNM announced measures to support insurance companies, including relaxation of capital standards. * BNM intervention rate reduced by 50 b.p. to 7.5 percent. November * BNM intervention rate reduced by 50 b.p. to 7.0 percent January 1999 * BNM restricted new lending for residential developments above RM250,000, February * Capital controls regime was modified with the introduction of an “exit tax” (see Box 3). April * BNM intervention rate reduced by 50 b.p. to 6.5 percent. . BNM announced measures to strengthen banking system supervision and regulation, including intensified supervision, performance reviews for bank CEOs, elimination of the two-tier bank classification system, and disallowance of bank lending to controlling shareholders. . BNM intervention rate reduced by 50 b.p. to 6.0 percent. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-26- Box 2. Malaysia: Strengths and Vulnerabilities Macmeconomic Str@ . Low extmlal debt -DdulprUW,LY9t l High le?etves /; L10 IO0 lulrnri. . currmt Bccoullt surplus 2 .YNCl :; cllhukd . Low intlatiori *“&am nmkp.a. -” Macroeconomic Vulmabilities l Sluggish expmis . Negative investor view of capital controls . Inilexible exchange system and fti ii and mmetmy policies ,D 4: t . Large governmat contingent liabilities ,996 ,997 199L 199pP . Good progress with poverty reduction MarhI* m.kr,surw U” Bmru.0 . ~e~developcd legal and regtdatmy framework l Competent civil service . High snvings Struchual Vulncrabilitics ~Pli--ml~ *w=-dmn l Highly-1eveInged corporats sector a- * Fragile furancial sector l Policy unpredictability Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 27 - Box 3. Malaysia: Exchange and Capital Control Measures, September 1998-February 1999 On September 1,1998, the following exchange and capital control measures were introduced: Ring& timds abroad were required to be repatriated by end-September 1998, at which time it was prohibited to bring in more than RM 1,000 per person per trip. Transfers from @g&denominated accounts for nonresidents (external accounts) not physically in Malaysia were restictcd. A one-year holding period was imposed on all funds in these accounts during which the money could not be used without BNM’s prior authorization, except to purchase ringgit assets (e.g., ringgit-denominated securities, fixed deposits), defray administrative and statutory expenses in Malaysia, pay for goods and services in Malaysia and, for corporations, to grant loans and advances to staff in Malaysia. The type of ringgit asset investment could be freely changed doting the holding period. Prior permission of BNM was needed for any use of external account funds not listed above (e.g., conversion to foreign currency for repatriation), and was granted readily for current international bansactions and FDI flows, or if the ring& assets had been held for at least a year from September 1, 1998 or the date of enby, whichever comes later. The extension of ringgit credit facilities to nonresident correspondent banks and stockbroking companies was prohibited. R&dents could no longer obtain credit facilities in ringgit from nonresidents. The import and expolt of ringgit by travelers, both resident and nonresidents, was restricted All cxpolt and import settlements were required to be made only in foreign currency Trading in Malaysian shares on Singapore’s Central Limit Order Book (CLOB) became de facto prohibited as a result of strict enforcement of the existing law requiring Malaysian shares to be registered in the Koala Lumpur Stock Exchange prior to trade. Current account transactions (the repatriation of interest. dividends, fees, commissions, and rental income from portfolio investment and other ring@ assets), and FDI flows, including income and capital gains, remained unrestricted. In effect, the controls were not intended to disrupt genuine trade-related activities or FDI flows, and care was taken to avoid any restrictions to current payments and transfers.’ On February 4, 1999, some of these controls were modified, with the rest remaining in place . While restrictions on the external accounts were retained, the twelve-month holding period for repatriation of portfolio capital was replaced by an exit levy. Key features of the levy are as follows: (i) for funds entering Malaysia before February 15, 1999, the levy is imposed on the principal amount, and the rate of levy, starting at 30 percent. is reduced in steps to zero if the repatriated amounts have remained in Malaysia for at least 12 months from the date of enby (since September 1, 1998); and (ii) for timds entering Malaysia on or after February 15. 1999, the levy is imposed on profits, and the rates are 30 percent or 10 percent rcspcctively, for repatriation within or after twelve months from the date of the investment. l The ceilings allowed for the import and expotl of tin@ were raised for border trade with Thailand. . Investments in property and MBSDAQ (stock exchange which lists growth and technology shares) were subsequently exempt from the levy. ‘An assessment by LEG and MAE of the newly introduced restrictions (including the rcccn( modifications) suggests that they are not in contravention of Malaysia’s obligations under Article VIII but that their implementation will need to be kept under review. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 28 - Box 4. Malaysia: Summary of Financial and Corporate Sector Restructuring, 199%99’ Asset management and recovery Dmaharta, a wholly government-owned entity, WBS established in June 1998. a Financial institutions with gross nonperforming loan ratios (NPLs) in excess of IO percent are required to sell NPLs with a principal of RM 5 million or more to Daoahti. l Financial institutions seeking recapitalization from Danamodal are required to sell their NPLs to Danabarta as a precondition to recapitalization. l Financial institutions avoid the immediate recognition of any loss that would normally result when an asset is sold below its book value as they axe allowed up to five years to amortize the difference behveen the book value and the sale price. l Danaharla is authorized to issue up to RM15 billion (face value) in zero-coupon bonds and has RM1.5 billion in capital provided by the Finance Ministry . To date, Danaharta has completed the acquisition of NPLs totaling RM 23 billion and has taken over some RM 11 billion under management. The average discount has been about 6 I percent (37 percent if one large loan is excluded). Little progress has yet been made with asset sales. Dmcnmwfd was established m July I998 with the main objectives of recapitaliziog tie banking system. Capital iojections received from Danamodal will enable institutions to restore their capital adequacy ratios to 9 percent. l The mitial set of banks chosen for capital injections was guided by BNM’s watch list of weak institutions. l The “lirst loss” principle, by which original shareholders’ equity is written down, is applied strictly to all txmsactions. l I&lotions requesting capital injections are to submit recapitalization plans and will be subject to monthly reporling of performance against a list of targets . Danamodal exercises control over management by appointing at least two members to the Board ofDirectors; at least, one is to be an executive director or chaiian of the board. l To date, Danamodal has raised some RM 10.7 billion to fond its needs, comprising RM 3 billion in paid-up capital from BNM, and RM 7.7 billion raised through issuing zero-coupon bonds to fmancial institutions. l By April 1999, 11 institutions had received a total capital injection of RM 6.2 billion, initially in the form of tier two subordinated debt that per defiitive agreement will be converted into equity, debt or a hybrid capital instrument. l It is intended that all banking institutions whose shareholders are unable to inject needed capital will be recapitalized by Danamodal by end-June 1999. Debt restructuring under the CDRC l Debt restructuring under CDRC is for viable businesses and not those in receivership or liquidation, with total aggregate bank loans of RM 50 million or more, from at least three institutions. l Companies that have obtained a restrainiog order on creditors under Section 176 of the Companies Act, may also apply on the condition that the restraining order is withdraull when the standstill period (see below) is agreed upon. l Creditors are to agree on a “standstill” period of 60 days (extendable) so that orderly decisions can be made; existing credit lines must bc kept open. l The creditor committees should represent the interests of at least 75 percent of total debt of all creditors. l Creditors’ existing rights to collateral will continue. l New credit during the restrucluring process will have seniority. . Debt tradmg is allowed, provided that it do-es not have a detiental effect on the restructuring process. l Debtors will normally assume all costs involved in restructuring, but creditors must cndeavor to control costs. l Debt-restructuring losses should be shared amongst creditors in the spirit of “shared pain.” l To date. some 57 companies with debt of over RM 3 1 billion have applied for workout arrangements under the CDRC. The majority are property, construction, and diversified holding companies. Of these, as of end-May, about RM 2% billion of debt (some 1% percent of the total CDRC applications) belonging to 9 companies had been restructured; agreement has been reached on a restructuring scheme for Renong (RM 8% billion) but it is still awaitinp. creditor aooroval. ‘More details can be found in Chapter III of the upcoming Selected Issues paper. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 29 - Box 5. Malaysia: Prudential Risk-Based Framework for Cross-Border Transactions General issues: . Cross-border capital flows typically involve different dimensions of risk (credit, liqoidily, interest rate, and foreign exchange risks) from those found in purely domestic transactions. . In opening its capital account, Malaysia would need a robust system that can handle these risks, including the existence of a healthy and sound fmancial system and the promotion of prudent risk management through best practice prudential regulations, in order to increase the ability of the facial institutions and markets to cope with the risks involved in capitol flows. BNhTs initiatives that would facilitate such a system: . Bank restructuring efforts started in early 1998 and have continued to date to strengthen the financial system under a four-pronged approach. l Use of internal techniques to assess and manage risks involved in cross-border transactions: BNM has stated to move toward a system where banks manage their owm risk through internal control mechanisms and, since March 1998, have required financial institutions to conduct monthly stress tests under o variety of scenarios and repoti to BNM on a qnaxterly basis. Since 1995, existence of on appropriate inGa.stmctore for risk management and internal controls has been required of banks that use derivative products. l Existence of limits against various sources of cross-border risks Approptiate limits to manage credit risk, including those to limit banks’ exposure to foreign currency loans, ore in place; a prudentially based liquidity Gamework based on maturity ladder approach was introduced in August 1998 to replace the LAR by January 2000. l lncorpurating cross-border risks in loan classification sod provisioning, capital adequacy, and disclosure requirements Since March 25, 1998, off-balance sheet items are incorporated in loan classification and provisioning requirements, and sensitivity to potential losses from adverse movements in interest rate and exchange rates are assessed. Market risks were also incorporated in capital adequacy requirements, to be fully implemented sometime in 2000. BNM will impose dinerent minimum RWCR on individual banking institutions according to their overall risk profile and internal controls. Disclosure requirements were tightened in early 1998, but somewhat relaxed in September 1998. Recommendations for further refinements: l BNM should proceed speedily with bank and corporate restructuring programs to restore balance sheet Srength of the financial institutions and increase their resiliency to potentially large and volatile capital flows following liberaliiation. l The existing open foreign exchange position limit (though not binding at present) is large (50 percent of regulatory capital) and should be reduced to no more than, say, 25 percent. l Regulation of liquidity should separate management of liquidity risk for each currency component on aregular basis within the new liquidity framework. l Loan classification, provisioning, and disclosure requirements and supervision activities should pay due attention to banks’ off-shore activities in Labuao. and ensure that off-balance sheet items cover derivative activities in view of a likely increase in such activities under greater capital mobility; banks should disclose data on such activities more frequently; and BNM should return to quarterly frequency for disclosure requirements as soon as feasible to enhance market confidence and discipline; extension of capitol adequacy requirements to incorporate market risks should be implemented as soon as possible. . Conditions conducive to financial market development should be crested, including the removal of restrictions that may interfere with the efftcient functioning of the markets and that limit risk management capability of market prut+anrs. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 30 - Box 6. Malaysia: Toward Consolidated Supervision of Financial System General issues: . The ownership structure of financial institutions, with several large diversdied holding companies, has permitted extensive multiple leveraging, resulting in substantial vxdnerability to financial disturbance. . The two-tier regulatory system (‘II%) for financial institutions, which has exacerbated the over- leveraging and higher-risk activities of banks by encouraging use of borrowed funds to increase tbe bank capital in order to anain the privileged Tier-l status. Tier-l banks, considered well-managed and wcll- capital&d, are exempted from certain regulatory requirements and given more flexibility in opening up branches. . Lack of transparency in the activities and financial positions of holding companies and Sdiates. BNM’s initiatives to address the problem: . Abolishment of TTRS in April 1999; the system had not achieved the goal of encouraging smaller banks to merge into well-capitalized, strong domestic institutions able to compete with international banks. . Introduction of regulatory reporting and restrictions on further borrowing by parent company or shareholders. Beginning April 1999, bank owners must file a fmancial information statement on debt and capital positions and seek prior BNM approval to increase bank capitalization through the use of borrowed funds. . Requirement for bank owners (shareholders or holding companies) to create a dedicated financial holding company to hold banking institutions that fall under tbc jurisdiction of tbe BAFIA by end 1999. Recommendations for further refinements: Consolidated supervision within the existing BAFIAz for BNM to increase the scope of its supcr- visory role to include the affairs of holding companies that own banking institutions. To this end, BNM will need to form a view on: (i) the overall condition of the holding company and its subsidiaries, (ii) the potential for the holding company or its nonbanking aftiliates to have a material adverse impact on the subsidiary banking institutions; and (iii) the ability of the holding company to support its subsidiary banking institutions during periods of stress. Consolidated supervision will require a higher level of coordination with other regulatory bodies (such as the Securities Commission). For BNM to continue to allow banking groups through their holding company to offer securities- related products, so as to maintain the competitive posture of Malaysia’s banking institutions, For BNM to disseminate balance sheet, income statement, and o&balance sheet items on a single entity and consolidated basis. At the minimum, the reported facial statement should contain information on: (i) the dedicated financial holding company (both parent company separately and consolidated holding company); and (ii) tic consolidated position of the bank to include bank subsidiaries. This may entail a change to existing laws and regulations, and collection of additional information; higher costs of collection and dissemination can be partially covered through fees charged to users. Certain supervisory information, such as e xamination ratings or customer identities will, however, need to remain contidcntial. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-31- Box 7. Malaysia: Recent Key Corporate Governance Reforms’ Corporate governance reforms fall into three main categories-those that enhance transparency and overall corporate governance, those aimed specifically at minority shareholders, and regulatory measures to reduce volatility in the stock market. Transparency and overall governance September 1998: All dealings in KLSE-listed stocks are to be effected through the KLSE and the persons on whose behalf the trades are being made are to be made known. October 1998: New guidelines were issued for share buybacks and transfers of securities to make the system more tmnsparent. March 1999: Public-listed companies are required to file quarterly reports’ financial statements including the balance sheet, the income statement, and explanatory notes. March 1999: Restrictions were placed on the number of directorships any individual may hold so as to enhance the quality of corporate governance. Strengthening the position of minority shareholders July 1998: The rules on related and interested party transactions were revised to widen the definition of related and interested parties, to reqoire aU such transactions to be announced to and approved by shareholders, etc. January 1999: Regulations were imposed requiring enhanced disclosure by public limited companies on matters related to takeovers and mergers. By mid-2000: Amendments will be made to the related party transaction provisions of the Companies Act which include restrictions on a significant shareholder’s right to vote in transactions in which he has an interest; amendments lo the Companies Act to enhance the timeliness and quality of information that goes oat to shareholders before a general meeting; simplification of shareholder’s ability to take court action against errant directors, by allowing shareholders or a regulatory body to seek injunctions to prevent breaches of the company law, allowing shareholders access to company records for purposes of a court action. A watchdog group, most likely headed by the EPF, will be set up to saf.egaard and promote the interest of minority shareholders. Regulatory improvements I January 1998: Tighter restrictions were imposed on stock-braking companies in terms of their gearing (or leverage) ratios, margin financing exposure to a single client or to a single security, as well as total trading exposures. December 1998: New risk-based capital adequacy requirements were imposed on stock-braking companies effective January 1999. April 1999: Listing requirements for PLCs listed on the Main Board and the Second Board were made more stringent. Requirements for share listing, reverse takeovers, and the tixing of warrant exercise prices were revised. Minimum share capital was raised for listing on both boards, and track record requirements were made more stringent. Constmctio~ trading, and retailing companies can only be listed on the main board. The new listing requiremenu also apply to companies seeking a back-door listing or a reverse takeover, where a private fum acquires control of a listed entity by paying cash or injecting assets. ‘More details can be found in Chapter IV of the upcoming Selected Issues paper. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 32 - CHART1 blALAYSL4 Indicators of Activity and Prices, 1995-99 20 Industrial Production ,5 yd Unemployment 5.5 5.0 i 10. 4.5 *nll*i* pm4uct*on 5. 7.:. (lear-on-year /- / TeFzlty ,.z . ...’ 4.0 ,’ O- 1 3.5 i -5. Ummp1oymmt : ht, ,/ 3.0 “..- . . . . . . . . . . . . . $ght scale) .:! -10. _-............. i b. 2.5 -151 1995 1996 1007 1996 ‘2; 12.0 30 Real Domestic Demand Growth 2. (Year-on-year percent change) \ 30 20 10 10 0 hm tion . . . . .." '... ..' 0 x, ./" -10 "..,,/." -20 LIIYl -10 -243 -30 GroI tiled -30 innstment -40 -44 -50 1995 1006 1087 ‘EY 1999 -50 Roj. 1400 1 KLSE 1400 CompwiLe index CompwiLe index ~12Nl 12Nl low low lmo+Y low 1OW 860 860 -wo lWO-;;“;;::- wo 000. 000 400 400 ,;y.+ ,;y.+ /i:!; .I3 /i:!; .I3 ..; saond board i saond board idea idea w. w. ,,~ _,_.,... -. .._., i’ ,,~ _,_.,... -. .._., i’ v; ;.,,-. ;.,,-. 260 260 >. . >. . . . ..__ ..__ J-I.. J-I.. 01 I 1995 1996 lQo7 1902 19D8 10 i'i ‘.., ! p.. “\ WP . . . . . . . d ,,i year-ml-ycu 5 .>..’ :; ;; // ii ygk$‘” 85 !*. 0 -5 -10 m C.p.Citg utmutian (I+@ sale) ,, 60 ;; 1095 1996 1997 ‘E 1990 75 Pm,. __ I Price Indexes (Year-on-year percent change) 15 pp,FJ ; 1 / ‘! .1° i A .5 -:v W’ ‘iii\iy5 1m5 1996 1997 1096 40 Property Prices 30 (Year-on-year percent change) 40 30 20. .20 10. 10 0 V 0 \ Re~dmti* ‘.., -10. .-10 -20. *flieultural -a -36. .-xl -40 1994 1885 1906 1997 1998 -46 swmaa: Data prmldcd bJ ihe “.lymim authtiti.m; pwxl mi.a sBtim.tes .Ild projactlma; and Rsutaa. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-33 - MART 2 huJ.AYSIA External Sector Developments, 1995-99 40 40 30 30 20 20 10 10 0 0 -10 -10 -20 1096 1997 1996 1009 -20 Roj. 40 40 30 30 20 20 10 10 0 0 -10 -10 -20 -20 -30 1005 1936 1997 1906 1000 -30 Pd. Capital flows ,5 (In prcent of GDP) I “...Short-term -5 ‘.... ,...... .“’ -101 wo5 1996 1997 1996 1090 praj. I:, 1:: i_I:: 1005 1996 1997 1906 1009 Roj. 15 ulrrent account balance (In percent of GDP) IO- 5. --5 --10 -,,A -I5 Roj. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-34- CHARTS MALAYSIA Exchange Rates, 1995-99 _- Bilateral Exchange Rates Yen per ringgit 0.70 50- - 0.64 0.59 . . . . . . . . . . . . “.. - 0.53 - 0.48 U.S. dollar per ringgit (right scale) ‘:, __.. .._. .,,,; ,’ ‘.._ ._._..’ ;...._.......__._.__. o.25 25 / I , , , I I I / I I I I I , , , , , , , I , , , I , , * , , , , I I / 0.20 JAN APRJU; OCT JAN APR JUL OCT JAN APR JUL OCI’ JAN APR JUL OCT JAyQgABPR lQQ6 1997 1998 120 120 Effective Exchange Rates (Jan 1996=100) IIO- - 110 - 100 Qo- 90 80. 70 - 6o..............,o JAN APR JUL OCI JAN APR JUL OCT JAN APR JUL OCF JAN APR JUL OCT JAN APR 1995 1996 1997 1996 1999 s-s: M. Lntem.tiond F‘rumi.l st.tidi,?s; htorm.tion Notice sptmn: and Fund atmn satim.tea. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Publiccd7 .i- MALAYSIA Financial System Indicators, 1995-99 Outstanding Loans by Sector l/ ::c 150 100 50 0 1995 1998 1907 l906 250 200 150 100 50 0 15 Deposits in Foreign 15 and Domestic Banks (Percentage ,c!xmges) ‘Oi i 10 / i ; \ / \Forebn ; /banks 5. -5 0. -0 comoanies / ,III,.,IIII: ,,,,.., -5JuL 1E JAN AF'R IUL cm JAN -5 100s 1900 3o Nonperforming Loans 2/ 30 (IIt percent Of total loans) :f 25. -25 20. 15. 10. 5 0 1005 1006 1907 1008 0 45 45 40- Central Bank Deposits with Financial Institutions 40 35. (In billions of ring@) 35 30. 25. -25 20. 20 15. 15 LO- 10 5. 5 0 f!,-y& 30 JUL OCT JAN APR JUL WX JAN’ 1997 1998 1900 4. Savings deposit rate ’ 2. ” ” ” ” ” ” ” JUL SEP NOV JAN MAR MAY JUL SW NO” JAN MAR 1997 199.3 1909 go-: Data provided by the “e.,aysimu UIthOritiCB. 14 12 10 6 6 4 2 I/ Commercial buuks. finance companies. and merchant bank.% loaos to brosd ~rapertp e&or ixlude tbm acdd to Cymas: “other” Lncludu Lams Im com,,,erce, and purch.se of stocks and shams. 2/ Calculated undo the 3-month classification system: for 199B. figures include NPLs sold to Dmnaharts. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public5 5 4 3 2 1 0 -1 -2 -3 - 36 - CHART 5 Selected Indicators for Five Asian Countries, 1999 l/ (In percent. unless otherwise indicated) Real GDP Growth Rate Malaysia lndonesla Korea PhlliPpineS Thailand 30 30 CPI Inflation Rate MabySia !ndoneSia Korea wln&lpims Thailand 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 0 Malaysis Indonesia Korea PhlllpFines Thailand lrm l”“” l.waywa ,ndoneJ,a KOreS mlllppnes Thailand NPLsfiotal Loans Z Malaysia IMo”e*ia Kcma PhilippineS Thailand 180 380 External DebVGDP 4, 160 160 Ma!aysia lndonesla Kma Philippine* Thailand Sources: Data provided by country authorities; WEO; Bloomberg; and staff estimates and projections. I/ Projections, unless otherwise indicated. z/current est,matc. ~/AS of May 28, 1999. ~/AS ofend-1998. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3l- CHART6 MALAYSU Fiscal Developments, 1995-99 (In percent of GDP) zderal Government . . .“’ ,,,, ,... ..” .,,. ,,:, \ Revenue \ and pants 66 24 22 20 LB 16 1905 1098 1007 1636 1009 Rd. Budget 10 Public Sector Balance B t -Consolidated public sector o Non-financial public enterprises KS General government -0’ 1065 1006 1007 1906 19ol Rd. hdt IO 6 6 4 2 0 -2 -4 -6 20 - -Total ~Educatian 15 o Health housing, social security, and community development 10 /BE4 Ff 1665 llra 1907 1996 ,888 Rd. b*d 6 Fiscal Impulse and Balance 6 Fiscal impulse l/ - Federal government balance 25 20 15 10 5 0 6 0 4 2 -6 Sources: Data provided by the Yalayhra autharitiea; and Fvnd atafl e&hates and calculations. I/ Base year for fiscal impulse cllcuhtions is LKO. The fisal impulse ia measured a.a the change in (be fiat., at.nce: the latta is the d,,,mnoe between actual and cyc,,c.“, neutral Ils,, balances Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicMonetary and Interest Rate Developments, 1995-99 60 40 20 D -20 -40 40 40 r,: ,/ -10. >... .i i .-IO L .\,.,. .‘.~,,j -20 1995 1906 1997 lQll6 1000 -20 12 12 Interest Rate Spread on Interest Rate Spread on LO. Sovereign Bonds l/ LO. Sovereign Bonds l/ 6. 6. 6. 6. 4. 4. 2 2 0 0 -21 1095 1988 1887 J twB lQQo-2 I Interest Rates I . . 1.2 DSse f--l I2 0 k....; 1805 1996 1w7 1996 ,WO” 40 Domestic Credit Growth 35 (Year-on-year percent change) 1895 1096 1907 1986 ‘,,b-lQ 6 6 Malaysia-U.S. Interest 5 Rate Differential Z/ n 15 Saum~: Data provided by the Malaysian mMmrities; Fund staff estimates; and 8loombag. I/ Intrrpolated PieId an Yalvsiln Yankee bonds with maturity date 0/27/2GQC! minus the yield on U.S. lhaslvy bonds “iti, maturity d.b 6/15/2OW. 21 End+heriod l-month interbank lending rate minus the average L-month LlBoR on US. dollara. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-39- CHART 8 ASIA CRISIS COUNTRIES EXCHANGE RATE DEVELOPMENTS AND EXPORT PERFORMANCE SINCE JULY 1997 Real Effective Exchange Rates JUL AUG y99ZT NOV DEC JAN PBB MAR APR MAY JUN JUL AUG SEP OCP NOV DBC JAN IE9MAR 1998 Export Growth l/ 3. (Year-on-year percent change) _------___ _,-: 20- -- - ..___ -____/- I,, '\ \.--__ Phiti~nea .\, ,/----/ ,,.“' ,...-, lndaesia -.,/ '., -10 t ,. .." '. '..',: ;' ,_' ,/... ..".I,;. A-‘:. .,,,.,,, ,..'"Kcm L,,; \ --‘\;,- . . ..I 0 *,s, -20 I -301 JUL AUG y99yT NOV DM: JAN FRB MAR APR MAY Jy99yL AUC -‘....,., ;,.-y---_ Md.a”&% ‘I p ‘.., /’ .<,..l’ ..,pY-:.: ‘,,, -Thailand OCT NOV DEC JAN FIBMA 1999 ,R 40 30 20 10 0 -10 -20 -30 Sources: lnformatlo” Notice system; APD database. 1/ 3.month moving average based on US$ values. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 40 - Table 1, Malaysia: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 1995-2000 prelim. & K 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 Real sector @ercenl change) Real GDP growth Real domestic demand CPI inllation (period average) Saving and investment (percent of GDP) Gross domestic investment Private, including stocks Public Gross national saving Private Public Fiscal sector (percent of GDP) I/ Federal government overall balance ReVeItUe Expenditure and net lcnding Federal government primary balance Consolidated public sector overall balanc Public sector debt 2/ Monetary sector (annual percent change) M3 growth Domestic credit growth Balance of payments (US% billion) Trade balance Exporis, f.o.b. bnpons, f.o.b. Services account balance Current account balance (percent of GDP) Capital account balance Medium- and long-term Net foreign direct investment Short-term Portfolio capital 3/ Overall balance International nadc (annual percent change) Export value import value Gross official reserves (US% billion) (months of imports) 4/ Total external debt (US$ billion) @ercent of GDP) Short-tam external debt (percent of total) Debt-service ratio @ercent) 5/ 9.4 8.6 7.7 -6.7 2.4 6.5 13.5 5.3 7.2 -25.5 7.9 12.8 3.4 3.5 2.7 5.3 3.0 2.4 43.5 41.6 42.5 25.8 27.9 34.4 30.9 30.2 30.9 14.5 15.3 20.9 12.6 11.4 11.6 11.4 12.6 13.5 33.6 36.7 37.3 38.8 38.4 39.5 18.6 20.8 19.1 23.6 28.1 27.4 15.0 15.9 18.3 15.2 10.3 12.2 1.3 1.1 2.6 -1.5 -3.8 -2.0 23.4 23.7 24.0 20.4 18.4 21.0 22.1 22.6 21.4 21.9 22.2 23.0 4.3 3.8 4.9 1.0 -0.7 1.7 X 3.7 4.8 3.5 -1.1 -2 7 -0 9 52.1 45.8 50.2 54.6 57. I 55.4 18.2 23.7 20.2 -1.6 11.2 13.8 27.7 27.4 24.1 -2.3 7.0 7.5 0.0 4.0 4.0 17.7 15.5 12.1 71.7 76.8 77.7 71.9 75.2 81.4 71.6 72.7 73.7 54.2 59.8 69.3 -7.7 -7.7 -7.7 -6.0 -6.3 -6.5 -8.7 -4.9 -5.0 9.2 8.1 4.4 -10.0 -4.9 -5.1 12.9 10.5 5.2 7.0 7.4 1.2 -4.7 -0.6 3.1 4.5 24 6.1 2.2 2.9 2.1 3.2 32 3.8 2.2 1.9 1.8 1.0 4.1 -4.0 -5.5 -3.5 1.0 1.5 0.8 -0.9 -1.4 0.0 0.0 -1.8 2.5 -3.9 4.5 7.4 7.5 26.7 7.1 1.2 -7.5 4.6 8.2 30.5 1.5 1.3 -26.4 10.2 16.0 25.1 27.7 21.7 26.2 33.6 41.1 3.2 3.4 2.6 4.3 5.0 5.4 33.4 38.7 45.6 42.0 43.2 43.7 38.3 39.0 46.6 59.2 56.4 52.2 19.1 25.7 27.8 17.8 17.7 17.9 7.3 8.5 6.5 6.6 6.2 5.3 Sources: Information provided by the Malaysian authorities; and Fund staiTestimates and projections l/ Figures are presented in the IMF format. 21 Figures are stalTestimates. They exclude domestic debt of the NFPEs. 31 Including errors and omissions. 41 Imports of goods and services. 51 Percent of exports of goods and services. Lncludes prepayment and refinancing. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-41- Table 2. Malaysia: Balance of Payments, 1995-2000 & g& PA 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 Current account balance -8.7 -4.9 -5.0 9.2 8.1 4.4 Trade balance 0.0 4.0 4.0 17.7 15.5 12.1 Exports, f.o.b. 71.7 76.8 11.7 71.9 75.2 81.4 Imports, Eo.b. 71.6 72.7 13.1 54.2 59.8 69.3 Services balance -1.7 -7.7 -7.7 -6.0 -6.3 -6.5 Of which : Interest payments 1.8 1.7 2.0 1.9 1.7 1.8 Net transfers -1.1 -1.2 -1.3 -2.5 -1.1 -1.2 Capital account balance Medium and long-ten” flows, “et Pubhc sector, net Net federal govemxznt Drawings Repayments Net other public sector Drawings Repayments Private sector, net Net foreign diiect investment Inward direct investment Outward direct investment Net borrowing Drawings Repayments Short-term flows, net Portfolio capital I/ 7.0 4.5 2.5 -0.7 0.2 -0.8 3.1 4.0 -0.9 2.0 3.2 -1.2 I.6 -2.8 I.0 1.5 7.4 I.2 -4.7 -0.6 3.1 2.4 6.1 2.2 2.9 2.1 0.3 I.7 1.4 2.8 1.6 -0.9 -0.6 0.5 1.9 0.9 0.3 0.2 1.1 2.4 1.4 -1.2 -0.8 -0.6 -0.5 -0.4 1.2 2.2 0.8 0.9 0.7 3.3 3.3 1.9 I.9 1.4 -2 I -1.1 -1.1 -1.0 -0.7 2.1 4.4 0.8 0.1 0.5 3.2 3.8 2.2 1.9 1.8 5.7 6.8 3.0 2.6 2.7 -2.5 -3.0 -0.8 -0.8 -0.9 -1.1 0.6 -1.4 -1.7 -1.3 2.0 3.0 0.6 0.3 0.7 -3.1 -2.4 -2.0 -2.1 -2.0 4.1 -4.0 -5.5 -3.5 1.0 0.8 -0.9 -1.4 0.0 0.0 Overall balance -1.8 2.5 -3.9 4.5 7.4 7.5 Official rcscrves (end period) 2s. I -10.0 0.0 -8.8 9.6 3.6 1.2 -2.0 21.7 21.7 26.2 33.6 41.1 Current account balance Trade balance Services balance Capital account balance Net foreign direct investment Net short-term flows Overall balance (Ln billions of U.S. dollars) (I” percent of GDP) -4.9 -5.1 12.9 IO.5 5.2 4.1 4.1 24.9 20.2 14.4 -7.8 -7.9 -8 4 -8.2 -7.8 8.3 0.3 -8.6 -0.8 3.7 3.2 3.9 3.2 2.4 2.2 4.1 -4. I -7.1 -4.6 1.2 2.5 -4.0 6.3 9.7 8.9 - Sources: Data provided by the Malaysia” authorities; and Fund statTcsttiates and projections. II Includes errors and omissions. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-42- Table 3. Malaysia: Indicators of Financial Institution Soundness, 1995-99 1998 1999 1995 1996 I997 1998 Mar. he Sept. Dec. Mar. Loan-deposit ratio I/ Commercial banks Finance companies Merchant banks Share of loans to broad property sector 2, Commercial banks Finance cornpanics Merchant banks Risk-weighted capital ratio (RWCR) 3/ Commercial banks Finance companies Merchant banks Institutions not meeting the minimum RWCR 31 Commercial banks Finance companies Nonperforming loans 41 Commercial banks Finance companies Merchant banks Banking system Memo: Total including loans sold to Daoaharta 5, General provisions 61 Commercial banks Finance companies Merchant banks Banking system Total outstanding bad-debt provision 71 Commercial banks Finance companies Merchant banks Banking syrtcm 88.9 89.3 91.9 92.9 94.2 97.2 96.9 92.9 90.1 89.7 90.9 96.2 88.6 91.0 89.6 90.8 88.6 86.1 87.9 80.3 87.4 84.3 89.1 93.8 88.8 84.3 75.7 26.5 30.4 31.8 33.3 32.3 32.7 33.0 33.3 34.2 24.0 24.0 24.7 28.4 25.6 26.9 27.8 28.4 28.3 22.2 25.8 32.7 32. I 30.3 32.6 33.3 32.1 31.4 11.1 10.8 10.3 9.7 9.8 10.3 11.9 11.7 13.3 11.7 11.0 11.1 10.7 15.2 II.8 (Number) 11.0 10.4 11.7 12.1 10.9 10.6 11.1 12.0 11.6 11.7 15.2 14.5 0 I 0 0 I I I 3 7 2 (Percent of total loans) 3 1 I I 4 7 7 6 4.9 3.6 4.9 15.0 7.6 to.9 6.6 4.7 9.2 28.1 13.6 17.3 7.8 1.7 4.8 32.4 8.0 13.3 5.5 3.7 6.0 18.9 9.1 12.6 15.5 15.0 16.4 23.6 28.1 27.1 23.1 32.4 36.5 17.8 18.9 19.8 (17.8) (21.3) (24.1) I.7 1.9 2.2 2.3 2.4 2.3 2.1 2.3 2.4 1.6 I.6 1.7 2.1 1.8 1.8 I.8 2.1 1.6 I.7 1.8 1.9 2.2 2.0 2.1 2.1 2.2 2.1 1.7 1.8 2.0 2.3 2.2 2.2 2.0 2.3 2.2 (Pcrccot of nonperforming loans) 85.0 98.3 79.7 53.7 56.1 56.2 48.7 53.7 50.0 84.0 87.9 46.9 32.0 37.6 34.2 31.6 32.0 31.2 90.2 155.6 68.0 34.5 61.9 50.0 38.9 34.5 36.1 85.1 96.4 66.2 44.7 49.5 48.6 42.8 44.7 43.1 (Perccnt) Source: Data provided by the Malaysian authorities. - Ii Deposits mclude repw and negotiable mstruments of deposit; loans exclude housing loans sold to Cagamas Berhad, the National Mortgage Corporation. 21 Lending for construction, real estate, and housing purchases: excludes loans sold to Cagamas Bcrhad. 31 The minimum RWCR is currently 8 percent for all institutions. 41 Loans are classiticd as nonperforming if payments we ovcrduc for three months or more; prior to January I, 1998, this period was six months. Total loans include housing loans sold to Cagamas Berhad 51 Loans were first sold to Danaharta beginning 43 1998. 61 In percent of total loans including housing loans sold ta Cagamas Berhad, minus interest-in-suspense and spcctic provisions: minimum requirement is I.5 pcrceot (I percent prior to January I, ,998). 71 Aggregate of provisions for general, spccitic. and interest-in-suspense. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-43- Table 4. Selected Indicators for Five Asian Countries (Percent, unless othcrwisc indicated) Malaysia lndoncsta K0r.%l Philippines Thailand 1999 pro,cctlons Real GDP growth rate 2.4 -2.0 4.5 2.2 1.0 CPI inflation rate (average) 3.0 24.0 1.3 8.5 0.5 to 1 .o Current account/GDP 10.5 3.0 5.2 2.1 8.6 Central government balance/GDP -3.8 -6.0 -5.2 -2.1 -3.7 External indicators ExporWtiDP Ii Imparts/GDP Ii Merchandise cxpat growth rate 21 98 66 49 52 58 71 65 36 59 41 4.6 5.0 2.2 9.5 2.5 Debt (end-1998) Corporate debt/equity 31 Private credit/GDP 4/ NPLs/lOtal loans 51 External dcbtiGDP Short-term dcbVGDP Public dcbVGDP 61 150 310 380 190 250 173 48 162 50.2 133.3 18.9 70 10.5 12.1 4x 59.2 146.1 46.6 76.0 13.6 11.0 24.8 9.6 15.8 20.5 54.6 46.0 29.1 72.2 52.7 Rescrvc cover (end-l 998) Reserves (months of imports of goods and services) 4.3 4.4 5.1 2.9 1.3 Base mOnCyirCSCr”CS 0.4 0.6 0.4 1.0 0.4 Fmancial markets Real interest rate 71 3.0 13.5 3.5 3.4 1.8 Nommal etTeetivc exchange rate 81 -25.7 -69.5 -25.2 -23.9 -26 0 Real effective exchange rate 81 -22.4 -35.9 -20.9 -14.4 -200 Spread of sovereign Yankee bond 91 305 825 235 365 222 Sources: I)& provided by country authorities, WEO, Bloombcrg, and desk databases: and Fund staff estimates and projections. II Exports or nnpolls of goods and nonfactor scrviccs relative ta GDP, as of end-1998. 21 Monthly exports, relative to the same month in 1998, in nominal lJ.S. dollar value terms. Most recently available data. 31 Figure for Philippines is top 5,000 corporations, ad-March 1998. Figure for Thailand is cnddcptcmbcr 1998. Korea, Malaysia, and Indonesia are end-1997. 4/Figure for Korea is end-December 1998. For the Philippines, ratio shown as a pcrccntagc of GDP is actually in relation to GNP 51 Loans three months past due. Commercial banks only for Thailand. Figure for Indonesia is MAE estimate. 61 Figure for Malaysia excludes domestic debt of the non-financial public enterprises. Figure for Indonesia is end-l 997. For the Philippines, ratio shown as a percentage of GDP is actually in relation to GNP Far Thailand, figure includes costs of financial sector restructuring. 7: Short-term interest rate at end-March 1999 less expected inflation for 1999; except for Indonesia and Korea (as ofcnd-May 1999) 81 Percent change behvccn July I997 and March 1999. 91 As of May 28,1999. Bonds selected have an original matwity of 10 years, and come due between 2006.2008. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 44 - Table 5. Malaysia: Stock of Short-Tern Debt and Liabilities at End-Period, 1997-99 l/ ( In bihonr .af”.S. dO,,ur. unlcu nhCtw”S indicated) ,997 u 1997 3, 19% ,599 m-4 (CstimlLcd) IPies I. Alwa”“t3 lwrmwcd tyMd.ysim residmtrmncial iraliMiU i Mday.im-arvnd snmcirl uutitutlau ii. O/w*ich. ammwing from ,“bsidiuk Md bmlChu had iii Forci&!-owned b* I” o,w*ich: Emmmvrng from lu~idimer and branchu abnmd ‘I/ I,. hwY”t. brmwd by nonbank pliMlc ysuy Total short-term debt @y origbml maturity) *a Ammthti.3” 0fMf.T 6-a mnliq due in next period Total short-tern debt @y remaining mnhwity) 1”. Nmrddmt dlpoS,(l m M&yaiur reddolt r-id imtitvtiorv ” mlayaim-cd rvlvlcill irs”luliay vi Faci~~umcd baots ” olhw l rnrn~l hbili”” ofh(dspm rcsidcnt fumc,al htllutlaa wi. Mdayriabownci rlLmc,., instiutica “Ml. 0,VhiCh LdilillU IO subrldianel and bradlea abard 41 ix. Forcipnwd bakl x ojv*ich’ L,abl,,,,c~ La ,ubaid,uiu and brmchu *cd 4 “I Ertrmd linblllUn orb,Mshcl ardnrbrldiancr orMll~%ylamKd h!k had u. salmul ,i*micr OflAb”sn brother u&d subsiditic. 6! 11, *,rhich: hkdiun to head asice mdtmn*a inMdayi. xi,. axtcmd hbilitkr dne”-Lhum oarhac tamchca alId subridiuvs xiv. ofwhrch: I,iabi,i,k ,a hS,d oniss ml brudwA in wvjai. Total short-term liabilities (by remaining mnMty) vu MLT dew with Edhbk *euura in puiod t+, Debt potentially falJb,g due Ylll Emm.ted portf0ll0 capifnl O”ttlOvn Potential oumon Mcmoruldum itsIn eos rwewe* (alI usabk) Total ,hort-term ukmal llabilillll olMd.pm rcsidmt f-ml YytilYtiay mar ,esCMI, in prcent ofrhon.turn da, mnuning rnlavlty cnou ,cIcNu. in p”cml ordw”-teml liabilik ronailing mstmly ororr ,uwcI, m percent Of potential c,p,td aualowr Grosr ‘~Clvu. in pcmmt OM2 orasr rUC@vVEP. in pccml of ,~t.J.z mnq Psreenlage Olld dmn-km liabllirier MtuRllY hcdgcd 7, 4.8 3.3 1.5 2.1 69 4.5 11.4 2.4 24 13.5 8.8 2.7 9.3 1.9 29.7 01 40 21.7 9.6 190.4 73 0 19.7 737 91 5 5.1 61 3.2 2.2 4.3 9.4 3.7 13.1 2.6 1.3 1.3 19 1.1 08 16.8 9 2.7 I I.2 0.7 34.3 0.1 4.0 21.7 9.5 166.3 63.3 19.7 73.7 !a2 4.2 3.3 l.2 2.0 2.3 6.5 3.6 10.1 2.5 ,.I 1.3 12 0.6 0.6 10.3 6.2 3.9 95 IS 24.0 I., 34.4 5.5 39.9 261 7.9 %%.I 108.9 6*.6 34.3 a84.0 91.2 6.1 4.1 1.2 Y 2.0 Y I.5 7.7 3.1 10.8 2.6 I.1 Y I.5 17.Y 0.6 Y 0.6 Y 10.3 Y 6.2 Y 3.9 Y 9.5 Y I.5 Y 249 09 25.1 3.5 28.6 33.6 10.0 311.9 134.9 117.5 38.4 320.5 93.3 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 45 - Table 6. Malaysia: Summary of Public Sector Operations, 1995-99 I/ (In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated) 1995 1996 Budget 21 PlCl. Budget 1997 1998 1999 Federal govcmmcnt RWClU Tax rcwnue of which: Corporate income taxes Personal income taxes Import duties Excise tlxes on goods and services salts taxes 23.4 23.7 24.0 19.8 20.4 17.9 19.8 19.7 20.2 16.3 17.0 14.0 6.3 6.6 7.5 7.2 7.7 4.8 2.8 2.5 2.3 2.2 2.5 1.7 2.6 2.5 2.4 1.4 1.4 1.5 4.2 4.2 4.2 3.1 3.2 3.5 2.2 2.2 2.2 1.4 1.4 1.5 Nonfax ~CVC~UC 3.6 4.0 3.8 3.6 3.4 3.9 Expenditure and net lending 22.4 22.7 21.6 22.6 22.2 23.6 Operating cxpenditurc 17.3 18.0 16.5 16.6 16.1 17.6 Development cxpcnditurc and net lending 5.1 4.7 5.0 59 6.1 6.0 Adjustment for accounts payable -0.3 -0.1 -0.1 -0.3 -0.2 Overall balance 1.3 1.1 -0.1 2.6 -2.6 -1.5 -5.5 Consolidated public sector Total ~C.YC~UC General government KVC~UC NFPE operating surplus 35.9 36.9 36.6 32.4 33.5 31.4 28.6 28.8 28.7 24.8 25.4 23.0 7.3 8.1 7.9 7.6 8.1 8.5 Total expenditure and net lending 31 32.1 32.1 33.2 29.1 34.6 35.9 General govcmment operating expenditure 31 19.5 20.6 18.8 16.2 18.5 20.1 Dcvclapmcnt expenditure and net lending 31 12.7 11.5 14.3 12.9 16.1 15.8 General gavcr,,mcnt 3/ 6.4 5.2 6.3 5.4 6.8 7.0 NFPES 6.2 6.2 8.1 7.5 9.2 8.8 Overall balance 4.8 3.5 Memorandum ,tcms Off-budget spending Fiscal impulse 41 Cycldly nculral balance Federal government debt 3.7 0.2 1.0 41.8 0.2 1.0 35.9 -1.5 1.0 32.7 3.4 5.5 0.5 -1.1 0.4 3.9 0.5 37.0 -4.4 1.8 4.0 0.4 Sources: Information provided by the Malaysian authorities; and Fund staff estimates. I/ Data arc presented in the IMF format. 21 Refers ta budget plans prcscntcd in July 1998. 31 Includes adjustment for accounts payable. 41 The fiscal impulse is calculated as the first differcncc of the fiscal stance. The fiscal stance is the gap between the actual federal government balance and the cyclically-neutral balance. The latter is calculated assuming that ncutml rwenue grows in line with actual GDP, and that expenditure grows in line with potential GDP. The base year. in which actual and potential GDP arc assumed to be equal, is 1993. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-46- Table 7. Malaysia: Financing Needs, 1998-99 (In RM billions, unless indicated otherwise) 1998 1999 Total financing need Consolidated public sector budget balance (- = surplus) of which : Federal government Infmst~cture fond and other extrabudgetary funds AMC (Danaharta) Less : Budgetary allocatiotiNM SPV (DaMmodal) Less : Budgetary allocation/BNM Called-up contingent liabilities (government guarantees) Possible fmanciog sources External Borrowing Market Official I/ Domestic borrowing Deposits with the banking system (+ = drawdown) Syndicated loan 21 Khazanab bonds Government securities, net Danaharta bonds Danamodal bonds Financing gap Memorandum items: Total financing need (in percent of GDP) Carrying costs of financial sector restructuring (in percent of GDP) 31 Federal government debt (in percent of GDP) Domestic External Public sector debt (in percent of GDP) 4/ Domestic financing (in percent of federal government domestic debt at end-1998) 12.8 3.2 4.2 6.7 3.6 2.3 4.6 3.0 __ 12.8 1.8 -1.3 3.1 11.0 -12.2 3.0 2.1 7.1 2.6 1.7 4.6 12.6 0.2 37.0 31.6 5.4 54.6 10.7 0.8 39.2 31.6 1.6 51.1 28.5 36.6 8.0 11.0 5.2 15.0 3.0 11.5 -- -- 36.6 1.2 6.5 0.8 29.4 12.7 2.1 1.0 1.2 12.4 Sources: Data provided by the Malaysian authorities; and Fond staff estimates and projections. l/Figures include World Bank loans and foods made available under the Miyazawa initiative. 2/ Loan from 12 foreign banks operating in Malaysia. 3/ Financial sector restmchuing is being financed primarily through the issue of zero-coupon bonds, maturing in 2003 and beyond. Calculations assome an average interest rate of 7 percent per annum on the outstanding stock of bonds, and that alI remaining restructuring costs will be covered by issuing bonds. 4/ Figores are staff estimates. They exclude domestic debt of the NFPEs. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 8. Malaysia: Banking Survey, 1995.2000 li Old rcportin+y forma NW rsportblg fornut u ,995 ,996 19% 1997 ,998 ,999 2000 ,997 ,998 -!z- Est. Pmj. Pmj. QI Q* 03 W PI Q2 Q3 Q4 QI Net foreign assets Ccntml bd Banking system Net domestic austs Net domestic credit Nd &IM m gowmmmt Chims on private *cctn Other itmu net ToId liquidily (M3) x.3 dmmntis l sSt( Nd dmstic credit Net claims on go”-snt 3 Chim on privets se&m olhm item3 “6131 Total liquidity 01 btonslAry but Adjusted mon~ury bnse 41 Bmkblg ryem loins 5, Mmcy mltiplin Wsl) Velocity (Ied) 58.4 63.8 -5.4 229.3 282.7 1.6 281.1 -53.4 287.7 -1.4 26.4 27.7 -I.5 30.0 -5.5 18.2 18.5 27.9 6.0 0.76 58.8 s* I 70.0 70.0 -11.2 -17 9 297.0 290.9 360.1 338.5 1.2 -7.2 358.9 345.7 -63.1 -47.6 355.8 343.0 01 29.5 27.4 -0.1 27.7 -3.4 23.7 352 27.9 27.9 5.5 5.3 0.70 0.73 34.7 60.0 -25.3 377.7 420.0 -6.8 426.8 -42.3 412.4 -5.1 29.8 24.1 0.1 23.5 I.5 20.2 28.4 28.4 26.5 5.0 0.67 85.3 59.4 -14.2 320.5 410.5 -193 429.9 -90.0 405.8 12.3 -IS., -2.3 -3.0 0.7 -11.6 -1.6 -56.4 -12.9 1.3 1l.Z 0.69 116.8 127.8 -11.0 334.3 439.3 -19.3 458.6 .,os.o 451.1 7.8 4.3 7.0 0.0 6.7 -3.7 11.2 10.2 10.2 11.3 0.65 (In billiau ofringgit) I2.S 12.8 11.4 52 5.2 51 0.62 0.76 0.72 0.70 34.7 60.0 -25.3 377.7 420.0 4.8 426.8 42.3 412.4 -5.1 29.8 24. L 0.1 23.5 1.5 20.2 28.4 28.4 26.5 5.0 0.67 42.2 58.0 -15.8 365.2 415.7 -7.2 422.9 -50.5 407.4 -1.9 17.2 15.7 a.1 15.5 4.8 12.9 -6.3 14.9 16.9 6.3 0.68 48.5 39.3 -10.8 353.9 411.0 -9.3 420.3 .57.1 402.4 1.0 5.3 6.5 4.4 6.7 -1.9 5.7 -15.0 4.0 10.2 6.5 0.69 73.9 81.5 -7.6 320.4 409.8 -11.7 421.5 -89.4 394.3 9.5 -10.0 1.5 4.2 1.7 -10.6 0.4 -51.7 -2.0 45 10.7 0.71 85.3 99.4 -14.2 320.5 410.5 -19 3 429.9 -90.0 405.8 12.3 -15.1 -2.3 30 0.7 -11.6 -1.6 -56.4 -129 1.3 11.2 0.69 89.4 105.3 -15.8 322.7 402. I -194 421.5 -79.4 412.1 116 -11.6 ’ -3.3 ?I -3.0 I -0.3 -7. I 1.2 -49.4 -10.8 16.9 Il.5 0.68 Sourcsr: D*la providsd by the Malaysian authorities: and Fund suffchnat~ 2nd pjsctiom. li Cmuoliddan ofthc xcount ofttic moncllry Mhxiticr. commmcid ha* and Bank Islam hmce companies, merchant h&a, and discount hourcs. ?J Rsnscb d!mga in *s rspaling fomu Nbrmned by timmrl imtitutionl 10 Bank Nsgw 2nd chlngel h ths c~lcg~uLion OfthSlS data in rMF tomu,. 31 Co”trib”tion to M3 &m*. 41 Adjusted for changes in statutory ressws rcqbxrcnt (SRRI. 5, Lcms by comnsrcia, b.nks, Sna”CC campmin and me,&“, bar*r. including lo.lls sold to the mtiomuI matg~gc corpantim (C.gam~a) Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 48 - ANNEX1 Asian Crisis Countries A Comparative Review of Economic Developments and Policies, 1996-Present 1. This annex reviews similarities and differences in initial conditions and policy responses to the crisis in Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia, the Philippines, and Thailand-with a special focus on Malaysia-in an attempt to shed light on whether different countries’ policy choices have delivered significantly different outcomes. However, given the very short time that has elapsed since adjustment began, it is difficult to come to definitive conclusions on this question; the findings below must therefore be treated as preliminary. Initial conditions 2. At the time it was hit by the crisis, the Malaysian economy had many strengths, especially in comparison with its regional neighbors-high national saving, large fiscal surpluses, relatively low external debt, and low inflation (Annex Charts 1 and 2). Indicators of banking system soundness-such as nonperforming loans and capitalization levels-and corporate sector vulnerabilities-measured by the ratios of debt to equity-also suggested greater strength than in its neighbors. For example, Malaysia’s nonperforming loan ratio at end-1997 of 6 percent was lower than that in Indonesia (estimated at 15-20 percent and for Korea (20 percent).’ Similarly, debt-equity ratios were much higher for Korea, Thailand and Indonesia (in the range of 400-600 percent) compared to about 150-200 percent in Malaysia and about 60-70 percent in the Philippines, 3. However, there were also areas where Malaysia, like Thailand and Korea, showed signs of vulnerability such as high rates of private sector credit growth, large current account imbalances, an “overheating” economy as evidenced by growth rates far in excess of potential, and asset (property and equities) price inflation. 4. The initial manifestations of the crisis were similar across all the countries. All countries experienced a severe loss in investor confidence and massive capital outflows, which resulted in a sharp decline in reserves, a collapse in the stock markets, and depreciation of the currencies. Policy responses 5. The immediate responses to the crisis were also similar in all the aFfected countries, and included intervention in foreign exchange markets to defend the exchange rate coupled with hikes in interest rates, followed by the floating of the currencies. Some ‘Official estimates of nonperforming loans in Korea are much lower (about 10 percent at end-1997). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-49- countries also tightened capital and exchange controls, particularly on forward or derivative transactions and their financing. 6. These attempts, which were generally inadequate in fully restoring investor conftdence and stemming capital outtlows, were followed by the adoption of adjust- ment packages that included tight monetary and fiscal policies and a wide-ranging program of structural reforms. Monetary policy was initially aimed at the priority task of stabilising the foreign exchange markets and thus involved sharp increases in interest rates. Fiscal policy was initially aimed at tightening the public finances, on the grounds that the current account adjustment brought about by the capital outflows should not unduly burden the private sector, and that financial sector restructuring costs would need to be accommodated. 7. The broad trends in monetary policy responses-measured by movements in nominal interest rates (Annex Chart 3)--are broadly similar in all the crisis countries. Some distinctions are nevertheless possible. In particular, those countries that raised interest rates sharply and maintained high rates for some time appear to have been able to bring them down earlier and more rapidly. . In all countries, sharp increases in interest rates were implemented when currencies came under sustained pressures (October-November 1997 for Korea, mid-1997 for the rest), although there were periods of “stop-go policies” with respect to interest rates in all countries; . Only in Korea and Thailand were higher interest rates (relative to pre-crisis levels) maintained for several months without interruption; . Interest rates began to come down in February-March 1998 in Thailand and Korea, while the downward movement in interest rates started later in Malaysia, Indonesia, and the Philippines; . Interest rates were brought down to pre-crisis levels earliest in Korea, followed by Malaysia and Thailand, while interest rates remained above pre-crisis levels in the Philippines and Indonesia for much longer; and . Nominal interest rates reached a lower peak in Malaysia than in other countries and real rates remained in single digits throughout the period.’ 8 With respect to fiscal policy responses-measured by changes in the planned central government balances in 1998 (Annex Chart 4)-all countries shifted from ‘This suggests that corporate and financial sector distress is not entirely attributable to high interest rates. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 50 - ANNEX1 planned surpluses to sizeable deficits. As the depth of the output collapse and the implica- tions for growth in 1998 were acknowledged, fiscal policy turned toward deficits to provide a stimulus to economic activity. The following points are noteworthy: . In all countries, with the exception of the Philippines, as long as growth was still being projected to be above 2 percent in1998, fiscal policy was aimed at generating a small surplus. However, when forecasts for growth were revised to below 2 percent and subsequently to negative rates, fiscal policy plans shifted toward deficits, in part, to augment social safety net expenditures, These shifts took place as early as February and March 1998 in the case of Korea, Thailand, and the Philippines. In Indonesia and Malaysia, the shift in fiscal policy toward stimulus took place somewhat later, in April and July 1998, respectively. . Actual central government deficit fell short of target in Malaysia, Korea, and Indonesia, was roughly as planned in Thailand and exceeded the budget target in the Philippines, 9. Another common feature of the adjustment efforts in all countries was the early focus on structural reforms, especially those aimed at strengthening the financial sector, and improving the efficiency of financial intermediation. Measures involved strengthened prudential regulations, including loan classification and provisioning guidelines and capital adequacy standards, and enhanced transparency with regard to disclosure of key economic, financial, and corporate sector information. Efforts to restructure corporate sector debt were also undertaken, but in most cases, started somewhat later than the financial sector reform. Despite starting the structural reform process somewhat later than the other crisis countries, information in Annex Table 1 suggests that Malaysia has kept pace with Korea and Thailand in implementing reforms, especially with respect to the purchase of nonperforming loans and bank recapitalization. 10. By July-August 1998, some measure of stability had returned to financial markets in the crisis countries (Annex Chart 5). By that time, currency and stock markets had broadly stabilized after another round of severe instability in April-May 1998, resulting primarily from the political turmoil in Indonesia, the fall in the Japanese yen, and fears of a devaluation of the renminbi. By then sovereign bond spreads had also peaked for Korea, Thailand, and the Philippines, and in both Malaysia and Thailand, the off-shore swap differential was clearly trending down. Importantly, the currencies remained stable as interest rates were gradually being brought down. 11. In September 1998, Malaysia imposed capital controls aimed primarily at drying up the off-shore ringgit market. Notwithstanding the fact that the ringgit remained broadly stable, the authorities remained vexed by the existence of a significant off-shore market for the ringgit which they believed was instrumental in fueling speculative outflows of ringgit and was constraining their ability to bring interest rates down more rapidly. Consequently, controls were imposed, requiring all ringgit funds abroad to be brought on-shore by end- September 1998. A one-year holding period was imposed on all funds in these accounts, Care Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-5l- ANNEX1 was taken from the start to exempt bona tide current account transactions and transactions related to FDI flows from these restrictions, although subsequently there was some tightening of regulations to prevent circumvention through transfer pricing. In February 1999, the one- year holding period on the principal amount was replaced by a system of exit levies (Box 3). The capital controls were accompanied by the fixing of the exchange rate at RM 3.8 per dollar. Economic developments to date 12. In many respects, the pattern of evolution of key economic variables has been similar across the crisis countries. Growth declined sharply in 1998, but since the fourth quarter of 1998, there have been signs of recovery of varying strengths in all of them (Annex Chart 6). In particular, export growth began to recover in all countries, except Indonesia, in September-October 1998; industrial production growth began to pick up in Korea and Thailand since about October last year, and in Malaysia, since early 1999. 13. Inflation remains subdued, as does private sector credit growth. Reflecting the collapse in domestic demand, inflationary pressures have been all but nonexistent (including in Indonesia in recent months), notwithstanding the very large nominal exchange rate depreciations between mid-1997 and mid-1998. Private sector credit growth fell sharply in all countries in 1998, and has only very recently shown some signs of revival in Korea and the Philippines. 14. In the fourth quarter of 1998, signs of returning investor confidence began to emerge in all countries. Bond spreads, which peaked in August for Korea, Thailand, and the Philippines and in September in Malaysia and Indonesia, have since come down, although in contrast to the period prior to the imposition of capital controls, the premium for Malaysia remains higher than that for Thailand and Korea. The exchange rates in all the countries stabilized in the fourth quarter of 1998 and since early 1999, all currencies (except Malaysia which had pegged the ringgit in September at an appreciated rate relative to the then-prevailing market rate) have experienced a modest appreciation. As a result, real effective exchange rates for all countries, except Malaysia, have appreciated slightly since the fourth quarter of 1998. Foreign exchange reserves have risen markedly in all countries, reflecting not only the large current account surpluses but also, in varying degrees, capital inflows. The timing and extent of the recovery in stock markets (since about September 1998) has also been broadly similar in all countries, Conclusions 15. The review of developments since the outbreak of the crisis, and especially since the imposition of capital controls in Malaysia in September 1998, suggests that the pattern of performance has been very similar across the crisis countries. In particular, the imposition of controls does not appear to have made a discernible difference-positive or negative-to economic developments, at least in the short time that has elapsed since their introduction. While the controls have been effective, due in part to their good design and Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 52 - ANNEX1 pragmatic implementation, pressures for capital outflows had already abated following the return of investor confidence to the region in late 1998. The stabilization of the currencies in the region and the undervaluation of the ringgit, together with the continued large current account surpluses further reduced pressures in the balance of payments. More importantly, however, Malaysia has made good progress in expediting financial and corporate sector restructuring, strengthening regulation and su implementing corporate governance reforms, P ervision of financial markets, and Thus any negative impact arising from the capital controls has, in large part, been offset by the increase in confidence from the acceleration of structural reforms and by generally sound macroeconomic management. 3More details of these reforms can be found in Chapters III and IV of the Selected Issues paper. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 53 - Annex chart 1 Asian Crisis Countries: Macroeconomic Indicators 1994-98 I/ IJ -I6 m G~0Wt.h Current Account 10. I(aloyslo .‘a 15. (In percent of GDP) 6. ‘--s,,,., .6 Philipt”m j. ” ,,,,,, IO- 0. -0 Thaihnd j 5 4. XorPO -J -10 4 I * 8 Budget Balances &eelves 3. (In pleent of GDP) 3 , (In montha of imports) 2. .- Yd.zym .2 6 Ihn,luu / ‘1 L ‘TY..... ” ‘.... I 0 ,,,:“-di .,,,,, ,,,,,,,,). ..,., .,..,,.,,.,,,,.,. ..x: # . :~<..~,~~~?’ . I,, -1 Pblrpprm 1. A Thda.d “‘. :, ;. ~~~~~~ .; 3. \\ .-z 3 2. .‘l, -1 1 ~,JyJ&“e* 2 ..,j -4. I ml 199 low Lou7 LOW m.4 L996 L9Gd wn mn m 10 45 Private Sector Credit Growth M pcmnt Chqe) National Savings P *” (In percent Of GDP) / Loo 100 Central Govanment Debt (In parcent Of mP) Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 54 - Annex Chart 2 Asian Crisis Countries: Financial Indicators 1994-97 LSO0 Stock Prices IBW (End Of periocl) Mwl~ m- Iwo- 8W- Brn- . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . -..~lndon0& j ;..;;., ,J (lyfT, I “p(” lv I IIwfs w I DwfD nr I n;n F Y w30 30 sew 25. 3000 2. .zam Is- mw LO- z4lo 6. @ml O- lllw -5L Real Interest Rates [Pcrunt per annum) MO Real Effective Emchange ,p (1880=100) T&d capita1 InIloTx+ L90 I6 (In percent of GDP) m 70 External Debt (In plant 01 GDP) m- 50. M- ,,,,,,,,,,,,,.,,,....~~ 11,,,.““’ 3% /.’ J,” xor.3. .30 / 20. ,,,,(,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,~ l,l.,.,,,,,r” ,,.” ,,/” -20 10 lOD4 10 ,005 ,896 1007 ,m (ln percent of short-tam debt) Soums: “PA,, IFS. FEM. INS and APD databases. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-55- Annex Chart 3 ASIAN CRISIS COUNTRIES: NOMINAL, REAL INTEREST RATES, AND EXCHANGE RATES, 1997-99 l/ 2/ -20 oNo*d (Ien salt, --ILral (left Bala) 700 --hcb.r,#c 1.1. (r&b1 wb) -40 I J A,sSg; N D J F Y A M ,JJSA S 0 N D J ,FFQ A 600 80 1' 100 120 140 160 180 204 0 JJASONDJFYAMJJASONDJFM 1997 199s 1998 120 2o 130 15 140 10 150 160 5 200 JJASONDJFMAY;g~SASONDJPMA 170 0 JJASONDJFMAYJJASONDJPMA 220 NJ7 1ow 1897 163s WSQ I. 0 D 1 I ‘MAIIJJASON ‘MAIIJJASON 189S 189S Sources: hta pmidcd by the autboritte,: .nd Pun., at& estizmte Sources: hta pmidcd by the autboritte,: .nd Pun., at& estizmte I/ l’birtyh~ mtabud rates or newest comparable rates. Par tb I/ l’birtyh~ mtabud rates or newest comparable rates. Par tb Data kv Yd,ys,a. Pbi,,pptnea, S~ngspore md ‘,‘bd,an,, r,re end-of-J Data kv Yd,ys,a. Pbi,,pptnea, S~ngspore md ‘,‘bd,an,, r,re end-of-J Red rates me wtimstsd by def,.tinp nomin., intar& r,tes b, tbr Red rates me wtimstsd by def,.tinp nomin., intar& r,tes b, tbr COrnspOr.di~ months. c Philippines. oveml&t interbank rate is used. m,iod. Data ior lndoneda is prlod avaeSee. I 12.month rate al inllation in the COrnspOr.di~ months. 2/ Nomind erehqe ralea M in&red, June ,O&‘=,‘W. 2/ Nomind erehqe ratea M in&red, June 1007=LoO. 3/ Note that in view of the recent shup deEline in idstim, past-inflation may not be a 3/ Note that in view of the recmt sharp deEline in idstim, past-inflation may not be a in”.tionug erpect.tlona. On the basis of projscted Mrtlon far the yeear a# a “bole. re., in”.tionug erpect.tlona. On the basis of projscted Mrtion far the yeear as a “bole. re,, positire. positire. 140 160 160 pod melsure of interest mte. UC Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 56 _ Annex Chart 4 Asian Crisis Counties: Planned Central Government Balance and Projected Growth, 1998 l/ m Central &wemmn, balance 0 output growdl (in percent ol GDP) (In percent) Malaysia -8 ’ I act 1997 Dee. 1997 Mar. ,998 Jul. ,998 Esumatcd outt”m Indonesia 2/ KO%i Nov. ,997 May 1998 Jul. 1998 Aug. 1998 Estimtcd Ixc. 1997 Feb. 1998 May 1998 Aug. 1998 Er,imkd O”tNm O”LLYIll Philippines 31 Thailand 8 4 7 2 6 5 0 4 3 -2 2 -4 I 0 -6 -I -8 -2 -3 -10 Jul. 1997 Mar 1998 Aug. 1998 Estimated Aug. Feb. Aug. OUttUrn ,997 NW. 1998 May I998 Erdmllcd ,997 ,998 OYLNm Source: Fund staff. 11 Except for Malaysia, dates indicate time of IMF Executive Board approval of program or revisions. 21 Data refer to fiscal year 1998199. 31 Data for Philippines are national government balance in percent of GNP. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-57- Annex Chart 5 Asian Crisis Countries: Financial Indicators 1998-99 1000 Stock Price Indices 901~ (End of period) 2600 160 - E41ange Rates, Domestic Currency per (US 2400 (huarg ,996=100. end of period) 140. 2200 hdonlti P.\,,, i ., 2ooo 120. j > 1800 200’ ,-, Imo 601 -. ’ JFNANJJASONDI~99~A 1996 I F M A N ;9;S A S 0 N D J ;99”g A 30 Nominal Interest Rates 26 (vt per annum. ,vod average) 60 75 70 65 60 55 50 45 40 35 Ol’, _1 JFNAMJJASONDJFMA 199fl ,999 17llo Sovereign Bond Spreads 30 I ( 25 20 15 10 5 0 L 1700 70 1500 60 1300 50 1lW 40 900 30 700 20 500 La 300 c Swap Premium, One Month (in percent) 70 60 50 10 ms e. “0 ,,,,,,,,ti,,, 0 100 I 100 -10 L I”N JUL AUG SEP OCT NOV DEC 1 -10 A N J I A S 0 N D J Tggi A 199B 1996 teal Interest Rates ;Percent per annum) I F M A M i99Jg A S 0 N D J pgg; I 30 20 10 0 -10 -20 -30 -40 Source: AJD datsbsaa. I/ Data for Indonesia M end-of-period. Z/ Note that in view of the -t sharp decUne tn infhtion. past-,,,f,atian may mt k a gwd meam of infhtionars erpeft&ions. On the balas of projected inflation for tbc year as a whole. real interest rates are pi”VC Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public16 14 12 10 6 6 4 2 0 140 120 100 60 60 40 20 - 58 - Amex Chart 6 Asian Crisis Countries: Developments in 1998-99 ,nfiation 10 -40 1 F N A M igg’B A S 0 N D J Tgg; A ?.eaI Effective Exchange Rates (19MklOO) PNlLppnPs ,i’ /----- . . ...\../ Y-H T~‘~~__. _ ~~ ,,,,,,..~ ,,,” . . ,nd.n.aid” . . . . .-...“’ ..“...\ ,i ., . . . . . “L ./ ..,.,,...-. .. J F Y A M 0 N D 40 Private Sector Credit Growth 60 60 20 50 40 0 30 -20 20 \ -201 r, , , J F N A N fg.S A S 0 N D J ;ggl d hport Growth :12-month percent change, in US) terms) I F N A M iggJg A S 0 N D J fg; A 80 60 40 20 0 -20 -40 20 JFNAYJJASONDJ;A1 1996 50 40 30 20 10 0 Sowtea: hternational Finmcid Statiatiea: APD databam. I/ Data for Indcmesia ueludca oil and (as. gxporta reported on FOB basis. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicAnnex Table I. Selected Asian Crisis Countries: Comparison of Progress on Financial and Corporate Sector Reform (In percent) NPwrolal lOam li 65 213 241 100 168 21 a I* NPWGDP 103 327 352 140 23.2 39 48 50 P,o”,slammLs 21 66.2 447 431 134 22 27 syrtan Capitallmlon 2, 103 116 120 9.8 94 11.4 42 is:97 * 8 31 4 59 44 IS 14 7 MImorandvm ,trmr Red dcporll ra!C (I -ycsr term) I 5 4.4 5 Red Icndmgralc 101 6 7 8 5-s Sourcn Dal2 pwdcd by somuy auhotitier. Fund rLlff ermlatn. and t&till Lynch. nlrosonfic &mkr Progms in ,%!I* Ramr*ri”g. Frhmy 23, ,999. 3, In Korcq !h KAMC .cquircd unsecud Ioans at a dircount of 97 pc”c”l and rccud lOam at 8 dirComt of 51 pment 4, F.3,,ma,cd rccapitalizatlon rcq”irrmc”u an ofha, erfnllat~s ior hklayria, and r#aff &matrr for Korea an* Thailand 5, Far Km% ‘lnICrvl”C~ hstiwiorv are *ox under rch&iabilitmo” and uclu*c~ Ihe numnou but ,c,at,“Ily smsi, Cdl, “nmnl rnd ‘rlutua, hings iNlifYl>ons For h&.,ayr,a and Ihdmld lhcy EompnY recapiLahd mL,NtiON 61 Fa tbrca, IhK figure cxcludcr tie numCrOu5 but rcI.ti”IIy UllPII crdlt himu and Murual sawngs lnsllf”flmn 7, For Malayli% tir fiyrc il pm&d km the rhax of,nrfltuliars loml3 in the ‘yltcm rota,. 8, For Km% *esc figures are for connnc~sid banlu Only (rouxad horn h&l, Lynch) and arc not dircclly comparabla to ulc nmnhr ofmc& lntcm”r4 and ciorcd VYtlmllOM above. whh inch& mnchant !3* and blswancc comparurs 9: For tmayria, *c figure includes ulc plannrd rcrtructunng of Renongs d&t amounting 10 RN 8.5 bll,iOR the largest ml& applK=m IO, FOl Thaihld *c Mm (sr of SillO) and ror Malaysia Ih< ALR car of cnd-i\pr ,999) are dlrcoumcd by p,LCrcd aucl2gBL CM innation rm 19%. I li Marl rccsdy availabis tiec-monU1 wcmge OYCI immedialsly prcccding ticc-month ~vwzgc d~rcounlrd by pjcclcd CPI tiafion in 19% Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 60 - ANNEX II Malaysia: Alternative Medium-Term Macroeconomic Scenarios This annex compares the staffs baseline medium-term economic projection, based on an unchanged nominal exchange rate of the ringgit versus the U.S. dollar, with an illustrative alternative scenario in which the ringgit is allowed to appreciate in order to achieve the objective of keeping consumer price inflation under 4 percent through the medium term. A. Baseline scenario: Ringgit remains pegged at RM 3.8 per U.S. dollar The baseline projection is shaped by a few key assumptions: l Excess capacity in the economy at the end of 1998 was around 4-5 percent of GDP; and that the noninflationary annual rate of growth (“potential growth”) is in the range of 5-6 percent over the medium term. l The real exchange rate is estimated currently to be about 15 percent below its long-run equilibrium level (see Chapter II of the Selected Issues paper). l The planned fiscal stimulus over 1999-2000 will be fully implemented. l Further liberalization of capital controls will prevent a large-scale outflow in September and lead to a progressive restoration of net private capital inflows. l Demand in export markets remains robust. On the basis of these assumptions, a rapid pickup in output growth is projected in response to the monetary and fiscal stimulus begun in 1998, strong external competitiveness, an end to destocking, and progress with financial and corporate restructuring. Inflation is projected to fall further as output remains below potential through late 2000, but then to accelerate as strong growth of activity leads to the emergence of excess demand in the economy. In the medium term, growth is projected to slow, as past stimulus wears off, and as higher inflation erodes external competitiveness. The current account is projected to return to deficit over the medium term as recovery of imports outpaces export growth. By the end of the projection horizon, inflation is well above the traditional range, while growth is below potential and slowing. To stabilize inflation and subsequently bring it down, a period of below potential growth would be implied beyond the end of the projection horizon. B. Alternative scenario: Flexible exchange rate adopted in 2000 In this scenario monetary policy is oriented toward maintaining low inflation. The ringgit is allowed to appreciate by 15 percent between 2000 and 2002. The rise in the real exchange rate, together with somewhat higher real interest rates implied in this scenario, boosts savings and imports, moderating the pace of demand expansion in 2001-03. As a consequence, little upward pressure on inflation emerges over the medium term. More moderate output growth also significantly offsets the impact of currency appreciation on the current account balance. By the end of the projection horizon, inflation remains below 4 percent, while growth is close to potential, and the current account is near the long-term equilibrium, Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-61 - ANNEX II C. Comparison of the scenarios A key factor behind the differences between the two scenarios is the timing of the adjustment of the real exchange rate toward long-term equilibrium. In the alternative scenario, exchange rate flexibility leads adjustment to occur earlier in the cyclical upswing, both preventing an acceleration of inflation and moderating the strength of the business cycle. Savings and investment are both higher than in the pegged nominal exchange rate scenario, with savings encouraged by firmer real interest rates and investment boosted by a lower cost of imported capital.’ By the mid-point of the business cycle, around 2004, the gains from the earlier adjustment are beginning to be reaped. In the pegged exchange rate scenario, real exchange rate adjustment also occurs, but much later. A consequence of this delay is a stronger upswing in output, which implies that the eventual adjustment in the real exchange rate has to be even greater than in the early adjustment scenario. By 2004, the pain of delayed adjustment is just beginning to be felt. D. Uncertainties in the scenarios The principal uncertainties in the projection relate to the current magnitude of excess capacity in the economy and its likely impact on inflation,* the extent of undervaluation of the real exchange rate, and the prospects for renewed capital inflows on a significant scale? l If the magnitude of current excess capacity is larger than estimated, then a longer period of above potential growth will be possible without a reemergence of upward pressure on inflation. But this possibility does not fundamentally alter the differences between the two scenarios. l If the real exchange rate is closer to long-term equilibrium than assumed, then the amount of adjustment in both scenarios would be less, muting the differences between them. l If capital inflows resume on a more significant scale than projected, in the alternative scenario, nominal appreciation of the currency would tend to be brought forward, while in the baseline scenario, stronger growth would lead to an earlier emergence of infla- tionary pressures. As a result, the differences between the two scenarios would be accentuated and brought forward in time. ‘In principle, this should tend to raise the level of potential output relative to the baseline projection. The projection, however, does not factor in this effect, *Although the aggregate output gap may be larger than assumed, the gap in the manufac- turing sector is much smaller than in the construction sector; consequently, inflation pressures could reemerge sooner than the aggregate gap figure might otherwise suggest. 3As always, of course, there is a great deal of uncertainty regarding the structure of the economy and the formation of expectations, affecting virtually all parameters in the economy. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public’ -62- ANNEXII Malaysia: Baseline Medium-Tam Sosnmio, 1997-2004 Eldh%Fnkm?i.~End.BpiEtpi ,997 1998 1999 2000 200, 2002 2m 2004 FA.11 .ectDT (paecnt chqc) Rul GDP p&l Re.ldane*sd~ CPl blaatim (paid “ngc) S.ving and ir,vest,.aW @cent of GDP) Grca domedic iclwawa G?wa natiolld uving Fomign mvins Fiil secta (p”rmt of GDP, I, Fe&n, p,.Jmmcnt ovca” bdmce Fedd pvc-t pirmty bllarux Public mcAor debt 5, Mouemy sector (.aaWl p-t *“*s) ~ul3provth rhllr,~liS di, &w+¶b Bhnco ofppmts (vs* billion) Trade blhnce Scrvices.cca""tbalm~c Cum”l .ccwmt bdaocc @srcd of GDP) capha, wzrmmtW~ owfdl bllurc Gmm cdlicid -(USEbillion) 6llmuu of impa) Ecabqe r.ta cpucmt Elm* of period werqe, Rin~uvSS (rise = d.qmialim of.+&) Redogoetivo-~n 1.7 7.2 2.7 42.5 37.3 XI 2.6 4.9 10.2 20.2 24.1 4.0 -7.7 -5.0 4.1 1.2 -3.9 21.7 2.6 11.9 -2.3 4, .25.5 5.3 25.8 38.8 -12.9 -1.5 1.0 54.6 4.6 -2.3 *7.7 .a 9.2 12.9 4.7 4.5 26.2 4.3 39.4 .M.6 2.4 7.9 3.0 27.9 38.4 -10.5 -3.8 6.7 57.1 11.2 7.0 15.5 -5.3 8.1 10.5 6.6 7.4 33.6 J.0 -3.1 0.8 6.5 128 2.4 34.4 39.5 -5.2 a0 1.7 55.4 13.8 7.5 12.1 4.5 4.4 5.2 3.1 7.5 41.1 5.4 0.0 0.8 6.9 10.0 4s 36.6 39.3 -2.7 -0.9 29 50.8 13.9 9.1 9.7 4.1 2.6 2.7 3.6 6.2 47.3 5.6 0.0 2.2 6.1 a0 6.4 35.7 36.6 4.9 4.2 3.4 45.4 14.4 12.1 8.3 -6.4 0.9 0.9 3.3 4.. 613 5.6 0.0 3.9 5.1 6.9 8.0 34.9 1.0 0.4 3.5 39.9 14.9 15.6 6.2 -6.4 -1.2 -1.0 4.2 3.0 54.7 5.5 0.0 5.3 4.0 4.5 9.0 36.0 34.3 1.7 0.8 3.8 34.6 14.7 15.9 5.3 -5.3 -2.3 -1.7 4.7 2.4 57.0 5.4 0.0 6.3 Malaysia: Alternative Medium-Term Scenario. 19973004 FIr5hL~Bpi4piF!r9i~L ,997 ,998 ,999 2Mlo 200, 2002 2w3 2004 Real lcftw (pcment CbqC) Rod GDP @-cdl IS”, do,,,e.,,ic dent& CPL inll~li.m (&l&d avcra@ s*ving d invutmti (pason, of GDP, Gmn dnnulis investrncnt Gmn NtiOrvl satin Foreign uviq FLU, accm (puceal of GDP) ” l&dad #rNammt oven,, bdmcc Feda, gomlmmt pimary bahnes Public lceta d&t U Mmcluyrctar(amull pcrccacdungc) Mad Dolllcstic credit gmwlb Balance ofpyna0 CUSS billion) kde balame SeNicel samud hlmcc cm, *CCOunt bal*rLcc @rcatofGDP) Cqiul acamt bahw OKn,, balm Gmn ofiisi., rc.0~ (USS billion) (lmnuu Of imp*) 7.7 7.2 2.7 42.5 37.3 5.1 2.6 4.9 50.2 20.2 24.1 4.0 -7.7 -5.0 -5.1 0.8 -3.9 21.7 2.6 4.7 -25.5 5.3 25.* 38.8 -12.9 -1.5 1.0 54.6 -1.6 -2.3 17.7 -6.0 9.2 12.9 -4.8 45 26.2 4.3 2.4 7.9 3.1 27.9 38.4 -103 -3.8 4.7 57.1 11.2 7.1 15.5 -6.3 a1 10.5 4.6 7.5 33.7 5.2 6.2 12.6 2.0 34.5 39.6 4.1 -2.0 1.7 55.7 13.2 8.2 11.8 -6.1 4.5 5.1 3.3 7.7 41.4 5.6 5.8 9.2 2.3 37.8 40.1 -2.3 4.9 3.1 52.7 10.2 7.0 9.4 -6.1 2.2 2.3 3.8 6.1 47.4 5.9 5.3 6.7 27 38.5 39.3 -0.8 4.2 3.7 49.2 9.5 a0 8.1 -5.1 0.9 0.8 3.7 4.6 52.0 6.1 4.9 7.0 3.1 39.6 38.5 1.1 0.4 3.9 45.2 9.8 93 6.0 -6.3 -1.3 -1.1 4.2 2.9 54.9 5.9 5.0 6.6 3.5 39.7 37.3 2.5 0.8 4.3 40.9 ICI.3 Il.0 4.7 -5.6 -3.2 -2s 4.6 1.4 s5.3 5.6 Scaucss: Data provided by the Malapian a&otiticq and Fud uflesthnten nd pje&wa. 11 Pi-mprmmkdintbcWIaaut 21 Figuml ,m ddf ulimaa l d exdvdc d.Dlmaio debt of NIppI. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 63 - ANNEX III Malaysia: Statistical Issues The quality and availability of Malaysian economic statistics is generally good and improving. Major data sources for surveillance include Bank Negara Malaysia’s (BNM) monthly bulletin and semi-monthly report on its own balance sheet (both available through BNM’s website); BNM’s daily report on money market operations (available from Reuters); and regular data releases from Department of Statistics Malaysia @OSM). In addition, over the past year, surveillance of financial restructuring operations has drawn extensively on reporting by Danamodal and Danaharta through their websites. Outstanding issues - National accounts: The Fund’s Statistics Department (STA) has been working with DOSM toward developing quarterly National Accounts Statistics that meet the SDDS requirements. Currently, DOSM compiles and publishes annual estimates of GDP by expenditure at current and at constant 1978 prices, annual estimates for gross disposable income, savings and net lending for the total economy, as well as annual and “quarterized” estimates of GDP by activity at constant 1978 prices. The annual and quarterly data are currently released ten months after the end of the reference year. Data for the quarters of the current year are not published. However, BNM compiles a set of crude estimates or “nowcasts” that are published with a lag of about three months after the reference quarter. STA has been focusing its assistance on (i) techniques for benchmarking of quarterly data to annual estimates that avoids introducing breaks in the time series and preserves the seasonal patterns of the series; (ii) ways of improving the timeliness of provision of quarterly GDP estimates; and (iii) review of the QNA source data to identify ways of improving the QNA estimates to reduce future revisions of the estimates. l Prices: The CPI and the PPI are available on a timely and comprehensive basis. As part of the PPI program, a separate import price index is compiled. However, no export price index is being compiled. STA has encouraged DOSM to start developing an export price index and have provided some assistance in this respect. * Labor market statistics: Data on employment, unemployment, and wages/earnings are disseminated quarterly. l Property market statistics: Despite the importance of developments in property markets for national economic and financial performance, timely coverage and dissemination of property market data is poor. The Department of Property Valuation currently reports property market developments on a semi-annual basis, with a significant lag, and the report is not posted on the Treasury website. The authorities are, however, planning to move to quarterly reporting of the House Price Index. It is recommended that the quarterly index and the aggregate national data and analysis in the Property Market Report be made readily accessible through the intemet. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 64 - ANNEX III l Monetary statistics: Over the past year, BNM and STA have cooperated on bringing Malaysia’s monetary statistics reported to the Fund into conformity with the Fund’s new reporting format. Publication according to the new format began with the April 1999 issue of IFS. l Balance of payments statistics: DOSM and BNM have made substantial progress toward the implementation of recommendations of the multisector mission to Malaysia in 1997. In particular, DOSM has revamped its quarterly enterprise survey with a particular focus on services and financial account transactions to facilitate conversion to the fifth edition of the Balance of Payments Manual (BPMS). Nonetheless, there have been no improvements in the published balance of payments statistics yet, and these continue to suffer from major deficiencies in coverage and presentation, as noted in the 1998 Article IV consultation. DOSM should aim to begin publishing by the end of 1999 quarterly data in conformity with BPMS, with particular reference to the financial account transactions and the international investment position-both identified as priorities in the 1998 Article IV consultation-and also provide data hack to 1995 according to BPM5. The critical part of the work program will be the establishment of a reporting system for inward and outward direct and portfolio investment, covering both positions and transactions, and the production of external debt statistics consistent with the coverage of nonequity transactions in the financial account. l Fiscal accounts: Until recently, there were substantial differences in fiscal data reported by BNM in its Annual Report and by Treasury in its Economic Report. Data have now been revised and progress has also been made in improving the consolidation of accounts across the various levels of government. A major remaining area of weakness is the data on nonfinancial public enterprises (NFPEs). As recommended by the multisector STA mission in 1997, increased efforts are necessary to verify reported data on at least the largest NFPEs, and to obtain more detailed data on their domestic and foreign financing by type of debt instrument and debt holder, Additionally, it is imperative for the Economic Planning Unit (EPU) to provide NFPE data to BNM and Treasury on a more timely basis, and for the EPU to improve the reliability and coverage of these data. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicSurvey of Reporting of Main Statistical Indicators (As of May 25, 1999) Countty: MALAY SL4 Central ReserveI Bank COIlSUm~ Current Federal Exchange International Base B&TKX Broad Interest PIice Exports/ Account Government External R&S ReSelTeS MOXy Sheet Money Rat.3 Index Imports Balance B&We GDP/GNP Debt Date of Latest Obsewatlon Date Received Frequency of Data Frequency of Reporting Source of Data Mode of Rep0rttig Confidentiality Frequency of Publication 1 May25 1 May 15 ) April 1 May 15 1 April 1 May25 1 April I Mach1 1 May 25 1 May20 1 May25 1 May20 1 May25 1 May25 1 May15 I April29 Mar 31 Mar.31 Note: For frequency: D=daily, M-monthly, Q=quarterly, A=amual, O=other For source: A=BNM or DOSM, C=Reuters, N=offkial publication. For confidentiality: C= unrestricted. II Bi-weekly. 2/ Bank Negan Malaysia @NM) or Department of Statistics Malaysia (DOSM) website. 31 Reuters momtor. 41 Quarterly estimate (BNM), Annual national accounts data (DOSM) I998 1998 44 44 Mar. 31 Mar. 31 Qz.441 Q Q,A4/ Q A N A 0 21 0 21 C C Q Q I % x E Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 66 - ANNEX IV 1. II. III. Iv. V. VI. VII. Malaysia: Fund Relations (As ofMay 31, 1999) Membership Status: Joined March 7, 1958; Article VIII General Resources Account: SDR Million Quota 1,486.60 Fund holdings of currency 878.45 Reserve position in Fund 608.16 SDR Department: SDR Million Net cumulative allocation 139.05 Holdings 53.07 Outstanding Purchases and Loans: None Financial Arrangements: None Projected Obligations to Fund: None Exchange Rate Arrangement % Quota 100.0 59.1 40.9 % Allocation 100.0 38.2 . Since September 1998, the ringgit has been pegged to the U.S. dollar at the rate of RM 3.8 per U.S. dollar. This middle rate is quoted by the central bank, with the maximum spread between the buying and selling rate fixed at 2 percent for the U.S. dollar, the deutsche mark, the pound sterling, the Japanese yen, the Hong Kong dollar, and the Singapore dollar. The spread is 3 percent for all other currencies. Malaysia has accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4. Malaysia maintains bilateral payments arrangements with 24 countries. As of the last Article IV consultation, 19 of these arrangements potentially gave rise to exchange restrictions which, since these were set up before July 1994, had been temporarily exempted pursuant to Decision No. 10749-(94/67). The authorities have since indicated that the restrictive features of these arrangements have been eliminated, On the capital account, foreign borrowing above RM 5 million is subject to approval, and foreign ownership of Malaysian equity is limited in some sectors (notably banking). The control measures imposed in early 1994 have all been lifted, with the exception of reserve requirements on foreign liabilities of banks, which is viewed as leveling the playing field with sources of domestic fUnding. However, in September 1998, Bank Negara imposed the following exchange and capital restrictions: (i) ringgit fhds abroad were required to be repatriated by end-September 1998 following which it was prohibited to bring in more than Rh4 1,000 per person per trip; and (ii) transfers from ringgit-denominated nonresident Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 67 - ANNEX IV external accounts for nonresidents not physically in Malaysia, are restricted. A one-year holding period is imposed on all mnds in these accounts during which the money may not be used without BNM’s prior authorization, unless they are used to purchase ringgit assets, defray administrative and statutory expenses in Malaysia, pay for goods and services in Malaysia, and, for corporations, to grant loans and advances to staff in Malaysia. During the holding period, the external account holder is free to change the type of ringgit asset he invests in. Prior permission of BNM is required for any use of external account 8mds not listed above (such as conversion to foreign currency for repatriation), and is granted readily if activities relate to current international transactions and FDI flows, or if the ringgit assets have been held for at least a year; (iii) extension of ringgit credit facilities to nonresident correspondent banks and stockbroking companies is prohibited; (iv) residents can no longer obtain credit facilities in ringgit from nonresidents; (v) the import and export of ringgit by travelers, both resident and nonresidents, are restricted; (vi) all export and import settlements must be made only in foreign currency; and (vii) trading in Malaysian shares on Singapore’s Central Limit Order Book (CLOB) became de facto prohibited as a result of strict enforce- ment of the existing law requiring Malaysian shares to be registered in the Kuala Lumpur Stock Exchange prior to trade. On February 4, 1999, some of these controls were modified, namely the following. First, while restrictions on the external accounts were retained, the 12-month holding period for repatriation of portfolio capital was replaced by an exit levy Key features of the levy are: (a) for funds entering Malaysia before February 15, 1999, the levy is imposed on the princi- pal amount, and the rate of levy, starting at 30 percent, is reduced in steps to zero if the repatriated amounts have remained in Malaysia for at least 12 months from the date of entry (since September 1, 1998); and (b) for funds entering Malaysia on or after February 15, 1999, the levy is imposed on profits, and the rates are 30 percent or 10 percent, respectively, for repatriation within or after 12 months from the date of the investment. Second, the ceilings allowed for the import and export of ringgit were raised for border trade with Thailand. Finally, investments in property and MESDAQ (stock exchange which lists growth and technology shares) have subsequently been exempt from the levy. The newly introduced restrictions (including the recent modifications) do not contravene Malaysia’s obligations under Article VIII but their implementation will need to be kept under review. VIII. Last Article IV Consultation Malaysia is on the standard 12-month consultation cycle. Discussions for the 1998 Article IV consultation took place during March 9-24, 1998. The staff report (W/98/79) was discussed by the Executive Board on April 20, 1998. Ix. Technical Assistance STA: A monetary statistics mission visited Kuala Lumpur in June 1998 and made recommendations for improving the methodology for the valuation of foreign-currency Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 68 - ANNEX IV denominated accounts as well as the consistency of the interbank accounts in the monetary statistics. STA: A staff member visited Kuala Lumpur in October/November 1998 to provide assistance in the compilation of quarterly national accounts. The mission was a follow-up to a multisector statistics mission in April 1997 and a quarterly national accounts mission in February 1998. STA: A mission visited Kuala Lumpur in December 1998 to review Malaysia’s balance of payments and international investment position statistics. BCS: A staff member visited Kuala Lumpur in February 1999 to assist Bank Negara in developing a centralized database system. STA: A mission visited Kuala Lumpur in May 1999 to provide fkther technical assistance on the development of quarterly national accounts. The mission was the last one in a series of statistics missions in the area of quarterly national accounts, following the multisector statistics mission in April 1997. X. Resident Representative/Advisor: None Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 69 - ANNEXV Malaysia: Relations with the World Bank Group’ (As ofMay 31, 1999) The World Bank Group recommenced relations with Malaysia in 1998 after a three-year hiatus. As a first step in this process, the Bank fielded a mission in February/March 1998 to begin preparation of a Country Economic Memorandum (CEM), which focussed on: the social impact of the recent economic turmoil and the adequacy of the social safety net; the role of contingent government liabilities in infrastructure development; competition policy and the financial viability of the corporate sector in light of recent market developments; and past and future trends in saving, investment, and consumption. The CEM was subsequently transformed into a Structural Policy Review (SPR) paper, with an emphasis on crisis-related and medium-term constraints to development (see below). In addition, the World Bank provided technical input into the financial sector strategy that was elaborated by an MAE mission in February 1998. The World Bank also provided a fast-disbursing Economic Recovery and Social Sector Loan of $300 million in June 1998; lMF staff participated in the preparation of the loan. In February 1999, the World Bank completed its SPR and shared it with the government. The SPR focused on: social safety nets; financial and corporate sector restructuring; macroeconomic policies for growth; and public sector management. The SPR is a new vehicle in World Bank relations with countries, and Malaysia is a pilot case. The SPR also provides a basis for a performance monetary framework. Moreover, the Bank’s Board of Directors discussed a Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) paper on March 30, 1999. The CAS proposed a program of lending and nonlending services designed to mitigate the social consequences of the regional economic crisis and support medium-term social development, and to restore short-term growth and medium-term competitiveness. In conjunction with the CAS, the Bank’s Board approved the following projects on the same date: (i) Social Sector Support Project ($60 million); (ii) Educa- tion Sector Support Project ($244 million); and (iii) Year 2000 Technical Assistance Project ($100 million). The World Bank is currently undertaking a Public Expenditure Review (PER) for Malaysia. With the renewed partnership between the Bank and the government ofMalaysia, a PER has become essential to provide a framework for the Bank’s lending program. The PER will: (i) assess the government’s performance in allocating and using public funds during the crisis; (ii) address selective fiscal challenges in the social sectors and infrastructure facing Malaysia over the medium term; and (iii) assess public expenditure management. Total loans approved Total held by IBRD Total ondisbursed Total commitments in FY 1997 Total commitments in FY 1998 Recent mission reports: (In millions?~.S. dollars) 3.746.62 1,065.99 70.93 0.00 300.00 “Meeting Labor Needs: More Workers and Belter Skills,” February 1995. “Stn~ctural Policy Review,” January 1999. “Countq Assistance Strategy,” March 1999. ‘Based on information provided by World Bank staff. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 70 - ANNEXVI Malaysia: Relations with the Asian Development Bank’ (As ofMay 12, 1999) The Asian Development Bank (AsDB) has provided 76 loans totaling $1,987.5 million to Malaysia since 1968. Approximately 66 percent of the loans have been for projects in the agriculture and social infrastructure sectors. No loans or technical assistance projects were approved in 1998. Malaysia: Cumulative AsDB Lending (as of May 12,1999) Amount of Loans Sector Number of Loans (in millions of U.S. dollars) Percent Social infrastructure 21 750.6 37.8 Agriculture and natural resources 26 566.0 28.5 Energy 11 321.5 16.2 Transport and communications 15 255.1 12.8 Industry and nonfuel minerals 1 53.0 2.7 Others 1 26.3 1.3 Financial 1 15.0 0.8 Total 76 1,987.5 100.0 The objectives of the operational strategy for Malaysia, which was approved in 1997, were to: (i) support human development; (ii) reduce socioeconomic disparity across states and regions of the country, (iii) promote sustainable environmental management, and (iv) support capacity building in selected areas. The government and AsDB have been discussing the future role of the Bank in Malaysia. ‘Based on information provided by AsDB staff. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public