DOCUMENT OF INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND NOT FOR PUBLIC USE MASTER FILES ROOM I-IQ c-525 0450 WI991122 CONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION May 27, 1999 To: Members of the Executive Board From: Subject: The Secretary The Gambia-Staff Report for the 1999 Article IV Consultation Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staff report for the 1999 Article IV consultation with The Gambia, which will be brought to the agenda for discussion on a date to be announced. Mr De Vrijer (ext. 36259) or Mr. Izvorski (ext. 36344) is available to answer technical or factual questions relating to this paper prior to the Board discussion. Unless the Documents Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the WTO Secretariat on Monday, June 7, 1999; and to the African Development Bank and the European Commission, following its consideration by the Executive Board. Att: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicCONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND THE GAMBIA StaBReport for the 1999 Article lV Consultation Prepared by the Staff Representatives for the 1999 Consultation with The Gambia (In consultation with the Legal, Monetary and Exchange Affairs, Policy Development and Review, Statistics, and Treasurer’s Departments) Approved by Paul A. Acquah and John Hicklin May 26, 1999 Executive Summary ................................................................................................................... .3 1. Introduction.. .................................................................................................................. .4 Il. Background and Recent Developments ............................................................................ 5 III. Policy Discussions.. ........................................................................................................ .9 A. Fiscal Policy.. ............................................................................................................. .9 B. Monetary and Financial Sector Policies ..................................................................... 12 C. Structural Reforms .................................................................................................... 12 IV. External Sector Policies and Prospects.. ......................................................................... 14 V. StaffAppraisal.. ............................................................................................................. 16 Text Boxes 1. The 1998 and 1999 Tariff Reforms ................................................................................ 10 2. Proposed Revenue and Expenditure Measures for 1999 ................................................ 1 1 Text Figures 1. Selected Economic Indicators, 1991/92-1999 ................................................................ 19 2. Exchange Rate Developments, January 1985-January 1999.. ......................................... .20 Text Tables I. Quantitative Performance Criteria and Benchmarks Under the First Annual Arrangement Under the Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility, April 1, 1998-March 31, 1999.. ................................................................................ 21 2. Structural Performance Criteria and Benchmarks Under the First Annual Arrangement Under the Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility, April 1, 1998-March 3 1, 1999.. ............................................................................... .22 3. Selected Economic and Financial Indicators. 1994/95- 1999 .......................................... ,23 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2- 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. Selected National Accounts Indicators, 1994/95-1999 .................................................. 24 Central Government Financial Operations, 1994/95-1999 .............................................. .25 Monetary Survey, June l995-December 1999.. .............................................................. 26 Summary Accounts of the Central Bank and Commercial Banks, June 1995-December 1999 ....................................................................................... 27 Balance of Payments, 1994/95-1999 ............................................................................. 28 Balance of Payments and Sensitivity Tests, 1997-2003 ................................................... 29 Key Indicators of External Indebtedness, 1998-2003. .................................................... .30 Central Government Operations and Domestic Debt, 1998-2003.. ................................. .3 1 Indicators of Fund Credit and Debt Servicing, 1998-2003 .............................................. 32 Selected Social and Demographic Indicators. ................................................................. 33 Fixes Tentative Work Program for 1999 ................................................................................. 34 II. Relations with the Fund ................................................................................................. 35 III. Relations with the World Bank Group ........................................................................... 37 IV. Relations with the African Development Bank ............................................................... 41 V. Statistical Issues ............................................................................................................ 43 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3- EXECUTIVE SUMMARY l The midterm review of The Gambia’s tirst annual arrangement under the ESAF, approved by the Executive Board in June 1998 in an amount equivalent to SDR 20.61 million, could not be completed because of slippages in program implementation. Moreover, afler unsuccessfU1 negotiations, the government seized the assets of the Gambia Groundnut Corporation and became directly involved in the marketing of groundnuts, without disclosing the financial implications of its activities in the sector. l During 1998, real GDP grew by almost 5 percent, while average inflation was low at about 1 percent. However, fiscal performance weakened in the last quarter of 1998 with revenue shortfalls and expenditure overruns, which contributed to a higher-than-programmed overall fiscal deficit (excluding grants) of 4% percent of GDP and the breaching of the end-December benchmarks with respect to the basic primary balance and domestic arrears. Broad money growth decelerated to about 10 percent from 22 percent in 1997 but exceeded the program target, while the external current account deficit (excluding official transfers) increased slightly to 11% percent of GDP. Gross official reserves increased by SDR 6 million to the equivalent of 5% months of import cover. . Structural reform implementation was mixed. The authorities reduced and simplified the external ta&T and took measures aimed at improving the soundness of the banking system on schedule. However, they missed a structural performance criterion for end-November on a new public enterprise divestiture strategy, and structural benchmarks with respect to the adoption of a procurement code and implementation of a new investment incentive system. l The mission proposed a number of corrective measures to address the governance issues, strengthen the financial policies, and deepen structural reforms. It recommended supplementary budget measures for 1999 to reduce the overall fiscal deficit (excluding grants) to about 2% percent of GDP, and in the process moderate the need for domestic financing while reducing domestic arrears, Monetary policy would need to be tight in order to contain inilation. These policies would contribute to reducing the external current account deficit (excluding official transfers) to IOVa percent of GDP and would target gross official reserves equivalent to 4.7 months of import cover. The mission urged the authorities to deepen reforms in the financial and external sectors, adopt a procurement code and a divestiture strategy, and take steps to improve economic data. l In the appraisal, the staff points out that this package of measures is essential to restore confidence, regain control over macroeconomic stability, and attain the medium-term objectives. Moreover, significant progress in its implementation should provide a test of the authorities’ resolve, as well as a basis to resume discussions on Fund support, which the staff supports. It would also be an important step toward a nonnalization of relations with donors and a possible resumption of their assistance. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4- L INTRODUCTION 1. Discussions for the 1999 Article IV consultation and the midterm review of the economic program supported by the first annual arrangement under the Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility (ESAF) were held in Banjul during the period February 9-25, 1999.’ The three-year arrangement under the ESAF in an amount equivalent to SDR 20.61 million (90 percent under the Nmth General Review of Quotas) was approved on June 29, 1998, together with the first annual arrangement tieunder. The iirst semiammal loan (SDR 3.435 million) was disbursed upon Board approval, and the second semiammal installment (SDR 3.435 million) was to become available upon observance of the performance criteria and completion of the midterm review. However, while some progress had been made under the economic program for 1998/99, the mission was not able to finaliie the discussions on the midterm review, because of governance problems and other slippages in program implementation. Instead, the mission urged the authorities to promptly take strong corrective actions and assisted them in formulating a macroeconomic framework for the rest of 1999. 2. The Gambia is on the standard .lZmonth consultation cycle. In concluding the 1997 Article IV consultation on October 6, 1997, Executive Directors observed that the economic situation in The Gambia was fragile and required substantial fiscal adjustment to increase government savings and bring down the domestic government debt to more manageable levels; they urged the authorities to establish full budgetary transparency. Directors also underscored the need for continued tight monetary policy and to resume structural reforms with a view to creating the basis for a sound recovery in economic activity. In 1993, The Gambia accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Section 2(a), 3, and 4, and maintains an exchange system that is free of restrictions on the payments and transfers for current international transactions. The Gambia’s relations with the Fund, the World Bank Group, and the African Development Bank are summarised in Appendices II, III, and IV, respectively. 3. The Roundtable Conference for The Gambia on macroeconomic issues and the social sectors, held in Geneva on July 15-16, 1998, endorsed the government’s economic program for ’ The Gambian representatives included the Honorable F. Jatta, Secretary of State for Finance and Economic Affairs, Mr. M.C. Bajo, Governor of the Central Bank of The Gambia, and other ministers and senior officials of the government and parastatal sectors. President Jammeh received the mission. Discussions were also held with representatives of the donor community and the private sector, including the trade unions. The staifteam consisted of Mr. De Vrijer (Head), Mr. Jang, Mr. Izvorski, Mr. Beddies, and Mrs. Cone11 (assistant), all AFR. Mr. Kibuka, AFR, participated in some of the policy discussions. A parallel World Bank mission was also in the field. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-5- 1998-2000. Donors pledged support equivalent to at least US%140 million for the period 1998-2001, mainly for the health, population, and education sectors. 4. Although the Gambian authorities have been providing the wre statistical indicators to the Fund, substantial deficiencies-particularly in the areas of the national accounts, the balance of payments, public investment, and the public enterprise sector-remain. While these weaknesses do not prevent a meaning&l assessment of economic policies, they make the analysis of economic developments more difficult. The mission found the authorities receptive to exploring the possibiity of The Gambia’s participating in the Fund’s General Data Dissemination System and using the framework it provides to improve the quality and timeliness of data provision. The mission also discussed with the authorities their plans to deal with the Y2K problem; a request for technical assistance was recently submitted by the government through the Fund to the World Bank. II. BACKGROUND ANJJ RECENT DEVELOPMENTS 5. From 1993 until mid-1997, a series of adverse external shocks and inappropriate policy responses led to a serious deterioration of the economic and financial situation in The Gambia. In particular, an overly expansionary fiscal stance resulted in large, unsustainable fiscal deficits, high interest rates, and a crowding out of private investment. In 1997, real GDP growth rebounded to almost 5 percent from less than 1 percent in fiscal year 1996197, while average infIation, as measured by the wnsumer price index (CPI), was kept low at 2.8 percent (Table 3 and Figure 1).2 The external current account deficit (excluding official transfers) narrowed by more than 2 percentage points to 10% percent of GDP in 1997. The overall fiscal deficit (excluding grants) fell Born 11% percent of GDP in 1996/97 to 7% percent in 1997, and with rewurse to mainly domestic financing, the total outstanding stock of domestic debt increased to 23% percent of GDP by end-1997 from 13% in mid-1995. Domestic interest payments absorbed 19% percent of total government revenue in 1997. 6. The Gambia’s medium-term adjustment strategy, as described in the policy framework paper (PFP) for 1998-2000 (EBD/98/60; 6/15/1998), aims at reestablishing macroeconomic stability by consolidating government finances, in order to achieve a much-needed stabiliition and then reduction of the government’s domestic debt. It also focuses on strengthening the implementation of structural reforms to significantly improve the environment for private sector activity, with a view to achieving sustainable economic growth and reducing poverty. Within the framework of this strategy, the economic program supported by the tirst annual ESAF arrangement, covering the period April 1998-March 1999, projected a real GDP growth of 3% percent in 1998 and 4% percent in 1999. It also aimed at limiting average inflation to 3 percent and at reducing the external current account deficit (excluding official transfers) to * The year 1997 marked the transition from a fiscal-year (July-June) to a calendar-year budget cycle, which begun in 1998. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-6- 10% percent of GDP in 1998 and 10% percent in 1999, while keeping gross official reserves above five months of import cover. 7. Economic developments in 1998 were, on the whole, encouraging. Real GDP grew by almost 5 percent as favorable weather conditions resulted in improved agricultural output; the groundnut crop fiuther increased by some 7 percent to almost 84,000 tons in the 1998/99 crop year (Table 4). The reexport trade increased significantly despite the adverse impact of the instability in Guinea-Bissau. While construction activity also picked up, and the tourism and related services continued their strong expansion, fisheries production fell sharply, owing to structural difficulties in the sector. Average innation remained low, at about 1 percent in 1998. 8. The external current account deficit (excluding offkial transfers) is estimated to have widened by 35 of 1 percentage point to 11% percent of GDP in 1998 (Table 8). An increase in imports coincided with a significant deterioration in the terms of trade, reflecting lower export prices, notably for groundnuts. Export earnings were also much higher, as both groundnut shipments and reexports expanded strongly and offset the decline in cotton and fish exports. The overall balance of payments is estimated to have improved as significant private capital inflows, mainly suppliers’ credits, more than offset the smaller-than-expected disbursements of external project assistance. Gross official reserves increased to SDR 7S/i million at end-1998, equivalent to 5% months of import cover. All external debt-service obligations weTe met in a timely fashion. The CPI-based real effective exchange rate of thg dalasi has remained relatively stable in recent years, but depreciated signiiicandy in September-October 1998 (Figure 2). The spread between the interbank and the parallel mark& exchange rates remained low at about 3 percent. 9. The implementation of the 1998/99 economic program suffered from governance problems and other slippages. The governance problems involved the interference of the government in the groundnut sector and the lack of transparency in its financial operations, in particular: l the seizure by the govemment on January 29,1999 of the properties of The Gambia Groundnut Corporation @GC)-a private company which has a monopoly in processing and exporting groundnuts-without compensation. l the previously undi,sclosed existence of a government debt to the GGC (initially estimated at some D 26 million), pursuant to agreements on government subsidies of the producer prices for groundnuts during the 1996/97 and 1997/98 crop seasons; and l the unreported activities of a new government-sponsored company in the marketing of groundnuts during the 1998/99 trading season-against the background of the policy of no direct government involvement in this area-as well as the lack of disclosure of either the amount of groundnuts bought by this company, or the modalities of the financing involved. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-7- The government’s actions in the groundnut sector were a culmination of its growing dissatisfaction with the role of the GGC in the sector and the difficult negotiations on the producer price for the 1998/1999 crop season. Recognizing the need for corrective actions and an opportunity to restructure the sector, the authorities have initiated discussions with the GGC in order to resolve the problems in the groundnut sector in a mutually agreeable manner. 10. While several measures envisaged under the program were taken as planned, there were also other slippages in program implementation in 1998. The quantitative performance criteria and benchmarks for end-September and end-December were met, except for a shortfall in the basic primary surplus of the central government and the accumulation of domestic payments arrears (Table 1). With regard to structural reforms, there were delays in the adoption of a new divestiture strategy for the public enterprise sector, a structural performance criterion for end- November 1998. A draft of such a strategy was prepared by the government in October, but it provided a very limited scope and lacked a legal and regulatory framework to promote transparency (Table 2). Moreover, there were delays in the adoption of a new procurement code and the implementation of a new investment incentives system, structural benchmarks for end- September and end-December, respectively. 11. Fiscal policy was tightened appreciably through September 1998 but, with slippages during the fourth quarter, the overall deficit (on a commitment basis and excluding grants) for the year as a whole (4% percent of GDP) was somewhat above the program target. However, the deficit (mcludmg grants) at 2% percent of GDP, was slightly lower than in 1997 and compared with the program target. Total government revenue decreased to 18% percent of GDP in 1998, below the program target, owing to lower customs and nontax receipts. The shortfall in import taxes reflected weaker tax administration and levels of duty exemptions that were higher than had been envisaged as necessBfy to offset the revenue loss resulting from a planned reduction in duties. As of July 1, 1998, the maximum duty rate was reduced from 90 percent to 25 percent (except for alcohol, tobacco, and vehicles) and the number of import duties from 30 to 18, in line with a program performance criterion. 12. On the expenditure side, there were sizable overruns during the last quarter of 1998, and total government expenditure and net lending (excluding interest payments and foreign-Snanced public investment) exceeded the program ceiling. As a result, the basic primary surplus of the central government in 1998 of 5% percent of GDP was well below the program target of 7 percent. An estimated D 12 million in unsettled domestic payments arrears were accumulated.’ Net recruitment in the civil service was in line with the program and largely limited to the priority sectors of heahh and education. While domestically financed public investment was much higher than foreseen, foreign-financed capital spending is estimated to have been 1% percent of GDP lower than projected. To tinance the fiscal deficit, the government increased its recourse to The legal status of these unsettled payments needs to be verhied in view of the di5culty involved in ascertaining the services rendered. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-8- domestic tinancing, thereby contributing to a tbrther increase in domestic interest payments to 21% percent of total government revenue in 1998. 13. The growth of broad money fell from 22 percent in 1997 to about 10 percent in 1998, but it remained above the program target and the 6.6 percent growth in nominal GDP. This outcome was primarily due to a much higher-than-foreseen increase in the net foreign assets position of the central bank. The net domestic assets of the banking system decreased in 1998 because of the strong recourse to nonbank financing of the fiscal deficit; net bank credit to the government declined and remained below the program ceiling. Credit to the private sector expanded further, by 15 percent, mainly to the trade and transport sectors. The sharp decline in the currency to deposit ratio from 43% percent to about 36 percent mainly reflecting increased private sector confidence. The share of nonperforming loans in the banks’ loan portfolio declined on average from 27 percent at end-1997 to 22% percent at end-1998, and the average shortfaJiof provisions against the required amount decreased from 46 percent to only 10 percent4 Jn view of the tightened fiscal policy during the first three quarters of the year, the treasury bill rate declined in a number of steps from 16 percent in September to 14 percent by end-December. Lending rates followed, with the prime lending rate coming down from 19 percent to 18 percent. - 14. Reforms were introduced to strengthen the linancial sector. The government finaliied negotiations with a major commercial bank on the settlement of D 45 million of nonperforming loans of the ex-GCU, and the CBG reached an agreement with all banks on a program to achieve full provisioning in the course of 1999. To facilitate bankruptcy and collateral liquidation procedures, a commercial chamber in the High Court was established in October 1998. The required reserve ratios on a8 deposits were unitied at 14 percent in June, and reserve asset requirements were henceforth calculated on a biweekly basis. Furthermore, the CBG has created a weekly marketplace in interbank deposits and foreign exchange. Finally, the TNS~ Bank was offered for sale in August 1998, ahead of schedule. 15. As regards other structural measures, only limited progress has been made to date. In the groundnut sector, the authorities decided to liquidate the GCU in April, and cleared a small outstanding debt to the Senegaiese groundnut company (Sonacos) in order to increase competition in crop marketing. As mentioned above, a number of key program reforms were delayed, while the envisaged streamlining of business regulations and modernising of business- related legislation are also behind schedule. However, in April 1999, the government, with support from the World Bank and the participation of the private sector, convened a workshop in Banjul to inform the drafting of a comprehensive divestiture strategy. Although progress was made in normalizing financial relations between the govemment and public enterprises during the tirst three quarters of 1998, mutual payments arrears reemerged toward the end of the year. The 4 Excluding the nonperforming loans of the ex-Gambia Cooperative Union (GCU), the total stock of nonperforming loans at end-1998 amounted to some 15 percent of total loans, and the provisioning shortfall was less than 5 percent. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-9- situation is under review, but the authorities may need technical assistance to effectively deal with this problem. III. POLICY DISCUSSIONS 16. In view of the governance problems and slippages in program implementation in 1998, the policy discussions focused mainly on the need to take immediate and strong corrective actions. The mission stressed the need to resolve the governance issues. In particubu, it was urgent to (i) enter as soon as possible into negotiations with the GGC in order to find a mutually agreeable solution to the present difficulties; (ii) end government involvement in crop marketing; and, (iii) My disclose all government financial operations and debts, including any extrabudgetary expenditures. In addition, credible actions must be taken to prevent a recurrence of these governance problems. As regards economic and financial policies, the focus of the discussion *aas on reducing the serious financial imbalances, notably by tightening the fiscal stance, and on accelerating and deepening structural reforms. 17. The Gambian authorities have begun to address the problems in the groundnut sector. A cabinet committee has been set up in order to fully involve the government in-these efforts. Discussions with the GGC have been opened, in the context of which the European Union has offered to provide technical assistance, to inter alia push for greater competition in groundnut marketing arrangements. To strengthen the coherence and credibility of government policies, henceforth ah government decisions will be taken by the cabinet, relying for advice on economic and financial affairs on the expertise of the Department of State for Finance and Economic Affairs, the CBG, and the Attorney General’s office. To improve the government’s capacity for policy implementation, particularly in those areas where slippages had occurred, the authorities requested Fund technical assistance in customs administration and expenditure control. 18. The mission discussed with the authorities a macroeconomic framework that projected real GDP growth in 1999 at about 4 percent, lower than the initial projection. In view of the significant expansion of broad money in 1997 and 1998, the average annual inflation rate could increase to about 2% percent. Details of the measures to support these objectives, as well as to achieve some improvement in the external current account deficit while maintaining adequate gross o5cial reserves, are outlined below. A. Fiscal Policy 19. The 1999 budget needs to be strengthened in order to increase government savings and to sharply curtail the growth and then reduce the stock of the domestic public debt, The original government budget for 1999, which was adopted by the National Assembly in early January, targeted an increase in the basic primary surplus of the central government of almost 1% percentage points to about 7 percent of GDP, and a reduction of the domestic public debt of some D 42 million. However, this budget did not fully incorporate the potential impact of a number of factors, including the reduction of the maximum import tariff rate to 20 percent as of January 1, 1999 (Box 1) and the sharp reduction of taxes on petroleum products aimed at passing Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicBox 1. Txx 1998 .um 1999 T- Rsaoa~s At end-1997, The Gambia’s tariff tictwe consisted of30 tariff bands, applying ta about 5,000 tariff lines. Tariff rates ranged fmm zero percent (on capital goods. raw materials. and govemmcnt imports) to a maximum of 90 puunt. The unwoightcd avenge of statutory tzuiffntcs -13.7 pxcent, and the import-weighted avemge tariff rate was 11 .g percent. There arc no non- tariff bmiers in place and official duty exemptions apply to NGOs, govcmmcnt, par&&Is, diplomat8 md others (for example schools and health). The reform of the extemal tariff sbucturs that was implemented as of July I,1998 has the following fcatulns: . The top tariff rate was reduced to 25 percant. except for tobacco, alcohol. and vehicles (which are subject to maximum rates in tbc range of 37%7 percent). . The number of tariffbands wss reduced from 30 to lg. . Spccitic duties (on beer, wine. petmlcum, and cigarettes) wrc eliminated. As a result, the untighted average of statutory twiffratea declined to 13.1 percat in 1998, while the import-weighted average dmpped ta 11% pcxcent. The revemu. km is estimated at about D 5% million (1.8 percent of total cue.toms duty). primarily owing ta the diiation ofthc specific rates and the reduction in tariff bands. Complemmtuy measu~c8 to limit -UC losses war. the erkmim of the aales tax of 10 9uccnt to pmfaiinak md ULC mncc rigorous con(ml of duty exeqtians. The 1999 tariffreform comprises the following mcasu~cs: . The top rate for all commodities (including alcohol, vehicles, and tobacco) has been reduced to 20 petcent. . The number of t&T bands has ban cut again fmm 18 to 10, providing for M estimated further reduction of the average statutory briErate to 12.1 percent and of the import tighted average tariff rate to about 10 pwxni At the same time. excise taxes have been intmduced on alcohol, tobacco, md vehiclea, aimed at limiting the potential rcvmuc lars related to the tariff reform to about D 9 million in 1999. through the decline in world market prices. In addition, the 1999 budget was based on what now appear to be overoptimistic assumptions as regards economic growth, as well as external project and budgetary assistance. After taking these factors into account, the basic primary balance in 1999 would remain at its 1998 level of 5% percent of GDP, and the domestic financing needed to cover the fiscal deficit and a reduction of domestic arrears would amount to D 63 million, even more than in 1998. 20. The staffteam strongly argued that the domestic public debt and the interest payments were spiraling out of control and posed an unsustainable burden on the economy and constrained spending on education, health, and basic infrastructure. Thus, the mission proposed a number of measures to enhance revenue and ensure expenditure control (Box 2), in order to increase the basic primary surplus to 6% percent of GDP in 1999 and, in view of the likely absence of budgetary assistance, to limit bank financing of the budget to D 8 miNion. The authorities agreed with the need to meet these objectives and indicated that in executing their budget for the remainder of 1999 they would take any measures needed to remain as close as possible to these targets. However, at the time of the discussions, they were not in a position to commit themselves to the details of the proposed measures. 21. On the revenue side, the revisions in the original 1999 budget estimates indicate that total government revenue would reach a level equivalent to 18% percent of GDP, below the initial Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-ll- Box 2. PaoPoseo -ANDExP~~M- ma 1999 The revenue musums rcoommcnded by the staff for 1999 UC as follows: : Maintain the tax collcotion cfforl with regard to pasaxl and w’porate taxation (about D 8% million) and increase the expatriate payroll tax in line with the doubling of rates (D 5% million). . Strengthen the colkction of domestic sales tax (D 4% million). . Strengthen mmagsmcnt and 00Ucotion capacity at cuntoms, reduce the number of goods subject to the zcm duty rate. and eliminate duty waivers ta individuals and reduce them signiticantly ta other mtitiss. with a view to limiting the revenue loss Gem the twitTrcfoml. . Strengthen the sales tax office at Customs (D 19% million). . Rescind the measure ta abolish the sales tax on kerosene, and limit the reduction of the flumam (a variable stabiiliition tax) on gas oil and kerosene. in order to limit the revenue loss on petroleum products to D 171% million. The following expendltwe measures am rccammendsd: . Ensure that govanment officials do not make any spending commitments outside the nomul budgetary procedures. All supplementary appmptiatiom ta tbr. budget must be appmved by the National Assembly. . Ensurs that all budgetary expenditures are appmved by internal auditors, in conformity with the approved budgetary allocations, and strengthen tbc internal monitoring cqacity of the Dcparbnmt of the Accountant General. . Limit the wage bill to D 297 million (6.3 percent of GDP). . Strictly mntin nonpriority spending. . Limit domestically financed public bwestment expenditures to D 45 million. program target. This revised revenue level takes into account the potential revenue losses related to the tariff reform, the tax reduction on petroleum products, the lower nontax receipts due to a more realistic estimate of government services and charges, and the smaller than expected transfer of profit from the CBG. The mission urged the authorities to undertake a number of tax measures that would raise total revenue by 1 percentage point to 19% percent of GDP, Vi of 1 percentage point higher than the level in 1998. 22. The expenditure measures recommended for 1999 are aimed at ensuring that total government expenditure and net lending (excluding interest payments and foreign-financed public investment) do not exceed the budgeted amount of D 597 million (12.7 percent of GDP). In particular, a tight wage and recruitment policy should ensure that the wage bill remains below the ceiling of D 297 million. Clear expenditure priorities will need to be established to ensure the strict containment of nonpriority spending, in particular on travel. Current expenditure on health and education would increase slightly to 39 percent of noninterest current expenditure in 1999. Furthermore, the staff urged the authorities to strengthen the methods of programming, executing, and monitoring public investment in 1999, while taking fill account of recurrent expenditure implications, within the framework of the three-year rolling public investment program. In view of the experience in 1998, the mission considered that the projected level of foreign-financed public investment needed to be revised downward from the initially programmed amount of D 284% million to D 225 million, Implementation of the measures described above would lead to a significant reduction in domestic financing needs and domestic interest payments in 1999. On this basis, the overall budget deficit, excluding grants, would be reduced from 4% percent of GDP in 1998 to a more sustainable level of about 2% percent in 1999, leaving Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12- room to reduce the stock of domestic payments arrears by D 8 million. The mission urged the authorities to avoid accumulation of any new payments arrears and to reduce the debt-related nonperforming bank loans of the ex-GCU as planned. Finally, the financial implications of reaching an agreement with the GGC on its seizure and the outstanding government debt would need to be included in the budget, once these became clear. B. Monetary and Financial Sector Policies 23. The mission assisted the authorities in preparing a monetary program for 1999 consistent with keeping average annual inflation below 3 percent and supporting the official external reserves position. This program aims at limiting the growth of broad money in 1999 to no more than 7 percent, in line with the projected growth of nominal GDP, through a tight control of reserve money growth.’ The net domestic assets of the CBG are projected to increase only moderately over the year, thereby limiting the deterioration in the net foreign assets position. On the basis of the proposed fiscal consolidation in 1999, net bank credit to the government would increase only marginally, thus making room for an expansion of credit to the private sector of some 11% percent as well as some scope for interest rates to decline further. Reflecting the expected increase in private sector confidence, the reserve money multiplier is projected to increase from 2.5 to 2.7. 24. The mission welcomed the actions taken to improve the finctioning of financial markets. In addition, and in line with the recommendation of the recent Fund technical assistance mission, it stressed the need to: (i) increase the frequency of treasury biil auctions; (ii) use the bank rate as a signaling rate; (iii) promote the fiuther development of the interbank markets; (iv) remove the floor on bank deposit rates; (v) allow foreign currency-denominated deposits at commercial banks; and, (vi) prepare the introduction of repurchase agreements with commercial banks. The authorities reaffirmed their commitment to implementing financial reforms and explained that while the average capital adequacy ratio for banks was 14 percent at end-1998 and their average liquidity ratio was 62 percent (required reserves are currently 30 percent), they would remain especially vigilant in supervising the weaker institutions. C. Structural Reforms 25. The mission strongly urged the authorities to take determined steps to resolve the existing governance issues and strengthen the mle of law in economic and financial affairs. In this context, the fimctioning of the judicial system needs to be reinforced by increasing the budgetary allocations for the justice administration and better training ofjudges in commercial matters. The modemization of business-related legislation needs to be speeded up while following closely the harmonization efforts undertaken at the regional level, particularly in connection with the general business’ law (OHADA Treaty) and insurance law (CIMA Code). Furthermore, the ’ Thus, the velocity of circulation of broad money would remain at 3.4 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13 - staffteam recommended that the authorities streamline the regulatory framework and establish a one-stop investment center. The mission strongly advised against creating additional distortions by bestowing a special status on selected investors and granting them significant tax privileges. Instead, it proposed integrating investment incentives into the tax code by putting in place facilities for accelerated depreciation and loss compensation, and, for new enterprises, by phasing in the existing corporate tax over a limited number of years. Finally, the mission stressed the need to promptly adopt, in consultation with the World Bank, the new procurement code, with a view to ensuring greater transparency and efficiency in government purchases. 26. Following the reduction of the mavimum duty rate to 20 percent and the introduction of excise taxes on alcohol, tobacco, and vehicles as of January 1, 1999, the authorities have indicated their intention to further simplify the tariff structure in 2000, taking into account the planned introduction of a common external tariff in the member countries of the West African Economic and Monetary Union (WABMU):The envisaged tariff system would comprise a maximum of three or four import duties, with duty rates ranging from zero percent to a maximum of less than 20 percent. Import duties would be based on an economic classification of products, and the zero duty rate would be applied to a limited number of essential goods only. At the same time, to partially compensate for the negative impact on government revenue, the sales tax will need to be broadly based and all duty waivers not required by international treaties abolished. The mission urged the authorities to place a ceiling on the existing variable stabiiization tax on petroleum products, in addition to maintaining the existing floor of zero, in order to let retail prices better adjust to changes in world market prices. Meanwhile, retail price fluctuations would be dampened somewhat and an adequate level of government revenue safeguarded. 27. Regarding the public enterprises, the mission strongly urged the authorities to prepare and adopt, by end-July 1999 and in consultation with the Fund and the World Bank, a comprehensive and clearly defined divestiture and regulatory strategy. Such a strategy should open up the energy and telecommunications sub-sectors and the port for private sector participation, as well as the hotel and transport sectors through the privatization of public enterprises. In addition, the strategy should outline the legal and regulatory framework for these operations, in order to ensure that the divestiture process is transparent and efficient, and will increase competition and improve economic performance in key sectors of the economy. The staff team also stressed the need to rigorously implement the terms of the memoranda of understanding that had been agreed upon between the government and a number of public enterprises in 1998. It is crucial that the government take all necessary measures to prevent any further accumulation of payments arrears, and that all public enterprises fully meet their tax, debt service, and dividend obligations. Concerning the national electricity and water company (NAWEC) and the national telecommunications company (GAMTEL), the mission strongly advised the government to postpone further piecemeal divestiture operations, so that these can be undertaken within the framework of the new divestiture strategy. In the meantime, the staff team encouraged the authorities to separate GAMTEL’s telecommunications business from its broadcasting activities. 28. In agriculture, the first priority is to ensure, in close consultation with the private sector and donors, that the present difficulties in the groundnut sector do not disrupt the production and Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14- marketing of the 1999/2000 crop. In particular, it is important for the government to disengage itselffiom groundnut marketing and to safeguard the tie-e access of private and foreign marketing companies, At the same time, producer prices for groundnuts should be allowed to move in line with world market prices, without further government subsidies. The mission also encouraged the authorities to continue supporting the Agribusiness Service Center Association in its efforts to introduce new seed varieties and develop a commercially managed agricultural credit system. Concerning the fishing sector, the staffteam recommended that the government help eliminate the structural bottlenecks that plagued the sector, including by exploring the feasibility of creating a fishing harbor, but without directly interfering in the core activities. IV. EXTERNALSE~~ORPOLICIESANDPROSPE~~ 29. The mission welcomed the government’s firm commitment to maintaining The Gambia’s liberal trade and exchange system. In particular, the tariffreforms implemented in 1998-99 and the further measures envisaged for 2000 should bring the Gambian tariff regime in line with the tariff reforms taking place in the WAJMU countries. The market-based flexible exchange rate policy has served the economy well and needs to be maintained. The authorities indicated that they continue to pursue the objectives of minimizing external reserves losses and moderating the fluctuations in the exchange rate of the dalasi. The mission considered these goals to be attainable, provided that the authorities implemented the measures discussed above to ensure prudent financial policy. In this context, the CBG envisaged staying with its current policy course of limiting official interventions in the foreign exchange market to meet its external reserves objective and to smooth short-term exchange rate fluctuations. However, activity in the interbank foreign exchange market has been limited as authorized dealers avoid revealing their financial position to each other and rarely deal among themselves, preferring instead to deal with the CBG and, on occasion, with the parallel market. Nonetheless, the CBG considered that the foreign exchange market operated reasonably well, as the 3 percent spread between the interbank and parallel market exchange rates reflects the limited competition in the former and the efficiency of The Gambia’s informal market. The authorities concurred with the mission’s view that the ltmctioning of the interbank foreign exchange market needed to be strengthened. To this end, the ongoing reform in the financial sector and the implementation of the recommendations of the recent Fund technical assistance mission were considered to be important steps that, together with increased competition, should gradually broaden and deepen financial markets and improve their efficiency. 30. The authorities reported that, despite the loss of competitiveness following the 1994 devaluation of the CFA franc, the tourism and reexports sectors had recovered and were expected to continue to grow steadily in the near future. The authorities considered the current level of the foreign exchange rate of the dalasi to be appropriate; this assessment was based on the relative stability of the CPI-based real effective exchange rate in recent years, the prevailing low inflation rate, and the absence of strong, persistent downward pressures on the daiasi. The mission concurred with this assessment, underscoring the urgent need to ensure the implementation of sufficiently tight financial policies that would help alleviate exchange rate pressures and achieve the external sector objectives. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-lS- 31. The medium-term balance of payments projections have been updated on the basis of recent developments and the latest World Economic Gutlook projections. The baseline scenario assumes a modest growth of the reexport trade and groundnut shipments, as well as an increase in tourism receipts at an average annual rate of about 6 percent. These projections reflect the recent completion of int?astructure projects (the airport and in the port of Banjul) and the ongoing efforts to gradually improve utilities, but still guarded private investment activities. Against this background, and assuming that the authorities implement the policies described above, the external current account deficit (excluding official transfers) would narrow steadily from 10% percent of GDP in 1999 to about 9 percent in 2001, and eventually decline to ahout 7% percent by 2003 (Table 9). Export volumes are projected to increase at an average annual rate of about 4 percent during the period 1999-2003. Import volume growth would be modest, at about an average annual rate of 3% percent over the same period. The terms of trade are expected to deteriorate substantially in 1999 owing to projected lower export commodity prices, but will remain relatively stable afler that. These projections are based on a modest increase of project assistance and do not assume additional exceptional assistance. 32. Alternative projection scenarios have been prepared to illustrate the sensitivity of the underlying assumptions, notably with regard to the reexport trade and crude oil and groundnut prices. In particular, either a fall in reexports to 10 percent below baseline projections or an increase in crude oil prices of some 20 percent would cause the current account deficit to widen by about 1 percent of GDP by 2003. Alternatively, if groundnut prices were 10 percent higher than assumed in the baseline projections, the current account deficit would be marginally smaller. 33. While The Gambia’s compilation and management of external debt have improved, the authorities recognixe the continued need to improve the data system. To this effect, the World Bank has provided technical assistance in the form of a short-term expert together with a commitment to upgrade some of the equipment. The authorities concurred with the mission’s view that The Gambia needed to continue to manage its external debt prudently and rely exclusively on external grants or long-term loans on highly concessional terms. Moreover, the government was urged to continue to meet its external debt service obligations in a timely manner and to speed up the ongoing discussions to reach an agreement with the Norwegian authorities on the debt arising from a government-guaranteed loan to the Senegambia Beach Hotel. 34. A detailed debt sustainability analysis exercise for The Gambia was undertaken in 1998 (EBS/98/102; a/15/98), and an update, based on aggregate data, indicates that for end-1998, the net present value of debt stock and debt service amounted to 105 percent and 9% percent of exports of goods and nonfactor services, respectively. By 2001, these ratios would decline to 90 percent for the net present value of the debt stock and 8.2 percent for the debt service (Table 10). On this basis, the country’s external debt is sustainable under the parameters used in the context of the Initiative for Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC). However, external debt obligations continue to represent a heavy fiscal burden for The Gambia: over the 1998-2001 period, the ratio of scheduled debt-service obligations to total government revenue is projected to average 22% percent. Repayments to the Fund remain relatively small and would decline in relation to projected exports of goods and non-factor services from 2.7 percent in 1998 to Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 16 - 0.1 percent by 2003. On this basis, and taking into account the anticipated improvement in the country’s balance of payments and fiscal positions, as well as its good record of payments to the Fund, The Gambia can be expected to continue to meet its fbture obligations to the Fund in a timely manner. 35. In view of the large and growing domestic debt burden on the budget, a medium term assessment of its impact has been undertaken. Key assumptions are that prudent fiscal policies would result in a surplus of about % percent of GDP in 2003, and permit monetary policies to relax somewhat and allow nominal interest rates to decline from the current level of 14 percent to around 8 percent (Table 11). On this basis, domestic interest payments would decline from 21% percent of domestic revenue in 1998 to slightly over 5 percent in 2003, and domestic debt would decline from 25 percent of GDP in 1999 to 13 percent in 2003. Possible domestic debt restructuring is contingent on the implementation of a comprehensive privatization program, likely donor assistance, and a strong commitment to rein in public finances. 36. Details of the social strategy of The Gambia, which aims at developing human resources and poverty alleviation, are provided in the PFP (EBD/98/60). The government is implementing its National Education Policy with a view to significantly raising enrollment rates in basic education. Additional steps are underway to improve access to health care; promote the distribution of generic drugs; and enlarge the role of the private sector in the provision of tertiary health care. v. STAFF zb’F’RAL%L 37. Since mid-1997, The Gambian economy has shown some signs of recovery, aided by the resumption of prudent macroeconomic policies and reform, partly in the context of the ESAF- supported economic program launched in June 1998. while a number of economic. developments during 1998 were broadly encouraging, owing to favorable weather conditions and the tightening of fiscal policies through September, the slippages during the last quarter resulted in a worrisome fiscal outturn for the year as a whole and contributed to the nonobservance of some of the performance criteria under the ESAF-supported program. The government’s seizure of the assets of the GGC-an enterprise of major economic importance-created a serious confidence problem for private investors. These circumstances precluded the finahzation of discussions on completion of the midterm review of the first annual arrangement under the ESAF. These developments and the continuation of the current policy stance threaten to undo the gains that have been achieved in the last two years and could also derail the medium-term economic and financial strategy. The latter aims at consolidating government finances and reducing the government’s domestic debt, while strengthening the implementation of structural reforms to promote private sector activity, Thus, to prevent further damage to the economy and rebuild confidence, strong corrective measures need to be taken without delay. 38. In particular, the staff strongly urges the authorities to expeditiously undertake the following measures: Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17- Resolve the governance issues by pursuing the negotiations with the GGC in order to find a mutually agreeable solution to the present difliculties; disengage the government from direct involvement in groundnut crop marketing; and tUly disclose all government financial operations and debts, including any extrabudgetary expenditures. The staffwelcomes the setting up by the authorities of a cabinet committee, which has been empowered to resolve these issues, and the commitment to better coordinate economic policies in the future as well as to strengthen the judiciary. These actions are steps in the right direction to build confidence and prevent recurrence of such governance issues. Given the importance of the groundnut sector in the economy, it is important that progress be timely in this area to prevent interference with the marketing of the 1999/2000 crop. Pursue focal retrenchment through the implementation of supplementary measures to strengthen the 1999 budget. This is essential not only to take account of the impact of recent developments-including the reduction in the maximum import tariE rate to 20 percent in JanuaryAut also to bring the overall stance of fiscal policy in line with the stated objectives. On the revenue side, the staffrecommends upward adjustments in the taxation of petroleum products; a strengthening of the income, customs, and sales tax administration; and a reduction in customs exemptions. On the expenditure side, it will be essential to contain recruitment and public sector wages and to curb nonpriority outlays, while providing adequately for priority sectors like education, health, the judiciary, and investment in infrastructure. The investment budget itself is in need of pruning and better programming, to fully take account of recurrent expenditure implications. Together, these measures would trim the overall budget deficit (excluding grants) to 2%‘~ percent of GDP in 1999 and pave the way for a significant reduction in government domestic financing needs, domestic interest payments, and arrears. Moreover, these actions would start the process of slowing-and eventually halting-the snowballing domestic debt and facilitate economic stabilisation. The staffurges the authorities to incorporate tilly into the budget the financial implications of their reaching an agreement with the GGC on the seizure of its property and the outstanding government debt. Maintain tight monetary policy in 1999 by controlling strictly reserve money growth, through the use of the indirect instruments at their disposal, while keeping a lid on intlation. Continue with reforms to strengthen the financial sector. The CBG’s interventions in the foreign exchange market should continue to be guided solely by its foreign reserve target and the need to smooth short-term exchange rate fluctuations. The StafFconcurs with the authorities that the current level of the exchange rate is appropriate and The Gambia remains broadly competitive. It welcomes the actions taken to improve the functioning of financial markets and urges the authorities to press ahead with the implementation of the recommendations by the recent Fund technical assistance mission to strengthen the financial markets and tinancial institution supervision. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 18- . Maintain the progress made in tariff reforms to ensure that The Gambia keeps pace with the reforms envisaged in the neighboring countries. l Continue with the implementation of other structural relorms to create an environment conducive to private sector activity. The key reforms include the enhancement of competition in groundnut marketing; the incorporation of transparent and nondiscriminatory investment incentives in the tax code; the adoption of a procurement code; and implementation of a clearly defined divestiture and regulatory strategy for the public enterprise sector, in consultation with the Fund and the World Bank. 39. This set of measures and reforms is essential to restore confidence, reestablish control over the domestic financial situation, and enhance the prospects of reducing poverty through higher economic growth. Moreover, significant progress in its implementation should provide a test of the authorities’ resolve, as w&II as a basis for resuming discussions on the second annual ESAF arrangement, which the staff supports. At the same time, it would be an important factor in seeking a normalization of relations with donors and a resumption of their assistance, which is critical to The Gambia achieving its medium-term economic objectives. 40. In view of the substantial weaknesses in The Gambia’s economic and financial database, especially in the areas of national accounts, balance of payments, and external debt, as well as the need to prepare for the year 2000 transition, the staffwelcomes the continued efforts by the . authorities to address these issues. These include the ongoing use of a short-term expert to upgrade data on external debt, the implementation of Fund technical assistance recommendations in the financial sector, and the recent fiuther requests for Fund and World Bank technical assistance. While data provision to the Fund does not prevent effective surveillance, the reporting delays and poor quality of some data makes it difficult to analyze economic developments. 41. It is proposed that the next Article IV consultation with The Gambia be held on the standard 12-month cycle. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 19 - Figure 1. The Gambia: Selected Economic Indicators, 1991/92-1999 l/ -. Output and Prices (Percent change) 5. ‘., ‘\ ..lr;- . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 ‘,\J “‘.j ..,..... .“’ ,, .,,,,, ., ,,, ,,, 0 \ /p/T ‘i,/ II Real CLIP -5 91/92 93/94 95/96 97 96 99 I 20 'I ~.,,,,,,,(,,,,..~~~~..,.,,.,..,,,..~... I,,,,.,,""' Total re”e,va 5 10 10 Basic primary bnhlce .' . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..~._........ "-.."'."'. " Ovenrll bdanm O 0 O Iy;;-J-py- -10 :I -10 -5 j Gyiiiiti~, 1 2. 91/92 93/94 95/96 97 98 99 20 Balance of Payments 15. (In percent of GDP) 20 ‘65 Monetary Developments 15 (Percent change) Not domshc wsets z/ : t7nns/er8) official transfers) official -20 1 65 45 25 5 -15 -35 -55 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicFigure 2. The Gambia: Exchange Rate Developments, January 1985January 1999 (Indices, 1990=100) 350 - 300 I 198.5 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 19959" 145 - Bi~leml l-cd e/lecttvo I edtang lute dth smgd _. (right male) i 2 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 21 - Tabk 1. The Gambia: QudMive Porfcmuncs Crikxia and Bendam* Undorlhe First Annwl Arrangement Undnrlhc Enhanced St~*rsl Adjudmmt Facility, Apil I, 1998 -March 3 I, 1999 -128 -357 2 2M.I 00 00 59.7 0.0 00 799.5 269.3 (Lnrmlli0.u of &hu: chqe hm kgLTmq ofsderh yced 159 -28.2 364 00 0.0 0.5 oil 0.0 193.2 88.7 0.0 119 -28.1 58.2 00 00 0.0 00 ,972 81.8 0.0 5.8 6 5 19.8 31 5 -17 4 .I,.7 -559 -712 -118 .6, -1211 -124 139 5 143.0 209.8 209.8 196.1 312 (I 00 0.0 0.0 00 0.0 oil 0.0 00 00 00 0.0 00 (In millimu 0fsm.x chmgs hnl tGgN!mc ofsalondar y”, 4.2 0 4 -0.9 -l.l 2 1 3 9 0.0 00 00 00 00 00 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 00 00 (hma,ioN of6ala.l. Ehmp frmnbe~~o~l.“~y~~ 422.5 4142 628.7 628.7 6024 8691 146.3 147.6 203 9 203.9 208.3 2762 -13 8 -34 5 3120 00 00 4.0 0.0 0.0 869 5 276.2 25 6 -20 0 ,380 25, I 12.0 00 63 0.0 0.0 831.5 282.9 25.6 106 -32 8 62 6 00 0.0 L1 00 00 2361 924 0.0 6, Ihc floor wdl be sdjyIt.d upward by the anmnt oI*xtd bud@my vmLIvlr0 i9 GUS d&at p-d. h went da hddl m uIcr~A budwtmy uwtanco Cc3 d&d ahavs,, tie nom wa b. Pdjwd dowmrard by he Mlowt dUls shmuall. 7, B*ma, Locn. contrasted m g”erenti oticr lhm th.no wuh p”l aiemenu+A34 oy”na,e”t fo 35 prrcsn, of mom, S.IC”I.L.d vi”g 8 duc”unt rate bad on OBCLI c.,““ncnc*I vltuost refcrrncc rater 8, rm”cludmg nomad lmpaatr*l.tad cd*. Yilllol”dmg planu, benI. and debt rs,lsf but a.hdiipm,cc, ad. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 22 - Table 2. The Gambia: StrwW’al Performance Criteria and Benchmarks Under the First Annual Arrangement Under the Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility, April 1, 1998~March 31, 1999 M&%WtW Date StatuS Stmctural performance criteria Reduction of the maximum duty rate to 25 percent (except for alcohol, tobacco, and vehicles) and of the number of impoa duties to 19 July 1,1998 Respeaed Adoption of a new divestiture strategy for the public End-November 1998 Draftreceived enterprise sector October 5, 1998 Structural benchmarks Extension of the sales tax to professionals End-June 1998 Implemented August 17, 1998 Completion of a study on the price and taxation stmctore of petroleum products, with a view to adjusting retail prices to changes in world market prices End-June 1998 Respected Unification of reserve requirements and exclusion of interbank deposits from the deposit base End-June 1998 Reaching of an agreement with the commercial banks on a program for foII reserve provisioning Adoption of a new procurement code Establishment of a commercial chamber in the High Court Implementation of a new investment incentives system Adoption of a three-year public investment program for 1999-2001 End-June 1998 Implemented December 1998 End-September 1998 End-October 1998 End-December 1998 End-December 1998 In progress Respected In progress Respected Offer of Trust Bank for sale End-December 1998 Implemented August 1998 Q:\DATA\GMBWISSION99FBB\SR99FEB\T2_strus 5117199 11:02 AM Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 23 - Thk 3. mc omnbu: se,cctd EEontic alId FM Jndiulma, ,994,9~.,999 I, lRUPJ 199%96 1996197 I597 ,998 I959 Elf. Flog. Pod Pm% Fmj N.aaulranad~r GDP.tcmmbn,pi,m ODP d4mm cc.numowcnax(pcncd.*, Cauunrrpticndu~mdofpnod) 1.9 21 28 01 .i: .26 2 -7 6 loll :i 11 1 -6 3 151 .35.9 I59 *.a 2;; 35 160 :; :: III t.;: :: .;: -3 I .I33 .:: 3.7 i: 191 127 2.: 12.6 8.2 44 -II 4 -97 :: 194 71 I* .ll8 -6 7 lDl.0 17 I8 :: 23.7 16.1 II 1 172 .9 4 -1 2 -1.6 .i.“, 2: .I 9 .I 7 ,:.; ,:: 181 ,:I 7.4 14.5 9.2 12 4, -2 5 57 3:: I? 111 -112 .3 9 102.9 (Inpse”f Olupore and m”dmrmc, 18, 162 131 13.J 10.9 10.2 I44 118 89 91 8.2 71 (,llMUiau Of mEA ude” alh- uldlnr4 48 :: 10 31 I.8 :‘, -3 9 88 :: 77 .:; ;.; II 198 1;; 106 15.6 10., II -2 9 .I 7 7.4 3.4 199 .:: -102 a2 Km9 2 .)08 .I34 -%3 -3II -330 .J..Z -311 -106 -316 .I90 -llO -133 -120 -112 6:; 124 701 4 6:: ,‘,i 7:: 82 19 I2 JI 16 56 12 60 ;“: :: :: 91 I., 4 4 106 I.5 O.! 49 :: :: II 178 1:: 71 136 99 1.6 .I6 -13 6.8 1:: :: -IO, 9:.: 96 1.4 .34 I -139 .I 1 71 I 17 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 24 - Table 4. The Gambia: Selected National Accounts Indicators, 1994/95 - 1999 I/ 1994195 1995196 1996197 1997 1998 1999 Est. Pmg. Est. Prog. Pmj Primary sector -0.4 5.7 -11.1 1.4 4.3 2.7 4.9 4.7 Groundnuts 5.3 -7.0 -39.0 70.5 4.0 7.1 5.0 5.0 other crops -5.7 13.5 -9.4 -16.4 3.6 8.4 4.5 4.5 Livestock 3.3 4.8 4.0 4.0 5.0 4.0 5.0 4.0 FOreStry 4.0 5.0 4.2 4.4 4.0 3.9 4.0 4.0 Fisheries I.0 6.3 7.0 -13.4 6.0 .48.3 6.0 10.0 Secondary sector -10.4 4.1 2.3 1.4 3.3 5.3 5.0 3.3 Manufacturing 0.7 -0.8 0.9 I.5 3.5 2.5 5.0 2.5 Constuction and mining -23.8 II.0 3.7 -1.2 3.5 7.8 5.0 4.0 Electricity and water 3.5 4.5 5.6 20.4 3.5 10.0 5.0 4.0 -feniary sec,o, -30 3.4 4.9 7.2 3.7 5.8 4.6 4.2 Trade 1.3 -7.8 -0.7 2.8 4.0 6.6 5.1 4.6 Groundnut trade 1.9 -19.7 6.2 4.3 7.1 6.1 8.3 7.1 Other trade 63.1 -26.6 -17.3 6.9 7.3 9.7 8.5 7.3 Hotels and restaurants -52.3 68.0 14.5 10.3 5.7 14.6 5.5 6.5 Transport and communication 7.9 II.5 8.8 II.8 4.5 6.0 5.0 5.0 Business services and housing 0.7 2.4 3.6 3.6 4.8 I.0 6.6 2.5 Government services 0.8 1.6 2.4 5.4 0.2 4.0 1.7 2.5 Other services 2l -9.3 -6. I 0.3 1.0 3.5 1.5 5.0 1.5 GDP (constant prices) -3.4 5.3 0.8 4.9 3.8 4.7 4.8 4.2 GDP deflator 4.4 3.3 4.5 2.3 2.1 1.8 2.7 2.3 Cjmss domestic investment 16.0 23.4 Government 6.1 12.9 Nongovcmment 9.9 10.5 Gross domestic savings 3.5 2.9 GOVWNll~~t 1.9 I.3 Nongovernment I.6 1.6 Investment-saving balance Government Nongovernment -12.5 -20.5 -4.2 -11.6 -8.2 -8.9 External current account balance 3/ -4.3 II.7 -13.4 10.0 Gross national savings (Annual percentage change) 19.8 17.8 6.9 5.7 12.9 12.1 10.6 1.5 4.5 3.6 6.1 3.8 -9.2 .lO.3 -2.4 -2.1 -6.8 -8.3 -42 -4.2 15.6 13.6 (In percent of nominal GDP) 19.3 17.2 18.7 18.4 12.7 8.4 6.9 5.9 6.6 8.8 II.8 12.5 6.0 7.1 9.6 7.4 2.1 I.6 3.6 2.0 3.9 5.6 6.0 5.4 -13.3 -10.1 -9.1 -10.9 -10.6 -6.9 -3.3 -3.9 -2.7 -3.2 -5.8 -7.1 -6.7 -3.8 -4.3 -3.9 12.6 13.5 14.4 14.5 Sources: The Gambian authorities; and staff estimates and projections I: Until 1996197, fiscal years (July-June); from 1997, calendar years. 21 Includes banking and insurance; imputed bank service charges; personal and household services; and social, recreational, and related services. 31 Includes oficial eansfcrs. Q:\DATA\GMB\Mission99Fcb\sr99feb\Tablc 4 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 25 - Table 5. The C)ambi~ CenU.L owmmmu Fnunclal opu.lrmu, 1s9u95 ,999 I, 1$99MI Is9,Iw 19%Fp, ,997 lPD8 ,999 Elt. SIP. Dec. Pro‘ rm.l PIDl. Pm,. Eat Pmg PA IR1.5 ml.4 801.4 291.6 291.0 291.0 281 I 2868 2Sl.S 201.1 2221.6 221.6 II 0 16.2 16.1 llO.4 L61.4 L61.1 00 00 0.0 lw.o 6119 2,o.c 129.1 6699 210.0 1815 618.9 221.0 rz6.0 407, ,640 18.1 1118 61.0 450 450 450 0.0 -29.1 .,:.: .,:.; L31.8 -5m.s .,?I., .IP., -,12.0 -19.1 -15.0 -250 6.1 6.8 19, 18.6 0.0 -LlS O’J -106 .10.0 .LO.P J.0 0 0 0.0 0.0 -114.8 -3712 -161.7 -2325 -1222 -129.1 -1.5.1 .,33.0 ll4B 212.5 129 I I.1 171.9 171 111.! 1M.l 118.6 111.5 ,591 138.6 0.0 00 0.0 0.0 -1124 .z: .8F.i 0.0 00 0.0 ,I 0.l 00 00 0.0 Ia97 161 4 71.0 ;; 13.3 718 II9 7*1 I,., 68 1 15.1 L9.8 .I,, .!I’ -200 16.9 9x1 16.9 ,7.J 23.6 89.2 21.6 86.1 II 00 00 0.c 00 0.0 0.0 11.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 00 0.0 00 2x5 00 1.492.0 1.8001 ,.00,6 1.111.2 6,426d 1.m1.1 4.126.4 4,424, II.5 32.6 43.3 42.6 40.8 177.8 181% 201.4 2111 198.3 6786 826.4 868.7 1,0,81 :: 1.::: 4.x2.5 ,,,iJ.O 1,115 9 4O.l 227.4 227.4 ,,o*.o 0” pcm”t DfGDP, ““Le” olh”ru, nd.e.1.d) 19, ll,, 194 19.3 ,*.2 11.6 196 I8.8 19.9 19.8 191 227 IO, 22.1 121 12.7 121 -19 .x2, .I!., -7s -14 -11 40 -4, .11 -9.9 -97 .6, -24 -2, .>I -2, :: :; :.: 4.9 II OI I.3 :.: 2 :: 214 184 212 22.7 L66 IS.5 226 200 160 11.9 I,., 14.2 IO5 IO.? 142 12.9 II4 IPI 211 236 21.9 25 9 11.2 20.7 206 14 6 ,,.I 12.8 24 8 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 26 - TabIs 6. IlIe Gambia: Monetary sumy, June ,995.Dsccmba ,999 ,991 15% 15% 1597 ,997 ,598 ,599 hnr ho kc mr kc ho ,un kc Des P-C P’OB E k Pm, 6164 621 I -7 7 2lJ.l 31, I -14,s 451.1 -961 811 I 107 1 624 1 1.192 0 0% 12 27 :: 9.3 89 .08 89 11.9 11.2 7, I 30 81 3 41.7 785‘ 7152 404 ,,9* 261.5 .71 I 139 6 -1.67 97348 111 I 69, I 1.800 I S.8 42 10 .:: -25 I II I 20, .I, I 233 101 767 0.0 907 51.0 711 I 767 6 -11.0 22s I I,,, -15 9 1S16 -17 7 97, 0 2110 7110 !.128 0 7.1 19 25 z.: -1 I 7.6 ,2 II 161 15 I II * 19 BP2 110 %I68 8116 4.2 218 6 111 3 48 6 x9.9 -12.7 i.0554 2445 81, 0 4.001 6 53 3.8 2.7 16 I II9 1z.i 1:: 23 2 10 I 76.8 I+ IOP.1 16.8 4.151.2 86 1.5 2.4 22 1 Z6 8 17.1 $55 1:: 101 41 I 697 25 ,091 197 4.1x.4 10.6 3.5 21 1:: 111 15 ., 1 97 26 3 15, 11.7 II Ill.5 19 I 6X 6 899 9 -44.3 4ill 467.1 -24 I 191 5 .I, I 1.27, 0 ,,I I 8,‘) 7 4.06 1 6.6 IS 25 :: PI 7.1 :: 100 41.9 700 12 1,s I 61 I 9JI6 1,020 8 -69 3 160 0 181 7 -32 8 514 I -121.7 1.111 6 I.7 6 %40 4,414 I 66 3.4 2.5 102 .I:: 162 II, -1.9 26.5 36 I 71.5 4, I35 0 66.0 916.1 9M1.8 4.3 152.4 101 I -96 9 MO9 -11.7 1.168.‘ 4030 065.9 4,762.! 7.6 I.5 2.5 :: 221 1.6 4% 29 294 4I.l 706 01 128.9 678 911 5 1.000.8 .I,9 1 471.5 Ill8 6 .X8 III.5 -76.8 l.403 4 110 8 1.012 I 4.715 9 66 3.4 27 .z II5 91 -I I *I 210 33.3 710 14 147 I 647 so”rcu nr omlbiul .“thor!tiU. and .utTriam.,u and prcjcclanr I! h&da Chbl 0” public alcqri,cs u I” lux ,598. r-e mqu,mmu were ““it3 l I4 pucr”, Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 27 - - N” forrig” Yleu (0” nl&liiOnr Of SDRI) Farlgn uyu (8” mihns o(SDRI) POXW” lilbill”II (L” rnllllc.m OfSDR3) CI.irn% DWXCU Chinll m P”WL IKv)r chmr on blnh (“a,, u rJ,rh;ch: M.nI b.“k bill, O*n,unw(nn, O,d,M: Ga,RI tank bill, RslWO money CvrrenEy ovtido bank, Bulk rr3~cI Cd7 De@. ,,OCIL”Yd b.“k Nn dor”DUE Lum Danu,r cndit CIcmS on po’munmt (““, ChirnS I*pmu CI.i”u 0” pi”.,. SCloi O,“h~& in foreign cu”~ruy Chirn. on pYb,iC cnterprira ResCr”vcr Net chM 0” cm”., b.“, 21 mu, if”“, (nrt, TOU, drpc.i, ,i*i,itior hm.“d &DoliL3 Swings d&i, 71mo dCpori” - ,996 ,947 ,997 ,991 ,991 Ike Ime DIE ha J”M Da DEC. Dec. Dr. Prop p=% hag PC.j.il 812.6 568 596, 704 -1117 -1*7 42, I -IS, I 469 8 267 6 -737 I 2L1 -I 8 -5 8 110 -17.9 ,893 211.5 111.1 16.6 128.2 109.1 II.5 4.2 .z *oa 119 I 421.2 425 I 3:: 5% 8 01 111.8 .,o:; 8110 117 1 167 6 It460 199 9 63 I 1.086 1 76 I -1*e, .I, 2 -119 I .a668 * -117.2 21 ‘I -52 0 -12 0 787 -219 1101 181 I ,190 110 lll.0 118 I 10.9 44, 61 0 -IN, 9140 l83 1 4121 416.1 42 10 129.0 520 .I101 889 7 291 I 411.2 182 I 9w8 61% 1.1094 154 -118.7 -17.6 4217 -SW I ~469 4 210 -120 -120 7s 7 -119 119 0 4010 lld.0 II 0 in0 128.9 71 443 610 -105 I 1,0101 912 I 171 I 376.5 5;“: 10 116 0 12.0 -110% 961.9 122 6 446.9 1x1 l.OM8 MI l.w91 71.0 -98 3 .64 .476 9 .I,87 -5303 20 1 -29 4 -3s.‘) 619 -28 4 523 9 1SO.8 173.1 146 1% I !,I 4 2s 7 -69 3 R.5 -1421 1.121 * Lo,*.0 IO, 4 IWI 5;; 19 In I 29. -138.7 1,012 I ,046 104 8 XI I Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 28 - T.blc 8. The Ombi.: Behn~c ofPsy,nmti, ,994/95-,999 1, (In millimd 0fSDF.s. tiw otbcwiac imhtcd) Trade balance Exports, f.a.b. Qmuodnuwgmundn”t pmduob otbcr domsrtis expartr P.cupo* bn,mb, hb. Fmcbmmicuas For nrrports Frzor scwics (“et) Nm+acta mviou @et) 0,fIv*,c*: tmvel iwwc Priwte unrquiti lnmfcn (ml) offid UNquitcd tramfen (“et) Current amount balanos Exobldii* affioial tmmfms Inchding a&id fmmf~r# Capital ao~ount Offoial loan. (“d) Project *cl~tcd Pqmm 1cmn! Amortizdtion Private oapihl (net foreign dirrxt invulmmt) Commercial balls (“et) Short-term capital ?.I suppliers OrrAts ovm” bahncz FiMChg cbulge in *osl offi&, MCNU (blcrsars = -) Rcpurcicu’rsppe* @fF) PlrcbnlcdloaM (nvc=) London Club Debt relief Fimnohg gap McmOWdum item: Cumnt aoommt bdmsc (in ,xrac”t of GDP) !Zxduding o&-id lrmsfm Idding oftid trsrufcn Gmaa o&&l rcsclvcI (end OfperiOd) In rdionr of SD% In mmtbr ofimpo*. 0.x D&t-rsrvicc ratio 4, blsbldiig tic Fvnd Eml”dig thc Fund Nmnin.1 ODP Nambul GDP (in millicm of&his) F.zuhn*c rate (blasb pzr SDR, ,997 ,998 Ed. Prog. -49.0 78.8 3.J 6.J 68.8 -127.9 -84.3 43.6 4.0 11.7. 46.0 12.4 20.4 -31.4 -11.0 I5.l 8.4 LS.2 0.0 -6.8 6.2 -0.5 1.6 0.” 4.7 4.7 0.0 -5.1 0.0 0.0 -49.1 91.2 10.4 9.1 71.7 -140.4 -95.0 -45.4 4.1 9.2 51.3 13.1 19.7 -33.0 -13.3 IS.5 10.1 16.9 0.0 -6.9 6.6 -0.5 0.0 -0.7 2.2 -2.2 -7.L -3.6 6.9 0.0 0.5 3, 0.0 0.0 1.6 -10.6 -10.6 -3.7 -4.3 69.6 16.8 5.6 5.6 13.5 10.9 9.2 8.2 291.8 312.6 4.151.2 4.426.4 14.0 L4.2 ,999 ,999 b8. Proj. Swou: Tbc Gambian sulhmiGp; and s~ffutimalcr and projcstionr. li ““Id L9%197, firca, yesm (luly-he); frcm 1997. oalcndu pm */ b~dudbtg cmn* and omiuioru. 31 Forgivmsm of R D 7.2 million herest papcnt by Taiwan Provimc of China, 41 In percent of cxpolts an* tiwd income. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 29 - Table 9. The Gambia: Bdancs 0fRymcnts and Sensitivity Tcru, 1997-2003 ,997 ,998 ,999 2000 2001 2ooz 2003 Ed. he,. Pmj. cwrat lCCDull balsnco, sxduding ceeid tmnsfm (pcmcnt of GDP) Debt-scrviss do 2l GvcnU balrncc (SDR millimu) Grca oftkid c.sUrvsI rnmilliana OfSDlb In moned ofimportr. E.i.f Financing g*p (SDR millions) Rcsxpm, ht. (SDR millions, Groundnut oxpot? price (SDRA psrto”) Cdr. oil prbc (SDRS per bad, Sccnlrio A: 10 pcrc.m ,oucr recxpo* c-t account bdmcc. cxclvding otficial trmdfm (perccnl OiGDP) Debt-rcrvics rho 2.J ovenll tdlncs (SDR rnilhmu, cross afficirl rcfCNCS In milliolu of SDP4 In months of i*po*, c.i.l fimctig gap (SDR maims) RSSxpr(a, f&b. @DR millions) Scenario B: 20 psrcsnl higher cludc oil price Cum”, *EEo”“t bdsncs, excluding official trr~fsra (pcrccnL a*GDP) D&L-scrviec Idi0 .a ovsmll b.hec (SDRmillions, &OS ociicirl NCIVSI In miuionl of SDRa rnmmlthsofimp*,c.i.~ Financing *ap (SDR millimu) CIudc oil prim (SDRs per bard, -10.6 13.5 4.7 69.6 5.6 0.0 68.8 350.7 14.0 -1ll.6 13.5 4.7 69.6 5.6 0.0 68.8 :10.6 13.5 4.7 69.6 5.6 0.0 14.0 Scsmrio c: LO pcrcenl hi&r plndnut oxpon price CulTen, 1EEDunL balms. excluding diicial trrrafcn (pcrcsnt OfCLIP, -10.6 Dsbt-rcrvics ratio U 13.5 Gvcdl balance (SDR milliOru) 4.7 Grora a5ici.l rw.zrvCI In millionr of SDRI 69.6 In month afimparla, c.i.t 5.6 Financing gap (SDR milliom) 0.0 Groudnvt sip” price (SDP.s psrton, 350.7 -11.2 10.2 6.2 75.4 5.2 0.0 82. I 303.4 9.6 -11.2 10.2 6.2 75 4 5.2 00 82.1 -11.2 10.2 6.2 75.4 5.2 0.0 9.6 -,I.2 10.2 6.2 75.4 5.2 0.0 303.4 -10.5 9.6 -1.3 71.1 4.7 0.0 85.7 267.0 8.5 -1U.J 9.6 -1.3 71.1 4.7 0.0 85.7 -IO.5 9.6 -1.3 7L.l 4.7 0.0 8.5 -IO.! 9.6 -1.3 71.1 4.7 0.0 267.0 -10 0 8.3 -0.4 68.9 4.3 0.0 90.9 267.4 9.7 -10.7 8.8 -2.9 66.4 4.3 0.0 81.8 -10.6 5.3 -2.5 66.9 4.2 0.0 11.6 -9.7 8.2 0.5 69.9 4.4 0.0 294. I -9.2 8.8 -0.6 67.6 4.1 0.0 96.0 267.4 10.1 -9.9 9.3 -3.1 62.6 3.9 0.0 86.4 -9.8 8.8 -2.9 63.3 3.8 0.0 LZ.1 -8.9 8.7 0.5 69.7 4.2 0.0 294. L -8.3 8.0 1.5 69.1 4.0 0.0 l0L.l 267.2 10.2 -9.1 8.5 -1.2 61.4 3.6 0.0 91.0 -9.0 8.0 -0.9 62.4 3.5 o.il 12.2 -8.0 s.0 2.7 72.4 4.1 0.0 293.9 -7.7 7.2 3.9 73.0 4.il 0.0 LO6.1 266 8 10.3 -8.5 7.6 0.9 622 3.1 0.0 91.5 -8.4 7.2 l.7. 63.7 3.5 00 12.3 -7.4 7.1 5.1 77.5 4.2 0.0 293.5 Sources: l%lhc Grmbim ruthoritiex and alafT atmutes 2nd projsetionr. li Bared on the acsrurio prsrsntd in T&k 8. zi In pcrcenr of sxpo* md ,ll”Cl immls. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 30 - Table 10. The Gambia: Key indicators of Extemnl Indebtedness, 1998-2003 (In millions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise indicated) 1998 Esf. 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 Proj. Total debt service 20.3 20.7 19.0 21.4 20.7 19.6 Principal 14.3 14.3 13.0 15.5 15.0 14.2 Interest 6.0 6.4 6.0 5.8 3.6 3.4 Scheduled debt sxvicc on existing contracted debt 20.5 18.9 21.1 20.3 19.1 Principal Medium and long term Multilateral li Oftkid bilatsral Paris Club Post-cutoff-date debt Pro-cutoff-date debt Of which : not previously rescheduled Other official Private creditors Short term 14.3 14.3 11.0 3.1 0.8 0.8 0.0 0.0 2.3 0.4 0.0 20.6 14.3 14.3 10.6 3.3 0.8 0.8 0.0 0.0 2.5 0.4 0.0 13.0 15.3 13.0 14.2 13.0 15.3 13.0 14.2 9.3 8.2 7.4 7.4 3.3 6.9 7.3 6.4 1.0 1.4 I.4 1.4 I.0 1.4 1.4 1.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 2.3 3.6 3.9 5.0 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 lntercst Medium and long term Mdtil~td 0ffh.l bilateml Paris Club Post-cutoff-date debt Prc-cutoffdato debt Of which : not previously rescheduled Other off~iciol Private creditors Short term 6.0 6.4 3.9 5.6 3.2 4.9 6.0 6.4 5.9 3.6 3.2 4.9 3.6 3.4 3.4 3.4 3.2 3.0 1.2 2.3 2.2 2.1 1.9 I.7 0.8 0.7 0.7 0.6 0.3 0.3 0.8 0.7 0.7 0.6 0.5 0.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 1.3 1.6 1.5 1.3 1.4 1.3 0.2 0.6 0.3 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Debt scrvicc on new borrowing Principal Intcxcst 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.0 0.4 0.3 0.0 0.3 Memorandum items: Total debt service In pcrccat of exports of goods and no&actor services In percent of *o”e”“e”t re”cn”C Total debt service ta multilateral lenders In percent of exports of goods and nonfactor sclviccs In pcrccnt of gwcmmcnt re”r,““e Total debt stock In pcrccnt of exports of goods and nonfactor services In percent of GDP Net present value of debt In percent of exports of goods and nonfactor services In percent of GDP 20.3 20.7 19.0 21.4 20.7 19.6 9.1 9.0 7.8 8.2 7.3 6.8 26.3 23.1 20.0 21.1 19.2 17.1 14.6 14.1 12.8 Il.8 11.0 10.9 6.9 6.1 3.2 4.6 4.0 3.8 18.7 13.7 13.3 11.7 10.2 9.3 427.6 448.4 434.6 460.4 468.3 479.3 201.2 194.2 183.9 177.3 170.5 163.3 102.9 97.4 93.0 88.6 84.7 81.4 223.2 226.1 230.7 233.4 236.5 240.7 105.0 97.9 94.3 90.0 86.0 83.1 33.7 49.1 47.2 44.9 42.8 40.9 Sources: The Gambian authorities; and staff estimates and projections. 11 Including IMF and nonguaranteed debt owed by public cntcrpriscs where the govcmmcnt is the majority shareholder. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 31 - Table 11. The Gambia: Central Govemment operations and Domestic Debt, 1998-2003 (In percent of GDP, untcw otinvise indicated) 1998 1999 2000 2001 Pmj 2002 2003 Domestic rcvemx Of which: Tax revenue Total expaditure and net lending Ofwhich: Dmmtic interest payments Overall fiscal deficit (commitment basis) Excluding grants Including grants Basic primary b&we Financing ExtCIlU.l Rormwing Amcntization Debt relief Domestic 18.8 19.3 17.0 17.3 23.2 22.1 4.1 3.3 4.5 -2.6 -2.3 -1.3 3.7 6.8 3.0 I.3 1.2 I.3 3.4 3.4 -2.1 -2.1 0.0 0.0 I.8 0.0 19.3 19.5 19.5 19.5 17.3 17.3 17.3 17.3 21.1 20. I 19.6 19.0 2.7 1.8 1.4 1.0 -1.7 -0.6 -0.1 0.3 -0.4 0.6 1.1 1.6 6.9 6.9 6.9 6.9 0.4 -0.6 -1.0 -1.3 1.3 0.7 0.8 1.1 3.4 3.5 3.3 3.3 -2.1 -2.7 -2.6 -2.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 -0.9 -1.3 -1.9 -2.7 Total Domestic Debt Ofwhich: Treasury bills auts@nding Avcragc annual treasury bill rate (In percent) Domestic interest p~ymcnts (In pcrccnt of domestic revenue) 25.6 24.8 22.4 19.8 16.7 13.1 23.1 22.1 19.9 17.4 14.3 11.0 13.7 14.0 13.5 10.0 9.0 8.0 21.7 18.0 14.1 9.3 7.1 5.1 MEMORANDUM ITEMS: Nominal GDP 4,424.3 4.713.9 3,Ol3.3 3,333.4 3.672.4 6.033.0 Sources: The Gambian authorities; and staff estimates and projections. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 32 - Table 12. The Gambia: Indicators ofFund Credit and Debt Servicing, 1998-2003 (In pacent. unless othctisc indicated) 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 Outstanding Fund credit/quota I/ Outstanding Fund credit/GDP I/ Outstanding Fund credit/exports II 2/ Gm.ss Fund tkmcinglfinancing needs 3/ Debt w-vice to the Fund/exports 21 Debt service to the Fund/total debt service 40.0 3.0 5.8 6.8 2.7 27.8 Total debt sev+icJcxports 2l 9.7 Mcmomndum items: Quota (in millions of SDRs) 22.9 Exports of goads and nonfactor .wviccs (in millions of SDRs) 156.8 19.6 1.9 3.7 0.0 2.0 22.4 9.0 31.1 164.0 14.1 1.3 2.5 0.0 1.1 14.0 7.8 31.1 174.0 11.8 1.0 2.0 0.0 0.5 5.8 8% 31.1 184.4 11.8 11.8 0.9 0.9 1.9 I.8 0.0 Xl.0 0.1 0.1 1.3 1.4 7.5 6.8 31.1 31.1 195.4 205.6 Sourocs: &SF, Tnasurch Department, the Ganbian autbotik, and &ffe.stimate~ and prc@&ns. I/ Outstanding Fund aedit include SAFIESAF loans and outstanding purchases. 2l In pwmt of exports of goods and nonfactor scwiccs. 31 Finanoing needs are dcfmed to include current account deficit, amortization due, repurchases and repayments to the Fund, and planned impmwments in official reas-ves. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 33 - Table 13. TbcGmbia: Selected Social and kmographic indicators Sub- Sahara” Tbc Gambia Africa Tom, la”dam(how”d~ofq.km) Agricultural land@ perccntofmtal) Populalion md vital statistics 11 24,271 ‘lo 53 Total population (1997, in millions) Population growth rate (1980-96, in percent) Urba”populatio”(1996,i”percentoftotalpopulatian) Populatio”dc”sity(pcrsq.Irm, oflandarsa) Populstion age stmc*urc (19%. in percent) o-14 years IS-64 years 65ycmmdabovc lnfanrmortdity mtc(1996,pcrtbousandlivc birth) Lifccxpecmcy st birth (1996,i”years) Malt Fmlak GNP pa capira(1997, in U.S. dollars) I.2 614 3 3.6 2.8 30 37 109 25 44 34 51 51 5 IS 79 91 53 53 51 54 - 338 500 Acecssmlafewaln(1995,i”pcremtofpopulatio”) Ovcrsll “dN” R”d P”puhtio” pet physician (1990,i” thousmds) Population per hospital bcd(1994,i”thousands) Calorie intake (1990, percent ofrquimncnl) Protein i”~spereapila(1990,gramspcrday) Labar force Total laborforce(1995,inpereentofpopulation) 49 43 ?.I A~riculture(1994,pcrec”toftotal) 83 70 l”durtly(1994,percc”toftotal) 8 8 76 153 1,667 86 51 45 1.269 I/ Education am3 school e”lOllme”t me (1993, perce”t Of age group, Primary school Male Fcmalc Ssondaryschwl Male Female Adult illiteracy rate (1997, in pcrccnt) 73 72 84 78 61 65 19 24 25 27 I3 22 61 44 Sourccr: World Bank,Wor,dDlvelopnrenrReporll99~ and WorldDwelopmml Indicolors. 1998; and Central Statistics Department, Slalislicnl Abstract of7k Gombic7. ,995. I/ Data for ,990. Z,D*ta for ,997 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 34 - APPENDIX I The Gambia - Tentative Work Program for 1999 Fund a. b. c. d. e. Staff discussions on the midterm review under the first ESAF arrangement and the 1999 Article IV consultation February 1999 Executive Board consideration of the 1999 Article IV consultation June 1999 Negotiation of an ESAF arrangement July 1999 Executive Board discussion of the ESAF arrangement September 1999 Staff visit October 1999 World Bank Lending operations a. b. C. d. Energy infrastructure Credit - Appraisal Board discussion on Poverty Alleviation & Municipal Development Credit Capacity Building for Economic Management Credit - Preappraisal Gateway Project Credit - Preappraisal January 1999 March 1999 March 1999 April 1999 Nonlending operations a. Financial Sector Strategy Technical Assistance Project - tentative June 1999 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-35 - APPENDIX II The Gambia: Relations with the Fund (As of February 28, 1999) Membership Status Joined g/21/67; Article VIII General Resources Account Quota Fund holdings of currency Reserve position in Fund SDR Million 31.10 29.62 1.48 SDR Department SDR Million Net cumulative allocation 5.12 Holdings 0.16 Outstanding Purchases and Loans ESAF arrangements SDR Million 7.32 Financial Arrangements Type ESAF ESAF SAF Approval Date 06129198 1 l/23/88 9/17/86 Expira- Amount Amount tion Approved Drawn Date (SDR Million) (SDR Million) 06/28/01 20.61 3.44 1 l/25/91 20.52 20.52 1 l/22/88 10.86 8.55 % Quota 100.0 95.2 4.8 % Allocation 100.0 3.2 % Quota 23.5 Projected Obligations to Fund’ (SDR Million; based on existing use of resources and present holdings of SDRs): Overdue Forthcoming 02/28/98 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 Principal 0.0 2.5 1.2 0.2 0.0 0.0 Charges/Interest 0.0 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 Total 0.0 2.7 1.4 0.4 0.2 0.2 ’ Excluding debt service payments to the Saudi Fund for Development. The projection of charges and interest assumes that overdue principal at the report date (if any) will remain outstanding, but that forthcoming obligations will be settled on time. \DPT4SL4FRIUXX\WR\GMBW99-I\STAF’F REPORlMF’P2FRLA.W May 26, 1999 (1236PM) Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 36 - APPENDIX II Exchange Rate Arrangement Prior to January 20, 1986, the Gambian currency, the dalasi, was pegged to the pound sterling at a rate of D 5=El. On January 20, 1986, an interbank market for foreign exchange was introduced and since then the exchange rate has been determined by market forces. At end- March 1999, the midpoint exchange rate in the interbank market was D 11.0720 per U.S. dollar The Gambia accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4 on January 21, 1993. Last Article IV Consultation The 1997 Article IV consultation (SM/97/238) was concluded by the Executive Board on October 6, 1997. The Gambia is on the standard 12-month cycle for Article IV consultations. Technical Assistance A STA technical expert provided assistance on national accounts in November-December 1998. An MAE technical assistance mission took place in August 1998 to assist the Central Bank of The Gambia in developing market-based monetary policy instruments and review its program for strengthening banking supervision. An MAE technical expert provided assistance of foreign exchange operations to the central bank in December 1996. A joint FADAJNDP technical assistance mission took place in January-February 1996 to help establish a system for monitoring the financial operations of public enterprises. An MAE technical assistance mission on monetary management and bank supervision visited The Gambia in January-February 1994. A joint FADRJNDP technical assistance mission on government accounting procedures and the computerization of these accounts took place in February-March 1993. A technical assistance mission from STA on government finance statistics visited The Gambia in November 1992. Resident Representative There is currently no provision for a resident representative to The Gambia, Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 37 - APPENDIX III The Gambia-Relations with the World Bank Group (as of February 28, 1999) The Bank, through IDA, has assisted the Govermnent in pursuing three main objectives: ii) establishment of a macroeconomic and sectoral environment conducive to economic growth; (ii) rehabilitation and development of infrastructure; and (iii) development of human resources by providing more efficient social services. The instruments to support these objectives have been adjustment lending (SALs I and II) buttressed by sector-based rehabilitation and investment projects 2. In addition to SAL II, which provided a global framework for IDA’s support to the policy reforms, IDA had financed other projects in support of policy and institutional reforms. Under the Enterprise Development Project, there was a marked progress in promoting private sector investment in small and medium-scale activities (by privatizing and restructuring public enterprises, upgrading the management contract system, improving financial performance of several public enterprises, and of the financial sector, partly through the privatization of The Gambian Commercial and Development Bank). The promotion of extension and other agricultural services under the Agricultural Development II Project yielded positive results. These results have been strengthened through the AgricuIfuruZ Services Project that closed this fiscal year (March 1, 1999). Past projects in the transport, utility and urban sectors promoted private sector activities by improving maintenance and rehabilitation of infrastructure, and by rendering better services with a more efficient use of public resources. Projects in the human resources sector were designed to help the Government to: (1) improve the quality of primary education and raise school enrollment under the Education Sector Project; (2) improve family planning programs (by increasing access to health care and raising the efficiency of health services under the National Health Development Project); and (3) promote women’s role in socio-economic development under the Women in Development Project. 3. The Board discussed and endorsed the Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for The Gambia on September 10, 1998 and concurrently approved the Third Education project. The CAS is line with the Government’s vision, strategy and policy documentation. Its overall objective is to achieve a sustainable reduction in the incidence of poverty. 4. As of February 28, 1999, IDA had approved 24 projects for The Gambia for a total amount of about US$209.8 million, with total undisbursed amount of about US$ 39.8 million. The current portfolio consists of three projects (73wironmem Munagemenf Cupuci@ Building, Purticiputory HeulthLPopulutionhWrition. and ThirdEducation) totaling US$40.6 million. IDA will support future lending that builds around poverty reduction and capacity building through various projects (i.e., third education, poverty alleviation and capacity building, for FY99; energy infrastructure, capacity building for economic management, gateway, for FY2000; and rural sector development, population policy, economic reforms support operation, for FY200 1. 5. As of February 28, 1999, IFC’s portfolio had four investments totaling US.SO.77 million. The current portfolio includes investments under the African Enterprise Facility (AEF) for: a hotels/tourism (Combo Beach), a medical clinic (Ndebaan), a commercial fishing (Lyefish), and an agribusiness (Radville). The establishment of the AEF has enhanced IFC’s ability to reach smaller businesses such as those currently in operation in The Gambia. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 38 - APPENDIX III 6. IDA and IFC will continue to coordinate their respective roles to support development activities in The Gambia. This is being enhanced by the IFC’s office opened in Dakar in February 1997 which also oversees IFC’s activities in The Gambia. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 39 - The Gambia-Relations with the World Bank Group Statement of IDA Credits as of February 28, 1999 APPENDIX III Amount in millions (USD) Cr. # Pmject m Description Principal Uadisbursed Disbursed Appmved Date Closing Da Closed Credits 1871 797 Bathurst Port Rehabilitation 2.2 0.0 2.2 7-Apr-70 31-Dee-71 1872 797 Bathurst Port Rehabilitation 2.4 0.0 2.4 26-Mar-74 30-Jim-8( 3330 798 Rice Development I 1.3 0.0 1.3 12-Sep72 3 1 -Dec.7: 6020 801 Tourism I 4.0 0.0 4.0 30Dec.75 30sJun-8; 6440 800 Rural Development 4.1 0.0 4.1 15.Jun.76 3 1 -Mar-S: 7920 803 Education 5.5 0.0 5.5 18-Apr.78 30-Jun-8: 8140 802 DFC (GCDB) 3.0 0.0 3.0 25-May-78 30-Jun-8: 8970 804 Highways 5.0 0.0 5.0 24-Apr-79 30-Jun-8f 11870 805 Energy 1.5 0.0 1.4 3-Now8 1 31-Mar-81 12660 806 Banjul Port 6.5 0.0 6.7 17-Jun-82 3 I-Mar-9 1 14430 808 Urban 11.5 0.0 13.5 6-Mar-84 28-F&9? 14760 807 A+x&.nal Development II 9.4 0.0 8.4 17-May-84 30-Jun-91 16820 809 Highway Maintenance. II 5.8 0.0 7.0 15-Apr-86 3 I -Mar-9; 17240 810 Water Sector/Elec 7.0 0.0 8.7 8&d-86 29-F&9( 17300 8 13 Struchlral Adjustment Credit 5.0 0.0 5.6 26-Aug-86 30-Jun-8f .0220 8 I3 Stluclural Adjustment Credit II.5 0.0 11.9 26-Aug-86 30-Jun-8$ 17600 812 Pop/He&b 5.6 0.0 6.3 17-F&87 30-Jun-91 19750 8 19 Enterprise Ref & Development 10.0 0.0 2.9 22Dec-88 30-Jun-91 !0320 817 Structural Adjustment Credit II 23.0 0.0 24.0 8-Jun-89 30-Jun-9; !I410 822 Women In Development 7.0 0.6 7.1 24-May-90 3 I-Dee-9: !I420 82 1 Education Sector Credit 14.6 0.5 15.7 24-May-90 3 1 -Dee-91 !5540 828 Public Works & Capacity Building 11.0 0.0 11.2 14-Dee-93 30-Jun-9I !4530 818 Agricultural Services 12.3 0.0 12.7 IZ-Jan-93 I-Mar-9! Total Closed Credits 169.2 1.1 170.6 Ongoing Credits !6020 83 I Environmental Mgt. Capacity Building 2.6 0.9 1.8 12~Apr-94 3 l-Jul-9! 10540 825 Participatory HcaltblPop/Nutrition 18.0 17.2 I.1 31-Mar-98 31sDec.02 11280 35643 Third Education 20.0 20.6 0.0 lo-Sep98 30-Apr-0: Total Ongoing Credits 40.6 38.7 1.9 Total Closed & Ongoing Credits 2a9.8 39.8 173.5 Acttve Pmlectr Closed Proiects m Repayments 0.0 8.25 8.25 Total held by IDA 40.6 150.98 191.58 &&?: Disbursed amount may be higher than commitment (approved amount) due to exchange rate vis-&vis SDR. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 40 - APPENDIX ID Statement of IFC’s Committed and Disbursed Portfolio in The Gambia as of February 28, 1999 (in millions US dollars) Committed Disbursed ------IFC I_______ IFC----- N Company Loan Equity Quasi Pm-tic Loan Equity Quasi PWtiC Kombo Beach I/ (Hotels/Tourism) AEF Ndebaao (Medical Clinic) AEF Radville (Agribusiness) AEF Lyefish (Commercial Fishingl TOTAL 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 .20 0.00 0.00 0.00 .20 0.00 0.00 0.00 .20 0.00 0.00 0.00 20 0.00 0.00 0.00 .37 0.00 0.00 0.00 .37 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.77 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.77 0.00 0.00 0.00 Pendina Commitme.nts 0 0 0 0 I l/ IFc’s investment in tourism (Kombo Beach) was written o%ancelled in 1995/1996. This remains io the portfolio without showing the writ-tan off amount of about US.W.8 million. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 41 - APPENDIX Iv The Gambia: Relations with the African Development Bank (As ofMarch, 1999) 1. The African Development Bank (AfDB) started lending to The Gambia in 1974. As of March, 1999, the AfDB Group’ had provided financial assistance amounting to SDR 162.37 million in support of 35 operations. This assistance consists of five loans from AfDB resources amounting to SDR 21.34 million, twenty one loans totaling SDR 124.17 million from African Development Fund (AfDF) resources, two loans from Nigerian Trust Fund (NTF) resources totaling SDR 6.5 million, and seven grants totaling SDR 10.36 million from the Technical Assistance Fund (TAF) of mF resources. 2. The assistance, which has been provided since 1990, includes seven AfDF loans and six TAF grants. The loans have been provided to finance (1) improvement of the Banjul port in&astmcture facilitates to meet the handling of increased cargo tonnage; (2) an education project aimed at improving primary teacher training and capacity building in the Ministry of Education; (3) rehabilitation of health-training facilities aimed at strengthening their capacity by expanding and improving the technical skills of students graduating From the School of public Health and the School of Nursing and Midwifery, as well as at improving primary health care delivery through support to maternal and child health care programs, and training of traditional birth attendants and community health workers; (4) a structural adjustment program in support of policy reforms; (5) a Lowlands Agriculture Development Program aimed at improving food security for the poor small-holder rice growers; (6) a poverty reduction project addressing several aspects of capacity building for the poor and women through strengthening local public services for the poor to grant financing for small-scale projects, and loan funds for income generating activities, particularly women-managed micro- enterprises, and (7) a health sector rehabilitation project aimed at strengthening institutional capacity of the Department of State for Health, Social Welfare and Women’s Affairs at divisional and central levels, thus enhancing the capability to plan, implement, and manage the delivery of improved health care services. The grants were provided for (1) institutional strengthening of the Ministry of Works and communications and carrying out a feasibility study for an eastern road-link (Essau-Farafenni Road), (2) a Skills Development Program geared at increasing economic productivity of rural women in the villages, (3) a feasibility study for a rural electrification project, (4) a health services requirements study to undertake a comprehensive analysis of requirements for a more efficient and cost effective health care delivery services, (5) a coastal protection study to examine the extent of sea encroachment and degradation of the coastline in Banjul and recommend mitigation measures, and (6) a capacity building operation to strengthen the project and debt management capability of the Department of State for Finance and increase the supply of qualified female teachers in the basic education cycle. 3. The AfDB Group lending strategy is to provide assistance aimed at poverty reduction and encourage Government to continue to pursue economic and administrative reforms. ’ The A!DB Group consists of the African Development Bank, African Development Fund, and the Nigerian Trust Fund. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 42 - APPENDIX IV Assistance for poverty reduction efforts will be through: direct pro-poor interventions via new operations in the social sector and rural infrastructure; analytical and financial support for diversifying the economy and increasing private sector involvement in new economic activities in order to speed up job creation. To achieve maximum results, the ADB Group will pay special attention to capacity building and closely co-ordinate its interventions with those of other donors active in The Gambia. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-43 - APPENDIX v The Gambia: Statistical Issues 1. There are substantial weaknesses in The Gambia’s economic and financial statistics, especially in the national accounts, balance of payments and the external debt statistics. Although these weaknesses do not prevent a meaningful assessment of economic policies, the analysis of recent economic developments is hampered by the reporting delays and poor quality of some of the data. The authorities have recently provided most core data to the Fund in a timely manner. Available data are published in the central bank’s quarterly bulletins and the Central Statistics Department’s (CSD) publications. Real sector 2. Annual national accounts data on the production side are produced with a long lag. The breakdown by expenditure category is largely estimated by Fund staff. Reliable information on employment and labor costs is not available. A STA technical expert provided assistance on national accounts in November/December 1998. Improvement regarding the timeliness and the quality of the national accounts data can be expected in the near future. 3. A new consumer price index (with a base of July 1994-June 1995) for the low- and middle-income population in the greater Banjul area has been published, using new weights from the 1992/93 household expenditure survey. To ensure a smooth transition, the Central Statistics Department will compile both the old and new indices for two years; the old consumer price index is based on the 1968/69 household survey. At present, however, the CSD only publishes data using the old weights. Government finance 4. The authorities provide the staffwith current information on central government revenue and expenditures. Data on domestic government linancing are also available on a monthly basis with a short lag. The three-year rolling public investment program has not been updated for some time, and the execution of public investment needs closer monitoring. The staff was provided with detailed information on foreign-financed extrabudgetary expenditures carried out after the July 1994 military coup. Monetary data 5. Monthly balance sheet data of the Central Bank of The Gambia (CBG) are available within two weeks after the end of the month, and the monetary survey with a lag of one month. The coverage of banks in the monetary survey is comprehensive, and the banks follow a uniform chart of accounts to report financial data to the central bank. There is also flash reporting of key monetary data from the banks to the central bank on a weekly basis. The analytical accounts of the CBG and the commercial banks used for publication in IFS are currently being reviewed in cooperation with the authorities, Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 44 - APPENDIX v Balance of payments 6. The Gambia’s external transactions are characterized by a large volume of activity in the informal sector. For example, the bulk of the reexport trade is unrecorded. Therefore, balance of payment statistics have to be supplemented by estimates of activity in the informal sector. The central bank estimates reexports as a fixed share of total imports. Tourism revenue is estimated based on tourist arrivals data from the relevant ministry. Data on private capital flows are poor. Data on official grants and loan disbursements and repayments are relatively good. Data on the gross and net international reserves of the central bank are available with a short lag. 7. There is an urgent need for technical assistance in compiling balance of payments statistics. Coordination and cooperation between the main statistical agencies also needs to be strengthened to improve the quality of balance of payments statistics. 8. The government has embarked on the computerization of its database on the stock of external public debt and the related debt-service obligations, using the Commonwealth Secretariat debt system. The World Bank is currently providing technical assistance to ensure that a comprehensive data management and reporting system is in place. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicThe Gambia: Core Statistical Indicators (As of May 1999) Date of latest obsmation Frequency of data U Frequency of reporting 21 source of data 31 Mode of repming 41 cmlfidentitity 51 Cenml CurmE 0”CI-d Exchange Intcmational R~S~IVEY/ Bulk Broad INret cmer EXpid ACCWlB OOVeCMlCnr Rates RWXVCS Base Money !3dancc MW Rates Price Index 1-s LMance Balpnce GDP Da SbXl A A A A A A A A A A A A C C C C C C C c, v c. v c, v c. v c. v C C C C C C C C C D C D l/ During tk mission. 2l A=a,,,dly; D=daily; mdM=monthly. 31 A=dircct repmtiq by central bank. ministry of linrmw, or other official agency. 41 C=cablcorfacsimile;andV=staffvisirs. 51 C =unmhicted use; D = restricted until offkially pblisbcd Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public