DOCUMENT OF INTERNATIONAL MONmARY FUND AND NOT FOR PUBLIC USE MASTER FILES ROOM C-525 0450 SM/95/279 CONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION October 19, 1995 To: Members of the Executive Board From: The secretary Subject: Kenva - Staff Reuort for the 1995 Article IV Consultation Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staff report for the 1995 Article IV consultation with Kenya, which will be brought to the agenda for discussion on a date to be announced. A draft decision appears on page 27. Mr. Hino (ext. 38379) or Mr. Max-et (ext. 38680) is available to answer technical or factual questions relating to this paper prior to the Board discussion. Unless the Documents Preparation Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the African Development Bank (AfDB), the European Commission (EC), and the UT0 Secretariat, following its consideration by the Executive Board. Att: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicCONTAINSCONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND KENYA Staff Remrt for the 1995 Article IV Consultation Prepared by the Staff Representatives for the 1995 Consultation with Kenya Approved by Bvangelos A. Cslamitsis and Michael Edo October 17, 1995 Executive Summary iii I. Introduction 1 II. Background 1 III. Medium-Term Economic Outlook 5 IV. Report on the Discussions 1. Fiscal policy 2. Monetary and exchange rate policies 3. Financial system reform 4. Public enterprise reform 5. Balance of payments outlook, trade reform, and exchange system 6. Other issues V. World Bank Lending Operations 24 7 7 11 18 19 21 23 VI. Staff Appraisal 24 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- ii - ContentS Charts 1. Real GDP Growth and External Current Account, 1990-95 2. Inflation and Interest Rates, 1992-95 3. Fiscal Developments, 1987/88-1995/96 4. Financial Market Developments, 1993-95 5. Reserve Money Developments, December 1992June 1995 6. Exchange Rate Movements and Prices, 1992-95 7. Competitiveness Indicators, 1989-95 8. External Sector Projections, 1993-2000 Tables 1. 2. 3. Selected Economic and Financial Indicators and Medium-Term Adjustment Framework, 1990-98 Balance of Payments, 1991-98 Central Government Financial Operations, 1990/91-1995/96 4. 5. 6. Central Bank of Kenya Balance Sheet, June 1993-June 1996 Financial Survey, December 1992July 1995 Operational Profit and Cash Position of Selected Public Enterprises, 1992/93-1995/96 Anendiceg I. II. III. IV. V. VI. VII. VIII. Fund Relations with Kenya World Bank Relations with Kenya Statistical Annex Table 1. Survey of Reporting of Main Statistical Indicators Official External Finance and External Debt Basic Data Social and Demographic Indicators Medium-Term Scenario Table 1. Long-Term Balance of Payments Indicators, 1994-2000 Key Structural Policies for 1995/96 3 4 9 12 13 15 16 22 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 36 42 44 45 48 50 51 53 54 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- iii - Executive 1. In many aspects, economic reform efforts in Kenya proceeded with vigor in 1995. Economic recovery continued in the first half of 1995, and inflation decelerated to 1.3 percent in the 12-month period ended August 1995. Nevertheless, the business community is concerned about political developments, some setbacks in economic reform, the strained relations with bilateral donors, and the delay in starting a new ESAF-supported program. 2. If the present uncertain economic climate continues and no further progress is made in economic reform, real GDP growth could stagnate at or below 3 percent over the next several years. As a result, per capita real GDP would decline and unemployment could rise rapidly from an already high level of 25 percent. 3. During 1995-98, the authorities aim at accelerating real GDP growth to 5-6 percent a year, keeping inflation to less than 5 percent, and reducing the external current account deficit (excluding grants) to a broadly balanced position. The authorities’ economic policies for 1995/96 (July- June) are consistent with these goals. 4. The overriding objectives of fiscal policy for 1995/96 are to further reduce the deficit; strengthen fiscal discipline; improve the tax structure; reorient expenditures toward key functions; and increase the quality of public investment. Monetary policy will be framed on the basis of targeting monetary aggregates of the central bank balance sheet. The authorities will accept exchange and interest rate variations as necessary to keep monetary aggregates on the desired path. 5. The authorities have taken measures to bring public enterprise reform back on track, and major progress toward restructuring/privatization of key parastatals is expected over the next 12 months. The civil service and privatization programs are proceeding on schedule. 6. The staff believes that the authorities’ economic policies for 1995/96 could form key elements of a comprehensive program that could be supported by a new three-year ESAF arrangement. However, it is crucial to provide greater assurances that the budget--and, more broadly, macroeconomic balances--will not be undermined by the recurrence of financial irregularities. This should also help to obtain broad donor support, without which an adjustment program cannot be sustained over the medium term. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicI. Introduction The 1995 Article IV consultation discussions with Kenya were conducted over the period December 1994-August 1995. The discussions took place in conjunction with negotiations on a new three-year arrangement under the enhanced structural adjustment facility (ESAF), which the authorities hope to conclude in the near future. 1/ At the last Executive Board meeting on Kenya on November 21, 1994, in the context of the midterm review under the previous one-year ESAF arrange- ment, Directors welcomed the major progress achieved in restoring economic stability and implementing a far-reaching economic liberalisation. They stressed, however, that performance had been uneven, as several performance criteria had been missed. Furthermore, they urged the authorities to ensure strict discipline in the management of public finances; strengthen public enterprise reform; accelerate the privatisation program and make the process more transparent; and take actions to deter recurrence of financial irregu- larities. The last Article IV consultation with Kenya was completed on December 22, 1993. Kenya accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2,3, and 4 on June 30, 1994. Fund relations with Kenya are summarised in Appendix I. Kenya's relations with the World Bank Group are summarized in Appendix II. The quality and coverage of economic data in Kenya are generally satis- factory, in particular with respect to monetary data. Reporting of the core financial data to the Fund is timely. However, the timeliness of the recording of current account transections and the overall quality of capital account data in the balance of payments need to be improved (Appendix III). II. BackPround At the Executive Board meeting on Kenya in November 1994, and in the Consultative Group meeting in December 1994, there was a sense of optimism about Kenya: . It appeared that rapprochement between the ruling party and the opposition was about to begin. L/ The staff representatives in the various stages of the discussions were Mr. Hino (head), Messrs. Beaugrand, Brekk, Kakoza, Maret, Selassie, Ucer, and Ms. McAuliffe (all AFR), Ms. Anulova (FAD), Mr. Erickson von Allmen (PDR), Ms. Cheng (administrative assistant-AFR), Ms. Murray (administrative assistant-AFR), and Mrs. Lorenz-Pelaez (assistant-RES). The Kenyan representatives included Mr. Mudavadi, Minister for Finance; Mr. Kipkulei, Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Finance; Mr. Cheserem, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya; and other ministers and senior officials dealing with economic and financial matters. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 2 - . Tribal tension was easing, with the resettlement of victims of ethnic clashes under the initiatives sponsored by the United Nations Development Program (UNDP). b Economic reform was gaining momentum, following the rapid imple- mentation of bold liberalisation measures. . Real GDP grew by 3 percent in 1994, the first significant positive growth in several years (Chart 1, Table 1); inflation was reduced drastically to less than 7 percent over the 12-month period ended December 1994 (Chart 2); and the external payments position remained relatively strong. In many aspects, economic reform efforts continued with vigor in 1995, and Kenya met most of the objectives of the 1994/95 program supported by the last ESAF arrangement. In particular: . Real GDP growth continued in the first half of 1995, in line with the program target of 5 percent for the year as a whole. . Inflation decelerated to 1.3 percent in the 12-month period ended August 1995, below the program expectation. . The central government budget deficit (on a commitment basis s.nd excluding grants) was reduced by 5.5 percentage points of GDP, to 2.5 percent in 1994/95 (July-June), as programmed. . The number of civil servants was reduced by 19,010 in 1994/95, bringing the total reduction since July 1993 to about 26,130, or 10 percent of the total. u . The privatisation program advanced in line with expectations; government shares of 105 of the 211 "nonstrategic" enterprises were divested as of June 1995. 2/ . The liberalisation of the exchange system was completed, in effect, in January 1995; Parliament is expected to approve the repeal of the Exchange Control Act in October 1995. Nevertheless, the optimism that prevailed in late 1994 gradually faded during 1995. Ethnic tension resurfaced, as a large number of victims of earlier tribal clashes were forcibly resettled by the Government. A "guerilla movement" in a neighboring country was repeatedly cited by the u Excluding teachers. y When the privatisation program was initiated in November 1991, public enterprises were divided into two categories--"nonstrategic enterprises," which were to be privatized, and "strategic enterprises" which were to remain in the public sector. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 3 - CRART 1 KBNYA Real GDP Growth and External Current Account, 1990-95 Real GDP Grcdh II6 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 4 - CRART 2 KENYA Inflation and Interest Rate, 1992-95 Inflation 70 b F-4 70 - 12 month moving average 60. -- 12 month end of period 60 60 - 50 40 - - 40 30 10 - - 10 0 _ 0 ..,./. Treasury Bill rnteremt Rate 60X 70 - 60 50 - 40 - 30 - 01 '1 " a 1 ' " j 8 " * j j j " a j "I c " a " j s j s " " / JFMAM~s~2ASONOJFMAM~s~3ASONDJF~AM~s~,ASONDJ~M~s~5JJ swrca: 0d.a prwfded by tha thyon .w+horl+isr. 60 70 60 50 40 30 20 10 0 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 5 - Government as a threat to national security. Political tension rose, as the Government accused prominent opposition leaders of collaborating with the guerilla movement and denounced a new political group as "disguised colonialism." The incidence of violent crimes also increased. Moreover, important setbacks occurred in economic reform. A ban on the importation of maize, sugar, and certain types of wheat was re-imposed in April (but was lifted in June). The National Cereals and Produce Board (NCPB) continued massive purchases of maize at a price substantially above the market price, effectively negating the liberalization of maize marketing introduced earlier. Reform efforts stalled for some key parastatals, parti- cularly the Kenya Ports Authority (KPA) and Kenya Posts and Telecommunica- tions Corporation (KPTc). The decision by the Government to construct an airport in Eldoret raised doubts about the appropriateness of the Govern- ment's public investment priorities. Reflecting the setbacks in economic reform and the developments in broad governance issues, Kenya's relations with bilateral donors have become increasingly strained (Appendix IV). Much of the aid pledged at the December 1994 Consultative Group meeting has not been disbursed, and some donors have begun scaling back their aid commitments. Members of the Kenyan business community appear concerned about the political developments leading up to the presidential and parliamentary elections scheduled for late 1997. They are also anxious about the possible impact of the strained relations with donors--and the delay in starting a new ESAF arrangement--on economic reform. The high premium imbedded in short-term interest rates is an indication of the risk perceived by the public. III. Medium-Term Economic Outlook If the present uncertain economic climate continues and no further progress is made on economic reform, economic recovery will likely falter. Real GDP growth could then stagnate at or below 3 percent over the next several years. The labor force is expected to increase at 4.1 percent a year, a rate significantly above populatfon growth (3.3 percent). If the relation between production and employment remains unchanged, real GDP growth of 3 percent would result in an increase in employment of about 2 percent a year. Thus. if economic growth averaged 3 percent over the next ten years, unemployment could rise from 25 percent at present to nearly 40 percent in ten years. About 38 percent of the population now lives in absolute poverty, and the incidence of absolute poverty would rise correspond- ingly. u u Basic data and selected social and demographic indicators are presented in Appendices V and VI, respectively. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 6 - Medium-term projections, prepared on the basis of strengthened macro- economic policies and an acceleration of structural reforms, as well as a stable political environment, suggest that real GDP growth could accelerate from 3 percent in 1994 to 5 percent in 1995 and to about 6 percent during 1996-98 (Table 1 and Appendix VII). Inflation could be limited to 5-6 per- cent during 1995-98, while the external current account deficit (excluding official transfers) could be nearly eliminated by 1998 (Table 2). Gross investment is projected to increase by about 2 percentage points of GDP over the next three years to 23.5 percent of GDP by 1998, a ratio close to the level achieved in 1990 before the recent economic crisis. Much of the impetus for higher real GDP growth is expected from an improvement in investment efficiency, a fruit of structural reform and enhanced infra- structure. It is now envisaged that the projected increase in investment could be more than matched by a rise in savings. During 1994-95. central government savings rouse sharply, but this was partly offset by a sharp decline in non-government savings. The latter are expected to rebound sufficiently in the coming years to restore, by 1998, the level achieved in 1990. Gross national savings are thus projected to increase by almost 3 percentage points of GDP over the next three years to 24.3 percent of GDP by 1998. Given Kenya's poor growth record over the last decade, as well as some deterioration in the terms of trade projected for the next few years, it is by no means certain that real GDP growth of 5-6 percent could actually be achieved. Even with a growth of 5-6 percent, however, unemployment would, at best, be maintained at the current high levels. Real GDP growth of 7- 8 percent would be needed if appreciable declines in unemployment and poverty are to be attained. The basic requirements for a high growth path are as follows: (1) A significant increase in public savings would be necessary, as the availability of official development assistance would be constrained over the medium term. (2) Monetary policy would have to be tight to maintain single-digit inflation. (3) Key parastatals would have to be privatized or restructured. Poor parastatal performance has contributed to a serious deterioration in key infrastructure, poor investment efficiency, and a major fiscal burden. State monopolies have deprived the private sector of investment opportunities. (4) Fully competitive markets would have to be promoted in the recently liberalized sectors, particularly in the maize, petroleum; financial, and foreign exchange markets. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 7 - (5) Foreign and domestic private investment should be encouraged. In addition to sound economic fundamentals, adequate infrastructure, an open trade and exchange system, and a simplification of business licensing requirements will be necessary. (6) The recurrence of misuse of public funds must be prevented. In the past, financial irregularities have led to a large expansion of central bank credit, seriously weakened the government budget, and undermined investor confidence. IV. ReDort on the Discussions The authorities and the staff team shared the view that the most press- ing challenge facing policymakers in Kenya was to generate and sustain a high rate of economic growth that would permit a reduction in unemployment and absolute poverty over the medium term. In this context, the authorities fully embraced the basic requirements for growth, listed above, as their medium-term policy objectives. They indicated that they would, over the next three years, aim at achieving real GDP growth of 5-6 percent per year; keeping inflation to less than 5 percent; reducing the external current account deficit to a broadly balanced position; and raising international reserves to the equivalent of four months of imports. Against this back- ground, the discussions focused on policy issues for 1995/96. 1. Fiscal uolicy While commending the authorities for the large fiscal adjustment achieved in 1994/95, the staff team noted that the expenditure control mechanism remained inadequate. Large unexpected outlays (1.4 percent of GDP) were committed for retroactive upward adjustments of salaries for teachers and doctors, for purchases of maize by NCPB at above market prices, and for the construction of an airport at Eldoret, whose economic viability was questionable. u The Government cut development expenditure;to accommodate these outlays. Moreover, as external financing fell short of expectations (1.9 percent of GDP), domestic borrowing by the Government far exceeded the target, and the planned reduction in pending bills did not materialize. u lJ The cost of this project was initially estimated at X$85 million, of which US$25 million (0.3 percent of GDP) was paid from the budget in 1994/95. In September 1995, the Government scaled down the project cost by one fourth, in close consultation with the World Bank. The authorities intend to proceed with the project after the remaining financing is mobilized. LQ In Kenya, spending ministries often delay settlement of bills payable to domestic suppliers, awaiting "exchequer issues." These bills are referred to as "pending bills." Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 8 - The authorities stressed that they would redouble their efforts to strengthen expenditure control. The Government has created a budget monitoring unit at the Treasury, with the assistance of a Pund fiscal expert, to monitor budgetary developments on a continuous basis. With the recent installation of a computerized data base, sanctions can now be strictly enforced against accounting officers exceeding their quarterly allocation without prior approval from the Treasury. Furthermore, for any checks issued by spending ministries without sufficient funds, the Central Bank of Kenya (CBK) has been instructed to refer to the treasury for approval before encashing them. The authorities stated that the overriding objectives of fiscal policy in 1995/96 are to further reduce the deficit; improve the tax structure: reorient expenditure toward basic functions and social areas; and increase the quality of public investment. Thus, the 1995/96 budget features the following: u . A reduction of the budget deficit (on a commitment basis and excluding grants) to 1.7 percent of GDP, compared with 2.5 percent in 1994/95. Total revenue would increase by 1.6 percent of GDP to 33.1 percent, while total expenditure would rise by 0.9 percent of GDP to 34.9 percent (Chart 3, Table 3). . Net domestic repayments equivalent to 0.6 percent of GDP. In addition, a reduction in the outstanding stock of pending bills of 0.4 percent of GDP is planned. 2/ . Commencement of the operations of the Kenya Revenue Authority, effective July 1, 1995. . Cuts in tax rates, which include reductions in the standard value- added tax (VAT) rate from 18 percent to 15 percent; u and a cut u The policy described here incorporates additional revenue/expenditure measures that the authorities adopted in August in order to preserve the target of net domestic repayments of 0.6 percent of GDP, which was stipulated in the 1995/96 budget presented to Parliament in June. Th*** measures are expected to yield 1.8 percent of GDP. 2/ The stock of pending bills amounted to 1.2 percent of GDP at the and of June 1995. Complete settlement of these bills is planned over this fiscal year and the next. y The high VAT rate was also cut from 30 percent to 25 percent, while the low rate was raised from 5 percent to 6 percent. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public, - 9 - CIIART 3 KENYA Fiscal Developments, 1987/88-95/96 Fiscal Balances ‘“W 10 9 , -6 -10 -15 RWellUe (In percent of GDP) on international trada 35 30 25 20 15 s Budgetary Financing 10 (In percent of GDP) - Total jinmwin~ ma Poruign financing a Domestic financing 8 t n ,n Expenditure (In psccnt of GDP) Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 10 - of 5 percentage points in the three top customs duty rates, as well as in the duty rates on capital goods and basic raw materials. . A broadening of the tax base, through the reintroduction of the presumptive income tax on agricultural income: expansion of the VAT coverage to all products, except food items and certain unprocessed products; and elimination of some customs exemptions. . No general salary increases, and limiting upward adjustments in allowances to only 3 percent of the wage bill. . A reduction in spending on behalf of public enterprises to 0.2 percent of GDP. . A substantial increase in productive outlays for operations and maintenance, as well as for development expenditure. Moreover, the quality of public expenditure is being improved. In the 1995/96 budget, development expenditure, which is to be maintained above 7 percent of GDP, has been structured with core and noncore projects, with the former constituting about 75 percent of the total. Noncore projects will be subject to cuts in the event of shortfalls in budgetary or donor funding. Allocations to core projects have been reviewed with the World Bank. More generally, project selection is being made more rigorous in the context of the Public Expenditure Review coordinated with the World Bank and other donors. All projects included in the public investment program (PIP) will require vetting and ranking. The authorities intend to strengthen the PIP monitoring unit in the Ministry of Planning, as well as the capacity of the External Resources Department, with a view to improving financial reporting and coordination of aid programs. The staff team supported the authorities' fiscal policy objectives for 1995/96. It stressed that the newly created Kenya Revenue Authority (KRA) must be managed with professionalism and transparency; that the strengthened expenditure control mechanism must be made to work; and that the quality of overall expenditure must be enhanced. The authorities reported that the civil service reform has been accele- rated. Under this reform, 16.000 civil servants are expected to leave annually during 1995/96-1997/98 through normal attrition and voluntary retirement; new recruitment will be limited as appropriate, in consultation with the World Bank. The reduction in manpower is to be accompanied by the streamlining of ministries, including the privatization of certain functions. The civil service reform will be expanded to cover teachers, local government workers, and clerical employees of public universities. As the size of civil service is reduced, remuneration will be raised to make the civil service more competitive vis-8-vis the private sector. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 11 - 2. Monetary and exchanee rate policies Over the past year, Kenya's financial markets have shown sharp fluctua- tions (Chart 4). These have been due largely to the volatility of foreign exchange flows, which reflected regional and political developments, Kenya's relations with the international donor community. and domestic macroeconomic policies. The primary focus of monetary and exchange rate policies shifted over the period, as the authorities tried at times to balance conflicting objectives. In the year through September 1994, a period characterized by large foreign exchange inflows to Kenya, the authorities' main policy thrust was to keep reserve money on the targeted path while minimizing the appreciation of the shilling. Systematic purchases of foreign exchange were made along with the sale of treasury bills--at very high interest rates--to sterilize the monetary impact. While the authorities' objectives were broadly met, the high interest rates were not conducive to further economic recovery, and the sterilization effort contributed to the accumulation of an excessively high level of government domestic debt. From October 1994 to June 1995, the policy aim was to bring about a gradual decline in interest rates to facilitate economic recovery, while ensuring that inflation would remain on target. Over this period, interest rates on treasury bills were lowered twice (in October and March). Both occasions led to a massive redemption of treasury bills as well as subs- tantial outflows of capital, and the shilling came under pressure. The authorities accepted the consequent expansion of net domestic assets (NDA) of the CBK and reserve money, and resorted to large drawdowns of inter- national reserves to limit depreciation of the shilling (Chart 5, and Tables 4 and 5). By June 1995, therefore, the economic recovery was continuing and inflation was declining as targeted, but international reserves had fallen to a critically low level. In July-August 1995, the authorities moved to protect their inter- national reserves position and to stabilize the exchange rate, first with some monetary measures lJ and, subsequently, with a sharp increase in interest rates on short-term treasury bills. 2/ The policy was successful as the exchange rate stabilized at around K Sh 55 - US$l in mid-August, and the decline in international reserves was reversed. However, the interest rates on treasury bills are now as high as those of a year ago, when the authorities began lowering them to facilitate the economic recovery. u Most notably by bringing forward the adoption of the cash reserve requirement to nonbank financial institutions (NBFIs) and discouraging access to the discount window through punitive interest rates. 2/ In response, the composition of domestic debt began to shift toward shorter maturities. The CBK then revised the structure of interest rates, tilting the slope of the yield curve in favor of longer-term treasury bills. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12 - CHART 4 KENYA Financial Market Developments, 1993-95 Fxchmge Rate 70: JFMAMJJASONDJFMAMJJASONDJFMAMJJ, 1993 1994 1995 Nairobi Stock Exchange wrkd u#ttiwum.z h mmiDu d 03. dnlllrs) A 70 65 60 55 50 45 40 35 4000 3500 3000 2500 2000 1500 1000 500 Sourc.: Dota provldsd by +h. Kanym outhoritisr. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13 - CHART 5 KENYA Reserve Money Developments, December 1992 - June 1995 Reserve Money (In miuiana Of rm,m P7fdlkqs) 60000 55000 55000 50000 50000 45000 05000 40000 35000 35000 30000 30000 25000 20000 2oorJo & IL n m I” n m I” n 250 200 Reseme Money Growth and its Sources (h percent d be~inin~-ot-paicd reme money) ea B-edit to Covwunat I Credit to the banking sgsfern m Net foreign assets - Reserve numq growth -2 -2 50 00 1% 100 50 3 -50 -100 $2 I!& n m I” IL n m IV I& n sourca: oata pr0”id.d by th, Kanyan a”th0riti.r. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTWO key policy questions arose from the review of these episodes: . Are the two fundamental objectives that the authorities are seeking, viz., facilitating economic recovery & maintaining macroeconomic s&ability through high interest rates, compatible under the current circumstances? . Should the authorities actively seek exchange rate stability at a competitive level, or should they be prepared to accept large exchange rata fluctuations as the market reacts to volatile foreign exchange flows? The authorities indicated that high levels of interest rates, though undesirable, would have to be accepted as long as -market conditions remained highly uncertain. They believed that, while the political calendar was a major factor, much of the investors' concern related to the delay in start- ing a new ESAF program and its impact on multilateral and bilateral aid flows. Thus, interest rates could be lowered as soon as the ESAF negotia- tions were completed, and this should not lead to large (net) redemptions in treasury bills and pressures in the foreign exchange market. While support- ing this strategy, the staff team cautioned that if the ESAF negotiations could not be concluded soon or if considerable uncertainty remained in the market even after an ESAF arrangement was finalized, fiscal policy should be further tightened. The authorities stressed the importance of maintaining a atable shilling for external competitiveness. It was noted that when the shilling depreciated during 1993, domestic prices of imported goods ware adjusted upward with a more or less complete pass-through, although with soma lag (6- 12 months). When the shilling appreciated, however, there was only a modest pass-through from lower import costs. This behavior of domestic prices led to a shift in the internal terms of trade against the tradable sector, particularly tourism (Chart 6). Moreover, the large exchange rate fluctuations made a timely assessment of external competitiveness more difficult. In retrospect, it was clear that the shilling, at around K Sh 45 - US$l, was overvalued from October 1994 through April 1995 (Chart 7). Imports responded strongly in the first half of 1995, with a lag, to the real appreciation in 1994, and the current account had worsened substantially. Nowever, the deterioration in the currant account was not known earlier this year because of the unavail- ability of timely data. Moreover, the weakening in the external payments Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 15 - CHART 6 KENYA Exchange Rate Movements and Prices, 1992-95 Ksh/US$ and CPI l/ _“” 240- ZZO- ?fifl Ksh/US$, CPI for Fuel and Power, and CPI for Household Equipment 1/ ,;’ ,_.“., ~-..u ._...: . . . . ,1 ., . ...’ ..,,,.)’ CPI-fuel lud pwer (kft scale) 60 50 40 30 sourcsr: Hi, ,“+sr”a+lona, Finmcia, S+dir+in. and cantro, B”m.0” 0, S+.ti.+iCs I/ CPI Index. January 199,:,00. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 16 - CHART 7 KENYA Competitiveness Indicators, 1989-95 Effective Exchange Rates (Index 188o.lW) :’ fkmild .,,.cti. :; edlmga vu*. : :.’ --- ;: ./ .. ._... ..___. Real Exchange Rates for Exporters and Importas (Ind= lW=IW) l,. , I- fPNpm) v I- fPNpm) v IrPMers mw ,, IrPMers mw ,, Sourcn: IUF, Informo+ion Notice System; and doto providd by the thyan authorltln. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17 - position was not immediately obvious at the time. given the stability of the shilling and the international reserves of the banking system. JJ In discussions with the staff team, market participants expressed the view that the present level of the shilling (around K Sh 55 - US$l) should not pose a threat to the competitiveness of Kenya's tradable sector. This assessment was supported by a staff analysis that indicated that the present level of the shilling is broadly consistent with the targeted improvement in the current account in the period ahead. It is critical, however, that inflation remain low, to protect the gain in competitiveness. The staff team understood the authorities' desire to target and maintain a competitive exchange rate, but argued that they might have to accept relatively large exchange rate fluctuations. The present level of international reserves would clearly preclude large sales of foreign exchange to support the shilling. Also. large purchases of foreign exchange to avoid an appreciation could not be sustained; the intervention-cum- sterilisation policy last year had perpetuated capital inflows, and led to an excessively high government domestic debt. Moreover, the effectiveness of fiscal policy as an instrument to cope with volatile foreign exchange flows was limited, not only because of the difficulties in implementing the required adjustments in a timely manner, but also because the magnitude of the feasible fiscal adjustments would be small in relation to the size of the flows. Furthermore, capital controls would not be advisable, as they would create doubts about the Government's commitment to economic liberali- zation, and undermine investor confidence. In sum, the staff team considered that the authorities did not have effective instruments to counter capital movements and keep the exchange rate stable at a desired level. Accordingly, the staff team recommended, and the authorities agreed, that monetary policy should be framed on the basis of targeting monetary aggregates, and that the NDA of the CBK should serve as the nominal anchor. Open market operations should be conducted to ensure that the NDA remain on the targeted path, with interest rates adjusting as necessary. In addition, foreign exchange intervention should be limited to smoothing short-term fluctuations in the exchange rate, ensuring that NFA remain within an admittedly arbitrary, yet operationally useful, band of K Sh 1.5 billion around the targeted path. If strong foreign exchange market pressures persist even after exhaust- ing the permissible interventions, then the exchange rate would be allowed u The CPI-based real effective exchange rate had appreciated to a level significantly higher than the level prevailing in early 1993, when the balance of payments was in crisis. However, analyses based on conventional indicators were thought to be less conclusive because of the large structural changes that the Kenyan economy was undergoing. Indeed, non- traditional exports (e.g., horticulture) continued to grow at a brisk pace. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 18 to'adjust freely. The authorities would consult with the staff to identify the sources of the pressures and modify monetary and fiscal policies appropriately. The authorities reiterated that monetary policy should focus--first and foremost--on maintaining inflation at no more than 5 percent. Under the authorities' monetary program for 1995/96. the NDA of the CBK ere envisaged to decline by K Sh 5.6 billion ( b a out 10 percent of beginning-of-period reserve money stock) by end-June 1996, about half of which would come from net repayments by the Government. Given the targeted increase in NFA of K Sh 3.4 billion, reserve money is projected to decline by K Sh 2.2 billion. With velocity projected to remain broadly unchanged and growth in economic activity at around 5-6 percent, the expansion in broad money of around 9 percent should be consistent with the inflation target of 5 percent. Given the planned decline in reserve money, the cash reserve requirement-- 18 percent at present--could be lowered, consistent with the broad money growth. u The authorities stressed, however, that the cash reserve requirement would be lowered only if all the relevant indicators suggested that inflation is safely under control. If there ere indications that inflation could exceed the 5 percent target, the authorities would maintain the cash reserve requirement unchanged and lower the NDA target to tighten monetary conditions further. a/ 3. Financial svstem reform The authorities indicated that the stability of domestic money and foreign exchange markets should be enhanced by their ongoing efforts to encourage greater competition and establish stricter discipline in those markets. Parliament approved, in March 1995, an amendment to the Banking Act that provided the CBK with greater supervisory authority over commercial banks. The amendment also required nonbank financial institutions to comply with the cash reserve requirements on the same basis as commercial banks. These measures are expected to produce, over time, a more competitive environment with a larger number of stronger banks. As regards the foreign exchange market, the authorities intend to enforce the limit on net foreign exchange exposure, on e daily basis, which should constrain the ability of a few large banks to drive the market. They also plan to introduce a code of conduct for foreign exchange dealers that should permit more orderly market transactions. In addition, the autho- rities intend to organize training sessions for local commercial bank dealers, so that they can compete on a more equal footing with foreign banks. u Beginning in July 1995, NBFIs are required to gradually build up their balance at the CBK so as to meet the cash ratio fully by December 1995. 2/ If, on the other hand, the inflation rate moved below the 5 percent target, the authorities would aim to safeguard the improved inflation performance by maintaining the NDA target unchanged. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 19 - The authorities stressed that it is necessary to strengthen the tech- nical capacity at the CBK in conducting monetary and foreign exchange market operations. They would require continued technical assistance in this area. They also indicated that coordination between foreign exchange and domestic monetary operations at the CBK, as well as coordination between the CBK and the Treasury, would be further strengthened. 4. Public enterurise reform The authorities were mindful that the inefficiency of key parastatals was the most critical remaining factor that is constraining growth in Kenya. In particular: Operations at the Mombasa port, the only commercial seaport in Kenya, are inefficient--handling charges are 50 percent higher, and the container turnover is three times slaver, than inter- national standards. Industries face periodic power blackouts; electricity tariffs in Kenya are higher than in other countries in the region, but they represent less than 70 percent of the long-run marginal cost of power generation. Railroad transportation remains unreliable. slower, and more expensive than road transportation. Telecommunications facilities are deteriorating. Although KPTC's arrears to the Government amount to K Sh 14.7 billion, the Corporation has spent about K Sh 1 billion for construction of a new headquarters building, and raised wages by 30 percent in October 1994. NCPB's cost of operations for maize average K Sh 330 per 90 kilo- gram bag, or 35 percent of the current international price of maize, resulting in a combination of both higher prices for consumers and large government subsidies. NCPB now carries 7 million bags of maize. equivalent to 50 percent of the annual marketed consumption, that it cannot sell without incurring substantial losses. The fiscal burden of parastatals amounted to about K Sh 6.1 bil- lion, or 1.5 percent of GDP, in 1994/95; this burden took the form Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 20 - of debt service payments by the Government, budget outlays to finance NCPB's purchase of maize, and nonpayment of taxes. J./ Recognizing that progress had fallen short of expectations under the lest ESAF-supported program, the authorities stressed that public enterprise reform is being accelerated in order to bring the reform beck on track. They noted the turnaround in the combined financial performance of four key parastatals (KPA, KPLC, NCPB, and Kenya Railways), from a loss equivalent to 0.1 percent of GDP in 1992/93 to a surplus of 1.2 percent of GDP in 1994/95 (Table 6). In addition, the authorities stressed the ongoing restructuring of those enterprises, which includes personnel retrenchment, corporate re- organization. managerial changes, partial privatization, end signing of performance contracts (Appendix VIII). The authorities also emphasized that the Government had recently taken major decisions regarding the four key parastatals. First, the management and operations of the container terminal of KPA will be contracted out to a reputable international operator. Second, non-economical railway lines will be closed, the passenger and freight services separated, end Kenya Railways restructured on this basis. Third, the privatization and restructuring plan of KPTC (except a few functions related to national security) will be completed by December 1995, in consultation with the World Bank. Finally, NCPB will be fully commercialized by December 1996; the modalities of commercialization are being worked out in consultation with the World Bank. Moreover, NCPB has been instructed to trade only at market prices, end to buy maize only if market prices fell below a certain level. The financial performance of key parastatals is expected to continue to improve. Specifically, the combined operating profit of the four key para- state16 is targeted to improve by about 0.5 percent of GDP in 1995/96, excluding the loss associated with NCPB sales of maize and depreciation allowances. The parastatals will take the necessary cost-cutting measures, including staff retrenchment and adjustments in tariffs. Finally, a study on the cross-debts between the parastatals and the Treasury was finalized in September 1995 and the procedures for their settlement established. The authorities indicated that the privatization program'would proceed on schedule. They have targeted the divestiture of 22 additional enter- prises by end-1995 and 40 enterprises in 1996. Moreover, the privatization of Kenya Airways has been advertised, and some interest has been indicated by potential investors. Further sales of the Government's shareholdings of the National Bank of Kenya and the Kenya Commercial Bank will be effected by end-December 1995 end end-June 1996, respectively, end work on divestiture u All direct and indirect subsidies were formally abolished in July 1994. Parastatals are now required to pay taxes on the same basis es private enterprises. Commercially based fees are required for use of government properties. In addition, market interest rates are charged for loans on-lent by the Government. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 21 - of et least four "strategic enterprises" will be initiated by end-1995. Except for a handful of public enterprises engaged in trade promotion, public utilities, public safety and other public interests, the authorities are determined to privatize, by end-1998, all public enterprises, both "strategic" and "non-strategic". While reaffirming their commitment to the privatization program, the authorities indicated that they were facing pressures to broaden the parti- cipation of Kenyans in the privatization process. The main issue preventing such a broader participation results from pre-emptive rights, by which the existing contract between the Government and the private shareholder stipu- lates that the latter has the first right to purchase government shares on the basis of mutual agreement. The private shareholders insist on exercising this right, and this raises a complicated problem regarding the fair price, and a delicate issue of foreigners taking over Kenyan proper- ties. The authorities are seeking the understanding and cooperation from the private shareholders so that the privatization program can proceed smoothly. The staff team welcomed the recent measures to bring the public enter- prise reform back on track, and expressed the view that the actions and plans described abale represented a credible effort by the Government for the coming months. It underscored the urgent need for the authorities to implement the restructuring actions as planned and carry forward the privatization program with maximum speed. 5. Balance of uavments outlook. trade reform. and exchange system The external current account deficit is projected to decline gradually from 1.9 percent of GDP in 1995 to 0.3 percent (on average) over the period 1996-2000, reflecting higher tourism revenues and lower interest payments (Chart 8). While imports of machinery, manufacturing, and basic raw materials are expected to remain strong, the trade balance is expected to improve as exports could grow by about 6 percent in volume terms. Kenya's balance of payments has become increasingly vulnerable to short-term speculative capital movements and, for this reason, it would be important to accumulate international reserves. On this basis, a financing gap of about lJS$135 million a year is projected, on average, for the next three years. Kenya's debt service on public and publicly guaranteed external debt in 1995 is estimated at about IJSSEOO million, or about 27 percent of exports of goods and services. L/ The present value of Kenya's external debt service is estimated at about 227 percent of exports of goods and services, and the debt service burden is projected to decline significantly over the next five years (Appendix IV). u Of Kenya's debt service, 27 percent is due to multilateral institutions. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 22 - KENYA External Sector F’rojections, 1993-2000 Current Account Trade Bslance 1.5 ,.a -0.5 -1.0 -1.5 -2.0 Import - Export Volume Growth Terms of Trade Changes -5.5 -6.0 -6.5 -7.0 -7.5 -8.0 -8.5 -9.0 -9.5 1993 lOD4 19115 1996 1997 1998 1909 2000 sourcn: oat.3 pr0”ld.d b” tll. Kmyon o”+horl+las: and 1993 lBSl 1995 19% 1997 1008 1999 2000 ltatt *silmates md pro,ec+lo”r. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 23 - While acknowledging that Kenya was paying significantly more in debt service than it was receiving in new inflows, the staff team stated that Kenya's external debt burden was manageable as long as sound macroeconomic policies were pursued. Kenya's debt service problem was considered to be related more to certain credits that were used to finance projects with questionable viability. Moreover, the terms of the previous Paris Club rescheduling (of arrears only, and on nonconcessional terms) were seen as a sign of strength by the international financial community. L/ The staff team expressed concern that small temporary debt service arrears continued to occur intermittently. The authorities explained that there had been frequent turnover at the department in charge of external debt management at the Treasury. This had resulted in delays in the preparation of the payments orders in the Treasury, and insufficient co- ordination between the Treasury and the CBK. The authorities indicated that a task force was revising the debt data base and that the procedure for preparing the payments ordsrs in the Ministry of Finance will be improved. Kenya became a member of the World Trade Organization (WTO) on December 23, 1994. Since the tariff rates in Kenya are well below the bound rates, membership in UT0 did not entail commitments to reduce tariffs. Neverthe- less, the Government intends to lower duty rates further and to simplify the structure over the next few years. In this context, the Government reduced the number of import duty rates to six (0, 5, 10, 15, 25, and 40 percent) in June 1995; and plans to reduce the maximum rate further to 30 percent, and the number of rates to no more than four (including the zero rate), by July 1997. Kenya maintains a multiple currency practice arising from certain obligations which were existing under the Exchange Risk Assumption Fund (ERAF), prior to its formal abolition in June 1994 (EBS/94/141). The inventory of existing commitments under the ERAF has been completed, and the outstanding obligations will be settled by end-1996. 6. Other issues The authorities had determined that K Sh 21.5 billion (about US$430 mil- lion, or 7 percent of GDP) of public funds had been misused between 1992 and July 1994 (EBS/94/208, Supplement 1). Since October 1994, the Government has recovered K Sh 5.9 billion in the form of cash and assets seized, including those that are currently held up in courts. This has brought total recovery to date to K Sh 13.8 billion, which is broadly in line with u The Government reached preliminary understandings in December 1994 with London Club commercial banks on a rescheduling of about US$72 million (including penalty fees) of arrears on terms similar to those for bilateral creditors. The agreement has been delayed because some banks have wanted to link the rescheduling to the buyback of other debt. The agreement is expected to be signed later in 1995. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 24 - the established schedule. Also, criminal prosecutions are under way against senior officials and others believed to have been involved in the irregular payments. Notwithstanding the substantive efforts made by the authorities, the recurrence of misuse of public funds has recently been reported. Partly for this reason, the authorities' actions have been insufficient to elicit financial support from a broad group of bilateral donors. The staff team discussed the need to provide the international community sufficient confi- dence that misuse of public funds would not recur. First, maximum efforts should be made to recover an additional amount of at least K Sh 1.2 billion by December 1995, in line with the earlier target; further recovery of at least K Sh 1.0 billion should be made by June 1996, to bring the total recovery to K Sh 16 billion, leaving K Sh 5.5 billion to be recovered. Second, the code of conduct for the civil service and its enforcement procedures should be strengthened to assure strict and prompt application of appropriate sanctions. Third, the current procedures for the granting of procurement contracts as well as external and domestic borrowing, and the payment mechanisms should be strictly enforced and, where necessary, be modified to ensure complete transparency of public finances. The Exchequer and Audit Act, External Loans and Guarantees Act, and other legislation should be reviewed to identify appropriate amendments required to this end. V. World Bank Lendinp. ODerations For the last several years, new lending from the World Bank to Kenya has remained modest. However, with the recent government decision to scale back the Eldoret Airport investment, and the agreement reached on commercial- ization and operating rules for NCPB, the Bank is now prepared to move forward on a number of investment projects. These include a poverty-focused Arid Lands Resource Management Project (US$22 million) and two essential infrastructure operations, namely Nairobi-Mombasa Road Rehabilitation (US$50 million) and Urban Transport (US$115 million). The arid lands project is slated for consideration by the Bank's Executive Board in late October, and the two infrastructure projects in mid-December. IDA has also been discussing with the Government a new Structural Adjustment Credit, the preparation of which has proceeded in parallel with that of an ESAF arrangement. This credit focuses on structural reforms in the areas of expenditure allocation, the civil service, and parastatals. The credit has been appraised, and substantive elements of the credit have been agreed to. Negotiation of the credit is linked to implementation of the agreed structural reforms and conclusion of the ESAF negotiations. VI. Staff Appraisal The Kenya economy is at a crossroads. Following several years of stagnation, real GDP grew by 3 percent in 1994, and inflation was brought down to single digits. The Kenyan public--and the international community-- rightly credited the Government for the rapid implementation of bold Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 25 - economic reforms. It "as thus hoped that 1995 would mark the beginning of a period of sustained economic growth and macroeconomic stability. Indeed, staff projections show that there are realistic prospects of achieving real GDP growth of 5-6 percent with low inflation over the next three years. Yet, substantial risks remain that such a favorable scenario may not materialize. The reversal in the maize sector reform earlier in the year reminded the public that progress in economic reform remains fragile. More- over, headway in instituting safeguards against financial irregularities has been slow, raising questions about the Government's commitment to stem recurrence of the activities that had led to a major financial crisis. The public is wary about whether the recently instituted multiparty democracy will lead to political stability and social harmony, particularly in the period leading to presidential and parliamentary elections in late 1997. In the staff's view, the 1995/96 government budget, presented to Parliament in June, constitutes an important signal that economic reform will stay on course even in the politically delicate period ahead. The budget is tight and consistent with the aim of facilitating private sector- led economic growth and fostering economic stability. The staff welcomes the authorities' commitment to fiscal discipline, es demonstrated by their decision to adopt additional measures to safeguard the target of net domestic repayments. The staff urges the authorities to ensure that the deficit target is met, that strict expenditure control is enforced, and that expenditures are oriented toward basic functions, truly productive areas, and social requirements. The recent announcement by the Head of State that the National Cereals and Produce Board will be fully commercialized by end-1996 is another indication of the Government's commitment to economic reform. In addition, the preparatory work on the privatization of telecommunications functions of Kenya Posts and Telecommunications Corporation has begun, and so has the preparation for contracting out management of the container terminal at the Mombasa port. Furthermore, the restructuring of Kenya Railways has been initiated, following the recent policy decisions to shed uneconomical rail- way iines and to contract out the operation of key maintenance functions. The staff believes that these decisions will now significantly accelerate the much-delayed reform of the key parastatals. The staff also welcomes the fact that the privatization program has proceeded on schedule. However, these steps are only a beginning, and the staff urges the authorities to spare no effort to ensure the timely conclusion of the reform of key para- statals and the overall privatization program, in close consultation with the World Bank. The implementation of monetary and exchange rate policies could continue to be complicated by volatile foreign exchange flows. The staff is of the view that foreign exchange intervention should be limited and should occur only with a view to smoothing out short-run fluctuations. If *C?CeS.SXy, the authorities should accept exchange rate variations in order to protect the Central Bank's international reserves. Moreover, while Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 26 - interest rates are very high in real terms, the pursuit of price stability must take precedence over other objectives. This would require that interest rates be adjusted as necessary to ensure that net domestic assets of the Central Bank remain on the desired path. The staff is encouraged that the authorities are in agreement with these principles. The staff believes that the authorities' monetary program for 1995/96 is appropriate, and urges the authorities to fully implement this program. The staff welcomes the timely publication of monetary, international reserves, and consumer price data. It encourages the Government to also publish monthly statistics of government finance, and improve the timeliness of comprehensive balance of payments statistics. The timely availability of economic statistics will help improve transparency, enhance investor confidence, and reduce volatility in the financial markets. The staff welcomes repeal of the Exchange Control Act that is slated for October 1995. It also welcomes the authorities' intention to settle, by the end of 1996, the obligations that remain under the Exchange Risk Assump- tion Fund (ERAF), which give rise to a multiple currency practice subject to Fund approval under Article VIII. In light of the authorities' established timetable to clear all the outstanding commitments under the ERAF by the end of 1996, the staff recommends Fund approval of the multiple currency practice. The staff is mindful of the importance for Kenya of implementing a comprehensive program that could be supported by a three-year ESAF arrange- ment. This would not only unlock a significant amount of multilateral financial assistance, but, more importantly, enhance investor confidence, as it would send a signal that economic reform will move forward. The staff believes that the authorities' policies presented above could form key elements of such a comprehensive program. However, it is crucial that the authorities provide greater assurances that the budget--and, more broadly, macroeconomic balances--will not be undermined by the recurrence of financial irregularities. To this end, the staff recommends that the Government enforce strictly the civil service code of conduct; ensure full transparency of public finances through appropriate actions; and redouble the efforts to recover misused public funds. Moreover, credible actions on governance issues in general are important to elicit broad donor support, without which an adjustment program could not be sustained over the medium term. It is proposed that the next Article IV consultation with Kenya take place on the standard 12-month cycle. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 27 - VII. ProDosed Decision The following draft decision is proposed for adoption by the Executive Board: Kenya's Exchange Risk Assumption Fund gives rise to a multiple currency practice subject to the Fund's approval under Article VIII, Section 3. In view of the authorities' intention not to enter into new commitments and to clear the outstanding commitments under, and dissolve the Exchange Risk Assumption Fund by December 31, 1996, the Fund grants approval for the retention of the multiple currency practice until December 31, 1996, or the conclusion of the next Article IV consultation with Kenya, whichever is earlier. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 28 - Table 1. Kenya: Selected Ezomnk and Finmcirl ln*icrtorr an* Medium Term .4dju.tncnt Fr.mwork. 1990-98 1.3 12.4 20.1 IS.8 8.5 LA -4.7 7.7 -9.3 -9.2 - 19.0 -9.6 21.8 24.4 IS.0 11.8 IS.6 2.3 16.4 24.3 20.7 6.7 14.0 3.5 -5.7 -8.1 23.7 31.6 - 7.9 -5.9 -1.0 -0.4 58.9 32.8 17.6 -1,s 2M I.4 1% So 22.9 2.1 13.9 14.5 19.6 5.9 - 15.6 -1S.I 6.2 -8.2 8.6 - 13.2 -7.1 15.7 19.9 13.4 16.6 19.4 2.2 17.3 21.3 19.3 6.1 13.2 2.0 - 1.8 -1.4 24.5 29s -4.9 -3.0 1.4 0.7 69.1 29.7 17.2 0.5 15.2 33.7 27.3 -1.1 -1.4 -7.2 -6.1 -0.4 5.4 - 13.4 11.4 42.9 42.6 26.4 16.5 0.2 B.0 54.7 MO 9.0 - 13.9 -17.5 11.6 -122 0.1 -40.1 -rn.l 637 3.2 23.2 498 3.0 5.0 m 19.3 6.5 9.9 6.6 7.0 5.0 is.8 1.7 5.0 34.8 10.1 5.3 n.2 11.1 4.3 42.7 10.1 5.1 7.0 9.5 6.4 xc.6 1.9 3.9 2x6 -8.0 -1.5 54.3 47.9 31.3 4.9 -4.0 y 29.3 14.8 - 10.4 2/ 26.5 7.6 8.7 2 23.3 16.0 -0.8 16.9 17.4 17.1 5.9 11.2 0.4 - 1.1 -1.1 24.2 35.6 -11.4 - 10.0 0.6 -5.0 69.2 29.6 16.8 201 -1.6 217 18.4 17 7 6.2 11s 0.7 1.8 01 292 372 -8.0 -6.8 5.3 -1.0 99.2 26 3 IS I 21.6 3.5 18.1 m.9 20.4 6.6 13.8 0.4 0.7 -0.4 31.5 34.0 -2.5 -1.1 5.5 5.2 79.1 24.3 15.0 21.0 7.2 13.8 21.8 21.3 7.3 11.0 0.5 -0.7 - 1.9 33.1 34.9 -1.7 0.4 5.4 5.6 72.8 26.6 14.3 2x6 7.6 IS.1 n.2 21.7 7.3 11.5 0.5 0.4 -1.2 32.1 33.6 -1.5 -0.2 4.3 6.1 70.5 24.5 12.6 (In !nimonaof”.S. do”an.“alessothenvucs~~ined, -314 -237 282 103 -88 36 1x4 I** 475 623 552 651 I.1 1.2 3.5 3.7 2.9 3.3 221 256 320 385 410 452 60 69 13 I48 144 163 n.5 32.2 580 56.0 51.0 55.0 5.3 10.2 5.0 5.0 6.3 5.7 5.6 6.0 5.2 -0.2 23.4 7.6 IS.8 23.0 n.5 7.7 Id.8 0.5 0.3 -0.7 31.5 33.0 -1.5 -0.5 3.2 6.7 63.4 x.3 11.4 21 772 3.7 498 172 55.0 5.7 11.1 5.0 5.0 7.3 6.0 5.9 6.0 5.2 0.5 a.3 7.7 16.6 2x5 730 8.0 IS.0 0.5 0.8 -0.1 3L.O 32.3 -1.3 -0.5 2.7 6.9 56.5 20.1 9.8 81 885 4.0 551 183 55.0 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 29 - Table 2. Kenya: Ealracc omymcnb. 1991-98 ,591 -146 -351 1,052 159 zn 76 540 -1,952 -147 -MC0 -385 -1.020 -WI 778 43, -122 -372 -249 348 144 XL4 -167 113 89 508 -419 39 -15 -280 -314 314 82 22: 80 2 184 1.1 223 -1.1 53.8 62 -1.8 -4.4 29.7 ,972 - -,,I -325 1.008 128 295 69 517 -1.866 -!?I -1.775 -412 -13.53 -858 820 442 -38 -355 -223 282 68 214 -126 -186 -131 276 -407 -39 -16 -- 64 -237 237 4: 313 -- * 5 182 12 536 -3.1 90.6 -6.1 -1.4 -4.1 29.6 1993 L994 1995 Eat. Pmj. (In muions Of us. d&n) 98 4 ID99 171 299 62 561 -75 -1,531 -407 -1,124 -507 735 391 22s -360 -175 234 136 94 183 -115 45 425 -380 -139 -8 -13 298 X2 -*a -303 -3a 49 _- __ -2s 4,: 5% -5.6 855 11.6 1.8 0.1 26.3 50 -30 1482 233 301 65 a3 -2.044 -78 -1,966 -333 -1,633 -562 759 501 1% -374 -no 228 148 80 53 -264 -207 252 -4.50 -17 -13 -- 3** 103 -103 -123 18 -499 501 _- -15, -28 625 3.7 4 96.3 7.0 0.7 -0.4 24.3 -156 I.631 236 304 74 1,016 -2271 -90 -2,181 -381 -1,799 -640 732 471 92 -378 -273 226 131 95 -27 -69 -112 379 -491 20 23 -- 41 -88 E 1; z 71 -22 552 2.9 0.0 11.9 1055 9.5 -0.8 -1.9 26.6 m Pro. 34 -102 1.718 217 335 75 I.092 -2369 -95 -2271 -384 -1,890 -651 767 503 117 -352 -24a 270 134 1% 1 -36 -80 391 -471 -- 44 38 36 -36 -100 -65 _- -- 129 -1w _- 651 3.3 -- 5.1 1M.8 6.4 0.4 -12 24.5 Sources: Data probided by the Kayan aulhoritin: and auffatimatn aad pmjedom !i Speirl imporu are mainly imports of mi7.c and sugar. ?i Exdudesrpccid imports y I” penen, olexpms olgds. setices. and priwc tr*“.fCR. 28 -65 I.827 204 373 79 1,171 -2.504 -59 -2,405 -409 -1.9% -677 813 531 136 -337 -225 229 136 94 -* -47 -106 336 -4442 59 -- 40 21 -21 -121 -76 -_ -- 17.5 -121 __ 772 3.7 52 104.1 6.0 0.3 -0.7 n.3 73 -17 I.961 207 416 85 1254 -2,655 -IO5 -2>50 -435 -2,115 -694 845 5M 151 -306 -198 228 138 w 8 -34 -104 337 -441 -_ 70 a 81 -81 -113 -77 104 -113 885 4.0 5.3 103.7 6.0 0.7 -02 20.1 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 30 - Table 3. Kenya: CcmaIGovernment Fimacid Opcntio~s, 1990/91-199X% Revenue .nd y*a Rcvcmue Taxrevenve “due-ldded tax hcomc 111 llp.md”ly Excise lax .nd orher No~rurevcr,“c cir.nts Expenditure and ael Idi& Recurrent expenditure wig” alId ..hien Interest paymne Other ree”rr.%I Devebplenl u$. a met kmdhg over.” b‘hce (c0mmitmcr.t hb) Ezcludiag grml9 hshding pa Adjusrment to cd bata over.,, bd.nee (C.d his) EXl”diq y.na Incl”dingy..cs Finming Foreign f.m.ncig Doncstk ri.ncir$ Fin.nciq sap Revenve d grmu Revenve l-u revenue “due-**.hd tax lacoPetu hpo”d”ly Ercise t.x .rtd other Noaturevenve Gr.as Expditurc *md llet lending Reevnent expecmure W.geP rnd s.,*rin Intereat p,ymcae Other rnurr.mt Devebpment experditure B met hdb~ Over.” hhce ,eonnitment b.Sia) Elchding pm* Incl”din~ym~ Adjustment to cub bid O”er.“c,sh lm,rme id. pnta Fim&~ Foreign liiatein~ Dolatk tii.nciq Fimcing gap Mcnor.ndun item: ODP (in nilkIll* or Keny. ahiuings, 49.474 15.388 14,262 6.378 5.868 7.578 4,165 6S.846 so.243 12,705 14.294 23.24 15.603 - 36.372 - 12,207 -2.524 - Ii,731 14.731 I.na 10.601 -- 25.7 23.7 al.1 7.4 6.8 3.1 2.8 3.6 2.0 31.6 24.1 6.1 6.9 11.2 7.5 -7.9 -5.9 -1.2 -7.1 7.1 2.0 5.1 208.393 73,603 69,661 57.608 22.143 19,959 7,139 8.367 12,053 3.942 m.460 84,118 26,9*0 34,425 22783 18.YZ -32,759 -28,857 5.116 -27,683 -n*71* 23.74, 630 17.331 -- 106,848 102823 91.s37 29,049 36.570 11,691 31,217 11,286 4.025 130,950 106,115 31,546 46,652 28,217 24x34 -28,m -u,m -933 -29.060 -25,035 21,035 560 24.475 -- (h pcr<entofODP) 25.5 30.3 24.2 29.2 20.0 26.0 7.7 8.2 6.9 10.4 25 4.2 2.9 3.2 4.2 3.2 1.4 1.1 35.6 37.2 29.2 30.2 9.3 9.0 11.9 13.2 7.9 8.0 6.4 7.0 - ‘1.0 -8.0 - 10.0 -6.8 1.8 -0.3 -8.2 -7.1 8.2 7.1 2.2 0.2 6.0 6.9 _- -- is8.111 352309 Sowcn: Da,* provided by the uthoritia; .nd am7 eaiP.Ies md pmjnriona Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 4. Kenya: Central Bark of Kenya Bahce Sheet, June ,993 - June 19% Net foreign auS3 Domestic credit Govcrnmcnt(ael) 1/ Sccuritia and direct a& owrdran 4, PMG 2, ACX3 a/ Advancer an* discounts to cmnmercial bmks apart ~c-shipment ownight advaxea owrdran Other domestic ss.93 ofwhich: Gxeip achange udcliemd currency outside banlrr BallkWS-ZM?32/ Mrmaandum items: Stak olT-bilk ouUtan*ing R- mooey (anaual percentage change) -9,339 36,108 13.08n 7,377 31.153 23.776 5,703 775 1,466 3.462 23.028 13,539 26,769 17,775 8,994 63.919 47.7 5,623 ?eJ!J 19.954 14,279 52,56a 3Jx.w 5,675 775 -- 4.m 16,555 5,809 42,132 ZL.355 20.777 58,683 63.7 16,lm 29,467 13,701 4,515 52,851 48,336 9.186 775 3,511 4,wo 15,766 5.m 45.545 21.833 23,711 80,938 78.9 21,410 19.375 6,139 -765 839 -1,604 -- -1,604 6.904 775 I.301 4.~ 13,236 5,370 20.438 20.347 a.609 52.4 source: Ceatra, Bank of Kellya. (1n million3 of Kmva Shillin& 24,059 20.8% 8.905 3,237 725 2,512 ‘775 537 4,356 11,991 5,37ll 44,955 21,696 23.859 94.941 46.0 11,374 43.!242 25,993 21p7 747 mm 4&! 775 10 3,911 17,949 5,370 55.316 24,829 30.487 82,484 31.3 13.651 24,765 18.351 723 17,638 WJm -2,455 -SW 775 2,039 3,590 13p9 5,370 51,715 24,459 27256 84,461 13.5 5.304 47,628 32,235 24,a24 744 23280 16,674 6,607 8,211 775 3,646 VW 15,393 w= 52,932 25.9im 27,032 75,399 29.8 5,187 53,185 40,534 36,169 1,914 HP5 2w% 13.999 4,355 775 3>w 12,651 5.452 %.m 26,949 31,423 6&w 24.4 6,219 51.799 35,365 31,&w 744 30356 22,563 7.694 4,365 16,434 58.018 25,822 32.1% 14,312 4.9 8,711 02,093 25,931 21,566 744 20,822 14,216 6.6@7 4,365 16.162 . 50,804 26,934 23,871 75.399 -4.cl 1, NFA valued at Kth 55.76= US I fmm June ,993 to June ,996. y June 1994 balance sheet reflects o&et of Govl stocks (K Sh 22,458 millioo) and Treasury bonds (K Sh 27,106million) and Government overdraft (K Sh 32.442 million) against Special Account No.2 (K Sh 83,610million). 21 ,adicates net domatic Iioancing horn the Cm. 4, Net overdraft pition is-a-vi3 CBK, including the T-bill--@may aad OMO--0pRatiom. 5, Total domestic iinancing need, arisiog from the budget, i.e. difference between apendiuer and rebeaua of the govanment. $I Account No. 3: net borrowing fmm noo-CBK through T-bills. An increase indicatea net redemption. 1, From June ‘95 inch&a NBFls Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 5. Kenya: Financial Survey, December 1992 - July 1995 L/ 1992 _ 1993 1994 1995 Dec. June Dec. Mar. JUtX sept Dec. Mar. June JUIY Est. Net foreign aSSets -7,066 -23763 19504 24,242 22,823 21,392 13291 13,221 lOPI 9,676 Net domestic assets 133,711 135,080 136,465 145320 145,456 159,710 183,940 183,247 198,131 194,901 Total domestic credit Government (net) Private Sector Other public sector 139,415 39,440 95,4% 4,479 133,933 33,008 97361 3J64 152298 48@7 99,012 4,399 159523 159,640 179,855 53@0 44,637 61,424 101,422 110,028 113,901 4541 4,975 4330 -14203 -14,183 -20,146 169562 168280 181,102 131,773 1%3@ 138,001 37,789 41,912 43,101 (Annual txxcenta~e change) 203,902 208,650 224,260 228,182 75905 73,798 75w 74,788 121,254 128,994 143,262 148,142 6,744 5,856 5,6% 5,252 Other items (net) -5,704 1,147 - 15,833 -19,962 -25,4CM -26,129 -3331 Money and quasi-money(M3) 126,645 132,317 155,%9 M2 9w= 104,648 124,629 NBFI money 27353 27,669 31,141 197,231 1%&v 2w3= 162,726 162,190 173;174 34505 34,277 34,614 204376 167,896 1 36,681 K I Money and quasi-money (M2) 33.6 34.7 25.7 24.5 20.8 23.8 30.4 23.1 37.5 31.5 Money and quasi-money (M3) 26.4 27.0 23.2 25.9 272 31.0 26.5 15.9 23.8 20.3 (In millionsof Kenya Shillinas) Source: Central Bank of Kenja. I/ Includes nonbank fmancial institutions (NBFI). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 33 - Table 6. Kenya: Operational Profit and Cash Position of Selected Public Enterprises, 199&93 - 19!35/96 1. operating balances 1/ Kenya Paver and Lighting Corporation (KPLC) - 147 2,043 4846 4,314 Kenya Posts & Telecommunications Company (KWC) 4% 593 5,923 7,074 Kenya Railways (KR) 62 520 4 481 National Cereals and Produce Board (NCPB) - 1,784 -2,522 -2,163 -3,485 Kenya Ports Authority (KPA) 1,543 395 2,181 2339 Y Total (in percent of GDP) Total excluding KFTC (in percent of GDP) Total excluding NCPB (in percent of GDP) 4,180 8,725 10,791 10724 1.5 2.5 2.1 2.5 -326 3,416 4w 3,650 -0.1 1.0 1.2 0.8 5,964 11,247 12,954 14,208 2.1 3.2 3.3 3.3 11. Cash position 2/ Kenya Power and Lighting Gxpot’ation (KPLC) Kenya Posts & Telecommunications Company (WC) Kenya Raihvays (KR) National Cereals and Produce Board (NCPB) Kenya Ports Authority (KPA) -150 -105 z-9 -147 124 1,216 -106 -180 -357 -183 287 -21 1,410 1240 171 3,160 -568 -199 -s&1 124 1,933 2501 2517 431,169 Total Total excluding KPTC Total excluding NCPB Memorandum item: GDP (in millions of Kenya Shillings) lw1/93 W&94 1994/95 Est. (In millions of Kcnw Shillings, unless otherwise specified) 139 15% 1.~ 288,111 Source: Data provided by the enterprises 352,309 3,448 2232 3,469 39Ip6 I/ Excludes foreign exchange losses/gains y Reflects an increaSe in depreciation allowance by KSh 1.0 billion, to KSh 1.4 billion, because of a revaluation of assets. 3/ As at end-period. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 34 - APPENDIX I Kenva: Fund Relations (As of Aunust'31. 1995) I. ~ Statlag: Joined 2/03/64; Article VIII II. General Resources Account: Quota Fund holdings of currency Reserve position in Fund III. SDR Deuartment: Net cumulative allocation IV. V. VI. Holdings Outstandinp Purchases and Loang: SAF arrangements ESAF arrangements Financial Arranaements: Approval IYE Date ESAF 12/22/93 ESAF 5/15/89 Standby 2/01/u SDR Milli 199.:: I4 owta 100.0 187.11 93.8 12.31 6.2 SDR Million DCatiOtJ 36.99 100.0 0.15 .4 SDR Milli II 14.;0 X 7.1 249.33 125.0 Expira- Amount Amount tion Approved Drawn Dafe ~SDR Millios) (SDR Million) 12/21/94 45.23 45.23 3/31/93 261.40 216.17 5/15/89 99.40 28.40 Prolected Oblie tions to Fund (SDR Million; based on existing use of resources andapresent holdings of SDRs): Overdue 8131/95 EEtl296 Principal _- 12.1 41.9 48.9 46.1 43.7 Charges/interest -- LlL!lLfi~Ll Total _- 13.2 44.7 51.5 48.4 45.8 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicAPPENDIX I VII. VIII. - 35 - l(enva - Relations with the Fund (concluded) (As of Aueust 31. 1995) whatwe Rate Arrannemenc: Float. The exchange rate on August 31, 1995 was K Sh 55 - US$l. Article IV Consultation: Kenya is on the 12-month cycle for Article IV consultations. The last Article IV consultation was concluded on December 22, 1993 (EBS/93/191 and H/93/258). IX. Technical Assistance LEG staff provided advice on foreign exchange legislation in February 1994. A staff follow-up MAE/LEG mission provided advice on banking legislation in April 1994. MAE provided technical assistance on foreign exchange management in July 1994. FAD provided advice on government expenditure management in February and July 1994, through short-term visits by a panel expert. As a follow-up, an expert has been assigned in Nairobi from July through December 1995. X. Resident Renresentative The Fund has had a resident representative in Kenya since December 1993. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 36 - . APPENDIX II Relations with the World Bank Group As of June 30, 1995. the World Bank had committed to Kenya $3.1 bil- lion, of which $2.6 billion had been fully disbursed (Statement A). Invest- ments (loans and equity) by IFC totaled $176 million, of which $41 million remains undisbursed (Statement B). 1. Aericulture The Bank's dialogue on agriculture focuses on supporting the broad thrust of the Government's sector development strategy and sector priorities. This strategy is based on realigning the policy framework and the incentive structure, and encouraging a more competitive marketing system with increased participation of the private sector in marketing and distribution of agricultural commodities. The Government's development strategy also recognizes the need to provide support for the core programs of research and extension. The Bank recognizes the need to significantly accelerate implementation, particularly with regard to liberalization of processing and marketing of agricultural commodities and for restructuring the role of Government in the provision of strategic services. The Bank's current involvement in supporting agriculture and environ- mental initiatives in Kenya comprises seven projects. These projects support the development of agricultural research and extension, enhance diversification and export orientation, and encourage natural resource management and conservation. On the institutional development side, the Bank is supporting the reorganization of the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock Development and Marketing, to develop its management and policy analysis capacity. On environmental/natural resource management, the Bank financed the preparation of the National Environmental Action Plan, and is assisting in wildlife conservation and management. The Emergency Drought Recovery Project, approved in February 1993 in response to the inadequate and irregular rainfall in late 1991 and early 1992, also has a component that focuses on mitigating the adverse environmental consequences of drought. In addition, the Bank is supporting a Forestry Development Project aimed at improving management of Kenya's forest resources. Awaiting presentation to the Bank's Board is an Arid Lands Resource Management Project that aims at: (a) reducing chronic poverty in the arid lands; (b) halting the deterioration of the natural resource base; (c) link- ing the largely marginalized communities of the arid lands with the rest of the economy; and (d) initiating the diversification from a pastoral economy. This project, along with the two infrastructure projects cited below, had been scheduled for Board consideration in the last fiscal year. However, concerns about economic governance resulting in these three projects being delayed. Under preparation is a Second National Agricultural Research Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 37 - APPENDIX II Project that would set the stage for developing a sustainable research program that is consistent with the needs of a rapidly diversifying sector. 2. Infrastructure A major impediment to private sector development is inadequately maintained and inefficiently operated physical infrastructure. Public sector, including parastatal, inefficiency is at the heart of many of these problems. Therefore, the careful restructuring of public expenditures and enhanced financial accountability of strategic state enterprises are crucial. Sustained progress in rehabilitation, maintenance and expansion of capacity in the respective infrastructure subsectors requires an appropriate framework of coherent sector development plans and policies, and the requisite institutional and organizational reforms to implement them, including an appropriate role for the private sector, and sound corporate governance and financial policies on management. The Bank has three ongoing infrastructure projects. The Geothermal Development Project's principal objective is to assist the country in preparing the necessary expansion of its generating capacity at least cost through utilization of indigenous energy sources. The Third Nairobi Water Supply Project includes major production, treatment and distribution works for Nairobi, and intends for the Nairobi Water and Sewerage Department to operate as a financially autonomous entity. The Second Mombasa Water Project provides for some rehabilitation of the coastal water system and the preparation of a large production project for the region. Two infrastructure projects are currently awaiting Board action: an Urban Transport Project, which will involve investments in new and expanded road links, intersections, and public transport facilities, and a Nairobi- Mombasa Road Rehabilitation Project, which will support rehabilitation of Kenya's chief transport corridor. In an advanced stage of preparation is an Energy Sector Investment Project, which is expected to increase generating capacity, reform energy pricing and encourage private sector participation in the sector. 3. Education and Health The Bank's attention is currently directed at developing viable financing and management capacity in these sectors. In education, this involves: (a) improving the quality of primary, secondary and university education to include technical training; (b) restructuring key sectoral institutions and policies to create incentives for more efficient service delivery in general; and (c) shifting public expenditure subsidies away from higher education and the expansion of the teaching force, to improving acces.s to quality basic education, especially in rural areas. In health, this involves: (a) the development of prevention programs for sexually transmitted diseases, including AIDS; (b) a shift in re.sources from curative to efficient primary care; and (c) a clarification of the respective roles of the private and public sectors. In both of these sectors, the shift of emphasis from rapid expansion to quality and equity improvements needs to be accompanied by a commensurate effort to build institutional capacity. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- - 38 - APPENDIX II The Bank's ongoing human resource operations number six. The Universities Investment Project focuses specifically on consolidating and developing the university system, with particular emphasis on limiting the growth of government budgetary resources devoted to the public universities by promoting cost sharing and improved investment planning. The Micro- and Small Enterprise Training and Technology Project aims to enhance entre- preneurial development in the private sector, specifically, to reduce constraints to employment promotion and enhance incomes in the informal sector. The Third and Fourth Population Projects, in addition to providing support for the Government's family planning services, provide financial assistance for drugs and information/education activities for addressing the rising incidence of sexually transmitted infections. The Health Rehabili- tation Project is intended to support the Government's reform of the health sector by rehabilitating Kenyatta National Hospital, thus reducing its burden on the overall budget end permitting an increase in expenditures on preventive and primary health care by improving the delivery of health service in the Nairobi area and by preparing for future policy and managerial reform. The recently approved Sexually Transmitted Infections Project has its objectives to reduce both the incidence and impact of such infections, including HIV/AIDS, in a cost-effective manner and to reduce the direct costs of AIDS and the workload of health facilities. A major objective will be to strengthen the institutional capacity at the national and provincial/district levels to design, implement and evaluate appropriate interventions. The Bank is currently preparing an Early Child Development Project which will aim at reinforcing existing institutions and improving the quality of services offered to pre-school age children. 4. Public Sector Hanaeement The Bank has provided two credits to improve public sector management in Kenya. A Parastatal Reform and Privatization Technical Assistance Project provides overall technical support for the Government's privati- sation program as well as for the preparation of specific restructuring plans for those enterprises remaining in the public portfolio. A Civil Service Reform Project provides support for the Government's efforts to reduce the size of the civil service and rationalize specific ministries. 5. Adiustment Lending After two structural adjustment loans in the early 198Os, a sectoral approach to adjustment was adopted on the premise that sector ministries would exercise greater ownership and accountability if they were directly involved in the design and implementation of reforms. Since 1986, Kenya has received six sectoral adjustment credits. The final tranches of the Agricultural Sector Adjustment Operation, the Industrial Sector Adjustment Credit and the Financial Sector Adjustment Credit were disbursed in 1988, 1990 and 1991, respectively. However, implementation progress under the three adjustment operations that followed, i.e., the Second Agricultural Sector Adjustment Operation (ASAO II) and the Export Development Project (EDP), both approved in 1991, and the EDSAC, approved in 1992, was more mixed. Backtracking by the Government on maize liberalization resulted in cancellation of the second tranche under the ASAO II in December 1992, and Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 39 - second tranche releases under the EDP and EDSAC were delayed until May and December 1993, respectively, because of the failure to maintain an appropriate macroeconomic framework. Release of the third and final tranche under EDSAC occurred in late 1994. Concerned that the slow pace of adjustment under the sectoral approach has been insufficient for the desired rate of economic growth, job creation and poverty reduction, the Bank has made its consideration of new adjustment operations in the future conditional upon the Government's progress on agreed sectoral reforms across the board, demonstrating a strong commitment to much-improved public sector management and to private sector development. The Bank ie preparing a Structural Adjustment Credit that would be under- taken with the objective of providing support for the next phase of reform under the Policy Framework Paper in the areas of budgetary control, public expenditure allocations, and civil service and parastatal reform. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 40 - APPENDIX u Status of Bank Gmup Operations in Kenya A. Statement of q RD Loans and IDA credits in the Operations Portfolio (as of June 30.1995) Amount in USS millions Loan or Fiscal Credit No. Yw Borrower Punmsc mm IDA CSncCl- Undis- Forty-six (46) loans and sixty-seven (67) credits closed 930.10 1 S22.83 of which: SAL, SECAL, or Pqram Loan Credit 60.90 925.53 Cr.19040 1988 Cr.19730 1989 Cr.20600 1990 Cr.20620 1990 Cr.21100 1990 Cr.21980 1991 Cr.21990 1991 Cr.22040 a/ 1991 Cr.23090 1992 Cr.23100 1992 Cr.23330 1992 Cr.23340 1992 Cr.24400 1993 Cr.24450 1993 Cr.24600 1993 Cr.25960 1994 Cr.26710 b/ 1995 Cr.26860 1995 KCny.¶ Kenya Kenya KCIlVa Kenya KeIM Kenya Kenya Kenya Kenya Kenya Kenya Kenya Kenya Population m 12.20 6.05 Gmthmnal Development 40.70 4.59 Third Nairobi Water Suppl. F’mj 64.80 32.31 coffee n 46.80 22.18 Population N 35.00 34.72 Forestry Dwclopmcnt 19.90 14.59 Ag. N&l. Ext. ll 24.90 19.73 A8ric. sector Adjust. II 75.00 33.50 6.28 Univetxities 55.00 54.62 Health Rehabilitation 31.00 29.43 Mombasa Water II Eng. 43.20 37.62 Wildlife Services PI. 60.50 39.88 Pamstatal Reform TA 23.32 21.94 A8riC. sect. h4ngt. I 19.40 17.17 Drought Reaery 20.00 16.06 Micro & Small Enterprise 21.83 24.38 ht. Development 25.35 26.18 Sexually Tnnsmittcd Infection 40.00 43.38 Total 930.10 2.181.73 ofwhich repaid 645.10 51.91 Total held by Bank and IDA Amount sold of which repaid Total undisburxd 33.50 451.11 45111 .w SAL, SECAL or Program Loan/Credit b/ Not yet effbctivc Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 41 - APPENDD( Il Status of Bank Gmup Opemtim~s in Kenya (cooeluded) B. Statement of IFC lnvcst”xnts in Kenya (as of June 30, 1995) Fiscal YCZU Obliger Type of Business Amount in USS millions Loan Equity Total 1994 AEF-AURA Mfg. of Weaving Apparel 1995 AEFCAPITAL FISH Canning Prcsctvcd & Prcccssing 1993 AEF-Fuhtn Hotel Rcstaumnts & Hotels 1995 AEF-KlH.lNGO ROSE Agric. & Livestock Products 1991 EAF-MALAA Agric. Wholesale de Retail 1994 AEF-MDSI Agric. Wholcsslc 81 Retail 1993 AEF-SAWA FLORA Agric. & Livestock Products 1994 AEF-SAWA FLORA Agric. 81 Livestock Products 1995 AEF-VEGPRO Agric. & Livcstwk Products 1994 AEF-Waterfront Restaurants 81 Hotels 1992 AEF-Wood Complex Mfg. of Wood 81 Cork Products 1982 Bamburi Cement Cement Lime & Plaster 1980-1984 DFCK DFC, Mfg Pulp Paper & Paperboard 1982 Diamond Trust Merchant Banks I994 FARC lnsumncc Companies 1986 EBP Rcstammts & Hotels 1995 lNT HOTELS Restaurants & Hotels 1982 m w Venture Capital Companies 1986 IPS (K>AL Venture Capital Companies 1986 E’S (K>ALLPACK Mgf. of ContaincrJ & B”XCS 1993 IPS (K>ALLPACK Mgf. of Containers & Boxes 1986 IPS CK4RIGOKEN Venture Capital Cornpanics 1986 IF’S (IQ-NOVASKINS Venture Capital Companies 1986 IF’S (K>PREM FOOD Venture Capital Companies 1986 IF’S O(>PREM REFR Venture Capital Companies 1986 IPS oo4JKuLlMA Venture Capital Companies 1981 KCFC Sm. & Med. Scale Enterprises 1966.1973 Kenya Hotel Restaurants 81 Hotels 1984 LLK Tanneries de Leather Finishing 1992 LM Tanneries 81 Lather Finishing 1985.1986 Madhupapcr Mfg Pulp Paper 81 Paperboard 1985-1986 oil Crop Mfg. Vegetables &Animal 011 1970-1990 Pan African Mfg Pulp Paper 81 Papcrbasrd 1994 Pan African t”ff8 Pulp Paper 81 Paperboard 1975.1985 Rivatcx Spinning, Weaving & Finishing 1977 SMSIE-KE Small & Med. Scale Enterptiscs 1983 TETRA PAK Mfg. Containers & Boxes 1972-1984 TPS (Kenya) Tourism Services Total Gross Commitments Less: repayments. cancellations, exchange adjustments, 154.20 21.39 175.59 writcoffs, terminations and sales 113.10 11.21 124.31 Total Commitments now held by FC 41.09 IO.18 51.27 Total Undisburscd 9.84 0.50 10.34 Total Outstanding lFC 31.25 9.68 40.93 0.30 0.64 0.50 0.52 0.53 0.29 0.32 0.95 1.00 0.40 4.43 5.07 3.67 6.00 5.M) 5.16 2.12 37.16 9.65 40.74 IS.00 8.16 2.00 2.17 2.42 0.16 0.20 1.31 0.80 2.70 0.55 0.62 0.31 0.05 0.06 0.14 0.11 0.14 0.06 0.72 0.60 0.03 I .97 1.40 6.27 2.77 0.37 0.05 0.30 0.64 0.50 0.52 0.69 0.29 0.20 0.32 0.95 I .oo 0.40 4.43 6.38 0.80 2.70 3.67 6.00 0.5s 0.62 0.3 I 0.05 0.06 0.14 0.11 0.14 0.06 5.00 5.88 2.72 0.03 39.13 I I.05 47.01 1S.M) 10.93 2.00 2.54 247 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 42 - Kenva - Statistical Annex The quality of the economic data base in Kenya is generally satis- factory (Table 1). A detailed account of various sectors and the corresponding statistical data are provided in a comprehensive annual publication (Economic Survey) by the Central Bureau of Statistics (CBS). The financial resources available to the CBS do not permit more comprehensive and timely data. Monetary, exchange rate, and some external data are published on a monthly and quarterly basis by the Central Bank in Fts Monthly Economic Reviews and Quarterly Statistical Bulletins. core financial data are available to the Fund on a regular basis. The last technical assistance mission in statistics to Kenya was in 1992. National income accounts (annual only) and the supporting sectoral data are prepared by the CBS, and are generally of good quality. National accounts data at constant prices use an outdated base year (1982); the authorities intend to rebase their constant price national accounts. 2. prices and Droduction A consumer price index (Nairobi) is compiled by the CBS and is reported on a monthly basis without a lag. There is no producer price index but the authorities intend to initiate the preparation for the compilation of this index. The index on manufacturing production needs to be rebased, as it uses an outdated base year (1976) and is available only on an annual basis. 3. Government finance The staff is provided with current information on central government fiscal accounts, with appropriate disaggregation, on a monthly basis vith a short lag. The recording of external financing and expenditure directly financed from abroad remains, however, an area for improvement. 4. fionetarv statistics Comprehensive financial data are produced by the Central Bank of Kenya (CBK) and reported to the staff and IFS on a timely basis. Data on the central bank balance sheet and international reserves are made available to the staff, usually within a week from the date they are compiled. nowever ( data on deposit money banks and data on average deposit and lending rates are not current in IFS. The staff encouraged the authorities to provide regular monthly reporting of interest rate data for publication in IFS. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 43 - 5. J)a lanceof Kenya reports balance of payments data on a regular basis to the IFS, although with a considerable lag. The overall quality of data is reasonably good for trade transactions; data for other current account and capital account transactions, most notably private sector capital flows, are poor. External trade data from the customs are reported on a monthly basis, although with significant lags. The timely availability of customs data as well as the recording of external public financing in the balance of pay- ments , especially imports financed directly by foreign aid, need to be improved. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 1. Kenya: Survey of Reporting of Main Statistical Indicators as of September 29, 1995 Exchange rates International reSer”eS Central Reserve/ Bank base balance rlwney sheet Broad “lO”.S” COWlJllW Current Overall Interest price Exports/ account government ,SWS index Imports balance balance GDP/GNP Date of latest observation Date received Frequency of data 11 Frequency of reporting 21 Source of data 3/ Mode of reporting 4 1 Confidentiality A A A A A A A A A A A-N C C C C C C C c-v c-v C A-V C D D D C C C C C D C I/ D = Daily; W = Weekly; M = Monthly: 0 = Ouanerly; A = Annually. L/ A=direct reporting from Central Bank or Ministry of Finance; N =official publication. a/ C = Facsimile: M =Mail: V = Staff visit. &I C =for restricted use; D =embargoed for specific period and then for unrestricted use. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 45 - ,4PPENDIX IV Official External Finance and External Debt 1. Tren >vJ n i a Over the last 20 years, Kenya has become increasingly dependent on external financing. The bulk of these inflows have been on concessional terms, and since the early 1980s the share of concessional financing has increased steadily. In 1988-91, there was a sharp increase in concessional inflows, in particular from IDA. This trend was reversed in 1992, as donors suspended balance of payments assistance to Kenya and severely reduced project assistance, urging Kenya to implement political reforms, curb corruption and strengthen economic policies. The disbursements from IDA, which had averaged around US$200 million a year in 1988-91, declined to about US$90 million in 1992. Disbursements of grants and concessional loans by bilateral donors, which had averaged more than US$310 million per year in 1988-91, were reduced to US$260 million in 1992. In 1993, in support of the Government's macroeconomic and structural reform program, donors resumed their financial assistance to Kenya, and there was a particularly marked increase in financing on concessional terms. Many donors have shifted from cash grants to project and technical assistance. In 1994, Kenya's relation with bilateral donors improved. Although the inflow of external finance declined significantly, this outcome reflected slow project realization in Kenya, and a delay in the audit of World Bank accounts which led to a postponement in IDA disbursements. At the Consultative Group meeting in Paris in December 1994, donors pledged commitments of about US$SOO million for 1995 and 1996, although only a relatively small part represented new commitments. In 1995, Kenya's relations with bilateral donors deteriorated. Their concerns relate to good governance, political reform, freedom of press, effectiveness of the judiciary system, corruption, and to the setback in economic reform. For the next few years, official financial assistance to Kenya could be constrained. In addition to the increased competition for external assistance and budget constraints in donor countries, Kenya's track record in the areas where donors attach particular importance has not been strong. 2. External Kenya's scheduled debt service obligations on public and publicly guaranteed external debt in 1995 are estimated at about US$SOO million. This is equivalent to 28 percent of Kenya's exports of goods and services. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicAPPENDIX IV Debt service to multilateral institutions amounts to US$214 million consisting mainly of the World Bank (US$155 million) and IHF (US$45 million). For the World Bank, about US$128 million is for service on nonconcessional debt. The substantial increase in debt service in U.S. dollar terms in 1995 reflects, among other things: the weakness of the U.S dollar against other major international currencies, u the expiration of grace periods on large debts contracted in the second half of the 198Os, and the repayments of arrears rescheduled in 1994. Debt service is projected to remain high over the medium term. Repayments to the Fund is projected to average US$66 million a year over the next five years. Although Kenya's debt service poses a burden on the economy, Kenya's external debt is not excessively high in relation to other severely indebted low-income countries. The present value of Kenya's debt service obligations is estimated at 227 percent of exports of goods and services, which is low compared with other sub-Saharan African countries. a/ A rule of thumb is that if the present value of future debt service declines to less than 200- 250 percent of exports of goods and services, the debt position is sustainable. Also, a scheduled debt service below 20-25 percent of exports of goods and services might generally be considered sustainable (see SM/95/228). Moreover, the scheduled debt service of the Government of Kenya is equal to about 23 percent of budgetary revenue (excluding grants) in 1995/96. This is also low in comparison with other sub-Saharan African countries. Assuming no major external shocks, Kenya's debt service should be manageable if the authorities pursue appropriate macroeconomic and structural policies and follow prudent debt management. Under this scenario, the external position could strengthen considerably over the medium-term, with the current account improving to a balanced position (excluding grants) by 2000. w Also, under this scenario, Kenya would make large net repayments on its public external debt, and Kenya's debt service would decline to 19 percent of exports of goods and services by 2000, The fiscal burden of the debt service of the central government would also decline to around 16 percent of budgetary revenue (excluding grants) in 1998/99. However, there could still be some financing gap in 1995-98 reflecting the need to build up international reserves. The gap could amount to about US$135 million, on average, for the period 1996-98 which may be financed through additional multilateral and bilateral assistance. u Only about 16 percent of Kenya's stock of debt is denominated in U.S. dollars, 35 percent in SDRs, 16 percent in Japanese yen, and 6 percent in French francs. 2/ This figure is from end-1993 and will have to be revised as the debt database is improved. u The medium-term scenario is described in Appendix VII. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicSensitivity analysis by the staff shows that, under a less ambitious adjustment path, reflected in, for example, export volume growth of 5 percent per year in 1995-2000, instead of 6.6 percent, the debt service ratio would be only about lti percentage points higher in 2000. Alternatively, if the projected financing gap is not financed on concessional terms, but at, say, five percent interest and five years maturity without grace, the debt service ratio would be about five percentage points higher than in the original scenario in 2000 (at about 24 percent). While this analysis shows that the debt service projection is sensitive to the assumptions on the terms of new borrowing, it also indicates that the assessment on the sustainability of Kenya's extended debt reduction is relatively robust. There have been periodic accumulations of short-term external arrears in the recent past. These temporary accumulations of arrears do not reflect a lack of resources, but administrative delays in the Ministry of Finance and insufficient coordination between the Ministry of Finance and the Central Bank of Kenya. A task force, consisting of officers from the Ministry of Finance and the Central Bank, is working to improve the external debt database to improve forecasting of debt service payments, and to enhance management of external debt. The task force is expected to complete its work in October 1995. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 48 - Honey and crsclit Dam.*t*c cr.dit 2, Gov.m.nt 0th.r public s.ctor Pri”.t. s.ctoz kmay and qu..i-m0n.y 2, m 81.0 29.8 13.1 5.0 25.2 13.5 13.6 1989/90 42.9 4.3 55.1 41.8 13.4 -0.4 -12.6 -8.3 6.0 2.3 1989 14.6 0.7 -1.5 15.4 20.8 EiQ 86.5 29.5 13.3 4.4 23.9 15.7 20.1 1990/91 w 86.2 28.1 13.5 2.1 21.3 19.6 14.5 1991/92 w Lw 86.6 86.9 27.6 26.6 13.6 13.8 0.5 0.2 17.4 18.4 27.3 46.0 33.7 54.7 m 1992/w APPERDIX Y u2i 89.5 Z6.6 13.6 3.0 20.9 28.8 6.6 m 125.3 5.5 135.2 107.6 27.6 0.7 -9.2 -3.7 -4.9 8.6 199) 36.9 19.7 1.3 15.9 30.4 1, Fix.1 ye.r, July l-June 30. 2, I” percent Of broad money 12 months earlier Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public, - 49 - w cm) u 916 -2,279 -1.365 499 250 -616 681 139 141 74 65 -7., -10.3 327 1.7 3.843 ,a., ._ m Lxl m 1993 (I” million* OI U.S. doll.**) 993 -2.311 -1,318 670 209 -492 367 155 212 189 -115 l,OSZ -1,992 -900 550 204 -166 -167 89 -256 -ZBO -31, 1.008 -1.866 -858 533 214 -111 -126 -131 4 59 -237 -5.6 -1.8 -1.6 -8.0 -4.4 -4.1 264 184 182 1.4 1.1 1.2 (Jn million, Of sm.1 3.711 4.062 3,910 36.1 32.3 33.1 __ 223 536 I.099 -1.606 -507 512 94 99 183 .5 138 298 282 1.8 0.1 675 3.5 3,920 28.6 585 ,ApPENuIX ” 199) 1.482 -2.044 -562 533 80 51 53 -207 260 320 103 -0.7 -0.4 625 3.7 3.788 26.2 86 1, Incld.. tran*.ctio”s et cunn.rclal ta*., and .rror, an* mi.,ion*. 2, pubus O.dim- and lo~-t.m d.bk. inc1wlin. th. Fund. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 50 - . APPENDIX VI Kenva: Selected Social and Demoerauhic Indicators u Area Total land area (square kilometers) 582,600 Population and vital statistics Total population (1993, in millions) Population growth rate (1980-1993 average, in percent) Urban population (percent of total) Population density (1992, per square kilometer) Population age structure (in percent) O-14 years 15-64 years 65 and above Crude birth rate (per thousand) Crude death rate (per thousand) Infant mortality rate (per thousand) Life expectancy at birth (years) 25.3 3.3 26 43.0 54.0 44.0 2.1 36 9 61 58 Health and nutrition Access to safe water (in percent of population) Urban (1989) Rural (1989) Population per physician (tn thousands) (1990) Per capita supply of Calories (per day) (1989) Proteins (grams per day) (1989) Labor force Total employment outside small-scale rural agriculture (in millions, 1994) Male (in percent) Female (in percent) Education Enrollment rates (in percent) Primary (1990) Secondary (1990) Pupil-teacher ratio Primary (1992) Secondary (1992) 61 21 10 1,973 55 3.4 76.9 23.1 95 29 31 17 Sources : The World Bank, Stars Data Bank; and Republic of Kenya economic Survev 1995. 1/ Unless otherwise indicated, estimates refer to the latest available data for 1993. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 51 - APPENDIX VII Kenya - Medium-Term Scenario Kenya's economy has undergone substantial liberalization and structural adjustment in the past few years. This appendix examines a scenario that assumes that structural adjustment and macroeconomic stabilization continues. The recent liberalization of the economy and the implementation of a strong economic program is assumed to lead to real improvement in Kenya's external competitiveness, notwithstanding a decline in the terms of trade. This improvemdnt, together with the' strengthening of Kenya's regional market, would set a basis for an export-led growth. Real GDP growth is projected to increke steadily to nearly 6 percent by 1998, assuming that the climatic conditions remain favorable over the period (Table 1). Most of the growth would be derived from'the services and manufacturing sectors, with agriculture envisaged to grow by about 4-5 percent a year. Growth would rely on the relatively well-educated labor force, increased private investmkt; and productivity gains arising from structural reforms. The elasticity of employment with respect to real GDP growth is estimated at 0.7, and employment would grow at 4.2 percent and absorb the expected growth of the'labor force over the period. Private investment is projected to increase from 12 percent of GDP in 1992-93 to 15k percent in 1998; it would be complemented by higher public 'investment, from about 6 percent in 1992-93 to 8 percent in 1998. to restore Kenya's,infrastructure and promote the development of the private sector. The efficiency of investment would increase as reflected in a decline of the incremental capital output ratio from 4 in 1995 to about 3k in 1998. Gross national saving would increase from 18 percent of GDP in 1992/93 to 24% per- cent in 1998 as a result of further fiscal adjustment and the increased profitability of the private sector. The saving/investment balance would improve over the period to reach 0.8 percent of GDP in 1998, if external grants are included, or near balance, if they are excluded. Reflecting the evolution of the saving/investment balance, the balance of payments is projected to strengthen. The current account balance (excluding official transfers) would improve gradually from a deficit of 1.9 percent of GDP in 1995 to about l/3 percent of GDP, on average, over the period 1996-2000. Exports are projected to grow in volume by about 9.5 per- cent in 1995, assisted in part by very favorable weather. Thereafter, export volume growth is expected to slowdown to closer to the growth in Kenya's production capacity and demand in Kenya's partner countries. Import volume, which is projected to grow by about 15 percent in 1995, is expected to slowdown significantly in 1996, and thereafter to grow in line with real aggregate demand in Kenya. Imports of machinery, manufacturing, and basic raw materials are expected to continue to record a strong growth, reflecting the buoyant investment activity, After a slight decline in 1995 following the appreciation of the currency, the tourism sector is assumed to grow by a modest 3-4 percent per year over the medium-term, reflecting the increased competition from South Africa and Asia. Net factor income is expected to Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 52 - improve slightly over the medium-term, reflecting the improved terms of borrowing by the Kenya Government in recent years. The balance on official medium- and long-term capital is projected to continue to be significantly negative over the medium term. The medium-term scenario does not assume any rescheduling of debt service, except for arrears outstanding at end-1993 to commercial banks for which a preliminary understanding had already been reached. For private capital flows, the balance of payments includes a moderate increase in foreign direct investment consistent with the projected increase in private investment and the planned privatisation of public enterprises. The large inflows of short-tens capital recorded in 1993 and 1994 are not expected to continue, and only inflows of short-term trade credits have been assumed. This would imply a significant decline in the Government's debt-to-GDP ratio, from 79 percent in 1994 to about 45 percent in 2000. The medium-term balance of payments under this scenario includes a gradual buildup of official reserves, from lJS$495 million, or about 2.7 months of imports, at end-June 1995, to US$552 million, or about three months of imports at end-December 1995, and further to four months of imports at end-1998. This level of international reserves is not high in relation to the magnitude of potential swings in private capital flows. Indeed, compared with other countries with an open trade and axchange system, a reserve coverage of four months is low. Given the fully libaralized exchange system and the increasing share of savings in the form of financial assets such as treasury bills and corporate sharas, Kenya's balance of payments has become Increasingly vulnerable to short-term speculative capital movements. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 53 - Table 1. Kenya: Long-Term Bdancc of Payments Micaton. 1594-2000 (In DerCCnt. YdeU olbenvbcnoted) APPENrlIX “II 199( 1995 E!x 1997 1998 1999 zoo0 Fdt. Pro,. P*0j. Pm. Pmj. Pmj. P,oj. -30.1 -0.1 0.7 3.8 7.0 119.1 -9.8 -7.1 20.3 24.3 123.3 272 3.6 104.7 -2.6 844 16.0 59.0 621 3.6 3.0 28.8 19.7 19.1 0.6 9.1 9.1 0.1 205.1 79.1 - 155.6 - 1.9 -0.8 10.1 9.5 130.1 5.0 20.0 8.3 0.1 123.7 11.1 1.9 106.7 9.1 92.L 14.9 96.2 551.7 356.7 3.0 26.1 17.2 15.9 1.3 8.8 8.7 0.1 202.5 71.3 101.7 -1.2 0.4 5.3 6.4 138.7 5.0 5.0 1.3 -l.L 32.3 1.3 3.9 110.9 0.4 92.4 5.1 94.4 651.4 418.4 3.4 25.4 17.6 15.5 2.1 7.8 7.6 0.2 195.1 70.2 -65.4 -0.7 0.3 6.3 6.0 147.1 6.0 5.0 6.4 0.3 122.7 5.7 5.2 116.7 0.5 92.9 5.2 93.7 Tn.2 497.6 3.9 23.4 16.1 11.0 2.4 7.0 6.8 0.1 183.7 63.5 16.5 -0.2 0.7 7.3 6.0 155.9 6.0 5.5 6.2 1.2 124.2 6.0 s.2 122.8 0.7 93.6 5.3 93.3 884.9 569.4 4.2 21.1 15.3 13.2 2.1 5.7 5.6 0.1 171.2 56.8 9.1 0.1 0.8 6.8 5.8 165.1 5.5 6.0 6.0 0.9 125.3 5.3 5.2 129.1 -0.4 93.2 5.2 92.9 931.5 596.7 4.2 20.8 15.8 13.9 1.9 5.0 4.9 0.1 158.8 51.0 M.4 0.3 0.5 6.9 5.8 174.7 5.5 5.0 6.3 1.0 126.5 5.5 5.2 135.9 -0.2 93.1 5.2 92.4 982.9 626.8 4.2 18.6 14.2 12.8 I.4 4.4 1.3 0.1 146.5 44.8 1, CUrreOt rcceipra ?z crporls Of &wdS. mvices. and p*iwe tr.rdcn. g Debt rervice Of medium- and hg-lerm debt only. iClUdi0~ dcb, OI public cnterprkes and debt scrvkc Ol finmcig gap. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicAPPENDIX VIII - AllO” Km purchas.. Of mair. only if m.iz, pric. .bllS b.lmI . c,rt,.in l.v.l; limit purcha‘.‘ to no mar. c3.D K Sh 2.5 billicm - 8.“. SCPB c..ll 5 minion b.s. Of mair. .t marht pris.. 1, An .ddit,ionsl 4.000 redYCti0” by Jun. 1996 i. r*j.ct to .Xhrn.l fi”ulCiq, Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public