DOCUMENT OF INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND NOT FOR PUBLIC USE MASTER FILES ROOM HQ C-525 0450 SM./99/86 CONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION April 7, 1999 To: Members of the Executive Board From: The Secretary Subject: Papua New Guinea -Staff Report for the 1999 Article IV Consultation Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staff report for the 1999 Article IV consultation with Papua New Guinea, which will be brought to the agenda for discussion on a date to be announced. Mr. Molho (ext. 38558) or Mr. Canetti (ext. 34028) is available to answer technical or factual questions relating to this paper prior to the Board discussion. Unless the Documents Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the WTO Secretariat on Thursday, April 15, 1999; and to the Asian Development Bank and the European Commission, following its consideration by the Executive Board. Att: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicCONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL, INFORMATION INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND PAPUA NEW GUINEA Staff Report for the 1999 Article IV Consultation Prepared by the St&Representatives for the 1999 Consultation with Papua New Guinea . (In consultation with other departments) Approved by Margaret R. Kelly and Carlos G. Mu& April 6, 1999 . The 1999 Article IV consultation discussions were held in Port Moresby during January 14-25, 1999. The staff team comprised Messrs. Molho and Canetti, Ms. Ilyina (EP), and Mrs. Eulate (Administrative Assistant) (all APD). The mission overlapped with visits by Mr. Nicolle (MAE expert on bank supervision) and by a World Bank mission. . The staff team met with Treasury Secretary Bai, Bank of Papua New Guinea (BPNG) Governor Vele, and other senior officials. . Papua New Guinea (PNG) has accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4 and maintains an exchange system free of restrictions on payments and transfers for current international transactions. . Deficiencies in many areas of PNG’s economic statistics complicate the analysis of current macroeconomic developments and introduce a large degree of uncertainty to estimates and projections, . The principal authors of this report are Messrs. Molho and Canetti. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2- Contents Page I. Executive Summary .................................................. 3 II. Introduction ....................................................... 4 III. Recent Developments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ,. . . . . 4 IV. Policy Discussions .................................................. 8 A. Short-Term Outlook and Macroeconomic Policies ....................... 11 B. Structural Reforms ............................. 1 ................ 15 C. Medium-Term Outlook ........................................... 16 D.OtherIssues ................................................... 18 V. Staff Appraisal . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18 Text Boxes 1. 2. 3. 4. Charts 1. 2. 3. Tables 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. Annexes I. II. III. IV. V. The Fallout of the East Asian Crisis on PNG’s Economy ............... 5 The1999Budget ............................................. . The Need for More Transparent Fiscal and Monetary Management ....... 9 Issues in Bank Supervision ..................................... 10 Economic and Financial Indicators, 1987-99 ....................... 20 Selected External Indicators, 1991-98 ............................ 21 S ho&Term Financial Indicators ................................. 22 Selected Economic Indicators, 1995-99 . . . . . . . . . . . 23 Balance of Payments, 1994-99 .................................. 24 Summary of Central Government Operations, 1995-99 ............... 25 Monetary Survey, 1996-98 .................................... 26 Medium-Term Adjustment Scenario, 1997-2004 .................... 27 FundRelations ............................ ..:...............2 8 Relations with the World Bank Group ............................ 30 Relations with the Asian Development Bank ........................ 3 1 International Comparison of Selected Social Indicators ................ 32 Statistical Issues ............................................. 33 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3- 1. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY l The discussions took place against the background of a marked deterioration in macroeconomic performance. The recovery of output from the 1997 drought was sluggish during 1998, owing, in part, to the fallout from the regional economic crisis. The effects of the crisis were compounded by weak macroeconomic management, in the context of deteriorating governance and a difficult political situation. As a result, inflation rose to more than 20 percent, investor and donor confidence was eroded, and official reserves fell sharply. 0 Inflationary pressures were exacerbated by a large fiscal imbalance, coupled with an accommodating monetary stance. On the fiscal front, a surge in public expenditure in late 1998, together with the effects of the poor external environment on tax revenues, led to a significant widening of the budget deficit and a continuing increase in the public debt ratio. Given also a shortfall in official external financing, the government faced serious cash-flow problems, which led to increased recourse to quasi-fiscal operations, a breach of the legal limits for government borrowing from the central bank, and a build-up of domestic arrears. In the absence of corrective action, the 1999 budget is likely to aggravate this situation. . 0 The policy discussions focused on the need to take timely action to avert a possible financial crisis, restore market confidence, and set the stage for an enduring revival of investment and growth. The mission urged the authorities to take immediate steps to adopt a more prudent and realistic budget, tighten monetary policy, and implement reforms to strengthen the institutions of macroeconomic management. 0 The authorities agreed that there may be a need to take corrective measures if the external environment continues to deteriorate, but they thought that it would be premature to consider revising the budget so early in the fiscal year. They were also wary about the effects of a tighter fiscal policy and higher interest rates on business activity and private investment. In the event, following an easing of monetary conditions in late-January, the kina came under renewed downward pressure and the loss of reserves gathered pace. 0 The mission’s ability to assess the macroeconomic situation was hampered by a dearth of reliable, up-to-date estimates of key national accounts, fiscal, and balance of payments data. As a result, this report’s estimates and projections are subject to a large degree of uncertainty. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4- Il. INTRODUCTION 1. Papua New Guinea’s economy has come under severe strain since mid-1997, owing, in large part, to a significant worsening of the external environment. A balance of payments crisis, which emerged in 1994, was temporarily redressed during 1995-96 following implementation of an adjustment program supported by the Fund.’ However, the onset of a drought in the second half of 1997, together with slumping regional demand and international prices for Papua New Guinea’s key commodity exports, led to a sharp contraction of output and the emergence of a large external current account deficit (Charts 1 and 2). 2. The effects of these external shocks have been compounded by inappropriate policies. On the fiscal front, the disciplined expenditure policies that had been in place under the Fund adjustment program were reversed in late-1997. This exacerbated the effects of the decline in tax receipts stemming from the East Asian crisis and the drought, while a lack of progress in adopting needed reforms gave rise to significant shortfalls in official external financing. In the face of worsening cash flow problems, the government engineered a merger of four state-owned financial institutions in late-1997, with a view to transferring to the budget some of their unrealized capital gains. In the area of monetary management, steps to tighten domestic liquidity conditions proved insufficient to arrest a rapid expansion in credit to the nongovernment sector. In these circumstances, official reserves fell sharply beginning in the second half of 1997 and the kina came under strong downward pressure. 3. At the conclusion of the last Article IV consultation on January 23, 1998, Directors noted the difficulties created by the drought and a drop in mining revenues, but emphasized that fiscal discipline would be essential to maintaining economic and financial stability and indicated that further monetary tightening might be necessary if pressures on the kina intensified. Directors noted the risks of unsound banking systems and urged the Bank of Papua New Guinea (BPNG) to move quickly to strengthen its supervisory capability. They underscored the need for state-owned financial institutions to operate in line with best commercial practices and expressed concern that the recently proposed merger would make it more difficult to ensure transparency and effective governance in these entities. III. RECENTDEVELOPMENTS 4. The recovery from the drought has, so far, been uneven and fragile. Mining output rebounded in 1998, but nonmining activity continued to be depressed by the lagged effects of the drought and the fallout from the East Asian crisis (Box 1). Inflation accelerated ‘An 18-month SBA approved in July 1995 was later extended through December 1997. The program’s macroeconomic targets were largely met during 1995-96, but progress in implementing structural reforms was slow. In the event, the reviews scheduled for 1997 were not completed because of political problems and failure to agree on appropriate fiscal targets. Discussions on a possible new Fund program ended without agreement in 1998. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public. -5- Box 1. The Fallout of the East-Asian Crisis on PNG’s Economy The adverse effects of the East Asian crisis on PNG’s macroeconomic performance over the last year have been tempered by the fact that PNG has been in a phase of recovery from a severe drought. Mineral exports rebounded in 1998, after having been depressed by the earlier closures of gold and copper mines following a disruption of river-bed transportation. However, the East Asian crisis, together with the lingering effects of the drought on PNG’s main cash crops, moderated the strength of the recovery. Thus, according to the latest available official estimates, real GDP rose by 2’/2 percent in 1998 or less than half the growth envisaged in the 1998 budget. The principal channels through which the economy was affected by the crisis were as follows. . Timber exports fell sharply following a collapse in the market for tropical woods in Japan, which had hitherto taken 80 percent of PNG’s exports in this sector, and the prices of copper, gold, and petroleum exports softened. Reflecting also the lagged effects of the drought on coffee, cocoa, copra and palm oil output, total exports (in U.S. dollar terms) fell by 16 percent in 1998 or about the same rate of decline as in 1997. . Tax revenues from the mineral sector and from log export duties fell significantly. This lowered the government’s overall revenue ratio by over 2% percentage points of GDP in 1998 or about double the decline envisaged in the budget. Weak external demand and falling energy and mineral prices, together with a deteriorating business climate in PNG, discouraged foreign direct investment (FDI) and slowed exploration of new oil and gas fields. The value of new FDI project approvals fell from K 470 million (7 percent of GDP) in 1997 to K 145 million (2 percent of GDP) in 1998. , The effects of the crisis were mitigated by a number of factors. . PNG has limited direct trade links with the countries that suffered the most severe declines in domestic demand, while the crisis did not significantly affect Australia (one of PNG’s main trading partners). In late 1998, improving prospects for log exports to China appeared to bode well for a recovery of the forestry sector. . Import prices fell substantially, helping to moderate pressures on inflation and the external current account. . A limited reliance on portfolio capital or short-term commercial loans provided some insulation from the effects of contagion through international capital markets. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-6- to a year-on-year rate of 22 percent in the fourth quarter of 1998. Although the current - account deficit was basically eliminated in 1998, this was achieved with the help of a compression of investment and imports. Indeed, with weak investor confidence encouraging private capital outflows, the overall balance of payments remained in large deficit. In this context, large-scale intervention to stem pressure on the kina drove offkial reserves further down to $128 million (1.2 months of imports) as of early-March 1999 (Tables 1 and 2). 5. The pressures on inflation and the balance of payments have been aggravated by an unsustainable fiscal expansion. An expenditure surge during the last two months of 1998 shifted the overall budget balance, excluding receipts from asset sales, from a small surplus in 1997 to a deficit equivalent to about 2 percent of GDP in 1998 (Table 3). As official external financing fell far short of the level envisaged in the budget, there was heavy government borrowing from the central bank and a build-up of domestic arrears. The ratio of public debt to GDP rose to an estimated 68 percent in 1998, up by some 15 percentage points from the end-1996 level. The 1999 budget, passed in November 1998, is likely to give rise to a significant increase in the budget deficit, which would be difficult to finance through noninflationary means (Box 2). 6. Monetary and credit conditions have been tightened reluctantly. Domestic interest rates rose modestly in late-1997 and early-1998, as intervention to support the kina was largely sterilized by BPNG purchases of treasury bills. Beginning in March 1998, treasury bill rates were raised more aggressively-to 24-25 percent-but that increase was partially reversed thereafter and both short-term treasury bill rates and bank deposit rates became negative in real terms in late 1998 (Chart 3). Credit growth accelerated through the summer of 1998, led by an upsurge in lending by the state-owned Papua New Guinea Banking Corporation (PNGBC) (Table 4). In July, the BPNG issued a directive requiring PNGBC to cease new lending. At the same time, the 20-percent minimum liquid asset requirement (MLAR) on bank deposits was replaced by a IO-percent nonremunerated cash reserve requirement (CRR). Following a cessation of lending by PNGBC, credit growth slowed, while bank margins and loan rates rose by 4-5 percentage points. But BPNG purchases of treasury bills to help banks meet the CRR, together with advances to finance the budget, led to a soaring of BPNG credit to government, a breach of the applicable statutory limits, and a large increase in reserve money.* The growth in the supply of broad money was restrained by the fall in the money multiplier that resulted from the imposition of the CRR. However, domestic credit growth slowed only marginally and, as real money demand was depressed by high inflation and negative real deposit rates, BPNG reserves remained under pressure. ‘The Central Banking Act stipulates limits for both the flow of BPNG credit to government during each calendar year and the stock outstanding at the end of the year. Thus, the annual flow of BPNG credit to government must be limited to 10 percent of estimated ordinary budget revenues (or 12.5 percent of such revenues for up to six months following a ministerial directive); and the end-year stock outstanding must not exceed 20 percent of such revenues (or 25 percent for up to six months following a ministerial directive) (see also Box 3). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-7- Box 2. The 1999 Budget The 1999 budget envisages an overall deficit, excluding receipts from asset sales, of 1.7 percent of GDP, or slightly below the estimated deficit outturn for 1998. However, staff estimates suggest that, on current trends, the budget deficit could rise to 3 percent of GDP in 1999. This would likely lead to heavy domestic bank borrowing and a further accumulation of arrears. Expenditure Total expenditure is to be reduced by 1 percentage point of GDP with respect to the estimated outturn in 1998, with a sharp contraction in recurrent expenditure to make room for an upsurge in development outlays. While a shift of funds toward public investment might be desirable in principle, the proposed budget is plagued by serious practical problems. . Noninterest recurrent expenditure is to be reduced by 4% percentage pomts of GDP, following the retrenchment of 7,000 civil servants (20 percent of the nonpriority civil service). To generate the budgeted savings on the public wage bill, the retrenchment was to have been completed by end-February 1999. However, an uneven implementation of less ambitious reforms undertaken in the past, together with contlicting signals regarding the phasing of the current reform, suggest that the envisaged savings may not be feasible. In addition, the retrenchment allowances provided for in the budget are unrealistically low by historical standards and no provision has been made for the required pension-related payments. . The allocation for interest payments is based on the assumption that the average interest rate on treasury bills will fall significantly in 1999. But market rates have risen to more than 20 percent since mid- 1998 and any further decline in interest paid by the government could threaten the financial integrity of BPNG (see Box 3). . Development expenditure is to be raised by some 3 percentage points of GDP. About half of this increase consists of district support and rural development funds to be spent with inadequate controls, in part at the discretion of parliamentarians. Guidelines and monitoring for such expenditures have, in the past, been weak. In any case, PNG’s capacity to productively employ such a sizable increase in development spending seems questionable. Revenue Although new revenue measures are budgeted to raise K 109 million (1.3 percent of GDP), tbe revenue ratio is budgeted to decline by almost 1 percentage point of GDP in 1999, even under highly optimistic assumptions. More specifically: . The new measures include a 15 percent withholding tax to be imposed on interest income, initially budgeted to yield K 3 5 million, but since diluted through the exemption of interest income on deposits below K 10,000; an advancement of nonmining companies’ income tax payments by one year, with 25 percent of the advancement to come in each of the next four years, which is to yield K 25 million in 1999; a reduction of prohibitive import duties on mackerel, plywood, sugar, and gaming machines, which is expected to spur imports of these items in 1999, yielding an extra K 10 million in import duties; an extension of an import duty surcharge (implemented under the 1998 budget) until a tarSreform comes into effect in July, which is to yield K 15 million; an increase in import duties on used cars by 33 percent, yielding an additional K 8 million; and increases in assorted fees and charges, which are to yield another K 10 million. . Even if these measures generate the budgeted yield, overall revenue could fall short of the budget target by at least % percentage point of GDP. In particular, with international oil prices remaining weak and with subdued import growth, receipts from the mineral sector and from import duties are likely to be significantly lower than envisaged in the budget. Financing . The budget envisages no recourse to net domestic bank financing on the assumption that gross official foreign fmancing rises to $100 million (2% percentage points of GDP). However, the envisaged external financing is predicated on a prompt disbursement of new loans from multilateral and bilateral sources; these inflows will materialize only if the government adopts reforms needed to pave the way for new official support, which it was not willing to do in 1998. Difficulties in securing a new commercial loan on acceptable terms in late 1998 also raise doubts as to whether there could be any significant reliance on external borrowing from private sources in 1999. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-8- 7. The macroeconomic outlook has been further clouded by a deterioration in the - quality of governance. This has been manifested by a marked weakening in the institutions of fiscal and monetary management. During 1998, in particular, the lack of transparency and accountability in public sector operations, together with recourse to quasi-fiscal activities, undermined fiscal management, while a weakening in the perceived autonomy of the BPNG diminished the credibility of monetary policy (Box 3). The effectiveness of monetary policy was also undermined by the rapid expansion of credit by PNGBC. A large share of that credit was reportedly extended on the basis of noncommercial considerations, including the need to finance public enterprise losses as well as the leveraged buyout of three other state-owned financial institutions. While credit growth was arrested in late-1998, the BPNG remained ill- equipped to deal with the supervisory challenges posed by the formation of the PNGBC group of companies (Box 4). Weak governance has also eroded donor and investor confidence in government policies and has been a major factor behind recent shortfalls in official financing. For the period ahead, there are indications that major multilateral and bilateral donors will further curtail their assistance to PNG if there is no improvement in meeting the basic requirements for effective aid utilization. In the absence of readily available alternative sources of finance, this could threaten external viability over the medium term. 8. Political uncertainty has heightened concerns about governance since late-1998. Following the elections of July 1997, the government enjoyed a constitutionally-mandated 18- month grace period during which it was not possible to call a no-confidence vote. As the expiration of this period approached, the government effectively extended it for another six months by moving, soon after the 1999 Budget bill was approved, to adjourn Parliament until July 1999. In this context, a diminishing accountability in the use of public funds has raised questions about the economic benefits of some of the new programs introduced under the budget, and the fragile political situation may have tended to increase incentives to allocate budgetary resources on the basis of political considerations, contrary to the advice included in the World Bank’s last Public Expenditure Review. IV. POLICY DISCUSSIONS 9. The discussions focused on the challenges posed by the difficult short-term outlook and on the policies required to consolidate the nascent recovery. The mission stressed that the most urgent policy priority was to take actions to eliminate the threat of a financial crisis. This was necessary to restore confidence among investors and donors, turn the tide of capital outflows, and set the stage for a sustainable revival of investment and growth over the medium term. To those ends, the mission called for a concerted package of corrective fiscal and monetary policies, complemented by reforms to promote improved governance. The authorities acknowledged the difficulty of the external environment, but they did not believe that a crisis was imminent. In any case, they doubted whether a tightening of fiscal and monetary policies would have the desirable effects on investment, and were wary about the effects of restrictive policies on domestic demand. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-9- Box 3. The Need for More Transparent Fiscal and Monetary Management The conduct of macroeconomic policies has been hampered in recent years by a lack of transparency and accountability in budgetary management and a bhming of boundaries between fiscal, public enterprise, and monetary operations. More specifically: The budgetary process has been undermined by diminishing accountability for the allocation of public funds. In late 1998, the government authorized new outlays on the order of K 80 million (1 percent of GDP) without subjecting them to the normal scrutiny of the budgetary process. These included a salary bonus for lower-paid public servants, a retroactive general salary increase for all public servants, and an increase in district support grants to be used at the discretion of parliamentarians. The 1999 budget increased the allocations for district support and rural development funds for parliamentary districts by about KlOO million (1.2 percent of GDP). In contrast to the practice in previous years, the budget had only a wages line and an other-expenditure line for each ministry. Inadequate appropriations for contractual obligations have led to an accumulation of government arrears. As of December 1998, outstanding arrears on pension-related payments alone amounted to an estimated K 75 million (1 percent of GDP); an undetermined amount of additional arrears were reportedly incurred as the government could not fund some of the late-year spending authorizations. The 1999 budget has again under-budgeted for pension contributions associated with the planned retrenchment program and the recent corporatization of the PNGBC group of companies. While the government has settled some arrears through the issuance of special bonds, it has not yet produced a comprehensive report of outstanding arrears, nor has it formulated a strategy for their elimination, A lack of provisions for the cost of quasi-fiscal operations and for calls on explicit or implicit loan guarantees has limited the analytical content of budgetary data. During 1998, a rigid tar-3 policy on public enterprises, together with the fact that major enterprises continue to incur losses to meet required social objectives, contributed to increased operating losses of Elcom, Telikom and Air Niugini. These were fmanced, in large part, through borrowing from the state-owned PNGBC. The government used K 50 million (0.6 percent of GDP) ofextra-budgetary receipts from the sale of assets by the PNGBC group of companies in late 1998 to reduce PNGBC’s exposure to Air Niugini (see also Box 4). The imposition of a new cash reserve requirement (CRR) since mid-1998 has served as a new implicit tax on the banking system. To quickly appropriate the resulting quasi-fiscal receipts, the government has sharply reduced the accounting treasury bill rate used to compensate the BPNG for the servicing of treasury bills held outside the central bank--to 10 percent. This lowered actual interest outlays well below budget despite much higher-than-expected market rates. The interest appropriations in the 1999 budget are based on the maintenance of the accounting treasury bill rate at 10 percent, compared with market rates in excess of 20 percent during the first two months of the year. Given the lack of transparency in the underlying calculations, this could threaten BPNG’s financial integrity. A lack of clarity in existing legislation on the procedures for appointment, term of office, and criteria for removal of the Governor of BPNG, together with conflicting signals from public officials regarding the stance of monetary policy, has raised questions about the central bank’s ability to pursue an independent monetary policy. Following the breaching of the statutory limits on BPNG credit to government in the second half of 1998, to comply with a narrow interpretation of the end-year stock limit, the government asked commercial banks to temporarily swap their cash reserves for treasury bills. This diminished the transparency of end-year monetary data and further weakened the perceived autonomy and authority of the BPNG in monetary management. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- lo- Box 4. Issues in Bank Supervision The commercial banking system of Papua New Guinea consists of two domestically-owned banks, including the publicly owned Papua New Guinea Banking Corporation (PNGBC), which accounts for over 40 percent of total bank assets and deposits, and four foreign commercial banks’ subsidiaries. The BPNG has full authority to supervise all commercial banks. However, because the four foreign banks are subject to home-country supervision as part of the consolidated supervision of their parents, recent Fund technical assistance has recommended that efforts focus more on domestic banks. In this regard, a recent restructuring of PNGBC, combined with extremely rapid growth of its loan portfolio, have raised the most serious challenges for BPNG supervision. The PNGBC restructuring involved the corporatization and folding of PNGBC into a holding company, along with three other state-owned financial institutions: the Motor Vehicles Insurance Trust @MT), the Rural Development Bank (RDB), and the Niugini Insurance Corporation (NE). The restructuring was reportedly fast-tracked in order to quickly raise government revenues and it was carried out with little transparency, including almost no prior consultation with the Treasury and the BPNG. The government received a K 50 million advance from PNGBC for the purchase of MVIT in early 1998, prior to any proper valuation of MVIT assets, and a second K 50 million payment was made in December 1998.’ While preliminary information suggests that the new conglomerate was adequately capitalized as of end-1998, it has yet to be determined whether the government will require additional payments for this operation. PNGBC expanded its loan portfolio sharply in 1998, reportedly accounting for an estimated two- thirds of total commercial bank credit expansion. Although PNGBC stopped making new loan commitments in August, and it reduced its exposure to Air Niugini following the recapitalization exercise in late 1998, the scale of recent credit expansion has raised concerns about the quality of its loan portfolio. To address these and other concerns related to the ongoing restructuring, the BPNG commissioned two external audits of PNGBC, which were completed in April 1998 and January 1999. The latter audit identified significant improvements in PNGBC’s internal control procedures over the last year. However, uncertainties regarding the structure of the new conglomerate, the disposition and valuation of key assets, and the final price to be paid to the state have continued to raise prudential concerns. While the BPNG has neither adequate legal authority nor the technical expertise to supervise a diversified financial conglomerate like the PNGBC group, it has recently taken some steps to beef up its bank supervision. New asset quality guidelines, including on classification and provisioning requirements, came into effect in the third quarter of 1998. However, the capital adequacy norms may need to be tirther strengthened in line with recent international trends, while enforcement will have to be enhanced, including by appointing more adequately qualified staff in BPNG’s supervision department. Limits on large exposures were reduced from 50 percent of capita1 to 25 percent as of February 1999; the reduced limits are to be phased in over a period of four years. ‘The second payment was earmarked for recapitalizing Air Niugini, which used the f%nds to reduce its debt to PNGBC. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-ll- A. Short-Term Outlook and Macroeconomic Policies 10. The mission observed that, despite signs of improvement in the external environment, the authorities’ GDP growth target for 1999 (3 percent) would be difficult to attain unless there is prompt action to establish a more stable and transparent policy framework. On the positive side, logging activity, which was worst-affected by the East Asian crisis, seems to have bottomed out. This, together with firm kina producer prices for major cash crops, a waning of the after-effects of the drought, and the full-year operation of the new Gobe and Moran oil fields, should help bolster exports in 1999. However, continuation on the recent policy course would likely weaken the current account, continue to discourage official and private capital inflows, and keep the already-depleted stock of reserves under pressure. This would lead to sustained depreciation of the kina and continuing high inflation. The need to stem the drain of reserves while, at the same time, financing a growing budget deficit would result in a crowding out of credit to the private sector, which would f%rther discourage private investment and could undermine the recovery. 11. To set the stage for a sustainable increase in investment and growth, the mission recommended that macroeconomic policies be aimed at reducing inflation to the low single- digit range, replenishing the stock of reserves, and making room for adequate expansion of credit to the private sector. This will require a well-coordinated effort to put in place more prudent fiscal and monetary policies, while maintaining a flexible exchange rate policy. Fiscal policy 12. The mission emphasized the need to reduce significantly, if not eliminate, the growing fiscal imbalance. On current trends, the budget deficit could widen to more than 3 percent of GDP in 1999. Given the continuing difficulties in securing external financing, this would intensify the government’s short-term cash flow problems, aggravate pressures on BPNG to operate outside the prescribed limits for credit to government, and lead to a f%rther increase of the public debt ratio-to the equivalent of 70 percent of GDP. Assuming that macroeconomic stabilization will require an early reversion to a policy of positive real treasury bill rates, and. given that the decline of concessional capital inflows may lead to increased recourse to more expensive commercial sources of financing, continuation on this trend would raise serious questions about the sustainability of the fiscal position over the medium term. 13. Against this background, assuming that the prospects for the productive sectors improve as discussed above, it would be desirable to aim, if possible, for a balanced budget (excluding receipts from privatization, which should be used to clear existing arrears). This would ease short-term pressures on the domestic financial system, while also beginning to reverse the recent upsurge in the public debt ratio. The mission cautioned that, if retrenchment plans are implemented as scheduled, there will be a larger-than-budgeted increase in severance payments. This could justify temporarily tolerating a small budget deficit on the order of l/2 percent of GDP (excluding privatization receipts), provided that the deficit Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12- can be financed by external budget support. In this context, the mission urged the authorities - to redraw a more prudent budget encompassing a stronger revenue effort, more realistic allocations for recurrent outlays, and a streamlined development budget. 14. The authorities acknowledged that the macroeconomic framework currently in place may need to be tightened further to maintain external balance in view of the absence of any signs of recovery in the world economy and possible shortfalls in external financing. In this context, they assured the mission that they would take corrective measures, if needed, in late 1999. However, they felt that the 1999 budget targets were achievable, and that external financing from commercial sources was being arranged at levels that would protect the integrity of the budget framework. In these circumstances, the authorities believed that it was still too soon to contemplate the submission of a revised budget to Parliament. 15. The mission noted with concern that, on current trends, a declining revenue ratio would make it difftcult to restore fiscal stability without curtailing essential public investment and social services. While weak mineral tax receipts were, to a large extent, attributable to the softness of international oil prices, which should recover over the medium term, the decline in the nonmineral revenue ratio implicit in the 1999 budget would not be consistent with medium-term fiscal sustainability. In this connection, while-the staff team welcomed the recent parliamentary approval of the VAT and tariff reform bills, it regretted that implementation had been postponed until July 1999 and noted that worsening prospects for the public finances might call for an earlier implementation at a rate that is somewhat higher than the envisaged revenue-neutral VAT rate (10 percent). In addition, there would seem to be scope to increase excises on petroleum products, which have not been adjusted in recent years, raise gaming-related taxes, and reverse a recent decrease in log export duties. In all, the mission estimated that a revenue effort on the order of 1% to 2 percentage points on a full-year basis would be needed to provide for a sustainable funding of basic investment requirements, including adequate counterpart funds for aid-financed projects. 16. The authorities were hopeful that the tax measures introduced under the 1999 budget would bolster the revenue effort, although they acknowledged that there were risks of a shortfall in major categories of revenue. They noted that the weakening of revenue performance was due largely to factors outside the government’s control. Aside from lower mineral tax receipts, these included declining receipts from export duties on logs and shortfalls in import duties owing to the weaker-than-expected recovery. As regards the possible measures proposed by the mission, the authorities thought that it would not be possible to introduce the VAT before July 1. However, they recognized that a somewhat higher rate (11 percent) than the envisaged VAT rate would still be inflation-neutral. The authorities would also consider the possibility of raising excises on petroleum products and thought that it would be desirable to enhance tax receipts from the gaming and logging sectors, although resistance from affected vested interests might make this difficult. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13 - 17. On the expenditure side, the mission urged the authorities to adopt a revised budget bill to reduce overall expenditure by at least 1 percentage point of GDP with respect to the initial budget target (or by 1X-2 percentage points of GDP relative to the projected outcome). In the mission’s view, the allocation for recurrent expenditure would have to be substantially higher than that envisaged in the initial budget. This is because the retrenchment exercise was hastily conceived and is unlikely to be completed on schedule. Higher-than-budgeted allocations will also be required for pension benefits to prevent a buildup of arrears that could test already-strained relations with trade unions. Finally, more adequate allocations for interest payments would be warranted to protect the financial position of the BPNG. On development expenditure, given the uncertainties regarding the effectiveness of the new mechanisms to monitor the use of district support and rural development funds, the mission urged the authorities to withdraw these allocations. This would still leave adequate resources to provide counterpart funds for externally-financed development projects. 18. The authorities agreed that slippages in the retrenchment program could lead to large expenditure overruns, but they thought that the budget was still on track. Public service reforms were proceeding under the direction of an inter-ministerial committee, and interest payment arrangements with the BPNG had been made keeping in mind the need to protect the BPNG’s financial position. On the issue of development spending, the authorities noted that shifting resources to the development budget-specifically for rural development-was one of the guiding policies of the government. In this connection, they were confident that new guidelines for the allocation of rural development funds would ensure proper use of these Lnds, thereby helping to stimulate the growth of the nonmining sector. 19. The discussions were clouded by uncertainties relating to the availability of external financing. The mission cautioned that the expected official financing ($100 million) would again be unlikely to materialize in 1999 unless proper macroeconomic and structural policies are put in place. The government has also been negotiating a new $60-120 million U.S. dollar-denominated loan with a European commercial bank, which was previously expected to be disbursed in 1998. However, initial proposals were reported to entail disadvantageous terms, including a short repayment period and an effective mortgaging of PNG’s future mineral tax receipts. In these circumstances, the government was also exploring the possibility of raising funds through an international bond issue. The authorities agreed with the staff that borrowing on onerous terms would provide no lasting relief for the public finances and should be avoided. In any event, to the extent that the commercial loans that had been envisaged to finance the 1998 budget materialize in 1999, it was agreed that these should be earmarked to retire the unanticipated build-up of debt to BPNG incurred in late 1998. Monetary and exchange rate policies 20. In the light of high inflation and the risk of a re-emergence of exchange market pressures, the mission urged the authorities to guard against a premature easing of monetary conditions. In line with the inflation, fiscal, and foreign reserve objectives Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14- proposed by the mission, and assuming that domestic interest rates rise to consistently positive real levels, the St&team recommended that broad money be targeted to grow only at a slightly higher rate than in 1998. This, together with repayment of some government debt to the domestic banking system, would make room for a modest increase in real credit to the private sector. To help meet these objectives, the mission urged that prompt steps be taken to bring BPNG credit to government back within the statutory limit, including through market- based measures to encourage more investment by nonbanks in treasury bills. The mission cautioned against any f$ther increase in compulsory reserve or liquid asset requirements, as this would likely f&her raise intermediation costs and distort saving and investment decisions. 21. The authorities were ambivalent about the role of monetary policy. While they recognized that tighter monetary and credit conditions had helped reduce pressure on the kina in late 1998, they were concerned that high interest rates were among the factors that had choked off private investment. The authorities also believed that, because the spread between commercial banks’ deposit and loan rates was relatively high, there was room to lower loan rates without undermining exchange rate stability. In this connection, they felt that the CRR had been an effective way to tax banks’ excessive profits and had been key to reversing the markets’ bearish outlook on the kina. For the period ahead, the authorities thought that it would be difficult to resist pressures to ease monetary conditions. In the event, beginning in January 1999, treasury bill rates were lowered by 1 X-4 percentage points and, soon thereafter, commercial bank loan rates were reduced by about 1 percentage point. Following a revival of pressure on the kina, which led to significant titther losses of reserves in February, treasury bill rates were nudged up, although they remained below the recent rate of inflation. 22. In the mission’s view, the uncertain external environment and the economy’s vulnerability to terms-of-trade shocks called for continued flexibility in exchange rate management The depreciation of the kina since mid-1997 had facilitated Papua New Guinea’s adjustment to falling export receipts. However, at this point, the main export industries seemed to be profitable, the short-term outlook for exports was broadly favorable, and the external current account position could be sustained if more prudent policies help stabilize the capital account. Against this background, the current level of competitiveness should be adequate to maintain external viability, provided that fiscal, monetary, and structural policies are geared to quickly stemming inflation and restoring confidence in domestic financial assets. Nevertheless, given the fragile external environment, the need to ensure that competitiveness is not eroded, and the low level of reserves, the mission cautioned against tirther intervention to support the kina, except for smoothing short-term fluctuations. 23. In the exchange system, obligations stemming from the recent calling of a government guarantee on an external loan have been met, thereby preventing a buildup of external arrears. However, the government has not settled an $18 million claim, which was recently awarded to an overseas military firm by an international arbitration tribunal, and the interested firm has sought court orders to seize state-owned properties and other foreign Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 15- assets of Papua New Guinea. This has further weakened business confidence and may have - made it more difficult for the government to tap international credit markets. B. Structural Reforms 24. Reforms to improve transparency and accountability in the conduct of macroeconomic policies will be key to reviving investor and donor confidence and promoting outward-oriented growth. To help strengthen fiscal management, in particular, the mission highlighted the need to: 0 0 0 0 0 0 25 Enhance coordination between the Treasury, the main superannuation funds, and other statutory bodies to ensure that scheduled outlays are adequately provided for in the budget, and to agree on a time-bound program for clearing all domestic arrears . Develop mechanisms to prevent the authorization of new appropriations during the budget year except in limited cases and following a transparent approval process. Formulate a realistically-costed, adequately-funded, and properly-phased public service reform plan, in consultation with affected trade unions, Properly target and prioritize development expenditure, in consultation with the World Bank. Establish a transparent mechanism for the determination of the level of profits to be transferred annually from BPNG to the budget, and eliminate the scope for discretionary changes in the budgetary allocation for interest payments. Fully account for, and make subject to parliamentary approval, any transfers within the enlarged public sector, including from the PNGBC group of companies. In the area of tax reform, the mission urged the authorities to expedite all the necessary preparatory work to prevent any further delays in the implementation of the VAT and tariff reform bills. The staffteam welcomed the repeal of the Pioneer Industries Act and accompanying reductions in tax exemptions and in prohibitive tariff rates (see also Box 2). Nevertheless, the mission expressed concerns that the medium-term objectives of the approved tariff reform were modest.3 Indeed, the new tariff structure is likely to increase the effective protection of some domestic industries and is not sufficiently ambitious to promote 3The reform is to replace the current schedule of five main rates (0, 5, 11,40, and 55 percent), various prohibitive rates (ranging from 75 to 17.5 percent), and an average nominal tariff rate of 2 1.9 percent or an average trade-weighted rate of 14.3 percent, with a schedule containing mainly four rates (0, 15, 25, and 40 percent) and an average nominal tariff rate of 6.4 percent or an average trade-weighted rate of 4.7 percent (excluding the VAT) by 2006. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 16- the desired outward orientation of the economy. In light of the slowdown in imports stemming from the large real depreciation of the kina, the mission urged the authorities to accelerate and broaden their medium-term program of tariff reform. 26. In the financial system, the mission welcomed a reported strengthening of internal controls in PNGBC, but it expressed concern that the approved corporatization bill provided insufficient leeway for the new PNGBC group to operate on purely commercial criteria. To foster good corporate governance and pave the way for an early privatization, that bill would have to be amended, including by eliminating community service obligations. In addition, the BPNG should continue to upgrade its supervisory norms, practices and capabilities following the advice provided by a Monetary and Exchange AfTairs Department expert. As regards monetary management, the mission noted with concern that the breaching of the statutory limits for BPNG credit to government and the end-year swap operation with commercial banks had undermined the credibility of monetary policy, while the compulsory reserve regime had been changed without adequate consultation with affected banks. These developments highlighted the need for a more transparent, stable, and rules-based monetary regime. 27. The authorities are aware that the problems of public enterprises are a threat to the budget and a disincentive to private investment. They noted that important steps had . been taken in 1998 to adjust Air Niugini’s tariffs and scale back some routes; these, together with a recent government payment to reduce debt, had helped contain losses. However, the financing needs associated with an overdue refleeting, together with a continuing obligation to maintain unprofitable routes, will likely place a further burden on the government budget in the future. Similar considerations apply to other major enterprises in the electricity and telecommunications sectors. To help meet the large unmet investment needs in these sectors, the staff team urged the authorities to rationalize all public enterprise tariffs, establish a mechanism for regular tariff adjustments, and develop and announce concrete action plans leading up to the privatization of the major enterprises. In the meantime, the practice of requiring public enterprises to provide subsidized services should be discontinued and any remaining subsidies shifted, and explicitly accounted for, in the government budget. C. Medium-Term Outlook 28. The medium-term outlook for the PNG economy will remain cloudy if the recent policy trends are not reversed. Inadequate or delayed fiscal adjustment would lead to a rapid accumulation of arrears, tighter cash flow constraints, and an unsustainable increase in the debt service burden. This would eventually lead to lower public investment and a disruption of essential government functions, which would impinge on the most vulnerable segments of the population and would further undermine investor confidence. In the absence of new outlays for oil and mineral exploration, the identified stores of natural resources would be gradually depleted, exports would remain on a declining trend, and the current account would revert into a large deficit. With poor governance continuing to discourage donor inflows, official reserves would be further eroded, the kina would remain under pressure, and inflation would Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17- remain high. Macroeconomic stability could then be restored only at the expense of lower imports, a crowding out of private investment, and economic stagnation. Given the country’s rapid population growth, this would depress living standards and hamper social development. 29. To illustrate how policies along the lines discussed above could alter this outlook, the staff has prepared a medium-term adjustment scenario. Assuming that appropriate policies ease the government’s cash flow problems and help underpin private investment, real GDP rises by 3 percent in 1999, led by a rebound of activity in agriculture and a full recovery in mining. Over the medium term, a revival of foreign direct investment (FDI) in the mining and energy sectors, coupled with increasing domestic investment in the nonmineral sector, lead to a pickup of activity in construction and services. This, together with the coming on stream of new mineral and oil and gas projects, helps raise real GDP by 3Y+l percent per annum over the 2000-2004 period, while exports increase by about 5 percent per annum. Imports rise somewhat more rapidly, reflecting the requirements associated with rising investment. This, together with a leveling off of official inflows, leads to the emergence of a current account deficit beginning in 2000, matched by a savings-investment gap for the nongovernment sector. However, that deficit is contained to l-l% percent of GDP and is more than financed through FDI inflows, allowing the external debt burden to be reduced and official reserves to be progressively rebuilt to a level of 4-4X months of imports. The . restoration of stability in the foreign exchange market, in the context of soft international commodity prices and low inflation in industrial countries, helps reduce the year-on-year rate of inflation to 7% percent by the end of 1999 and to 3 percent over the medium term. 30. On the policy front, the staff’s adjustment scenario is predicated on a front- loaded fiscal adjustment, which helps gradually reverse the recent increase in the public debt ratio. The overall fiscal position (excluding receipts from privatization) remains near balance from 1999 onward. On the revenue side, a sustained effort to enhance receipts from the VAT and from other nonmineral tax revenues more than offsets a progressive decline in official grants. This, together with continued restraint on recurrent spending, provides adequate public savings to fund a steady increase in development expenditure. While net domestic financing is zero under this scenario, receipts from asset sales are used to eliminate existing arrears and to reduce government debt to BPNG to well within the legal ceiling. This, in turn, facilitates monetary management, allowing inflation to be reined in, and reserves to be built up, without crowding out credit to the private sector. On the external financing front, the adjustment policies help catalyze an increase in official capital inflows to $130-140 million per annum in 1999-2000. This arrests the net repayment of external government debt without recourse to commercial borrowing. Official inflows revert to a more normal level of $90-100 million per annum thereafter, which is in line with average inflows over the last five years. However, in the event that the authorities can secure official financing in excess of that amount, it should be possible to allow a reversion to a small budget deficit over the medium term (linked to a somewhat more rapid increase in development spending), and a slower decline in the public debt ratio, without threatening macroeconomic stability. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 18- D. Other Issues 31. Papua New Guinea’s social indicators of development remain among the worst in the Asia Pacific region. The standard of living is particularly low in the rural sectors, where 85 percent of the country’s population lives (Annex IV). The depreciation of the kina since mid-1997 is likely to have cushioned, to some extent, the effects of the worsening terms of trade on rural incomes. To also help meet rural areas’ needs in health, education, and public infi-astructure, the mission urged the authorities to supplement measures to improve fiscal discipline with an improved targeting of development expenditures. 32. The mission inquired about the environmental implications of recent policies in the forestry sector. The authorities explained that export duties on logs with an f.o.b. price of up to K 130 per cubic meter had been removed in late-1998, with a view to reviving log exports in the face of a depressed export market. However, they acknowledged that a side- effect of this measure could be excessive exploitation of lower-grade timber. Concerns about policies in the forestry sector were heightened in recent weeks by uncertainty as to whether the government would renew the soon-to-expire contract of a pre-shipment inspection company that has been monitoring log exports over the last few years. 33. Papua New Guinea’s statistical base is plagued by a number of weaknesses. The compilation of balance of payments and national accounts statistics has been recently reviewed by experts from the Pacific Financial Technical Assistance Center (PFTAC), which found a number of problems in both areas; there are also serious deficiencies in government finance statistics (Annex V). The staff team noted that a dearth of reliable, up-to-date estimates in all these areas had hampered its ability to assess Papua New Guinea’s macroeconomic situation. As a result, this report’s estimates and projections are subject to a large degree of uncertainty. V. STAFFAPPRAISAL 34. The staff is seriously concerned about recent policy developments in Papua New Guinea. Despite a recovery from the 1997 drought, inflation is high, the kina remains under pressure, and reserves are being rapidly depleted. Against this background, the continuing increase in the government’s domestic financing requirement in an environment of negative real treasury bill rates is unsustainable. To avert a possible crisis down the road, which would have very damaging effects on the economy, the authorities are urged to promptly adopt a comprehensive adjustment package, centered on decisive fiscal consolidation, tighter monetary policy, and improved governance. 35. The most urgent priority must be to eliminate the fiscal imbalance. The 1999 budget overestimates revenue, understates outlays, and implies a further increase in the public debt burden. Given also significant risks of slippage in the implementation of the government’s retrenchment program, and of a shortfall in external financing, serious cash flow problems are likely to threaten the government’s ability to meet its contractual obligations in the second half Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 19- of the year. To arrest the buildup of arrears, protect the provision of essential public services, and restore credibility in the government’s macroeconomic management, the authorities are urged to adopt a revised budget to be approved by Parliament as soon as possible. The revised budget bill should include adequate tax measures to arrest the decline in the revenue ratio, more realistic allocations for wages, interest payments, retrenchment costs, and pension contributions, and a withdrawal of the budgeted increases in district support and rural development funds. 36. The recent surge in BPNG credit to government has greatly complicated the tasks for monetary and exchange rate policies. With inflation rising to more than 20 percent, it was clearly premature to ease monetary conditions in early 1999.. In the period ahead, a tighter monetary policy, including unequivocally positive real treasury bill rates, will be indispensable to stem exchange market pressures without further eroding the level of reserves. While competitiveness currently seems to be adequate, if balance of payments pressures intensify, market pressures on the kina should not be resisted. 37. Better fiscal governance will be key to a sustainable rehabilitation of the public finances. Urgent steps are required to improve the transparency of budgetary procedures, eliminate recourse to implicit taxes and extra-budgetary operations, and limit discretion in the allocation of major outlays. The authorities are also urged to rationalize all public enterprise tariffs and develop and announce concrete action plans leading up to the privatization of the major public enterprises. 38. A strong and effective central bank will also be essential to safeguard the integrity of monetary policy. The recent breach in the limit for government borrowing from BPNG, together with changes in the compulsory reserve regime, have undermined BPNG’s credibility and authority. Against this background, any attempts to raise the legal ceiling for BPNG credit to government should be resolutely resisted and the imposition of further distortionary controls on the banking system avoided. To enhance the effectiveness of monetary policy, the Central Banking Act should be amended, including by establishing mechanisms to ensure greater continuity and autonomy in the management of BPNG. New legislation is also required to strengthen the BPNG’s supervisory powers, so as to ensure that no public or privately-owned bank could be reorganized without first addressing prudential concerns. 39. The authorities are urged to take adequate steps to improve the coverage, timeliness and reliability of data on national accounts, government finance, and the balance of payments. The timely provision of more comprehensive and up-to-date statistics in these areas will be essential to ensure effective surveillance by the Fund. 40. It is recommended that the next Article IV consultation be held on the standard 12- month consultation cycle. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 20 - CHART 1 PAPUA NEW GUINEA ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL INDICATORS, 198'7-99 20 Growth Rate 15 - (Percent change) -10. ’ n 8 8 * a ’ ’ s n ’ 87 66 69 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 96 -lo 1000 Balance of Payments 800 -(III miIIiona of US dollars) 400 200 0 -200 ll-month percent change period average 0 ’ n ’ 3 a 8 8 ’ ’ 8 ’ 67 66 69 90 91 02 93 94 95 96 97 06 0 700 +oss Reserves I/ 7 InmiDioMof US dollare (left male) 500 5 400 4 300 3 200 2 109 1 0 67 66 69 90 91 02 93 94 95 96 07 96 99 0 40 1 Money and Credit 40 3. (P-it change; end of period) i b ! \ rl 30 ,.I :., j t. Broad money i.. -j , , , ~~2z$!;~e~tm, , 1-z El7 66 69 90 91 02 93 94 95 96 97 06 Sources: Data provided by the Papua New Guinea authorities; and etaff e&mates. I/ lW0 numbwe are 8s of February 23. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 21 - CHART 2 PAPUA NEW GUINEA SELECTED EXTERNAL INDICATORS, 199 1-98 120 - 130 Effective Exchange Rates l/ 70 1 p~.~~.j;;%&.......\~ 1; / :- 4. (right wale) 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1996 loo 30 30 25 25 20 20 15 15 15 15 10 10 10 10 5 5 5 5 0 0 0 0 -5 -5 -5 -5 -10 -10 -10 -10 -15 -15 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1996 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1996 -15 -15 Exports r Minerals and petroleum (In millions of = LO@ 4ooo us dollars) 0 other 3000 rll-lrlli ’ 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 I 130 Bilateral Exchange Rates ( 1990=100) 50- 301...,.-.,...,..-1...,-- ,‘.‘I.,’ 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1996 1000 Overall Balance *OO (1x1 millions of US dollars) l-l 600. 400. 200. o- -200. -400. -600. -6OOl 1991 1902 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 199e 0 0 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 130 110 BO 70 50 30 1000 El00 600 400 200 0 -200 -400 -600 -600 30 30 70 30 50 10 30 20 10 0 Sources: Data provided by the Papua New Guinea authorities; and staff estimates l/ Country coverage of these indexes differs from the Information Notice System in that Brazil is excluded. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public105 - 22 - CHART 3 PAPUA NEW GUINEA SHORT-TERM FINANCIAL INDICATORS 110 Nominal Effective Exchange Rate 1/ (End-1996=100) 30, ,30 - 105 25 - 100 9 -I b5 20 - - ! 90 I 85 I 80 75 Interest Rates and Inflation (Percent) 100 r(nir 95- 90 - 95- 80 - 75 - 70 - JDL ywNOV JAN YAR MAYleG s&P NW JAN 199 50 40 30 20 10 BPNG Net F’X Market Intervention (US$ million) 200 - 0 I I ,150 - -10’ ’ ’ ’ ’ ’ ’ ” ’ ’ ’ ’ ’ ’ ’ ’ ’ ’ LL JUL mwNDV JAN MAR MbYloE SEP NW ; ,-lo Sowoe: Data provided by the Bank of Papua New Guinea. l/ Weigld.ed b&et of the Au&alien dollar, US. dollar. and Jagmneae yen. 1001 I , I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I 1 JDL ~Z’7NOV JAN MAR HAY JUL SEP NOV JAN lD96 mu 01 t I 6 1 10 III Iv I II III n 1997 1998 de 600 - Gross Official Reserves 550 _ (US8 million) Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 23 - Table 1. Papua New Guinea: Selected Economic Indicators, 1995-99 Nommal GDP (1996) USSS 2 billion Population (1996) 4 4 milhon GDP per capita (1996) USSl,l73 Quota SDR 171.6m~1lu~n 1995 Staff Budget Staff Es Est.- Est Pro1 II 1996 1991 1998 1999 Growth @ercent change) Real GDP growth Mineral NOMllnMll lnllation (pcrccot change) CPI (annual average) CPI (12 months) Central government budget @went of GDP) Revenue and grants Ofwhrch New revenut measule~ (Identified m budget) Expendwrc and net lendmg Overall balance 21 Overall balance. excludmg ossct sales 21 Domesttc linancmg Of which : Arrears 31 Foreign financing Pubbc debt &went of GDP) External Domestic 4/ Money and credit (percent change over prcwous year) Total domestic credjt Credit to the nongovernment sector Broad money Balance of payments (5 mn ) Export\, f.o.b. Imports, c.1.f. Current BCCOunt (In percent of GDP) Exceptional financing (net) Overall balance Reserves (end of year. 0 mn ) Gross 0rrK.1al reserves (In months of nonmmmg nnports. C.I I) External debt (S mn) Medun- and long-term external debt (In percent of GDP) 51 Debt-scwlce ratlo (percent of external current rewpts) Exchange rate Exchange rate regnne USS per Kmn (end-period) Nom& effective rate 61 Red effective rate 6/ -2.9 40 -4.6 2.4 2.9 1.0 -1.9 -9.7 -26 4 29.7 9.3 6.8 -1.0 8.8 0.9 -3.7 1.0 -1.0 17.3 II 6 3.9 13.6 8.0 21.3 I87 53 53 21.8 6.0 IS.3 264 328 273 -0.8 -2.3 IS 04 27.3 26.8 0.3 -0 3 -0 7 04 327 01 01 I.2 300 292 1.3 31 8 30.9 -1 7 -1 9 -I 7 3.0 0.7 0.3 -1.2 10 68 I 359 322 286 13 317 -3 I 27 06. -07 0.1 -I 3 51.3 52.8 652 264 245 31.6 249 28.3 33 6 0.4 70.1 390 31 I I.6 65 22.7 -3.0 0.8 292 I3 8 31.8 68 20. I 289 18 64 9.7 05 2,825 2,603 2.191 -1.532 -1.791 -1,972 845 289 -258 17.1 5.5 -5.4 96 IS 2s I59 344 -194 1,842 -1,391 I6 0.4 0 -157 1,998 I.511 -22 -0.6 0 -71 268 549 2.8 51 439 369 252 177 355 30 54 I 17 I 194 21 53 I 24 4 128 7/ I.4 538 195 independently floatmg 075 074 057 048 -12.5 -0. I -10.5 -24.6 0.4 1.8 -6.3 -127 042 81 Sources Data provided by the Papua New &mea authoribes, and Fund staff cstilatcs and projechons Ii Based on a continuation ofcurrent policies 21 Asset sales are mcluded m other property revenues through 1998, but following official reclasaticakm under the 1999 budget. they are treated as fkmcinp from 1999 onwar& 31 Prelmtiary staNestm~atas based on pamal mformaiion on pension-related liabLties 41 On a commibnentc basis. 51 Debt in US dollars, converted at end-period exchange rate. divided by nonunal GDP 61 Percent change from I2 months earber, based on IMF lnformabon Notice System 71 Actual data BS of March 4. 1999; informatwn based on unoffinal sources 51 Actual data as of M<vch 23, 1999 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 24 - Table 2. Papua New Guinea: Balance of Payments, 1994-99 (ln millions of U.S. dollars) 1994 1995 1996 Prel. Staff Staff Act. Est. Proj. II 1997 1998 1999 Current Account Balance 593 845 289 -258 16 -22 Mineral 1193 1287 736 311 509 726 Nomnineral -601 -442 -447 -569 494 -748 Trade Balance 1192 1293 813 218 451 486 Exports (f.o.b.) 2756 2825 2603 2191 1842 1998 Mineral 1863 2056 1777 1328 1245 1400 Nomineral 893 771 827 863 597 597 Imports (c.i.f.) -1564 -1532 -1791 -1972 -1391 -1511 Mineral -280 -379 -496 -573 -287 -280 Nomnineral -1284 -1153 -1294 -1399 -1104 -1231 Services Balance -685 -609 -690 -673 -642 -647 Mineral -389 -390 -544 444 -449 -395 Nonmineral -295 -219 -146 -229 -193 -252 Unrequited transfers (net) 86 130 166 197 206 138 Official 201 238 219 229 213 177 Private .-115 -108 -53 -32 -6 -39 Capital Account Balance Official (net) Concessional Non-concessional Exceptional Private (net) Mineral ofwhich : Foreign direct investment (net) Nonmineral ofwhich : Foreign direct investment (net) -604 -661 84 76 463 -49 -107 -19 11 -54 40 18 -14 -22 10 0 0 1 -93 -93 -14 -78 40 17 0 96 15 25 0 0 -497 -641 74 130 -123 -66 -533 -720 161 147 -39 -26 10 428 184 -7 104 16 36 79 -87 -18 -84 -41 64 47 42 30 26 0 Errors and omissions -86 -25 -29 -12 -9 0 Overall Balance -98 159 344 -194 -157 -71 Mineral balance 661 567 897 458 470 700 Nomnineral balance -758 -407 -553 -652 -627 -771 Change in NlR (- increase) Gross official reserves IMF (net) Purchases Repurchases Other foreign liabilities 98 -159 -344 194 157 71 45 -172 -281 195 161 94 -31 34 3 0 -4 -22 0 50 3 0 0 0 -3 1 -16 0 0 -4 -22 84 -20 -66 -1 0 0 Memorandum items: Current account balance (in percent of GDP) Mineral (in percent of GDP) Nonmineral (in percent of GDP) 10.9 17.1 5.5 -5.4 0.4 -0.6 22.0 26.0 14.0 6.5 13.6 20.6 -11.1 -8.9 -8.5 -11.9 -13.2 -21.2 Gross official reserves (in months of nomnineral imports) 95 268 549 0.9 2.8 5.1 Debt service ratio (in percent of exports of GNFS) 32.8 25.2 17.7 Debt-GDP Ratio (ii percent) 49.4 43.9 36.9 355 3.0 17.1 54.1 194 2.1 100 1.0 24.4 19.5 53.1 53.8 Sources: Papua New Guinea authorities and staff estimates. l/ Based ou a continuation of current policies. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 25 - Table 3. Papua New Guinea: Summary of Central Government Operations, 1995-99 I995 I996 I991 1998 I/ Budget Staff 1999 I! Budget Sbff Total revenue and grants I.702 1,898 2,202 2,411 2,316 2,485 2,435 Tax revenue 1,208 I ,526 1,674 I .673 I.582 1,762 I.712 - Mtned SCCIO, (MRSF) 257 405 390 298 241 340 305 Log export taxes I33 157 149 9s 31 30 30 Other 818 964 1,135 I.315 1.310 I.392 1,377 Nontax revenue 259 201 215 289 271 262 262 Foreign grants 236 I70 312 450 463 461 461 Total expcnchtwe Recurrent expend~lure Interest payments Noninlerest recurrent Wages and salaries Retrenchment costs 21 OthWS Of which : Unbudgeted liabilities Development expenditure 1,756 I.861 2.192 2,500 2,449 I.519 1,608 I .820 I .964 I.914 273 257 298 466 330 1,246 I.351 I.522 1,498 1,584 590 604 655 655 613 656 7a7 867 843 238 253 373 536 911 26 536 2,630 2.700 I .769 1.898 401 395 I.368 I.503 591 671 65 20 712 812 51 862 802 Overall balance -54 37 9 -89 -133 -14s -26s Overall balance, cxcl asset sales 3/ -146 -24 9 -164 -147 -145 -265 Financmg 54 -37 -9 89 133 I45 265 Foreign linsncing (net) -44 10 -88 103 -96 85 36 Concessional -38 29 6 -30 -7 -1 -I C0mmerc1al -130 -37 -127 -59 -89 -136 37 Exceptional fmancmg I24 17 34 I92 0 222 0 Domestic finnncing (net) 98 Asset sales 31 DomestIc borrowmg (net) 98 BankIng system 85 Olkr 13 oh: alTears 41 27 0 -47 78 -15 -15 229 -a7 109 -1.55 260 78 116 -38 229 101 129 26.4 60 65 -5 228 65 I63 I12 51 51.0 (In percent of GDP) TOLII re”C”ue and gram 26.4 27.3 32 8 31 3 30.0 292 28.6 Tax revenue 18.8 22.0 25.0 21 7 20.5 207 20.1 Nontax revenue 4.0 29 32 3.7 35 3.1 31 Foreign grants 3.7 24 47 58 60 54 54 Total expcndlture 27.3 26 8 32.1 32.4 31.8 30.9 31 7 Recurrent expenditure 23.6 23 I 27.1 25.5 24.8 20.8 223 Development expenditure 37 3.6 5.6 69 6.9 10.1 9.4 Overall balance 3/ -0.8 0.5 0. I -I I -1 7 Overall balance, cxcl. asset sales 3/ -2.3 -0.3 0. I -2. I -1.9 -I 7 -3.1 Financing Foreign financmg (net) Domestic Iinancmg (net) Of which Asset sales 31 Arrears 41 Memorandum Items Mmenl revenue Nonmineral revenue Stock of domestIc arrears (end-year) 41 0.8 -0.5 -0.7 01 I5 47 -0.1 I I -1 3 I.3 12 -0.2 1.7 -I 2 30 I7 IO 07 0.8 04 04 0.3 3.1 04 27 OK 0.6 4.4 6.1 6.7 4.9 I84 I88 21.5 206 4.0 20 0 80.0 I.0 49 189 4.5 IS.7 1340 1.6 Percent of GDP 4/ Sources: Data prowded by the Papua New Guinea authori&%, and Fund staff proJectlon%. II For 1998 and 1999, staff estimates and projectmns are on a commitment baw, budget figures are on a cash basis Staff proJectlon IS based on a continuation of current policies 2/ Any retrenchment costs pnor to 1999 are included in other 31 Asset sales are included in other property revenues through 1998. but followmg ofliiclal reclassification under the 1999 budget, they are treated as financmg from 1999 onward For 1998. K50 milhon pmd by PNGBC for MVIT 1s excluded from asset sales. 41 Prehmmary staff est!mates based on partial mformatlon on pensIon-related habdmes. There 1s no r&able informatIon on the evolution of the stock of arrears prior to 1998 (In millions 0fKina) Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 4. Papua New Guinea: Monetary Survey, 1996-98 Act. Act Act. Act. AC1 AC1 Act Est r DCC. Mar. Jun Sep. DS Mm. Jun. Sep. DCC. 1996 1997 1998 Net foreign assets 845 831 819 Bank of Papua New Guinea (BPNG) 716 693 690 Commercial banks 129 138 129 Net domestic assets Domestic credit Net credit to consolidated central govemment I/ BPNG li Commemal banks Credit to other sectors 21 Other items (net) 1,587 1,636 1,607 1,891 1,904 1,968 912 841 833 -26 -52 -131 938 903 964 980 1,063 1,135 -305 -268 -361 Broad money Narrow money Quasi money 2,432 2.467 2,426 865 888 946 1,567 1,579 1,480 Domestx credrt 6.5 7.2 36 Consolidated central government II 13.3 10.2 -5 0 other sectors 21 08 11.9 119 Broad money 31.8 28.8 170 Bank of Papua New Guinea Accounts Reserve money (Percent change from end of previous year) 333 (32 9) 308 s(7.6) 312 X6.2) Net foreign assets Net domestic assets Credit to government 4/ Credit to nongovernment Other items (net) 716 693 690 -383 -386 -378 -28 -63 -133 4 4 5 -360 -326 -249 Net forctp assets 202.6 -6.9 -7 9 Net domestic assets -169.7 -0 7 1.7 Credit to government 41 -88.9 -10.6 -31.1 Credit to nongovemment -1.9 -0 2 -0 4 Other items (net) -78 9 100 33 2 Memorandum items: Velocity 5/ Money multiplier Share of government credit in total credit Average B-month trcasuy bill rate 6/ Commercial bank liquid assets 7/ As B percent of deposits As a percent of credit to other secton 2 12 73 8.0 48.2 442 15.1 102 78 42.3 9.3 54 8 51.4 513 125.0 112.2 107.1 (In millions of kina) 822 781 643 589 179 192 1,661 1,817 1,988 2,320 843 1,054 -121 117 963 937 . 1,145 1,266 -327 -503 2.483 2.598 919 919 1,563 1.679 (Percent change) 3; 47 227 -126 157 20.8 29.2 14.3 6.8 (In millions of kina) 295 302 41 2) s(9.2) 643 589 -348 -287 -122 II5 -23: 407 5 493 556 603 450 308 401 414 322 185 155 189 128 2,085 2,096 2,130 2,500 2,682 2,700 1.049 I.076 978 290 360 653 759 716 325 1,451 I.606 1,721 -415 -586 -570 2,578 2,652 2,733 877 902 957 1,701 1,749 1,776 2,195 2,787 1,155 715 440 1,632 -592 2,645 . 31 3 36.3 35.8 20.1 24.8 29.2 16.1 9.6 366 41.5 50.3 28 9 43 9.3 10.1 1.8 276 328 -(8 5) (8.8) (II32 637 (1108) 308 401 414 322 -32 -73 232 315 288 358 651 713 4 4 4 4 -324 -435 -424 Jla3 (Contributions to growth of reserve money) -21.9 -38 1 -93.0 106 28.9 84.5 -25.7 46.9 57 1 -2.5 -3.8 00 38.9 -14.2 27.4 84 2.10 8.6 9.3 42.4 45.4 420 8.8 11.0 I54 504 440 366 107 6 87.0 t: 643 -62 3 -58.0 -88 5 71.1 171.9 199.3 80.2 177.4 198.0 0.0 0.0 00 -9 2 -5.5 14 8 i 40.1 21.7 2.12 4.2 4.2 36.2 41.5 ,23.4 23 3 354 33.0 58 8 49.2 Sources: Data provided by the Papua New Guinea authorities; and Fund staff estimates and proJections. I/ Includes net credit 10 the central govemment plus the commodity stabdization fun&. 21 Includes credit to the private sector, provincial govemments. and nonfinancial public enterprises. 31 Year-on-year change 41 Excluding credit to, but including deposits of, commodity stabilisation funds through 1997. Excluding them for 1998 51 Nonmineral GDP divided by end-year money stock. 61 Annual average for L994-96, quarterly averages thereafter. 7/ Includes commercial bank holdings of treasury bills, inscribed stock a-ith term to mati& of less than three years, notes and corns, and deposits with the BPNG Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 27 - . Table 5. Papua New Guinea: Medium-Term Adjustment Sccnsrio, 1997-2004 . PreL St& Act. Eat. 1997 1998 1999 2000 Pmjected I/ 2001 2002 2003 2004 Output and Prices Real GDP of which: Nonmineral GDP CPl (end period) CPI (period average) -4.6 0:9 2.4 . 2.9 5.3 3.9 -3.7 1.4 21.8 7.4 13.6 15.0 (Annual pcrcerdage change) 3.5 3.8 3.9 * 4.1 4.5 3.5 5.0 3.5 (In percent of GDP) 3.9 4.0 4.0 4.1 4.1 4.2 2.9 2.9 2.9 2.9 2.9 2.9 Central government finances Total revenue and grants 32.8 30.0 30.0 30.6 30.6 30.8 30.9 30.9 Mineral Tax Rcvtnues 6.1 4.0 4.5 4.5 4.5 4.5 4.5 4.5 0th rNc”“es 21 21.5 20.0 20.6 21.5 21.9 22.4 22.7 22.9 Foreign grants 4.7 6.0 4.9 4.6 4.2 3.9 3.7 3.5 Total expmditurc 32.7 31.8 30.0 30.6 30.6 30.8 30.9 30.9 Rccumnt expenditure 21.1 24.8 22.2 22.2 22.1 22.0 21.9 21.9 Dcvetopmcnt expenditure 5.6 6.9 7.8 8.4 8.5 8.8 9.0 9.0 OvcraU balance 2/ 0.1 -1.8 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Public Debt 65.2 68.1 63.0 58.8 54.8 51.5 48.6 46.0 Domestic 33.6 32.2 26.7 24.9 23.1 21.6 20.3 19.2 EXtcrnal 31.6 35.9 36.3 33.9 31.7 29.9 28.3 26.8 Balance of Payments (lo nliuions of us d&Is) Current Account Balance -258 16 0 -43 -57 -55 -53 -51 Trade Balance 218 451 482 482 478 467 464 468 Exports (f.o.b.) 2191 1842 1987 2107 2222 2333 2450 2575 Imports (c.i.f.) -1972 -1391 -1505 -1625 -1744 -1866 -1986 -2106 Setices Balance -673 -642 -620 -672 -680 -662 -657 -660 Unrequited transfers (net) 197 206 138 147 145 140 140 140 Capital account balance 3/ 64 Official capital intlows (net) -54 Disbursements 93 AlllOltiZidOO -146 Private (net) 3/ 118 -172 88 140 145 135 129 117 -40 6 0 0 0 0 0 59 129 139 92 93 93 93 -99 -123 -139 -92 -93 -93 -93 -133 82 140 146 135 129 117 130 83 99 112 112 110 109 of which: Foreign direct investments (net) 23 Overall Balance -194 -157 88 97 89 80 76 66 Memorandum items: Nongovcmmcnt sector’s saw-invcstmcnt balance (in percent of GDP) -5.6 2.2 0.0 -1.1 -1.4 -1.2 -1.1 -1.0 Curmnt account balance (in percent of GDP) -5.4 0.4 0.0 -1.1 -1.4 -1.3 -1.2 -1.0 Gross official rcs- (end-year) In million.5 of U.S. dollars IO months of nonmineral imports 355 194 259 335 423 503 579 645 3.0 2.1 2.7 3.2 3.7 4.1 4.4 4.6 Debt service ratio (in percent of cwrcnt receipts) 17.1 24.4 19.6 16.9 14.1 13.9 13.5 13.1 External Debt-GDP Ratio (in percent) 54.1 53. I 52.6 49.6 47.2 45.0 43.1 41.0 Public 4/ 34.5 37.2 37.0 34.0 31.8 29.9 28.4 26.9 Private 19.6 15.9 15.5 15.6 15.4 15.0 14.7 14.1 Sources: Papua New Guinea authorities and staff estimate.s. 11 Assumes implementation of policies reconm~ended by the staff 2/ Asset sales are included in other property revenues through 1998, but foUowing official reclassification under the 1999 budgef they are tmatcd a~ fimmcing from 1999 onwards. 31 Includes errors and omissions 41 Includes external debt of the BPNG Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 28 - ANNEX1 I. II. III. Iv. V. VI. PAPUA NEW GUINEA: FUND RELATIONS (As ofMarch 31, 1999) Membership Status: Joined October 9, 1975; Article VIII General Resources Account: SDR Million Quota 131.60 Fund holdings of currency 159.74 Reserve position in Fund 0.05 SDR Department: SDR Million Net cumulative allocation 9.30 Holdings 0.03 Outstanding Purchases and Loans: SDR Million Stand-by arrangement 28.18 Financial Arrangements: Amount Approval Expiration Approved Date Date Amount Drawn (SDR Million) (SDR Million) Percent Quota 100.0 121.4 0.0 Percent Allocation 100.0 0.3 Percent Quota 21.4 Type Stand-by 7114195 12/15/97 71.48 35.34 Stand-by 713 l/91 9130192 26.36 0.0 Stand-by 4125190 6/24/9 1 26.36 0.0 Projected Obligations to Fund (SDR million; based on existing use of resources and present holdings of SDRs): Overdue ------- --_ - Forthcoming --__-------- 03/31/99 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 Principal 0.0 12.5 14.7 1.0 0.0 0.0 Charges/interest 0.0 0.9 0.7 0.4 0.3 0.3 Total 0.0 13.4 15.4 1.4 0.3 0.3 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 29 - ANNEX1 VII. Exchange Rate Arrangement: The kina was pegged to a basket of currencies of Papua New Guinea’s major trading partners from December 1976 through October 1994. Kina trading was suspended on October 4, 1994, and the currency was floated as of October 10, 1994. Since August 14, 1995, the value of the kina has been determined through a screen-based foreign exchange market; this replaced the auction system initially introduced when the kina was floated. Exchange restrictions against Iraq were imposed in August 1990 and continue to be maintained in accordance with UN Security Council Resolution 661. VIII. Article IV Consultation and the Stand-by Arrangement: Papua New Guinea is on the standard 12-month consultation cycle. The last Article IV consultation discussions were held during October 27-November 10, 1997, and the consultation was concluded on January 23, 1998 (S&I/98/2 and SM/98/4). An 18-month stand-by arrangement was approved by the Executive Board on July 14, 1995. The first review was completed on November 27, 1995 on a lapse of time basis (EBS/95/178). The second review was completed on December 20, 1996, and the arrangement was extended. through December 15, 1997. Ix. Technical Assistance: FAD: A mission visited Port Moresby in September/October 1995 to provide advice on the introduction of a broad-based consumption tax. LEG: A mission visited Port Moresby in November 1996 to provide advice on the legal framework for the National Value Added Tax (NVAT). MAE: A mission visited Port Moresby in September 1995 to provide assistance in developing monetary instruments and primary and secondary markets. Missions in November 1997, June 1998 and January 1999 provided advice on banking supervision. PFTAC: A mission in May 1996 provided advice on fiscal reporting of provincial governments. In July 1996, a mission visited Port Moresby to provide assistance in upgrading bank supervision. A mission in January 1997 provided advice on implementation of the NVAT. A mission in March 1998 (in conjunction with the AsDB and AusAID) discussed financial management, A mission in November 30-December 11, 1998, provided assistance in the areas of national accounts and balance of payments statistics. A follow-up mission is scheduled for July 1999. STA: Four missions visited Port Moresby over the period August 1995 to April 1996 to provide advice on the compilation of national accounts. X. Resident Representative/Advisor: None Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 30 - ANNEX II PAPUA NEW GIJINEA: RELATIONS WITH THE WOIILD BANK GROUP’ (As of February 28, 1999) To date the World Bank has provided 29 IBRD loans and 13 IDA development credits amounting to $597 million and $115 million, respectively, for a total of 37 projects. This includes a second structural adjustment loan which was approved in 1995, the second tranche of which was released on January 13, 1997. The loan closed on January 15, 1997. A third policy-based operation (Social and Economic Development Program Loan) is currently under consideration, but was held up by government for a large part of 1998, The Bank’s assistance strategy comprises four elements: (a) to help government with analytical support to develop a coherent set of macroeconomic and structural reforms; (b) to provide a judicious combination of balance of payments support, project, and technical assistance to assist the reforms and build institutional capacity to sustain them; (c) to coordinate donor assistance to Papua New Guinea Consultative Group Meetings, as well as through bilateral arrangements with Australia, Japan, the Asian Development Bank, and other donors; and (d) to work closely with NGOs and other civic organizations to improve service delivery, effective resource management, and broad-based ownership of reforms in the context of IMP/World Bank programs. Thus far, there has been only one IFC investment in Papua New Guinea: a $13 million investment in a tuna canning operation, approved in August 1993. IFC continues to look for private sector initiatives and, through the South Pacific Facility, is assisting in the development of project proposals and in the mobilization of funding. Papua New Guinea signed the MIGA Convention in 1990. To date, MIGA has extended one guarantee for a gold mine project. Papua New Guinea: IBRIYIDA Lending Operations (In millions of U. S. dollars) Fiscal year ending June 30 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 I/ Loan approvals 67 51 27 42 11 0 50 0 0 0 Loan disbursements 39 60 49 12 23 23 39 42 21 8 Balance undisbursed (end of period) 160 151 127 154 130 106 117 70 54 46 Source: Data provided by the World Bank. I I As of February 28, I 999. ‘Prepared by World Bank staff Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3l- ANNEX III PAPUA NEW GUINEA: RELATIONS WITH THE ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK’ - (As of February 28, 1999) As of February , 1999, the Asian Development Bank (AsDB) had approved 47 loans totaling $620 million for 38 projects. Of this total, 20 loans ($284 million) had been extended from ordinary capital resources and 27 loans ($336 million) from special fbnds resources. In addition, $28.4 million had been provided for 132 technical assistance projects. The AsDB lending operations focus on improving living standards through sustainable employment generation and improved social services. The strategy is to improve governance and public sector management, to improve sectoral policy formulation and implementation, and to improve social conditions. The AsDB’s assistance focuses on smallholder agriculture, transport, vocational training, health and water supply and will extend to public sector management reform, and improving financial management. In 1999, tentative plans cal,l for lending of about $40 million for the Road Upgrading and Maintenance project and of about $25 million for the Skills Development and Employment project; the timing of approvals for the two loans will depend on processing. In addition, current plans are to provide lending of about $25 million for financial management improvement during 1999. Over the next three years, lending is programmed to average about $70 million a year. The 1999 program for grant financed technical assistance comprises nine projects, totaling $3.9 million. Table 1. Papua New Guinea: Loan Approvals and Disbursements, 1991-98 (In millions of U.S. dollars) 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 Loan approvals 80.3 25.6 0.5 0.0 0.0 60.0 0.0 Loan disbursements 19.8 28.3 29.9 17.6 11.9 24.3 24.0 Source: Data provided by the AsDB. ‘Prepared by the Asian Development Bank staff. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicXntemational Comparison of SeIected Social Indicators I/ Bangladesh Cambodia China India Indonesia Lao PDR Malaysia Papua New Pakistan Philippines Sri Lanka Thailand Vietnam Guinea Human resources Population (millions) Age dependency ratio Urban (@ percent of population) Porrk& growth rate Natural resources Density (population per sq. km) Cropland (percent of land area) Income distribution Share of top 20 percent (percent of total income) Share of bottom 20 percent (percent of total incom Fuel and power Energy consumption per capita (kg of oil eq.) Poverty (headcount index in percent of population) National poverty line International poveriy line Population below $1 a day Population below $2 a day Education Gross enrollment ratios Primary (percent of schoo1 age) Pupil/teacher ratio Secondary (percent of school age) Pupil/teacher ratio Illiteracy (Percent of pop. 15+) Health Population per hospital bed Mo$zz (per thousand lrve births) Under 5 Immunization (percent of age group) Measles DPT Child malnutrition under 5 (percent of age group) Lie expectancy (years) Total fertility rate (births per woman) Maternal mortality rate @er 10,000 live births) 122 10 1215 945 197 0.80 0.80 0.60 0.60 0.60 19.0 21.0 3 1 .o 27.0 36.0 1.6 3.0 1.1 1.7 1.6 4.7 6.1 4.4 2.1 3.6 0.9; 21.0 2.9 5.9 21 134 72 0.80 0.90 0.80 54.0 35.0 55.0 2.4 2.8 2.3 3.9 4.3 4.1 0.:: 22.0 1.4 2.1 60 O.JO 20.0 1.2 2.5 a.::, 0.7: 19.0 16.3 2.0 2.3 2.9 4.0 930.0 60.0 130.0 320.0 110.0 20.0 60.0 170.0 241.0 280.0 120.0 230.0 9.7 67 22 10 57 17 4 23 28 32 29 40 21 1 38 48 39 43 40 54 40 48 39 53 44 ,.. . . 9 6 9 8 8 5 8 7 9 6 8 . . 67 52 707 260 442 40 1,655 243 307 136 878 104 232 36 28 51 22 . . 46 32 I 7 58 35 53 89 1s 12 59 I.. 16 34 6 12 27 57 . . . .,. 35 13 4 2 41 24 . . . 92 122 63 45 21 27 43 I.. 62 35 118 100 114 24 63 23 67 49 48 15 26 16 19 48 16 107 :i :3” El 61 19 17 116 2 50 5 113 28 :i LO !Z 55 18 6 114 34 4: 6 it 14 . . . 28 5,479 1:; 491 612 105 33 170 39 1,503 405 437 1,769 49 101 11 88 60 140 14 123 615 34 38 261 :i 62 85 2 68.0 58 3.4 850 E 17.5 70 1.9 115 1,371 ;: 84 86 66.0 63 3.1 437 89 65 92 54 53 86 58 86 29.6 I.. 53 38.7 40.0 65 53 66 4.6 900 2.6 5.1 390 650 lit 23.3 72 3.4 43 40.0 63 5.1 340 3.6 208 365 15 19 9”; 38.0 73 2.3 30 9”: 13.0 69 1.8 200 95 94 44.9 68 l% 55 50 .I. 58 4,7 . . . Sources: The World Bank, World Development Indicators, 1998; and IMF staffreports. I/ Data refers to most recent estimates. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 33 - ANNEXV PAPUA NEW GUINEA: STATISTICAL ISSUES Monetary data are normally of reasonably good quality and, with some exceptions, available on a timely basis, but national accounts, price statistics, government finance and balance of payments data are seriously deficient. The compilation of the balance of payments and national accounts statistics has recently been reviewed by the Pacific Financial Technical Assistance Centre (PFTAC), which found a number of problems in both areas, Existing legislation limits data collection authority to the National Statistical Office (NSO) except for data collected by the BPNG through records of the commercial banks. However, NSO lacks both the capacity and willingness to exercise its function. Currently, the NSO is concentrating on conducting the 2000 Census, for which it has recently received technical assistance from the United Nations Population Fund. The only surveys conducted on a regular basis are the consumer price and migration surveys, published quarterly. Nationai Accounts: The most recent year for which national accounts statistics are available is 1993, the year in which the most recent Annual Business Census (ABC) was conducted. GDP estimates by industry in both current and constant prices are being produced by BPNG on the basis of information collected through a Business Liaison Survey (BLS), which is conducted twice a year. However, the frequency of updating these estimates is uneven and their reliability questionable. Fund technical assistance missions visited on four occasions between August 1995 and April 1996, but as a result of institutional weakness of the NSO, their recommendations have not been implemented. Prices: The only price data produced is a quarterly consumer price index (CPI); the main deficiencies include outdated weights (based on consumption studies from the mid-l 970s) given large shifts in consumption patterns over the last two decades, and regional focus on a small number of urban centers. Governmerit finance: While central government revenue statistics are generally accurate and timely, public expenditure data are deficient, and there is no recording of off-budget outlays and corresponding liabilities. Key problems include a lack of any formal accounting for domestic arrears to workers, pension funds and public enterprises; inaccurate recording of interest payments, following a netting out of quasi-fiscal receipts from BPNG through nontransparent procedures; and delays in the availability of accurate data until well after the end of the fiscal year. In addition, a lack of timely data on BPNG’s profit and loss account makes it difficult to assess the magnitude of quasi-fiscal transfers to the government, and there is incomplete accounting for large implicit or explicit transfers between the government and public enterprises. Data for publication in the GFS Yearbook and International Financial Statistics (‘IFS) have not been provided for some time. The latest published data in the GFS Yearbook are for 1994, and in IFS for December quarter 1997. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 34 - AN-NEXV External Sector: Aggregate data on the balance of payments are published by the BPNG on a quarterly basis. Data on international reserves and the BPNG’s foreign exchange cash flows, which used to be provided to the Fund on a weekly basis, have not been available in recent months, although the staff has partially updated its database Corn unofficial press reports. Balance of payments data are based on the exchange record system which is not tightly monitored despite BPNG reporting requirements. The financial account data are of poor quality because of major deficiencies in data collection, especially in the areas of private external debt. In many cases, donors and lenders disburse funds directly to contractors for the purchase of goods and services, effectively bypassing the exchange record system. Therefore, a substantial proportion of capital flows is not recorded. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicCentral Papua New Guinea: Core Statistical Indicators as of March 10, 1999 Date of latest observation Date received Frequency of data 11 Frequency of reporting 1 / Source of data 21 Mode of reporting 31 Intema- Bank Exchange tional Balance Rate Reserves Sheet Confidentiality 41 Frequency of publication 11 Reserve/ Base Money Dec. 1998 02/l 9199 M M A Consumer Broad Interest Price Money Rates Index Dec. 1998 03/04/99 1998 44 ;I M I I W Q A I I A A C C I I C D I I C D Q ( Q / Q 1 / D-daily; W-weekly; M-monthly; Q-quarterly; A-annually. 2/A-direct reporting by Bank of Papua New Guinea and/or Department of Treasury and Planning. 3/ C-fax; M-mail; O-Internet; V-obtained during mission and/or Annual Meetings. 4/ C-for unrestricted use; D-embargoed for a specified period and thereafter for unrestricted use. Current Overall External Exports/ Account Government Debt/Debt Imports Balance Balance GDP/GNP Service p Q Q M A Q Q Q M A Q A A A A A M M 0 V M clcl c Ic I c Q Q M A Q Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public