DOCUMENT OF INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND NOT FOR PUBLIC USE MASTER FILES ROOM C-525 0450 srw98/280 CONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL. INFORMATION December 22, 1998 To: Members of the Executive Board From: The Acting Secretary Subject: Canada-Staff Report for the 1999 Article IV Consultation Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staff report for the 1999 Article IV consultation with Canada, which is tentatively scheduled for discussion on Monday, January 25, 1999. Mr. Stuart (ext. 34579) or Mr. Dunaway (ext. 37343) is available to answer technical or factual questions relating to this paper prior to the Board discussion. Unless the Documents Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the WTO Secretariat on Tuesday, January 5, 1999; and to the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), following its consideration by the Executive Board. Att: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicCONTAmS CONFlDENTI~ INFORMATION INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND CANADA Staff Report for the 1999 Article IV Consultation Prepared by the Staff Representatives for the 1999 Consultation with Canada Approved by Brian C. Stuart and G. Russell Kincaid December 22. 1998 Contents Executive Summary 3 I. Introduction ....................................................... 4 II. Economic Developments and Outlook ................................... 4 III. Policy Issues, .................................................. A. EconomicProspects.. ........................................ B. Monetary Policy and the Exchange Rate ........................... C. Fiscal Policy ................................................ D. OtherIssues ................................................ 13 13 14 15 20 IV. StaffAppraisal _.., ., 24 Tables 1. Selected Economic Indicators ................................ 2. Balance of Payments ...................................... 3. Federal Government Budget, Public Accounts ................... 4. Net Government Debt ....... ... ...................... 5. Canada and the G-7 Countries: Indicators of Economic Performance 6. StaffEconomic Projections ................................. 7. Staff Projections for the Federal Public Accounts ................. Figures 1. ExchangeRate ................................................ 2. Monetary Conditions Index ...................................... 3. Interest Rate Differentials ........................................ 4. Output and Demand ............................................ 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 5 5 6 8 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicEmployment -2- 6. Employment and Output Gap .............. 7. Core CPI Inflation ...................... 8. Federal Fiscal Policy Indicators ............ Boxes 1. The Sources of Real Exchange Rate Fluctuations 2. How Sound is the Fiscal Position? Appendices I. Fund Relations .......................... II. Core Statistical Indicators .................. III Press Information Notice .................. ,I ,I .I. 9 ...................... 9 ..................... 10 ..................... 10 7 17 ..................... 35 ..................... 36 ..................... 37 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3- EXECUTIVE S-Y Economic Setting . Over the past year, the Canadian dollar experienced bouts of heavy selling pressure, reflecting the fall in commodity prices and turmoil in world fmsncial markets. Monetary conditions ware allowed to ease after February 1998 with the depreciation of the currency, but in late August the Baok of Canada raised interest rates by 100 basis points to stem the currency’s decline. Subsequently, the Canadian dollar recovered somewhat, and the Bank followed short-term interest rate reductions by the U.S. Federal Reserve with cuts in Canadian rates of 25 basis points on three occasions. . The federal govenuneot budget shifted to a surplus of nearly % percent of GDP in 1997/98. The provincial governments on an aggregate basis also ran a small surplus in 1997, and net general government debt fell from a high of 69 percent of GDP in 1996 to just under 66 percent in 1997. . Over the seven quarters through the first quarter of 1998, real GDP grew at an annual rate of 3% percent. Growth slowed to 1% percent in the second and thud quarters of 1998, owing to the effects of the Asian crisis and several strikes, Employment growth has remained strong, with the unemployment rate falling to 8 percent in November 1998. Core CPI inflation remained at the lower end of the l-3 percent official inflation target range in 1998. Policy Issues . The immediate challenges in setting macroeconomic policies are assessing the prospects for the Canadian economy in light of the uncertainties associated with the external economic environment and ascertaining the extent to which concerns about renewed downward pressure on the Canadian dollar might constrain the use of monetary policy. . Over the medium term, substantial budget surpluses are in prospect on a status quo basis. The authorities need to choose between the pace of debt reduction and the pursuit of other fiscal priorities, such as tax reform end increased spending on education and health care. . The unemployment rate has fallen, but it remains high, and further measures need to be considered to improve the flexibility and efficiency of the labor market, and the economy more generally. Staff Positions . If economic prospects worsen, there is scope to ease monetary policy and to allow the automatic fiscal stabilizers to function. . In the absence of further adverse economic shocks, it would be reasonable for the authorities to aim for annual budget surpluses on the order of 1 percent of GDP over the next few years, To do so would reduce the debt-to-GDP ratio significantly, while making resources available to tinance a phased reform of the income tax and to meet health care and education needs. . Tying the EI premium to the experience with unemployment in individual iirms end eliminating regional extended unemployment benefits would reduce disincentives to work. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4- 1. INTRODUCTION 1. The discussions for the 1999 Article IV consultation with Canada took place in Ottawa on November 9-13 and November 23-24. The mission held discussions with the Minister of Finance, the Governor of the Bank of Canada, r@d senior officials of the Departments of Finance, Foreign Affairs and International Trade, and Human Resources and Development; Health Canada; and the Bank of Canada. The staff team comprised B. Stuart, S. Dunaway, M. Cerisola, M. Leidy, S. Tokarick (all WHL$, and P. Swagel @ES). The Executive Director for Canada, Mr. Bemes, and his advisor, Mr. Askari-Rankouhi, attended the meetings. Mr. Fischer participated in a dinner with the Minister and the Governor at the conclusion of the discussions. Comprehensive, high quality economic data are available for Canada on a timely basis, and Canada has subscribed to the Fund’s Special Data Dissemination Standard. 2. The 1998 Article IV consultation discussions were held in November 1997, and the staffreport was considered by the Executive Board o January 30, 1998 (EBM/98/10).’ k Executive Directors noted the strong fundamentals of the anadian economy, citing in particular fiscal policies that were expected to eliminate deficits in federal and provincial government budgets in the next several years, and a monetary policy that had given Canada one of the lowest inflation rates among major industrial countries. Directors cautioned that monetary policy would need to be managed carefully, especially in view of the Asian crisis, to ensure that economic growth converged smoothly to its potential path. Directors supported the objective of using potential budget surpluses to reduce public debt. II. ECONOMICDEVELOPMENTSJANDOUTLOOK 3. The authorities have substantially improved th# macroeconomic environment in Canada in recent years. Inflation has been maintained at a low level under the Bank of Canada’s successful inflation targeting policy adopted in 1991, The budget positions of all levels of government have improved, with the federal government and the consolidated general government budgets moving into surplus in 1997/98. Actions have also been taken to improve the financing of the public old-age support system, particularly the Canada Pension Plan, and all levels of government are also working to deal with financial challenges faced by the health care system. These policy efforts, as well as other structural reforms, have fostered the conditions underpinning the current economic expansion. Economic growth has slowed during 1998, reflecting the effects of the financial crisis( in Asia and the turmoil in world markets and illustrating Canada’s vulnerability to external shocks. 4. The federal Government is in the second yea+ of itsfive-year mandate and maintains a majority position in Parliament. In the Quebec provincial elections held on ‘&l/98/3, l/8/98 and the selected issues paper W/98//17, l/16/98. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-5- November 30, the ruling FIGLmI.F.xCHANGEaA~ separatist Parti Queb&cois (PQ) an WssW won a significant majority in the provincial parliament, but the a,s popular vote was about evenly 0.13 split with the Quebec Liberal Party. The PQ leader indicated “’ during the election campaign 0.68 . that a new sovereignty referendum would be caged abl only if it was highly likely to be 061 successful. am L -1 5. Notwithstanding the ~~~~~~.~,~~~~~,~~~~~,~,~~~~~~ sound macroeconomicpolicies in place, sustained growth of output and employment in FIGURE 2. MmETAFtY CzcNDrnoNSINDM Canada has been threatened by (19s7Q) events in Asia and in world 4.0 40 financial markets in thepast 45 4 year. Income, output, and the .5.0 . 60 external balance were adversely affected by a substantial decline -~,5 -5.5 in commodity prices and by d0 -50 slower activity in a number of 4s -5s the country’s overseas markets. .,. . -7.0 These events, accompanied by the turmoil in world financial -I5 -1.5 markets, have been reflected in do -80 sharp movements in the a, . . .dJ Canadian dollar that complicated ~~~~~~l~m~~h~~yhn~~m~ 19pI *‘*s the conduct of monetary policy, as the authorities sought to moderate the adverse effects on the Canadian economy of the deterioration in international economic conditions (Box 1)’ 6. Over much of the past year, the Canadian dollar experiencedperiodic bouts of heavy sellingpressure, and in late August the currency reached an all-time low value of around 63 U.S. cents (Figure 1). After February 1998, the Bank of Canada allowed monetary 2A more complete description of the analysis presented in this box is included in the forthcoming selected issues paper. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-6- conditions to ease (Figure 2).’ It also intervened at various mes in the foreign exchange market in an attempt to maintain orderly conditions in the IT rket.’ 7. Over most of this FlGllRE3. INTERESTRA?EDlER period, the decline in the ).D (Ins-) value of the Canadian 2.5 I dollar appeared to largely reflect changes in the fundamental determinants of the currency’s value, x.0 especially declining 0, 03 commodity prices. At the DO 0.0 same time, there continued to 4, be expectations in the market -I that the value of the -1.5 -43 Canadian dollar would -20 .2.0 strengthen over time, as -2s long-term interest rates in Canada remained below their U.S. counterparts (Figure 3). 8. In August 1998, the situation changed Continue(d strong downward pressure on the Canadian dollar was accompanied by a shift in the differe tral between Canadian and U.S. interest rates back to positive values, with the differential the long end widening substantially toward the end of August. Against this back the Bank of Canada stepped ‘This was in sharp contrast to the Bank’s actions in the sdcond half of 1997 and early 1998. With expectations of continuing strong economic growth, the Bank raised short-term interest rates in October 1997 to tighten monetary conditions mc#lestly and again in November and December 1997 and in January 1998 to keep monetary conditions roughly unchanged given the depreciation of the Canadian dollar. The index used y the Bank of Canada in judging the change in monetary conditions is calculated as the percent change in the 90-day commercial paper rate since January 1987 plus one-thir of the cumulative percent change in Canada’s trade-weighted effective exchange rate countries over the same period. ‘From January to August 1998, net exchange market int rvention amounted to US$9.4 billion To finance this intervention, the Exchange Fund Accou k t entered into medium-term currency swaps amounting to US$3.4 billion and issued nearly U denominated Canadian bills and long-term government p” $5 billion in foreign currency onds. Net intervention in September-November 1998 was USSl billion, but the stock of gross international reserves rose to US$23.3 billion at end-November. Financing for intervention purposes and to increase the level of gross reserves comprised US$1.3 billion in currency swaps and USS4.2 billion hr foreign curr&cy denominated government bonds, Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-7. Box 1. The Sources of Real Exchange Rate Fluctuations since the onset of the Asian crisis. the dowward pressure on the Canadian dollar’s exchsttgo rate against the U.S. dollar has raised saw. ~ucstiotts regarding the underlying factors driving m~vernent~ in the rate To diseme.ngle the effects of tbc principal factors expected to nflumce the real value of the bilateral exchange rate, movcmcnts in the real rate and these variables were broken down between their :yclical and tread cotnponents, and simple correlations were estimated (tabulation below). These resultt suggest that the relative terms ,ftmdc, the relative price of nontraded goods to traded goods in Canada compared to the Unitrd States (commonly used in exchange rate :quations as a proxy for rclatiw prcductivi~ growth in the traded goods sccmr), and the net government debt-to-GDP ratio in Canads alativc to that in the Uniti States (a proxy for the relative riekincos of Canadian ass&s) may be the most important taaors in explaining luctw.tions in the Canadian real exchange rate. 4 red exchange rate equation was estimated for Canada that aims at explaining real bilateral exchange rate Suctuations es a functiotlon If the variables in the table. The mcdcl estime.tes the long-run relationship between the real bilateral exchange rate and these variables :wintegrating vector). Fitted abus for the exchange rate were derived using the estimated long-run cocfticients and the trend mnponetm of the vaiablsr. Diffsrettccs bctwwn the actual rate and its fitted value reflect primarily tbc e&ts of unobserved cyclical md random factors. As seen in the figure on tbc let? below, tbc model doss a rwsonably good job of explaining tbc fluctuations in the real ilateral exchange rate bctwecn the Canadian and U.S. dollars over most oftbe estimation period f?om 1984 to the third quarter of 1998. :n particular, the real depreciation that took place bctwccn end-1996 and mid-1998 is relatively wll explained by the long-no ictermiwmts for the real exchange ntc. However, the model is not able to predict the sharp depreciation that took place in the third partcr of 1998. This depreciation could have ban partly related to a cyclical detetioration in the rclatiw terms oft&c (figure on the ight below). Stylizd Facts on Canada’s Real Exchange Rate Re*LExsh.ngc aus and Term, ofP.de’ cyclid cmnponant, ,** ,?@ ,N p ,& ,+@ ,& % B ,e Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-8- up its exchange market intervention and moved to make its intervening more on an ad hoc basis and in larger amounts. 1 increased sharply in late August, reflecting in part the intens effects stemming from the financial crisis in Russia, and this, tions less predictable by ‘essure on the Canadian dollar cation of the ‘flight to quality” vent appeared to trig$er a . - reappraisal of market expectations regarding the Canadian ollar’s mture value. Amid concerns about the apparent shift in market expectations (t i at was seen as probably contributing to a further sharp decline in the currency whit potentially would have persistent adverse effects on domestic economic activity as long-t Canadian interest rates would tend to rise), the central bank moved to bolster market confiden e in the Canadian dollar by raising the overnight bank rate by a full percentage point on 9. Following the Bank’s Augustpolicy action and markets the Canadian aMar’s value recovered, rising December, and market interest rates-especially long September, mid-October, and mid-November, the Bank interest rate reductions by the U.S. Federal Reserve wi 25 basis points on each occasion. Market interest rates prior to the Bank’s August policy action, with long-te points below their late August levels. Differentials between Canadian and U.S. interest rates have also narrowed significantly since late August, lo but Canadian rates still exceed those in the United States. I d turmoil in world~nancial nd 65 U.S. cents in rates-declined In late ada followed short-term in the bank rate in Canada by ember were below their levels rest rates roughly 100 basis 10. The implementation of sound macroeconomic 0 policies and a favorable external environment .J conhibuted to a rapid expansion of the economy after the first half of 1996. .lQ Over the seven quarters through thefirst quarter of 1998, real GDPgrew at an average annual rate 1% percent (annual rate) in the second and thz the Asian crisis and several strikes, including t ent Growth slowed to about owing to the effects of Figure 4). Consumption growth moderated in 1998 personal income, diminishing consumer confidence, ting a slower rise in disposable sharp drop in Canadian stock prices. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-9. At the same time, private fixed muREs.-emLoYh4E.Nr investment also slowed due to a marked weakening in the pace of inventory accumulation and a slowdown in equipment purchases, related to expectations of weaker sales and declining corporate profitability. In contrast, employment growth has remained relatively strong in recent months, and the unemployment rate declined to 8 percent in November 1998 ’ ’ from 8.6 percent in December ~;~~n1,.~NI;~,e’;p;;s’;~11,~~~s~~~NL1nNI.~’I,~: ,996 ,wI ,938 1997 (Figure 5). Slack appears to remain in the economy, with the staff estimating that output was about 1% percent below potential in the third quarter of 1998. The unemployment rate is in line with the staff’s estimate of NAIRU, but this estimate is subject to a great deal of uncertainty (Figure 6)’ 11, The current account FlGuRE6.FiMPL.OYMKNTA?4DCUIPUTGAF’ deficit widened from (In parslt) ISpercentof GDPin 1997to ’ 2 percent in thejirst three 3 quarters of 1998 (Table 2). 2 Export growth slowed largely ’ because of the effects of lower economic activity in Asian markets and a decline in -2 commodity prices (especially -3 lumber, petroleum, and metals). At the same time, although .s growth in domestic demand in 4 Canada slowed, import growth ., 1 remained robust (after allowing I~~~I~~PII~NI.~~l~nR,~~~,~.~,~~~,~~~,.~ ,989 1990 ,991 ,991 1~ 1~4 195 196 ~7 ,998 for the effects of the General - Motors strike that temporarily reduced imports of motor vehicles and parts). Net capital inflows to Canada declined in the first nine months of 1998, reflecting a large direct investment in the United States by a Canadian firm that was only partly offset by net loan sUncertainty regarding the estimate of the NAIRU in part reflects the difficulties in estimating the expected effects on structural unemployment of the reforms to unemployment insurance implemented in 1996. The staffs estimates incorporates a limited effect of these reforms. The authorities estimate NAlRU in a range from 6% to 8% percent. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-lO- I I repayments by foreigners to Canadian banks and a net reduction in the foreign assets of Canadian nonbanks. The statistical discrepancy shifted from a net outflow of about $7 billion in 1997 to a net inflow of $5 billion in the first three quarters of 1998. FIGURE 7. CORE WI rNFlATl& (pcrcntt ChF F agO) I 55, 12. Since early 1997, core CPZ inflation has generally remained at the lower end of the 1-3 percent official inflation target range.6 In November 1998, the 12-month rate of change in the core CPI was 1.2 percent (Figure 7). Despite some pick-up in wage LxGmE 8. mF.RAL FLXAL pKY lNDIcAToRs (In pmtilgc of GDP) 0 t I .:’ growth in 1997, unit labor costs I in manufacturing were virtually ” I unchanged, as labor productivity .’ growth rose to 2% percent. In -3 the first nine months of 1998, -4 labor productivity growth -J slowed, reelecting the softening d of economic activity, but unit -, labor costs declined slightly, as hourly wages decreased -8 ” modestly. 1 13. Decisive efforts by the I current Government since coming to of$ce in 1993 h ’ veproduced a marked improvement in the federalfiscalposition (Table 3 and Figure 8). T 4 e stat? estimates that the structural budget balance shied from a deficit of around 5% percent of GDP in 1993/94 to a surplus of 6Core CPI is the CPI excluding food, energy, and the e February 1998, the Government and the Bank of Cana ,k ects of changes in indirect taxes. In a agreed to extend the l-3 percent inflation target range through the end of 200 1. In anno fiuther experience with inflation within the current tar i ncing this decision, it was noted that et range would help to demonstrate the economy’s ability to perform well under conditions of ow inflation, before determining an appropriate long-run target consistent with price stabiihy. The Government and the Bank intend to identify such a long-run target for monetary policy before the end of 2001. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-ll- % percent in 1997/98.’ Strictly enforced limits have led to a decline in program spending over this period from close to 17 percent of GDP to less than 13 percent, with nearly two-thirds of the reduction resulting from cuts in federal government programs and the remainder from reductions in transfers to other levels of government. The 1998 Budget introduced some modest initiatives with respect to education and health care, and provided some tax relief for low- and middle-income families.8 In the February 1998 Budget, the Government defined its objective as achieving balance in 1998/99. The staff estimates that the budget could be in surplus by almost 1 percent of GDP in 1998/99 since revenues are likely to be higher than the Budget estimate and it appears that the contingency reserve included in the estimate for spending will not be used. 14. The improvement in thefinances of thefederal government contributed to a shift in the general government balance from a deficit of 5% percent of GDP in 1994 to a surplus of about 1 percent in 1997 (national accounts basis).’ The provincial governments also improved theirfinances, with the aggregateprovincialfiscalposition shiftingfrom a deficit of about 1 J/r percent of GDP in 1994 to a surplus of more than % percent of GDP in 199% The improvement in the provincial finances was primarily achieved through restraint on public consumption and controls on capital spending. The strength of the fiscal adjustment at all levels of government has resulted in a decline in the net general government debt from a high of 69 percent of GDP in 1996 to 65% percent in 1997 (Table 4). Nevertheless, the ratio of net general government debt to GDP in Canada remains significantly above the average for G-7 countries (Table 5). 15. National saving increased significantly owing to the marked improvement in general government saving since 1993. Between 1993 and 1997, gross national saving rose in relation to GDP by about 5% percentage points to 18% percent of GDP. Over this period, general government saving increased by almost 8 percentage points to 3% percent of GDP. ‘Fiscal years end March 3 1 *Proposals presented in the 1998 Budget include $7 billion in general and targeted tax cuts and $11 billion in new spending over the 1998/99-1999/2000 period. Targeted tax cuts and spending initiatives are generally aimed at improving access to post-secondary education, assisting youth employment, supporting families with children, and improving health care. General tax relief is provided through two changes in the personal income tax: (i) an increase in the threshold below which income is tax free; and (ii) a reduction in the 3 percent general surtax for certain middle-income households, and its elimination for households earning less than about $50,000. The net impact of the budget measures is estimated to average 0.3 percent of GDP a year. ‘The general government includes the federal government, the provincial governments, hospitals, local governments, and the Canada and the Quebec Pension Plans (CPP and QPP, respectively). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12- I Business saving also increased by 3 percentage points, as th sector improved significantly. Partly offsetting these increas & profitability of the corporate s in saving was a 5% percentage point fall in personal savings, which reflected the effects on ominal personal saving of declining intIation and a substantial increase in the financial ealth of households, which was particularly related to the strong performance of Canadian i! ock prices over the past few years.“’ After declining slightly in 1995 and 1996, gross inv stment rose sharply in 1997 in both nominal and real terms. In real terms, gross investmen t, in 1997 was equivalent to 20 percent of real GDP, significantly above its historic aver, ge. 16. The staff envisages real GDPgrowth slowing 1998 to 2% percent and in 1999 to 2% percent, as further small declines in the terms ade and reduced consumer confidence work to reduce domestic demand lation below and Table 6). In 2000, a pickup in GDP growth is expected reflecting recovery in commodity prices and more stable world macroeconomic conditions, pace of economic activity rising above potential (2% percent) and eliminating the ou ut gap by 2003. The unemployment rate is expected to remain relatively stable ver the period at around 8 percent. Inflation would remain in check, rising very gradually period to around the middle of the official target range. The external steadily from a deficit of 2 percent of GDP in 1998 to conditions are expected to improve in many of Canada’s ajor export markets, commodity prices rise, and Canadian producers are more competitive) especially in the U.S. market with the recent depreciation of the exchange rate. (Percent change) ; Real GDP growth CPI inflation Unemployment rate Current account balance/GDP 3.8 1.4 ::‘9 ::z f:“9 ::i 9.2 84 8.2 8.0 8.0 8.0 -1.5 -2. I -1.1 -0.8 -0.4 -0.0 17. The key risk to the outlook in the near term is t at continued instability in global financial markets could create a considerably less fa rable external environment for Canada than the one currently underlying the staffs orecast. Actions by the U.S. Federal Reserve to lower short-term interest rates, which have 1 een followed by the Bank of Canada “With lower inflation, households need to save less of /heir nominal incomes to try to preserve the real value of their net wealth. I Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13 - with cuts in Canadian short-term rates, and the recent coordinated interest rate cut by European central banks have reduced this risk. However, if growth in the United States were to be weaker than expected and commodity prices were to fall further, prospects for near-term growth in the Canadian economy would be significantly diminished. III. POLICY IssuEs 18. There was general agreement between the authorities and the staff on the course of macroeconomic policies in the period ahead and on many of the major structural policy issues. The discussions centered on the near-term outlook for the economy and the policy implications of that outlook, and on medium-term fiscal prospects and objectives. In particular, the discussions focused on: . the immediate challenge in sem’ng monetary policy of assessing the likely effects of the turmoil in worldfinancial markets on economic growth in Canada and ascertaining the extent to which the Bank of Canada’s ability to use monetary policy might be constrained by concerns about renewed downwardpressure on the Canadian dollar. . the Government’s plans to use the fiscal surpluses in prospect over the medium term on a current policy basis to support tax cuts, higher levels of government spending, andor debt reduction. The discussions also considered a number of structural policy issues including labor market and social assistance policies, financial sector reform, barriers to internal trade, and international trade policy. A. Economic Prospects 19. The word the authorities used most often to characterizeprospects for the Canadian economy was “uncertain. ” Available economic indicators provided mixed signals regarding the strength of economic activity over the remainder of 1998 and into early 1999. Recent surveys pointed to flagging consumer confidence, but the unexpectedly strong growth in employment (which could positively affect confidence) suggested some strength might remain in the economy. With further modest growth in output expected in the latter part of the year, real GDP growth was estimated to average 2.8 percent in 1998, down from 3.8 percent in 1997. 20. The outlook for the economy in 1999 was seen as being largely dependent on events in the rest of the world The key uncertainties were volatility in globalfinancial markets and economic prospects in the United States, Europe, and Japan With more normal Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicI - 14- I I \ conditions in financial markets, domestic demand in the Unit d States and Europe growing in line with consensus forecasts, and economic recovery begi 4 ing in Japan, the Bank of Canada envisaged that GDP growth in 1999 would be somewhere i a range from 253% percent. Growth would be in the upper end of this range if net expo 4 s rose sharply in response to the depreciation of the Canadian dollar and commodity prices began to increase. The Department of Finance’s 1999 growth forecast (2% percent) was toward the bottom of this range, as a strong recovery in the terms of trade and net exports was nft anticipated. For a similar reason, the staffs estimate of GDP growth in 1999 of 2% percent as in the lower end of the Bank’s forecast range.” 1 21. The depreciation of the Canadian dollar against t/te U.S. dollar was expected to exert some upwardpressure on prices, but this effect wo competitive pressures from Asian suppliers. Core CPI in li Id be mitigated by increased ation was expected to be largely unchanged at around 1% percent in 1999, well within the $ ttom half of the l-3 percent offtcial target range. At the same time, wage increases wer likely to be moderate through 1999, reflecting continued slack in the economy and low inflation. B. Monetary Policy and the Exkhange Bate I 22. In conducting monetary policy, the Bank of Cat&da targets inflation with the aim of influencing the rate over the nextfour to eight quarters. The Bank’s assessment of future inflation relies on an evaluation of current and projected output gaps, inflation expectations, changes in indirect taxes, and the current and expected e$hange rate. A broad range of other economic and financial indicators, including monetary and credit aggregates and the outcome of collective wage settlements, is also considered. I 23. In the discussions, the Bank of Canada representatives explained that during the second half of 1997 the economy had been expanding at ss rapid rate, and it had appeared likely that this would continue. The Bank responded in ctober 1997 by tightening monetary conditions modestly and subsequently attempted to keepiconditions roughly unchanged into early 1998 as the Canadian dollar weakened. Monetary the depreciation of the Canadian dollar during thefir t half of 1998, as it became more il onditions were allowed to ease with apparent that the economy would slow appreciably re ecting a terms of trade shock stemming from thefinancial crisis in Asia. The signifiiant selling pressure on the Canadian dollar that developed in July-August 1998 was judged not to be fully warranted by economic fundamentals, but instead was thought to reflect a loss i a market confidence in the currency, prompting the Bank to raise interest rates by 100 basis oints in late August. The staff indicated its view that the Bank of Canada had acted ap i ropriately in raising interest rates to stem the decline in the Canadian dollar and in subseque tly unwinding most of that increase “In November 1998, the consensus forecast was for G P growth of around 2 percent in 1999. P Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 15 - (as U.S. interest rates were reduced in September, October, and November). In theperiod immediately ahead, with inflationary pressures well contained, the Bank of Canada officials expected monetary policy to have room to maneuver to help to ensure that economic growth would be sustained The staff agreed that the Bank of Canada will have scope for reducing interest rates further in the event the outlook for economic growth worsens. 24. The authorities stressed that they would, nonetheless, proceed with caution to ensure that monetary policy actions did not unduly undermine confidence in the Canadian dollar. However, the authorities believed that the risk that policy actions might shake confidence in the currency was now reduced somewhat, because the present structure of interest rates was potentially more stable than the one prevailing in the early part of 1998. At that time, the interest rate differential between Canada and the United States was substantially negative suggesting that market participants expected an appreciation of the currency. In late August 1998, the differential had shifted back to positive and, although narrowing some, it had remained positive subsequently. This development suggested that there was no longer a strong market expectation regarding a change in the Canadian dollar’s future value. 25. Over the past year, the authorities had intervened heavily in the foreign exchange market, especially when the Canadian dollar was under strong downwardpressure. Historically, the Bank of Canada has intervened on a relatively regular basis in a symmetrical fashion largely to ensure that there was sufficient liquidity. The Bank would also intervene in relatively large amounts on an occasional basis to try to influence market confidence and psychology. The Bank of Canada representatives indicated that in early August 1998, it was decided to suspend symmetrical intervention because the market was seen as having matured sufficiently to preclude the need for continued management of liquidity by the Bank. Also, relatively regular intervention was seen as reducing the signaling effect that intervention could have on the market. It was decided that the Bank would intervene only when it perceived that the market had significantly overshot and market perceptions regarding the underlying value of the currency appeared to be uncertain. In such circumstances, intervention was seen as being very effective in intluencing market outcomes. C. Fiscal Policy 26. The federal government’sfiscalposition was expected to remain very sound Given uncertainties in the economic outlook, the authorities said that no new major initiatives were expected to be introduced in the 1999 Budget. However, further modest measures were likely to be included, primarily to provide marginal improvements in the income tax system and raise spending slightly in sectors such as health care and education. In basic terms, the Government would continue to aim for budget balance on an ex ante basis; however, in the absence of significant adverse economic shocks, this approach would tend to produce ex post budget surpluses of $3-5 billion (%--% percent of GDP) a year, reflecting the incorporation of Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 16- I contingency reserves in the spending projections and the pru ence factors applied to the economic assumptions underlying the budget estimates. The budget surplus for 1997/98 before the booking of a few large one-time spending items l as about $6 billion, compared with an estimate of budget balance in the 1998 Budget, and he authorities noted that the budget was likely to register another sizable surplus in 1998199, instead of being in balance as originally projected. These better-than-anticipated budgeta outcomes were leading to a more rapid reduction in debt than originally envisaged and t T pressures to reduce taxes and increase spending more quickly, but the authorities would c ntinue to fend off these pressures. 27. The authorities felt that it was critical to safeguar the focal position and to seek to ensure that the budget did not slip back into deficit The e rudence factors in the budget’s economic assumptions and the contingency reserves would help maintain the soundness of the underlying fiscal position in the face of most adverse economic developments, In fact, owing to the uncertainties in the economic outlook, additional prudence was applied to the economic assumptions in the 1998 Budget, and the same was likely to be done in the 1999 Budget. This approach was not expected to lead to a withdrawal of fiscal stimulus in 1999, although it certainly would limit the scope for new initiatives. The Go emment’s success in consolidating the fiscal position and the policy credibility that has been k e tablished was seen as providing an opportunity to allow the automatic fiscal stabilizers to nction in the event that economic growth in Canada weakened by more than is expected (B x 2). 28. Only in the event of a significant downturn in t 1 e economy would the authorities consider an easing offiscalpolicy that would go beyon allowing the automatic stabilizers to operate Moreover, they saw that the scope for such p licy action was circumscribed by the distinct possibility that it could undercut confidence in th Canadian dollar and policies more generally, inducing a significant rise in risk premiums and pushing up long-term interest rates in Canada. Canada’s general government net debt as a ra io to GDP is still relatively high (at 63 percent of GDP, compared with a G-7 average of 50 1 ercent), and the country may not have established enough of a track record for pursuing s 1 und fiscal policy to allow a significant departure, even on a temporary basis, from a teady downward path in the debt-to- GDP ratio. The authorities were of the view that monet$ policy was better positioned to deal with short-term shocks to economic activity. ) 29. The staff and the authorities agreed that, in th absence of substantial adverse economic shocks, fiscalpolicy should retain a mediu 1 -term focus, with a primary objective of steadily bn’nging down the ratio of debt to GDP. In this manner, market confidence would be consolidated and sufficient resour es would be released to meet the Government’s priorities for reforming the tax system an $ strengthening health care and education. The staff noted that on a status quo basis, th budget surplus could be expected to rise to 2% percent of GDP by 2003/04. In these circum$tances, there would be an opportunity to significantly reduce the debt-to-GDP ratio, while still making some progress in addressing the Government’s other fiscal priorities. Accordingly, the staff took theposition that it would Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17- Box 2. How Sound is the Fiscal Position? On a status quo basis (i.e., basically assuming the continuation of current policies) and given the staff’s economic assumptions, the federal budget surplus could rise from S3’% billion (0.4 percent of GDP) in 1997198 to about $28 billion (2% percent of GDP) in 2003104 (figure on the let? b&w). Net federal govcmmcnt debf would decline from 66.7 percent of GDP in l997/98 to about 45 percent of GDP by 2003104 (figure on the right b&w). These projections are based on the assumptions that the economy would reach its productive capacity uvcr this period and that part of the buoyancy in corporate and personal income tax rcccipts in 1997198 and 1998/99 would be rcvcmcd in 1999l2000. In addition, it is assumed that the employment insurance premium is lowcrcd gradually to its bnak-even point of $2.20 per $100 of taxable employee camings during the period. To assess the sensitivity of the federal budget position to changes in the economic outlook, these status quo projections were adjusted to simulate the effects of a rcces~ion similar in magnitude to that of 1990-91 (which was unc of the must scvcrc in Canada since World War II) fogether with a recovery in line with the pace of rccovcry during 1991-92 (which w&s alower than in previous business cycles in part reflecting adjustments in monetary policy ta bring in&&n down to the target Icvcl). The scenario indioates fhat the budget balance would shifi to a deficit of about ‘A percent of GDP in 1999/2000, before moving back into B small surplus in 2000/01, which would rise to 1% percent of GDP by 2003/04. Net public debt would rise slightly to 67 percent of GDP during the recession, bcforc declining to 53 pcrccot at the end ofthe forecast period. The recession scenario suggests that, wcn if the economy faced a scvcrc recession, the automatic stsbilizcrs could be allowed to function fully without significantly undermining the fcdcral fiscal position; however, further actions to address the Govcmmcnt’s priorilics in cutting taxes and increasing spending would need to be deferred. be reasonable for the authorities to aim for annual budget surpluses on the order of I percent of GDP over the nextfew years (Table 6). By doing so, the debt-to-GDP ratio would be brought down from 67 percent of GDP in 1997/98 to around 50 percent in 2003/04. At the same time, new measures of $24 billion (around % percent of GDP) could be introduced each year, with such measures providing roughly $40 billion of tax relief and new spending initiatives over the next five years. The employment insurance (EI) premium also could be brought down gradually over this period to its currently estimated break-even rate.of around $2.20 per $100 of taxable employee earnings. At the end of the period, sizable Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 18- resources would be available to complete a comprehensive health care and education needs. The authorities indicated magnitude might be feasible, assuming a favorable outer however, they said that it was criticalfor the Governmeni reform they had begun in the 1998 Budget by taking add; subsequent budgets, and that some additional spending H care in particular. come tax reform and/or to meet hat surpluses of this order of re for economic activity; 0 sustain theprocess of tax bnal measures in the 1999 and uld need to be directed to health 30. The authorities stressed that reform of the income tau was a majorpriority. Overall, the authorities viewed the Canadian tax system (federal an provincial combined ) as more distortionary than the U.S. tax system. The problems of th 1 personal income tax system included a lack of full indexation to inflation and high and ineven effective marginal tax rates.” The authorities also considered that the corporate income tax was not internationally competitive and that it provided, in particular, excessive i ’ entives for Canadian firms to invest abroad.” The staff and the authorities agreed that a y attempt to mitigate the problems T of the corporate tax system should include an adequate transition period to facilitate business planning. I I 31. Given the highfiscal cost of a comprehensive t& reform (for example, each percentage point reduction in marginal tax rates on pemonal incomes is estimated to reduce revenues by $3j% billion or 0.4percent of GDP),1 an incremental approach would need to be followed, building on thefirst steps taken in ithe 1998 Budget. Actions would be taken to compensate partially for the lack of full indexation in the system through further change8 in nominal income thresholds and standard credi s, and in time measures would be adopted to bring down tax rates. The authorities also k not d that the proposals put forward by the commission studying corporate tax reform were intended to be revenue neutral, but they thought that meaningM changes to the corporate income tax would probably entail some loss of revenue because it would not be possible to remove the tax preferences currently received by some industries to fully offset revenue loses from a reduction in the overall corporate tax rate. Spendingfor education the health care system to meet the challenges posed by the aging of thepopula were other high priorities. Efforts ‘*The top marginal tax rate in Canada (federal and provmcial combined ) is about 5 1 percent, and it is applied to personal incomes above $60,000, w ‘ch is a level of income only 3 times greater than the median income. In the United States, t h” e top marginal rate (federal and state combined) is about 45 percent, applying to personal in+mes above the Canadian equivalent of $430,000, roughly 7% times the U.S. median income level. The forthcoming selected issues paper describes the personal income tax system in more detail and looks at its disincentive effects on work and saving and its impact on the emigration of skilled workers. “The forthcoming selected issues paper provides a dis@sion of the shortcomings in the corporate income tax system and summarizes the findings of the Report of the Technical Committee on Business Taxation, which was released in April 1998. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Publicin these areas also would need to be phased in, consistent with the availability of required resources. 32. In the near-term, the Government faces a dsfficult decision with respect to the EI program EI receipts have exceeded benefits over the past several years by a wide margin, and this surplus on the notional EI account has made a substantial contribution to strengthening the fiscal position.‘4 The authorities said that the Government was determined to reduce the EI premium only gradually and, thus, to retain net receipts generated under the program to fund higher priority items, a position that the staff endorsed. Accordingly, subsequent to the mission on December 1, the Minister of Finance announced that the EI premium would be reduced by 15 cents in 1999 to $2.55 per $100 of taxable employee earnings. The staff supported the authorities’ position on the EI premium, noting that empirical work suggested that the level of payroll taxes had not had a significant effect on employment in Canada.” 33. In the discussions, the staff urged that the Elpremium not be cut across the board Instead, the opportunity to reduce the premium rate could be used to reform the EI system and mitigate its disincentive effects by introducing some differentiation in the premium based on the unemployment experience of individualfirms (experience-weighting).‘6 For a similar reason, the staff also pushed for the elimination of regional extended unemployment benefits. While the authorities agreed with these ideas in theory (especially the introduction of experience-weighting of the premium), they were reluctant to push for tiuther EI reforms at this time. They stressed that they were struggling just to retain some of the reforms to the program that had been put in place in 1996. Pressures to roll back these changes were “The EI program is filly integrated into the overall finances of the federal government. The EI account is a notional account in the budget established to ensure that the program meets the legal mandate that the EI premium should be set so that receipts will balance the cost of benefits over the course of a business cycle. To bring the EI account into balance (i.e. receipts equal to expenditures on a current basis), the premium rate would need to be reduced to around $2.20 per $100 of taxable employee earnings, which would result in a net loss to the budget of roughly $6 billion (about % percent of GDP). “See for example Chapter II of Canada-Selected Issues, SM/97/3, January 15, 1997 or Chapier I of Canada-Selected Issues, SM/98/17, January 16, 1998. i61n a recent Department of Finance working paper, it was estimated that the introduction of an “ideal” experienced-weighted EI premium would lower the natural rate of unemployment by 2 percentage points, compared with the current unweighted system. Introduction of a less- than-ideal system such as the one in the United States was estimated to lower the natural rate in Canada by 1 percentage point. See Beausejour; Louis, Munir Sheikh, and Baxter Williams, “Potential Economic Effects of Experience-Rating the Employment Insurance System Using a Multi-Sector General Equilibrium Model of Canada,” Working Paper 95-12, Canadian Department of Finance. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 20 - reflected in extensions of some of the rules originally intend’ d to provide a transition to the new system. Given the strong pressures that they faced to i 4 prove EI benefits and the lack of complete agreement within the government on establishing xperience-weighting of premiums, the authorities were concerned that opening up tit e EI system to changes now ran the risk of losing ground relative to what had been achieve1 in the 1996 reform. 34. The authorities noted that theprovinces had mad 4 subsiantialprogress in implementing their own individualplans to achieve bud et balance or surplus by 2000. Faced with strong revenue performance in 1997/98, sever provinces sought to provide some tax relief in their 1998/99 budgets while holding the line o spending. In light of economic developments since mid-1997, in particular the fall in co odity prices, the depreciation of the Canadian dollar, and the uncertainties underlying Cana a’s economic prospects, the budgets of some provinces (mainly British Columbia, Nov % Scotia, and the Yukon Territory) had been adversely affected. The authorities noted that the e provinces had started taking actions to safeguard their fiscal positions, primarily by def rring or scaling back new spending or tax reduction policy initiatives that had been planned w en the economic outlook was stronger. As a result, the authorities remained confident t t the overall fiscal position of the provinces would continue to show improvement over the 1 ext two years. Efforts by the provinces, as well as by the federal government, have con ained the growth in health care expenditures in recnet years, but significant f%ther improt ements in the delivery of medical services were needed to make the health care system more cost effective to meet the longer- term challenges posed by the aging of the population.” ( I D. Other Issues ( 35. Although the unemployment rate has been measures need fo be considered to improve market (in addition to the changes in the EI system above). In particular, the availability of social assistance with high benefit withdrawal rates and thresholds, has created “poverty traps,” whereby it is ad antageous for some people to remain on social assistance rather than to provinces have introduced important changes in social programs to reduce benefits and establish some form of work and/or training require ents for employable social assistance recipients.” l7An analysis of longer-term health care issues associate/l with changing demographics and their implications for fiscal policy was presented in Cha ter VI of Canada-Selected Issues, Sh4/98/17, January 16, 1998. ! ‘*The forthcoming selected issues paper will review the“poverty trap” problem and examink recent developments in selected provincial social assistijnce programs. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-21- 36. To help alleviate poverty traps, the National Child Benefir was introduced in the 1997 Budget and increased in the 1998 Budget. This benefit provides a refundable tax credit to all families with children. The benefit is reduced gradually for families with incomes above $21,000. The authorities noted that the provinces continued to consider measures to improve social assistance programs and that there were ongoing efforts to coordinate actions on the part of the federal and provincial governments to mitigate the disincentive effects of these programs. The staff encouraged the authorities to make fiuther efforts to reduce the high effective marginal income tax rates that social assistance recipients face. The staRconcurred that the National Child Benefit made an important contribution to reducing poverty traps, since at low income levels the benefit was not withdrawn as individuals earnings rise, but the staEalso suggested that it may be necessary to reduce social assistance benefits tirther over time, and perhaps to limit the duration of benefits to employable recipients who refuse offers of employment. 37. Reforms of the Canada Pension Plan (CPP) enacted late last year have significantly improved the financial outlook for the government’s public oh&age support systemn The actuarial report released in December 1998 concluded that it was unlikely that significant changes in contribution rates, beyond those already enacted, would be needed to ensure the long-run financial viability of the plan. 38. According to the most recent official estimates, the surplus in the CPP is projected to rise to around 1 percent of GDP during the nevt 18 years,with the CPP’s assets expected to rise from the equivalent of about 2 years of prospective benefit expenditures to about 5 years of benefits over this period CPP assets are expected to earn a higher return, albeit with increased risk, by being invested in a diversified portfolio that includes private securities. The CPP investment board, which manages the fimd at arm’s length from the government, now oversees the single largest financial portfolio in Canada. The authorities indicated that the new investment board would face the same rules that apply to ah federally regulated pension timds in Canada. The CPP’s assets would be invested in the best interests of the plan’s “Changes in the CPP include a phased increase in contribution rates from 5.85 percent in 1997 to 9.9 percent in 2003; freezing the income exemption at $3,500, rather than increasing it along with maximum pensionable earnings; and changing the basis on which pensions are calculated from the average of the last three years of earnings to the average of the last five years before retirement. An analysis of the longer-term financing problem of the CPP was included in Chapter III, Canada-Selected Issues, SM/97/3, January 15, 1997. The measures that have been enacted are in line with possible solutions discussed in that paper. The authorities also have tightened the administration and scale of disability benefits paid through the CPP, including more careful initial assessments of disability claims and more f?equent . reassessments of ehgtbihty; a reduction in the base for calculating pensions for disabled persons, so that their pensions would be closer to those received by other retirees; the tightening of caps on combined benefits (disability and survivor or retirement and survivor benefits); and a reduction in the maximum death benefit. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 22 - participants, with the goal of achieving the highest rate of r( response to concerns that the investment board’s decisions authorities said that the domestic equity portion of the pool ” 0 passively so as to replicate one or more major market index 5 operation. This three-year period was intended to give the i 1 establish a history of sound governance and to insulate it frc n investment decisions. After three years, the investment polil ZY evaluated. I lrn without undue risk. In iuld affect market outcomes, the f funds would be invested ; during the first three years of vestment board an opportunity to n pressures to influence its equity of the board would be re- 39. The authorities indicated that the overall conditi n sound Although bank profitability was expected to 1 of thefinancial sector was very declin in the second half of 1998 owing to the turmoil in world financial markets, Canadian banks +ere not expected to encounter significant problems. The banks were well capitalized, andltheir portfolios were diversified, with limited exposure from loans in Asia and exposure to ferivatives. The financial position of insurance companies was also reasonably strong, although the profitability of property and casualty insurance companies had been impaired by lossesresulting from the severe ice storms in early 1998. The authorities noted that developments in ihe financial sector were being monitored carefully and that appropriate actions would be taken if indications of possible fragilities were to emerge. I I 40. The proposed mergers of several of Canada’s I gest commercial banks raised questions about how further concentration might affec competition and what gains in efJiciency might be achieved by the merging insiitutio 1 s.” The mergers were not seen as having a major impact on the provision of financial serviaes in Canada as a whole, because of the increased competition from nonbank financial institudons that has taken place in recent years; however, there could be significant adverse effect on competition in some regional markets. At the same time, efficiency gains from the me j gers were not clear, particularly if restrictions are placed on the ability of the banks to con$olidate operations and reduce employment. Evidence from the U.S. experience with b nk mergers did not show substantial gains in efficiency, although there might be important g 1 ins from the opportunities to expand the scope of the merging banks’ lines of business, a fact t! r behind the push toward establishing large financial conglomerates to compete in globalized : nancial markets. Subsequent to the consultation discussions, in mid-December the Minister of Finance announced that the proposed bank mergers would not be allowed. In maki g this decision, the Minister cited the possibility that the proposed mergers could lead to an nacceptable concentration of economic power in the hands of a few, very large banks and reduce the Government’s flexibility in addressing potential future prudential concerns. I *” In early 1998, four of the largest banks in Canada announced plans for mergers (Bank of Montreal with Royal Bank of Canada and Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce with Toronto-Dominion Bank). The forthcoming selected issues paper will look at issues regarding concentration in the banking sector. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 23 - 41. The staff did not take a view on the proposed mergers, but agreed with the authorities that competition in financial services should be examined more generally in the context of the broad review that is required in response to the recommendations in the recent report of the Task Force on the Future of the Financial Services Sector. There is scope for enhancing competitiveness by reducing barriers to entry for both domestic and foreign financial firms and investors. It was noted that these barriers in part reflect concerns about ensuring the financial soundness of institutions. The staff encouraged the federal authorities to work with the provinces to evaluate the regulatory framework in financial services to ensure that there is an appropriate balance between prudential concerns and ease of entry. 42. The Canadian representatives indicated that in 1998 some additionalprogress had been made in reducing interprovincial barriers to the free flow of goods, services, workers, and capital under the Agreement on Internal Trade (AZTJ. An agreement had recently been reached to open up procurement in municipal government agencies, hospitals, and publicly funded academic institutions to competitive bidding by fhms in other provinces, and it will be implemented beginning in mid- 1999. Some progress had also been made in harmonizing corporate registration and reporting requirements across provinces. At the same time, unresolved issues relating to electricity transmission had held up completion of an interprovincial agreement on energy. Moreover, the authorities noted that there were key unfinished issues regarding implementation of the ATT’s labor mobility provisions, associated with efforts to achieve mutual recognition and to reconcile differences in professional certification and registration requirements across provinces, and extending the government procurement commitments of the AIT to crown corporations. The federal government was pushing the provinces to harmonize occupational licensing requirements, with the objective of having an agreement put into effect by 2001. 43. The authorities stressed Canada’s interest in further liberalising international trade, and they noted that Canada continued to actively pursue this objective on a regional and multihzteral basis. They pointed out that competition from imports had intensified in the wake of the fallout from the financial crisis in Asia, with a concomitant rise in protectionist pressures, and that such pressures would be strongly resisted in Canada, and hopefully in the rest of the world as well. The authorities said that they were prepared in the context of scheduled multilateral and regional negotiations to push for greater trade liberalization, including in traditionally sensitive sectors, such as agriculture and textiles and clothing. Potentially broadening the product coverage of these negotiations could provide an opportunity to go further in liberalizing trade, since it would allow for tradeoffs between competing trade interests. On a regional basis, the major focus of their attention was on the negotiations for the Free Trade Agreement of the Americas. 44. The Canadian representatives also highlighted the completion in 1998 of two significant uniZatera1 trade initiatives. First, a comprehensive simplification of Canada’s tariff system had been completed that resulted in a higher degree of transparency and reduced Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 24 - I many tariffs beyond what was required under Canada’s Uru ’ uay Round obligations; most “nuisance tariffs” (those under 2 percent), for example, had t een eliminated. Second, Canadian antidumping and countervailing duty policies had een thoroughly reviewed, and legislation had been tabled in Parliament that would strengt $ en the provisions in the law that required officials to consider the public-interest implication of a prospective antidumping or countervailing duty. 1 45. Canada’s official development assistance (ODA) /declined as a share of GNPfrom 0.46percent in 1992 to 0.3tpercent in 1996, before incr asing to 0.36percent in 1997. The Government remains committed to improving the effe tiveness of ODA and to moving toward an ODA target of 0.7 percent of GNP, as i Canada’s fiscal situation allows. IV. STAFFAPPRAISAL 46. The implementation of soundpolicies in recent ears has established afirm foundation for the sustainedfavorableperformance of k he Canadian economy. The inflation targeting approach used by the Bank of Canada t implement monetary policy has been very successful in lowering inflation and maintaining it % at a low level. At the same time, budget positions at all levels of government have been su stantially improved, and prospects are good that the ratio of government debt-to-GDP will f 11 significantly over the next several years. Important steps have also been taken to improve t 7 e financing of the public old-age support system, and all levels of government are working to deal with the financial challenges faced by the health care system. The staff commends the buthorities for the success of their macroeconomic and structural policies. I 47. Nevertheless, a great deal of uncertainty cloudi the prospects for the Canadian economy, with external factors posing the greatest ris :’ to Canada’s ability to sustain strong economic growth. With inflation likely to remain within the bottom half of the official target range, the prospects for economic activity should pe the key determinant of the stance of monetary policy in the period ahead. If the outlook for economic growth worsens, the Bank of Canada will have scope for reducing interest rates fu$her. However, the Bank will need to proceed with caution to ensure that its policy actions d not unduly undermine market confidence in the Canadian dollar which, in turn, could “p ut upward pressure on long-term interest rates and potentially undo the intended effects of a policy easing. Developments during 1998 suggest that Canada continues to be vulnedable to adverse shifts in market confidence. 48. Fiscalpolicy will need to retain its medium-tekm focus to bring down the ratio of government debt-to-GDP and to strengthen market cbnfidence in the country’sfiscal management. Canada’s fiscal position is fimdamentall i very sound. In the absence of further significant adverse economic shocks, the staff believes, hat it would be appropriate to run annual budget surpluses on the order of 1 percent of TP over the next few years. As a Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 25 - result, the debt-to-GDP ratio could be brought down rapidly, while each year new measures of $24 billion (about r/4 percent of GDP) could be introduced to begin the task of addressing the Government’s other fiscal priorities. At the end of the period, sizable resources would be available to complete a reform of the income tax system and/or to meet health care and education needs. 49. Against this background, the staff commends the authorities for their determination to ensure that a soundfiscalposition is maintained and that the budget does not slip back into deficit The Government’s success in consolidating the fiscal position and the policy credibility that has been established provides an opportunity to allow the automatic fiscal stabilizers to tinction in the event that economic growth in Canada weakens. Only in the face of a significant downturn in Canada’s economy, especially in the context of a broader fall in world economic activity, would the staff see the need for an easing of fiscal policy that goes beyond the operation of the automatic stabilizers. 50. In view of Canada’s relatively high ratio ofpersonal income taxes to GDP and the signtficant distortions caused by high marginal tax rates, the staff believes thatpriority should be given to reforming income taxes in order to improve incentives to work and save Restructuring these taxes would leave a permanent legacy of higher growth and prosperity in Canada. To do so, however, will be costly in terms of revenues forgone, and a phased approach will need to be adopted. The lack of effective indexation of the tax system has been a problem, and consideration needs to be given to compensating partially for this by further discrete adjustments in nominal income thresholds and standard credits. In time, when sufficient resources are available, efforts could be directed to more sweeping changes in the personal income tax to lower average and marginal tax rates. Steps to reduce effective marginal income tax rates faced by Canadian corporations should also be introduced to improve economic efficiency. Actions in these areas taken at the federal level will need to be coordinated with the provincial governments to help ensure that federal government tax reform measures are not offset by tax increases by the provinces. 51. A key to the strength of thefiscalposition is the substantial net receipts generated by the Elprogram. The EI premium in Canada (and payroll taxes more generally) is not high by international standards, and empirical work does not show a significant adverse effect of payroll taxes on Canadian employment. Hence, the stalTsupports the Government’s position that the EI premium should be lowered gradually and that net receipts under the program should be used to help finance the Government’s priorities with respect to taxes and spending. The Government’s recently announced reduction in the EI premium of 15 cents in 1999 is consistent with this approach. 52. The 1996 reforms to the EZ system sought to improve theflexibility and efficiency of the labor market and, thereby, help to reduce structural unemployment in Canada. For these reforms to have their intended effects, it is essential that they befully implemented Any tendency to ease some of the impact of the reforms as they begin to have binding effects Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 26 _ needs to be strongly resisted if progress in fostering greater e: mployment opportunities is to be sustained. Further efforts are also needed to deal with the el n ployment disincentives that remain in the EI system. In particular, the scope for reducin g the EI premium offers an excellent opportunity to tie the premium more closely to thl et experience with unemployment in individual firms. In addition, elimination of regional extend d unemployment benefits would significantly reduce disincentives to work. 53. Theprovinces are implementing their own indivi alplans to maintain, or achieve, budget balance or surpluses by 2000. In light economic developments and uncertainties with regard to Canada’s economic of some provinces may be adversely affected, and policy actions may be needed t preserve the soundness of their fiscal positions. levels has been reflected in edical services and to improve the to meet the growth in support reforms in the health care 55. In recent years, mostprovinces have also important changes in their social assistance programs by reducing benejits ablishing work and&r training requirements for employable social assistance measures need to be considered, as part of the effort to raise flexibility and efficiency of the labor be reduced by additional coordinated efforts on the pa of the federal and provincial authorities to mitigate the disincentive social assistance programs, The availability of benefits ithout time limits, combined with high benefit withdrawal rates and taxes created “poverty traps,” whereby it is advantageous to emain on social assistance rather than to work. The introduction of the investors. In particular, the staff Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 27 - encourages the federal authorities to work with the provinces to evaluate the regulatory framework for financial services to ensure that there is an appropriate balance between prudential concerns and ease of entry to promote competition. 57. The Agreement on Internal Trade (AZZJ provides a framework for ongoing reductions in interprovincial barriers to the free flow of goods, services, workers, and capitaL The staff urges the provinces, with the encouragement of the federal government, to continue pushing forward with these reforms to improve the allocation of resources across the country. In particular, labor mobility would be appreciably enhanced by harmonization of provincial licensing requirements for professions or by the recognition of professional credentials across provinces. 58. Canada is a leading advocate of liberal trade and continues to work for trade liberalization in particular sectors and through regional and multilateralfora. The recently completed initiative to simplify the tariff system is a commendable unilateral step toward a more transparent and open trade regime. Competition from imports has intensified in the wake of the fallout from the financial crisis in Asia, and protectionist pressures can be expected to rise. It is important that such pressures are strongly resisted. The staff encourages the authorities to continue to pursue trade liberalization, and in particular to take every available opportunity in the context of multilateral and regional negotiations to achieve greater trade liberalization in such sensitive sectors as agriculture and textiles and clothing. 59. The Government remains commuted to improving the effectiveness of ODA and to moving toward an ODA target of 0.7percent of GNP, as Canada’sfiscal situation allows. The staff encourages the authorities to make further progress toward reaching this goal. 60. It is expected that Canada will remain on the standard 12-month Article IV consultation cycle. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable I. Canada: Selected Economic 4, d~cators Avcrs~cr I 1960s 1970s 1980s 1943 1994 1995 ,996 1997 EEmmmle actlvlty and prices Real GDP Red net cqmls li Red fad dome& demand Co"sumcr npending Nonrcsidm~id fixed invetieti IAmr force El”plOp.S”l ““cmpl”ymenl rate (period weragc) bbor productivity Capital stock Price, GDP deflator Implicit piss deflator for GDP Core EOnw”lcr price tndex Unit hbor cost Exchange rate U.S. cenWCanad,an dollar Psmcnt change Nominal c&ctive exchmgc rate Zi Real efkzlive exchange rate 31 lnterest rates Tkrec-month Treasury hill rate Ten-year Treasury bond rate Icahlee OfpsymenlS chnm account bahcc Merchandisemdc halmcc lnvisihls balance Real “0, cxp0rl.s FLsc* indiestnrs Genera, fiscal balance (NM) Federal fiscal balance (NV.) Provincial fiscal balance (NV.) 4, SWi”~ and hYeSb”ent 51 ckoss “atio”a, saving General eo”-c”l Ofwhrch: Federal go”cmmc”t Private Persona, Busincrr Gross dcmenic invcstmcnt Private Pubbc Pubbc Ofwhch: Federal go”er”mc”l Ofwhch: Federal go”er”mc”l Net foreign i”“ePment Net foreign i”“ePment Net national saving Net national saving Net privats i”“cmnc”t Net privats i”“cmnc”t I” AI tern Char domsdc inwstmcnt Private Public Federal fiscal balance (public aounts~ 5.6 0.3 5.1 4.8 4.0 4.6 3.5 94.4 -1.2 -,.I -2.2 0.9 -3.1 2.4 -0.3 -0.3 -0.5 21.9 4.6 0.6 17 3 7.0 10.3 23 5 18.9 4.6 0.7 1.8 13.5 L2.1 15.4 12.3 3.1 44 0.0 4.6 4.5 5.8 2.0 4.3 a:0 7.8 96.4 -0.8 -1.4 7.0 2.9 -0.3 3.4 2.9 1.4 2.0 2.0 9.4 0.8 3.7 6.0 5.8 6.0 79.5 -0.1 -0.1 1.5 11.3 (I” percent of GDP or N -2.6 1.7 -4.3 2.3 -1.0 -1.4 -0.7 22.3 3.1 -0.6 19.2 9.8 9.4 23.6 20.0 3.6 0.5 1.8 14.3 14.0 157 13 3 2.4 -2.2 1.9 -5.1 1.3 -4.7 -4.6 -0.8 20.1 -1.0 -3.5 21.1 11.9 9.2 21.4 18.6 2.8 0.5 1.9 10.8 11.6 L7.6 15.5 2.1 i.3 .9 H 6 .8 .5 (1.3 ,I.4 1 12 04 ($7 ( I.5 1.5 118 I 0.0 I (77.3 , -6.2 , -5.7 , -8.6 I I 4.8 72 DPj -3.9 1.8 -5.7 0.6 -7.6 -4.6 -2.9 13.1 -4.7 -3.9 17.9 10.0 7.9 17.3 14.7 2.6 0.5 4.9 0.9 5.7 17.2 14.6 2.6 4.7 1.5 2.8 3.1 8.9 1.1 2.1 10.4 1.2 2.8 1.3 1.1 1.6 -1.3 73.0 -5.6 -6.2 -7.6 5.5 8.4 -2.3 2.6 -5.0 1.9 -5.6 -3.7 -1.7 15.4 -2.8 -3.0 18.2 8.0 10.2 18.2 15.6 2.6 0.5 3.4 3.9 6.9 17.9 15.3 2.6 2.6 0.9 0.7 2.1 -1.2 0.7 1.6 9.5 0.4 2.9 2.5 2.4 2.3 1.3 73.1 0.2 -2.0 -0.7 7.0 8.1 -0.8 4.3 -5.1 2.7 -4.5 -3.2 -1.1 L7.6 -1.7 -1.6 19.3 7.8 11.5 18.0 15.5 2.5 0.4 0.5 6.9 6.7 17.9 15.3 2.6 I.2 cl.3 2.0 2.3 4.3 1.5 1.3 9.7 -0.4 3.0 L.5 1.5 1.5 2.6 73.3 0.3 1.7 2.2 4.2 7.2 0.5 5.1 -4.5 3.0 -2.2 -1.6 -0.4 18.0 0.4 -I 0 17.5 6.5 II.0 17.7 15.2 2.4 0.4 -1.” 7.1 6.1 18.0 15.5 2.5 3.8 -1.5 4.3 4.1 9.1 1.3 1.9 9.2 2.8 3.3 0.7 0.7 1.5 0.0 12.0 -1.8 0.2 -0.6 3.2 6.1 -1.5 2.8 -4.3 L.5 0.9 0.8 0.4 18.6 3.2 I.2 15.4 4.4 11.0 19.7 17.5 2.2 0.3 1.7 7.9 9.1 20.0 17.9 2.2 Fiscal Ycan 93194 m y 96197 97198 -5.8 -4.9 -1.1 0.4 Sources: sta,,rtiFE Canada; and Fund staasslimatcs. li Contribution to growth. I Zi Constructed usmg 1989-91 trade weighLr 31 Defined in tern ofrelative nomalized unit labor costs m manufduring as &hated by the IMF’s Competitiveness Indicators System using 1989-91 tradewclghts I 41 includes local gavmunsn~ and bospitlls 5, Gross national savrng doer not equal the sum ofgross domestic investmcnl a$d net farep lnvsrtmsnt because oftbe statt~cal disc~epmcy. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 29 - Table 2. Canada: Balance of Payments (In billions of dollars) 1993 I994 1995 1996 1997 1998 11 Current account balance -28.1 -17.7 -6.4 4.5 -12.8 -17.8 In percent of GDP -3.9 -2.3 -0.8 0.5 -1.5 -2.0 Merchandise trade balance 13.1 20.3 34.8 41.9 24.3 18.7 Exports. goods 190.2 228.2 264.8 279.7 301.1 314.9 Imports, goods 177.1 207.9 229.9 237.8 276.8 296.2 Services balance -13.6 -11.7 -10.3 -9 3 -87 -9.3 Investment income balance -26.8 -25.9 -30.8 -28.4 -28.9 -27.8 Transfer balance -0.7 -0.5 -0.2 0.3 0.6 0.5 Capital and financial accounts balance 34.5 17.8 -0.3 -12.9 19.9 12.8 Direct investment, net -1.3 -1.5 -3.3 -6.5 -9.6 -15.1 In Canada 6.1 11.2 12.5 9.3 9.9 25.6 Abroad -7.4 -12.7 -15.8 -15.8 -19.4 -40.6 Portfolio accounts, net 34.9 14.4 17.3 1.7 7.6 -0.3 Canadian securities 52.8 23.3 24.6 20.2 18.7 17.7 Bonds 31.4 16.0 30.1 19.3 9.5 6.0 Stocks 12.1 6.4 -4.2 8.3 7.6 14.6 Money market 9.3 0.9 -1.3 -7.3 1.6 -2.8 Foreign securities -17.9 -8.9 -7.3 -18.6 -11.2 -18.1 Bonds -5.1 0.4 -1.1 -2.0 -6.7 -3.7 Stocks -12.8 -9.4 -6.2 -16.6 -4.5 -14.4 Other investment 21 -8.7 -5.9 -17.3 -8.6 10.9 24.9 Assets -0.5 -27.9 -11.8 -30.2 -24.5 20.4 Liabilities -8.2 22.0 -5.5 21.6 35.3 4.5 Other flows, net 10.7 10.2 Changes in official international reserves -1.2 0.5 6.8 -3.8 Statistical discrepancy -6.4 -0.0 6.7 Memorandum item: Net external debt In percent of GDP -323.7 -336.3 -336.9 -44.7 -43.8 -41.8 8.1 -7.5 8.4 ,331.l -39.9 7.6 3.4 -7.1 -339.4 -39.2 5.6 -2.2 5.1 Source: Statistics Canada. I/ First three quarters of the year at annual rates. Current account flows have been seasonally adjusted 2/bcludes bank, nonbank, and non&i&l reserves transactions. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3o- Table 3. Canada: Federal Government Budget, ublic Accounts 11 (I” billions of Canadian dollars; ““less otherwi indicated) 1993194 1994195 1995196 1996197 1997198 Total revenuea 116.0 123.3 130.3 140.9 153.2 In percent of GDP 16.0 16.1 16.2 17.0 17.7 Total spending 158.0 160.8 159.0 149.9 149.7 In percent of GDP 21.8 20.9 19.7 18.1 17.3 Program spending 120.0 118.7 112.0 104.9 108.8 In percent of GDP 16.6 15.5 13.9 12.7 12.6 Interest payments 38.0 42.0 46.9 45.0 40.9 I” percent of GDP 5.2 5.5 5.8 5.4 4.7 Budget balance -42.0 -37.5 -28.6 -9.0 35 In percent of GDP -5.8 -4.9 -3.5 -1.1 0.4 Net public debt 508.2 545.7 574.3 583.2 579.7 In percent of GDP 70.1 71.1 71.2 70.3 66.9 Memorandum items: Primary balance In percent of GDP -4.0 4.6 18.3 36.0 44.4 -0.6 0.6 2.3 4.3 5.1 Structural primary balance -0.2 7.1 20.9 40.6 47.3 In percent of GDP 0.0 0.9 2.6 4.9 5.5 Stmctural budget balance -38.2 -35.0 -26.0 -4.4 6.4 In percent of GDP -5.3 -4.6 -3.2 -0.5 0.7 Stmctural revenues 191.1 125.6 132.6 145.2 155.9 In percent of GDP 16.4 16.4 16.4 17.5 18.0 Structural program spending 120.5 118.5 111.8 104.6 108.6 In percent of GDP 16.6 IS.4 13.9 12.6 12.5 Employee UI premium (in dollars) Sources: Department of Finance; and Fund staff estimates. I I I On a fiscal year basis, which ends on March 3 1. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3l- Table 4. Canada: Net Government Debt (In percent of GDP) 1980 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1991 National accounts basis l/ 13.5 56.0 63.3 66.8 67.8 69.2 65.7 Federal 14.6 48.7 52.4 53.4 54.2 53.7 50.8 Provincial 21 7.0 15.5 18.7 20.5 20.4 22.0 20.8 Social Security 31 -8.0 -8.2 -7.8 -7.2 -6.8 -6.4 -5.9 Public accounts basis 41 3;.4 90.6 94.2 98.5 99.5 98.0 93.9 Federal 29.2 66.7 70.1 11.6 71.9 71.1 61.8 Provincial 8.2 23.9 26.1 26.9 27.6 26.9 26.1 Memorandum item: Government of Canada marketable securities held by nonresidents 2.3 12.3 14.6 14.4 14.2 14.1 12.9 Sources: Statistics Canada, National Balance Sheet Accounts (I 3-2 14) and Canada’s International Investment Position (67-202); Department of Finance, Canada; and Fund staff estimates. II Calendar year; 1997 provincial figures arc based on Department ofFinance. The national accounts measure of net debt does not include govcmment indebtedness to the public service pension plans and the Canada Pension Plan (CPP)/Qucbcc Pension Plan (QPP) as a govcmmcnt liability 21 Also includes local government and hospital sectors. 31 CPP and QPP assets. 4/Fiscal year, beginning April 1; 1997 provincial figures arc based on Department of Finance. The public accounts measure of net debt includes govemment indebtedness to the public. service pension plans, the CPP, and the QPP as a government liability. Note that data on intergovemmcntal holdings of net debt arc not available on a public accounts basis so that the totals may be biased upward. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 32 - i Table 5. Canada and the G-7 Countries: Indicators of:%mmnic Performance Averasc ladlow 1985-94 ,995 1996 1997 1998 1999 Real GDP Canada UNtedstatcs J*pan 0-y G-7 Red domestic demand Canada “nacdstatrs JW ch-nuw o-7 Rd tied prtvde hvutmcnt cam& united statc.5 J*pSn Gemmy O-7 cc.mlumcr pr*u - United Sates Japan &MY cl-7 “III, lnbor cost in mmufacturbq Canada united states Japan west ONmany G-7 unemp+nent rate Can.ds uniti states Japan t?UlilUly G-7 short-term Lnterwr rate Canada united sitdes Japan oenmny o-7 Ga.,.l government bhcc catvds united statea Japln -mav G-7 General govemcnt net debt Canada United States Japan PI’ C,,mt accomt bstmee Canadr. United States Japan G-Y O-7 2.6 2.6 3.3 2.8 2.6 2.7 2.4 3.5 2.7 1.6 3.6 2.0 4.6 3.3 2.7 3.5 3.6 1.6 2.4 3.4 1.3 t.2 1.8 1.1 1.6 9.6 6.4 2.s 7.6 6.8 8.7 5.8 4.7 6.5 6.8 2.6 12 3.8 2.8 2.2 1.3 34 3.9 3.6 1.8 1.5 39 0.8 -1.8 4.5 1.2 3 2.2 2.7 2.0 1.1 .8 2.9 2.1 1.5 1.6 .I 5.2 2.4 1.7 2.1 .6 4.2 5.0 2.6 2.3 .8 4.5 -3.6 -0.7 1.4 .7 1.4 2.8 2.2 2.0 .9 2.7 2.8 1.9 -2.8 8.3 14.L 4.9 4.0 5.J 8.8 8.3 LO.9 4.6 2.2 0.5 -0.5 -11.7 -8.1 0.6 0.4 1.1 1.1 3.6 4.0 6.7 5.0 4.2 1.1 1.2 1.6 1.4 L.2 2.8 2.9 2.3 L.6 -0.1 0.1 1.7 0.4 1.8 1.5 1.8 1.0 2.3 2.2 2.0 1.3 1.3 1.7 1.2 1.8 -1.6 -2.3 Xl.0 1.1 -2.2 .I.9 -1.6 5.2 -0.1 -0.8 -5.4 .3.0 -1.0 -0.6 -0.7 t.5 1.8 2.2 -0.7 t.2 1.5 2.2 0.9 0.3 -1.3 0.8 (I" percent) 9.5 9.7 9.2 8.4 8.4 5.6 5.4 4.9 4.5 4.8 3.1 3.3 3.4 4.2 4.9 9.4 10.4 11.5 to.9 10.5 6.8 6.9 6.7 6.5 6.7 7.0 5.5 1.0 4.5 4.2 3.2 4.7 4.6 5.0 5.1 4.9 4.2 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 3.3 3.3 3.5 3.2 4.2 4.1 4.0 3.4 (As P percent of ODP) -5.7 4.5 -2.2 0.9 1.5 1.4 -2.9 -1.9 -0.9 0.2 1.1 1.1 0.6 -3.6 -4.3 -3.0 -6.2 -8.5 -2.0 -3.3 -3.4 -2.7 -2.4 -2.3 -2.9 -3.4 -2.7 -1.2 -t.z -1.6 46.6 67.8 69.2 65.7 63.2 60.3 44.7 52.4 52.0 49.6 46.9 44.8 t3.7 13.3 ts.4 18.2 30.5 39.5 73.5 48.9 51.5 52.4 52.4 52.8 39.3 49.0 49.8 49.2 50.1 50.0 -3.2 -0.8 0.5 -2.0 -1.6 -*.* 2.9 1.2 1.4 2.0 -0.9 -0.6 -0.5 -0.3 ( -0.3 -1.5 -1.9 2.2 -0.2 -0.1 -2.1 -2.7 3.4 0.1 -0.4 -1.7 -3.3 3.3 0.2 -0.7 Source: Fund sIaTe&mtcs. Projcctims TIC taken Corn the Special Interim 1998 World Emnomic Outlook. ,,Gcrmany'snctdcbtstartsi,, ,986. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-33 - Table 6. Canada: StaffEconomic Projections 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 NIPA in constant prices Real GDP Net exports I I Total domestic demand Private consumption Private domestic investment Change in business inventories I/ Final domestic demand GDP (current pnccs) Employment and inflation Unemployment rate (percent) Consumer price index GDP deflator Indicators of fiscal and monetary policies Federal fiscal balance Public accounts 2/ 31 In percent of GDP Federal fiscal balance @‘IA) 2/ In percent of GDP Provincial fiscal balance (NIA) 2141 In percent of GDP General govemxnt fiscal balance (NIA) 21 In percent of GDP (In percent change from previous period; unless othenvise indicated) 3.8 2.8 2.2 2.7 -1.5 0.4 0.6 0.4 5.2 2.4 1.7 2.4 4.1 3.0 1.9 2.1 14.1 4.9 4.0 4.2 0.8 -0.5 -0.6 -0.2 4.3 3.0 2.3 2.4 4.5 2.3 2.6 3.1 9.2 8.4 8.4 8.2 1.4 1.2 1.8 1.9 0.7 -0.4 0.5 1.3 35 7.6 4.9 6.9 04 0.9 0.5 0.7 7.3 II.4 8.4 9.2 0.8 1.3 0.9 1.0 3.0 4.3 3.8 4.5 0.4 0.5 0.4 0.5 7.6 13.0 12.3 15.6 0.9 I.5 I.4 1 .I 3.2 4.7 4.6 4.6 6.1 5.3 5.1 5.3 .12.8 -19.0 -15.2 -10.5 -1.5 -2. I -1.7 -1.1 24.3 18.2 20.2 25.1 2.8 2.0 2.2 2.7 9.0 6.9 4.3 4.3 16.1 6.6 3.2 3.9 .37. I -37. I -35.4 -35.6 -4.3 -4.2 -3.9 -3.8 Three-month treasury bill rates (percent) Ten-year government bond rates (percent) Balance of payments Current account balance 2/ In percent of GDP Merchandise trade balance 2/ In percent of GDP Export volume Import volume Invisibles, net 2/ In percent of GDP 2.9 0.2 2.8 2.5 4.2 0.0 2.7 8.1 1.9 1.6 8.9 0.9 II.7 1.2 3.5 0.4 18.8 1.9 -7.5 -0.8 29.2 3.0 4.0 4.3 36.7 -3.8 2.8 2.8 0.2 0.2 2.7 2.6 2.4 2.4 4.1 3.9 -0.0 0.0 2.7 2.6 4.2 4.4 8.1 8.0 1.9 1.9 1.6 I.6 10.3 10.9 1.0 1.0 13.1 14.1 1.3 1.3 3.0 2.8 0.3 0.3 22.2 23.5 2.2 2.2 5.0 5.8 5.1 5.8 -4.4 -0.0 -0.4 -0.0 33.2 38.3 3.3 3.6 3.8 3.8 4.1 4.1 .37.6 -38.3 -3.7 -3.6 Source: Fund staff estimates. II Contribution to growth. 2/ In billions of dollars. 31 Fiscal year ends March 3 1, contingency reserve of $3 billion is excluded in the projections for 1998/99 and 1999/00. 4/ Includes local governments and hospitals. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 34 - Table 7. Canada: StaffProjections for the F&r (In billions of dollars) AChld Fiscal Years 1997198 1998l99 1999/00 20 Total revenues 153.2 152.6 149.3 In percent of GDP 17.7 17.2 16.4 Total spend@ 149.7 145.0 144.4 In percent of GDP 17.3 16.4 15.9 Program spending In perecnt of GDP Intcmt payments In percent of GDP 108.8 104.8 12.6 11.8 40.9 40.2 4.7 4.5 107.5 11.8 36.9 4.1 Budget balance In pcrccnt of GDP 7.6 0.9 4.9 0.5 Primary balance In pcrccnt of GDP 47.8 41.8 5.4 4.6 Structural budget balance In pcrccnt of GDP 9.8 7.5 1.1 0.8 Structural primary balance In percent of GDP 49.9 5.6 44.4 4.9 Net public debt In percent of GDP 572.1 567.: 64.5 62.1 Memorandum items: I Status quo projecttons Total revenues In percent of GDP 152.6 151.: 17.2 16.1 3 6 I Total spending In pcrccnt of GDP 145.0 144 16.4 15.’ 4 9 I Budget balance In pcrccnt of GDP 7.6 71 0.9 0.: Additional measures In percent of GDP 3.5 0.4 44.4 5.1 6.4 0.7 47.3 5.5 579.7 66.9 153.2 17.7 149.7 17.3 3.5 0.4 2.90 2.1 0.: 0 2 I Cumulative masures In percent of GDP 2.1 0.: D 2 I Employee Ul premium (in dollars) 2.66 2.5, 51 Public Accounts ‘01 2001/02 2002/03 2003/M Sources: Department ofFinance; and Fund staffcstimatcs. / 560.3 551.4 59.7 56.4 42.9 4.2 541.2 53.2 530.2 49.9 156.5 163.0 169.7 176.8 16.7 16.7 16.7 16.6 144.3 145.5 147.1 148.7 15.4 14.9 14.5 14.0 12.2 17.6 22.6 28.0 1.3 1.8 2.2 2.6 3.0 0.3 3.0 0.3 3.0 0.3 4.0 0.4 5.0 8.0 11.0 15.0 0.6 0.9 1.2 1.6 2.45 2.35 2.25 2.20 158.0 162.7 167.8 16.2 16.0 15.8 149.2 152.4 156.8 15.3 15.0 14.8 116.2 120.6 126.0 11.6 11.5 11.3 33.0 31.8 30.9 3.4 3.1 2.9 8.9 0.9 10.3 1.0 10.9 1.0 44.8 46.1 47.8 4.6 4.5 4.5 10.3 1.1 11.0 1.1 10.9 1.0 43.2 4.4 41.8 3.9 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 35 - APPENDIX I Canada - Fund Relations (As of November 30, 1998) I. II. Membership Status: Joined 12/27/45; Article VIII Percent General Resources Account: SDR Million of Quota Quota 4,320.30 100.0 Fund holdings of currency 2,902.12 67.2 Reserve position in Fund 1,418.24 32.8 Fund’s indebtedness under the GAB 75.78 Operational budget transfers (net) 113.00 III. IV. V. VI. vu. VIII SDR Department: SDR Million Net cumulative allocation 779.29 Holdings 779.52 Percent of Allocation 100.0 100.0 Outstanding Purchases and Loans: None Financial Arrangements: None Projected Obligations to Fund: None Exchange Rate Arrangements The Canadian authorities do not maintain margins with respect to exchange transactions, and exchange rates are determined on the basis of demand and supply conditions in the exchange market. However, the authorities intervene to maintain orderly conditions in the exchange market. There are no taxes or subsidies on pur- chases or sales of foreign exchange. On December 21, 1998 the exchange rate of the Canadian dollar was US$O.65 per Canadian doliar. Canada has notified the Fund with respect to restrictions imposed pursuant to Decision No. 144 vis-&is Iraq (EBD/90/279). Last Article IV Consultation The staff report for the 1998 consultation with Canada (SM/98/3) was considered by the Executive Board at EBM/98/6 (January 30, 1998). Canada is on a 12-month consultation cycle. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicCanada: Core Statistical Indicators (as of December 1998) Exchan_ee Rates lntema- tional Rcscrves CC”lF3l Bank BalanCc Sheet Reserve Base MOW!, Broad MOK) interest R&S Consumer Price Index EXpWtS Imports CU,TCd ACC.XW B&UlCC 0VCf.d Government Balance Ii GDP/ GNP External Debti Debt Service 2/ Date of latest obsenaon same da> cnd- NO~Crnba 1998 12’12198 October October 1998 1998 fame da) Octaber 1998 September 1998 ,998 Q3 ,998 Q3 1998 Q3 cnd- 1997 Date received same da! 12/l5/98 12114i98 12114’98 12/14!98 same da> I I/18/98 I I/18/98 11130198 I l/30/98 11/30198 May 98 Frcqucnc! of data daily monthly wcckl) monthly monthly dailv monthly monthly qualtcrly quarterly quarterly annual Frcquenc! of rcparting dad) month11 weeklv week11 weekI> daily monthly monthI> quarterly quarterly quarterly annual % *EL?L BGC BOC BtX update --Fin.Sm-ha~&m financial financial Statistics Statistics Statistics Statistics statistics Statistics various “CWS rclcasc statcmcnt SGiZiif ---c--~ariQur Canada Canada Canada CUA Canada CCUl.& Mode of Reporting electronic electronic electronic clcctronic clectro”ic electronic electronic electronic Clcctronic electronic clcctronic electronic CO”& dcntialit) unrestricted unrestricted unrestricted unrestricted unrestricted unrestricted unrcstrictcd unrestricted unrestricted unrestricted unrestricted unrcstrictcd Frequency of Publication dad) monthly wekly weekly weekly daily monthly monthly quarterly quarterly quarterly ~IlllU~lly I: National accounts. 21 Net intemational investment position. ! 3 3 s - Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-37- APPENDIX III Press Information Notice (PIN) No. 99/- FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE January _ 1999 International Monetary Fund Washington, D.C. 20431 USA Www.imf.org IMF Concludes Article IV Consultation with Canada The IMF Executive Board on January 25, 1999 concluded the 1999 Article IV consultation with Canada.’ Background During 1998, output, income, and the external balance were adversely affected by a substantial decline in commodity prices and by slower activity in a number of Canada’s overseas markets. Over the seven quarters through the first quarter of 1998, real GDP grew at an average annual rate of 3% percent. Growth slowed to about l’% percent (annual rate) in the second and third quarters of 1998, owing to the effects of the Asian crisis and several strikes, including the General Motors strike. Consumption growth moderated reflecting a slower rise in disposable personal income, diminishing consumer confidence, and a sharp drop in Canadian stock prices. At the same time, private fixed investment also slowed due to a marked weakening in the pace of inventory accumulation and a slowdown in equipment purchases, related to expectations of weaker sales and declining corporate profitability. In contrast, employment growth has remained relatively strong in recent months, and the unemployment rate declined to 8 percent in November 1998 from 8.6 percent in December 1997. Since early 1997, core CPI inflation (the CPI excluding food, energy, and the effects of changes in indirect taxes) has generally remained at the lower end of the 1-3 percent official inflation target range. The external current account deficit widened from 1% percent of GDP in 1997 to 2 percent in the first three quarters of 1998. Export growth slowed significantly, largely because of the effects of lower economic activity in Asian markets and a decline in commodity prices (especially lumber, petroleum, and metals). At the same time, although growth in domestic demand in Canada slowed, import growth remained robust. ‘Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with members, usually every year. A staffteam visits the country, collects economic and fmancial information, and discusses with officials the country’s economic developments and policies. On return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the country’s authorities. In this PIN, the main features of the Board’s discussion are described. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 38 - I Monetary conditions in Canada were allowed to ease after 1998, as the Canadian dollar faced periodic bouts of intensified in July-August 1998, prompting the Bank of Canada to raise interest rates by basis points in late August. Following the Bank’s August policy action and reduced tu in world financial markets the Canadian dollar’s value recovered, rising to around 65 in December, and market interest rates-especially long-term rates-declined. In mid-November, the Bank of Canada followed Federal Reserve with cuts in the bank rate in Canada by 2 basis points on each occasion. Market interest rates in December were below their levels rior to the Bank’s August policy action, with long-term interest rates roughly Decisive efforts by the current Government marked improvement in the federal fiscal position, with th budget shifting from a deficit of $42 billion (5% percent of GDP) in 1993/94 83% billion (nearly % percent of GDP) in their finances, with the aggregate shifting from a deficit of about 1% percent of GDP in 1994 (national accounts basis) to surplus of % percent of GDP in 1997. The strength of the fiscal adiustment at all levels government has resulted in a decline in the net general government debt from a high of 69 p, er’ in 1997. I- ent of GDP in 1996 to 65% percent Executive Board Assessment Press /nFormafion Notices (PINS) are a new series of IMF press notices (see Press Release 97/21). PINS are issued, at the request of a member country, following the conclusion of the Article N consultation for countries seeking to make nnown the views of the IMF to the public. This action is intended to strengthen IMF surveillance over the economic policies of member countries by increasing the transparency of the IMF’s assessment of these policies. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 39 - Table 1. Canada: Selected Economic Indicators APPENDIX III I ‘4”ela7es 19609 1970s 19800 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 (In pcrcmt cbmgc fim previous period at mud rats, urdeg o&vise indicated) Eco”omtc actkny and prices Real GDP RdtiCKpS 11 Real Sml damstic dmmd conrumaspending N-idmtisl fixed in”eshent hbor force Elnplo)lllmt “nmploynmt mk @aiod average) Labor productivity Capital stock Prhx.9 ODP ddlator Implicit price deflator for GDP oars mumcr price index unit labor cod Exebulge rate U.S. mtdCamdim dollar Percent cilangc NondMl eabctive excbnngc rate 7.i Rail &cti”c exchange rate 3, Interest mte* Thee-mantb T-ry bill rati Ten-year Trmsury bond r&c allanec Of p~ymcnts Cum, account balance Mcrchandirc trade balance lnvisiblc balance Real net cx,mRI m.wal tndlcalo~ oeneral fiscal balance (NM) Federal fiscal bahcc (NM) Provincid fiscal balance (NM) 41 Snvhg and in”eoh”eot 5/ Ores n&ma1 saving omaat gowmmetlt Ofw,,ich: Fcdcral go”emcnt Prkte Personat Busincrr Orws domestic invcstmcnt Private Public ofv*& Fcdcrd govcmment Net foreign in”estmenf Net national saving Net private investmcd I” real ImN Gross domestic investment pnvate Public Mcmomdm item: Federal fiscal balance (public mmnls) 5.6 0.3 5.1 4.8 4.0 4.6 3.5 94.4 -1.2 -1.1 -2.2 0.9 -3.1 2.4 6.3 6.3 -0.5 21.9 4.6 0.6 17.3 7.0 10.3 23.5 18.9 4.6 0.7 1.8 13.5 11.1 15.4 12.3 3.1 4.4 1.9 2.3 0.0 -0.3 0.9 4.6 3.4 0.6 4.5 1.9 1.8 5.8 1.4 0.5 2.0 1.3 z.0 1.4 9.4 11.2 2.0 0.8 0.4 4.3 3.7 1.7 6.0 1.5 8.0 5.8 1.5 1.8 7.8 6.0 0.0 96.4 79.5 77.3 -0.8 4.1 4.2 -,.‘I a., -5.7 I.5 -8.6 7.0 11.3 4.8 7.2 (In ~ereent of GDP or ND,‘) -1.6 1.7 -4.3 2.3 -1.0 -1.4 -0.7 22.3 3.1 -0.6 19.1 9.8 9.4 23.6 20.0 3.6 0.5 L.8 14.3 14.0 15.7 13.3 2.4 -2.2 1.9 -5.1 1.3 -4.7 -4.6 -0.8 20. I -1.0 .3.5 21.1 11.9 9.1 21.4 18.6 2.8 0.5 1.9 to.* 11.6 17.6 15.5 2.1 -3.9 1.8 -5.7 0.6 -7.6 4.6 -2.9 13.1 -4.7 -3.9 17.9 10.0 7.9 17.3 14.7 1.6 0.5 4.9 0.9 5.7 17.2 14.6 1.6 4.7 1.5 1.8 3.1 8.9 2.6 0.9 0.7 2.1 -1.2 1.1 0.3 2.0 2.3 4.3 3.8 -1.5 4.3 4.1 9.1 1.1 2.1 10.4 1.2 1.8 0.7 1.6 9.5 0.4 2.9 1.5 1.3 9.7 -0.4 3.0 1.3 1.9 9.2 1.8 3.3 1.3 t.1 L.6 -1.3 2.5 1.4 2.3 t.3 1.5 1.5 1.5 2.6 0.7 0.7 1.5 0.0 73.0 73.1 73.3 72.0 -5.6 0.2 0.3 -1.8 -6.1 -1.0 1.7 0.2 -7.6 -0.7 2.2 -0.6 5.5 8.4 7.0 8.1 4.2 7.2 3.2 6.1 -2.3 2.6 -5.0 1.9 -0.8 4.3 -5.1 2.7 0.5 5.1 -4.5 3.0 -1.5 1.8 -4.3 1.5 -5.6 -4.5 -2.2 0.9 -3.7 -3.2 -1.6 0.8 -1.7 -1.1 -0.4 0.4 15.4 17.6 18.0 18.6 -2.8 -1.7 0.4 3.2 -3.0 -1.6 -1.0 1.2 18.2 19.3 17.5 15.4 8.0 7.8 6.5 4.4 10.2 11.5 11.0 11.0 18.1 18.0 17.7 19.7 15.6 15.5 15.2 17.5 1.6 2.5 1.4 1.2 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.3 3.4 0.5 -1.0 1.7 3.9 6.9 7.1 7.9 6.9 6.7 6.1 9.1 17.9 15.3 2.6 17.9 15.3 2.6 18.0 15.5 2.5 10.0 17.9 1.2 Flsd Ysam 93/94 yj 97198 -5.8 0.4 Sowcs: St&ha Canada, and Fund staffcstimates. li Contribution to groowuI. 11 carruUc(ed using 1989-91 trade weights 31 D&cd in terms of relative nomalizcd unit labor costs in manufachring, BJ estimated by uls IMFs Compclili”cnes~ Indicators System, using 1989.91 tradeweights. 41 lncludcs local go”mmmts and horpitalr. 5, Oros~ nstional raving doer not equal the rum of gross domestic investmsnt and net foreign investment bscaum ofths Jlatiscal discrepancy. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:55 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public