DOCUMENT OF WTERh’ATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND NOT FOR PUBLIC USE FOR AGENDA CONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION May 18,2000 ‘To: Members of the Executive Board From: The Secretary Subject: United Arab Emirates-Staff Report for the 2000 Article IV Consultation Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staff report for the 2000 Article IV consultation with the United Arab Emirates, which is tentatively scheduled for discussion on Friday, June 9,2000. Mr. J. Wilson (ext. 37098) is avaiiable to answer technical or factual questions relating to this paper prior to the Board discussion. Unless the Documents Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the WTO Secretariat on Friday, May 26,2000; and to the Arab Monetary Fund, following its consideration by the Executive Board. Att: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2- Charts 1 . 2 . 3 . 4 . 5 . 6 . Selected Economic Indicators. 1993-2000 ............................................................. 23 Real GDP, 1994-99 ............................................................................................... 24 Saving-Investment Balances, 1993-2000 ................................................................ 25 Monetary Trends, 1993-2000 ................................................................................. 26 Fiscal Developments, 1993-2000 ........................................................................... 27 Exchange Rate and Competitiveness Indicators, 1990-1 999., ................................. 28 Tables 1 . 2 . 3 . 4 . 5 . 6 . Basic Data-Economic Indicators. 1994-2000 ....................................................... 29 Oil and Gas Production, Exports, and Prices, 1994-2000 ....................................... 31 Consolidated Government Finances, 1994-2000 ..................................................... 32 Balance ofpayments. 1994-2000 ........................................................................... 33 Monetary Survey. 1994-2000 ................................................................................ 34 Medium-term Baseline Scenario, 1997-2005 .......................................................... 35 Appendices 1 . I1 . m . Fund Relations ....................................................................................................... 36 Statistical Issues ..................................................................................................... 38 Core Statistical Indicators ...................................................................................... 4 1 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3- EXECUTIVE SUMMARY Current setting Supported by ar! outward-oriented development strategy, prudent financial policies, and massive oil reserves, the U.A.E. has been successhl in diversifjing its economy, building a modern infi-astmcture, and accumulating a large stock of official foreign assets. Nonetheless, with the sharp drop in oil prices in 1998, the rapid pace of real GDP growth came to a halt; the fiscal deficit deteriorated to 17 percent of GDP; and the external current account swung into a deficit of 6 percent of GDP. External conditions improved after the March 1999 OPEC agreement, but growth remained subdued and the fiscal deficit narrowed marginally. Prospects for the year 2000 are favorable. With high oil prices and the completion of refining capacity and other investment projects, the economy is poised to resume robust growth; the fiscal deficit is projected to narrow to 2% percent of GDP; and the external current account surplus to exceed 16 percent of GDP. Medium-term context Based on WE0 assumptions and the authorities’ commitment to reduce gradually the fiscal deficit, the cumulative budget financing requirement in 2001-2005 (projected at about US$18 billion) appears consistent with the authorities’ objective to preserve the stock of official external assets in real terms, and also with preserving the country’s total real wealth. Given the sensitivity to oil price assumptions, stepped up efforts to reduce the deficit would provide a safeguard against uncertain oil revenue prospects. Policy issues While some emirates are improving governance and the efficiency of public administration, fiscal transparency and coordination remain key to monitor consolidated fiscal developments and to improve policy making from a national perspective. Bank supervision and financial sector transparency have been strengthened. Prudential indicators suggest that banks meet or exceed Bade capital adequacy standards, and are well provisioned. International Accounting Standards have been adopted, and a formal stock exchange has begun operations. While the U.A.E.’s open trade and exchange system supports non-oil sector development, diversification could be enhanced by removing impediments to foreign investment, and by labor market reforms. In particular, the authorities should avoid the efficiency costs of rigid administrative procedures in the process of substituting national for expatriate workers, and aim at enhancing skills and productivity of nationals. Access to information for the oil sector and the emirates’ ex-ternal position has improved. However, concrete steps should be adopted to increase the coverage and quality of statistics on consolidated fiscal accounts, prices, the national accounts, and the balance of payments. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4- 1. The 2000 Article IV consultation discussions with the U.A.E. were held in Sharjah, Dubai and Abu Dhabi during the period February 22-March 7,2000. The Emirate representatives included the Minister of State for Finance and Industry; tile Minister of Petroleum and Mineral Resources; the Minister of Economy and Commerce; the Governor of the Central Bank; and other senior officials of the federal and emirate governments, The mission also met with representatives of the Chambers of Commerce and several local and foreign banks. The staffteam consisted of Messrs. Mecagni (head), Duran, Hamam, Wang, and Wilson (all MED). Mr. Dhonte joined the staffteam during March 14,2000, 2. In concluding the last consultation (EBM/98/113; November 4,1998), Executive Directors commended the authorities’ commitment to an open trade and payments system, and to prudent macroeconomic policies. In view of the sharp decline in oil prices, Directors noted the need to: (i) improve the budget structure by reducing subsidies and non-priority development expenditure, and by rationalizing public sector employment; (ii) enhance transparency and labor market flexibility to promote pnvat~ investment and hrther diversify the economy; (ii) address deficiencies in the coverage and quality of data, and the lack of information on the disposition of oil proceeds and the emirates’ external assets. 3. Articles of Agreement in February 1974.’ The U.A.E. accepted the obligations of Article Vm, Sections 2,3, and 4 of the 4. the authorities. The staff received detailed data on Abu Dhabi’s production of oil and gas, and updated information on the level of Abu Dhabi’s government foreign investments. Progress could be made in understanding the disposition of the emirate’s oil and gas proceeds, and the authorities have taken important initiatives to promote transparency in the financial sector. The federal authorities also recognize the need to enhance policy making by improving the availability and quality of data on consolidated fiscal operations, the national accounts, the balance of payments, and prices. International reserves data are reported to the Fund on a gross basis and are adequate for surveillance. Nonetheless, important data shortcomings continue to reflect shortage of trained staff and gaps in information sharing among government entities. The authorities have requested Fund assistance to establish a system of consolidated fiscal data conforming to international standards. The discussions on transparency witnessed improved access and cooperation by The U.A.E. joined the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) in 1994, and the 1 World Trade Organization (%’TO) in 1996. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-5- n. BACKGROUND AMD RECENT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS A. Macroeconomic Setting 5. The U.A.E. has a highly open economic system. Trade flows (exports plus imports) are equivalent to 140 percent of GDP; the exchange system is fiee of restrictioiis on payments and transfers for current international transactions; and there are no capital controk2 A pegged exchange rate acts as the nominal anchor, ensuring domestic price developments in line with trading partners, and a close link between domestic and U.S. dollar interest rates.3 In this context, there is little scope for independent monetary policy. Fiscal policy has served as the vehicle to distribute oil and gas wealth and support non-oil sector development, harnessing oil and gas resources to endow the country with modem physical and social infra~tructure.~ This role has been consistent with domestic price stability, since the financing of fiscal deficits has relied mainly on returns fiom the large stock of official foreign assets. These assets were accumulated over time as part of oil revenues has been saved in form of financial wealth for the endowment of future generations, giving the country a strong position to weather oil market uncertain tie^.^ 6. outward-oriented development strategy and prudent financial policies. In a climate of The economy has performed well and diversified during the 199Os, helped by the In accordance with the GCC Economic Agreement, the U.A.E. has no restrictions on the movement of goods, services, capital, and labor to and from other GCC countries. In August 1994, the uniform tariff rate was raised fiom 1 percent to 4 percent (except for alcohol and tobacco) under a GCC resolution calling for uniform maximum tariffs in all member states. Goods originating from GCC states are exempted from duties, provided that at least . 40 percent of the value-added is produced in the GCC region and that the producer’s capital is at least 51 percent owned by GCC entities. The U.A.E. dirham has been officially pegged to the SDR since January 1987, but in practice 3 was fixed to the U.S. dollar at the rate of Dh 3.6710 per dollar from 1980 to late November 1997, and at Dh 3.6725 per dollar thereafter. The U.A.E. is a major producer and exporter of oil-with reserves estimated at 10 percent of the world’s total and equivalent to 120 years of production at current rates of extraction- and a significant exporter of gas, with reserves equivalent to 4 percent of the world total, and some 60 years of production based on the trend increase in domestic use. Oil production and reserves are concentrated in Abu Dhabi. Dubai’s production is declining as reserves are coning to depletion. 4 Reserve assets are held by individual emirate governments and rr.maged by their investment authorities, the most important of which is the Abu Dhabi Investment Authority (ADIA). The federal governnient and the emirates of Abu Dhabi and Dub& have no external public debt. 5 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-6- low and declining inflation, red GDP growth averaged 5 $4 percent per annum in 1990-97, driven by strong non-oil real growth (8 percent on average per annum) and employment creation.6 With new impetus fiom manufacturing, trade, tourism and other services, the non-oil share in real value added reached 64 percent in 1997, an increase of ten percentage points of GDP since 1990.' Nonetheless, the oil sector has remained a mainstay of the economy, providing for 70 persent of fiscal revenues and about half of export earnings. B. Economic Developments in 1998 7. underscoring the vulnerabilities associated with oil dependence. The export price for U.A.E. oil averaged USU2.40 per barrel, a drop of some USS5.40 per barrel, or by 34 percent compared to 1997. This entailed a loss of US%6 billion in hydrocarbon export earnings, and a decline of hydrocarbon fiscal revenues by 7% percentage points of GDP. The weak world oil market bad significant adverse consequences in 1998, 8. The rapid pace of real CDP growth in previous years came to a halt, Based on standard measures of real GDP (Box I), oil output declined in line with the reduced OPEC crude oil production quota (2.17 million barrels per day). Real non-oil growth decelerated to 4.5 percent, almost halfthe 1997 rate, as a result ofweak demand in export markets and spillover effects of oil prices on construction and real estate (Chart 1 and 2). ~~ Non-oil sector employment increased by 63 percent during 1990-97 (over 7 percent per annum), creating 435,000 new jobs. Almost half' of these were in trade, tourism and manufacturing activities; 10 percent in agriculture; and the rest in other services. A large share of non-government employment consists of expatriates. In nominal terms, the U.A.E.'s share of non-oil GDP (70 percent) compares favorably with 7 other GCC countries such as Kuwait (56 percent), Qatar (60 percent), and Saudi Arabia (63 percent). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-7- Box 1. Estimating Real Oil GDP for the U.A.E. According to the 1993 System of National Accounts (SNA), the volume measure of pss domestic product, colmonly referred to as GDP at constant prices or real GDP, can be estimated by "extrapolating the (current) value of GDP in the base year by the volume index of GDP". The U.A.E. authorities follow this cmventional method in calculating real GDP estimates for the nan-oil sector. For the oil sector, they calculate real GDP by deflating the current valiie of oil production by a composite index of prices of all U.A.E.'s imports, rather than using a volume index linked to oil output levels. Since most oil output is exported, the authorities' estimates are in fact an indicator of the purchasing power of oil export receipts. There are three problems with this approach. First, the resulting estimates reflect the combined effect of changes in oil output, oil prices and import prices, and are in fact dominated by changes in oil prius. Second, total real GDP estimates display unusual volatility, reflecting the different methodology used in the oil and non-oil sectors. Third, the resulting estimates complicate comparisons with other countries (for instance, in the GCC area) where the conventional SNA has been followed. A comparison of real oil GDP estimates calculated on the basis of the conventional methodology-obtained by extrapolating oil value added in 1990 (the base year) by the oil output volume index-with those based on the authorities' methodology reveals that the former are significmtly more stable (Chart 2). The discrepancy is significant in recent years. For 1998, the authorities' estimates yield a real contraction by 34 percent in the oil sector and by 7 percent in overall GDP, reflecting the sharp drop in oil export prices. The conventional methodology points to a real GDP decline by 7-8 percent in the oil sector, and to a negligible increase (0.2 percent) for the total. 9. Fiscal conditions deteriorated sharply. The consolidated fiscal deficit widened fiom 6 percent of GDP in 1997 to17 percent of GDP, excluding income fiom official foreign assets which does not accrue automatically to the budget, is not recorded as revenue, and is considered as financing by the authorities.' On top of plummeting oil and gas revenues, a sizable increase in public spending (5% percentage points of GDP) reflected increased subsidies, transfers and development expenditure, as implementation of major infrastructure projects was accelerated to help offset the impact of filling oil prices on the economy. An The public finance data in Table 3 consolidate the official fiscal accounts of the federal government and the emirates of Abu Dhabi, Dubai, Sharjah and Ras-Al-Khaimah. Fiscal accounts for the federal government and the emirates of Abu Dhabi, Dubai and Sharjah are included separately in the Statistical Appendix for the period 1995-99. Data for Ras-Al- Khaimah are available only for 1995-97, and staff estimates were used for 1998-99. Estimates for the consolidated accounts in 2000 reflect official budget projections for the federal government, Dubai and Shajah, and staffestimates for Abu Dhabi. The latter are based on official indications of expenditure plans, and staff projections for oil and gas revenue in line with existing taxes and royalties. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-8- increase in non-hydrocarbon revenue resulted from upward adjustment in electricity tariffs and expanded provision of government ~ervices.~ 10. 1997 into a sizable deficit (over 6 percent of GDP). The large swing reflected a steep decline in the government’s saving-investment balance (1 1 percentage points of GDP, Table 3), and, to a lesser extent, a drop in non-govemment saving (Ckart 3). The current account and the budget were financed by large transfers from the investment authorities, which nonetheless remained below investment income, preserving the stock of government foreign assets. The net inflow of official and private (bank) capital ensured an overall balance of payments surplus of some 1.5 percent of GDP (Table 4). Central bank international reserves remained at a comfortable level equivalent to 3.7 months of imports. The external current account shifted from a surplus close to 9 percent of GDP in 11. non-oil income velocity and declining import prices, this contributed to maintain a low rate of consumer price inflation at 2 percent (Chart 4). Despite the large budget deficit, a decline in net bank clzirns on government offset in part the continued robust growth of private sector credit (1 3 percent of initial money stock), funded by commercial banks also by drawing on their foreign lines of credit. Nonetheless, commercial banks retained a net foreign assets position equivalent to USS7.7 billion, and the net foreign asset cover of broad money remained safely at 64 percent by end-year. Monetary growth remained moderate at some 4 percent (Table 5). With stable C. Economic Developments in 1999 12. The recovery of oii prices set the stage for improved external conditions. The March 1999 OPEC agreement entailed a hrther drop in the U.A.E.’s crude oil production quota (to 2.00 million barrels per day). Oil export prices rebounded to an average of US$17.64 per barrel, over US$5 higher than the previous year. Despite the rise in total imports, the increase in oil and gas export revenues (by some US$4 billion, including petroleum products) and the recovery in non-oil export markets contributed to restore a modest surplus in the current account (1 percent of GDP). With a continued inflow of official and private capital, the overall balance of payments recorded a surplus close to 3 percent of GDP (Table 4). 13. Hydrocarbon revenue remained flat at 15 percent of GDP, because of lags in the assessment and payment of taxes and royalties on a cash basis. Total expenditure was reduced by Nonetheless, the consolidated fucal deficit narrowed only marginally. The adjustment in electricity tariffs implied a revenue increase by 16 percent, and a reduction of subsidies for operations by Dh 0.3 billion (0.2 percent of GDP). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-9- 3.5 percent of GDP, mainly on account of lower net lending and development expenditure." A decline in non-hydrocarbon revenue reflected the transfer of water and electricity activities in Abu Dhabi to an autonomous entity, and a reduction of some fees in Dubai." 14. The recovery in economic activity proved slow. Negative oil sector growth reflected fiuther cuts in production in line with OPEC policies. Non-oil growth also remained subdued (2.9 percent) relative to the past record, due to corrections in public spending programs (for urban development and utilities) and, to a lesser extent, confidence effects linked to the sharp correction in stock market valuations in late 1998.12 Bank profitability deteriorated, reflecting a more sluggish business climate. 15. Liquidity growth was moderately high relative to 1998 (11 percent), but not out of line with developments in preceding years. The increase in net foreign assets accounted for some 40 percent of broad money growth, partly reflecting an overall balance of payments surplus of about US$1.5 billion. By year-end, gross central bank reserves increased to US$ 1 1 billion, equivalent to four months of imports. D. Prospects for 2000 16. Prospects for 2000 are favorable. With high oil prices, the completion of new refining capacity and the recent upward revision of OPEC oil production quotas, red GDP growth is expected to pick up to close to 6 percent. In the external sector, this could translate to a trade surplus more than doubling, and contributing to lift the current account surplus to over 16 percent of GDP. Even with offsetting capital outflows, the overall balance of lo Subsidies and transfers in consolidated fiscal accounts have fluctuated between 3 and 5 percent of GDP during 1994-99 (excluding a large BCCI-related payment in 1996), reflecting mainly outlays by the federal government (for payments to autonomous institutions of higher education and pensions to retired civil servants) and Abu Dhabi (for payments to farmers). Until recently, subsidies for water and electricity were also implicit in revenues and expenditures of the federal government and Abu Dhabi. In contrast, the provision of water and electricity in Dubai and Sharjah has been entrusted to autonomous authorities not receiving budget subsidies. " Abu Dhabi's Department of Water and Electricity was abolished on January 1, 1999, and its activities were transferred to 11 new public enterprises. As a result, water and electricity charges, and outlays for operations and investment will no longer be reflected in Abu Dhabi'.s budget, which includes explicit subsidies to the new public enterprises and autonomous authority. Mer a sharp increase until mid-August 1998, the over-the-counter stock market began to fall in September 1998, and lost 20-25 percent of its value by end-year. Stock prices remained depressed through 1999 and early 2000. I2 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 10- payments is likely to remain moderately positive, and central bank resewes to exceed four months of imports. 17. consolidated budget deficit is projected to drop to 2% percent of GDP, down from 15 percent of GDP in 1999 (Chart 5). This improvement reflects a large increase of hydrocarbon revenue (by over 7 percent of GDP), consistent with WE0 oil price projections and lags in tax and royalty payments by oil and gas producers. A significant reduction in expenditure (by 7 percent of GDP) reflects the federal and emirate authorities’ intention to reduce the deficit while avoiding revenue measures. The projected decline would come from development expenditure, following completion of some major investment projects, and savings related to the transfer of water and electricity operations in Abu Dhabi to autonomous entities.13 The outlook is for a significant improvement in the fiscal position. The REPORT ON DISCUSSIONS 18. In a favorable external environment, the U.A.E. economy is entering a phase in which the authorities are reconsidering their economic development strategy. With enviable achievements in endowing the country with modem infi-astructure, the key objective is to sustain non-oil growth, diversification, and the expansion of employment opportunities for nationals, while reducing dependence on oil and the large influx of expatriate labor. The consultation discussions focussed therefore on the macroeconomic challenges related to oil market developments, and the reforms needed to promote strong private sector-led growth and employment creation over the medium term. The stateam agreed with the authorities that reengineering government and improving the efficiency of public administration was key to private sector development. However, staff underscored the need to enhance transparency, particularly in the fiscal policy area, in order to improve policy making and promote private investment to its full potential. A. Fiscal transparency and Coordination 19. The U.A.E. has a strong reputation for stability, continuity of arrangements with commercial partners and a pro-business orientation of its public administration, but not for the public provision of current economic data, in particular in the fiscal area. In discussions with stae some emirates’ authorities, particularly in Abu Dhabi which on average accounts for two thirds of consolidated budget revenues, took the view that it was not necessary to give their budgetary process a public character similar to other countries, because of the specifics of the emirates’ institutional arrangements, because they do not seek to use . l3 Operational expenditures are expected to moderate following the setting up of new hospitals and other service providers in Abu Dhabi, and subsidies and transfers to remain at 5 percent of GDP, as a result of a new federal housing program, the expansion of pension hnd operations to cover nationals in the private sector, and the setting up of the water and electricity authority. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 11 - fiscal variables to influence private sector expectations, and because they View the credibility of present arrangements as weil established. In view of the volatility of oil prices, the Abu Dhabi authorities prefer to manage expenditure and budget resources on a continuous basis, without a formal budget process. 20. In discussing fiscal transparency, the federal authorities recognized that the flow of data among the emirates and the federal government needed improvements for policy making, to facilitate a better perspective of the country as a whole. The authorities noted that efforts are underway to improve the provision of information to markets, to enhance market confidence and reduce perceptions of so called “information risk”, as some U.A.E. observers have labeled the situation. In addition, the federal and Abu Dhabi authorities recognized that clarification of pending issues such as the disposition of oil and gas proceeds and the size of the government’s foreign investments would allow staff to assess more accurately the medium-term fiscal and balance of payment prospects of the country. On the disposition of oil revenues, a key feature is that some revenue is retained by the national oil company for the financing of investments or transferred directly to Abu Dhabi government foreign assets, rather than accruing to the budget (Box 2). Regarding the amount of Abu Dhabi government foreign assets, the authorities’ rationale for not making this information publicly available was their lack of interest in international credit ratings, given the U.A.E.’s lender status in capital markets; and their desire to contain demands on these assets. 21. While welcoming news that the Interministerial Statistical Committee was being reactivated, the staff recommended that the authorities consider a standing arrangement to centralize the preparation of timely and comprehensive statistics on the consolidated fiscal situation, to improve their ability to monitor macroeconomic developments. Given the autonomy of emirate governments in public finance matters, staff and authorities also agreed that better coordination in setting policy objectives and instruments among emirates would enhance efficiency, reduce duplication of projects, and the tendency for individual emirates to outbid each other in investment incentives. While this competition was reducing the cost of business, it was seen as eroding the credibility of U.A.E.’s common policies. For instance, custom duties are subject to ad hoc rebates, posing problems for several emirates, including the least developed. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12- Box 2. The Disposition of Oil and Gas Proceeds hydrocarbon revenues represented about 70 percent of consolidated fiscal revenues in the U.A.E. in thc period 1995-99, of which more than 80 percent were accounted for by Abu Dhabi. Oil policy decisions in Abu Dhabi are taken by the Supreme Petroleum Council (SPC), chairui by H.H. the Crown Prince. Decisions are implemented by the Abu Dhabi National Oil Company (ADNOC), which holds the government’s equity participation in the oil and gas operating companies. Oil production is carried out by right operating companies. Five of them, accoUnting for 96 percent of projected oil output for 2000, are jant ventures with foreign partners, with the government’s equity share ranging hm 60 to 88 pacent. The remaining three smaller companies are 100 percent (foreign) privately owned. ADNOC’s share in total oil output produced by all eight companies amounts to 65 pucent, and the foreign investors (BP-Amow, Shell, Total, Exxon-Mobil, Patex, and the Japan Oil Development Company) share is 35 pcrcwrt. The shm of the Abu Dhabi government in oil revenues is specified in several concession and production sharing agreements concluded with the foreign partners, and comprises royalties and profit taxes. In general, royalties are set at 20 jmcent of sales for ADNOC and the other major companies, with M overall average rate of 19.5 percent. The profit tax rate amounts to 55 percent for ADNOC, and 85 percent for the other major companies, With a 62.4 percent overall average profit tax rate. For the determination of royalties and profit taxes, oil sales are vaiued on the basis of a posted price, and royalties are deducted &om profits. The posted price is set e-- on a monthly basis, and is nOrmally about 7 percent higher than the government selling prices (closely related to market prices) for deliveries effected in the month. Profits are allocated to ADNOC and its parmms according to their respective share in the equity of each operating company. Part of the profit af ADNOC (after taxes and royalties) is set aside for the fmancing of investments to expand capacity, while the remainder is transferred to the Abu Dhabi Investment Authority (ADIA), an autmonms government e~tity entrusted with managing Abu Dhabi’s official external (and some domestic) wets. Abu Dhabi also obtains considerable revcnus ikm the production of gas. In this sector, ADNOC holds a 70 percent equity share in ADGAS, the only pmducer ofLNG h the mirate, in addition to its output of NGL products, and a 68 percent equity share in GASCO, also B majrs prducer of LPG and other natural gas liquids. Profits of ADGAS and GASCO are taxed at the rate of 55 prcznt. Ahr retaining part of its share in profits to fmance investments, ADNOC tramfers the remahcier KO ADLA. B. Fiscal Policy Requirements io a Medium-term Franrework 22. the long-term objective of preserving and increasing the stock of foreign investments in red. terms, In Abu Dhabi it was recognized that attaining this target would be assisied by gradually reaching a balanced budget position. While pursuing the latter, however, the long-term objective has to be balanced against the recourse to government foreign assets to satisf) short- term financing requirements. The two aspects need not be mutually inconsistent. In fact, the financing of deficits since mid-1980s had not prevented a hrther accumulation of foreign assets, as investment income on the latter has not been automatically transferred as revenue to the budget. In the authorities’ view, the gradual narrowing of the deficit would come fiom the The authorities’ strategy. The authorities indicated that they remain c:o-mitted to Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13 - steady implementation of policies initiated recently, namely the privatization and outsourcing of government services in Ah Dhabi; the scaling down of investment expenditure as infrastructure projects were coming to completion; a prospective phasing out of subsidies; and reduced outlays for current operations induced by efforts to raise efficiency in public offices, for instance in Dubai, Shq’ah, and the federal institutions. The need for government support of private activities to counter adverse external developments would also diminish with fbrther progress in diversification. 23. Medium-term baseline scenario. Baseline projections for the period 2001-2005 were prepared by the staff under assumptions of expenditure restraint consistent with the authorities’ strategy; current WE0 assumptions of oil export prices and non-oil export market growth; and working assumptions for oil production. These projections indicate that in a framework ofcontinued low inflation, the external current account would remain in surplus by close to 6 percent of GDP and the fiscal deficit, after widening to over 6 percent of GDP in 2001 due to the projected fall in oil prices, would gradually decline to 4 percent of GDP by 2005. l4 The cumulative budget financing requirement in 200 1-2005 @E, 67 billion, or US$I 8 billicn) could be met from investment income on government external assets, and be consistent with the authorities’ objective to maintain the stock of these assets constant in real terms. l5 24. Alternative strategic objective. In light of the nonrenewable nature of oil resources, a broader strategic objective would imply that the authorities maintain the stock of total wealth (government foreign assets and the present value of oil and gas resources) constant in real terms so as to preserve an adequate stream of income for future generations, and ensure intergenerational equity. In this perspective, preliminary calculations of the permanent oil rent able to sustain a constant level of public spending without depleting the country’s wealth indicate that under WE0 oil price assumptions the projected level of government expenditure The calculations are based on conservative assumptions regarding the setting aside of 14 dividend income on Abu Dhabi’s share in oil and gas companies, allowing the latter to retain significant self-financing for capacity expansion. In this context, it should be noted that if the accumulation of physical assets (including infrastructure and productive assets) were to be included in the wealth target, its real value would increase, as development expenditure and investments by oi! and gas companies entail a steady accumulation of the country’s real assets. The medium-term projections are sensitive to assumptions about oil prices, and subject to. downside risks in View of oil price volatility. For instance, with oil prices 10 percent below current WE0 projections, the fiscal deficit over the 2001-2005 period would be higher by 2-2% percentage points of GDP per year relative to the baseline scenario. The higher budget financing needs and recourse to investment income, together with lower dividends from oil and gas companies, would lead to some modest erosion of financial reserve assets in real terms. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14- would allow for the gradual replacement of oil wealth by financial assets. In other words, total wealth would be preserved in real terms, thus maintaining a steady stream of income and consumption for fbture generations. In addition there would be a significant accumulation of physical assets (Box 3). These calculations, however, are sensitive to assumptions about oil prices.I6 ~ Box 3: Nonrenewable Resources and Preservation of Total Wealth In view of the exhaustible nature of hydrocarban resources, the preservation of wealth across generations may need to be extended to include hydrocarbon (oil and gas) wealth in addition to forcign ~SSG~S. The preservation of total wealth would entail the gradual replacement of oil and gas resources by financial and productive physical assets. To that effect the use of hydrocarbon revenue would be limited to thc permanent rent from oil and oil replacing wealth, which is the difftrence between current revenue fiom hydrocarbon resources and oil replacing assets, and the saving required to replace hydrocarbon wealth by otha assets. The permanent rent is estimated at 19 percent of GDP on average in 2000-05. Based on total hydrocarbon revenue accruing to the public sector, including ADNOC and ADLq the present value of hydrocarbon wealth is estimated at some 590 percent of projected GDP for 2000. Under the baseline fiscal scenario and WE0 oil price assumptions, and including investment undertaken by ADNOC in government expenditure, available saving from hydrocarbon revenue and investment income, after financing development expenditure, would largely exceed the amount needed to maintain financial and hydrocarbon wealth constant in real terms. The increase in financial assets in excess of such requirement would reach 13 percentage points of GDP in 2005 on a cumulative basis. In addition, the baseline scenario would allow for a substantial accumulation of physical assets during 2001-05. These results are sensitive to oil price assumptions. For instance, if oil prices were to be 10 percent lower than in WE0 projections, the accumulation of financial assets would be insufticient to replace oil and gas wealth, implying some erosion of the country’s wealth. Even in these circumstances, however, the accumulation of physical assets would largely exceed the reduction in financial and hydrocarbon wealth in real terms. 25. Contingency measures. In light of the uncertainty for oil prices and revenue prospects, the staffencouraged the authorities to step up efforts to contain the deficit; reduce the role of government in the economy, and improve the budget structure for efficiency reasons. On the expenditure side, this could be achieved by eliminating redundant government positions; phasing out subsidies, especially for water and electricity; prioritizing in6astructure l6 An assessment of wealth preservation in per cauita terms over the medium and long term would need to take into account that the decline in per caDita government wealth would be significantly offset by non-oil income growth. Accurate calculations are hampered by the absence of recent data on national population growth. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 15- projects, and rationalizing outlays for operations and maintenance, including through outsourcing. To reduce the budget’s dependence on oil revenues, the non-hydrocarbon base could also be widened by introducing selective excises on luxury items and reducing the scope of import duty exemptions. 26. governance and the efficiency of public administration are underway, particiharly in Dubai. ” Second, water and electricity services have been or are in the process of being transferred to autonomous entities-at the beginning of 1999 in Abu Dhabi, and in early 2000 for the federal government. New capacity is to be built only on the basis ofjoint ventures with private sector management, and cost savings, including by a reduction in staff, had already been achieved by the new entities. On the revenue side, the authorities agreed that custom revenues could be increased by better coordinating administration among emirates. However, they opposed the introduction of domestic taxes, on grounds that these would entail high administrative costs and risk adverse effects on foreign investment. The authorities also were of the view that the elimination of subsidies for water and electricity was to be achieved only gradually. The authorities underscored the progress made in some areas. Efforts to improve C. Monetaqv and Exchange Rate Policies 27. Nominal anchor policy and external competitiveness. The staff commended the authorities for their commitment to interest rate flexibility, prudent credit policy and sound banking conditions to ensure the sustainability of the pegged exchange rate. There was agreement that the U.A.E.’s exchange rate policy is consistent with the economy’s integration with world markets, and has served the country well by providing an anchor for price stability, contributing to low inflation and market confidence. Continued progress in diversifying the economy; the buoyant performance of non-oil exports with sustained gains in market shares; a decline in manufacturing unit labor costs relative to trading partners; and the remarkable efficiency of the main trade-related infrastructure, all suggest that the exchange rate remains viable fiom the standpoint of external competitiveness (Box 4). l8 In Dubai, the government has established the Dubai Governmefit Excellence Program, designed to help government agencies improve efficiency, quality and performance of public services. Participation in the program is mandatory. All government agencies must provide detailed annual information on efforts to simplify procedures, and improve customers’ service, human resources management, and cost effectiveness. Performance is evaluated and ranked by an independent cornittee, in a process aimed at providing benchmarks and spread best practices io all agencies. 17 Central bank international reserves remain equivalent to 190 percent of reserve money, and 152 percent of short-term external liabilities, based on 31s-IMF-OECD-World Bank data. The latter show a total external debt at end-June 1999 of about I;‘S$17.4 billion, most in form of cross-border liabilities to banks, and short-term debt (due within a year) ofabout $6.2 billion. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 16- Box 4. Real Effective Exchange Rates and Competitiveness The real effective exchange rate (REER) of the dirham, based on consumer prices in the U.A.E. and its trading partners, appreciated by 23 percent between 1990 and 1999, lxgely as a result of changes in the U.S. dollar against other major currencies. However, an alternative measure of cost competitiveness, the red effective exchange rate based on relative unit lahor costs, and the good performance of non-oil expat mdet shares point to continued competitiveness of the U.A.E. in world markets. (Chart 6). During the period 1990-99, the REER based on unit labor costs in manufacturing m the U.A.E. and its main tradmg partners depreciated by 8 percent, and by 26 percent if the trade-based weighting system is limited to industrial partner countries. The depreciation in real ULC-based effective terms reflects a cumdative decline in U.A.E.’s unit labor costs by 10 perceat compared with an increase by 22 percent in industrial partner countries, and a slight decline in all trading partners. While reforms aimed at increasing domestic factor producti\rity remain a priority, the improvement in the U.A.E.’s cost competitiveness is consistent with the sustained and significant gain in non-oil export market shares. Non-oil export volume growth reached 17 percent per annm compared with an average annual growth of non-oil import demand in trading partners by 6 percent during 199 1-99. 28. number of instruments to influence credit expansion and domestic liquidity. These have been confined to changes in reserve requirements, issuance of Certificates of Deposit (CDs), and foreign exchange operations. The recent decision to change reserve ratios which went into effect in March 2000 is understood by stafT to be aimed mostly at encouraghg repatriation of fimds placed by U.A.E. residents with offshore affiliates of local banks. The change is significant. From initial reserve ratios for both short and longer-term deposits fairly high relative to other countries, the ratio on time and savings deposits has been simplified and reduced to one percent. At this level, banks and customers have little arbitrage incentive to recycle hnds through offshore markets. However, the reserve ratio on current and call deposits was increased fiom eight to 14 percent. This high level introduces an incentive for banks and customers to shift into time deposits, but it could also result in an offshore incentive at short maturities. The staff therefore encouraged the authorities to monitor the situation carefully, and consider a timely response to any unintended effect. Recent changes in reserve requirements. The central bank uses only a limited 29. on demand by the Central Bank to commercial banks at rates closely aligned to LIBOR The CDs reduce incentives for banks to change their foreign exchange positions in response to temporary liquidity imbalances. On the other hand, in circumstances where domestic liquidity might be tighter than desired, and holdings of CDs are low, the only option for banks would be to swap or sell foreign exchange. To improve the system, the staffrecommended that the authorities consider widening the array of instruments. The scope for developing government debt instruments and open market operations is limited by the emirates’ unwiilingness to grant the federal government the right to issue debt. Nonetheless, the authorities recognized that, in addition to limiting the central bank options to manage domestic liquidity, this constraint c.amed a cost, since a well managed stock of domestic public debt instruments could reduce The main instruments for short-term liquidity management are the CDs offered Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17- budget financing costs relative to liquidating higher yield official foreign investments. Staff also noted that, over time, the existence of a carefblly managed safe asset with longer maturities could also play a useful benchmarking role for the pricing of corporate securities, arid thus for developing a market for corporate debt instruments. D. Financial Sector Transparency and Banking Supervision 30. transparency of the financial system. All banks and financial institutions operating in the U.A.E. are required by the central bank to publish their accounts for 1999 onwards according to the International Accounting Standards (IAS).The publication of US-based accounts is widely welcomed by market participants. A new draft banking law includes tighter provisions against money laundering. l9 Also, the Dub& Financial Market (stock exchange) opened in late March 2000, and the Abu Dhabi floor is expected to open within the year. The establishment of a formal stock exchange to replace the over-the-counter system is expected to improve information flows 011 the performance of listed companies; help privatization; and further deepen the integration with international markets. Staff commended the authorities for taking important steps to enhance the 3 1. of two significant banking problems. In mid-1998, Dubai Islamic Bank had to be recapitalized as a result of large losses resulting from management fiaud. In 1999, 14 banks in the U.A.E. and Six elsewhere in the Gulf suffered losses totaling some Dh 1.1 billion as a result of customs fraud by a trading company (the Patel-Solo Industries case). However, no bank required public financial support. After the first episode, the authorities had already acted to strengthen the oversight system, more than doubIing the number of bank examiners in 1998-99, and preparing for a fbrther increases2’ From the detailed bank soundness indicators provided to staff, it appears that banks in the U.A.E. at end-1999 exceeded Bade capital adequacy standards by a significant margin, and met the prudential standards employed at the national level to ensure sound banking (Box 5). Nonetheless, to promote market discipline and prevent excessive risk taking, staff recommended to clarify ex-ante the limits of financial responsibility of the authorities in cases of financial difticulty, and to give consideration to introducing a limited deposit insurance scheme. With regard to the overall situation of the banking sector, the authorities agreed to participate in the Financial Sector Assessment Program. Banking supervision has been strengthened over the last two years, in the wake l9 The draft banking law also calls for an increase in minimum capital. The proposed new floor @h 100 million) is five times higher than under current regulations. The change will strengthen the capitalization of the smaller foreign banks, as all local banks exceeds the new minimum. ’O On-site examination is carried out at least once every 18 months for all banks, and off-site examination is performed on a continuous basis. Mer the “Solo Industries” case, increasing use is made of the Central Bank’s Risk Bureau information on large borrowers’ exposure. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 18 - Box 5: Banking System Supervision and Performance Iadicators Capital Adequacy Banks are required to meet a minimum capital adequacy ratio of 10 percent of risk weighted-assets. All licensed banks are in compliance. At end 1999, the average ratio was 23 percent for local banks and 15 percent for foreign banks operating in the U.A.E. Nonperforming loans Classified loans and loan provisions statistics am hew@ influtnced by events in the mid=198Os, still reflected in the books of s~me local banks for legal reasons, Excludiag this canyovcr of non@&g Bsscts and the associated provisions, classified loans represented 8.5 percent of total loans of local banks at end-1999 (7.8 percent at end-1998). For foreign banks, thersltio was 17.4 percent at ea61999 (16.8 peaccnt at end-1998). Banks are required to provision against four Categories of ncm-perfwming loans (unclassified, substandard, doubtful, lost), with provision requirements up to 100 percent &pending on the stverity of the problem. All banks were in compliane at end- 1999. Provisions were equivalent to 86 percent of classified loans (92 percent at end-1998) for local banks, and to 66 pencat (73 percent at end-1998) for foreign banks, as the latter have tended to write off doub$ul loans more quickly, Bank profitability Reflecting the less favorable business envirOamt in 1999 and the impact of the Patel-Solo Industries problem which aff'ted 14 banks in the U.A.E., rem on assets ratios declined &xu 3.4 percent in 1998 to 2.2 percent in 1999 for local banks, and &om 2 perceat to 0.9 percent for fmeign banks, International Accounting Standards (US) Banks and other financial institutions are required to prepare and publish their 1999 and future accounts in ~I&Ormity with us. Loan exposure and concentration Banks are required to maintain a do no higher than 1 : 1 betweca loans and advances to a stable resou~ces base comprising capital and reserves, interbank deposits With a mmabhg life of more than six months, 85 percent of interbank deposits with a remaining life of less &an six months, and nongovernment deposits. Large exposure limits apply to loans made to Werent categories of individuals and related groups of borrowers. ranging from 5 percent of capital for loans to individual board members to 60 percent for loans to bank's parent companies and aEihtes. Govment and noacommercial public sector entities are exempt. Personal loans (loans seared by salary assignment and end-of-service benefits) are subject to a ceiling of Dh 250,000 excluding outstanding balances on credit card accounts. Since 1997, tending for sharepw&ases is limited to 50 percent of the book value of companies in operation for less than five years, and 70 percent of the share market value of companies operating for more than fivc years. Risk Bureau Reporting System Banks report loans of Dh 250,000 or more to the Central 33ank's Risk Bureau. This xnfmation is pooled and provided to banks With respect to a bank's existing customers. With new customers, the commercial bank can access the infoxmation with the client's prior permission. Consideration is being given to improve the reporting system to include credit card loans and the information on overall bank exposure to large customers. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 19- E. Economic Diversification and Structural Reforms 32. over the years in diverslfying the economy and promoting private sector participation. Nonet heless, the driving force behind non-oil sector development remains the government, and many of its activities in construction, transport, tourism, trade and finance ultimately rely, directly or indirectly, on oil revenues. The extent of diversification varies according to the development strategies of individual emirates, which have, by and large, emphasized complementarity. Abu Dhabi relies on downstream capital- and energy-intensive petrochemical industries, and its large official external assets are key to diversification. Dubai has been enhancing its role as a regional trading and financial services center, actively promoting tourism and establishing new free zones including for the development of electronic commerce. Sharjah accounts for about 45 percent of U.AE.’s manufacturing industry, and has invested to promote retail trade, tourism, higher education, and new gas developments. The other emirates remain dependent on transfers tiom the federal budget, largely financed by Abu Dhabi, although Ajman and Fujairah also have established free zones to attract manufacturing and distribution companies. Diversification and development strategy. The U.A.E. has made important progress 33, a number of areas such as labor, education, health and foreign investment outside the fiee zones, on which a uniform federal policy is in place, each emirate draws up and implements its own economic development strategy, based on its own perceived comparative advantages. As a result, competition for policy concessions and duplication of projects among the emirates become an issue, and there is scope for efficiency gains fiom the perspective of the country as a whole. Coordinated strategy for economic development among the emirates. Except for 34. that the U.A.E. is not’ accustomed to bankruptcy proceedings and may have inadequate collaterdization procedures. Since this may encourage moral hazard, the authorities are considering revisions to existing legal procedures. Staff also encouraged the authorities to consider removing the remaining constraints on foreign investment. Current policies for investment outside the free zones limit foreign ownership to 49 percent of companies and do not allow long-term land leasing by foreigners. These constraints do not apply in the fiee zones, where there has been a very successfid response fkom private and foreign investors, and where individual emirates ar~ using considerable degrees of freedom to attract foreign investment. Thus, in Dubai’s Internet City, foreign investors will be granted up to 50-year renewable land leases; Sharjah has extended the tecure of leases at Sharjah International Airport Free Zone fiom 15 years to 25 years; Abu Dhabi is considering similar arrangements in its planned Saadiyat free zone.21 Legal framework and constraints on foreign investment. The authorities recognize 21 Individual emirates also take initiatives to address the disincentives faced by foreign investors outside the free zones. Dubai has lifted the restrictions on company ownership for nationals of other G€C countries, and Sharjah is considering GCC majority ownership of companies. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 20 - 35. Labor policies. The staff shared the authorities’ concerns that job creation for nationals is a pressing socio-economic priority, and that in view of past large investments the economy may have entered a phase beyond the expansion supported by the large influx of expatriate labor (Box 6). Nonetheless, in rethinking the modalities of strategic development, staff encouraged the authorities to avoid resorting to rigid administrative measures, which may carry longer-term efficiency costs that outweigh short-term benefits ofjob creation for nationals. To facilitate the absorption of a rapidly growing national labor force, it would be advisable to adopt a flexible and effective job creation strategy. This would involve a mix of measures aimed at: a) raising the skills and productivity of nationals through education and training programs geared toward private sector labor demand; b) improving job placement services; c) promoting non-oil growth and employment by removing existing barriers to private and foreign investment; and d) reducing the distortions due to divergent allowances and benefits between public and private sectors, by replacing differences in benefits with an explicit income support system. Box 6: Labor Market Issues Structure of population, labor force, and employment The U.A.E.3 population grew at an average rate of 5.3 perccnt a year during 1990-99, reflecting the high mmase of national population and the large influx of expatriate workers. Labor force growth averaged 8.6 percent a year, with the national participation rate rising from 38 percent to 50 percent. Exact information on the shares of nationals and expatriates in total U.A.E.’s population and labor fa is not available. However. estimates arz that nationels comprise only 15-20 percent of total population and 10-1 5 percent ofthe labor fom. Service sectors employed about 58 pacent of the total labos force m J 999, of which 1 1 percent in government and 20 pmt in trade. 33 percent wuz in industrial sectors, with manufacturing and construction accounting for 13 percent and 18 percent. ~speCtively. The share of the labor force in oil and agriculture sectors has been stable and low. Segmentation The U.A.E.’s labor market is segmented both between nationals and expatriates, and between govemmmt and the private sector employment. With the country’s abundant natural resources and capital, U.A.E. nationals have a high reservation wage, while liberal immigration policies have mtriited to an almost infinitely elastic supply of cheap and well-trained labor from the Wian subcontinent and elsewhere. U.AE. nationals traditionally opt to work in govemmenf wbch offers higher wages, allowances, and social status. The private sector has been dependent on expatriate workers. Lack of systcmatic data prevents direct comparison between the average wages earned by nationals and expatriates. lndrcations are, however, that average cornpeasation in govenunent is up to two and halftimes higher than the average, of all other sectors. Eruiratization An increasing number of educated nationals enter the work force every year, while the economy has grown beyond the extensive expansion supported by a large influx of expatriate labor. The authorities believe it is time to contain the size of expatriate labor, and to emiratize employment. With government already overstaffd pressure is growing on the pnvate sector to recruit more nationals in high value-added industries such as banking, insurance, and telecommunications. In 1998, a Cabinet Decree required banks to increase employment of nationals by 4 percent annually; the bates Telecommunications Corporation (ETISALAT) is trying, on its ovkp, to emiratiZe nearly half its staff In July 1999, the bsby of Labor and Social Affairs imposed a ban on visas for unskilled foreign workers. The emiratization policy imposes constraints on private sector hinng. Since June 1997, private employers seeking work visa for expatriates must discuss the vacancies with the Mmistq of Labor, and visa applications are approved when there me no qualified nationals to fill the positions. A National Recruitment & Training Committee has been recently set up to coordinate the emiratization process, and provide nationals with training for private sector jobs. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-21 - IV. STAFFAPPRAISAL 36. The U.A.E. has made impressive economic progress over the years, by consistently pursuing an outward-oriented development strategy, prudent financial policies, a stable currency, and by harnessing its massive oil reserves as a basis for modernizing the country. Openness, sustained investment in physical and social infkastructure, strong institutions and a good record in macroeconomic management have contributed to the diversification of the economy; to the accumulation of a large stock of official foreign assets; and to lay the foundation for hrther economic and social progress into the new millennium. 37. dependence, and tho! resilience af'f'orded by a strong external position and sustained diversification efforts. The sharp drop in oil price in 1998 and cuts in the production quota entailed a large shock to export and fiscal revenues, and significant adverse effects on growth, the fiscal balance and the external current account. Nonetheless, the shock was absorbed by recourse to income from official foreign assets-in itself a key component of'the U. A.E.'s diversification strategy. In the event, the shock proved temporary, and the external situation improved after the March 1999 OPEC agreement. With high oil prices and the completion of new refining capacity and other investment projects, prospects for 2000 are favorable, and the economy is poised to resume robust growth in the context of much improved fiscal and external conditions, and continued low inflation. Developments in 1998-99 are a reminder of the vulnerabilities associated with oil 38. country's official foreign assets in real terms, and move gradually towards a balanced budget position. On WE0 oil price assumptions, the medium-term outlook is for an overall deficit that would allow to preserve foreign assets in real terms, and indeed even total wdth (financial and hydrocarbon), without adversely affecting deveiopment expenditure and hrther investments in the hydrocarbon sector. Nonetheless, in view of the downside risks associated with volatile oil prices, the staff recommends reinforcing the envisaged mix of measures to strengthen the fiscal position, enhance the private sector role in the economy, and increase efficiency. On the expenditure side, government employment should be contained and rewards increasingly based on productivity; the privatization of water and electricity, after the propitious started in Abu Dhabi, should be strengthened and the phasing out of subsidies accelerated; and ongoing efforts to improve the prioritization of infrastructure projects and rationalize operations and maintenance outlays stepped up. The revenue base could be also broadened by introducing excises on luxury items; reducing the scope of import duty exemptions; and strengthening the harmonization of customs administration among emirates. In the fiscal area, the staff welcomes the authorities' objective to preserve the 39. the efficiency of public administration, fiscal transparency remains a key challenge for the authorities. Progress was made during the consultation on clarifying the disposition of oil proceeds and the official foreign assets position. At the same he, staff urges the authorities to give high priority to improve the compilation of statistics on consolidated government While some emirates are making important efforts to improve governance and Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 22 - activities, the absence of which undermines crucially the authorities’ ability to monitor macroeconomic developments, and to adopt policy decisions informed by a national perspective. 40. prudent credit policy and sound banking conditions supports the credibility and sustainability of the pegged exchange rate arrangement. The staff endorses the authorities’ exchange rate policy which has served the economy well, and helped to maintain low inflation with adequate competitiveness. On monetary instruments, the authorities are encouraged to monitor carefilly the impact of the recent change in reserve requirements, and to explore additional options for short-term liquidity management, including the development of government paper instruments and repurchase facilities. The Central Bank has made important progress in strengthening supervision of the banking system during the past few years. Banks in the U.A.E. meet or exceed Basle capital adequacy standards, and are well provisioned against classified loans. Important steps have also been made to enhance financial sector transparency, with the adoption of the International Accounting Standards for all banks and financial institutions, and the opening of a formal, regulated stock exchange. The authorities’ established record of commitment to interest rate flexibility, 41. The ongoing efforts to strengthen efficiency in public institutions contribute to improve the business environment and thus to promote further diversification. On the other hand, in order to exploit the economy’s fill long-term potential, the staff encourages the authorities to remove existing impediments to foreign investment. While the country’s open economic, trade and exchange system are important conditions for non-oil sector development, growth and job creation could be enhanced by removing existing constraints to enterprise and land ownership, and by pursuing labor market reforms. On the latter, the authorities should avoid the long-term efficiency costs of rigid administrative procedures in the process of substituting national for expatriate workers, by emphasizing a flexible and gradual implementation enhancing skills and productivity of nationals, and reducing existing distortions. 42. The staff notes that the Interministerial Statistical Committee is being reactivated, and that efforts are being made to enhance provision of business-related information to markets. However, the staffunderscores the need for the authorities to pursue concrete results to improve the coverage and quality of the national accounts and the balance of payments, in addition to the consolidated fiscal data. Increased coordination between federal and emirates’ authorities, adequate resources allocated to data collection and management, and training of staff on international statistical standards are necessary conditions for fbrther progress in these areas. The effectiveness of Fund surveillance needs also to be improved by a regular and timely provision of data to staff between consultations. 43. 12-month cycle. It is proposed that the next Article IV consultation take place on the standard Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicI5 10 5 0 -5 -10 Ckirns on -0- I Chart 1. United Arab Emirates: Selected Economic Indicators, 1993-2000 1. I I I Real GDP Percartagc change US5 per baml Nonoil ODP , -.-e *. 50 14 45 22 40 20 3s 18 30 16 14 2s Fiscal Accounts , ,(ln percent of GDP) , -2 4 -8 -1 1 -1 4 -17 -20 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 External Sector In billions of US5 In pcrcd of GDP 15 10 5 0 IS 10 S 0 -5 ' -5 -10 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 J \ Claims on gowmmm! (net) 1 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 15 !O 5 0 -5 -10 Sources: U.A.E. authorities; and Fund stafT estimates. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 24 - Chart 2. United Arab Emirates: Real GDP, 1994-1999 Conventional Method vs. U.A.E. Method Real Oil GDP and Oil Prices 35 22 25 15 5. -5 -15 -25 -3 5 1994 1995 19% 1997 1998 1999 20 18 16 14 12 10 12 10 8 6 4 2 0 -2 -4 -6 -8 -v 1994 1995 19% 1997 1998 1999 Sources: U.A.E. authones; and Fund staff calculations. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 25 - 10 8- 6- 4- 2- 0- -2 -4 -6 -8 Chart 3. United Arab Emirates: Saving-Investment Balance, 1993-ZOO0 (In percent of GDP) 10 -8 -6 / /\ / \ / /\ f -4 \ 1 -2 L ,I I I / Saving / / --,--\ \ / \ - -0 -2 / \ / \ c f \ - \ \' \ - 4/ L----,/ Non-government Investment and Saving 50 lnvestmcnt 25 t 2o t 15 I 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 45 40 35 30 2s 20 15 Saving-Investment Balances 30 I 25 20 15 10 < 0 -5 -10 -15 --" ~ ~ e- 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 Sources: U.A.E. authorities; and Fund staff estimates. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 26 - 2.0 1.8 1.6 1.4 1.2 1.0 Chart 4. United Arab Emirates: Monetary Trends, 1993-2000 -7 __---- ----- - Velocity (QDP) \ * --- -___--- c - /FH -----A) -4 - 9+2 - (right de) CPI (non-oil ODP) -1 .*-__.. -.--. ____~_.~~~._.._......----..-..-..--------. --.*_- -. - ...- - -2 3month Dirham interbank Credit to Nonbanks and M2 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 2 60 58 56 54 52 50 48 46 44 (In percent of GDP) Credit to 60 58 56 54 52 50 46 44 4a 42 t 4 42 1993 1994 1995 19% 1997 1998 1999 2000 Sources: U.A.E. authorities; and Fund destimates. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 27 - 20 10 Wagcsud~luiea Chart 5. United Arab Emirates: Fiscal Developments, 1993-2000 , I Composition of Fiscal Revenue (In billions of U.A.E. dirhams) 60 Total revenue ~ v- 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 Revenue and Expenditure (In percent of GDP) c t 8 :m Revenue 20 J 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 ~ 70 50 60 40 50 30 40 30 20 20 10 10 00 so 45 40 35 33 Composition of Fiscal Expenditure I (In billions of U.A.E. dirhams) 80 - 70 -60 - 50 ’I 40 -16 25 Fiscal Balance 0 4 -8 -12 Sources: U.A.E. authorities; and Fund staff estimates. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 28 - 110 100 90 Chart 6. United Arab Emirates: Exchange Rate and Competitiveness Indicators, 1990-1999 - - - - - - 120 t 110 100 90 REER - Consumer Prices / . / \ fuEER - Unit Labor Costs /---- 4. --/ \ \ 1 120 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 Nond Ewrt Growth Relative to Export Market Growth, 199 1-99 11 (In percentage points of difference) 30 -5 1991 1992 1993 1994 1993 1996 1997 1998 1999 1/ U.A.E. non-oi! export growth less non4l export market growth, each in percent. 30 25 20 15 10 5 0 -5 Sources: U.A.E. authorities; World Economic Outlook; and Fund s*& calculations. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 29 - Table 1. United Arab Emirates: Basic Data-Economic Indicators, 1994-2000 prel. 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 Oil and gas production Oil production 1/ Crude oil exports 1/ Average price (US% per barrel) WE0 oil price (US$ per barrel) 2/ Natural gas production LNG exports NGL exports National income and prices Real GDP at factor cost 3/ Oil 3/ Non-oil GDP deflator 3/ Consumer prices Unit labor cost in manufacturing Investment and saving Government Non-governmen t National saving Gownment Non-govenmient Gross domestic investment Saving-investment gap Consolidated fiscal accounts Revenue, ofwliick Hydrocarbons Expenditure Current Capital 41 Current balance Overall balance Financing Domestic bailks Other financing 5! Money and credit Dsmestic liquidity @l2) Foreign assets (net) Domestic assets, of wkich: Claims on govemment (net) Claims on public sector enterprises Claims on private sector 2.18 1.95 15.57 15.95 25.8 3.8 7.8 6.5 -0.9 12.0 0.0 5 .O -10.3 30.6 8.4 22.2 33.7 -3.4 37.1 3.2 26.7 20.4 41.2 30.0 11.2 -3.4 -14.6 14.6 1.6 13.0 (In millions of barrels per day) 2.23 2.23 2.39 2.21 2.11 2.25 2.01 2.03 2.10 2.17 2.03 2.05 16.65 19.87 18.80 12.57 17.64 24.00 17.20 20.37 19.27 13.07 18.14 24.50 (In billions of cubic meters per year) 31.3 33.8 35.8 36.5 37.0 41.9 5.8 6.3 6.2 6.0 5.8 6.8 7.6 8.2 8.9 9.6 8.9 10.9 (Annual percentage changes) 6.7 2.3 9s 3.6 4.4 -8.2 29.7 7.6 22.0 36.5 -2.3 38.7 6.8 27.1 20.4 40.6 29.3 11.3 -2.3 -13.5 13.5 -1.9 15.4 4.8 8.1 0.2 0.5 5.8 0.0 7.2 -7.5 -4.5 6.5 7.8 8.6 4.5 2.9 5.5 6.9 -2.9 -6.3 9.7 14.7 2.6 2.1 2.0 2.0 2.0 10.3 -10.9 4.1 -1.6 .., (In percent of GDP) 28.1 28.7 5.8 5.9 22.3 22.8 39.2 37.4 -6.4 2.7 45.6 34.7 11.1 8.7 29.2 30.6 21.0 22.2 43.7 36.3 35.6 27.9 8.1 8.4 -6.4 2.7 -14.5 -5.7 14.5 5.7 1.2 0.3 13.3 5.3 31.3 29.0 29.9 8.0 7.2 5.0 23.3 21.8 24.0 25.2 30.1 45.6 -6.2 -6.8 3.5 31.4 36.9 42.1 -6.2 1.1 16.6 24.7 23.1 28.9 14.7 14.7 21.9 41.8 38.2 31.2 30.9 29.9 25.4 10.9 8.3 5.9 -6.2 -6.8 3.5 -17.1 -15.1 -2.4 17.1 15.1 2.4 -0.7 0.8 0.0 17.9 14.4 2.4 (Changes in percent of begmning stock of domestic liquidity) 7.9 10.2 6.9 9.0 4.2 11.4 8.8 -7.4 8.7 -0.6 -1.2 0.4 4.3 5-8 15.3 1.5 7.4 10.3 3.8 7.1 3 .O 3.2 -4.1 2.6 0.7 -1.3 1.1 0.0 4.4 0.0 -1.0 0.5 -0.3 0.3 0.1 9.0 10.7 8.9 12.6 13.1 8.0 5.5 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 30 - Table 1, United Arab Emirates: Basic Data-Economic Indicators, 1994-2000 (concluded) 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 Interest rates LDBOR (three month, U.S. dollar) U.A.E. dirham (three month) Lending rate External sector Exports Crude oil Petroleum products Gas Non-oil Re-exports Imports, f.0.b. Trade balance Services (net) Income (net) Transfers (net) Private Official Current account balance (In percent of GDP) Overall balance Central Bank reserves (excluding gold) (In months of imports) (As percent of reserve money) Banking system NFARv12 (percent) Exchange rate Dirham/U.S, dollar (end of period) Real effective exchange rate (Percentage change) GDP at market prices 6.38 6.50 7.6 1 27.0 11.0 1.4 1.1 5 .O 8.4 -24.1 2.9 -2.0 3.7 -3.4 -3.1 -0.3 1.2 3.2 0.7 6.9 3.4 218.7 77.8 3.6710 108.5 -0.4 140.5 5.44 5.44 7.58 30.4 11,s 1.7 1.7 6.7 8.4 -25.7 4.7 -3.1 4.8 -3.5 -3.2 4.3 2.9 6.8 0.7 7.7 3.6 220.4 78.5 3.6710 104.2 -4.0 5.44 5.92 5.59 5.44 5.63 5.50 7.55 7.80 7.79 (In billions of U.S. dollars) 35.2 14.2 2.0 1.9 7.8 9.1 -25.0 10.2 -5.9 4.8 -3.8 -3.6 -0.2 5.3 11.1 0.6 8.2 3.8 216.4 72.9 3.6710 109.2 4.9 38.1 13.6 2.1 2.5 9.3 10.4 -28.5 9.6 -6.3 4.7 -3.6 -3.3 -0.3 4.4 8.7 0.3 8.6 3.4 209.5 65.7 3.6725 116.5 6.6 33.8 9.4 1.3 1.4 9.8 11.7 -30.5 3.3 -7.0 4.6 -3.8 -3.4 -0.3 -2.9 -6.2 0.8 9.3 3.7 210.4 63.5 3.6725 124.6 7.0 5.29 5.40 7.80 39.9 12.4 2.0 1.7 10.5 13.1 -32.8 7.1 -7.5 4.8 -3.8 -3.5 -0.3 0.6 1.1 1.5 10.9 4 .O 199.8 60.8 3.6725 123.6 -0.8 (In billions of U.A.E. dirhams) 157.1 176.2 185.1 174.0 190.6 ... ... ... 51.1 17.9 s.s 2.3 10.9 13.7 -34.2 17.0 -7.8 5.2 -3.9 -3.6 -0.3 10.5 16.6 1.1 12.0 4.2 211.2 61.2 ... ... ... 231.1 Sources: United .Arab Emirates' authorities; and Fund Staffestimates. 1/ Including condensates. 2/ WE0 forecast, February, 2000 3/ Conventional method of calculation, rather than U.A.E. method. 4/ Including loans and equity. 5/ Pnmarily drawdomn of Abu Dhabi Investment Authority's foreign assets Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-31 - Table 2. United Arab Emirates: Oil and Gas Production, Exports, and Prices, 1994-2000 Prel.BL 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 Oil production Crudeoil 11 Abu Dhabi Dubai and others 21 Condensates Refinery output Oil exports Crude oil Abu Dhabi Dubai and others Condensates Refined products Natural gas production 31 LNG exports NGL exports Oil exports Crude oil Abu Dhabi Duhai and others Condensates Refined products LNG and NGL exports 41 Total oil and gas exports Crude oil and condensates exports LNG and NGL exports 4/ Total Average oil export price WE0 oil price (In millions of barrels per day) 2.18 2.23 2.23 2.39 2.21 2.11 2.25 2.16 2.16 2.16 2.28 2.10 2.00 2.12 1.80 1.82 1.86 1.98 1.82 1.74 1.91 0.36 0.34 0.30 0.30 0.28 0.26 0.21 0.02 0.07 0.07 0.11 0.11 0.11 0.13 0.25 0.29 0.27 0.40 0.16 0.19 0.37 2.02 2.09 2.10 2.18 2.24 2.11 2.22 1.93 1.94 1.96 1.99 4.06 1.92 2.04 1.63 1.65 1.71 1.74 1.83 1.70 1.87 0.30 0.29 0.25 0.25 0.23 Q.22 0.18 0.02 0.07 0.07 0.11 0.11 0.11 0.01 0.07 0.08 0.07 0.08 0.07 0.08 0.16 (in billions of cubic meters) 25.80 31.30 33.80 35.80 35.50 37.00 41.88 3.82 5.83 6.34 6.23 5.97 5.81 6.80 7.80 7.62 8.16 8.86 9.56 8.94 10.90 (In millions 0fU.S. dollars) 12,347.7 13,478.9 16,212.9 15,767.2 10,723.0 14,342.2 23,381.3 10,968.3 11,765.6 14,236.8 13,648.5 9,428.4 12,355.7 17,882.0 9,263.4 10,003.2 12,423.6 11,933.0 8,373.2 10,939.2 16,340.3 1,704.9 1,762.4 1,813.1 1,715.5 1,055.3 1,416.5 1,541.8 121.0 451.0 533.2 795.0 544.8 748.4 91.3 1,258.4 1,262.4 1,442.9 1,323.7 749.7 1,238.1 5,408.0 1,071.8 1,699.1 1,939.1 2,106.7 1,395.6 1,733.5 2,835.1 13,419.5 15,178.0 18,152.0 17,873.9 12,1186 16,075.5 26,216.4 (In millions of U.A.E. dirhams) 40,708.6 44,846.8 54,220.6 53,043.7 36,626.9 48,124.7 66,006.9 3,934.5 6,237.3 7,118.6 7,736.7 5,125.5 6,366.2 10,411.9 44,643.1 51,084.1 61,339.2 60,780.4 41,752.4 54,490.9 76,418.8 (In U.S. dollars per barrel) 15.57 16.65 19.87 18.80 12.57 17.64 24.00 15.95 17.20 20.37 19.27 13.07 18.14 24.50 ~ ~~~ Sources: Supreme Petroleum Council; and Fund staf€ estimates. 1/ Breakdown of productin? by emirates is available though 1999. 21 Sharjah and Ras Al-Khaimah. 31 Net after re-injection into wells. 41 Includes a one time payment of USS400 million in 1997 for the retroactive adjustment of LNG prices. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 32 - Table 3. United Arab Emirates: Consolidated Government Finances, 1994-2000 1/ prel. w 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 Total revenue Hydrocarbons Non-hydrocarbon Customs Profit transfers Income tax Fees and charges Other Total expenditure Current Wages and salaries 21 Goods and services Subsidies and transfers Foreign grants Other 41 Development Loans and equity (net) 5/ Overall balance Financing Domestic banks Other financing 61 Total revenue Hydrocarbons Non-hydrocarbon Total expenditure Current Development Loans and equity Overall balance Saving Sa\ing-investment balance 37,464 28,694 8,770 606 1,422 1,121 2,980 2,641 57,946 42,204 10,914 15,648 4,172 953 10,517 11,745 3,997 -20,482 20,482 2,195 18,287 26.7 20.4 6.2 41.2 30.0 8.4 2.8 -14.6 -3.4 -11.7 42,533 32,033 10,500 1,335 1,311 1,955 3,909 1,99 1 63,756 46,077 11,848 17,570 5,399 974 10,285 12,017 5,663 -2 1,223 -3,042 2 1,223 24,265 27.1 20.4 6.7 40.6 29.3 7.6 3.6 -13.5 -2.3 -9.9 (In millions of U.A.E. dirhams) 51,429 37,007 14,422 1,427 1,989 3,302 4,669 3,035 76,996 62,700 12,618 18,295 19,343 789 11,655 10,261 4,035 -25,567 25,567 2,148 23,419 56,65 1 41,140 15.5 11 1,676 2,652 2,925 5,039 3,219 67,149 51,671 13,157 19,173 6,898 1,203 11,240 10,912 4,566 -10,498 10,498 598 9,900 42,913 25,500 17,413 1,82 I 3,051 1,679 5,554 5,308 72,729 53,695 12,581 19.609 8.0 17 1,209 12,279 13,987 5,047 -29,816 29,816 3 1,064 -1,248 (In percent of GDP) 29.2 30.6 24.7 21,o 22.2 14.7 8.2 8.4 10.0 43.7 36.3 41.8 35.6 27.9 30.9 5.8 5.9 8.0 2.3 2.5 2.9 -14.5 -5.7 -17.1 -6.4 2.7 -6.2 -12.2 -3.2 -14.2 43,966 28,054 15,912 1,884 3,374 2,179 4,121 4,354 72,763 56,93 1 12,638 21,375 9,646 499 12,773 13,754 2,078 -28,797 28,797 1,450 27,347 23.1 14.7 8.4 38.2 29.9 7.2 1.1 -1 5.1 -6.8 -14.0 66,735 50,529 16,206 1,860 3,550 2,383 3,987 4,426 72,193 58,671 13,086 20,255 10,714 1,050 13,566 1 1,522 2,000 -5,458 0 5,458 5,4513 28.9 21.9 7.0 31.2 25.4 5 .O 0.9 -2.4 3.5 -1.5 Sources: Federal and emirate governments; United Arab Emirates’ Central Bank; and Fund staff estimate 1/ Consolidation of federal accounts and the emirates of Abu Dhabi, Dubai, Sharjah, and Ras Al-Khaim 2/ Excludes military wages and salaries. 3/ Includes payments of about Dh. 8.2 billion in 1996 toward settlement of BCCl obligations. 4/ IncIudes payments made by Abu Dhabi on behalf of the Federal Government, including defense 5/ Mainly subsidized loans to finance construction, and housing loans for ~ti~nals. 6/ Financing provided by ADIA. expenditure. Also includes interest payments, and unclassified eqenditure of Sharjah and Ras Al-Khaimah. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 33 - Table 4. United Arab Emirates: Balance of Payments, 1994-2000 Qn billions of U.S. dollars) prel.g& 1994 1995 19% 1997 1998 1999 2000 Trade balance Exports Crude oil and petroleum products Gas 1/ Other 2/ Non-oil exports Crude oil Petroleum products Free zone exports Exports (by Emirates) Non-monetary gold Re-exports Imports (f.0.b.) Free zone imports Imports (by Emirates) of which: Non-manemy gold Services and income (net) Investment income (net) Services (net) 41 Private Official Unrecorded government imports 3/ Banks and private nonbanks Official Transfers (net) Current account Capital account Financial account (net) Private capital (net) Commercial banks Private nonbanks official capital (net) 51 Errors and omissions Overall balance (in percent of GDP) Change in net foreign assets of Central Bank (increase -) Memorandum items: Gross official reserves of the Central Bank Current account (in percent of GDP) Overall balance (in percent of GDP) (in months of imports) 2.9 27.0 12.3 11.0 1.4 1.1 0.1 5.0 1.6 1.2 2.2 8.4 -24.1 -1.4 -19.5 -0.8 -3.2 1.7 3.7 1.8 2.0 -2.0 -3.4 -3.1 -0.3 1.2 0.0 2.0 0.2 0.2 0.0 1.8 -2.6 0.7 1.7 -0.7 6.9 3.4 3.1 1.7 4.7 30.4 13.5 11.8 1.7 1.7 0.1 6.7 2.4 1.6 2.7 8.4 -25.7 -2.3 -19.5 -0.8 -3.9 1.7 4.8 2.1 2.6 -3.1 -3.5 -3.2 -0.3 2.9 0.0 2.6 0.0 0.4 -0.4 2.6 -4.8 0.7 1.7 -0.7 7.7 3.6 6.8 I .7 10.2 35.2 16.2 14.2 2.0 1.9 0.1 7.8 3.2 1.6 3.1 9.1 -25.0 -2.6 -18.5 -0.8 -3.8 -1.1 4.8 1.9 2.9 -5.9 -3.8 -3.6 -0.2 5.3 0.0 3.1 1.4 0.7 0.7 1.6 -7.8 0.6 1.3 -0.6 8.2 3.8 11.1 1.3 9.6 38.1 15.8 13.6 2.1 2.5 0.1 9.3 4.0 1.9 3.4 10.4 -28.5 -3 .O -21.1 -0.7 -4.3 -1.7 4.7 2.1 2-6 -6.3 -3.6 -3.3 -0.3 4.4 0.0 0.9 -0.4 0.6 -1.0 1.3 4.9 0.3 0.6 -0.3 8.6 3.4 8.7 0.6 3.3 33.8 10.7 9.4 1.3 1.4 0.2 9.8 4.4 1.9 3.5 11.7 -30.5 -3.3 -22.8 -0.7 -4.4 -2.4 4.6 2 .o 2.6 -7.0 -3.8 -3.4 -0.3 -2.9 0.0 7.7 -0.9 0.6 -1.6 8.6 -4.0 0.8 1.5 -0.8 9.3 3.7 -6.2 1.5 7.1 39.9 14.3 12.4 2.0 1.7 0.2 10.5 4.8 2.1 3.6 13.1 -32.8 -3.3 -25.0 -1.6 -4.5 -2.7 4.8 2.1 2.7 -7.5 -3.8 -3.5 -0.3 0.6 0.0 7.7 1.4 0.4 1 .o 6.4 -6.8 1.5 2.9 -1.5 10.9 4.0 1.1 2.9 17.0 51.1 23,4 17.9 5.5 2.8 0.3 10.9 5 .O 2.3 3.6 13.7 -34.2 -3.5 -26.0 -1.6 -4.6 -2.6 5.2 2.2 3 .O -7.8 -3.9 -3.6 -0.3 10.5 0.0 0.8 -0.3 -0.4 0.1 1.1 -10.2 1.1 1.7 -i.l 12.0 4.2 16.6 1.7 Sources: Abu Dhabi National Oil Company, emirates customs departments and central bank; and I/ 1997 includes a one time payment for the retroactive adjustment of LNG prices. 21 Including fertilizers and lubricants exports. 31 Data introduced since the 1998 consultation in both fiscal and external accounts. 4/ Transport, travel, government services, and freight and insurance. 5/ Mainly withdrawal from official foreign assets to finance budget deficits. Fund staff estimates. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 34 - Table 5. United Arab Emirates: Monetary Survey, 1994-2000 (In millions of U.AE. dirhams) End of Period Levels Est 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 ___ - ~~ ~- Net foreign assets 57,474 63,887 63,430 62,365 62,738 67,000 73,365 Foreign assets 91,015 92,375 100,825 108,151 116,080 121,971 127,239 Central Bank 25,512 28,089 30,263 31,431 34,148 40,163 43,921 Commercial banks 1/ 65,503 64,286 70,562 76,720 81,932 81,808 83,318 Foreign liabilities 33,541 28,488 37,395 45,786 53,342 54,971 53,874 Central bank 380 175 75 52 10 403 200 Commercial banks I/ 33,161 28,313 37,320 45,734 53,332 54,568 53,674 Domestic assets 16,406 17,514 23,553 32,488 36,086 43,128 46,444 Claim 11,764 11,787 9,314 8,099 11,568 14,554 14,654 Deposits 19,026 22,091 17,470 15,658 20,375 22,352 22,352 Claims on public sector enterprises 5,869 5,858 5,069 5,511 5,236 5,581 5,693 Claims on private nonbanks 63,914 71,843 79,067 90,046 102,452 110,355 116,466 Nonbank financial institutions 2,656 2,526 2,330 2,689 3,443 3,075 3,137 Capital and reserves (-) -21,108 -23,162 -24,819 -26,981 -31,430 -33,517 -34,413 Other assets (net) -27,663 -29,247 -29,938 -3 1,218 -34,808 -34,668 -36,740 -10,534 -12,218 -13,455 -12,906 -13,934 -16,261 -19,974 -17,129 -17,029 -16,483 -18,312 -20,834 -18,407 -16,766 Claims on government (net) -7,262 -10,304 -8,156 -7,559 -8,807 -7,698 -7,698 Central Bank Commercial banks 1/ Domestic liquidity (M2) 73,880 81,401 86,983 94,854 98,824 110,128 119,809 Money 19,182 20,824 22,266 25,368 27,783 30,250 30,557 Currency outside banks 6,030 6,404 6,767 7,366 8,194 10,270 10,578 Dirham demand deposits 13,152 14,420 15,499 18,002 19,589 19,980 19,979 Quasi-money 54,698 60,577 64.717 69,486 71,041 79,878 89,252 Foreign currency deposits 15,936 15,741 17,311 18,570 19,731 23,354 24,771 Dirham time and savings deposits 38,762 44,836 47,406 50,916 51,310 56,524 64,481 Dirham-denominated liquidity 57,944 65,660 69,672 76,284 79,093 86,774 95,038 Resente money 2J 11,665 12,743 13,986 15,006 16,233 20,099 20,795 Foreign currency depositdtotal deposits (in percent) 23.5 21.0 21.6 21.2 21.8 23.4 22.7 M2 velocity (GDP) 1.9 1.9 2.0 2.0 1.8 1.7 1.9 h42 velocity (nonsil GDP) 1.3 1.3 1.4 1.4 1.4 1.3 1.3 hTA/ iviz (in percent) 77.8 78.5 72.9 65.7 63.5 60.8 61.2 CBU foreign assetsheserve money (in percent) 218.7 220.4 216.4 209.5 210.4 199.8 211.2 Memorandum items: ( Growth in percent of initial M2 stock) Net foreign assets Domestic assets, of which: Claims on government (net) Claims on private nonbanks Domestic liquidity (M2) -7.4 8.7 -0.6 -1.2 0.4 4.3 5.8 15.3 1.5 7.4 10.3 3.8 7.1 3.0 3.2 -4.1 2.6 0.7 -1.3 1.1 0.0 9.0 10.7 8.9 12.6 13.1 8.0 5.5 7.9 10.2 6.9 9.0 4.2 11.4 8.8 Sources: United Arab Emirates Central Bank; and Fund staff estimates. I/ Including the restricted license bank. 2/ Excludes cedcates of deposit. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public* 35 - Table 6. United Arab Emirates: Medium-term Baseline Scenario, 1997-2005 &Est. Proiectiom 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 Crude oil production 1/ Crude oil exports 11 Oil export price WE0 oil prices (In U.S. dollars per barrel) (In U.S. dollars per barrel) 2/ Real GDP 3/ Oil-sector 3/ Nonsil sector GDP deflator 3/ Consumer prices National saving Government Non-government Government Non-governant Saving less investment Government Non-government Fiscal revenue Hydrocarbons Non-hydrocarbons Fiscal expenditure Current Capital Overall balance Gross domestic investment External Accounts 011 and products Gas Non-oil exports Re-exports Imports, f.0.b. Services (net) Investment income Transfers (net) Private official Current account balance (In percent of GDP) Overall balance Central Bank reserves (level) (In months of imports) Expprts 2.39 2.10 18.80 19.27 8.1 7.2 8.6 -2.9 2.1 37.4 2.7 34.7 28.7 5.9 22.8 8.7 -3.2 11.9 30.6 22.2 8.4 36.3 27.9 8.4 -5.7 38.1 15.8 2.5 9.3 10.4 -28.5 -6.3 4.7 -3.6 -3.3 -0.3 4.4 8.7 0.3 8.6 3.4 2.21 2.17 12.57 13.07 0.2 -7.5 4.5 -6.3 2.0 25.2 -6.2 31.4 3 1.3 8.0 23.3 4.2 -14.2 8.1 24.7 14.7 10.0 41.8 30.9 10.9 -17.1 33.8 10.7 1.4 9.8 11.7 -30.5 -7.0 4.6 -3.8 -3.4 -0.3 -2.9 -6.2 0.8 9.3 3.7 (In millions of barrels per day) 2.11 2.25 2.29 2.34 2.38 2.43 2.48 2.Q3 2.05 2.10 2.15 2.20 2.25 2.30 17.64 24.00 19.30 18.09 18.27 18.46 18.65 18.14 24.50 19.80 18.59 18.77 18.96 19.15 Annual percentage changes 0.5 -4.5 2.9 9.7 2.0 30.1 -6.8 36.9 29.0 7.2 21.8 1.1 -14.0 15.1 23.1 14.7 8.4 38.2 29.9 8.3 -15.1 J.8 3.4 3.5 6.5 2.0 2.0 5.5 4.1 4.2 14.7 -6.8 -0.8 2.0 2.8 2.3 (In percent of GDP) 45.6 37.7 35.3 42.1 38.2 36.9 29.0 29.1 29.2 5.0 4.8 4.6 24.0 24.3 24.6 16.6 8.6 6.1 18.1 13.9 12.3 28.9 26.7 25.4 21.9 19.0 17.5 7.0 7.7 7.9 31.2 32.9 32.2 25.4 27.1 27.0 5.9 5.7 5.2 -2.4 -6.2 -6.8 (In billions of U.S. dollars) 3.5 -0.4 -1.6 -1.5 -5.3 -6.2 39.9 51.:. 47.5 47.8 14.3 23.4 19.3 18.5 1.7 2.8 2.3 2.2 10.5 10.9 11.4 12.0 13.1 13.7 14.2 14.8 -32.8 -7.5 4.8 -3.8 -3.5 -0.3 0.6 1.1 1.5 10.9 4.0 -34.2 -7.8 5.2 -3.9 -3.6 -0.3 10.5 16.6 1.1 12.0 4.2 -35.4 -8.1 5.2 -4.0 -3.7 -0.3 5.2 8.6 0.2 12.2 4.2 -36.7 3.5 3.6 3.6 2.0 2.0 2.0 4.2 4.3 4.3 1.8 1.9 1.9 2.0 2.0 2.0 35.3 35.5 35.4 -1.2 -0.8 -0.3 36.5 36.3 35.7 28.9 28.9 29.0 4.1 3.7 3.3 24.7 25.2 25.7 6.4 6.6 6.4 11.7 11.1 10.0 25.1 24.8 24.5 17.1 16.7 16.3 8 .O 8.1 8.2 31.0 29.7 28.5 26.3 25.5 24.8 4.8 4.1 3.7 -6.0 -4.9 -4.0 -5.4 -4.5 -3.6 50.0 52.3 54.6 19.1 19.7 20.4 2.2 2.3 2.3 12.9 13.8 14.7 15.6 16.3 16.9 -38.1 -39.6 -41.3 -8.4 -8.7 -9.0 -9.4 5.2 5.2 5.2 5.2 -4.1 -3.8 -0.3 3.8 6.1 0.2 12.4 4.1 -4.2 4.3 . -4.4 -3.9 -4.0 -4.1 -0.3 -0.3 -0.3 4.2 4.6 4.7 6.4 6.6 6.4 0.2 0.4 0.4 12.7 13.0 13.4 4.0 4.0 4.0 Source: United Arab Emirates’ authorities; Fund staff estimates and projections. 1/ Includes condensates. 21 Based on WE0 forecasts of February, 2000. 3/ Real GDP, the oil component, and deflator calculated by conventional method, rather than UAE method. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-36- APPENDIX I I. 11. HI. IV. V. VI. VII. United Arab Emirates: Fund Relations (As of March 3 1,2000) Membership Status: Joined 9/22/72; accepted Article VIII status in February 1974. General Resources Account: Quota Fund holdings of currency Reserve position in Fund Operational budget transfers (net) SDR Department: Net cumulative allocation Holdings SDR Million % Ouota 61 1.70 100.0 408.34 66.8 203.36 33.2 -5.00 SDR MI ‘llion ‘j6 Allocation 38.74 100.0 4.25 11.0 Outstanding Purchases and Loans None Financial Arrangements None Projected Obligations to Fund None Exchange Rate Arrangement The U.A.E. dirham, though officially pegged to the SDR at the rate of Dh 4.76190 = SDR 1, has been fixed to the U.S. dollar since November 1980. The mid-point between the official buying and selling rates for the dirham vis-a-vis the U.S. dollar ha5 been Dh 3.6725 = US$1 since November, 3 997. VIII. Exchange System The U.A.E. maintains restrictions on transactions with the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) pursuant to resolutions of the UN Security Council. IX, Article IV Consultation The last Article IV consultation discussions were held during June 14-30, 1998 and the Staff Report (SM./98/247) and Recent Economic Developments (SW98/248) were considered by the Executive Board on November 4, 1998. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-37- APPENDIX I X. Technical Assistance STA Mu1 ti sector FAD Government financiaf management STA Data collection and balance of payments STA Terms of reference and arrangements for resident advisor in balance of payments STA International Reserves XI. Resident Representative None June 1993 June 1994 December 1995 April 1997 May, 1998 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public~ -38- United Arab Emirates: Statistical Issues This appendix reviews statistical issues of significance for the U.A.E. 1. Background Data shortcomings in the U.A.E. reflect inadequate data compilation; a shortage of trained sta, and gaps in information sharing among government agencies. Provision of statistical information to the Fund has not been regular except for money and banking data to STA. Monthly data on consumer prices were not compiled by the Ministry of Planning for part of 1997, but in June, 1998 compilation was resumed. Other monthly core data-the Federal fiscal accounts, exchange rates, foreign trade, internationai reserves of the central bank, and monetary data were not provided to the Fund between November, 1997 and mid-1998, because of disagreement between the authorities and the Fund about the definition of reserves for purposes of calculating the U.A.E. ’s contribution to the Fund’s operational budget. Other core statistics (emirates’ fiscal accounts, balance of payments, and national accounts) are available only on an annual basis. Provision to MED of agreed data such as the Core Statistical Indicators has been irreguiar over 1998-99. Based on recommendations of a 1993 multisector statistical mission, an action plan was agreed with the authorities during the 1995 Article N consultation mission. Under the plan, Fund technical assistance was envisaged to provide on-the-job training for U.A.E. staff An STA technical assistance mission visited the U.A.E. in December 1995 and reviewed progress in balance of payments data compilation. In April 1997, an STA mission discussed possible arrangements for a resident advisor in balance of payments statistics. The authorities also asked for the appointment of a resident advisor in national accounts statistics and the compilation of economic indicators. Subsequently, the authorities decided the number of qualified staff in the Central Bank and Ministry of Planning was insufficient to support the proposed advisors or carry out their recommendations. In the event, therefore, there was no significant progress in implementing the action plan arising fiorn the 1993 mission. 2. Data deficiencies The main weakness in the national accounts is a lack of basic information for most economic sectors except government, financial institutions, and agriculture. With regard to the production account, basic data are inadequate for manufacturing, construction, wholesale and retail trade, and most of the service sectors. Oil sector data are partly estimated because information provided to the Ministry of Planning by the Abu Dhabi National Oil Company (ADNOC) varies fiom year to year. In the expenditure account, data are lacking on final consumption by households and on changes in stocks. In these areas, the national accounts compilers rely on ad hoc information, which causes wide margins of error. There are no short-run indicators of economic activity. The last national accounts reported to the Fund for publication in IF’ were for 1996. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 39- APPENDIX I1 Concerning price statistics, the old consumer price index (CP1)-based on weights derived from 1980s household budget surveys in Qatar and Abu Dhabi-was replaced during 1997-98. Retail and wholesaIe prices for individual commodities and certain services have been published monthly since 1982 for each of the seven emirates. The Ministry of Planning publishes retail and wholesale prices, but price data are not reported to the Fund for publication in IFS. Important deficiencies in government finance statistics arise from the lack of coordination among the emirates and low frequency in reporting government financial operations. The Ministry of Finance and Industry compiles data for the federal government only, Some emirates provide annual fiscal data to the central bank after a considerable lag. Consolidated fiscal accounts are produced by Fund consultation missions using all these sources, but it is not clear the authorities do so for themselves. Annual statistics reported to STA for the GFS Yearbook cover only the federal government. Fiscal data for 1995 and 1996 are missing fiom IFS. Data on foreign assets of the emirates are not publicly available. The U.A.E.’s balance of payments (BOPS) suffer from lack of primary data sources for many transactions. Many entries are estimates based on incomplete information. Some important transactions are not reported at all. There are major gaps in transfers (e.g., workers’ remittances), oil companies’ service payments, investment income of the private sector and some emirates, oil sector and foreign direct investment transactions, and private sector and emirates’ financial transactions. Therefore, the U.A,E.’s BOP accounts are of limited analytical use. Although the BOPS are published locally, in the Central Bank’s Quarter& Bulletin, they are not reported to the Fund for publication in IFS or the Bdance of Payments Statistics Yearbook (BUPSY). Reporting of data on external trade has been irregular; at present, these data are seriously uncurrent in IFS. The December, 1995 STA technical assistance mission reviewed progress in implementing recommendations of previous missions.’ It suggested that procedures be introduced without delay to gather information directly from U. A.E. sources on oil and oil-related international transactions; and that enterprise surveys be used to measure services transactions and direct investment flows. 3. The 1995 action plan Real Sector. The 1993 multisector statistical mission had recommended the establishment of direct surveys to create new information sources, and an intensification of the use of existing data sources in other areas. Highest priority was accorded to measuring final consumption by households; production of the non-financial private sector, including manufacturing, the free trade zone, and construction activities; constant price data on construction; and production prices. U. A.E. : Report on the Balance of Paymenis Statistics Mission, December 1995. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 40 - APPENDIX II In the short run, it was expected that the authorities would use the existing ofiicial records to enhance the data reporting and establish new data collection systems. In the long run, however, the action plan envisaged conducting regular surveys for manufacturing, wholesale and retail trade, land transportation, and construction; developing a plan for undertaking a household expenditure survey immediately after the preliminary results of the 1995 census were available (end of 1996); and compiling short-term indicators. With regard to government finance, the 1993 mission had proposed that the Ministry of Finance and Industry establish a new database based on the methodology of the Fund’s Manual of Government Finance Statistics. In the short run, the new database would cover the operations of the federal government, and those of Abu Dhabi, Dubai, md Sharjah, as well as the Dubai municipality. In the long run, coverage would be expanded to include the operetions of the other emirates, as well as of extra-budgetary accounts and of municipalities‘ accounts at the emirate level. For the balance of payments, the action plan underscored the urgent need to establish a systematic approach to compiling data on a regular and consistent basis. Other recommendations fiom previous STA technical assistance missions also were to be implemented without delay. The 1993 mission had suggested specific short-run improvements in the current BOP classifications and estimates. For instance, separate current account entries were to be shown for transportation, travel, government services, investment income, and workers’ remittances. In the financial account, separate entries were to be shown for direct investment abroad, for changes in foreign assets and liabilities of commercial banks, and for short-term liabilities of the central bank. The recommendation about commercial bank positions has been implemented, but in net form only. 4. Monetary statistics There are no urgent issues in the U.A.E.’s monetary statistics; definitions and residence criteria are appropriate. However, there are gaps in coveragdpublication about foreign currency claims on residents and loans made to individuals. 5. Interministerial Statistical Committee The 2000 consultation mission learned this committee is being reactivated, which had been a recommendation of previous missions. The Committee’s mandate and program of activities remains to be clarified. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-41 - APPENDIX III Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public