DOCUMENT OF MONETARY FUND AND FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY SM/O3/32 January 27,2003 To: Members of the Executive Board From: The Secretary Subject: Syrian Arab Republic-Staff Report for the 2002 Article IV Consultation Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staff report for the 2002 Article IV consultation with the Syrian Arab Republic, which is tentatively scheduled for discussion on Monday, February 24,2003. At the time of circulation of this paper to the Board, the Secretary’s Department has not received a communication from the authorities of the Syrian Arab Republic indicating whether or not they consent to the Fund’s publication of this paper; such communication may be received after the authorities have had an opportunity to read the paper. Questions may be referred to Ms. Eken (ext. 36511) and Mr. Elhage (ext. 36370) in MED. Unless the Documents Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the Arab Monetary Fund and the Islamic Development Bank, following its consideration by the Executive Board. Att: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicINTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND SYRIAN ARAE REPUBLIC Staff Report for the 2002 Article IV Consultation Prepared by Staff Representatives for the 2002 Article IV Consultation with the Syrian Arab Republic Approved by George T. Abed and Shigeo Kashiwagi January 24,2003 . The 2002 Article IV consultation with Syria took place in Damascus during October 19- November 3,2002. The mission consisted of Ms. Eken (head), Messrs. Elhage, Dridi, Megarbane (all MED), Brown (PDR), and Ms. Otker-Robe (MAE). Mr. Abed had discussions with the authorities on October 23. Mr. Shaalan also attended the meetings on October 23 and Mr. Bakhache, Advisor, from Mr. Shaalan’s office attended the policy discussions. The mission met with Ministers Al-Atrash (Finance), El-Rifai (Economy and Foreign Trade), Al- Zaim (Industry), Al-Jabi (Social Affairs and Labor), Central Bank of Syria Governor Kabbarah, as well as with other senior government officials. In preparation for the Article IV consultation discussions, a staff team also held discussions with the authorities in Damascus during August 22-28. l In concluding the 2001 Article IV consultation on December 3,2001, Executive Directors noted that more comprehensive reforms were needed to bring Syria back on the high growth track of the 1990s and unleash the economy’s vast potential. Directors were of the view that, without new measures, the large wage increases since 2000 would reverse the recent progress made toward fiscal consolidation. They urged the Syrian authorities to implement a comprehensive reform package of mutually reinforcing measures that would encourage private investment and exports, reduce projected fiscal deficits, and, ultimately, restore the economy to a rapid growth path. Directors also noted the pervasive weaknesses in the Syrian data system, and urged the authorities to give high priority to this issue. l Syria continues to avail itself of the transitional arrangements of Article XIV and maintains restrictions on payments and transfers for current transactions. Syria also continues to maintain exchange restrictions subject to Fund approval under Article VIII. Syria has incurred external payments arrears on official debt and maintains bilateral payments arrangements with Fund members. l Limited progress in improving Syria’s statistical base has been made. However, significant weaknesses remain in terms of coverage, consistency, periodicity, and timeliness, all of which have hampered the staffs ability to conduct economic analysis and effective surveillance. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2- Content Page I. Background . . . .4 II. Recent Economic Developments and Policies ................................................................... .6 A. Economic Performance in 2001 ............................................................................. 6 B. Economic Performance in 2002 ........................................................................... 11 III, Policy Discussions ......................................................................................................... 11 A. Macroeconomic Policy Issues. ............................................................................. 12 B. Structural Policies ............................................................................................... 14 IV. Medium-Term Outlook and External Vulnerability _. _. .20 V. Staff Appraisal.. _, _, _, _. _. _. ,21 Text Boxes 1. Distortions in the Economy ....................................................................................... .5 2. Monetary Impact of the Fiscal Stance., ...................................................................... .7 3. Interaction Between the Multiple Exchange Rates and Trade System ....................... 10 Figures 1. Real Sector Indicators, 1994-2002 ......................................................................... .3 1 2. Public Finance, 1996-2002 ..................................................................................... .32 3. Monetary Sector Indicators, 1994-2002 ................................................................. .33 4. External Sector Indicators, 1994-2002 .................................................................... 34 5. Exchange Rate Developments ................................................................................. .3 5 Tables 1. Selected Economic Indicators, 1996-2003 .............................................................. .25 2. Summary of Fiscal Operations, 1996-2002 ............................................................. .26 3. Monetary Survey, 1996-2002 .................................................................................. 27 4. Balance of Payments, 1996-2002 ............................................................................ .28 5. Summary of the Exchange Rate System ................................................................... 29 6. Macroeconomic Framework, 1996-2007 ................................................................. 30 Appendices I. Fund Relations ......................................................................................................... 36 II. Relations with the World Bank Group ...................................................................... 39 III. Statistical Issues ...................................................................................................... ,4 1 IV. Social and Demographic Indicators .......................................................................... 46 V. Policy Measures and Main Points of the Decrees Issues in 2001 ............................... 47 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3- EXECUTIVE SKY Developments and prospects. The Syrian economy has performed well during the past two years. In 2001, real GDP growth was strong mainly fueled by an increase in oil production and continued expansion of the agricultural and service sectors. Reflecting abundant foodstuffs inflation remained low. While the overall fiscal position of the central government remained near balance, the non-oil fiscal deficit weakened further. The balance of payments remained strong; official reserves were built up further; and the free-market exchange rate remained stable. Reflecting the build-up in net foreign assets broad money growth accelerated. With high real interest rates, money demand continued to increase but private investment continued to decline. Structural reforms were mainly related to trade liberalization, In 2002, reflecting a slight decline in oil production, real GDP growth is estimated to have decelerated to about 3 .O percent. The overall fiscal deficit is estimated to have widened slightly with inflation remaining low. The external current account is estimated to have remained in surplus and gross official reserves to have increased further. Over the medium term, reflecting the limited potential in oil and agricultural activities, growth is expected to remain in the 3 .O-3.5 percent range. Such growth rates will not be sufficient to absorb the labor force growing at an average of 4.0-4.5 percent per year. Also, in view of the projected decline in international oil prices and in the absence of a revenue-enhancing measures and expenditure restraint, the overall fiscal deficit is expected to come under pressure and the external current account balance to weaken over the medium term. Views of the authorities. The authorities agree that significant measures are needed to stimulate private sector investment and exports and contain the projected rise in fiscal deficits over the medium term. To this end, they have put together a framework for an economic reform program for 2002-04 with a view to modernizing the economy and promoting private initiatives. Staff Appraisal. The key challenge for the Syrian authorities is to achieve sustainable high rates of economic growth to generate employment opportunities for the rapidly growing labor force. To these ends, macroeconomic policies would need to be more supportive of private sector led economic growth. In this context, there is a need to gradually reduce non-oil fiscal deficits and interest rates, while closely monitoring developments in light of the excessive increase in money supply during 2000-01 which might have resulted in monetary overhang. There is also a need to accelerate structural reforms to enhance the economy’s growth potential and private activity. In this context, the staff recommended that fiscal reforms receive priority, the step-by-step approach to unification of exchange rate be accelerated in coordination with the liberalization of the trade system, the financial sector be developed, and the financial position and efficiency of public enterprises be improved. Greater efforts to address data deficiencies and to improve the timeliness and quality of data for surveillance between consultations are required. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4- 1. BACKGROUND 1. After two-decades of protectionist and inward-oriented policies, the Syrian authorities initiated a reform program in the late 1980s to strengthen the incentive system, promote private sector activity, and liberalize the economy. The reform policies, together with a high level of oil output, elicited a strong supply response, evidenced by a high rate of economic growth during 1991-95 (annual real GDP growth averaged 7.5 percent), a significant increase in private sector exports and imports, and sharp gains in agricultural production. Also, the private sector made substantial inroads in many economic activities previously dominated by the public sector. 2. In the second half of the 1990s the growth rate decelerated, non-oil exports stagnated, and foreign direct investment declined (Table 1 and Figure 1). Real GDP growth averaged 3 .O percent per year in 1996-2000, a disappointing figure relative to the rapid growth in the labor force (4.0-4.5 percent per year) and the earlier performance. The slowdown can be ascribed to a variety of reasons: (a) the agricultural sector was affected by recurring droughts; (b) oil output leveled OR, and (c) private investment performance, which had responded strongly to earlier reforms, relapsed as the reforms ebbed. More generally, the slowing growth reflected the absence of a well-articulated growth-oriented reform strategy to address the widespread structural weaknesses and distortions in the economy (Box 1). 3. Against these developments, Fund surveillance in recent years has focused on policies to bring Syria back on the high growth path of the early 1990s and to prevent fiscal imbalances from becoming a serious problem over the medium term as well as on improving the economic data base. ’ During consultations, staff urged the authorities to adopt comprehensive reforms that would remove the major impediments to private investment and exports, most notably by simplifying the trade and exchange systems and eliminating price distortions. The authorities implemented several measures in these areas starting in 2000’ in the context of a continued gradual and piecemeal approach. However, more recently, in line with President Al-Assad’s initiatives, reform efforts picked up momentum and the authorities put together a more comprehensive framework for economic reforms to address the remaining distortions in the economy and promote growth (discussed below). On fiscal policy, recent consultations recommended strengthening the budget by broadening the tax base and prioritizing expenditures. Measures in these areas have recently been initiated and are also included in the economic reform program. Data quality has been a recurring theme in recent consultations. While progress has been made, there is still some way to go. ’ Syria’s relations with the Fund and the World Bank are summarized in Appendices I and II, respectively. Statistical issues are discussed in Appendix III and social and demographic indicators are shown in Appendix IV ’ The measures implemented in 2000 are listed in SM/OO/187. For a list of the reform measures implemented during 200 142, see Appendix V. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-5- Box 1. Syrian Arab Republic: Distortions in the Economy Despite the substantial progress that has been made during the 1990s in opening up the economy and promoting private sector growth, the economy is still characterized by a cumbersome regulatory system, continuing state controls, price distortions, and a complicated trade and exchange system which make it difficult for Syria to compete with other developing countries that have adopted more market and outward- oriented development strategies. The main distortions in the Syrian economy are: 1. Price distortions The government issues price guidelines administered by the ministry of industry and supply for major goods and services, whether imported or domestically produced by the public or private sector. The pricing of basic commodities such as strategic crops and certain medicines is determined by high-level ministerial committees. On the output side, production of key crops (wheat, cotton) has been promoted by support prices well above international price. For instance, in 2000, cotton and wheat support prices were 124 percent and 210 percent above international prices, respectively. On the input side, there are a considerable amount of subsidies. Electricity, water, and diesel prices are significantly below international prices. There are also indirect subsidies through credits provided at favorable interest rates. Consumer subsidies (bread, sugar, rice), in the range of 3-4 percent of GDP annually, are being absorbed by the Price Stabilization Fund. Interest rates are set administratively. Nominal interest rates have remained unchanged since 1981. 2. Exchange and trade system I The foreign exchange market is segmented into one for public sector transactions and one for the private sector. There are four ofticial exchange rates and two unofficial rates (see Box 3 for details). According to IMF Trade Restrictiveness Index, Syria is ranked 10, which represents the most restrictive trade regime. Imports are regulated through various positive lists and a licensing requirement. There are three import lists: (i) a “negative list” encompassing prohibited imports because of security, health, and religious reasons, but also to protect domestic industry (finished clothing, shoes, and various electric appliances); (ii) “the restricted list” comprising products whose import remains monopoly of the public sector, and; (iii) “permitted list”, including goods whose import by the private sector is allowed subject to restrictions on methods of financing. These imports are divided into three categories according to three different methods of financing. Import tariffs range up to 200 percent. For some goods, tariff rates are higher on intermediate than on final goods. Widely different rates are applied for similar goods. Exporters are required to surrender 10 percent of the proceeds from nonagricultural exports to the Commercial Bank of Syria (CboS). 3. Fiscal policy On the revenue side, a wide range of taxes are imposed at specific rates, Income tax revenue is adversely affected by widespread exemptions. Profit tax rates reach 60 percent, The transparency of the financial position of the public sector is hampered by the presence of public sector operations outside the budget, These include the operations of the Price Stabilization Fund and the Public Debt Fund. 4. Monetary policy/banking system Monetary policy is conducted through an annual credit plan formulated by a ministerial committee. The plan has generally accommodated the financing requirements of the government and the public enterprises. The banking system is entirely in the hands of the public sector and is underdeveloped. There is only one commercial bank in Syria which has a monopoly on dealing with foreign exchange. 5. Public enterprises Public enterprises have a monopoly power over the following areas: (i) the marketing of cereals, and the marketing and processing of cotton; (ii) oil and natural gas production and marketing, (iii) utilities, water, and electricity; (iv) education, railroads, air transportation, communications; and (v) in the manufacturing sector what is considered to be a “strategic” industries, such as cement, fertilizers, basic food, alcohol, tobacco, pharmaceuticals, and ceramics. 6. Labor market Labor laws and regulations limit employers’ options to lay off workers for economic reasons and create rigidities that inhibit the efficient functioning of the labor market. Regulation of working conditions goes so far to define separate minimum wages for each occupational category in both the private and public sectors. Public sector wages are low by international standards; the average monthly civil service wage is about USSlOO. While wages in the formal sector are low, nonwage benefits are substantial and represent a large proportion of workers compensation. The regulatory framework in Syria is costly to administer from the government’s perspective, it imposes additional costs on employers, and raises the unit labor cost. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-6- 11. RECENT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS AND POLICIES A. Economic Performance in 2001 4. In 2001, real GDP growth picked up while inflation remained subdued. Real GDP grew by 7.2 percent3 (Table 1). About half of this growth was driven by the increase in oil production (associated with the condensation program, technological improvements, and the restructuring of the management of oil companies) and the remainder reflected the continued expansion of the agricultural and services sectors. Meanwhile, value added in the manufacturing sector continued to decline mainly due to an aging infrastructure and increased competition from imports resulting from trade liberalization, Inflation as measured by the consumer price index (CPI) amounted to 0.5 percent. The low inflation level reflected mainly abundant foodstuffs, stability in the free market exchange rate, and increased competition resulting from some liberalization of private imports. However, given that prices for about 20 percent of the CPI basket (bread and utilities) are still controlled, the official price developments recorded by the CPI may tend to understate the actual inflation rate. 5. The overall fiscal position of the central government, excluding the Price Stabilization Fund (PSF), remained near balance; 4 but the non-oil fiscal deficit widened by 1.7 percentage points to 16.2 percent of GDP. The increase in oil production more than compensated for the decline in export oil price, resulting in an increase in oil-related revenue (Table 2 and Figure 2). However, this was offset by an increase in development expenditures, higher transfers from the budget to the PSF, and a decline in non-oil tax revenue.’ The monetization of oil revenues in 2000-01 generated a monetary impulse equivalent to 12 percent of end-1999 broad money stock.6 6. Broad money growth accelerated to 23.5 percent in 2001 (Table 3 and Figure 3). This expansion was driven by a build-up of net foreign assets, the equivalent of about 21 percent of the initial money stock (Box 2). Net credit to the government increased while 3 This estimate is still preliminary and is based on the 200 1 oil production figures received from the ministry of petroleum, according to which oil production reached 620,000 barrels on account of a daily increase in oil production of 77,000 barrels as a result of higher recovery rates (44,000 barrels per day) from existing fields and condensation program (33,000 barrels per day). The authorities’ current GDP growth estimate of 3.4 percent for 200 1 assumed a slight decline in oil production between 2000 and 200 1, and does not take into account the latest oil production figures. 4 Including the Price Stabilization Fund, the fiscal position improved by 0.5 percent of GDP 5 PSF subsidies cover mainly wheat (flour) and other smaller subsidies, which apply to sugar and rice. For a detailed description of the PSF, see box in SM/OO/187. 6 For more details of recent monetary developments, policy recommendations for the short run, and steps to improve the functioning of monetary policy in Syria, see “Monetary Conditions in Syria” in the forthcoming Selected Issues and Statistical Appendix. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-7- Box 2. Syrian Arab Republic: Monetary Impact of the Fiscal Stance The traditional monetary survey equation explains changes in broad money in terms of changes in credit to governmenl (ACG), changes in net foreign assets (ANFA) and other items net including changes in credit to economic sectors (AOIN): AM2, = ACG, + ANFA, + AOIN, (1) The traditional approach would consider that fiscal policy was neutral from a monetary perspective over the last several years since the overall budget remained near balance. However, this description gives a distorted picture of the monetary impulse associated with fiscal policy, in particular the role of the non-oil fiscal balance. Rewriting the traditional equation results in an alternative presentation whereby the monetary expansion corresponds to the part of the impulse imparted by the non-oil deficit (NOD) that has not yet leaked through the balance of payments (GNO and PNO representing the non-oil balance of the external operations of the public and private sectors):’ AM2, = NOD, - GNO, - PNO, + AOIN, (2) In Syria, the monetary stimulus imparted by the widening of the non-oil deficit during 200041 spilled over partly into higher imports by the private sector. However, these leakages were offset by private capital inflows attracted by the high real interest rates and, as a result, the private sector foreign exchange pool, which is isolated from the public sector pool, balanced out with a stable exchange rate. In short, while the rapid growth of money supply reflected the build-up in foreign reserves mainly as a result of higher oil revenue and unrecorded private sector transactions (Equation 1, Figure l), the driving forces behind the monetary creation were the non-oil fiscal balance (Equation 2, Figure 2) and high real interest rates Figure 1. Sources of Money Growth Change in percent ofbeginning period money stock Broad., ,, :. Net ‘+=w.J ._ _. _. _. Figure 2. Fiscal Balances and Money Growth In percent 25. 20. l5- lo- 5. ’ The change in credit to government is determined by the non-oil deficit (NOD), oil revenues (OR) and external financing (EUR): ACG, = NOD, - OR, - EUR, Similarly, the change in NFA is the outturn of oil revenues (OR), external borrowing (EUR), public sector non-oil external operations (GNO), and private sector non-oil external operations (PNO): ANFAt = OR, + EUR, - GNO, - PNO, It is assumed for simplicity that all oil revenues are channeled directly to the budget. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-8- credit to the public enterprises and private sectors remained flat. On the liability side, the increase in money supply was reflected in an increase in time and savings deposits as demand for these savings instruments continued to increase due to high real interest rates. Nominal interest rates are between 4 percent and 8 percent for savings and term deposits and 9- 13 percent for nonagricultural loans to the private sector. Reflecting the increase in money demand, velocity of money and quasi-money declined further. Although there is some evidence of monetary overhang,7 it is difficult to quantify precisely to what extent the increase in money demand is temporary in nature and to what extent the increase reflects a structural shift of money demand. 7. The external sector remained strong in 2001 due primarily to a further increase in oil export volumes (Table 4 and Figure 4). Oil export volume is estimated to have increased by 26.7 percent including the estimated increase in condensate exports from gas recovery. * The increased demand from the fiscal stimulus and the trade liberalization led to a surge in imports by 15 percent offsetting the increase in oil exports. However, with an increase in non-oil exports and improvement in the service balance, the current account surplus increased slightly to 5.9 percent of GDP. Moreover, with a further increase in errors and omissions, the overall balance of payments registered a surplus and the foreign exchange reserves of the central bank increased to $3.5 billion (6.9 months of merchandise imports) by end-2001 .9 Including those at the state-owned Commercial Bank of Syria (CboS), foreign exchange reserves amounted to $7.8 billion. The likely sources for the errors and omissions are unrecorded goods exports due to the relatively open border with Lebanon; underestimated workers remittances;” and unrecorded private sector capital inflows.” An increase in private capital inflows in 2001 would be consistent with the large increase in time and savings deposits of the private sector in Syrian banks in response to high real interest rates and the widened interest rate differential with U.S. dollar deposits. ’ The monetary overhang is estimated at about 10-l 2 percent of broad money stock. For details, see “Monetary Conditions in Syria,” Appendix I to Selected Issues and Statistical Appendix (forthcoming). * Syria’s oil exports in U.S. dollars are higher than could be derived from the supplied volume and price data. ’ There is a large discrepancy between reserve flows reported in the balance of payments (BoP) and reserves flows implied by the monetary survey (MS). Given the reliability of the monetary survey, reserve accumulation in the BoP was re-estimated using MS data. As a result, errors and omissions are much higher than previously estimated (see Appendix III). lo The Central Bank of Lebanon estimated remittance outllows from Syrian workers in Lebanon at around $2.0 billion in 2001. The Central Bank of Syria’s estimate is $500 million. l1 Residents and non-residents are allowed to open bank accounts with CboS in foreign exchange using transfers or checks originated abroad. There are no restrictions on retransfer of these deposits abroad. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-9- 8. The exchange rate system has remained complex, with a foreign exchange market segmented into public and private sector pools with multiple exchange rates (Box 3 and Table 5). The private sector has almost no access to the official pool and conducts its transactions in the unofficial foreign exchange markets located in Syria as well as offshore. The complex exchange rate structure (with four official rates pegged to the U.S. dollar and two unofficial rates determined by supply and demand) and segmentation of the markets are supported by a restrictive exchange control regime, ‘* a complex trade system with several positive import lists with different financing requirements, as well as high real interest rates that attract capital inflows. 9. The nominal free market exchange rate for the Syrian pound remained relatively stable at about LS 50-52 per U.S. dollar during 2001 and in most of 2002 (against the official rate of LS 46.5 per $1). This rate came under pressure in mid-2002, and depreciated to about LS/$ 55-58 in early October, mainly reflecting political uncertainties in the region. Subsequently, the pressures eased and the free market rate appreciated back to about LS/$ 52 as of end-October, reflecting partly the indirect intervention by the authorities in the foreign exchange market. l3 The nominal effective exchange rate appreciated by 7.6 percent in 2001 due to the depreciation of trading partner currencies against the U.S. dollar (Table 1). However, with low inflation in Syria, the real effective exchange rate (REER) appreciated by only 2 percent in 2001 (Figure 5). 12Syria continues to maintain, under Article XIV, restrictions on payments and transfers for current international transactions, including administrative allocation of foreign exchange. Syria also maintains exchange measures that are subject to Fund approval under Article VIII: (i) prohibition against purchases by private parties of foreign exchange from the banking system for most current international transactions; (ii) multiple currency practices resulting from divergences between the official exchange rate and the rates applicable to debt service payments under bilateral payments agreement, and to transactions in the export proceeds market; and (iii) a 100 percent advance import deposit requirement for public sector imports, In addition, Syria is a net debtor under inoperative bilateral payments arrangements with the Islamic Republic of Iran, the Russian Federation, and Sri Lanka, each of which gives rise to an exchange restriction subject to Fund approval. l3 With no formal intervention mechanism in the foreign exchange market, the operations of the CboS and the foreign exchange regulations have been the key instruments to affect the unofficial market rates. Since January 200 1, the CboS had been buying and selling foreign exchange at market-related rates. The recent measures to increase the CboS’s foreign exchange sales at the noncommercial rate for a specified list of noncommercial transactions reportedly helped to channel some of the foreign exchange demand away from the free market to the official market and helped reduce the spread between the oflicial and unofficial rates. The reduction in the surrender requirement for nonagricultural exporters (from 25 percent to 10 percent) also freed up foreign exchange that could be sold in the export proceeds market, causing the export proceeds market rate to appreciate and helping to reduce its gap with the official rates. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-lO- Box 3. Syrian Arab Republic: Interaction Between the Multiple Exchange Rates and Trade System The exchange system in Syria is characterized by multiple exchange rates and a foreign exchange market segmented into public and private sector pools. There is no formal domestic foreign exchange market where market participants exchange foreign currencies for authorized transactions. Instead, public and private sectors conduct their respective transactions with foreign exchange sourced from two separate foreign exchange pools. The private sector has almost no access to the official pool, (sourced by public sector foreign exchange revenues channeled through the CboS as well as surrendered foreign exchange receipts from private exports), and conducts its transactions in two unofficial markets-the export proceeds market and the free market located in Syria and offshore. In the former market, exporters sell retained export receipts to importers of a specific list of imports. Most private sector transactions take place in the free market, sourced by foreign exchange from tourism receipts, workers’ remittances, proceeds from “suitcase” exports, and private capital inflows. Under the multiple rate structure, there are four official rates, pegged to the U.S. dollar, and two unofficial rates, determined by supply and demand conditions in the respective markets. The multiple rate system and the segmented foreign exchange market are supported by a restrictive and complex exchange and trade regime (see below). Dealing in foreign exchange for unofficial purposes is prohibited, subject to a three-year prison sentence for violation. The inability of private importers to finance imports by purchasing or borrowing foreign exchange from domestic banks (except for the recent offering of a limited foreign exchange facility for industrialists through the CboS) support the segmentation of the public and private pools and push most private foreign exchange transactions to the unofftcial markets. The existence of several positive import lists with different financing requirements also help segment the unofficial foreign exchange markets, and intluence the potential demand for foreign exchange in these markets. official rates Exchange Rate Trade regime Negative import lit (no imports) Financing -Legally designated official rate (LS/$ 11.20/l 1.25) (0.0% of current account payments) Budget accounting rate (LS/$46 45146 50) (13.5%ofcurrentaccountpayments) Permitted import list -Non-commercial rate (trade) (LS/$ 51.7OE.2.05) (0.1% of current account payments) . . . . . . . . b Raw material imports for ~-export by miustrialists . . Export proceeds market rate unoff1clal rates i (currently about LSB 53.50) Imports m the export (12 8% of current account payments) . . . . . . .eL?Ze.ds!??L . . . . . . . . i- Free market rate (clmently about LS/$52.50) (50.9% of current account payments) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . b All other private imports . . . . . . . . . . . . . Free market Pnvate pm1 * L/C from ctxls w/ 100% advance deposit requirement ‘Other (offshore credit lines, FX deposits of nmesldents suitcase export proceeds, etc) A, Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- ll- 10. Syria’s offkially acknowledged external debt at end-2001 was $3.7 billion (equivalent to 17.9 percent of GDP),14 about $200 million lower than that in 2000, of which 73 percent is owed to official creditors. Syria continues to pursue a strategy of reducing its external arrears bilaterally, as it has successfully done so with most European countriesi B. Economic Performance in 2002 11. Real GDP growth in 2002 is estimated to have been about 2.7 percent, driven mainly by continued growth in agriculture and services, and an increase in public investment. Consumer prices are estimated to have remained low (about 1.5 percent) aided by the good agricultural crops and food production. In the balance of payments, the increase in oil exports was not sufficient to offset the expected increase in imports and the decline in tourism receipts. As a result, the current account surplus is expected to have declined slightly to 4.5 percent of GDP. Nevertheless, with the continued unrecorded inflows, gross official reserves are expected to have increased further, reaching $4.2 billion (about 8.0 months of imports) by end-2002. 12. The overall fiscal deficit is estimated to have widened to 2.1 percent of GDP (excluding the PSF deficit of 1.0 percent of GDP), due entirely to a drop in oil related revenues. As a percent of GDP, current expenditures are expected to have remained at the same level as in 2001, with the increase in the civilian wage bill offset by the curtailment in the defense and security wage bill. Development expenditures are estimated at about 12.5 percent of GDP, as in 2001, reflecting the government’s strategy of using public investment as one of the engines of economic growth and employment. No net domestic bank financing for the budget was envisaged. Nevertheless, broad money is estimated to have continued to increase rapidly, driven by the buildup in net foreign assets. Meanwhile, with no change in nominal interest rates and continued high real rates, money demand is expected to have remained strong. III. POLICY DISCUSSIONS 13. The main challenge facing the Syrian authorities is to achieve high and sustainable growth to improve living standards and create employment opportunities for the rapidly growing labor force while maintaining financial stability. To these ends, discussions focused on reform measures to address structural weaknesses in the Syrian l4 Officially acknowledged debt excludes ruble debt to the Russian Federation (RF) and late interest obligations on debt to Paris Club creditors. Debt due to the RF (including arrears) at end- 1996 was Rub 7,173 million, $188.2 million, and &76 million. l5 In 2002, Syria settled its overdue service payments to IBRD and IDA. Consequently, all World Bank loans and credits to Syria were restored to accrual status and the country’s eligibility for disbursements was reinstated as of July 1,2002. Staff has no other data on external arrears. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12- economy and on appropriate macroeconomic policies that would promote private sector-led economic development and enhance the effectiveness of structural reforms. 14. The discussions were held in the context of the authorities’ framework for an economic reform program for the period 2002-04, approved by the cabinet in June 2002. This program acknowledges the need for significant changes in Syria’s economic structure and its relations vis-a-vis the rest of the world to modernize the economy and promote private initiatives, It has been made public for debate with a view to building consensus, with specific measures in various sectors16 to be formulated by the concerned ministries. 15. The measures identified in the authorities’ reform agenda contain many of the recommendations that have been made by the staff during previous consultations. The key measures identified in the reform program include: the unification of the exchange rate system, the liberalization of the trade system, the use of interest rates as a monetary policy instrument, improvements in the tax system, including through adoption of a general sales tax or VAT, better targeting subsidies to the needy, reforming the civil service, and liberalizing prices. Reform of the public enterprises is also envisaged, but without their privatization. 16. The staff commended the authorities for the proposed reform program. Its implementation will create a friendlier environment for private activity, encourage higher investment, and improve the efficiency of the Syrian economy. However, given the comprehensiveness of the reform program, the staff stressed the importance of proper planning, coordination and sequencing of policies for the success of the reform efforts. In addition, the staff underscored the need to accelerate the reform agenda in the context of a comprehensive macroeconomic framework with a supportive macroeconomic policy mix. A. Macroeconomic Policy Issues 17. In light of the recent macroeconomic developments, there is a need to gradually reverse the policy mix of high real interest rates and increasing fiscal stimulus. This policy mix appears not to be conducive to growth as high real interest rates have likely contributed to discourage private investment and consumption growth, and have attracted large unrecorded balance of payments inflows causing high money growth and increasing Syria’s vulnerability to a reversal of such flows. At the same time, the deterioration of the non-oil fiscal position and the heavy reliance on oil revenues has increased the budget’s vulnerability to oil price fluctuations, while much of the fiscal stimulus leaked out through a surge in private sector imports. In this context, discussions focused on the need to move to a l6 The framework covers reforms in the following sectors of the economy: administration, financial and banking, fiscal, trade, industrial, education system, agriculture and irrigation, energy, construction, transportation, tourism, and labor market. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13 - fiscal consolidation over the medium term, reduce gradually interest rates, and preserve the stability of the exchange rate. 18. At the time of the consultation discussions, the 2003 budget had not been finalized. However, the authorities indicated that, in order to stimulate non-oil growth, they intend to pursue a more expansionary fiscal policy in 2003, driven by an increase in development expenditures. In their view, experience in Syria has shown that private sector activities depend to a large extent on public sector expansion. Accordingly, and taking into account the implementation rate of budgeted development expenditures in the past few years, l7 the staff projected an increase in the budget deficit to 4.2 percent of GDP (including PSF deficit). The authorities agreed with the staffs projection and indicated that, as in previous years, the fiscal outcome will be better than envisaged in the budget. In the staffs view, such a deficit should not exert pressure on the macroeconomic stability in 2003. However, the staff stressed that expansionary fiscal policies cannot be a substitute for comprehensive structural reforms needed to provide a lasting solution to Syria’s growth problem, and cannot be sustained over the medium term. 19. In view of the projected oil revenues, the fiscal position is expected to come under pressure in the medium-term (Table 6). In the absence of significant additional measures, the staff is concerned that the overall fiscal deficits (including the PSF deficit) may increase to about 6-7 percent of GDP over the medium-term. In staffs view, it would be difficult to finance deficits of such magnitudes from the domestic banking system without exerting pressures on domestic prices and the exchange rate. Staffs projections suggest that non-oil deficits of around 13 percent of GDP and overall fiscal deficits (including PSF) of below 3 percent of GDP on average during 2003-07 would be consistent with a stable macroeconomic environment while allowing a modest credit growth to the economic sectors. Meeting such non-oil fiscal deficit targets would imply a consolidation effort of about 2- 3 percent of GDP compared to the baseline medium-term projections, The authorities agree on the need for fiscal consolidation over the medium term. They also recognize that the heavy dependence on oil revenues makes the budget highly vulnerable. However, they are of the view that, since total budgetary expenditures are not unrelated to oil revenues, assessments of the fiscal position should be in the context of the overall fiscal deficit and not focus on the non-oil fiscal deficit. 20. There is a need to reduce interest rates to promote growth. The staff and the authorities agree that overall macroeconomic conditions seem appropriate for a gradual reduction in interest rates while closely monitoring developments, especially in light of the possible monetary overhang. However, reductions in interest rates should be accompanied by structural measures (discussed below), including the introduction of interest rate flexibility and development of indirect monetary policy instruments. l7 Development expenditures averaged about 75 percent of the budgeted amounts during 1998-2002. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14- 21. In the period ahead, economic reforms would most benefit from a stable free exchange rate. This would provide some anchor to inflation and expectations while monetary instruments are developed. In the short term, given the absence of effective monetary policy instruments, fiscal policy will remain the most important determinant of money supply and exchange rate developments. In this connection, credit policies have to be developed within a macroeconomic framework. The current very high level of reserves would allow the authorities to deal effectively with temporary shocks through foreign exchange intervention in the free market. 22. Limited data and relatively complex and protective exchange and trade regimes make a definitive assessment of competitiveness difficult. ‘* However, there is not clear evidence that the current free market exchange rate is misaligned. Although non-oil export growth has been slow, an important factor behind this is the continued existence of significant structural impediments to investment (for example, limited banking services, trade restrictions on intermediate goods, and a complex regulatory environment). Removing these impediments and securing wider market access for Syrian exports are necessary, and may also be sufficient, for higher rates of non-oil export growth. If non-oil exports do not respond to such measures, the competitiveness of the exchange rate would have to be reassessed. Indeed, as structural reforms move forward and the economy opens up further, it will be important to continue to closely monitor exchange rate and external sector developments. B. Structural Policies Fiscal and pricing policy 23. As noted earlier, fiscal policy is expected to come under pressure in the medium term and the heavy dependence on oil revenues makes the budget vulnerable to oil price fluctuations. In this context, the authorities share the staffs view that it is important to strengthen the non-oil position of the budget with measures aimed at reforming the tax system and enhancing the efficiency of expenditures. The authorities and staff agree that tax system needs to be streamlined and made more efficient. In particular, the staff recommended a speedy: (a) advancement of the introduction of a value-added tax (VAT); and (b) implementation of the new income tax law, which reduces exemptions and tax rates. The staff also recommended that the authorities initiate the reform of civil service and undertake a comprehensive review of public sector investment program with a view to streamlining them. 24. In the short run, the authorities could consider a number of measures to contain the widening of the non-oil fiscal deficit. These measures could include reducing gradually l8 Syria’s real exchange rate has remained roughly constant since 1997 vis-Lvis global competitors. For a further discussion of external competitiveness, see “Assessment of the Equilibrium Exchange Rate” in the forthcoming Selected Issues and Statistical Appendix. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 15- subsidies on some petroleum productslg and the budgetary burden (3.2 percent of GDP, in 2001) of food subsidies through price adjustments. As a first step, the small subsidies on sugar and rice (0.3 percent of GDP) could be eliminated by fully liberalizing their prices, and the generalized subsidy on bread could be replaced by targeted subsidy programs. Concurrently, there is a need to strengthen the social safety net to protect the vulnerable groups of the population against adverse impact of the above measures. Exchange and trade systems 25. The authorities are committed to unifying the exchange rate system as part of the comprehensive reform program adopted in June 2002. To this end, they have recently implemented measures to simplify and liberalize the exchange rate system and move it towards a more unified system. The measures included: (a) the unification of the different customs valuation exchange rates at the official rate; (b) the extension of the period for repatriation of export revenues and the reduction in the surrender requirement for non-agricultural exports from 25 percent to 10 percent; and (c) the introduction of a new official rate (noncommercial rate) for limited public and private sector noncommercial transactions, tying its rate to movements in the free market and broadening its coverage to some private commercial transactions. These measures have contributed to the deepening of the foreign exchange market and narrowed the spreads among various exchange rates (see Box 3 and Figure 5). The measures were taken in the context of a step-by-step approach to unification that is favored by the authorities. 26. The staff concurred with the authorities’ step-by-step approach, but recommended that they accelerate it toward full unification. This approach seems more appropriate given the complex interrelationship between the exchange and trade systems and the need to take a number of important trade measures in tandem with the unification efforts, as well as the lack of well-developed financial markets in Syria.2o A step-by-step approach seems to have worked well to date without imposing a major disruption to the system. Such an approach would also give the authorities the opportunity to assess the impact of each step so as to avoid undue pressure in the foreign exchange market that could undermine the confidence in the currency and disrupt capital inflows, thereby risking a reversal of unification efforts. Moreover, this approach would allow to keep the free market as a gauge of macroeconomic and structural policies until full unification can be implemented. lg The Syrian Petroleum Distribution and Storage Company is still making profits from the sale of petroleum products domestically. However, the revenue surcharge transferred to the budget has declined from 5.7 percent of GDP in 1995 to reach 0.2 percent of GDP in 200 1. While the domestic price of gasoline is more than double the international price, gas oil and fuel oil prices are 69 percent and 18 percent of their international prices, respectively. ” See “Exchange Rate System in Syria,” Box 3 and Figure 4 in the forthcoming Selected Issues and Statistical Appendix. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 16- 27. Along the lines of the above-described approach, the following main steps were identified: (a) unify fully two of the three relevant official rates (i.e., budget accounting and the commercial rates)21 whose selling rates have already been unified (this could be done anytime); (b) unify the two unofficial market rates (export proceeds and the free market rates), while keeping the third official rate (noncommercial rate) closely tied with the free market rate (this could be done by eliminating the export proceeds list); (c) unity all official rates (budget accounting, commercial, and noncommercial rates), while keeping this unified rate closely tied with the free market rate. At this stage, all private sector imports could be moved to a negative list. When macroeconomic and external conditions are supportive, the official rate and the market rate could be unified by permitting all authorized public and private sector transactions to be financed through the banking system. The authorities were in broad agreement with these recommendations. 28. In the process of unification, there may be pressures on the exchange market. Therefore, the staff stressed that unification needs to be implemented while maintaining a tight grip on macroeconomic policies and accelerating structural reforms to facilitate a smooth transition and an effective functioning of the unified system. 22 The staff offered the authorities technical assistance in the implementation of the various aspects of the unification process. 29. The staff is of the view that if a pegged exchange rate is chosen as the post unification exchange rate regime, exchange rate adjustments should occur, as necessary, in response to market forces, while taking into account the level of the central bank official reserves, performance of non-oil exports, and movements in the real effective free market exchange rate. Such a regime would be more appropriate given the current features of the Syrian economy, in particular its small size, the absence of well-developed financial markets, including a formal foreign exchange market, and the lack of adequate monetary instruments to manage liquidity under a more flexible exchange rate regime. This exchange rate policy will, of course need to be kept under review both as to the level of the exchange rate and the operations of the system as structural and macroeconomic reforms progress. 30. Trade liberalization is a key element of the authorities’ reform agenda to move the economy to a high growth path and has to be coordinated with the unification of exchange rates. The authorities have been gradually moving items out of the prohibited list of imports and have been reducing tariffs on trade with Arab countries in the context of the Greater Arab Free Trade Agreement (GAFTA). Trade liberalization efforts are to continue in ” The fourth official rate does not apply to any foreign exchange transactions, except for the repayment of outstanding balances arising Tom (inoperative) bilateral payments agreements. *’ These include efforts to develop indirect monetary instruments and establish a formal foreign exchange market. The latter could be done, for example, by permitting licensed foreign exchange bureaus or banks to deal in foreign exchange for authorized current account transactions after eliminating Decree No. 6, which punishes dealing in foreign exchange for unofficial purposes by a prison sentence. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17 - the future in connection with the envisaged association agreement with the EU, membership in the WTO and the establishment of a common market with Lebanon (which already exists for agricultural goods). The authorities also indicated that beyond these agreements, trade liberalization will proceed. In the near term, a negative import list will replace the different positive lists of authorized imports and regulations under which certain commodities can only be imported through specific means of payments will be eliminated. The staff welcomed these measures which are essential to unify the multiple exchange rates. The staff also urged the authorities to further reduce and eventually eliminate the remaining 10 percent surrender requirement for nonagricultural products. Monetary policy and financial sector reform 31. The authorities are considering important measures to improve the functioning of monetary policy and develop the financial system. Monetary policy has remained passive and has been directed mainly to meet the credit needs of the public sector within a framework of administrative credit allocation.23 However, with the passage of law number 23 in March 2002, under which a credit and monetary committee (CMC) will be set up to be responsible for monetary policy and the development of the financial sector, Syria has taken a step toward achieving a more active monetary policy framework.24 However, the CMC has not yet become operational. At this stage, given the current status of monetary policy in Syria and the low level of development of the financial sector, it will be necessary to rely on direct instruments, mainly credit policy. 32. In time, the authorities are planning to move to a system of indirect monetary controls. To this end, in staffs view, there is a need to initiate the development of a treasury- securities market. Staff stressed that the conduct of open market operations will also require a significant strengthening and upgrading of the analytical capability of the Research Department at the CBS. Furthermore, for monetary policy to be effective, it is essential that accurate and timely information is readily available. 33. The staff and the authorities agree that there is a need to introduce flexibility in setting interest rates. In this connection, the authorities are considering establishing auctions of government papers and allowing banks some flexibility in setting deposits and lending rates, including through setting of benchmark rates with a plus/minus margin around which banks could set their deposit and lending rates, The authorities are also considering relaxing 23 Under a decree issued in 1967, monetary policy is conducted by a ministerial economic committee (EC), in which the CBS is not represented. 24 The CMC has been given the legal authority to pursue a more active monetary policy. However, the CMC is not an independent board and most of its members (8 out of 11) will come from outside the CBS, mainly from the different ministries. Also, the Minister of Economy and Foreign Trade will have the right to suspend the implementation of any decision taken by the CMC. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 18- restrictions on the activities of specialized banks and allowing entry of private banks into the system. These measures would enhance competition in the financial system and reduce its compartmentalization. 34. The staff encouraged the authorities to accelerate financial sector reforms while strengthening the regulation and supervision of banks. In staffs view, the decision to allow private banks to operate in Syria should go hand in hand with the introduction of measures to improve the operations and efficiency of existing public banks. The authorities are aware that the liberalization of the financial system and increased competition will also need to be complemented by efforts to strengthen banking regulation and supervision. They indicated to the staff that the banking system in Syria is sound and nonperforming loans are insignificant. However, information was not available to make a full assessment of the banks’ current situation. The staff urged the authorities to prepare the needed data to evaluate the soundness of existing institutions and their ability to adapt to a market-based environment. 35. In conjunction with reforming the financial sector in Syria, a bank secrecy law came into effect in April 2001, and a draft Money Laundering (ML) Law has been submitted to the parliament. In the draft ML Law, legislative provisions were included that would authorize the establishment of a Financial Intelligence Unit, as well as measures to prevent and block the flow of fimds to terrorist organizations, For the time being, the authorities are confident that there are no money laundering or financing of terrorism activities taking place in the banking system in Syria. They also argued that the existence of only one commercial bank which is government owned and the current regime of exchange controls makes it difficult for such activities to occur in Syria. Public enterprises 36. The authorities have made progress in the past two years toward improving the financial position and efficiency of public enterprises. The approach adopted consists of enhancing the profitability of public enterprises by giving their management broad freedom to achieve agreed goals and increasing the exposure of these enterprises to market forces. In this process, the authorities are eager to preserve the existing employment in the public sector and would reallocate any redundant labor from enterprise restructurings into new projects. Currently, public enterprises provide about one half of nontax revenue in the budget, partly due to the importance of oil in this sector. 37. The authorities and the staff agree that there is an urgent need to improve the efficiency of public enterprises, if Syria is to improve the total factor productivity in the economy and strengthen its ability to compete in the international markets. Reform of the public enterprises is particularly important to minimize the short-term costs associated with trade liberalization. Noting that privatization per se is not contemplated at present and building upon the measures already taken, the staff recommended that the authorities: (a) accelerate the process of turning over the management of public enterprises to private companies; (b) give public enterprises greater control over their operations, including Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 19- decisions on product pricing, wages, and management so as to enable them to effectively compete with the private sector; and (c) detach public enterprises from the central government’s budget and expedite their financial autonomy. Labor market 38. Syria’s recent growth performance fell short of generating enough jobs for a labor force growing at an average rate of 4-4.5 percent per year. The insufficient employment growth could be traced to low output growth rather than a low employment content of growth.25 Structural rigidities in the labor market are also likely to have contributed to unemployment in Syria. In particular, rigidities in hiring and firing regulations, strict rules for the delivery of work permits, definition of separate minimum wages for each occupational category, and strict working hours may have deterred firms from hiring in the first place. 39. The authorities and the staff agree that reducing unemployment would necessitate reforms that accelerate growth through private initiatives, The authorities have made progress in addressing unemployment through allocating substantial public resources to vocational training and providing job matching services nationwide for demands by the private sector. Furthermore, an Agency for Combating Unemployment (ACU) started operation in 2002.26 The authorities have also continued to address unemployment through public employment, both in the civil service and in public enterprises. Staff stressed that, while such policies might be helpful in the short run, they could have adverse fiscal implications and would run counter to the long-term objective of empowering the private sector as the principle source of growth and employment creation. As recognized by the authorities, an effective labor market policy would therefore need to place emphasis on: (a) promoting the private activities; (b) removing existing rigidities in the labor market; and (c) strengthening and restructuring the educational and vocational training systems. Statistical issues 40. The authorities have made progress in improving the statistical database. However, there are still important shortcomings (Appendix III) in the coverage, timeliness and consistency of Syria’s economic data due, mainly, to capacity constraints. These shortcomings exist in most sectors, including national income accounts, public finances, monetary accounts, trade transactions, foreign capital movements, debt obligations, and labor market. There are also inconsistencies between fiscal, monetary and balance of payments data. Furthermore, ” For more details, see “Growth. and Employment in Syria” in Selected Issues and Statistical Appendix (forthcoming). *’ The ACU focuses on securing the financing for new small enterprises created and operated by unemployed individuals or small entrepreneurs and f&ding of training of unemployed persons; rehabilitating institutions and disadvantaged groups; and enhancing women’s participation. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 20 - provision of data to the Fund is not on a regular basis, except for some monetary, price, and trade data which are compiled with long delays. 41. Further improvements in the database are needed to monitor economic developments more closely, enable in-depth economic analysis, and provide a stronger foundation for macroeconomic management. In this connection, the staff welcomed the authorities’ request for a multi-sector mission to assess data deficiencies to be followed by sector specific technical assistance missions. The staff encouraged the authorities to join the General Data Dissemination System (GDDS), which would provide a useful framework for steady improvement in the country’s statistical system over a long period of time. The Syrian representatives indicated that the implementation of this system, while desirable, was very difficult at this stage. The staff also encouraged the authorities to supply the IMF, to the extent possible, with a core set of indicators on a regular basis and intensity efforts to enhance data coverage. IV. MEDIUM-TERMOUTLOOKANDEXTERNALVULNERABILITY 42. In the staffs baseline medium-term scenario, fiscal and external balances are projected to deteriorate (Table 6). The baseline scenario is based on the following assumptions. First, reforms will be gradual, resulting in moderate levels of real GDP growth (around 3.0 percent) supported by a steady increase in private investment (from 6.7 percent of GDP in 2002 to 9.6 percent in 2007). Second, oil production will be roughly constant with average oil prices declining gradually in line with WE0 projections, This will lower both the fiscal and current account balances, though the impact on the latter is assumed to be partially offset by increases in domestic consumption of gas which would allow oil export volumes to continue to increase. Third, measures will be introduced to raise non-oil revenues, thus lowering the non-oil fiscal deficit from 16.2 percent of GDP in 2002 to 13.9 percent of GDP in 2007. However, the government economic program implies little savings on expenditures, so the impact of lower oil revenues will widen the overall fiscal deficit by 5.5 percentage points of GDP. In staffs view, it will be difficult to finance such deficits in a sustainable manner and would most likely will require a draw down of reserves. 43. A more favorable medium-term outcome could result from a number of factors. Oil and gas production (or prices) could be higher than in the baseline, depending on when ongoing projects in gas production come online. Moreover, factors such as a relatively well- educated and growing labor-force point to the potential for higher rates of non-oil GDP growth in Syria. Therefore, if the pace of economic reform were accelerated, this could result in a faster pick-up in private sector investment and correspondingly higher real non-oil GDP growth. To the extent that this pick-up was financed by increases in foreign direct investment, pressure may be kept off the external position in such a scenario. 44. However, there are risks that the medium-term outcome could also be less favorable. Medium-term oil prices could turn out to be weaker. Staff estimates that a $1 drop in the barrel price of oil would result in a 0.7 percent of GDP decrease in the current account Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2l- balance and an 0.4 percent of GDP decrease in the fiscal balance. Moreover, as oil reserves deplete, production levels may actually begin to decline in the medium-term and extraction costs may increase. Finally, if the reform process does not move forward, non-oil GDP growth rates would likely be lower as significant obstacles would remain to private sector investment. 45. The external outlook remains comfortable, though some short-run vulnerabilities exist. At end-200 1 central bank reserves totaled $3.5 billion, equivalent to seven months of imports, and over 250 percent of short-term debt (by remaining maturity).27 In addition, the wholly state-owned CboS reported $4.3 billion in net foreign reserves at end-200 1. Reported external debt levels (excluding the unsettled debt to the Russian Federation) are low (public external debt was about 18 percent of GDP at end-200 1). However, several vulnerabilities exist, though Syria’s strong reserve position would help smooth adjustment to an adverse shock. First, demand for Syrian pound assets has been high, in part as a response to high real interest rates. A fall in this demand, due to a shock to real interest rates or the risk premium, could result in deposit outflows and pressure on the free market exchange rate. Second, Syria has trade and banking sector linkages to neighboring Lebanon, Finally, as with all countries in the region, Syria is exposed to potential adverse regional effects of a conflict, in Iraq. Stress testing by staff suggest that Syria would be able to manage the short-run impact of a conflict particularly if oil prices were to increase. However, depending on the nature of the conflict, real GDP growth could be affected negatively if private investment and tourism were to decline. V. STAFFAPPRAISAL 46. The Syrian economy has performed well during the past two years. The overall GDP growth benefited from higher oil production in 2001, activity in non-oil sectors has improved, and inflation has remained subdued. Benefiting from higher oil revenue, the overall fiscal deficit has remained low and the external current account registered surpluses. These developments together with large unrecorded balance of payments inflows contributed to the stability of the exchange rates and allowed a build up in foreign exchange reserves. 47. These positive macroeconomic developments, however, mask some imbalances. The non-oil fiscal deficit was expansionary in 2000-01 and is estimated to have remained high in 2002. The deterioration in the non-oil fiscal position and the heavy reliance on oil revenue have made the government budget highly vulnerable to developments in the oil market. Moreover, the widening of the non-oil deficit resulted in a surge in imports conducted primarily through the private sector foreign exchange market. These imports have not created pressure on the free market exchange rates or official reserves because of increases in unrecorded balance of payments inflows, as the private sector increased its holdings of Syrian 27 For this data and a further discussion of vulnerability issues, see “External Vulnerability Analysis” in Selected Issues and Statistical Appendix (forthcoming). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 22 - pound deposits in response to high real interest rates and widened interest rate differential vis- a-vis U.S. dollar deposits. However, high real interest rates have likely contributed to discourage private investment and consumption growth, and have led to high money growth rates that may have resulted in a liquidity overhang. 48. The key challenge for the Syrian authorities is to achieve sustainable high rates of economic growth to generate employment opportunities for a rapidly growing labor force To these ends, macroeconomic policies would need to be more supportive of private sector- led economic growth. In this context, there is a need to gradually reduce the non-oil fiscal deficit and interest rates, while closely monitoring developments in light of the possible monetary overhang. At the same time, the maintenance of a stable free market rate would provide an anchor to inflation and expectations. The current level of the exchange rate does not appear misaligned. However, in view of the complex and protective exchange and trade systems, it would be important to reassess competitiveness as these systems are liberalized. 49. The authorities are aware of the need to address structural weaknesses in the Syrian economy to enhance its growth potential and promote private activity. The authorities’ reform program is a significant step in the right direction. The current stable macroeconomic environment provides an opportune time to accelerate structural reforms. However, proper planning, coordination, and sequencing of policies as well as their implementation in the context of a comprehensive macroeconomic framework are essential to enhance the effectiveness of reforms. 50. Fiscal reforms should receive priority. A fiscal deficit of about 4 percent of GDP in 2003 is manageable. However, fiscal reforms are essential to prevent a deterioration of government finances in the medium term, reduce the vulnerability of the budget to oil prices, remove disincentives to investment, and enhance the efficiency of expenditures. To these ends, the authorities’ intentions to introduce a sales tax or VAT, widen the tax base, improve tax administration, limit the subsidies to the needy, and reform the civil service are welcomed. The staff recommends a speedy introduction of a VAT to mobilize additional revenue and allow tax reductions on income and profits, and a comprehensive review of the public sector investment program. In the meantime, subsidies could be gradually reduced and, as envisaged by the authorities, generalized subsidies should be replaced by a targeted program. 51. The authorities are committed to unifying the multiple exchange rates and simplifying the exchange system. To these ends, important steps have been taken during the past few years, including the unification of customs valuation rates, the gradual depreciation of the official rates toward the free market rate, and broadening of transactions taking place at market-related rates. These measures have brought official and unofficial exchange rates closer, paving the way to a unified exchange system. The authorities are encouraged to accelerate their step-by-step approach to full unification. However, given their complex interrelationships, the simplification of the exchange system needs to be coordinated with the liberalization of the trade system. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 23 - 52. Despite significant steps taken recently, the trade system remains complex and restrictive. It is encouraging, therefore, that trade liberalization is a key element of the authorities’ reform agenda. However, the trade and exchange systems are closely intertwined and cannot be reformed separately. The staff encourages the authorities to replace the different positive lists of authorized imports by a negative import list and eliminate the restrictions regarding specific means of payments for various imports. These moves should take place in tandem with the unification of the unofficial exchange rates. The staff also encourages reductions in tariffs in a multilateral context. 53. Staff welcomes the envisaged measures to improve the functioning of monetary policy and develop the financial system. There is a need to introduce interest rate flexibility and move gradually to a system of indirect monetary control. To these ends, the staff recommends development of a treasury bills market. As the competition in the financial system increases, including through the entry of private banks, there is a need to improve the efficiency of public banks and strengthen the regulation and supervision of the banking system. The efforts of the authorities in these areas are welcomed and should be expedited. Moreover, a data base to assess the soundness of the banking system should be developed. 54. The authorities have made progress toward improving the financial position and efficiency of public enterprises. Nevertheless, Cuther progress is needed in improving the profitability of enterprises engaged in manufacturing activities and public utilities. In this regard, the staff recommends that the process of turning over the management of public enterprises to private companies be accelerated and enterprises be given greater autonomy in their operations to enable them to compete with the private sector. 55. The current high rate of unemployment and the rapidly growing labor force present the authorities with difficult issues. In the past, the authorities have addressed unemployment issues largely through public employment, both in the civil service and public enterprises. A more effective and enduring strategy would be to step up economic reforms to promote private sector investment and growth and thereby create jobs, while removing existing rigidities in the labor market. 56. While progress is underway in improving Syria’s economic data base, further efforts are needed. There are still important shortcomings in the coverage, timeliness, and consistency of economic data on most sectors, which hinder monitoring of economic developments, in-depth economic analysis, and the staffs ability to conduct effective surveillance. In this context, the staff welcomes and fully supports the authorities’ request for a multi-sector mission to assess data deficiencies and help them develop comprehensive plans to correct the deficiencies identified by the mission. In the meantime, the staff encourages the authorities to supply the IMF staff, to the extent possible, with a core set of indicators on a regular basis. 57. Syria continues to maintain under Article XIV restrictions on payments and transfers for current international transactions. Syria also maintains exchange measures that are subject Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 24 - to Fund approval under Article VIII. In the absence of specific measures to eliminate these restrictions within a specific time frame, the staff does not recommend that the Executive Board grant approval for their retention under Article VIII, The staff urges the authorities to eliminate these restrictions as soon as possible, and to accept the obligations of Article VIII. 58. It is proposed that the next Article IV consultation take place on the standard 12- month cycle. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-25- Table 1. Syrian Arab Republic: Selected Economic Indicators, 1996-2003 Staff Proi. Prel. Staf Est. 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 National income and prices Nominal GDP (LS billions) Real GDP at market prices Real nonoil GDP at market prices Crude oil production (‘000 b/d) Oil export price ($ per barrel) CPI period average Savings and investment Gross domestic savings Public investment Private investment Central government finances Revenue and Grants Expenditure Overall deficit (including PSF deficit) Nonoil balance Money and credit Money and quasi-money Net foreign assests Net domestic assets Credit to government (net) Credit to public enterprises Credit to private sector Interest rate (6-month deposit rate; in percent) Balance of payments Exports, f.o.b., of which : Oil exports Imports, Eo.b. Current account (including official transfers) In percent of GDP Overall balance Reserves Gross official reserves (end period) m months of imports of goods) De:; External debt (percent of GDP) l/ Debt service ratio (payments basis) Exchange rates LS/$ (end period selling rates) Official rate “in neighboring countries” 2/ Official rate 3/ Budget accounting rate 21 Free Market rate (Beirut/Amman) Real effective exchange rate (change in percent) 4/ Nominal effective exchange rate (change in percent) 4/ Terms of trade (change in percent) 690.9 4.7 6.9 603.9 19.08 8.9 23.5 22.8 20.2 19.1 22.3 24.1 23.3 22.8 11.5 12.1 11.9 10.9 10.5 12.5 12.4 12.9 12.4 8.8 8.5 7.6 6.3 6.0 6.7 7.2 24.6 24.5 -2.8 -13.5 10.0 14.3 -4.2 -4.9 2.1 0.9 7.0 (Change in percent; unless otherwise indicated) 745.6 790.4 819.1 903.9 970.8 1,042.8 4.1 6.3 -0.9 0.6 7.2 2.7 5.9 8.8 -2.0 3.1 5.4 3.8 576.8 572.7 576.0 543.0 620.0 610.3 18.01 11.33 15.43 26.13 22.37 23.02 1.9 -0.4 -2.1 -0.6 0.5 1.5 (In percent of GDP) 26.5 25.9 26.5 27.2 28.8 26.8 25.0 25.4 24.8 27.2 29.0 28.9 -1.4 -2.3 -1.1 -2.1 -1.6 -3.0 -12.6 -13.0 -11.9 -14.5 -16.2 -15.7 (Change in percent of beginning period money stock) 8.4 10.5 13.4 19.0 23.5 13.5 13.1 9.1 9.8 29.1 21.0 17.1 -4.7 1.4 3.6 -10.2 2.6 -3.6 -4.6 -1.1 -8.2 -5.9 6.8 -0.3 5.0 -1.1 4.6 1.6 0.7 1.4 1.9 -0.2 0.7 0.3 0.4 0.7 7.0 7.0 7.0 7.0 7.0 7.0 (In billions of dollars; unless otherwise indicated) 4.2 4.1 3.1 3.8 5.1 5.7 6.0 6.1 2.7 2.5 1.6 2.3 3.6 4.1 4.3 4.3 4.5 3.6 3.3 3.6 3.7 4.3 4.4 4.8 -0.1 0.3 0.0 0.1 1.1 1.2 1.0 0.7 -0.4 1.9 -0.3 0.6 5.5 5.9 4.5 3.0 1.0 0.9 0.8 1.2 2.2 2.6 2.6 2.2 1.7 1.6 1.9 2.2 2.8 3.5 4.2 4.7 3.4 3.8 4.6 5.1 6.2 6.9 8.0 8.3 22.7 21.9 23.8 23.9 20.4 17.9 16.9 16.2 17.4 28.2 26.5 26.0 23.5 19.9 17.6 17.2 44.0 45.5 46.5 46.5 46.5 46.5 11.25 11.25 11.25 11.25 11.25 11.25 23.0 35.0 45.5 46.5 46.5 46.5 50.1 51.4 52.0 51.7 49.4 50.4 7.7 3.9 -1.4 0.3 5.3 2.0 7.5 10.0 6.3 5.5 15.6 7.6 9.5 2.6 -22.9 12.6 29.8 -5.1 46.5 11.25 46.5 52.0 -2.7 0.5 0.3 1,110.9 2.8 3.8 610.3 22.75 2.5 26.3 30.4 -4.2 -16.1 . Sources: Data provided by the Syrian authorities; and staff estimates and projections. l/ Excludes obligations to the Russian Federation; negotiations regarding their settlement are ongoing. 2/ The buying rates for the official rate “in neighboring countries” and the budget accounting rate differ by LS 0.45 per $1 3/ Since 1996, this rate has applied only to a few debt servicing transactions relating to bilateral payments agreements, 41 Using the market exchange rate and partner country weights of the IMF’s Information Notice System (INS). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-26- Table 2: Syrian Arab Republic: Summary of Fiscal Operations, 1996-2002 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 Prel. Staff Est. 2001 2002 Total revenue 169.8 197.2 204.5 216.8 245.6 280.0 279.8 Oil-related proceeds 73.5 83.6 85.1 88.1 111.5 142.1 131.6 Tax revenue 65.7 79.4 82.3 93.3 88.8 88.9 95.6 Non-oil non-tax revenue 30.6 34.3 37.0 35.5 45.3 49.0 52.6 Total expenditure 168.9 186.5 201.0 202.8 246.2 282.0 301.2 Current expenditure 89.6 96.1 106.7 113.7 151.3 161.0 172.4 Wage bill 11 62.9 63.9 67.8 68.5 83.6 86.9 91.7 Goods and services 13.4 15.3 17.3 15.3 17.4 19.1 20.6 Interest payments 21 2.7 4.6 7.6 8.8 21.1 22.5 24.5 Others 10.6 12.2 14.0 21.1 29.2 32.5 35.7 Development expenditure 79.3 90.4 94.3 89.1 94.9 121.0 128.8 Foreign grants 0.1 0.3 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Budget balance 1.0 11.0 3.5 14.0 -0.6 -2.0 -21.4 PSF deficit -20.5 -21.3 -21.5 -23.3 -18.6 -13.4 -10.4 Overall fiscal balance (including PSF) -19.5 -10.3 -17.9 -9.2 -19.2 -15.4 -31.8 Nonoil balance -93.0 -93.8 -103.0 -97.3 -130.7 -157.5 -163.4 Total financing 1.6 -0.9 3.6 -18.1 -2.7 69.7 31.8 External 14.5 11.9 4.0 9.2 13.8 22.0 25.7 Domestic bank financing net -15.6 -16.1 -4.2 -34.4 -28.0 38.2 -1.9 Non-bank financing 2.7 3.3 3.8 7.1 11.6 9.5 8.0 Discrepancy 31 17.9 11.1 14.3 27.4 21.8 -54.4 0.0 Total revenue 24.6 26.5 Oil-related proceeds 10.6 11.2 Tax revenue 9.5 10.7 Nontax revenue 4.4 4.6 Total expenditure 24.5 25.0 Current expenditure 13.0 12.9 Development expenditure 11.5 12.1 Budget balance 0.1 1.4 PSF deficit -3.0 -2.9 Overall fiscal balance (including PSF) -2.8 -1.4 Nonoil balance -13.5 -12.6 Total financing 0.2 -0.1 External 2.1 1.6 Domestic bank financing net -2.3 -2.2 Non-bank financing 0.4 0.4 Discrepancy 3/ 2.6 1.5 (In percent of GDP) 25.9 26.5 27.2 10.8 10.8 12.3 10.4 11.4 9.8 4.7 4.3 5.0 25.4 24.8 27.2 13.5 13.9 16.7 11.9 10.9 10.5 0.4 1.7 -0.1 -2.7 -2.8 -2.1 -2.3 -1.1 -2.1 -13.0 -11.9 -14.5 0.5 -2.2 -0.3 0.5 1.1 1.5 -0.5 -4.2 -3.1 0.5 0.9 1.3 1.8 3.3 2.4 28.8 26.8 14.6 12.6 9.2 9.2 5.0 5.0 29.0 28.9 16.6 16.5 12.5 12.4 -0.2 -2.1 -1.4 -1.0 -1.6 -3.0 -16.2 -15.7 7.2 3.1 2.3 2.5 3.9 -0.2 1.0 0.8 -5.6 0.0 (In billions of Syrian pounds) Sources: Ministry ofFinance; and staff estimates and projections. 11 Includes civilian and military wages. 21 Includes principal and interest payments. 3/ This can be largely explained by misclassification of credit to public enterprises (including settlements of arrears) that were recorded as government transactions. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 27 - Table 3. Syrian Arab Republic: Monetary Survey, 1996-2002 (In billions of Syrian pounds) End-of-period 1995 1996 1997 1998 Prel. Staff Est. 1999 2000 2001 2002 Money and quasi-money 316,742 Money 224,967 Currency outside banks 143,728 Demand deposits 81,239 Quasi-money 91,775 Foreign assets (net) 169,037 Central Bank 24,591 Commercial bank 144,446 Domestic assets (net) Claims on central government and public enterprises Claims 0; government (net) Claims on public enterprises Claims on private sector 147,705 211,353 70,809 140,545 63,666 Other items (net), of which : -127,314 Import and restricted deposits -26,708 Capital accounts -46,967 Valuation adjustment (net) -30,866 Other -22,773 Foreign assets (net) 12.4 Domestic assets (net) -3.2 Claims on central government (net) -0.7 Claims on public enterprises 6.8 Claims on private sector 3.9 Other items (net) -13.2 Foreign assets (net) 26.9 Domestic assets (net) -5.9 Claims on central government (net) -2.8 Claims on public enterprises 16.4 Claims on private sector 21.6 Money and quasi-money 9.2 Memorandum items: Velocity of money I/ Velocity of money 21 1.76 1.81 1.71 1.72 1.47 1.28 1.15 1.06 1.88 2.08 2.05 1.99 1.84 1.74 1.54 1.40 348.6 377.8 417.5 473.5 563.5 696.1 243.9 260.8 281.9 313.2 368.7 419.9 153.2 159.7 177.8 182.1 203.9 229.3 90.8 101.1 104.0 131.1 164.8 190.6 104.6 116.9 135.6 160.3 194.8 276.2 214.3 259.9 294.4 335.5 473.4 591.6 39.3 40.2 42.4 54.6 79.4 93.3 175.0 219.7 252.0 280.8 394.1 498.3 134.2 117.9 123.1 138.1 90.0 104.4 202.5 203.8 195.4 180.4 160.0 201.9 55.2 39.1 34.9 0.5 -27.4 10.8 147.3 164.7 160.5 179.8 187.5 191.1 66.6 73.4 72.6 75.3 76.6 78.7 -134.9 -159.3 -145.0 -117.6 -146.6 -176.2 -27.2 -33.2 -22.8 -20.3 -28.4 -40.5 -59.2 -68.5 -78.8 -92.8 -96.7 -103.6 -31.5 -34.3 -30.1 -17.1 -54.1 -52.9 -17.0 -23.2 -13.4 12.6 32.6 20.8 (Change in percent of beginning broad money stock) 14.3 13.1 9.1 9.8 29.1 21.0 -4.2 -4.7 1.4 3.6 -10.2 2.6 -4.9 -4.6 -1.1 -8.2 -5.9 6.8 2.1 5.0 -1.1 4.6 1.6 0.7 0.9 1.9 -0.2 0.7 0.3 0.4 -2.4 -7.0 3.8 6.6 -6.1 -5.2 (Annual change in percent) 26.8 21.3 13.3 13.9 41.1 25.0 -9.1 -12.2 4.4 12.2 -34.8 16.0 -22.0 -29.1 -10.7 -98.4 n.a. n.a. 4.8 11.8 -2.5 12.0 4.3 2.0 4.7 10.1 -1.0 3.8 1.7 2.8 10.0 8.4 10.5 13.4 19.0 23.5 790.0 470.3 252.2 218.1 319.7 710.7 . . . . . . 79.3 209.5 8.9 200.7 83.9 -214.1 . . . . . . . . . . . . 17.1 -3.6 -0.3 1.4 0.7 -5.4 20.1 -24.1 -17.7 5.0 6.5 13.5 Sources: Central Bank of Syria; and staff estimates and projections. l/ Ratio of nonmining nominal GDP to average-period stock. 2/ Ratio of nominal GDP to average-period stock. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-28 - Table 4. Syrian Arab Republic: Balance of Payments, 1996-2002 (In millions of dollars, unless otherwise indicated) Prel. StaffEst. 1996 1991 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 Current account balance -63 315 -42 101 Trade balance Exports, free on board Oil Non-oil Public Private Imports, free on board Public Private Services (net) Receipts Payments Freight and insurance Travel and tourism Sea!Kmal remittances Investment earnings Oil and gas companies’ receipts of which: interest Government services Other services Transfers of which: workers’ remittances Official transfers (net) Capital and financial account Migrants’ transfen Financial account Direct investment (net) Long-term loam Receipts Payment5 11 Short-term loans (net) Receipts Payments Errors and omissions 240 532 Overall balance 985 929 Financing Net monetary movements (increase -) Convertible Central Bank Commercial Bank Nonconvertible -985 -929 -845 -985 -929 -845 -764 -814 -778 -326 193 -185 -438 -1,067 -593 -221 -55 -61 253 -76 -234 80 63 17 173 -139 -25 1 263 270 103 187 -154 -174 412 261 166 -225 -415 -340 -277 -255 -180 920 945 970 -1,197 -1,200 -1,150 819 1,211 1,617 1,173 2,195 2,597 -1,173 -2,195 -2,597 -1,173 -2,195 -2,597 -1,248 -2,153 -2,551 -356 -531 -701 -892 -1,622 -1,850 75 -42 -46 1,001 1,590 6,021 4,288 1,732 437 1,296 -4,43 1 -95 1 -3,479 -1,096 1,878 -2,975 -742 -709 -32 -1,175 -1,011 -164 -206 -110 507 497 10 -80 20 -100 76 -166 190 -356 -10 1,009 -1,019 1,639 2,561 -2,561 -2,561 -2,561 -691 -1,870 0 Memorandum items: Current account (percent of GDP) -0.4 1.9 -0.3 0.6 5.5 5.9 4.5 Oil export price ($ per barrel) 19.1 18.0 11.3 15.4 26.1 22.4 23.0 Non-oil export volume (percent change) 2.5 14.9 -0.1 3.9 12.8 1.5 3.7 Non-oil import volume (percent change) 12.9 -18.7 -16.1 10.8 -0.7 20.5 2.1 Central Bank reserves (millions of dollars) 1,709 1,624 1,860 2,213 2,776 3,462 4,153 Central Bank reserves (months of imports of GNFS) 3.4 3.8 4.6 5.1 6.2 6.9 8.0 Central Bank reserves (percent of M2) 19.2 19.3 21.2 22.3 23.2 23.4 24.8 External debt (millions of dollars) l/2/ 4,013 3,643 3,950 4,103 3,912 3,692 3,745 External debt (percent of GDP) l/Z/ 22.7 21.9 23.8 23.9 20.4 17.9 16.9 Debt service ratio li 3/ 17.4 28.2 26.5 26.0 23.5 19.9 17.6 GDP ($ billion) 4/ 17.6 16.6 16.6 17.2 19.2 20.6 22.1 -338 455 -178 216 4,178 4,057 3,142 3,806 2,748 2,509 1,615 2,342 1,430 1,548 1,527 1,464 402 636 506 271 1,028 912 1,021 1,193 -4,516 -3,603 -3,320 -3,590 -1,802 -1,205 -892 -985 -2,714 -2,398 -2,428 -2,605 -349 -639 -395 -604 2,326 2,003 2,035 2,007 -2,675 -2,642 -2,430 -2,6 11 -798 -668 -634 -689 -513 -545 -583 -63 1 -20 -25 -29 -28 -1,100 -1,128 -910 -971 -823 -774 -661 -709 -271 -354 -249 -262 -177 -187 -192 -196 -67 -89 -82 -96 624 499 531 489 618 490 505 465 6 9 26 24 808 83 26 18 782 65 89 80 200 -134 405 380 -205 -514 493 119 1,255 1,116 -762 -991 223 21 196 82 173 390 -217 -59 1,032 -1,091 664 845 1,060 1,214 1,422 1,425 5,146 5,706 3,558 4,064 1,588 1,642 449 417 1,139 1,225 -3,724 -4,281 -1,038 -951 -2,686 -3,330 -847 -703 2,044 2,120 -2,891 -2,823 -698 -717 -669 -690 -29 -30 -1,195 -1,079 -932 -837 -263 -242 -199 -200 -101 -107 485 493 476 483 9 10 Sources: Central Bank of Syria; and staff estimates. li Oflicially acknowledged debt; excludes military debt, and obligations in rubles to the Russian Federation as negotiations regarding their valuation in dollar terms are ongoing. U Debt to the Russian Federation at end-1996 was Rub. 7,173 million, $188.2 million, and UKE 76 million. Converting ruble debt at the official exchange rate of $l=SUR 0.6 and applying the up-front discount of 65 percent as agreed with the Paris Club would imply a debt to the Russian Federation of $4.4 billion (21.4 percent of GDP). 31 Calculated as the ratio of debt service payments to receipts of goods, services, and workers’ remittances. Breakdown of debt service obligations is not available. 41 Calculated using the weighted average nominal exchange rate. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 29 - . . . . Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 30 - Table 6. Syrian Arab Republic: Macroeconomic Framework, 1996-2007 @J. Projections 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 Real GDP at market prices Crude oil production (‘000 b/d) Average oil export price ($/barrel) Consumer price index National savings Public Private Gross domestic investment Public Private Public finance Total revenue, including grants oil-related Non-oil Total expenditure Current Development Budget balance (excluding PSF deficit) PSF balance l/ Overall fiscal balance Non-oil fiscal deficit Balance of payments 21 Exports Oil Non-oil Imports Services and transfers (net) Current account CBS reserves in months of imports External debt 3/ External debt service ratio 4/ 17.4 28.2 26.5 26.0 23.5 19.9 17.6 17.2 17.4 17.9 17.9 18.2 23.7 24.4 19.0 22.2 26.8 27.7 27.2 26.1 23.3 20.8 19.9 19.2 15.6 15.1 9.7 13.6 18.5 19.7 19.4 18.3 15.5 12.8 11.8 11.0 8.1 9.3 9.2 8.5 8.3 8.0 7.8 7.8 7.9 8.0 8.1 8.3 -25.6 -21.7 -20.0 -20.9 -19.4 -20.8 -20.0 -20.6 -20.7 -20.6 -20.7 -20.9 1.6 -0.8 0.8 -0.7 -1.9 -1.0 -2.7 -2.5 -1.8 -1.2 -1.0 -0.8 -0.4 1.9 -0.3 0.6 5.5 5.9 4.5 3.0 0.8 -1.0 -1.8 -2.5 3.4 3.8 4.6 5.1 6.2 6.9 8.0 8.3 7.9 6.9 5.3 3.8 22.7 21.9 23.8 23.9 20.4 17.9 16.9 16.2 15.4 14.7 14.1 13.4 (Change in percent) 4.7 4.1 6.3 -0.9 0.6 7.2 2.7 2.8 3.0 3.1 3.3 3.4 604 577 573 576 543 620 610 610 610 610 610 610 19.1 18.0 11.3 15.4 26.1 22.4 23.0 22.8 20.4 18.1 18.0 17.9 3.5 4.0 4.0 8.9 1.9 -0.4 -2.1 -0.6 0.5 1.5 2.5 3.0 (In percent of GDP) 23.5 22.8 20.2 19.1 22.3 24.4 23.6 23.0 21.1 8.7 10.8 9.7 9.8 8.4 10.9 9.3 8.7 7.9 14.9 12.0 10.5 9.3 13.9 13.5 14.3 14.3 13.3 19.7 19.5 19.4 6.7 5.7 5.2 13.0 13.8 14.3 23.9 20.9 20.5 18.5 16.8 18.5 19.0 20.0 20.3 20.7 21.3 21.9 11.5 12.1 11.9 10.9 10.5 12.5 12.4 12.9 12.7 12.5 12.4 12.3 12.4 8.8 8.5 7.6 6.3 6.0 6.7 7.2 7.7 8.2 8.9 9.6 24.6 26.5 25.9 26.5 27.2 28.8 26.8 26.3 25.2 23.7 22.6 22.1 10.6 11.2 10.8 10.8 12.3 14.6 12.6 12.0 10.5 8.7 7.5 6.8 14.0 15.3 15.1 15.7 14.8 14.2 14.2 14.3 14.7 15.1 15.2 15.3 24.5 25.0 25.4 24.8 27.2 29.0 28.9 30.4 30.0 29.5 29.3 29.2 13.0 12.9 13.5 13.9 16.7 16.6 16.5 17.6 17.3 17.0 17.0 17.0 11.5 12.1 11.9 10.9 10.5 12.5 12.4 12.9 12.7 12.5 12.4 12.3 0.1 1.5 0.4 1.7 -0.1 -0.2 -2.1 -4.2 -4.8 -5.8 -6.7 -7.1 -3.0 -2.9 -2.7 -2.8 -2.1 -1.4 -1.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 -2.8 -1.4 -2.3 -1.1 -2.1 -1.6 -3.0 -4.2 -4.8 -5.8 -6.7 -7.1 13.5 12.6 13.0 11.9 14.5 16.2 15.7 16.1 15.3 14.5 14.2 13.9 Sources: Data provided by the Syrian authorities; and staff estimates and projections. l/ It is assumed that budgetary transfers to the PSF will gradually increase to bring the PSF operations in balance by 2007. 2/ Using the weighted average exchange rate. For 200 1, this rate was LS 46.3= $1. 31 Officially acknowledged debt; excludes military debt and obligations in rubles to the Russian Federation. 41 Calculated as the ratio of debt service payments to receipts of goods, services, and workers’ remittances. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public2000 1600 800 -3l- Figure 1. Syrian Arab Republic: Real Sector Indicators, 1994-2002 Per Capita GDP, Non-Oil Exports, and Foreign Direct Investments Non-Oil Exports (in millions US dollars) // /0* GDP per Capita (US dollars) Real GDP (Annual percentage change) 2ooo 3. , 1600 20 ’ Real agricultural I: GDP growth 800 0 - 400 -10 t at market prices ;I ,I 0 1994 1996 1998 2000 2082 Est. 30 , Savings and Investment (in percent of GDP) Gross domestic savings Public investment c- ---- 0 0 , Private investment c 30 25 20 15 10 5 0 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 Est. 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 Est. 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 Est. 20 16 12 8 Consumer Price Index (Annual percentage change) 20 16 12 8 Source: Data provided by the Syrian authorities; and staff estimates. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicRevenue Trends 30 30 30 25 L 25 25 20 - 20 Nonoil revenue 15 15 1C )- ~ --- ~ - Oil-related revenue 10 j- ( 1 -r 5 20 15 10 5 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 Prel. Est. Composition of Nonoil Revenue 16 16 4 0 revenue 12 12 -4 incl. PSF -4 8 8 -8 -8 Transfers International Trade I -)- 4 r 0 -12 -16 -2c - 5L - Figure 2. Syrian Arab Republic: Public Finance, 1996 -2002 (In percent of GDP) 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 Prel. Est. Expenditure Trends /Wage bill 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 Prel. Est. Fiscal Balance , - ) -- Til balann 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 Prel Est. 25 4 0 -12 -16 -20 Source: Data provided by the Syrian authorities; and Fund staff estimates. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-33 - Figure 3. Syrian Arab Republic: Monetary Sector Indicators, 1996-2002 Sources of Money Growth (Change in percent of beginning broad money stock) -Domestic credit Other Items Net 30 -M2 - -NFA 20 20 -- 10 0 I I -10 1 1 -20 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 Prel. 2002 Est. 50 45 40 35 30 25 20 Composition of Broad Money (In percent of broad money stock) Currency outside banks -- .- .- .- - I .__. - - - .-.’ ‘... - -- --.. ^_ - -.. ,.,. ,. . . . . . . - ,,, ,:, -.- -- “’ .- _, ,C, -- -. .,.: _ - ” ^ii: ” “’ ,,,&~sj_cj~pc)si~ “” .,., ,.,. ‘.‘. “’ .‘.’ “” “” “” “” ** - -- -_ _-- __ I _- -_, _ . . ,C.’ ,:,. ,:.: ,.,. . . . . . . .‘.I Demand deposits 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 Prel. 2002 Est. Money and Credit Ratios (in percent) 1.9 -Nonal G to money stock (Rtght scale) 1.7 1.3 1.1 0.9 0.7 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 Prel. 2002 Est. Source: Central Bank of Syria, 11 Combined share of General Organization for Cotton Ginning and Marketing and General Organization for Cereals Trade and Production in total credit to public enterprises averaged about 90 percent over 1994-2001, 2/ Private sector includes cooperatives and mixed private-public joint ventures. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 34 - 35 30 25 20 20 15 10 5 0 Figure 4. Syrian Arab Republic: Public Finance, 1994 -2002 (In percent of GDP) Fiscal Balance Expenditure Revenue 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 Prel. 2002 Est. Revenue Trends q Oil-related revenue Ki Non-oil related revenue 7 .: :. :: :: :: :: :: :: :: :: :: :: :: :: :.: :. :: L 35 30 25 20 20 15 10 5 0 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 Prel. 2002 Est Expenditure Trends 20 n Current expenditure q Wage bill IZ Development expenditure 20 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 Prel. 2002 Est. Sources: Data provided by the Syrian authorities; and Fund staf?f estimates and projections Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-35- Figure 5. Syrian Arab Republic: Exchange Rate Developments 60 - Exchange rate, Jan. 1995- Jul2001 (Syrian pounds per U.S. dollar) 60 Free market rate l/ 50 Budget accounting rate - 20 - 10 170 160 150 140 130 120 110 100 90 - Real Effective Exchange Rate, Jan. 1995- Jan. 2002 (1995=100) 1 .ehanon Al\ Syria 31 Source: Central Bank of Syria; IMF, Information Notice System; and Fund staff estimates. 170 160 150 140 130 120 110 100 90 l/ Average of daily quotations in Amman and Beirut. 21 On January 1, 1998, the selling rates of the official rate “in neighboring countries” and the budget accounting rate were unified. 31 Average of Beirut and Amman market determined rates; weights of trading partners are those of the IMF’s Information Notice System. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-36- APPENDIX I I. II. III. Iv. V. VI. VII. Syrian Arab Republic: Fund Relations (As of December 3 1,2002) Membership Status: Joined 4/10/47; Article XIV General Resources Account: SDR Million % Quota Quota’ 293.6 100.0 Fund holdings of currency 293.6 100.0 Reserve position in Fund 0.01 -- SDR Department: SDR Million % Allocation Net cumulative allocation 36.56 100.0 Holdings 0.02 0.07 Outstanding Purchases and Loans: None Financial Arrangements: None Projected Obligations to Fund: (SDR million; based on existing use of resources and present holdings of SDRs): Charges/Interest Total Exchange Rate Arrangement: Forthcoming 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 0.71 0.70 0.70 0.70 0.70 0.71 0.70 0.70 0.70 0.70 The exchange system in Syria is characterized by multiple exchange rates and a foreign exchange market segmented into public and private sector pools. Public and private sectors conduct their respective transactions with foreign exchange sourced from two separate foreign exchange pools. The private sector has almost no access to the official pool, sourced by public sector foreign exchange revenues channeled through the commercial bank of Syria, and conducts its transactions in two unofficial markets-the export proceeds market and the free market located in Syria and offshore. In the former market, exporters sell retained export receipts (net of surrender requirements) to importers of a specific list of imports. Most private sector transactions take place in the free market, sourced by foreign exchange from tourism receipts, workers’ remittances, proceeds from unrecorded exports, and private capital ‘Under the Eleventh General Review. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 37 - APPENDIX I inflows. Under the multiple rate structure, there are four official rates, pegged to the dollar and two unofficial rates, determined by supply and demand conditions in the respective markets. The exchange rate in the export proceeds market is determined freely, and averaged about $1 = LS 52.0 during 2001 and is currently about LS 52.5. The free market rate for the Syrian pound in other countries in the region averaged LS 50.4 during 2001 and is currently about $1 = LS 52. Virtually all private sector transactions take place at this rate. VIII. Article IV Consultations: 69 Syria is on the annual consultation cycle. The last consultation was held in August-September 2001 and was completed on December 3,200l. w The staff report for the 2001 Article IV consultation (W/01/345) was issued on November 19,200 1. The Executive Board’s decision (Decision No. 1263 l-(0 l/123)) was as follows: 1. The Fund takes this decision relating to the Syrian Arab Republic’s exchange measures subject to Article VIII, Sections 2(a) and 3, and in concluding the 2000 Article XIV consultation with the Syrian Arab Republic, in the light of the 2000 Article IV consultation with the Syrian Arab Republic conducted under Decision No. 5392-(77/63), adopted on April 29, 1977, as amended (Surveillance over Exchange Rate Policies). 2. As described in W/01/345, the Syrian Arab Republic maintains restrictions on payments and transfers for current international transactions in accordance with Article XIV, Section 2. In addition, the Syrian Arab Republic maintains measures subject to approval under Article VIII. The Fund encourages the authorities to eliminate the restrictions maintained under Article XIV, Section 2 as soon as its balance of payments position permits, and urges the Syrian Arab republic to eliminate the measures that are subject to approval under Article VIII as soon as possible. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-38- APPENDIX I Ix. Technical Assistance: (a) In July 2002, MAE provided a two day workshop on on-site supervision. (b) In March 2002, MAE provided a workshop on off-site banking examination. (c) In January 2002, MAE provided Syria with a long-term advisor on banking supervision. (4 In July 2001, STA provided technical assistance on monetary statistics. w In April 2001, MAE and MED provided training on bank supervisory issues. 03 In August 1998, a FAD mission provided follow up assistance on the work of the previous mission of November 1997. (!a In November 1997, FAD provided technical assistance on conversion of the tariff nomenclature to the Harmonized System and unification of the exchange rate for customs valuation. (h) In March, 1997 an MAE-mission advised on central bank and banking legislation. (0 statistics. In April 1996, STA and MED provided technical assistance on monetary 09 In March 1996, MAE provided technical assistance on modernization of the Central Bank, banking supervision, monetary policy issues, and development of the financial sector. (1) In January 1996, STA provided technical assistance on balance of payments. (m) In December 1995, STA provided technical assistance on national income accounts. 09 In February 1993, an MAE staff member visited Syria for a few days to ascertain the authorities’ position on banking reform. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 39 - APPENDIX II Syrian Arab Republic: Relations with the World Bank Group 1. In July 1997 Syria and the World Bank reached an agreement for the settlement of Syria’s arrears. By mid-1997 arrears had risen to the equivalent of US$526 million. Under the terms of the agreement, Syria repaid all of the principal arrears outstanding as of September 1, 1997 in the amount of US$270 million, and, starting October 1, 1997, has made monthly payments in the amount of US$6.1 million. The monthly payments at this level cover new debt service falling due and payment of interest arrears over a period of five years from October 1, 1997. 2. Subsequent to the agreement on arrears, the World Bank has begun to provide non- lending services to Syria. Initial activities included support for the Ministry of Finance and the Central Bank of Syria in accounting and the establishment of an external debt management system in the form of grants from the Institutional Development Fund; planning and implementation grants supporting Year 2000 remediation efforts; the Global Environment Fund biodiversity project; and reviews of the trade regime (including export promotion), health, roads, urban water and sanitation, and agricultural irrigation sectors. 3. At the same time, the IFC has begun to identify possible private sector projects for support through IFC equity investments or loans without government guarantee. In December 1999, the IFC approved its first project in Syria, making a US$l million equity investment in an irrigation technology company that designs and manufactures systems that address the critical problem of water scarcity in the Middle East. 4. Syria has now settled its overdue service payments to IBRD and IDA. Consequently, all loans and credits to Syria were restored to accrual status and the country’s eligibility for disbursements was reinstated as of July 1, 2002. The full scope and nature of the assistance program continues to be under discussion with the Syrian authorities. Although the Bank involvement in Syria is still limited, two main areas of focus are emerging: (i) analytical and technical assistance activities on trade, investment and economic development issues; (ii) pilot lending in the social sectors, possibly health and education. In the current fiscal year, the Bank will finalize a report on trade policy options, and a note on long-term economic development challenges, as well as carry out an investment climate survey with the private sector. FIAS will provide assistance on the FDI environment. 5. Since 1999, IFC has made three investments in Syria totaling US$17.2 million. The first is an investment in Arab Drip Irrigation Technology Company in Latakia. The company specializes in manufacturing drip irrigation equipment for the Syrian and export market, thereby reducing flood irrigation and promoting efficient water utilization strategies. The second is a project finance loan to Daaboul Company, an established manufacturer and exporter of detergents and cleaning products. IFC has also agreed to structure and to invest in a commercial bank with Blom Bank as its technical partner, and a group of Syrian businessmen. IFC has undertaken numerous technical assistance assignments and studies in Syria aimed at: assisting the Government in defining the role of the private sector in the Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 40 - APPENDIX II economy; or providing IFC and other investors with sector assessments to facilitate our investments. The most recent of which is advising on the regulatory framework in the insurance sector and is providing a draft modem insurance law. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4l- APPENDIX III SYRIAN ARAB REPUBLIC: STATISTICAL ISSUES 1. Significant weaknesses exist in Syria’s statistical base, in terms of coverage, consistency, periodicity, and timeliness, which have hampered the staffs ability to conduct economic analysis and effective surveillance. Efforts to address the weaknesses in Syria’s statistical base must cover a wide range of sectors, including national accounts, government finance, monetary accounts, and balance of payments statistics. 2. Statistical issues have been discussed with the Syrian representatives during Article IV consultations. They have acknowledged data deficiencies and indicated that efforts will be made to address them. Statistical issues in various sectors of the economy are discussed below. a. Real sector 3. The Central Bureau of Statistics has made steady progress in implementing the recommendations of the last (December 1995) national accounts statistics mission. However the following weaknesses still exist: 0 GDP estimates by the production approach suffer from under-coverage of activities, particularly in trade and private services. The baseyear is 1995. l Syria has a multiple exchange rate system. The system imposes implicit indirect taxes and subsidies that can affect GDP and other national accounts aggregates. Currently Syria does not make adjustments to these aggregates. 0 The estimates of final expenditures on GDP are incomplete, in that household final consumption expenditures are calculated as a residual, and include changes in inventories since the latter is not estimated separately. The authorities have begun to collect data on inventory changes in the public sector. 0 The consumption of fixed capital is estimated as a constant ratio of output. 0 Net income flows between residents and nonresidents derived from the balance of payments are unsatisfactory. As a result, the estimates of saving, investment, and net borrowing from abroad are unreliable. l The wholesale price index (1990=100) is compiled and reported annually but is not representative as most prices are those of public sector enterprises. As of November 2002, the latest national accounts figures reported in the IFS were for 2000. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 42 - APPENDIX III b. Government finance 4. MED staff does not receive any fiscal data from the authorities between consultations and has identified the following weaknesses in the fiscal accounts: 5. Financing abroad as reported in the budgetary accounts cannot be confirmed by the balance of payments accounts. The accounting system of the Ministry of Finance (MOF) does not permit an accurate breakdown between interest and principal payments on domestic and foreign debt, and debt servicing is reported on a cash rather than an accrual basis. 6. There are large discrepancies between the fiscal deficits and total financing. The discrepancy is estimated at -5.6 percent of GDP in 200 1. This can be largely explained by misclassification of credit to public enterprises (including settlements of arrears) that were recorded as government transactions. 7. The Central Bank of Syria (CBS) occasionally assumes the accumulated debt of public enterprises to the banking system through the issuance of government bonds; such operations are not reflected in the fiscal accounts. 8. There is a need for reclassification of some tax revenue items to non-tax revenues. Syria regularly reports GFSannual data for publication in the Government Finance Statistics Yearbook (GFSY). However, the reported data are partial, too aggregated, misclassified (for some revenue component items) and do not include extra-budgetary and social security accounts. No data on financing and debt are provided; and lending minus repayments is reported as zero. In the GFSY 2001, the latest fiscal data reported is for 1998. C. Monetary accounts 9. The CBS has made progress in implementing the recommendations of the April 1996 STA/MED technical assistance mission, and reporting lags have been reduced to about six months. In September 2002, STA sent to CBS a questionnaire inquiring about status of implementing recommendations made by the monetary and financial statistics mission in July 200 1. 10. As discussed below, monetary statistics suffer from major deficiencies, which hamper the staffs ability to conduct meaningful analysis of monetary development. Valuation of net foreign assets in the monetary accounts l Foreign assets and liabilities held by the CBS are recorded in its balance sheet at an overvalued exchange rate. For instance, as indicated by the CBS staff, foreign liabilities appear to be valued at LS 11.25 per U.S. dollar instead of LS 46.5 per U.S. dollar. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-43 - APPENDIX III a Valuation adjustment, an unclassified liability in the consolidated balance sheet of commercial banks, is a source for concern, its LS 17.6 billion (1.8 percent of total liabilities) increase in 200 1 seems excessive in the absence of change in the accounting exchange rate. Inconsistencies between the monetary survey and the balance ofpayments statistics l Net Foreign Assets (NFA) of the banking system are much higher in the monetary survey (MS) than in the international liquidity table derived from the balance of payments. For instance, they amounted to $7.3 billion in 2001 in the international liquidity table, compared to US$12.7 billion in the MS. The discrepancy on 2001 flows was even larger in relative terms, with NFA increasing by almost $2.5 billion according to MS compared to $0.97 billion in the international liquidity table which reflects developments in the balance of payments (BOP). Inconsistencies between the fiscal and monetary accounts 0 According to the MS, government deposits at the CBS stood at LS 374 billion at end- 2001 (equivalent to US$S.O billion, or about 39 percent of GDP). Such a level seems very unlikely, because according to MS gross claims on the government remained very large and kept on increasing in 2001 and the Ministry of Finance has denied the existence of such large deposits. 0 Profits advanced to the government have been increasing steadily over the past years to reach LS 50 billion in 2001 (6.8 percent of CBS’s total assets), as if profits transferred in the past were considered a permanent claim on the government. The counter entry for this discrepancy has been in the capital account on the liability side. d. Balance of payments 11. The January 1996 STA technical assistance mission found that balance of payments data suffer from incomplete coverage and valuation problems arising from the presence of multiple exchange rates. Several data issues have been addressed since then; however, the following weaknesses remain: l Private transfers do not fully reflect remittances by Syrians working abroad. The statistics in the balance of payments for official transfers differ significantly from figures provided from other sources, such as donors. a Data on long-term official capital inflows and amortization are not consistent with the data provided by the Ministry of Finance on the external financing of the budget deficit. Data on private capital movements are incomplete. l Data on external debt continue to be incomplete, and external debt service obligations and arrears are not recorded in the balance of payments statistics. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 44 - APPENDIX III a Military imports are still excluded from the balance of payments and external debt data. 0 There is a large discrepancy between reserve flows reported in the balance of payments, and the reserve flows implied by the monetary survey. In 2001, for example, the balance of payments was reported with a reserve increase of $973 million. However, the increase in NFA of the banking system was estimated at $2.5 billion. The balance of payments data has not been compiled in complete consistency with BPMS methodology since, in calculating the reserves flow, foreign currency liabilities of the banks to both residents and non-residents were deducted. Data on total foreign currency deposits of residents was not provided, and is not readily available from the MS since some of these deposits are recorded as Syrian pound deposits in the MS. l Reserve accumulation in the BoP was re-estimated using monetary survey data. Total below-the-line financing was set equal to the change in NFA in the monetary survey less the valuation change reported as part of other items net. This was converted into US dollars at a rate of 46 Syrian pounds/$. Reportedly, this is the rate used to convert the entire stock of foreign currency assets and liabilities into pounds in the balance sheet of the CboS. As a result, errors and omissions are much higher than previously estimated. Trade data are compiled monthly by the Customs Department and reported quarterly by the Central Bureau of Statistics with a six-month lag. The balance of payments is compiled annually on a provisional basis with about an eight-month lag. As of November 2002, the latest balance of payments figures reported in the IFS were for 2000. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-45 - APPENDIX III Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 46 - APPENDIX IV Syrian Arab Republic: Social and Demographic Indicators l! Area Population (2000) GDP Per Capita (2000) 185180 sq. km. 26.4 percent arable land (1994) 15.8 millions Rate of growth: 2.5 percent per ammm Density: 88.1 per sq km US$l215 Population characteristics (2000) Life expectancy at birth (years) Crude birth rate (per thousand) 69.7 29 Crude death rate (per thousand) 4.6 Infant mortality (per thousand live births) Percentage age distribution (1999) 15-64 24 55 Percentage Urban (2000) Rural (2000) 54.5 45.5 Access to safe water (2000) Percent of population 80 Health (1999) Physicians per 1000 people (1999) Immnnization, DPT (“XI of children under 12 months) Immunization, Measles (% of children under 12 months) Access to electricity - Percentage of dwellings with electricity (1993) Electric power consumption (KWH per capita) (1993) Education Adult literacy, percentage (Age 15+) (2000) Net Primary school enrollment, percentage (1998) 2/ Primary school pupil-teacher ratio (1998) 1.3 94 97 82 838 74.4 92.7 22.9 l/ World Bank Social Indicators of Development, 2002; Central Bureau of Statistics; Statistical Abstract, 1997. 21 Net enrollment ratio is the ratio of the number of children of official school age (as defined by the national education system) who are enrolled in school to the population of the corresponding official school age. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-47 - APPENDIX V I. POLICY MEASURES AND MAIN POINTS OF THE DECREES ISSUED IN 2001 l In January 2001-the Commercial Bank of Syria (CboS) was permitted to buy foreign currency at market related rates (“the exchange rate in the neighboring countries for non- commercial transactions”). In April, 2001, a new banking law came into effect that would allow private banks to operate in Syria. A bank secrecy law came in effect in April 2001. In June 2001, Decree 7 allowed investment projects to use bank accounts abroad for their operations as long as the funds banked outside are equal to no more than 50 percent of the project’s capital. The decree also allowed the actual value of a project to be repatriated five years after the completion of the project. Free trade zones agreements were signed with the following countries: Jordan, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Sudan, and U.A.E. Also, fi-ee export zones agreements were signed with: Algeria, Egypt, Libya, Morocco, Oman, and Tunisia. To increase the profitability of private sector exports, the 25 percent surrender requirement for nonagricultural exports was allowed to be_surrendered at the market rate. The list of prohibited imported items was shortened, including the removing of car imports from this list, whose maximum tariff rate was lowered from 100 percent to 40 percent. However, only 10 percent of private exports proceeds could be sold for this purpose. In May 2001, tariff rates on all raw materials were reduced from the rates of 7 and 20 percent to the rate of 1 percent (including duty and surcharge) and the exchange rates used for customs valuation for these items have been unified at the LS 46.0 per $1. The Harmonized Tariff Classification System, which aligns the tariff classification system in Syria with international standards, became effective on July 1,200l. Tariff levels on imports from countries of the Greater Arab Free Trade Area (GAFTA) were reduced further by 10 percent (a yearly reduction since 1998). An additional bilateral measure was the signing with Iraq of an agreement, which eliminates all customs duties between the two countries. Agricultural tax and profit tax on exports were eliminated in July 2001. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 48 - APPENDIX V The effective rate for the individual income tax, covering both public sector and private employees, was reduced as of July 1,200 1. The tax schedule has not changed but the exemption rule has been modified.’ In early 2001, subsidies on sugar and rice were reduced.2 Investment bureau branches were set in each of the country’s 14 provinces with strict time limitations for awarding project licenses. 11. POLICY MEASURES AND MAIN POINTS OF THE DECREES ISSUED IN 2002 Implemented measures A Credit and Monetary Committee was set up in April 2002. The committee will be responsible for monetary policy and the development of the financial sector. In the context of a plan to turn over the management of public enterprises to private companies, the management of a large public enterprise was taken over by a foreign company. The CboS was permitted to transfers pensions in foreign currency to Syrians living abroad (using the neighb oring countries rate for non-commercial transactions). The CboS was permitted to sell the equivalent of $1,000 for each pilgrim conditional that this amount be considered as part of the $3,000 travelers are allowed to take with them. Syrians and non-Syrians were allowed to open bank accounts with the CboS in foreign exchange using transfers or checks originated abroad. Depositors were allowed to transfer their money back abroad in foreign currency. Deposits can be used to finance imports or be withdrawn as banknotes. Depositors can sell their foreign exchange to the CboS and they can buy it back. Syrians and non-Syrians were allowed to open bank accounts with the CboS in foreign exchange using banknotes. Deposits can be used to finance imports or to withdraw it as banknotes. Depositors can sell their foreign exchange to the CboS. Transfers abroad must be supported by documents that the money will be used for medical reasons, education, attend conferences, and to subscribe to newspapers. ’ According to the previous exemption rule for the individual income tax, the lowest LS 100 tranche of an employee’s income was exempted Corn the income tax, while according to the new rule all income within the highest LS 1000 tranche is exempt from the tax. 2 The allocation of subsidized sugar and rice per person per month was limited to 1 kg and % kg, respectively. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 49 - APPENDIX V l l a When non-resident buys real estate in Syria the equivalent foreign exchange will have to be brought into the country through the official channels and be sold to one of the authorized banks. Effective June 2002, employees were granted a 20 percent pay increase and public sector benefits were raised, such as a 15 percent raise in retirement benefits. At the beginning of 2002, tariff rates on goods produced in Lebanon were eliminated. Monthly benefits of public employees were adjusted to LS 300 for the wife, LS 200 for the first child, LS 150 for the second child, and LS 100 for the third child. Heating subsidy per month increased by LS 250 to LS 870. Taxes on real estate were limited to trading activities in this sector. In May 2002, the Ministry of Supply and Internal Trade announced a rise in fuel prices by 20 percent, cooking gas by 33 percent, and heating oil by 33 percent. However, the rise in the price of cooking gas was subsequently reversed by the Parliament and limited to 4 percent. Pre-determination of profit margins was discontinued for the following commodities: electrical appliances (refrigerators, washing machines, gas and electrical stoves, etc.), air conditioners and heaters, spare parts for cars, coffee, office equipments, sewing machines, carpets produced by private sector, knitting , sport equipments and machines, cars, agricultural machines, furniture, and watches. Effective September 2002, some non commercial transactions were permitted to take place at the neighboring countries exchange rate for non-commercial transactions. Accordingly, residents are allowed to purchase up to $20,000 for medical treatments abroad; students with parents living in Syria can obtain foreign exchange to cover their educational expenses abroad; and for pilgrimage purposes residents can purchase up to $3,000 dollars. Effective September 2002, the export surrender requirement on non-agricultural products was reduced from 25 percent to 10 percent. Effective September 2002, exchange rates used for customs valuations were unified at the exchange rate in neighboring countries and the tariff rates were reduced so as to maintain the net impact on revenue neutral. Effective October 2002, the CboS was permitted to open facilities in foreign exchange to Syrian industrialists that export their production. These advances are limited to the importation of raw materials. These facilities take place at the rate in neighboring countries and require that a 10 percent in Syria pounds of the total loan amount is deposited at the CboS. For any one industrialist the amount could not exceed $600,000. Among the Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 50 - APPENDIX V conditions set on this borrowing from the CboS is that the loan amount will have to be repaid within a year of the export date. a Effective October 2002, residents were allowed to purchase foreign exchange at the rate in neighboring countries to buy airline tickets from Syrian Arab Airlines. l Effective October 2002, the CboS was permitted to sell Syrian residents wishing to visit Saudi Arabia for pilgrimage purposes an amount of SR1029 and $3,000 at the rate in neighboring countries. B. Measures in the pipeline 0 A new commerce law will be adopted. The law is currently with the prime minister. a In September 2002, a draft project for the establishment of a ‘One-stop shop’ for investment was submitted to the Cabinet for approval. l A new income tax system is with parliament for approval. Under the new law rates will be reduced across the board and exemptions will be limited. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public