DOCUMENT OF INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND NOT FOR PUBLIC USE FOR AGENDA SM/OO/240 CONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION October 23,200O To: Members of the Executive Board From: The Secretary Subject: Seychelles-Staff Report for the 2000 Article IV Consultation Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staff report for the 2000 Article IV consultation with Seychelles, which is tentatively scheduled for discussion on Wednesday, November 1,200O. Mr. Alleyne (ext. 36510), Mr. Akitoby (ext. 36646), and Mr. El-Masry (ext. 37240) are available to answer technical or factual questions relating to this paper prior to the Board discussion. Unless the Documents Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the WTO Secretariat on Tuesday, October 3 1,200O; and to the African Development Bank and the European Commission, following its consideration by the Executive Board. Att: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicCONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND SEYCHELLES Staff Report for the 2000 Article IV Consultation Prepared by the Staff Representatives for the 2000 Consultation with Seychelles Approved by A. Basu and Martin J. Fetherston October 23,200O 0 Consultation discussions were held in Mahe, during July 25 - August 7,200O. . The representatives from Seychelles included Vice President and Minister of Finance, Mr. James Michel; Governor of the Central Bank of Seychelles, Mr. Norman Weber; Minister of Tourism and Civil Aviation, Ms. Simone de Comannond; Principal Secretary in the Ministry of Finance, Mr. Francis Chang Leng; other senior officials of the government and major parastatals; and representatives from the banking, tourism, and business communities. . The mission team consisted of Messrs. Alleyne (head-AFR), Akitoby (AFR), El-Masry (AFR), Fonteyne (MAE), Haacker (EP-AFR), and Tyaba (Research Assistant-AFR). . Seychelles is currently on a 24-month Article IV consultation cycle. At the 1998 Article IV consultation, Executive Directors expressed serious concern about the deterioration of the country’s economic and financial position and urged the authorities to adopt a strong homegrown adjustment program that would include a timely and credible exchange rate adjustment, supportive structural reforms to realign prices and liberalize the economy, and a tightening of macroeconomic policies. . Seychelles accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2(a), 3, and 4 in January 1978. However, Seychelles maintains restrictions on payments and transfers for current international transactions subject to approval under Fund jurisdiction, including restrictions on the transfer of profits and dividends, a foreign exchange allocation system, and restrictions evidenced by external payments arrears. 0 Summaries of Seychelles’s relations with the Fund and the World Bank Group are provided in Appendices II and III, respectively. Selected social and demographic indicators are contained in Appendix IV, information on core data and statistical issues is presented in Appendix V, and the background of the Public Information Notice (PIN) is in Appendix VI. l A joint IMFWorld Bar&/African Development Bank mission visited Seychelles in April 2000, to begin discussions on possible financial arrangements. In June and July, separate technical assistance missions from MAE, FAD, and the World Bank visited Seychelles to look into various issues raised by the April discussions. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2- Contents Page Introduction Box 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...*... . . . . . . . . . . Executive Summary ,.......,......,.........a........ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..a................ . . . . . . . . . . . ..*........................*..... 4 I. Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6 II. Report on the Policy Discussions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9 A. Exchange Rate Policy ......................................................................................... 12 B. Fiscal Policy ........................................................................................................ 13 C. Monetary Policy and Financial Sector Reform ................................................... 14 D. Trade Reform, Domestic Price Liberalization, and Private Sector Development ............................................................................... 17 E. Statistical Issues.. ................................................................................................ 17 III. Staff Appraisal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..*.............................. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18 Text Boxes 1. Trade and Exchange Restrictions .................................................................................. 8 2. FAD Technical Assistance Mission ............................................................................. 15 3. MAE Technical Assistance Mission ............................................................................ 16 Figures 1. Economic Indicators, 1995-2000 ................................................................................. 21 2. Exchange Rate Indices, January 1990-July 2000 ........................................................ 22 3. Main Economic Indicators, 1997-2005 ....................................................................... 23 Statistical Tables 1. Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 1996-2000 ............................................ 24 2. Consolidated Government Operations, 1996-2000 ..................................................... 25 3. Balance of Payments, 1996-2000 ................................................................................ 26 4. Summary of Monetary and Credit Developments, 1996-2000 .................................... 27 5. Indicators of Banking System Soundness .................................................................... 28 Appendixes I. Main Assumptions Behind Scenarios.. ....................................................................... .29 II. Relations with the Fund.. ............................................................................................. 34 III. Relations with the World Bank Group ....................................................................... .36 IV. Social and Demographic Indicators ............................................................................. 38 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3- Contents Page V. Statistical Issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39 VI. IMF Draft Background Section for Public Information Notice . . . . ..*............................. 42 Appendix Tables Table 6: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 1999-2002 (Status Quo). . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...32 Table 7: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 1999-2005 (Adjustment Scenario). 33 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public. -4- Executive Summary l As a result of growing macroeconomic imbalances and persistent structural problems that have weakened economic efficiency and external competitiveness, economic conditions have steadily deteriorated since the time of the last Article IV consultation in 1998. Real GDP has declined, the growth of public debt continued at an unsustainable rate, inflation picked up, while official foreign exchange reserves remain depleted and a parallel foreign exchange market with a large exchange rate premium is thriving. l The main macroeconomic imbalance underlying the current economic difficulties is the large fiscal deficit, which doubled from about 7 percent of GDP during 1993-95 to 14 percent of GDP during 1996-99. While the government has taken important steps to correct its fiscal problems, the related gains have been offset by the growth in capital spending. l Seychelles faces serious structural impediments to economic growth, many of which arise from the extensive intervention of the government. These impediments include controlled prices, a foreign exchange allocation system, a restrictive import licensing system, and intervention in manufacturing and distribution by the parastatals, often with monopoly power or privileges not granted to the private sector. As a result, the latter has remained reluctant to invest, and economic efficiency has been hurt. l The authorities agreed that there was a need for wide ranging economic reforms, including the correction of fiscal imbalances and the liberalization of the economy and stated that they were in broad agreement with most of the mission’s proposals. However, they were concerned about the potential negative effects of some of the proposals, in particular, on exchange rate policy and interest rate policy. l On fiscal policy, the mission recommended that the authorities aim for a surplus in their recurrent operations in 2001, and limit spending on capital projects to an amount that can be covered by that surplus, and foreign financing (including grants). Moreover, the quantity and terms of foreign borrowing should not impair the central bank’s usable foreign exchange reserves or create potential debt service difficulties. The authorities planned to target a budget deficit of 3-4 percent of GDP, consistent with the recommendation of the mission. l The existing level of the Seychelles rupee in the official market appears to be far out of line with current economic fundamentals. Because of the lack of reserves with which to defend a fixed exchange rate, and the difficulty in estimating the effect on the equilibrium rate of the planned economic liberalization and correction of fiscal imbalances, the mission recommended that the currency be allowed to float to find its equilibrium level. The authorities favored a more gradual change in the exchange rate out of concern for the possibility of a large overshooting in the event of a float and Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-5- the negative impact a sharp decline in the exchange rate could have on the private sector. The mission argued that these risks were small, provided that the proposed fiscal policies were implemented, and monetary policy was sufficiently tightened. Moreover, no systemic risk to the banking system was foreseen. l The authorities were in broad agreement with the mission’s proposals to remove controls on price and profit margins, eliminate the administrative allocation of foreign exchange, abolish the restrictive licensing of imports, simplify and liberalize the tariff system, develop a strategy for the privatization of the major parastatals and phase out the monopoly status and the concessions granted to the Seychelles Marketing Board. However, they were concerned that the implementation of reforms be structured so as to minimize the disruption in the economy and they hoped that foreign financing could be obtained to soften any possible short-term negative effects of the reforms. l The economic and financial statistics and the reporting procedures of key economic data to the Fund need to be strengthened. In particular, deficiencies in the national income and price statistics limit their usefulness and hamper surveillance, economic analysis, and policy formulation. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicI. BACKGROUND 1. Seychelles has achieved one of the highest standards of living in Africa. Over the past 20 years, GDP per capita has increased eight-fold. According to the 1998 United Nations Development Program (UNDP) Human Development Index, Seychelles ranked 56th among 175 developed and developing countries. In recent years, the sustainability of these achievements has been threatened by growing macroeconomic imbalances and structural problems that have made the economy less efficient and less competitive. Real GDP has stagnated in the past two years, after rising by 5 percent during 1996-97. Also, serious balance of payments problems have emerged, causing a decline in net international reserves from US$28 million in 1995 to US$15 million (less than two weeks of imports) in 1999 and the accumulation of some US$50 - US$60 million in external payments arrears. 2. The main macroeconomic imbalance underlying the current economic difficulties is the large fiscal deficit, which doubled from about 7 percent of GDP during 1993-95 to about 14 percent of GDP during 1996-99. The principal reason for the deterioration in the public finances was a surge in capital outlays and net lending, but there was also a steady growth in current spending (e.g., the wage bill, transfers to parastatals, and social welfare payments). Fiscal data for the first half of 2000 point to a deficit of 16 percent of GDP for the whole year as smaller dividend transfers by parastatals to the government and lower tax revenue offset lower spending.l Government arrears on external amortization payments also increased by an estimated US$3 million. The government’s domestic debt rose from 69 percent of GDP in 1996 to about 107 percent of GDP in 1999, while its external debt remained largely unchanged at about 60 percent. 3. While the government has taken important steps to correct its fiscal problems, the related gains have been offset by the growth in capital spending. Measures taken to improve the public finances include a reduction in transfers to parastatals, reflecting the strong reorganization of Seychelles Petroleum Corporation and Air Seychelles; the sale or lease of more than half of the state-owned hotels and the privatization or closing down of loss-making enterprises; the reduction in abuses and tightening of eligibility requirements for social welfare benefits;2 the reform of budgetary procedures to tighten expenditure control; and a resolution by the Board of the Central Bank of Seychelles (CBS) to place a ceiling of ’ The deficit is expected to be higher than the budget estimate by 4 percent of GDP because of lower-than-projected revenue. However, capital spending will be lower than projected in the 2000 budget as dredging and landfill operations on the largest project, the East Coast Land Reclamation Project (ECP), were temporarily suspended in early July because of the need for equipment repairs, * In 1998, following an audit of the Subsistence Level Supplementary Benefit Scheme that succeeded in eliminating widespread fraud, monthly payments were reduced from about SR 7 million to about SR 300,000. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-7- SR 100 million on the amount of short-term advances to government. However, the increased rate of government capital spending, which, as a percent of GDP, far exceeds that of countries of similar size, wealth, and economic orientation, has negated the fiscal saving made elsewhere in the budget.3 4. The large budget deficit was accommodated by a substantial easing of monetary conditions. Increased government borrowing from the banking system has been facilitated by an increase in the liquid assets ratio for commercial banks.4 Between 1995 and 1999, broad money increased by 19 percent per year, compared with nominal GDP growth of 8 percent. The increase in underlying inflationary pressures created by the acceleration in the growth of money has not been reflected in the official retail price index data because a significant portion of commodities in the consumption basket are subject to price controls. Nevertheless, measured inflation has risen steadily from less than 1 percent in 1997 to over 6 percent in June 2000. 5. The decline in net saving by the go\;ernment during 1996-99 has been reflected in strong import demand, worsening export performance, and a widening external current account deficit. With insufficient autonomous capital inflows to finance these larger deficits, and the authorities’ policy of keeping the official exchange rate of the Seychelles rupee unchanged, international reserves have declined, external payments arrears have accumulated, and trade and foreign exchange restrictions have been tightened (Box 1). The shortage of foreign exchange has disrupted economic activity, especially in those sectors without preferential access to foreign exchange, by creating difficulties in obtaining timely supplies of imported inputs, equipment, and spare parts. The illegal parallel foreign exchange market that has emerged (with an exchange rate premium of up to 100 percent) now accounts for the financing of a large proportion of all imports of goods and services in Seychelles.’ 3 Government capital expenditure has included projects such as power generation, sewerage systems, water desalination, and the construction of houses and roads. As a percentage of GDP, it has been, on average, more than twice that of comparator countries in the Caribbean. 4 The liquid assets ratio for commercial banks (which is a requirement to hold government securities) was raised from 50 percent to 70 percent of their deposit liabilities, and the cash reserve requirement was lowered from 20 percent to 2V2 percent. In addition, in September 1998, the six-month interest rate on government securities was reduced from 11% percent to 5 percent and the rate on savings deposits from 8 percent to 3 percent. 5 The parallel market, though illegal, in practice operates with little interference. In 1999, total foreign exchange flows into the banking system that were not purchased by government for its external debt service amounted to US$247 million, or less than 50 percent of total imports of goods and services, as recorded in the balance of payments. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-8- Box 1. Seychelles: Trade and Exchange Restrictions Foreign trade restrictions . Import licenses and permits. Importers are required to obtain import licenses from the Seychelles Licensing Authority. In addition, for each shipment of commodities, an importer must submit an application for an import permit, the approval of which is at the discretion of the Ministry of Finance. l Import quotas. On January 1, 1997, the government introduced import quotas (in value) applicable to most imports, which are set as a percentage of the previous year’s imports. In 1999, the annual import quota was set at 75 percent of 1998 imports. l State import monopoly. The Seychelles Marketing Board has the monopoly on imports of meat, dairy products, edible vegetables and fruits, rice, wheat, vegetable oil, margarine, sugar, tomato sauce, and squash. The Seychelles Petroleum Company is the sole legal importer of petroleum and petroleum products. Foreign exchange restrictions . Repatriation and surrender requirements. The 1996 Foreign Earnings Act requires all residents (including companies and private persons) to repatriate all their foreign exchange earnings and to surrender them to the commercial banks. Exceptions to the general repatriation requirement include the commercial banks and offshore companies, of which the most important is the Indian Ocean Tuna. In July 2000, the government allowed major foreign exchange earners and small businesses to retain 15 percent in foreign exchange accounts with resident commercial banks for their import needs. l Foreign allocation guidelines. Commercial banks are required to allocate foreign exchange as follows: 27 percent of the foreign exchange accrued to them must be surrendered to the Central Bank of Seychelles (CBS) for essential goods; 13 percent has to be transferred to government debt servicing accounts; 5 percent has to be surrendered to the CBS for the external obligations of the nonresident airlines; 2.5 percent has to be sold to the Seychelles Tourism Advisory Board for its marketing and promotional activities; 10 percent has to be devoted to the elimination of the frozen pipeline [commercial external payment arrears for which the domestic currency equivalent is held on deposit at commercial banks); and the remaining foreign exchange has to be used for payments in accordance with a priority list. l Restrictions evidenced by external payment arrears. 6. Seychelles also faces serious structural impediments to economic growth, many of which arise from the extensive intervention of the government. This intervention, whether designed to artificially control prices (such as controls in the form of fixed markups on imported goods or the maintenance of an overvalued official exchange rate) or to allocate resources (via the foreign exchange allocation mechanism or the system of import quotas and permits) has distorted relative prices in the economy, thereby preventing an efficient allocation of resources by market forces. In addition, the government has intervened in manufacturing and distribution via the parastatals, which often have effective monopoly power or privileges not granted to the private sector. The structure of taxation is heavily reliant on taxes on trade and business, including a business payroll tax/contribution to the Social Security Fund (SSF) at a marginal rate of 40 percent that adds significantly to the cost Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-9- of labor. Largely for these reasons, the private sector has been discouraged fi-om playing an active role, thus remaining dormant and reluctant to invest. All of these factors have led, over time, to a decline in productivity and efficiency.6 7. In the past two years, progress in correcting structural problems has been mixed. There have been some positive developments in improving the competitive environment: the list of goods for which the Seychelles Marketing Board has exclusive importation rights has been reduced, and, in 1998, the government introduced competition in the telecommunications industry by licensing a second telephone service provider. Since the classification of Seychelles by the Financial Stability Forum as a Category III offshore financial center, the authorities have undertaken a number of measures, including the repeal of the Economic Development Act (EDA) in July 2000 and participation in the outreach program organized by the Fund.7 However, as foreign exchange pressures have mounted, the authorities have introduced more regulations on foreign trade and foreign exchange allocation. II. REPORTONTHEPOL~CYDISCUSSIONS 8. The main policy challenge facing Seychelles is the urgent need to move more aggressively to correct the macroeconomic imbalances and the structural problems that are at the root of the slowdown in economic growth and balance of payments difficulties. Under current policies, the mission estimated that real GDP growth would continue to stagnate during 2000-02, as the recession in the domestic import substitution and nontradable sectors would worsen in response to the continuing scarcity of foreign exchange in the official foreign exchange market. A larger proportion of the country’s foreign exchange transactions would be diverted to the illegal parallel market, but, as confidence on the part of both domestic and foreign investors waned, an increasing demand to shift out of rupee-denominated assets and into foreign currency would cause the parallel market rate to continue to depreciate. These developments would put steady upward pressure on domestic prices, and, in the absence of either budgetary or monetary restraint, inflation would steadily rise. Although the officially recorded current account deficit would shrink markedly, reflecting the shortage of foreign exchange to finance imports, the overall external balance would likely remain in deficit, as net capital inflows would decline. As a result, it is likely 6 Total domestic investment has been high but it has been concentrated in public sector capital projects, many of which were undertaken without due regard to their potential economic rates of return. 7 The EDA, through never put into operation, contained provisions for attracting foreign investment that could have encouraged money-laundering activity. The Financial Action Task Force (FATF) of the OECD endorsed the repeal of the EDA. The FATF also retracted its warning that financial institutions world-wide be cautious in their transactions with individuals or companies domiciled in Seychelles. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- lo- that international reserves would continue to be at very low levels and external payments arrears would rise (Table 6 and Appendix I). 9. Thus far, the government’s strategy to promote investment and revive economic activity has relied largely on the granting of selective tax and other incentives. Certain beneficiaries under the Investment Promotion Act (LPA),’ such as tuna processing, luxury (“five-star”) hotels, and semi-industrial fishing, have experienced increased investment and improved economic performance as new productive capacity has come onstream.’ However, because of continuing problems in other sectors and increasing demands by those sectors for special favors, the mission suggested that a better approach would be one that sought to correct the fundamental imbalances in the economy, create a level playing field for all economic activities and participants, and then, for the most part, allow market forces to determine the allocation of resources. Otherwise, the need for an elaborate system of investment incentives would grow over time, eroding the tax system, creating administrative problems, and reducing overall economic efficiency.” The mission argued that the necessity for a vehicle like the IPA was proof that, in the current economic environment and under the current system of taxes and regulations, entrepreneurs were reluctant to invest without substantial incentives. 10. The mission proposed an economic recovery and growth program containing the following core features: l the market determination of the exchange rate in the context of a far-reaching liberalization of the existing foreign trade and exchange systems; * The law specifies rebates on trade taxes, social security contributions, and business taxes; provides exemptions from foreign exchange surrender requirements; guarantees minimum quotas of non-Seychellois employees, and offers accelerated depreciation schemes. ‘Compared with the same period a year ago, canned tuna and prawn exports are up 20 percent and 400 percent, respectively, for the first six months of 2000. Tourism arrivals are up by about 7 percent for the first six months of the year, and investment plans for luxury hotels totaling some U$375 million over the next eight years have been approved or are close to approval by the government. ” According to staff estimates, in 1999, the various exemptions from import duties amounted to SR 281 million (8% percent of GDP) in forgone revenue, 40 percent of which was on account of IPA or other statutory exemptions. Furthermore, the Ministry of Finance has had to set up a special unit to monitor the investment incentive claims that companies have sought under the IPA in order to combat growing abuses. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-ll- a substantial reduction in the overall fiscal deficit to help stabilize the foreign exchange market, facilitate the tightening of monetary policy, and put government debt on a path consistent with medium-term sustainability; a tightening of monetary conditions sufficient to contain inflationary pressures, preserve the potential gains in external competitiveness from the adoption of a market-determined exchange rate, and foster stability in the liberalized exchange market; a comprehensive package of structural and sectoral reforms covering (1) the liberalization of trade, marketing, domestic prices, and interest rates; (2) privatization strategy; and (3) reform of the civil service, labor market policies, and the welfare system; and a prudent strategy for foreign borrowing, debt restructuring, and public debt management to support the implementation of the program and the economic growth process, and to ensure the regularization of external arrears and the resumption of normal relations with external creditors. 11. Under an economic program embodying the set of proposals summarized above, the staff estimated that real GDP growth could rise from 1 percent in 2000 to 1 ‘/ percent in 2001 and rebound thereafter to an average annual rate of about 5 percent in 2002 and beyond (Table 7 and Appendix I). Inflation could rise temporarily to an average annual rate of 24 percent in 2001, following the liberalization of the foreign exchange market and the domestic price controls but should then fall quickiy to below 3 percent in the medium term. Official foreign reserves would rise from four to ten weeks of imports during 2000-2005, while the external current account deficit would narrow from about 8 percent of GDP in 2000 to about 5 percent of GDP in 2002 and about 4 percent thereafter, reflecting strong growth in real exports of about 5 percent a year during 2001-05. The budget deficit was projected to fall from about 17 percent of GDP in 2000, to about 5 percent of GDP in 2001, and two percent or less thereafter. 12. The authorities agreed that there was a need for wide-ranging economic reforms, including the correction of fiscal imbalances and the liberalization of the economy, and broadly concurred with most of the mission’s recommendations. However, they were concerned about the potential negative effects of some of the proposals, in particular on exchange rate policy and interest rate policy, and how they could be mitigated. They emphasized that they were committed to carrying out the necessary reforms and were working on a timetable for implementing them, with a view to developing an adjustment program that they hoped could be supported by the Fund and other multilateral and bilateral donors. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12- A. Exchange Rate Policy 13. The large parallel market premium, the acute foreign exchange shortages, and the serious balance of payments problems point to an official exchange rate that is well out of line with economic fundamentals. The misalignment of the exchange rate and the highly distortionary allocation mechanism for imports and foreign exchange have hurt economic efficiency. They have also increased the vulnerability of the economy by depleting the level of reserves and have led to interruption in debt-service payments, which has impaired relations with creditors and weakened the country’s creditworthiness. In return, the authorities have gained no perceptible benefits, since economic activity remains sluggish. The mission therefore urged the authorities to adjust the exchange rate to a level more reflective of market conditions in order to help correct the problems caused by the currency’s misalignment. 14. Because of the lack of reserves with which to defend a fixed exchange rate, the need to rebuild international reserves, and the difficulty in estimating the effect on the market- clearing rate of the proposed economic liberalization and correction of fiscal imbalances, the mission suggested that the authorities float the currency to allow it to find its equilibrium level. 15. The mission suggested that, together with a floating of the currency, all surrender and allocation restrictions on foreign exchange operations of the commercial banks be abolished (including those that restricted the repatriation of profits and dividends by nonresidents), thereby allowing them to trade foreign exchange freely with exporters and importers for all approved current international transactions. Intervention by the central bank would be limited to that necessary to meet its own debt-service obligations, rebuild its international reserve position, smooth exchange rate fluctuations, and purchase funds on behalf of the government. The central bank would compete on a nonpreferential basis with other market participants for foreign exchange. 16. The authorities did not favor an immediate float of the currency and argued instead for a gradual adjustment of the official exchange rate to the parallel market rate. They felt that there was a risk of a substantial overshooting of the exchange rate. They were also concerned about the inflationary impact of a large exchange rate adjustment and the losses to the business community holding foreign currency liabilities.” The mission noted that a gradual adjustment of the official exchange rate would lead market participants to wait for further adjustments toward the market-clearing rate, and thus dampen the ” The mission was unable to obtain data on the size or concentration of foreign currency debt held by the private sector outside the banking system. It noted, however, that since external borrowing costs and rates of return have tended to reflect the parallel market exchange rate, rather than the official exchange rate, a devaluation of the official rate should have little impact on corporate profitability. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13- momentum of adjustment. It also commented that the risk of a possible sharp overshooting of the exchange rate as a result of a float, with a corresponding spike in inflation, would seem to be limited in the case of Seychelles. Given that a large amount of transactions were already taking place at the parallel foreign exchange market rate, the impact on inflation of a change in the official rate to a level close to the parallel rate would likely be moderate and temporary, especially if this change were supported by an early strengthening of macroeconomic policies and a reduction of import tariffs (discussed below). B. Fiscal Policy 17. The mission emphasized that, in order to minimize the risk of an overshooting of the exchange rate and avoid an inflationary spiral, there should be a substantial tightening fiscal and monetary policies prior to the float of the currency. A large reduction in the fiscal deficit was also important to stop the current unsustainable growth of government debt and facilitate the desired monetary restraint. The mission recommended that the fiscal balance be reduced to 4-5 percent of GDP in 2001 and further to below 2 percent of GDP by 2002, a level consistent with the government’s medium-term external debt-service capacity and implying a debt-to-GDP ratio much lower than that of 1999. 18. The mission proposed that the authorities aim for a surplus in the current budget in 2001, compared with the projected deficit of 1% percent of GDP in 2000. In addition, capital spending would be limited to an amount that could be covered by current budget surpluses, resources generated by the projects themselves, and foreign financing. This implied that the government would have no new recourse to domestic banking system credit. The authorities acknowledged the need for a substantial reduction in the fiscal deficit and indicated that, for the 2001 budget, they planned to target a fiscal deficit of about 3 percent of GDP. They noted that no new capital expenditure projects would be considered for 2001 and that all existing projects, with the exception of the ECP and sewerage projects, had been put on hold pending an assessment of their economic viability. Furthermore, in line with recommendations by a July 2000 World Bank mission, they agreed that government’s investment in the ECP project would be substantially scaled back and limited to the completion of the dredging and landfill operations, leaving the private sector responsible for subsequent downstream development. 19. The authorities also intended to seek additional fiscal savings via civil service and social welfare reforms. They planned to strengthen ongoing efforts to limit the growth of the wage bill through wage moderation and rationalizing the civil service, and indicated that measures to further reduce abuses and increase means testing for social welfare benefits would be implemented.” The mission endorsed these plans and noted that civil service and ” A consultant from the African Development Bank is in Seychelles advising the authorities in this area. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14- social welfare reforms would also help increase the supply of domestic labor for the private sector, which, especially in the case of the tourist sector, was experiencing difficulty in filling its vacancies with Seychellois. 20. The mission recommended that foreign financing be on terms that neither reduced the level of usable foreign exchange reserves, nor created the potential for debt-service difficulties. Such a policy implied a slower pace of capital expenditures than had been undertaken in recent years. In addition, it was important that the ECP be financed by medium- to long-term funds without pledges of export receipts or other attachments. 21. The mission urged the authorities to implement the recommendations of the July 2000 FAD technical assistance mission, including import tariff liberalization and the replacement of the existing trade tax with a manufacturer’s sales tax (Box 2). The mission also recommended that the authorities reduce the tax burden borne by businesses, especially with respect to the high and progressive social security tax/contribution rates, and consider the introduction of a personal income tax. It also urged the government to broaden the tax base by curtailing the use of discretionary tax exemptions and not granting any new statutory exemptions. The authorities broadly agreed with the recommendations. They indicated their intention to introduce a general sales tax, simplify the tariff system (including curtailment of discretionary exemptions), and significantly reduce tariffs. However, they wanted to ensure that their main manufacturing sectors, beverages and tobacco, were afforded sufficient time to adapt to any removal of protection. C. Monetary Policy and Financial Sector Reform 22. The mission emphasized that it would be important to implement a sufficient level of monetary restraint in order to ensure that second-round inflationary pressures arising from the exchange rate adjustment and price liberalization were contained and did not generate more widespread and permanent price pressures. The mission proposed that the authorities increase substantially the reserve requirement ratio on remunerated terms and also move gradually toward a more market-based system of monetary control, including the liberalization of interest rates. In the transition to more indirect methods of monetary control, and especially in the initial stages of macroeconomic adjustment, the mission suggested that the authorities first raise nominal interest rates on government securities to achieve positive levels in real terms; ensure that deposit and lending rates were also positive in real terms; and place limits on the overall expansion of bank system credit.13 The authorities concurred. The mission encouraged the authorities to adopt the recommendations I3 In the early stages of a move to market-based tools, the operations may not be well understood by commercial banks and there could be uncertainty as to how the monetary transmission mechanism might work in Seychelles. Until these concerns have subsided, and to ensure the success of the monetary restraint exercise, it would be desirable to work with instruments with which the authorities were accustomed. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 15- of the June 2000 MAE technical assistance mission (Box 3), which judged the financial system to be relatively sound and foresaw no systemic problems arising from the macroeconomic adjustment.14 Box 2. Seychelles: FAD Technical Assistance Mission A FAD technical assistance mission visited Seychelles during June 18-30,2000, to advise the authorities on reforming the indirect tax system, including customs duties. The mission’s findings and recommendations are summarized below. The mission noted that the current trades tax, which bundles into a single tax import duties, excise duties, and taxes on specific services, is characterized by the widespread application of tax exemptions and incentives that have eroded the tax base and complicated tax administration. The mission emphasized the need to unbundle the current trades tax into three separate levies: (1) customs duties, to provide certain protection for domestic production; (2) a consumption or sales tax, to raise revenue by taxing expenditure on consumption of goods and services as uniformly and comprehensively as possible; and (3) an excise tax on a narrow range of products with high revenue yield, to supplement the consumption tax. [n its recommendations, the mission was mindful that (1) Seychelles would need to reform its customs tariff system in line with commitments and obligations under regional trading organizations, including the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA); (2) the proposed tax collection system should take account of the limited capacity of the tax administration; and (3) the reforms should be more or less revenue- neutral, as the overall tax burden in Seychelles was already heavy. The mission’s key recommendations included the following: The introduction of a manufacturers’ sales tax on goods and the continuation of the current trades tax on selected domestic services. The manufacturers’ sales tax would provide for a credit mechanism allowing registered manufacturers to deduct from their sales tax liability the sales tax paid by them in respect to inputs directly used in the manufacture of taxable goods. The threshold for mandatory registration for the manufacturers’ sales tax would be set at an annual turnover of SR 200,000. The tax base of the trades tax applicable to domestic services would be broadened to include restaurants, car hire, boat charters, and tour operations. The consolidation of all import duties into four rates of 0,5, 15, and 30 percent. This system would be adapted to conform with COMESA’s common external tariff (CET) structure, once the final CET has been agreed upon. A systemic effort should be made to reduce the extent of discretionary duty concessions granted to importers. Excise duties on goods not produced in Seychelles, to be levied on top of the highest customs tariff rate (30 percent) at an excise rate sufficient to maintain the total tax burden on these imports. Excise duties on goods produced in Seychelles would need to be uniformly levied at the same excise rate as on corresponding imports. In addition, specific excise duties should be introduced for petroleum products. l4 Stress tests undertaken to estimate the effect on the banking system of possible exchange rate and interest rate changes, indicated that two government-owned banks could require recapitalization of about SR 60-SR 100 million (2-3 percent of GDP). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 16- Box 3. Seychelles: MAE Technical Assistance Mission The MAE technical assistance mission that took place during June 12-16,200O concluded that the financial sector in Seychelles is essentially sound and highly profitable. Nonperforming loans are low and (Basel) capital adequacy ratios are high because of the importance of government paper in the balance sheet of banks (hvo- thirds of total assets). However, in terms of total assets and total deposits, capital adequacy is less comfortable, particularly, at one state-owned bank. It found that the banking system’s main vulnerability might be to an interest rate shock, as a sudden large increase in interest rates would reduce the value of the government paper in banks’ portfolios. The mission recommended liberalizing the exchange rate system, rationalizing foreign exchange regulations, and moving to a market-based system of monetary management, including through a liberalization of interest rates. The mission also recommended that banking supervision be strengthened and prudential regulations enhanced. The mission concluded that the foreign exchange system was in pressing need of reform, noting that the currency was overvalued at the official exchange rate, and that the foreign exchange regulations imposed exchange restrictions resulting in the breach by Seychelles of its obligations under Article VIII. Accordingly, the mission recommended the following: . After a substantial up-front devaluation along the lines envisaged by the African Department’s mission in April 2000, the rupee should be allowed to float to find its appropriate level. 0 All restrictions maintained by Seychelles on payments and transfers for current international transactions, including restrictions on the transfers and profits and dividends, the foreign exchange allocation system and the restrictions evidenced by external payment arrears should be eliminated as soon as possible to bring Seychelles into compliance with its Article VIII obligations. l A completely new foreign exchange law should be enacted to differentiate between current account transactions and capital movements. The new law would enable the imposition of capital controls, which may be required during the initial stages of the exchange system reform. In recommending a move to a more market-based system of monetary management, the mission advocated the phasing in of the following reforms: l Liberalizing interest rates, initially through an increase in nominal interest rates to produce positive real rates. This would be followed by the reintroduction of auctions for treasury securities and the abolition of all regulations on interest rates. . Increasing the reserve requirement from 2.5 percent to 5 percent, remunerable at near market rates; lowering the local assets ratio in three stages from 70 percent to 20 percent; and consolidating the existing three central bank facilities into one overdraft facility. . Encouraging the central bank to undertake open market operations, after first acquiring a stock of treasury bills through the securitization of the government’s overdraft. Regarding the strengthening of banking supervision and enhancement of prudential regulations, the mission recommended a fundamental change in focus of bank regulation and supervision, including the introduction of limits on open foreign exchange positions, large exposure limits, and loan classification and provisioning rules for banks. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17- D. Trade Reform, Domestic Price Liberalization, and Private Sector Development 23. The mission urged the authorities to rapidly move towards an elimination of nontariff barriers, and, as already mentioned, recommended that they simplify and liberalize the tariff system.” The proposed reforms would make the tariff system consistent with the country’s obligations to the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA). The authorities reaffirmed Seychelles’s commitment to implement the COMESA free trade agreement by August 2001 and noted that, although Seychelles had not yet signed the Southern Africa Development Community (SADC) trade protocol, negotiations were continuing on how it should enter the process. In addition, background work had just begun toward joining the World Trade Organization (WTO). 24. In conjunction with the trade liberalization measures, the mission emphasized the importance of removing the existing controls on prices and profit margins, and of developing a strategy for promoting competition in domestic production and private sector development. In particular, the mission encouraged the authorities to phase out the monopoly status and the concessions granted to the Seychelles Marketing Board, and develop a privatization program for the major parastatals. The latter would have the added benefits of reducing government debt and facilitating the rebuilding of foreign exchange reserves and the elimination of external payments arrears. A well-designed strategy for demonopolization, price liberalization, and external liberalization could also result in cheaper and more efficient sources for the supply of imported goods and services, helping to reduce substantially any potential inflationary impact of the proposed shift to a market-determined exchange rate.16 The authorities affirmed their commitment to promoting private sector development and indicated that they were developing a program of measures with the assistance of the World Bank (Appendix III). E. Statistical Issues 25. The mission urged the authorities to strengthen the statistical databases and procedures for reporting key economic data to the Fund. In particular, the authorities should reconcile as soon as possible the large differences between the consolidated government operations (which include the accounts of the Social Security Fund) and the monetary statistics.” The fiscal and monetary accounts also should be revised to properly I5 Seychelles has a rating of 10 on the Fund’s lo-point scale of trade restrictiveness. The tariff system specifies 12 nonzero ad valorem rates, ranging from 5 percent to 225 percent. In 1999, the average (unweighted) tariff rate was 28 percent. l6 There is evidence that large markups are being charged for some monopoly goods, and that price controls have encouraged the over invoicing of imports and discouraged importers from seeking out the cheapest sources of supply. ” In 1999, this difference amounted to more than 5 percent of GDP. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 18- classify assets and liabilities, using the residency criterion rather than the currency as the determining factor. Finally, the authorities were urged to provide sufficient resources to strengthen the statistical office’s staffing and administrative capacity, with a view to improving the quality, periodicity, and timeliness of national accounts and price statistics. III. STAFFAPPRAISAL 26. As a result of growing macroeconomic imbalances and persistent structural problems that have weakened economic efficiency and external competitiveness, economic conditions have steadily deteriorated since the time of the last Article IV consultation in 1998. Real GDP has declined, the growth of public debt has continued at an unsustainable rate, and inflation has picked up, while official foreign exchange reserves remain depleted and a parallel foreign exchange market with a large exchange rate premium accounts for a significant and growing proportion of foreign exchange transactions. 27. Given the severity of the macroeconomic imbalances and structural policy distortions, the government wiIl need to push forward more aggressively with significant policy changes. The main pillars of the new policy framework should be a substantial strengthening of the government’s fiscal position, a realignment of the exchange rate to help restore equilibrium in the foreign exchange market, the tightening of monetary policies, and the removal of the administrative controls on foreign trade and exchange transactions, prices, and interest rates. 28. On fiscal policy, the staff supports the authorities’ goal of reducing the budget deficit to 34 percent of GDP in 2001. They should aim for a surplus in their recurrent operations in 2001 and limit spending on capital projects to an amount that can be covered by that surplus, as well as foreign financing (including grants). It would be essential that the quantity and terms of foreign borrowing not impair the central bank’s usable foreign exchange reserves, or create potential debt-service difficulties. 29. To achieve budgetary savings, but also to improve efficiency, the authorities should aim for a steady reduction in the ratio of the wage bill to GDP through wage moderation and a streamlining of the civil service. Savings could also be generated by deepening the reform of the social welfare system through a weeding out of remaining abuses and continued application of means testing wherever possible. Civil service and social welfare reform would have the added benefit of contributing to a more efficient and flexible labor market by increasing the incentive to work and the available supply of labor for the private sector. 30. To improve economic efficiency, the tax system should be reformed. The authorities should reduce the tax burden borne by businesses, especially the high and progressive social security tax rates, and broaden the tax base by curtailing the use of discretionary tax exemptions and not granting any new statutory exemptions. Moreover, the authorities are encouraged to implement the indirect tax reforms suggested by the Fund’s Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 19- Fiscal Affairs Department, including a liberalization and simplification of the tariff structure consistent with their COMESA obligations and the introduction of a general sales tax. 31. The existing level of the Seychelles rupee in the official market appears to be far out of line with current economic fundamentals, and steps to correct the misalignment need to be undertaken as soon as possible. A correction of the misalignment would facilitate the removal of existing foreign exchange and trade restrictions as well as the rebuilding of reserves and the elimination of external payment arrears. Because of the lack of reserves with which to defend a fixed exchange rate and the difficulty in estimating the effect on the equilibrium rate of the planned economic liberalization and correction of fiscal imbalances, floating the currency to allow it to find its equilibrium level is the most appropriate option. The risk that the floating currency could depreciate to more than the level of the parallel market rate would need to be contained through the fiscal policies mentioned above and a sufficiently tight monetary policy stance, including through the raising of nominal interest rates to achieve positive real levels, and the introduction of credit ceilings (while the authorities move progressively towards more market-based methods of monetary management). No systemic risk to the banking system is foreseen as a result of the implementation of these exchange rate and macroeconomic policies. 32. As an alternative to a float, the authorities could consider other options to unify the official and parallel foreign exchange markets. Postponing such a unification would impede and delay the progress toward achieving the goals of reserve accumulation, elimination of arrears, removal of trade and exchange restrictions, and, hence, economic recovery. If the devaluation is smaller than the market’s perception of the appropriate change, the foreign exchange shortage in the official market will not be alleviated, and destabilizing speculation in anticipation of further exchange rate adjustment is likely to occur. 33. The staff urges the elimination of the exchange restrictions that are described in the introduction box, which are contrary to Article VIII. The staff does not recommend approval for the retention of these restrictions in the absence of a specific timetable for their elimination. 34. In order to stimulate private sector activity and improve economic efficiency, a comprehensive economic liberalization policy is required. Steps to remove controls on price and profit margins, eliminate the administrative allocation of foreign exchange, abolish the licensing of imports, and promote competition in domestic production and marketing should be taken as soon as possible. It would be important to phase out the monopoly status and the concessions granted to the Seychelles Marketing Board and develop a strategy for the privatization of the major parastatals. 35. The financial sector in Seychelles is essentially sound. Since Seychelles was classified as a Category III offshore financial center, the authorities have undertaken a number of reforms. In particular, the repeal of the Economic Development Act strengthens their fight against money laundering activities and has helped improve the international Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 20 - reputation of Seychelles in this area as evidenced by the recent endorsement given to the country by the FATF. In addition, the authorities have asked the Fund for technical assistance to assess and strengthen their offshore sector legislation. 36. The economic and financial statistics and the reporting procedures of key economic data to the Fund need to be strengthened. In particular, deficiencies in the national income accounts and price statistics limit their usefulness for surveillance, economic analysis, and policy formulation. Problems in data classification also exist in the fiscal and monetary accounts. The recommendations of the STA statistical assessment mission in March 1999 and the government finance statistics mission in March 2000 have not been implemented, in large part because of insufficient staffing and administrative capacity in the statistics office. 37. In line with the authorities’ request, and in view of the serious problems facing the Seychelles economy, the staff proposes that the next Article IV consultation with Seychelles be changed to the standard 12-month cycle. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-21- Figure 1, Seychelles: Economic Indicators, 1995-2000 26 24 22 20 48 16 14 12 10 a 6 External Current Account Deficit and Fiscal Account Deficit -(In percent of GDP) / \ / '. / s, Fiscal dgficit / \ / \ / \ / \ \ \ \ \ \ \ 1 26 - 24 - 22 - 20 - 17 - 15 - 13 - 11 External current account 3 9 l- I i 7 0 i / 1 I 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 '0 32 Broad Money and Inflation 3o - (In percent ) 28 ,- 26 - 24 - / / 30 1 28 26 Broad money - 24 20 - ia - 16 - la - 16 a a 6 ____----- ./. 6 4 Injlation .I .// I 4 2' -- -H 2 _--- -----___ _--- --_- 0 / 0 -2 I I I I 1 ' 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 -2 Sources: Seychelles authorities; and staff estimates and projections. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public170 160 150 140 130 120 110 100 90 80 70 60 Figure 2. Seychelles: Exchange Rate Indices, January 1990 - July 2000 l/ (1990=100; foreign currency per Seychelles rupee) --- Nominal qflective h-l---J’- /./ / ,i ._-=. ,-._-^.__,.’ 1’ , ,,’ / -. Real .effecti\pe ‘4 / 1. -, erchange rate 2/ 7 t \ _ /L . *- _ _ _ _ Relative prices 3/ ‘_ ._ _ *m-e__ ‘-. - - . _ --. ‘_--__ --. --_.-__ ,__*-- .--_* -._--. . 1990 1991 1992 . 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 Source: IMF. Informalion Notice System I/ Information Notice System multilateral weights based on the geographical pattern of trade and tourfsm. 2/ Relative consumer prices; the ratio of the domestic price index lo weighted partner price indices. Changes in the real effective exchange rate do not truly reflect the underlying loss of competitiveness because of the weakness in the retail price index as a measure of underlying inflation. 31 Based on relative consumer prices. 160 80 60 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 23 - Figure 3. Seychelles: Main Economic Indicators, 1997-2005 8 a Growth in Real GDP 7 _ (In percent) -7 6- -6 5- \ Adjustment _------- 5 Sfatus au0 I I 1 4 3 -3 t V i -1 4’ I I I I I I 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 '-4 6 c 16 -14 -12 - 10 -8 -6 c 4 2; \ Adjustment ‘\ \ \ -4 0' \ . -2 '. \ 0 \ \ -2 - . . - -2 . 4 I 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 -4 3. I Inflation - 30 28 (In percent) - 26 26r - 26 24- Ii - 24 22 - I\ -22 I \ 20 - I \ - 20 I \ 18 - I \ - 10 I \ 16 - -16 14- - 14 12 - - 12 IO- - 10 a- -a 6- -6 4- \ -4 2 !- --__ -2 ' I I I I 0 I I 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2 t : 4 2 o-o 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 External Current Account Deficit (In percent of GDP) I 81 Stalus quo I I 6t i \ 4 \ __---- -8 -6 - 16 - 16 - 14 - 12 -10 Sources: Seychelles authorities; and staff estimates and projections. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 24 - Table I. Scychelles~ Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 1996-2000 1956 1997 1998 1999 2GK ROV Pr0-J Est PrOI (AMud perccmage change. unlesr olhcrwrc sralcdi 2.725 ? 2.953 4 3,177 0 3,275 0 47 53 34 -3 0 2’ 25 17 -16 37 29 40 03 1.1 07 26 62 46 4 AT 4 7.3 177 X.6 78 16 0 -9 1 Of OS 24 1 17 7 IS9 14 -4 7 -3 1 -I 1 -0 7 86 -3 0 rJ6 103 12.3 71 -7.9 13 5 I’S 23 2 -13 3 99 11 I 13 8 13 I -10 0 19 26 2 36 6 62 8 -23 3 16: VUUUI.~ change m parccnt of be.@nrung-of-penod broad money. unless orhenvue mbcatedi -0 9 05 -8 6 c!: 16 6 24 s 33 lJ 114 166 17 7 29 5 168 01 71 25 oti I’7 29 3 164 I9 I !7 I5 13 12 92 91 83 64 -2 8 14 I 95 45 120 1 I iln pcrcem of GDP) 3: 0 -1.1 43 1 81 20 0 21 0 -0 1 -103 30 7 38 0 89 I3 4 200 -0 4 37 I 1: 3 19 5 -3 7 29 3 120 42 6 43 4 45 3 47 1 43 5 5: 4 52 9 69 6 61 C 573 44 1 46 3 48 6 42 5 4: n 93 II 8 178 I3 3 i4 4 -9 2 -90 -23 7 -12 7 -I5 7 69 4 ?I 3 35 c 106 3 III 0 -1: I -10 7 -17 G -17 1 -9 s 63 5 60 3 60 4 61 I 61 9 Iln perccnr ofexpom ofgoods and nonfaclor rcrncer~ 109 9 96 3 93 4 7: 4 IJ 5 131 13 9 14 0 iln dhns of U S dollars. unless orherwsc uxbcatedj -12 0 -6 6 -15 6 -10.8 I8 1 13 6 21 4 25 7 2.6 25 24 35 63 55 45 52 1.506.6 12 -0 5 5.n 6.7 7s : 1: 3 -28 2 17 I9 2: 5s Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-25- Table 2. Seychelles: Consolidated Government Operations, 1996-2000 1) 19% 1997 1998 1959 2uN NOC’ Frel Budge1 F’rq Total rcvcnuc and grants 43 1 -13 9 Tolal revenue 4: 6 43 3 External grams Cl 5 05 Expendwe and “ct lcndmg 52 4 52 9 Currm; eqx”d”we JJI 463 Oj‘whlch wages ana sa1an.s 14 5 13 8 merest “2 ‘5 4 Capful expcnditue 81 89 Net lcndmg 13 25 Unidentkd expmd”u-es 3: -I 0 -5 1 Gmall dcfxlr. cash baas Bciore p.mls -9 2 -5 7 92 .I I 103 53 1.1 30 0 D 325 7 -3 0 -5 5 Yomilal GCP (in rmlhons c-f Seychelles rupees) 2.953 4 l.l749 1,296 9 1.453 8 1,581 7 I.161 9 1.281 6 I.438 8 I.541 3 8572 97s E I.073 5 I.144 6 3046 302 8 35 3 396 7 13.0 153 IS0 GJ.5 I.455 -1 1.713 8 1 .x0 9 1.366 1 395 1 a89 251.6 276 2 220 2 261 E 34 3 E5 9 -33 0 -84 5 1,627 0 1.391 I 496 3 23a 7 402 3 33 5 I50 I .?80 5 -416.9 1.2 06 -275 3 -416 3 -245 2 0 0 -245 : -27 9 -251-l -151.0 -265 3 265 3 2.5 I 66 5 -454 6 0 2402 302 7 a25 0 0 GO J17il 42.3 35 I .:j 5 ou 459 3 431 6 27 7 00 or! iIn m~llmns ofkjchelles rupees, I! Includes the ccniral go-vemmenl a”d the social security system 2, includes Identified arrears on forwq ~“tcres: pa)msnu 3, Th,s reprcsenls the dlfi-erence between rde”rG-xd bl?dgck rc’:cnues and expcnd,twes. on Lhe o,x hu,d and the financmg cf the consoildated budger on Ihe other 41 Excludes gowmncnl papen xld by the Scaa! Seiw~ry Fund Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 26 - Table 3. Seychelles: Balance of Payments, 1996-2000 (b millions of U.S. dollan, unlcu oti~ewisc indicated) 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 Prov. Eat. PWJ. Currmt account GOOdS cl-edit Ofwhich : mcrchandiac exports, fo.b. Debit OfwhIch : mcrchandirc imports, f.o.b. Smiccs, net CC&it Ofwhrch : totim income through commercial banks Debit Income. net Componaation of employees, net Investment income net Ofwhrch : interest payments CutTmt rmnsfers General govemmmt, net Other sectota, net -65.9 -63.3 -101.6 -104.8 -61.5 -184.7 -188.5 -228.2 -233.9 -186.1 78.0 115.0 123.4 145.2 175.2 46.0 73.3 90.6 111.0 128.7 -262.7 -303.5 -351.6 -379.1 -361.3 -244.9 -288.2 -342.6 -368.1 -350.8 122.9 125.8 134.0 151.0 136.1 237.1 255.0 277.0 310.8 315.5 105.5 122.4 110.9 111.6 112.1 -114.2 -129.2 -143.0 -159.8 -179.5 -14.1 -8.8 -17.0 -25 7 -16.0 0.3 -0.1 -2.1 -0.9 -0.8 -14.4 -8.7 -14 3 -24.8 -15.2 -18.7 -15.7 -19.6 -25.0 -15.2 10.0 8.2 9.6 3.8 4.6 16.1 14.6 17.3 10.6 10.6 -6.1 -6.4 -7 7 -6.8 -6.0 Capital and !&uncial account 45 6 62.8 82 4 Capital accommt 5.6 6.8 21 7 Finmclal account 40 0 56.0 60.7 Dim3 investment net 17.0 34.0 41.7 other invesbncnt 23.0 22.0 19.0 Govcxnn-mt bot~~wing, net 11.0 14.0 17.0 Diabumemen~ 20.0 25.0 30 0 Of which : Eat Coast Land Reclamation Project Amortization Other sectors, net Diiburaemmts Amortizalion -9.0 12.0 30.0 -18.0 -11.0 8.0 30.0 -22.0 -13.0 2.0 25.0 -23.0 99 6 33.2 16.5 5.0 83.1 28.2 52.0 30.0 31.1 -1.8 35 3 21.6 49.8 43.4 5.0 0.0 -14.5 -21 8 -4.2 -23.4 20.0 0.0 -24.2 -23 4 Net errors and omissions 8.3 -6. I 3.6 -5.6 0.0 Overall balance -12.0 -6.6 -15.6 -10.8 -28.2 PiincA and overall balance 12.0 6.6 15.6 10.8 28.2 Rcscrvc assets 4.0 -5.5 2.2 -8.3 14.0 hears 8.0 12.1 13.4 19 1 14.2 Financing gap 0.0 00 0.0 0.0 0.0 Memorandum items: Official reacrves In weeks of prospective imports Net ofiicial reacrvcs 1: In weck9 of prolpcctivc import3 Outstandmg stock of amars h’oninal GDP Current account balance (in percent of GDP) 18.1 23 6 21.4 29 7 15.7 2.6 2.9 24 3.5 19 10.0 10.0 11 0 14.7 I1 7 14 1.2 1.2 1.7 14 7.8 19.9 33.3 52 4 66 6 545.1 590.7 599.4 612.1 624 6 -12.1 -10.7 -17.0 -17.1 -9.8 External debt scwicc External debt scticcl exports GNFS (in percent) 21 External debr sctvicd GDP (in percmt) Stock of cxtemal debt 3/ Stock of external debt/exports GNFS (in percent) 3i Stock of external debt/GDP (in percent) 3: 45 7 48.7 55.6 63.7 60 3 14.3 13 2 13.9 14.0 12.3 84 8.2 9.3 10.4 9.7 346.4 356.3 361 9 373 9 386.4 109.9 96.3 90.4 72.4 78.7 63.5 60.3 60.4 61.1 619 Sources. Central Bank of Seychelles; and Fund staff csimatcs and projections. l/ Defined as gross official rmcrvcs mmus central bank’s short-term external liabilihcs U GNFS = goods and nonfactor scticcs. 3; lncludlng arrears. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-27- Table 4. Seychelles: Summary of X4Monctat-y and Credit Dcvclopments, 1996.2000 19% 1997 1998 1999 Dac Dee DCC DCC 2ooil DCC hJ Dmntouc credrc thUl-6 O,, &We-~,. “et Clam on publrc e”“t,c~ clauns on pnvats lcctor Money and quasr money (M2) Money (MI i Qua.31 monq Pqellne depos:tr I ’ 0hcT Imns, net Memorandum items. flomrnal GDP tioti m nomnal ODP ( UI percent, 93 3 101.8 -87 I -68 9 -155 3 86.7 114.3 -58.0 -51 .o -1361 99 1 127 2 115 I ILK.2 90 4 12.5 12.9 173.1 211 2 226 5 66 -12 5 -29 1 -I?.9 -192 1.872 6 2.295 9 3.i102 1 3,448 6 3.8790 1.533 3 1,836 0 2.486 2 2.917 8 3.209 6 66 7 71 8 55 9 43 6 53 6 269 6 387 6 4400 503 5 6158 I.?06 11 2,205 8 2,567 7 3.056 5 3.423 7 449.9 648 7 7806 I.071 2 1.199? 939 0 1,339 I 1.608 8 1.837 7 2.096 Cl 31: I 2180 178.3 1480 128.0 259 9 191 8 347 3 322 9 31r3’ 0 151 9 423.3 704 2 446 5 4304 25: 8 302 7 650 2 431 6 291 8 -23 7 31 -15 9 -I? 3 10.0 23 5 I180 72 4 43 5 1123 1928 4599 361 9 489 I 113 2 1988 131 9 2906 63 5 400 2697 2289 IS 7 -99 1 .39 ’ -30 4 45 I -68 I 155 5 -24 J I5 5 I96 -25 6 IO0 I?? ss -198’3 IX2 27.6 -1723 : I, 2x 0 -1: 1 45 1 04 160: 38 I -19.1 -166 111 22 6 30 8 145 I97 354 174 45 -22 I -22 5 43 8 I87 95 29 3 154 191 -86 4 35 : -69 8 153 -I 3 366 8 128 .c 258 3 -33 0 -22 5 lhnnual change m pexsnt of b@“W@-Of-FC”Od broad money. unleu o!hcnwsc md:carcd~ -0 9 05 -8 6 07 -2 a 166 24 8 32 F I74 I4 1 166 177 29 5 168 95 -1 6 02 -07 -0 5 0 3 I6 69 33 17 37 12’ 29 3 I64 19 I I? 0 30 -4 0 7 Cl -I /, -0 : 7 -, 9-5 - ._ 2.953 4 3.177 0 3,275 C 3.506 5 8.5 84 ?4 31 ?I Sowcen: Central Bad of Scychollos, and staff prqectmns 11 The p@“e scheme for forelp CLUTC”:~ allocauo” was lnnoduced UI April I994 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 28 - Table 5. Seychelles: Indicators of Banking System Soundness Indicator System Highest Lowest Capital adequacy ratio (Base1 definition) 37.6 Capital / deposits 6.8 Nonperforming loans / total loans 2.6 Net Interest Margin 3.5 Return on Assets 2.6 Return on Equity 28.5 (in percent) 1693.9 12.4 4.5 2.6 4.2 62.0 7.6 3.4 0.4 4.9 1.7 12.3 Source: MAE technical assistance report on Seychelles, June 2000. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 29 - APPENDIX I Main Assumptions Behind the Scenarios A. Status Quo Scenario Real sector l Official exchange rate remains fixed at about SR 5.6 per U.S. dollar. l Real GDP is likely to decline significantly because of the continuation of trade and exchange restrictions, and foreign exchange shortages. l Wages and domestic costs are assumed to rise by about 1 percent in 2000 and about 2- 3 percent during 2001-02. l The annual inflation rate is projected to rise from about 7 percent in 2000 to 15 percent in 2001, and further to 17 percent in 2002, in line with a steady rise in the illegal parallel market exchange rate. Fiscal sector Expenditure l Interest rates for all government securities remain unchanged. l Subventions and transfers would be in line with the budget in 2000, and grow in line with nominal GDP during 2001-02. l Capital projects other than East Coast Land Reclamation Project (ECP) will grow in line with nominal GDP. Revenue l Tax revenue would grow in line with budgeted levels, reduced, however, by l-5 percent per annum to reflect loss of tax buoyancy. Balance of payments The output of the tuna cannery factory is expected to rise from 3 15 tons per day in 2000 to 320 tons per day in 2001-02, as indicated by the management of Indian Ocean Tuna (IOT). Real growth in tourism receipts is expected to stagnate at 5 percent during 2000-02. Real growth in other export sectors would also stagnate at 2 percent during 2000-02. Reflecting foreign exchange shortages, real imports in 2000 are expected to decline from 4 percent in 2000, to about 2.5 percent in 2002. ECP is expected to proceed according to the authorities’ revised planning, with imports of goods and services of US$2 1 million in 2000, US$2 1 million in 2001, and US$20 million in 2002. Owing to lack of confidence in the economy, there will be no foreign direct investment except for that in five-star hotels. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 30 - APPENDIX I l The accumulation of external arrears is likely to make it difficult for the government to borrow new money or to receive some of the planned disbursements on existing loans (for instance African Development Bank loans). l The private sector cannot borrow abroad, given the country risk. l The overall external balance is financed by the further accumulation of external arrears. l The official reserves are projected to decline from three weeks of imports in 2000 to less than a week of imports in 2002. B. The Medium-Term Adjustment Scenario Real sector l Exchange rate system unified in 2000: Q4. l The growth of real GDP is projected to average 1 percent during 2000-01, and about 5 percent during 2002-05, owing to buoyant export sectors, rebound in the import substitution sector in the outer years, and the implementation of key structural reforms. l Wages and domestic costs are assumed to rise by 2-3 percent in 2000, 12 percent in 2001, 5 percent in 2002, and grow broadly in line with nominal GDP during 2003-05. l The price projections assume that the impact of floating the exchange rate and removing price controls would be modest because domestic prices already reflect to a large degree the unofficial parallel market exchange rate. With the proposed fiscal and monetary tightening, the annual inflation rate would be targeted to rise from about 10 percent in 2000 to 24 percent in 200 1, and then fall rapidly thereafter. Fiscal sector Expenditure The fiscal projections are based on a strong reduction in capital expenditures and current transfers relative to GDP. Interest rates on short-term treasury bills would rise to 20 percent in 2000: 44, and then gradually fall to 10 percent in 200 1: 44, to 9 percent in 2003: Q 1, and to 8 percent in 2004: Ql and thereafter. Interest rates on treasury bonds would decline from 12 percent in 2000 to 10 percent during 2004-05. Interest rates on treasury stocks would decline from 13 percent in 2000 to 11 percent during 2004-05. Revenue l External trade taxes are assumed to grow in line with the projected growth in imports. It is expected that improved tax administration will generate an additional 2 percent increase in 2001. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3l- APPENDIX I Balance of payments The output of the tuna cannery factory is expected to level off at about 330 tons per day, as indicated by the management of the IOT. Real growth in tourism receipts is expected to average about 7 percent over 2000-05, mainly as result of planned private investments in luxury hotels and tourism services. Real imports in 2000 are expected to rise by only 0.6 percent, because of foreign exchange shortages (in the first and second quarters), a strong up-front fiscal adjustment in the third quarter, and a large rupee depreciation in the fourth quarter. Thereafter, real import growth would average 7 percent during 2002-05, broadly in line with the growth rate of real GDP. The foreign borrowing for ECP ( US$30 million) is assumed to be drawn in 2001 and will be at a maturity of ten years with a two-year grace period, with an interest rate spread of 2 percentage points above the London interbank offered rate (LIBOR). The scenario assumes the clearance of outstanding arrears at end-December 1999 (US$52.4 million) over three years and a gradual buildup of foreign reserves to 10.7 weeks of imports in 2005. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 32 - Table 6. Seychelles: Selected Economic and Financial Indxators, 1999-2002 APPENDIX I 1999 2000 2Gol 2Nl2 Eat. hoJ PIOJ pr0.l 3.215 II 3.506.6 3,683 0 3,663 ‘J -3 II 12 -0 8 -cl 7 -4 6 -Gz .: 5 -2 4 0 3 5a 5c 5: 6: 5’ IS4 16 7 I7 - 20 6 86 22 c f, 05 25 4-l 74 -4 7 -3 5 27 ac -3 0 19 3 1:s 0’ -2 8 05 -I 6 1: 1 14 ’ 175 :I 6 165 95 II 6 !9 -I 06 45 59 16 19 I 120 IS” 2u 3 i: 1 I 1 2 12 64 :In pcrcenr ofGDP.1 2G 0 -c 4 37 i 12 1 19 5 -3 7 29.3 1: 0 ias ..I ’ 23 0 1: 0 -17 I -9 a -Y 4 -4 s 61 I 61 9 6: 6 56 2 Iin pacer! of expom ofgoods and nonracror rernccs, -10s -:a 2 1s -2s 5 29 7 IS ‘1 IS 5 76 35 1.5 ‘2 0 9 s2 ?’ 5: 58 54 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 33 - APPENDIX1 Table 7. Ssychellca: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators (Adjustment Scenario). 1999-2005 1999 ES1 2oDo PrOJ 2cul h@l 2002 PIOj 2003 Pro) 2W4 Pro] 200s &@I Naoonal mcomc and prices Kormnal GDP (m nulhons of Seychelles rqees) Real GDP Real GDP per caplts GDP deflator (1986.loi)) Retail pnce index (RPI) I! Exports. f.o.b. (iwludqrccxp~. m U S. dol!.amJ Toumm rcompts tluou@ commercial bank (m U.S d0Lkar-s) Imports, f.o.b. Go-ent bud@ Total revenue Govcmmenr budget Toral ~cvenue Total sxpenLrurc and rut lendq 3; Cunant expendmuc Capital expendrue and ner lendmg Overall balance !cruh bati). mcludmg pts Total domcshc government debt 41 Exrcmai curem account b&ncc after OrnCld hansfen Total encmal debt ouotanding 5/ Totd extemd debt oulsrandmg 51 Actual extend debt rencc Cmmil external balance Gram offiml reserves (end of year) hl week3 of !nlpom. c I f In percent ol- broad money Exchange rate Seychelles mpca per USSl (end of period) .S Saycheilw mpee~ per USSI (penod average) 3,275 8 3.494 8 4.308 3 4,727 I 5,106 4 5,512 0 S,932 4 -3 c I5 15 48 48 49 49 -4 6 -0 2 -0 1 31 31 32 32 03 Jl 21 4 47 31 2.9 26 62 97 23 8 91 32 29 25 17 7 21 6 s.7 29 49 8.0 78 L16 28 178 13 !I 60 58 100 74 -29 18 7.1 48 72 84 86 -26 0 -8 6 2’ OS 00 00 71 -4 3 39.5 83 65 85 -13 5 I58 10.3 06 49 41 -IOG IS 3 23.0 00 43 33 -23 0 \7 2 -29 9 55 78 19 I Annual change m percenl of bcv&-of-penod 07 1: i 168 06 19 : I2 64 ‘0 0 -0 4 37 I 12 3 4? 1 42.2 610 60 J 42 5 45 9 13 3 146 -12 7 -172 ICI69 113.6 -17 1 61 I broad money. unlcsn othcnvue mdxarcd) -5 6 9 0 66 1 I 76 52 I? 8 -J 3 Id &I -0 i ?I ii C’ -6 8 -: .c -3 7 .I! 0 -100 I8 26 39 9E IO 1 12 0 10 : a.! 80 72 73 73 I I 13 I3 13 13 1.3 (Ln percent of GDP) 21 0 -i6.2 32 3 12.5 22 5 -5 9 31 3 79 47 6 54 1 45 8 83 -5 0 89 I -8 8 92 s 235 24.0 24 5 24 5 -2 6 .I.8 01 15 2i7 3 216 28 1 2E 2 SO 80 80 80 47 I 46 5 46 6 46 8 49 7 4.8 3 46 5 45 3 4, 7 40 3 38 5 37 3 80 80 80 6.0 -I 3 -0 2 1.6 29 61 5 74 7 62 7 52.4 -II 3 68 9 -48 -j 6 -3 7 -3 7 849 i: 3 67 2 61 9 (In pcrcsnt of cxpa”~ of gOO& and nonfactor retT4CeS) 72.4 79 9 74 1 69 ? 64 2 56 2 14 0 1: 3 IO 1 II 7 16 5 II 0 (In tions of U 9 dollars. ties3 otherwse mdxaled) -108 -I1 I 30.2 30 3 97 299 29 7 186 46.8 72 I 76 4 107 3 35 21 52 7.4 73 94 5: 3.2 5a 58 54 5.6 54 46 90 51 4 98 23 0 1303 in 7 Sources Ccnhal Bank of Seychelles; Mmisay of Fiiance, and staff esnmatas and pqcchons Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 34 - APPENDIX II Seychelles: Relations with the Fund (As of September 30,200O) I. II. III. IV. V. VI. VII. Membership Status: Jointed 6/30/77; Article VIII General Resources Account: SDR Million Quota 8.80 Fund holdings of currency 8.80 Reserve position in Fund 0.00 % Quota 100.0 100.0 0.0 SDR Department: Net cumulative allocation Holdings SDR Million 0.41 0.02 % Allocations 100.0 4.5 . Outstanding Purchases and Loans: None Financial Arrangements: None Projected Obligations to Fund (SDR million; based on existing use of resources and present holdings of SDRs): None Exchange Rate Arrangement: The Seychelles rupee is pegged to a trade- and tourism-weighted currency basket. As of end-May 2000, the rate was US$l = SR 5.6809 VIII. Article IV Consultations: Seychelles is currently on a 24-month consultation cycle. The 1998 Article IV consultation was concluded by the Executive Board on July 17, 1998. IX. Technical Assistance (1995-2000): Head of Denartment Mission Subiect FAD Mr. Schiller Review the revenue system. STA/AFR Mr. Dublin Assess statistical databases. STA Mr. Pritchett Advise on government finance statistics. Date July 1995 March 1999 March 2000 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-35 - Denartment Head of Mission Subiect APPENDIX II MAE Mr. Ouanes Advise on liberalizing the foreign June 2000 exchange system; introducing indirect instruments of monetary management; strengthening prudential regulations; and restructuring the domestic debt. FAD Mr. Sunley Review indirect taxes, including customs duties. X. Resident Representative: None June 2000 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 36 - APPENDIX III Seychelles: Relations with the World Bank Group (As of September 30,200O) Seychelles joined the World Bank (IBRD) in 1980, the International Finance Corporation (IFC) in 1981, and the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA) in 1992. Given the country’s small size and its access to commercial lending sources, the IBRD has had only a modest assistance program in Seychelles, mainly in infrastructure rehabilitation and environmental protection, and it has provided technical support in building institutional capacity in the preparation of the multiyear public investment programming. The IFC has extended loans to investors in Seychelles in the hotel and tourism industry, and in the fishing and banking sectors. MIGA does not yet have any exposure or applications for guarantees in the Seychelles. The status of IBRD and IFC operations are summarized in the attached tables. The Bank’s main objectives in Seychelles are to (1) assist the government in restoring macroeconomic balance and create an environment conducive to improving economic prospects in the medium and long term, and (2) provide support for environmentally sustainable economic activities and the preservation of the environment. To this end, the Bank has cooperated with other donors on macroeconomic policy advice, including technical support in the preparation of the Seychelles Macroeconomic Plan for 2000-04 and on environment protection through GEF (Global Environment Facilities) grants. In additional, the Bank is cooperating closely with the Fund and African Development Bank in the provision of technical and financial assistance for a strong economic reform program. In this regard, a Bank team visited Seychelles in June-July 2000 to advise the authorities on developing a privatization program; encouraging private sector development; and liberalizing the domestic and foreign trade system. The mission recommended that the government consider the following: l Remove entry restrictions, price control and operating constraints. Where applicable, develop direct public assistance programs to replace subsidies implicit in price controls, l Formalize competition law, government ethics, and business-friendly labor and land regulations. l Carry out privatization plans for individual public enterprises, including sales to strategic investors, public offerings, asset sales and liquidations. The IFC’s focus is on (1) supporting the hotel industry, which requires modemization in terms of facilities, services, and management; (2) supporting the financial sector; and (3) helping small and medium-sized local entrepreneurs. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public. - 37 - APPENDIX III Seychelles: Relations with the World Bank Group (concluded) I. Statement of the World Bank Loans and IDA Credits (as of May 31,200O) Loan Number Year Purpose 1 loan has been fully disbursed 35510 1993 Environment/transport Total Of which: repaid Total outstanding World Bank IDA Undisbursed (In millions of U.S. dollars, less cancellations) 6.20 0.00 4.50 2.05 10.70 0.00 2.05 4.94 5.76 II. Statement of IFC Investments (as of May 31,200O) ye&r Comnany Loan 1992 PTD Limited 2.21 1995 AEF Acajoux 1 .oo 1995 Beau Vallon 2.80 1996 AEF Sea Harvest 1 .oo Total commitments 7.02 Total disbursements 5.90 Committed but not yet disbursed l! 1.12 l/ Pertains to the Beau Vallon project. Eauity Participation (In millions of U.S. dollars) Total 1.46 3.67 1.00 2.81 1.00 0.00 1.46 0.00 1.46 0.00 0.00 8.48 7.36 1.12 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 38 - APPENDIX IV . Seychelles: Social and Demographic Indicators GDP (1999) Total (in million of U.S. dollars) 612.1 Per capita (in U.S. dollars) 7,611.O Area (sq. km) Ofwhich : agricultural (in percent) 455.3 22.2 Population characteristics (1999; in percent, unless otherwise indicated) Health (1999) Life expectancy at birth (years) 72.4 Population per physician Male 67.4 Population per hospital bed Female 78.2 Infant mortality rate (1999; per Infant mortality (aged under 1) 1.0 thousand births) Child death rate (aged l-4) 2.0 Access to safe water (1997 census; in percent) Population under age 15 26.8 Urban population Median age (years) 26.0 Rural population Education ( 1993; in percent) Primary school enrollment, population aged 6- 13 (2000; in percent) Pupil-to-teacher ratio (2000) 88.0 14.6 Population Total (mid- 1999) Growth (percent a year, average 1995-99) 80,410.O 1.3 Density (1999; per sq. km) Total Ofwhich : agricultural 773.0 760.8 773.0 181.0 10.3 90.0 80.0 Nutrition (1980-86) Per capita daily calorie supply 2,317.0 Per capita daily protein supply (in grams) 49.0 Sources: Management and Information Systems Division (MISD); and World Bank. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 39 - APPENDIX V Seychelles: Statistical Issues Despite several STA missions, the quality of economic data in Seychelles remains mixed. The 2000 Article IV consultation mission encouraged the authorities to expedite the implementation of the STA recommendations and reiterated the staffs earlier requests that the authorities provide the Fund with regular reports on core data. Real sector The statistical assessment mission that visited Victoria during March 1999 noted that two main deficiencies exit in the areas of national accounts. First, long lags in the production of constant price estimates have hampered policy formulation. For instance, estimates of GDP had not been published yet for 1998, while several inconsistencies exited in the 1997 data. Second, the deflators adopted were unreliable because they relied too heavily on the Retail Price Index (RPI), which did not reflect inflationary pressures in various sectors of the economy. The deficiencies were attributable to inadequate staffing of the National Accounts Unit of the Management and Information Systems Division (MISD). Consequently, the mission recommended additional staffing to assist the lone statistician, and proposed that another STA mission be launched to provide assistance in national accounts and price statistics. Government finance Annual transaction data on consolidated central government transactions are reported for publication in the GFS Yearbook. Quarterly data on central government budgetary operations are also reported to the Fund for publication in International Financial Statistics (IFS). The government finance statistics are recorded on a cash basis. The aforementioned STA mission concluded that the methodology used to consolidate fiscal data (i.e., central government and Social Security Fund) was broadly consistent with the GFS Manual (1986). However, to increase the transparency in the accounting practices, the mission recommended that the Treasury prepare a parallel set of accounts, which would record external debt service on a commitment basis. A STA mission on government finance statistics, visiting Victoria in March 2000, worked with the authorities to enhance the usefulness of fiscal data by (i) reviewing the institutional coverage of government; (ii) assessing GFS classification and compilation procedures; (iii) identifying the treatment of government arrears and assumptions of guaranteed debt; and (iv) documenting the sources of inconsistencies between the fiscal and monetary data on government financing (after documenting the substantial inconsistencies in the two sets of data). The authorities indicated their plans to implement the mission recommendations associated with these issues. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4o- APPENDIX V l Monetary accounts Monetary data are reported regularly for publication in IFS, albeit with some delay. Data for the central bank are available with a two-month lag, while those for commercial banks become available with a lag of five months. The monetary and credit aggregates are generally consistent with the Fund’s methodological standards. However, the monetary accounts need to be revised to properly class@ ,assets and liabilities using the residency criterion rather than the currency criterion as the determining factor. Balance of payments The authorities have made substantial progress in adopting the balance of payments methodology outlined in the Fifth Edition of the Balance of Payments MunuaZ (BPMS), but quarterly data are reported to STA with some delay. The quality of the data has been hampered by the thriving foreign exchange parallel market, which diverts substantial transactions away from the banking system. The 2000 Article IV consultation mission stressed the need to collect data on private foreign debt and arrears. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public. . Date of latest observation Date received Frequency of data Frequency of reporting Source of update Mode of reporting Confidentiality Seychelles: Core Statistical Indicators (As of October 4,200O) Central Overall Inlema- Bank Reserve/ Consumer Current Govem- Exchange tional Balance Base Broad Interest Price Exports/ Account ment GDP/ Rates Reserves Sheet money Money Rates Index Imports Balance Balance GNP woo 8100 8100 8100 8100 8100 8100 8100 M M M M M M M M CBS CBS CBS CBS Mail Mail Mail Mail u U U U 6100 6100 8100 8100 M M M M CBS CBS Mail Mail U U 6100 6100 3100 3100 3100 3100 4100 4100 12199 12199 12199 12199 12199 12199 12199 12199 8100 8100 5100 5100 5100 5100 7100 7100 3100 3100 3100 3100 3100 3100 3100 3100 M M M M M M M M Q Q A A A A A A M M M M M M M M Q Q A A A A A A CBS CBS CBS CBS CBS CBS MISD MISD MISD MISD CBS CBS MoF MoF MISD MISD Mail Mail Mail Mail Mail Mail Mail Mail Mail Mail Art. IV Art. IV Art. IV Art. IV Art. IV Art. IV Mission Mission Mission Mission Mission Mission U U U U U U U U U U U U U U U U Notes: Frequency of data: M=monthly; Q-quarterly; A=annual. Frequency or reporting: M=monthly; Q=quarterly; A=annually. Source of data: CBS=Central Bank of Seychelles; MISC=Management and Information Systems Division; and MoF= Ministry of Finance. Confidentiality: U-for unrestricted use. R:\D0CU0\SYCiMO03\SrmOO3ap5tbl.Doc October 20,200O (6:02 PM) Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 42 - APPENDIX VI . Public Information Notice (PIN) No. OO/- FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE November, -, 2000 International Monetary Fund 700 19rh Street, NW Washington, D. C. 20431 USA IMF Concludes Article IV Consultation with Seychelles On November 3, 2000, the Executive Board concluded the Article IV consultation with Seychelles.’ Background Seychelles has achieved one of the highest standards of living in Africa. In recent years, however, the sustainability of these achievements has been threatened by growing macroeconomic imbalances and structural problems that have made the economy less efficient and competitive. Real GDP has stagnated in the past two years, inflation is rising, and serious balance of payments problems have emerged, causing a near depletion of net international reserves to less than two weeks of imports, and the accumulation of some US$50 - US$SO million in external payments arrears. The main macroeconomic imbalance underlying the current economic difficulties is the large fiscal deficit, which averaged 14 percent of GDP during 1996-99, and resulted in the growth of government debt from 133 percent of GDP in 1996 to 168 percent of GDP in 1999. Although, in the past two years, the government has taken important steps to correct its fiscal problems, including by reducing transfers to parastatals, tightening eligibility requirements for social welfare benefits, and strengthening expenditure management, the gains have been offset by growth in capital spending, which, as a percent of GDP, far exceeds that of countries of similar size, wealth, and economic orientation. I Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial information, and discusses with offkials the country’s economic developments and policies. On return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the country’s authorities. In this PIN, the main features of the Board’s discussion are described. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 43 - APPENDIX VI The decline in net saving by the government during 1996-99 has been reflected in strong import demand, worsening export performance, and a widening external current account deficit. With insufficient autonomous capital inflows to finance these higher deficits, and the authorities’ policy of keeping the official exchange rate of the rupee unchanged, trade and foreign exchange restrictions have had to been tightened in order to ration foreign exchange. The illegal parallel foreign exchange market that has emerged (with an exchange rate premium of up to 100 percent) now accounts for the financing of a large proportion of all imports of goods and services in Seychelles. Seychelles faces serious structural impediments to economic growth, many of which arise from the extensive intervention of the government. These impediments include controlled prices, a foreign exchange allocation system, a restrictive import licensing system, and intervention in manufacturing and distribution by the parastatals, often with monopoly power or privileges not granted to the private sector. As a result, the latter has remained reluctant to invest, and economic efficiency has been hurt. In the past two years, there has been some progress in correcting structural problems, including the reduction of the list of goods for which the Seychelles Marketing Board (SMB) has exclusive importation rights, the introduction of competition in the telecommunications industry, and the repeal of the Economic Development Act, which contained clauses that could have encouraged money laundering activity. However, more economic distortions have been introduced through the tightening of trade and exchange restrictions. Executive Board Assessment [Summing Up] Public lnformatlon Notices (PINS) are issued, (i) at the request of a member country, following the conclusion of the Article IV consultation for countries seeking to make known the views of the IMF to the public. This action is intended to strengthen IMF surveillance over the economic policies of member countries by increasing the transparency of the IMF’s assessment of these policies; and (ii) following policy discussions in the Executive Board at the decision of the Board. 1 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-44- APPENDIX VI Seychelles: Selected Economic Indicators 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 II Domestic economy Real GDP Retail price index (period averages) External economy Export, f.o.b. Imports, f.o.b. Current account balance . (in percent of GDP) Capital and financial account balance Official reserves (end of period) (In weeks of prospective imports) Debt service (In percent of exports of goods and nonfactor service Change in real effective exchange rate (in percent) 2/ Financial variables Total revenues and grants Total expenditure and net lending Overall deficit, cash basis Change in broad money (in percent) Interest rate (six-month deposits: weighted average) 4.7 5.3 3.4 -3.0 1.2 1.1 0.7 2.6 6.2 6.7 (In millions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise indicated) 46 73.3 90.6 111.0 244.9 288.2 342.6 368.1 -65.9 -63.3 -101.6 -104.8 -12.1 -10.7 -17.0 -17.1 45.6 62.8 82.4 99.6 18.1 23.6 21.4 29.7 2.6 2.9 2.4 3.5 45.7 48.7 55.6 63.7 -3.1 -1.1 -0.7 8.6 (In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated) 43.1 43.9 45.8 48.3 52.4 52.9 69.6 61 .O -9.2 -9.0 -23.7 -12.7 12.7 29.3 16.4 19.1 9.2 9.1 8.3 6.4 128.7 350.8 -61.5 -9.8 33.2 15.7 1.9 60.3 -3.0 41.5 57.3 -15.7 12.0 . . . Sources: Seychelles authorities; and IMF staff estimates. I/ projections 21 A negative sign signifies a depreciation. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public