DOCUMENT OF INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND NOT FOR PUBLIC USE SM/O1/215 CONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION July 9,200l To: Members of the Executive Board From: The Secretary Subject: El Salvador-Staff Report for 2001 Article IV Consultation Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staff report for the 2001 Article IV consultation with El Salvador, which is tentatively for discussion on Monday, July 23,200l. At the time of circulation of this paper to the Board, the Secretary’s Department has not received a communication from the authorities of El Salvador indicating whether or not they consent to the Fund’s publication of this paper; such communication may be received after the authorities have had an opportunity to read the paper. Questions may be referred to Mr. Rennback (ext. 37350) and Mrs. Coronel (ext. 34330). Unless the Documents Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the WTO Secretariat on Tuesday, July 17,200l; and to the European Commission, the European Investment Bank, and the Inter-American Development Bank, following its consideration by the Executive Board. Att: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicCONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND EL SALVADOR Staff Report for the 2001 Article IV Consultation Prepared by the Staff Representatives for the 200 1 Consultation with El Salvador Approved by Miguel E. Bonangelino and G. Russell Kincaid July 6,200l Contents Page Executive Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 I. Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .4 II. Background and Recent Developments ............................................................................... .4 A. Developments in 2000 ............................................................................................. .6 B. Developments in 2001. ............................................................................................. .9 III. Policy Discussions ............................................................................................................. 10 A. Fiscal Policy.. ......................................................................................................... .l 1 B. Financial Sector ....................................................................................................... 12 C. Operations of the Central Bank.. ............................................................................ .14 D. External Sector Policies ......................................................................................... .16 IV. Medium-Term Outlook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16 V. Staff Appraisal ..,................................................................................................................. 17 Tables 1. Macroeconomic Flows ........................................................................................................ .23 2. Operations of the Overall Public Sector ............................................................................. .24 3. Operations of the Financial System.. .................................................................................. .25 4. Balance of Payments, 1997-200 1 ....................................................................................... -26 5. Indicators of External Vulnerability ..... .:. ........................................................................... .27 6. Indicators of Financial Soundness ...................................................................................... .28 7. Financing Scenarios for Earthquake Reconstruction.. ........................................................ .29 8. Balance of Payments, 2000-2006, Active Projection ......................................................... .30 9. Balance of Payments, 2000-2006, Passive Projection.. ...................................................... .3 1 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2- Figures 1. Macroeconomic Performance Indicators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5 2. External Competitiveness Indicators ..,...............................,..................,............................... 7 Boxes 1. Main Features of the Monetary Integration Law.. ............................................................. .20 2. Summary of the Financial System Stability Assessment (FSSA) ...................................... 21 3. The Role of the Coffee Sector in Central American Economies ........................................ 22 Appendices I. Fund Relations .................................................................................................................... ..3 2 II. Relations with the Inter-American Development Bank ...................................................... 34 III. Relations with the World Bank Group ............................................................................... 35 IV. Statistical Issues ................................................................................................................. 37 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3- Executive Summary In 2000, real GDP growth slowed to 2 percent and inflation picked up to 4 percent, reflecting mostly the surge in world oil prices. The overall public sector deficit rose to almost 3 percent of GDP. Bank credit to the private sector expanded by only 1 percent, mainly in response to tighter financial supervision. The external current account deficit increased to 3 percent of GDP. Net international reserves fell slightly but still exceeded base money by end-2000. On January 1,2001, the U.S. dollar became legal tender, with the rapid conversion of all financial system accounts into U.S. dollars and a gradual conversion of domestic currency. The authorities’ objective was to strengthen the credibility of economic policies and to reduce domestic interest rates by eliminating the currency risk premium. Through end-May, about 20 percent of currency in circulation had been converted into U.S. dollars, and lending interest rates had declined by over 200 basis points since late 2000, remaining about 300 basis points above the U.S. prime lending rate. Two major earthquakes hit the country in January and February 2001, causing damage estimated at US$2.2 billion (16 percent of GDP). Economic activity now appears to be recovering and consumer prices have been stable since January. The authorities adapted their medium-term program to support the recovery from the effects of the earthquakes. Real GDP is projected to rise by 3 percent in 2001, and by 5 percent in the medium term. Inflation is projected to decline to 3 percent in 2001 and then stabilize at 2% percent a year. The plan is to reduce the public sector deficit excluding reconstruction costs (“underlying deficit”) to 1% percent of GDP in 2003 and beyond. Reconstruction costs will raise the overall public sector deficit from 2001 to 2005, financed with long-term external borrowing. The staff agreed that this approach was appropriate. The underlying public sector deficit is expected to rise to 3.2 percent of GDP in 2001, above the authorities’ target of a deficit of 2.7 percent of GDP, and the overall public sector deficit would reach 4.3 percent of GDP. The staff urged the authorities to adopt moderate adjustments in tax and expenditure policies to reduce the underlying deficit to 2.7 percent of GDP and keep fiscal policy on a sustainable path. To reach the deficit target in 2003 and beyond, the authorities need to implement measures to strengthen public enterprises, improve tax administration, and restrain the growth in the government’s net pension costs. The authorities appreciated the thorough analysis of the FSAP mission and report, and endorsed all of its major recommendations. It was agreed that public financial institutions need to be strengthened to limit potential fiscal liabilities. The staff raised several concerns about the government’s plan to restructure bank claims on the coffee sector. The authorities felt their plan entailed less risk than other options. The transition to the new monetary regime appears to be proceeding well. However, the staff urged the authorities to phase out quickly the use of the inventory of domestic currency and to adopt clear rules for the operation of monetary policy. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4- 1. INTRODUCTION 1. A mission visited San Salvador during May 7-16,200l to conclude discussions that began in September 2000 for the Article IV consultation. Discussions continued on a possible Stand-By Arrangement to support the country’s economic program for 2001 and 2002.’ The authorities remain interested in Fund support, but want more time to secure political support for all their policies. Mr. Ize (MAE) and Mr. de la Ton-e (IBRD) joined the September 2000 mission for discussions on the FSAP report. 2. At the conclusion of the last Article IV consultation in November 1999, Directors welcomed the authorities’ success in maintaining macroeconomic stability, notwithstanding adverse shocks. They noted that the de facto exchange rate peg to the U.S. dollar had been instrumental in achieving price stability. Directors observed, however, that the fiscal position had weakened, and stressed the importance of a strong fiscal effort to ease the pressures on domestic interest rates. They welcomed the improvements in bank supervision and the progress made in the areas of privatization, pension reform, and trade liberalization. 3. El Salvador’s database is adequate for macroeconomic surveillance. In 1998 the country subscribed to the Fund’s Special Data Dissemination Standard (SDDS). The coverage, frequency, and timeliness of data have improved over time, but a few weaknesses remain in the measurement of private capital flows and broad money. 4. El Salvador has accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3 and 4, and maintains an exchange system that is free of multiple currency practices and restrictions on the making of payments and transfers for current international transactions. El Salvador has no outstanding obligations to the Fund. Relations with the Fund are described in Appendix I. II. BACKGROUNDANDRECENTDEVELOPMENTS 5. Since the end of the civil war in 1992, economic policies have aimed to promote sustained economic growth by reducing inflation, expanding the role of the private sector, and integrating the economy with the rest of the world (Figure 1). In the period 1993-99, the overall public sector deficit averaged about 1% percent of GDP, which helped reduce public debt in relation to GDP. Structural reforms focused on financial liberalization, privatization, and comprehensive trade reform. Since January 1993, the currency has been pegged de facto at C 8.75 per U.S. dollar, returning the country to its exchange rate regime prior to the civil ’ Discussions on a possible Fund-supported program and the Article IV consultation began in San Salvador during September 1 l-20,2000, and continued during a staff visit in November 2000, at headquarters in December 2000, and in San Salvador in late January and early February 200 1. The staff team consisted of Messrs. Rennhack (Head) and Dehesa, Mrs. Coronel (all WHD), and Ms. Richter (PDR). Mr. Espejo and Ms. Frantischek (WHD) and Mr. Hamann (PDR) participated in some of these discussions. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-5- Figure 1. El Salvador: Macroeconomic Performance Indicators 2.5 20 15 10 5 0 -5 Output growth and inflation (In percent) Overall public sector deficit Net international reserves (In percent of GDP) (In percent of base money) 4 2 0 -4 -6 -8 External current account balance (In percent of GDP) 125 100 75 50 I i Sources: Central Reserve Bank of El Salvador; and Fund staff projections. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-6- ~ax-.~ While the real effective exchange appreciated substantially in the period 1993-99, a decline in the real minimum wage and a relatively flexible labor market helped maintain external competitiveness (Figure 2).3 The country also benefited from preferential access to the U.S. textile market under the Caribbean Basin Initiative (CBI). These policies succeeded in reducing inflation to low single digits by 1997 and strengthening the external sector. The external current account deficit remained relatively low aided by strong growth in nontraditional and net maquila exports and high remittances from Salvadorans abroad. Net international reserves rose to 98 percent of base money by end-1999. Real economic growth averaged 6% percent a year in 1993-95, as capacity utilization recovered. However, real growth then tapered off to about 3 percent a year in 1996-99, partly in response to a worsening of the terms of trade. Also, private investment grew slowly, reflecting concerns about domestic security and high real lending interest rates (which reached 15 percent by 1999). A. Developments in 2000 6. In 2000, economic performance was affected by the 60 percent increase in world oil prices and the lagged effect of high real interest rates (Table 1). Real GDP growth slowed from 3.4 percent in 1999 to 2 percent in 2000, due to weaknesses in the commerce, construction, and transportation sectors. Inflation rose from a negative 1 percent in 1999 to 4.3 percent, owing to higher electricity and gasoline prices and the one-time effect of the elimination of some VAT exemptions. With the turnaround in inflation, the real effective exchange rate appreciated by 5 percent during 2000. 7. Demand policies were intended to be mildly expansionary. The overall public sector deficit widened from 2.6 percent in 1999 to 2.8 percent of GDP, with about half the deficit financed through domestic debt (Table 2). A temporary increase in electricity subsidies4 helped boost current spending by 1 percent of GDP, while capital transfers rose to recapitalize a weak public bank-the Agricultural Development Bank (BFA). To limit the effect on the deficit, the government restrained the growth in fixed capital formation. Also, revenues and grants rose by about % percent of GDP, as the government received an exceptional grant from the United States for general budgetary support. In mid-2000, the 2 The colon was pegged at C 2.5 per U.S. dollar from 1934 to 1985. 3 The evolution of external competitiveness is analyzed in “External Competitiveness and Export Performance,” see Chapter II of the accompanying paper on Recent Economic Developments. 4 Due to higher oil prices, in March 2000 the government extended electricity subsidies to all residential consumers and industrial and commercial firms, and then in July 2000 returned the coverage of these subsidies to low-income consumers. This increase in the subsidy had a fiscal cost of 0.5 percent of GDP. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-7- Figure 2. El Salvador: External Competitiveness Indicators Real effective exchange rates 180 (1990=100) 160 - Based on consumer prices _---- ______ --- - -..- 140 - 120 - I--------- Based on unit labor costs 60 - 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 Maquila and nontraditional exports growth 120 (In percent) 100 80 60 40 20 0 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 Real minimum domestic wages (1990=100) 102 100 - 98 - -----,b- 96 - 94 - 92 - ---_ 90 - 88 - 86 - 84 ’ 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 Sources: Central Reserve Bank of El Salvador; and Fund staff projections. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-8- assembly approved the elimination of VAT exemptions on vegetables and pharmaceutical products and removed the ability to credit VAT payments against the income tax. The central bank contracted its net domestic assets during the year, but chose not to absorb all of the banks’ excess liquidity to encourage a gradual decline in domestic interest rates. As a result, ex post real interest rates on central bank open market operations fell from about 10 percent at end-1999 to about 2 percent at end-2000. 8. Bank credit to the private sector rose by only 1 percent, mainly in response to tighter financial supervision (Table 3). A credit boom in 1996-98, as well as the rise in real lending interest rates, led to an increase in nonperforming loans, which reached 5 percent of total loans by end-2000 (compared with 3.2 percent at end-1995). The two public banks (about 6 percent of system assets) took excessive risks, and accounted for 25 percent of total nonperforming loans by end-2000. Since 1999, the authorities have been strengthening the enforcement of prudential guidelines and have secured the adoption of new laws (a new banking law was approved in September 1999 and a new law for nonbank financial intermediaries in February 2000). The new banking law introduced several changes, including consolidated supervision of financial conglomerates and a phased increase in the minimum risk-weighted capital asset ratio from 9.2 percent in 1999 to 12 percent by January 2005. By end-2000, the average risk-weighted capital asset ratio was 11.4 percent, compared with the legal minimum of 9.6 percent, and provisions covered 85 percent of nonperforming loans (Table 4). While banks slowed their credit expansion, broad money continued to rise in line with nominal GDP. As a result, banks continued to accumulate excess liquidity and real lending interest rates fell steadily, declining to 9 percent by end-2000. 9. The external current account deficit widened to over 3 percent of GDP, mainly because of a sharp deterioration in the merchandise trade deficit (Table 5). Merchandise exports in U.S. dollars rose by 14 percent, reflecting mostly a recovery in nontraditional exports. However, the value of non-oil imports grew by almost 20 percent, while the run up in world oil prices almost doubled the value of oil imports. The growth in non-oil imports reflected higher investment in the electricity sector, as well as strong growth in consumer goods imports. Net maquila exports continued to perform well, rising by 20 percent in U.S. dollars. Workers’ remittances rose by 27 percent (reaching 13 percent of GDP), and contributed to part of the strong growth in imports. Net capital inflows declined in 2000, as the proceeds from the privatization of the former state telephone company ceased and the decline in domestic interest rates led to lower net private capital inflows. As a result, net international reserves fell by US$50 million to US$l.9 billion by end-2000, which was equivalent to 102 percent of base money (Table 6). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-9- B. Developments in 2001 10. On January 1,200l the U.S. dollar became legal tender, following the approval of the Monetary Integration Law in November 2000 (Box 1). This law required the rapid conversion of all financial system accounts into U.S. dollars at the exchange rate of C 8.75 per dollar and prohibited the printing of new currency notes in colones. The law allowed U.S. currency notes to circulate with the existing stock of colon currency notes, and did not impose a deadline for the conversion of currency from colones into U.S. dollars; instead the colon notes are to be converted as they wear out and the demand for U.S. dollar currency rises. The central bank planned to wind down its monetary operations and let the government assume its liabilities. The law allows the central bank to engage in repurchase operations under exceptional circumstances, which include sudden contractions in financial system liquidity and so-called “acts of god” such as wars or natural disasters. The authorities intended to sell two assets (the government’s remaining shares in the former state telephone company (CTE) and the central bank’s claims on a public second-tier bank) to build up net international reserves in excess of base money by about US$600 million. These excess international reserves amounted to US$42 million at end-2000, and the central bank wanted a larger cushion to cover a significant share of the outstanding stock of open market securities, liquid government deposits, and potential withdrawals from the recently created deposit insurance fund (IGD).’ 11. Two major earthquakes hit the country in January and February 2001, causing damage estimated at US$2.2 billion (16 percent of GDP). Of the total reconstruction costs, about US$l-1.5 billion was expected to be incurred by the government in the period 2001-05 to help rebuild or repair housing, heath facilities, schools, roads, and other public infrastructure. At a consultative group (CG) meeting in early March, donors pledged financing in the amount of US$l.3 billion, consisting of US$300 million of grants, US$700 million of new loans on favorable terms and US$300 million of reprogramming of existing loans. 12. The earthquakes have affected economic performance. Through April, the monthly index of economic activity rose by 0.4 percent year on year, reflecting lower output in transportation, construction, agriculture, and commerce. With supply bottlenecks, consumer prices rose by 1.8 percent in January and then remained virtually stable, bringing 12-month inflation in June to 3.5 percent. The nonfinancial public sector deficit rose to 2.1 percent of GDP in the first four months, from 0.7 percent of GDP in the same period of 5 At end-2000, open market securities amounted to US$629 million and liquid government deposits in the central bank amounted to US$15 1 million. By end-2000, banks had contributed US$8 million to the IGD. Over the medium term, the IGD needs to accumulate US$300 million of resources to cover 5 percent of the US$6 billion of eligible deposits. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- lo- 2000, reflecting earthquake-related expenses and unusually low income tax receipts. The government decided to ease the transition to the new monetary regime by issuing some colon notes from the central bank’s inventory of currency.6 Through end-May about 20 percent of currency in circulation had been converted into U.S. dollars. The central bank contracted its net domestic assets by about US$60 million mainly through continued open market operations, and increased excess net international reserves to US$lO5 million. Early in the year, almost all bank assets and liabilities had been redenominated into U.S. dollars, and nominal interest rates on loans of more than one-year declined to 11.6 percent in U.S. dollars compared with 14 percent in colones in October 2000 (the month prior to the announcement of the monetary integration law). Nonetheless, the growth in bank credit to the private sector remained low. It is too early to know whether the earthquakes have increased banks’ nonperforming loans, which are defined as loans more than 90 days past due. III. POLICY DISCUSSIONS 13. The authorities adapted their medium-term economic program to support the recovery from the effects of the earthquakes. The program continues to aim at translating economic reforms, including the new monetary regime, into real economic growth of about 5 percent a year, with continued low inflation. The fiscal plan is to reduce the overall public sector deficit excluding reconstruction costs (“underlying deficit”) to 1% percent of GDP in 2003 and beyond. However, the overall deficit will increase in the period 2001-05, as the government incurs its share of the reconstruction costs, most recently estimated at US$l.O5 billion (about 7% percent of GDP). Based on a long-term debt sustainability analysis, the staff concluded that the government could afford to raise the overall public sector deficit and finance these costs mainly through borrowing, provided the underlying deficit declined as planned. Also, public debt at end-2000 was relatively low, and the new loans had sufficiently long maturities. Structural reforms include steps to negotiate concessions with the private sector to operate the remaining public enterprises, lower the medium-term fiscal burden of the old public pension system, rationalize the operations of public banks, and strengthen financial supervision further. 14. For 2001, the staff and the authorities agreed that real GDP was likely to grow by 3 percent, with public reconstruction spending rising to 1.1 percent of GDP. Inflation is expected to fall to 3 percent by year-end, based on the stability of prices since January and the usual seasonal decline in food prices after the harvest. The central bank planned to increase net international reserves by US$l80 million, consistent with a build up of excess international reserves of US$250 million. 6 The law prohibits the printing of new currency notes, but allows the central bank to issue currency from its inventory. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-ll- A. Fiscal Policy 15. The government planned to reduce the underlying overall public sector deficit to 2.7 percent of GDP in 2001, in line with their medium-term fiscal path. Soon after the January earthquake, the assembly approved medium- and long-term loans that had been blocked for several years7 and consented to the government’s plan to issue a Eurobond for US$350 million (2 percent of GDP). 16. However, by midyear, the underlying public sector deficit was expected to rise to 3.2 percent of GDP. Total revenues and grants (not related to reconstruction) are projected to decline by 1 percent of GDP. Tax revenues are expected to increase slightly in relation to GDP, reflecting further efforts to improve tax administration, some minor tax increases and the full-year effect of the tax measures approved in mid-2000.8 The new monetary regime, especially the provision to remunerate liquidity requirements in full, is expected to worsen the central bank operating balance by 0.6 percent of GDP to a deficit of 0.4 percent of GDP in 2001, while non-reconstruction grants return to normal levels. The operating surplus of public enterprises is expected to deteriorate, reflecting a contractual increase in the cost of electricity for the state electric company and a weaker financial position of the state water enterprise (ANDA). To offset most of the lower revenues and grants, the authorities planned to cut total underlying expenditure by 0.7 percent of GDP by scaling back the wage bill and transfers and limiting the growth in fixed capital formation. In recent years, the government has been offering early retirement programs to trim employment, including most recently an offer to employees of the ministry of public works in March 200 1, while maintaining a freeze on nominal wages. As a result, the wage bill is expected to decline by 0.4 percent of GDP. The reduction of the electricity subsidy granted in 2000 is expected to slow the growth in current transfers, while capital transfers to public banks are to be limited to 0.1 percent of GDP. 17. With public reconstruction spending of 1.1 percent of GDP, the overall public sector deficit was expected to reach 4.3 percent of GDP. Net external financing would rise to over 6 percent of GDP, reflecting the new reconstruction grants and long-term loans and the planned Eurobond issue.’ These resources, together with the proceeds of sale of the 7 The constitution requires a two-thirds majority to approve all medium- and long-term loans to the public sector, and the opposition party has held more than a third of the seats for several years. ’ FAD recently appointed a long-term expert in the field to help El Salvador and Honduras improve their tax administration. 9 Reconstruction grants are recorded as financing to help separate reconstruction spending from the underlying deficit. The authorities would like to place the Eurobond in July or August. They are seeking a maturity of at least lo-15 years. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12- remaining shares in CTE, are expected to enable the government to build up its deposits in the central bank and to reduce its short-term debt in relation to GDP, which amounted to 6 percent of GDP at end-2000. 18. The staff urged the authorities to adopt moderate adjustments in tax and expenditure policies to reduce the underlying deficit to 2.7 percent of GDP in 2001 and keep fiscal policy on the sustainable path. Specific measures could include a reduction in the export subsidy for nontraditional exports, increasing excise taxes on alcohol and cigarettes, trimming excess reimbursements of VAT rebates to exporters, and targeting the water subsidy to the poor. The authorities replied that they were preparing a plan to secure the approval of these and similar measures, with a view to achieving the deficit target. 19. For 2002, the authorities intend to lower the underlying fiscal deficit to close to 2 percent of GDP. The state electricity enterprise (CEL) is in the final stages of securing a revision in its contract to buy electricity from a local generator, which would allow it to save about 0.3 to 0.4 percent of GDP a year in electricity costs. CEL is preparing a joint venture to invest in an expansion of its geothermal capacity. The Port Authority (CEPA) is gearing up to sell concessions for the operation of the port of Acajuctla and the airport. The authorities intend to propose to the assembly the elimination of the standard corporate income tax deduction of 75,000 colones (about US$8,600). The staff noted that these measures would reduce the underlying deficit to about 2.3 percent of GDP, and emphasized that the additional measures to be adopted in 2001 would help achieve the deficit target in 2002. 20. The authorities and the staff agreed that reaching the target for the underlying deficit in 2003 and beyond would most likely require steps to lower the government’s net pension costs. The 1998 reform is replacing over time the old pay-as-you-go (PAYG) social security system with a fully funded system of individual retirement accounts. “As a result, the government no longer receives contributions to the PAYG system, yet it must pay the pensions of retirees under the old system. In addition, it must issue “recognition” bonds to compensate retirees under the new system for their contributions to the old system. These costs are projected to rise from less than 1 percent of GDP in 2000 to about 2.5 percent of GDP a year in 2003-05. The government is considering options, such as eliminating an expensive provision for early retirement, to lower net pension costs by about 1 percent of GDP by 2004. B. Financial Sector 21. The authorities appreciated the thorough analysis of the FSAP report, and endorsed all of its major recommendations (Box 2). Most importantly, they planned to strengthen procedures for troubled bank resolution by proposing an amendment that would lo The effects of the pension reform are described in more detail in “Pension Reform in El Salvador,” see Chapter III of the accompanying paper on Recent Economic Developments. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13- permit least-cost closed-bank resolution and establish suspension of payments as a trigger for bank closure. They also intended to raise the premia paid by banks to the IGD, which was created with the purpose of covering payments to small depositors in case of bank liquidation, and to secure a contingent credit line to back the IGD. Based on the law approved in early 2000, financial supervision will be extended to nonbank financial intermediaries. Consolidated supervision of financial conglomerates, as well as supervision of insurance companies and “quasi-mutual” funds will continue to improve. Also, the payment system clearance and settlement are being upgraded. 22. The authorities had reservations about some aspects of the report. They agreed that a strong international reserve position and an adequate capital-asset ratio provided the best protection from external liquidity shocks, but were reluctant to adopt an adjustable general provisioning requirement. ’ ’ They commented that-in response to the banking system difficulties following the 1996-98 credit boom-they had already been planning to adopt many of the proposals presented by the FSAP report. Also, they regarded the stress tests as useful but questioned the realism of the assumptions used. 23. Public financial institutions need to be strengthened to limit potential fiscal liabilities. The authorities noted that they recently changed the management of the Agricultural Development Bank (BFA) and the Mortgage Bank (BH) and intended to downsize and tighten the lending criteria of both banks. They believed it would be possible to privatize the BH over the medium term, but felt that the sale of BFA would never gamer enough political support. They have also agreed with the IDB on a plan to strengthen the Social Housing Fund (FSV), which has been paying market interest rates on bonds sold to the pension funds, while lending at subsidized rates to finance housing projects. The FSV is to adopt more transparent accounting and more stringent lending criteria. It must charge market interest rates on new mortgages, with an explicit subsidy of about 0.1 percent of GDP a year financed by an IDB loan. Interest rates on existing mortgages are to be increased gradually from 6 percent to 7.5 percent over three years. 24. Like the rest of Central America, the government is concerned about the economic, social, and ecological effects of the extremely low world coffee prices (Box 3). It is in the final stages of developing a scheme to restructure the existing stock of bank loans (about US$300 million or 5 percent of bank credit to the private sector) to coffee growers from l-year working capital loans into 20-year loans at a significantly lower interest rate. The restructuring agreements assume that world coffee prices will recover in 2 to 3 years to their average level of the 199Os, and repayments of these loans will be accelerated if coffee prices rise faster than assumed. A second-tier public bank (BMI) will create a trust that will issue 20-year bonds with the aim to sell them outside the banking system, such as to the private pension funds, and use the proceeds to purchase the restructured loans from the ‘i As explained in the FSSA report, such a general provisioning requirement would be reduced in periods of slow credit growth and raised in periods of rapid credit growth. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14- banks. With this liquidity banks would be able to extend new credits to coffee growers. The government will guarantee about one sixth of the restructured debt, while the banks will guarantee the remainder. Banks will continue to administer the loans. The government will also cover part of the net interest cost of the trust. 25. The staff noted that this scheme created a potential fiscal liability, added to moral hazard and weakened the financial position of banks. While the direct fiscal cost of this scheme was very low, the potential fiscal cost could be significant, if prices remain low over the medium term. In this regard, it would be essential to assess whether the low prices were a temporary or permanent shock before developing a plan to support the sector. The staff noted that the scheme restructured debt without requiring banks or coffee growers to change their behavior. Also, the staff estimated that-by lowering the interest rate on the restructured loans-the scheme reduced the net present value of the claims on the coffee sector, yet it was unclear who would absorb this cost. The authorities agreed with this assessment, but explained that the scheme, as designed, entailed less risk than other options. They recently decided to require banks to set aside a reserve that initially equaled 10 percent of the restructured loans and that rose by 2% percent of the outstanding balance of these loans each year until the loans were repaid. They explained that the scheme required coffee growers to service their debt more frequently, which would discourage speculation about price fluctuations. The staff agreed that this provision might force coffee growers to adopt better financial management. C. Operations of the Central Bank 26. The authorities explained that the monetary integration law was designed to encourage a gradual transition to the widespread use of the U.S. dollar, as part of the broader process of integrating El Salvador with the world economy. They believed that the perceived risk of an exchange rate adjustment under their de facto peg had pushed up real interest rates, negating the benefits from low inflation and progress on structural reforms. They estimated that the new monetary regime could reduce real interest rates by eliminating the currency risk premium, which would stimulate faster real economic growth. The staff agreed that the new regime could achieve such a reduction in interest rates, but stressed that this effect would last only if fiscal policy remained on a sustainable path and financial sector reforms continued. l2 The staff added that the regime removed the option to adjust the exchange rate peg to strengthen external competitiveness and took away the seignorage earned under the previous system. However, the authorities were firmly convinced that an exchange rate adjustment would only destabilize expectations and feed quickly into higher wages and prices. They estimated that the lost seignorage would be minimal. l2 An analysis of the currency and country risk premia is presented in “The Risk Premium in El Salvador,” see Chapter I of the accompanying paper on Recent Economic Developments. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 15- 27. The government believed the transition to the new monetary arrangement was proceeding well. They were satisfied with the fairly rapid adjustment in interest rates to the elimination of the currency risk premium and with the pace of conversion of colones into U.S. dollars. They recognized that there was some resistance to the new regime, stemming from the uncertainty following the earthquakes, confusion over converting prices at an exchange rate of C 8.75 per U.S. dollar, and several constitutional challenges to the law. However, they felt that this resistance would dissipate over time and regarded the constitutional challenges as politically motivated and mostly without merit. 28. For 2001, the central bank projected that base money in colones would decline by about 4 percent, as currency in colones would be converted into U.S. dollars, while bank liquid reserves would rise in line with the growth in bank deposits. Net domestic assets were projected to decline by US$250 million, as government deposits would rise from the proceeds from the sale of the government’s remaining shares of CTE. Credit to commercial banks and the stock of open market securities were projected to remain constant. As a result, net international reserves were projected to rise by US$l80 million, while net excess international reserves (net international reserves minus base money) would rise by US$250 million. For the financial system, broad money is expected to grow by about 4% percent, while bank credit to the private sector is projected to rise by almost 5 percent. 29. The staff urged the authorities to phase out quickly the use of the currency inventory, which could undermine the credibility of the new regime. The authorities understood the risks of continuing to issue local currency under the new regime. However, they emphasized that the law deliberately avoided setting a deadline for a currency conversion to allow for a gradual transition, which they consider essential to ensure the acceptance of the new arrangement in the long run. 30. The staff noted that the operation of monetary policy seemed to have remained basically unchanged following the introduction of the U.S. dollar as legal tender. The central bank has continued to conduct open market operations and to set, in this context, interest rates. The staff commented that this approach could also weaken the credibility of the new regime and recommended that the central bank adopt the following rules: (i) set specific quarterly and annual targets for excess net international reserves, which would define a path for net domestic assets; (ii) keep the stock of open market securities within a narrow limit, while allowing the interest rates to be determined in the auction; and (iii) set a floor on government deposits in the central bank. Over time, it will be important to reduce the role of the central bank by letting the government assume all central bank liabilities and converting open market securities into treasury bills. It will also be important to define certain aspects, such as the instruments and amounts, of the repurchase operations in the event of exceptional circumstances. The authorities responded that they had been conducting open market operations to offset fluctuations in the government deposits in the central bank. They accepted the need for a clear target for excess net international reserves, a limit on open market operations, and a floor on government deposits. Nonetheless, they preferred to continue setting the interest rates in each auction. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 16- D. External Sector Policies 31. The external current account deficit is expected to nearly double in 2001 to 6 percent of GDP, reflecting weak demand for exports and higher imports. The economic slowdown in the United States is expected to slow the growth of nontraditional exports to 10 percent (from 14 percent in 2000) and the increase in net maquila exports to 15 percent (from 20 percent in 2000). Also, the drop in world coffee prices is expected to halve the value of coffee exports. Reconstruction spending by both the public and private sectors is projected to raise non-oil imports by over 20 percent. Insurance reimbursements and official grants are expected to finance part of the additional imports. Workers’ remittances are conservatively projected to grow by only 10 percent, reflecting the effect of the slowdown in the United States. 32. Net capital flows are projected to reach 8 percent of GDP, as the public sector steps up its net borrowing. Net financing to the public sector would rise significantly, based on the new reconstruction loans from official creditors, the planned Eurobond issue, the sale of the remaining shares of CTE and net short-term external financing to repay more expensive short-term domestic debt. Net private capital inflows are projected to increase moderately, as banks have been investing their excess liquidity abroad. 33. The authorities want to promote trade integration further. The trade regime is relatively open, with a rating of 4 on the Fund’s trade restrictiveness indexed based on a simple average tariff of less than 6 percent and a moderate incidence of nontariff barriers. The country signed a free trade agreement with Mexico in 2000 and is discussing similar agreements with the Andean Community, Canada, the Dominican Republic, and Panama. It recently signed an agreement with Guatemala and Nicaragua to facilitate the construction of a trade route from the Guatemalan Caribbean port of Puerto Barrios, going through El Salvador, and arriving in the Pacific coast of Nicaragua. In October 2000, the United States agreed to enhance access under the Caribbean Basin Initiative by eliminating duties and quotas on apparel exports that met certain requirements, and the authorities felt that employment, particularly for low-income workers, would benefit substantially from this improved access. IV. MEDIUM-TERMOUTLOOK 34. The staffs analysis showed that the financial impact of borrowing to pay for a large share of the reconstruction costs could be managed, provided the underlying public sector deficit declined to 1.5 percent of GDP in 2003 and beyond (Table 7). 13As the underlying deficit falls, reconstruction costs would increase the overall public sector deficit l3 Different models for estimating the sustainability of the public sector’s debt position are presented in “Measuring the Effect of the Fiscal Deficit on Public Debt”, see Chapter IV of the accompanying paper on Recent Economic Developments. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17- to 3.8 percent of GDP in 2001 (assuming an underlying deficit of 2.7 percent of GDP) and then to 2.6 percent of GDP in 2005 (with an underlying deficit of 1% percent of GDP). With this deficit path, total public sector debt would peak at about 33% percent of GDP in 2005 and then return to 30 percent of GDP by 2010, its level at end-2000. Short-term debt would decline to 17 percent of central government current revenues by 2010. Debt service in relation to central government current revenue would follow a similar profile, with interest payments rising slightly to 2.1 percent of GDP by 2010. The external current account deficit would gradually fall to 3 percent of GDP in 2006, while real economic growth would average 5 percent a year (Table 8). 35. The staff contrasted these results with a scenario that assumed a constant underlying public sector deficit.14 This passive scenario assumed that-in the period 200 1- 1 O-the underlying public sector deficit stayed at 3.4 percent of GDP, which equals the overall deficit in 2000 plus the deterioration of 0.6 percent of GDP in the operating balance of the central bank under the new monetary regime. The overall public sector deficit would rise to 5.1 percent of GDP in 2002, and then decline to 4.5 percent of GDP in 2005 and 3.4 percent of GDP in 2006. As a result, total public debt would increase to 46 percent of GDP in 2010, with a doubling of the government’s short-term debt in relation to central government current revenues. This scenario would require a significant adjustment in the primary balance to offset the higher interest payments and keep the underlying public sector deficit at 3.4 percent of GDP. The external current account deficit would be much higher in this scenario, while higher interest rates would limit real economic growth (Table 9). 36. There is also some uncertainty about the sustainability of net maquila exports. The recent enhancement of the CBI is likely to lead to strong growth in these exports in the next 5 years. However, the global trade agreement on textiles and clothing (ATC) is scheduled to enter into full effect in January 2005 and requires WTO members to reduce barriers to trade in these products over time, with room for some discretion. The staff commented that it would be important to phase the transition carefully, because the ATC agreement could weaken El Salvador’s external position and harm its employment and growth starting in the middle of this decade. The growth in net maquila exports also depends on the minimum wage, because most salaries in the sector are directly linked to the minimum wage, and it is crucial for the authorities to maintain a prudent minimum wage policy to protect this sector. V. STAFF APPRAISAL 37. Since 1992, economic policies have centered on a sound fiscal policy, a stable exchange rate, a prudent minimum wage policy and structural reforms designed to increase the role of the private sector and make the, economy more open. This approach reduced l4 It was considered unrealistic to assume a constant primary balance, which would lead to a rapid deterioration in the overall public sector deficit. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 18- inflation to low single digits and strengthened the external sector, particularly by diversifying exports. However, this approach met with less success in generating strong real economic growth, which picked up in 1993-95 but then tapered off after 1995. Economic performance in 2000 illustrated some of the impediments to more rapid economic growth. While inflation remained low, the terms of trade worsened, banks slowed the growth in credit in an effort to strengthen their loan quality, and real lending interest rates were very high at the beginning of the year. As a result, real growth slowed to 2 percent. 38. The authorities’ medium-term strategy is designed to promote a faster rate of sustainable growth, while maintaining low inflation and a strong external sector. The approach seeks to reduce the underlying public sector deficit to 1% percent of GDP in 2003 and beyond and deepen the structural reforms of recent years, especially by strengthening financial supervision further and promoting more trade integration. The authorities have adapted their fiscal plan to support the recovery from the effects of the earthquakes in early 2001, which caused widespread damage to housing and other infrastructure. The policy strategy has incorporated the bold step of introducing the U.S. dollar as legal tender, with a view to eliminating the currency risk premium and strengthening confidence. The transition to the new monetary regime has been relatively smooth, even following the earthquakes, in large part because the strong policies of recent years led to macroeconomic stability and a credible exchange rate. However, the success of the authorities’ strategy will depend on achieving a sustainable underlying fiscal position, closing potential fiscal liabilities, adopting rules for central bank operations, strengthening financial supervision further and continuing to pursue a prudent minimum wage policy. 39. A reduction in the underlying public sector deficit as intended by the authorities is essential. This fiscal path will allow the government to absorb the impact of borrowing to finance most of its reconstruction costs, without jeopardizing the government’s ability to service debt. Also, if there were concerns about fiscal policy, risk premia could increase and offset the intended benefits of the new monetary regime. So far in 2001, developments suggest that the underlying public sector deficit may turn out somewhat higher than targeted, and it would be important to put in place soon adjustments to bring the deficit in line with the target. The authorities will thus be in a better position to reach next year’s target for a further decline in the underlying deficit through sales of concessions for the operation of some public enterprises and the revision of an unfavorable contract to purchase electricity. The 1998 pension reform is expected to raise the government’s net pension costs significantly in the period 2003-05, and measures to reduce these costs substantially are needed to lower the underlying public sector deficit as planned beyond 2002. 40. The staff cautioned the authorities that continue to issue local currency could undermine the credibility of the new monetary regime. To secure the full benefits of this regime, the authorities should phase out quickly the use of the inventory of colon notes and adopt clear rules for the operation of monetary policy. It would also be important to take the steps to build up excess net international reserves in an amount sufficient to cover a significant share of the central bank’s liabilities in excess of base money. The authorities Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 19- should develop specific plans to wind down monetary operations of the central bank, while leaving the provision to conduct repurchase operations under clearly defined exceptional circumstances. 41. The authorities began to strengthen financial supervision following the credit boom of 1996-98, and are committed to advancing reforms in this area. The adoption of least-cost closed-bank resolution will help curtail the fiscal cost of resolving problem banks and minimize moral hazard. The new deposit insurance fund needs more resources, which should come from higher premia paid by banks; while these resources are being accumulated over the next few years, the fund would benefit from backing through a contingent line of credit. It will also be important to rationalize the operations of the public financial institutions to limit potential fiscal liabilities. While the best option would be to privatize these institutions and subsidize housing for the poor through the budget, the staff welcomes the authorities’ efforts to work within the political constraints to strengthen these institutions. The proposed scheme to assist the coffee sector is a source of concern, because it creates another potential fiscal liability if world coffee prices were to remain low, creates adverse incentives, and weakens the financial position of banks. The recent decision to require banks to set aside a significant reserve against the restructured loans to the coffee sector is welcome. 42. Over the medium term, strong economic policies are needed to keep a sustainable external position, especially over the next few years when reconstruction spending will raise the current account deficit. In particular, a sustainable underlying public sector deficit will contain demand pressures, and a prudent minimum wage policy is essential to maintain the competitiveness of exports. 43. It is proposed that the next Article IV consultation be held on the standard 12-month cycle. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 20 - Box 1. Main Features of the Monetary Integration Law Starting January 1,200l financial system accounts (such as credits, deposits, pensions, and securities) converted from colones to U.S. dollars at the exchange rate that has prevailed since early 1993 (C 8.75 per U.S. dollar). Required the banking system to accept colones in exchange for dollars, without charging any fee, and to redenominate all old transactions in U.S. dollars. Banks may not set up new accounts in colones. The law allowed for a three-month period to gradually lower interest rates on old loans that had been denominated in colones in line with the decline in banks’ cost of funds and the interest rates on new U.S. dollar loans. Allowed prices, wages, and salaries to be denominated in colones or in U.S. dollars, and required prices of goods and services to be expressed in both colones and U.S. dollars during the first six months. After that, prices may be expressed in either currency. Eliminated the central bank’s authority to print new currency notes and issue new coins. The central bank may issue currency from its inventory of colon notes. The law did not set a deadline for the conversion of existing currency notes in colones into U.S. dollar notes. The authorities are importing coins from the United States. Prohibited central bank credit to financial institutions, and eliminated the various existing credit modalities (automatic liquidity, stabilization, structural and solvency loans, and credits to financial institutions in liquidation). Maintained the capacity of the central bank to grant credit to the deposit insurance agency (IGD) and required that IGD deposits be maintained in the central bank. The central bank may conduct repurchase operations in the event of exceptional circumstances that might provoke systemic problems. The ministry of finance will become responsible for all central bank liabilities. Substituted reserve requirements with remunerated liquidity requirements divided into three tranches: the first 25 percent in deposits in the central bank could be automatically used by banks, the second 25 percent in deposits or securities could be drawn by banks at a cost, and the third 50 percent in securities could be used by banks only with authorization of the superintendency of banks and under a regularization plan. Excluded long- term bonds from liquidity requirements. Retained the power of the central bank to sell to financial institutions, and buy from them, portfolio and investment documents. Allowed the central bank to issue bonds and trade securities. Established a single lender-of-last-resort facility, which would provide credit up to 50 percent of the bank reserve requirement in coordination with the superintendency of banks. Introduced specific prudential regulations, including the obligation of financial institutions to maintain adequate matching between assets and liabilities denominated in other international currencies, and sufficient liquid assets as a proportion of short-term liabilities. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2l- Box 2. Summary of the Financial System Stability Assessment (FSSA) El Salvador volunteered to participate in the Joint Bank-Fund Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP). The FSAP mission visited El Salvador during February 14-19,200O and April lo-16,200O. The findings of the FSAP mission were discussed with the authorities in September 2000. The FSAP report was written before El Salvador introduced the U.S. dollar as legal tender, but the FSSA has been updated to reflect the monetary and money market implications of this change. The regulatory and supervisory framework of the financial system has been strengthened in recent years. However, the banking system is undergoing some stress, Its profitability is low, its capital could be overstated, and non-performing loans have risen. It is also prone to credit cycles and exposed to external financial shocks, interest rate risk and liquidity risk. High leverage ratios among Salvadoran corporations and tight capital constraints among banks are likely to inhibit credit growth in coming years. Significant contingent fiscal liabilities arise from the Central Bank (BCR), the pension system reform, the Fondo Social de Vivienda (FSV), and the Banco de Foment0 Agropecuario (BFA). The BCR balance sheet has been weakened by recent depositor bailouts and is exposed to further losses via the Deposit Guarantee Institute (IGD). Monetary integration requires fiscal resources to allow full remuneration of reserve requirements (RR). Important reforms to the BCR’s liquidity facility management and lender of last resort framework were introduced to ease the transition to the new monetary regime. Following FSAP recommendations a two-tiered liquidity requirement regime was established, with a first tier used as liquidity buffer and the second tier as prudential buffer. The BCR has maintained its capacity to issue bills and to intervene occasionally in the money market to smooth transitory liquidity shocks. A single LOLR window was introduced to provide liquidity on the basis of funds held by banks in the prudential buffer. Additional “buffers”, such as adjustable general provisioning requirements, should be established to protect the solvency and liquidity of the banking system; the framework for deposit insurance and bank failure resolution should be revamped, bank regulation and supervision strengthened further including the implementation of consolidated supervision of financial conglomerates and reform to loan classification and provisioning norms; and contingent fiscal liabilities limited. Some weaknesses and developmental needs with respect to nonbank financial institutions and markets also need to be addressed including micro lending and a shift towards a more forward-looking, risk-based approach in the supervision of insurance companies. The long-term role of the central bank in a fully dollarized economy should be reassessed. Overall, 13 Basle Core Principles (BCPs) were found compliant, 4 noncompliant, and 13 materially noncompliant but many of the major weaknesses are in the process of being remedied. Regulations currently under preparation will enter into effect and suitable training programs will enhance supervisory and enforcement capacity. On corporate bankruptcy and restructuring, insolvency and rehabilitation procedures for troubled corporations need to be strengthened. In addition, reforms are needed to facilitate lending backed by movable collateral. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 22 - Box 3. The Role of the Coffee Sector in Central American Economies Over the past twenty years, the role of coffee in Central American economies has diminished considerably. In 2000, coffee exports accounted for 3 percent of regional GDP and 10 percent of regional exports, well below the shares of 7% percent of GDP and 30 percent of exports registered in 1980. The world price of coffee fell by over 70 percent in real terms during this period, as the entry of new producers such as Vietnam expanded world output substantially. During the same period, Central America succeeded in diversifying into nontraditional and maquila exports, which rose from 5 percent of GDP in 1980 to almost 25 percent of GDP in 2000. Despite this diversification, the economic effect of the recent decline in world coffee prices has been significant. During 2001, coffee exports are projected to fall to 1.8 percent of GDP, from 3.6 percent of GDP in 1998. Honduras and Nicaragua, where coffee accounted for over 8 percent of GDP in 1998, are likely to be hit hardest by the price decline. In all countries, the overall quality of bank credit might deteriorate, as coffee sector borrowing represents 5 to 8 percent of total loans. The coffee sector remains a significant employer, especially in poorer rural areas, and thus low prices are expected to result in a significant loss of rural jobs and rural income. Pressures have thus emerged for governments to provide assistance to this sector. Several private sector schemes have been proposed to bolster coffee exports. Colombia has called for the return of quotas under the international coffee agreement that collapsed in 1989. In October 2000, the Association of Coffee Producing Countries (ACPC) tried to implement an export retention scheme. And early this year, eight Latin American coffee growing countries met in Guatemala to consider purchasing low quality coffee for use in other products, such as fertilizers. Central American governments have been implementing emergency assistance schemes. In Honduras, coffee growers received $45 million in interest-free loans over the last two years to mitigate the negative effect on crops of Hurricane Mitch; currently, they are requesting an additional $100 million loan. In both Costa Rica and Guatemala, the authorities are guaranteeing bonds to be sold abroad by their coffee producers’ association, In El Salvador, the government guaranteed an $80 million bond issued by the country’s coffee producers’ association in 2000, and the authorities are currently devising a scheme to guarantee the refinancing of domestic bank lending to coffee growers. Nicaragua is considering official support for refinancing a portion of domestic coffee sector loans maturing in 200 1. The authorities may be taking on too much exposure through such relief programs. Specifically, governments should resist pressures for general fiscal incentives, broad government guarantees, or schemes to assist banks. The recent weakness in world coffee prices could represent a permanent shift in the market. In this event, governments should develop programs to encourage producers to move to other sectors, rather than providing incentives for producers to remain in this sector. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 23 - Table 1. El Salvador: Macroeconomic Flows Average 1990-95 1996 1997 1998 1999 Prel. Proj. I/ 2000 2001 (Annual percentage change) Income and prices Real GDP 5.7 1.7 4.2 GDP deflator 10.8 6.8 3.5 Consumer prices (end of the year) 13.6 7.4 1.9 Consumer prices (average) 14.8 9.8 4.5 Monetary sector Domestic credit 2/ 25.6 15.4 18.5 Liabilities to private sector 2/ 24.4 17.3 12.3 Interest rate (annual rate, time deposits) 3/ 14.9 12.0 12.7 External sector Export volume 10.8 10.9 21.1 Import volume 13.3 -9.9 9.4 Terms of trade 2.3 -8.7 8.2 Real effective exchange rate 4/ 3.1 3.8 3.4 (In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated) Current account (including official transfers) Trade balance Exports Imports Factor payments (net) Private transfers Other -1.9 -1.6 0.9 -0.7 -2.3 -3.2 -6.0 -17.4 -16.0 -14.5 -15.4 -16.1 -19.0 -23.8 10.7 9.9 12.2 10.5 9.5 10.3 9.3 -28.1 -25.9 -26.7 -26.0 -25.6 -29.3 -33.1 -1.5 -0.9 -0.8 -0.6 -2.4 -1.9 -2.5 11.4 11.6 11.7 12.3 12.3 13.6 14.1 5.7 3.6 4.4 3.0 3.8 4.1 6.2 Capital account 2.9 Public sector 0.9 Private sector 2.1 International reserves (increase -) -1.9 Gross domestic investment 16.3 Public sector 3.2 Private sector 13.2 Change in inventories -0.1 National savings Public sector Private sector External savings (after official transfers) 14.4 1.0 13.4 1.9 Overall public sector 5/ Overall balance (before grants) Overall balance (after grants) -3.2 -1.6 Financing 1.6 External financing 1.8 Privatization proceeds -0.2 Domestic financing 0.0 Memorandum items: Nominal GDP (in billions of colones) 57.2 90.3 97.4 104.8 109.1 115.6 123.3 3.2 2.4 3.2 3.9 2.8 7.3 3.2 2.2 6.2 2.5 2.9 6.6 0.0 0.2 -3.0 1.4 -0.1 0.7 -1.6 -3.3 -2.5 -1.6 0.4 -1.3 15.2 15.1 17.5 16.3 17.0 18.3 4.2 3.7 3.6 3.1 2.9 3.9 11.6 12.3 13.0 13.2 14.2 14.4 -0.6 -1.0 0.8 0.0 -0.1 0.0 13.5 16.0 16.8 14.0 13.8 12.3 2.1 2.2 1.4 0.4 -0.4 -0.6 11.4 13.8 15.4 13.6 14.2 12.9 1.6 -0.9 0.7 2.3 3.2 6.0 -2.4 -1.7 -2.3 -2.8 -3.7 -4.5 -2.2 -1.5 -2.2 -2.6 -2.8 -4.3 2.2 1.5 2.2 2.6 2.8 4.3 2.7 2.0 -0.2 1.5 1.5 6.1 0.0 0.0 6.8 1.4 0.0 1.7 -0.5 -0.6 -4.4 -0.3 1.3 -3.5 Nominal GDP (in millions of U.S. dollars) 6,764 IO,3 16 11,135 11,974 12,467 13.211 14,090 Sources: Central Bank; Ministry of Finance; and Fund staff estimates. 3.5 3.4 2.0 3.0 3.9 0.5 4.0 3.5 4.2 -1.0 4.3 3.0 2.6 0.5 2.3 4.0 18.0 4.1 12.7 6.5 10.7 10.7 1.1 4.8 3.6 4.6 9.3 . . . -3.6 0.9 3.8 -2.5 -0.1 -6.3 1.6 1.0 15.8 0.7 14.4 18.5 -5.6 -0.8 5.1 l/ On the basis of staff passive projections for fiscal policy. Assumes that US$l50 million externally financed are spent in reconstruction in 200 1. 2/ Starting from 1998 includes Banco de Foment0 Agropecuario as part of the banking system. 3/ Annual average of monthly interest rates for 180 days time deposits. 4/ End of period; a positive change indicates an appreciation. For 2000, data refers to the period December 1999-June 2000. 5/ The average for 1990-95 refers to the nonfinancial public sector. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 24 - Table 2. El Salvador: Operations of the Overall Public Sector (In percent of GDP) 1997 1998 1999 Prel. 2000 Proj . 2001 Revenue and grants Current revenue Tax revenue Nontax revenue Operating surplus of public enterprises Operating surplus of the central bank Capital revenue Official grants Expenditure and net lending 16.6 17.4 17.7 18.6 17.9 Current expenditure 12.6 13.7 14.4 15.3 14.7 Consumption 9.6 10.2 11.0 11.2 10.7 Wages and salaries 7.0 7.7 8.3 8.3 7.9 Goods and services 2.6 2.5 2.7 2.8 2.8 Interest payments 1.6 1.5 1.4 1.5 1.6 Current transfers 1.5 2.0 2.0 2.6 2.5 Capital expenditure 4.0 3.8 3.2 3.3 3.1 Fixed capital formation 3.7 3.6 3.1 2.9 2.9 Capital transfers 0.3 0.1 0.1 0.4 0.2 Net lending -0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 Underlying balance -1.5 -2.2 -2.6 -2.8 Reconstruction expenditure -3.2 1.1 -0.6 -4.5 -4.3 6.1 -3.5 1.7 Current account balance (deficit -) Overall balance before grants Overall balance after grants External financing Domestic financing Privatization proceeds 15.1 15.2 15.1 15.7 14.7 14.8 15.1 14.9 14.8 14.2 10.3 10.1 10.4 10.2 10.4 3.0 3.2 3.4 3.9 3.9 1.3 1.4 0.8 0.6 0.3 0.3 0.4 0.2 0.2 -0.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.2 0.1 0.3 0.8 0.3 2.2 1.4 0.4 -0.4 -1.7 -2.3 -2.8 -3.7 -1.5 -2.2 -2.6 -2.8 2.0 -0.2 1.5 1.5 -0.6 -4.4 -0.2 1.3 0.0 6.8 1.4 0.0 Sources: Ministry of Finance; Central Bank; and Fund staff estimates. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 25 - Table 3. El Salvador: Operations of the Financial System 1997 1998 1999 Prel. 2000 Proj. 2001 (End-of-period stocks; in millions of dollars) Net international reserves 1,462 Net domestic assets 85 Nonfinancial public sector 462 Central government 508 Rest of public sector -47 Commercial banks 20 Credit 20 Nonbank financial institutions 170 Open market operations -386 Medium- and long-term foreign liabilities 243 Other -423 Money base Currency issue Currency in circulation Cash in vault Liquidity requirements Net foreign assets Net domestic assets Nonfinancial public sector Central government Rest of public sector Private sector Medium- and long-term foreign liabilities Other Liabilities to the private sector Of which Money 1,547 467 369 98 1,080 II. Financial System l/ 1,172 3,944 270 613 -343 4,525 385 -1,236 5,116 Quasi-money Net domestic assets Of which 916 3,637 (Percentage changes) 2/ 8.0 Nonfinancial public sector Private sector Liabilities to the private sector Credit to the private sector Liabilities to the private sector Of which -0.4 15.5 12.3 (In percent of GDP) 3/ 37.3 43.2 Currency in circulation Money Quasi-money 3.2 3.2 8.3 8.1 30.7 32.4 Memorandum items: Credit to the private sector (12-month percentage change) Income velocity of broad money 18.5 18.0 2.3 2.2 I. Central Reserve Bank 1,767 12 72 143 -71 93 93 298 -45 1 -171 171 1,779 476 403 73 1,303 1,969 35 74 107 -33 148 148 326 -572 -165 225 2,004 652 539 113 1,352 1,891 -48 84 102 -18 117 117 326 -629 -150 204 1,843 556 449 107 1,287 2,071 -298 -148 -133 -15 116 116 285 -629 -125 203 1,772 435 350 85 1,337 1,580 1,814 1,812 1,982 4,183 4,324 4,546 4,667 -218 -145 57 -175 155 158 361 126 -373 -303 -304 -301 5,341 5,558 5,618 5,890 -443 -490 -52 1 -454 -497 -599 -607 -593 5,763 6,138 6,358 6,649 1,013 1,140 1,147 1,093 4,130 4,283 4,884 5,206 4.7 2.4 3.6 1.9 -9.5 1.3 3.3 -3.6 15.9 3.8 1.0 4.3 12.7 6.5 3.6 4.6 41.2 45.4 43.7 42.3 40.8 47.7 47.3 46.2 3.8 3.7 2.8 8.6 8.7 7.9 33.7 34.7 35.8 4.1 1.1 4.8 Sources: Central Bank; and Fund staff estimates. I/ Starting from 1998 includes Banco de Foment0 Agropecuario as part of the banking system. 2/ In relation to the stock of liabilities to the private sector at the beginning of period. 3/ Average stocks in proportion of GDP. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 26 - Table 4. El Salvador: Balance of Payments, 1997-2001 1997 1998 1999 Prel. 2000 Proj. 2001 (In millions of U.S. dollars) Current account (after official transfers) Current account (before official transfers) Trade balance Exports, f.o.b. Coffee Other traditional Nontraditional Imports, c.i.f. Non-oil Oil Nonfactor services Maquila Other Factor services (net) Of which interest payments Private transfers (net) Official transfers Capital account Capital transfers Nonfinancial public sector of which net short-term debt Privatization proceeds Public financial sector Private capital and net errors & omissions Currency substitution (colones for US$) 96 41 -1,614 1,359 518 86 756 -2,973 -2,853 -120 434 291 143 -87 119 1,308 55 267 0 219 111 0 28 19 -84 -289 -424 -845 -115 -317 -452 -944 -1,850 -2,002 -2,5 17 -3,356 1,263 1,190 1,356 1,314 322 245 298 145 99 62 56 66 842 883 1,003 1,103 -3,113 -3,192 -3,873 -4,670 -3,026 -3,077 -3,662 -4,474 -87 -115 -211 -196 324 449 514 778 339 379 456 525 -16 71 58 253 -66 -293 -250 -354 177 278 292 349 1,477 1,529 1,801 1,987 31 389 1 -43 -136 810 -26 -354 Overall balance (deficit -) Change in international reserves (increase-) Of which Coverage of base money Currency conversion Bank reserves (increase-) Excess net international reserves (increase-) l/ 363 305 -363 -305 (In percent of GDP) Current account (after official transfers) Current account (before official transfers) Trade balance Nonfactor services Factor payments (net) Private transfers Official transfers Capital account Nonfinancial public sector Privatization proceeds Public financial sector Other Currency conversion 0.9 0.4 -14.5 3.9 -0.8 11.7 0.5 2.4 2.0 0.0 0.3 0.2 -0.7 -2.3 -3.2 -6.0 -1.0 -2.5 -3.4 -6.7 -15.4 -16.1 -19.0 -23.8 2.7 3.6 3.9 5.5 -0.6 -2.4 -1.9 -2.5 12.3 12.3 13.6 14.1 0.3 3.2 -0.4 6.8 -0.2 -2.9 28 28 491 376 29 109 175 293 -42 78 127 0 -19 -17 179 -9 100 1,145 70 861 164 202 -17 29 -121 202 -49 180 -202 49 -180 71 121 -50 -250 0.2 0.2 3.9 2.8 1.4 2.2 1 .o 0.0 -0.2 -0.1 1.7 0.8 0.7 8.1 6.1 1.4 -0.1 0.7 -0.9 3.3 2.5 1.6 -0.4 1.3 Overall balance Sources: Central Bank; and Fund staff estimates. l! International reserves minus base money. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 27 - Table 5. Central America: Indicators of External Vulnerability 1997 1998 1999 Prcl. 2000 Pmj. 2001 Merchandise exports (yearly change) Merchandise imports (yearly change) Terms of trade (percentage change) Current account halance, after grants (in percent of GDP) Central bank net international reserves In months of imports of next year’s goods and services In percent of M2 Public sector external debt (in percent of GDP) Public external debt service to merchandise exports REER appreciation (+) (yearly change) Latin America and the Cnrlbbenn 9.8 -4.6 3.6 20.8 2.2 18.4 4.3 -7.1 15.2 7.8 -3.4 -7.3 0.9 4.3 -0.9 -2.6 -4.0 -2.9 -2. I -2.9 7.9 14.1 8.1 6.7 14.9 17.8 62.8 75.7 -5.7 -7.2 6.4 15.0 14.8 62.9 50.2 5.5 64.4 9.0 Costa Rica Merchandise exports (12~month percent change) I/ Merchandise imports (IZ-month percent change) Terms of trade @ercentage change) Current account balance, atIer grants (in percent of GDP) Central bank net international reserves In months of imports of next year’s goods and services In percent of M2 Public sector external debt (in percent of GDP) NFPS external debt service to merchandise exports REER appreciation (+) (ll-month percentage change) Merchandise exports (IZ-month percent change) II Merchandise imports (IZ-month percent change) Terns of trade @ercentagc change) Current account balance, atler grants (in percent of GDP) Central bank net intemational rcscrves In months of imports of next year’s goods and services In percent of M2 Public sector external debt (in percent of GDP) NFPS extemal debt service to merchandise exports REER appreciation (+) (IZ-month percentage change) Merchandise exports (IZ-month percent change) Merchandise imports (IZ-month percent change) Terms of trade (percentage change) Current amo”nt balance, afler grants (in percent of GDP) Central bank net international rcscrvcs In months of imports of next year’s goods and sewices In percent of M2 Public sector external debt (in percent of GDP) NFPS extemal debt service to merchandise exports REER appreciation (+) (IZmonth percentage change) Honduras Merchandise exports (IZ-month percent change) Merchandise imports (IZ-month percent change) Terms of trade (percentage change) Current account balance, r&r grants (in percent of GDP) Central bank net international reserves In months of imports of next year’s goods and services In percent of M2 Public sector external debt (in percent of GDP) NFPS external debt service to merchandise exports REER appreciation (+) (IZ-month percentage change) Nicaragua Merchandise exports (I Z-month percent change) Merchandise imports (IZ-month percent change) Terms of trade @ercentage change) Current account balance, after grants (in percent of GDP) Central bank net international reserves In months of imports of next year’s goods and services In percent of MZ -6.6 12.8 6.8 -31.8 2.8 -8.5 -4.7 18.3 -5.1 2.6 24.8 -5.8 -0.9 6.7 -18.1 -12.6 -2.8 -29.7 -39.2 -30.7 -27.9 2.0 2.4 2.1 2.4 Public sector external debt (in percent of GDP) 296.5 295.6 288.8 NFPS external debt service ta merchandise exports 67.9 63.1 72.1 REER appreciation (+) (l2-month perccnrage change) 3.5 2.0 1.7 6.9 21.9 25.5 -15.2 -0.5 13.0 16.8 -6.5 3.4 6.0 4.8 3.1 I.7 -13.2 -0. I -4.9 -5.2 -4.6 -5.6 -6.1 2.0 I.8 24.6 18.5 21.6 20.4 -20. I -28.0 3.7 -2.2 2.7 2.3 1.8 27.7 21.8 16.3 19.5 19.9 19.0 -16.7 -25.5 -37.2 I.7 4.7 33.3 Il.3 a.2 0.9 -2.9 -2.1 15.6 I.4 4.6 0.9 20.9 20.6 -0.1 -6.3 -5.6 -0.8 -0.7 -2.3 -3.2 -6.0 4.9 5.1 29.7 31.7 24. I 22.0 15.9 21.5 3.4 1.6 16.4 22.4 6.8 -3.5 2.2 21.9 14.7 17.0 a.2 5.1 -24.4 13.1 -3.4 15.9 16.3 5.9 7.5 6.9 10.0 3.8 -9.5 -2.8 -4.3 -3.9 -2.8 -3.7 -3.5 -6.7 2.4 3.2 4.4 4.4 4.3 68.9 20.9 15.4 64.9 79.1 16.7 17.8 6.2 1.6 77.8 75.5 24.0 8.0 5.7 4.6 4.3 33.3 31.3 32.9 22.5 23.3 27.0 17.4 14.1 23.3 I.0 5.1 9.6 -2.3 10.9 6.1 20.7 -2.0 7.1 6.4 6.0 -11.5 -5.0 -4.9 -5.3 -5.6 -4.5 -4.3 2.8 2.3 26.4 26.3 14.9 18.1 16.4 17.0 -4.5 -6.0 3.6 3.7 35.0 36.9 17.5 17.5 23.2 20.3 4.9 278.3 268.0 65.0 58.2 8.8 Sources: National authorities; and Fund staff estimates. 11 Includes net maquila exports. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-28 - Table 6. El Salvador: Indicators of Financial Soundness 1997 1998 1999 Prel. 2000 (In percent) Broad money (12-month basis) 12.3 Private sector credit (12-month basis) 18.5 Private sector credit over GDP (average) 37.3 Loan-deposit ratio Financial system 95.3 Commercial banks 94.5 (In percent of total loans) Loans in arrears (end period) l/ Commercial banks 3.9 (In percent of loans in arrears) Provision for loans in arrears (end period) Commercial banks I/ (In percent) 60.2 Share of loans to real state sector Capital and related credit 13.1 Actual risk-weighted capital ratio (RWCR) 9.7 Required risk-weighted capital ratio (RWCR) 8.6 Institutions with RWCR below required Actual credit to related parties (percent of net worth) Limits on actual credit to related parties (percent of net worth) Institutions with credit to related parties above 20 percent of total loans Profits after tax To equity capital To total assets Memorandum items: Net international reserves Central bank Rest of the financial system Net foreign assets Central bank Rest of the financial system 0.0 12.6 25.0 2.0 18.6 3.7 4.5 6.0 1.3 0.3 0.4 0.5 (In millions of U.S. dollars) 1,172 1,462 -290 787 1,220 -433 12.7 6.5 3.6 18.0 4.1 1.1 41.2 43.7 42.3 99.6 99.3 95.1 99.6 99.3 95.1 5.0 5.5 5.0 67.8 89.0 84.9 13.2 12.7 15.2 9.2 10.5 8.9 9.2 1.0 0.0 9.3 15.0 0.0 7.4 15.0 0.0 11.4 9.6 0.0 3.2 5.0 0.0 1,580 1,814 1,812 1,767 1,969 1,891 -186 -156 -79 1138 1324 1291 1,597 1,806 1,742 -459 -482 -45 1 Sources: Central Bank; and Fund staff estimates. l/ Loans in arrears for 90 days or more. Starting in 1998 includes Banco de Foment0 Agropecuario. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-29 - Table 7. El Salvador: Financing Scenarios for Earthquake Reconstruction (In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated) PWZI. Proiections 2000 200 1 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 Underlying Position Overall balance -2.8 -2.7 -2.0 -1.5 -1.5 -1.5 Reconstruction fiscal spending 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Reconstruction fiscal spending (million dollars) 0 0 0 0 0 0 Underlying overall balance -2.8 -1.7 -2.0 -1.5 -1.5 -1.5 Interest payments I.9 1.7 2.0 2.0 2.0 1.9 Primary balance -0.9 -1.0 0.0 0.5 0.5 0.4 Public debt I/ 30.2 31.2 31.6 31.0 30.3 29.6 Medium- and long-term debt 24.2 25.7 26.9 26.7 26.3 25.9 Short-term debt 6.0 5.5 4.6 4.3 4.0 3.7 Debt service/central government current revenue 22.2 29.2 33.4 28.3 26.8 25.5 Short-term debt/ central government current revenue 55.2 48.2 38.7 35.0 32.0 29.4 Memorandum items: Real GDP growth 2.0 2.5 4.0 4.5 5.0 5.0 Inflation 4.3 3.0 2.5 2.5 2.5 2.5 Active Position with reconstruction Reconstruction fiscal spending ofUS%l.OS billion in the period 2001-05 2/ Overall balance -2.8 -3.8 -3.7 -3.0 -2.6 -2.6 Reconstruction fiscal spending 0.0 1.1 1.7 I.5 I.1 1.1 Reconstruction fiscal spending (million dollars) 0 150 250 250 200 200 Underlying overall balance -2.8 -2.7 -2.0 -1.5 -1.5 -1.5 Interest payments 1.9 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.1 2.1 Primary balance -0.9 -2.1 -1.7 -1.0 -0.6 -0.4 Public debt I/ 30.2 31.4 32.6 32.9 33.2 33.4 Medium- and long-term debt 24.2 26.6 28.7 29.2 29.8 30.3 Short-term debt 6.0 4.8 3.9 3.7 3.4 3.2 Debt service/central current revenue government 34.0 41.2 33.4 29.0 28.0 27.3 Short-term debt/ central current revenue government 55.2 42.0 33.2 30. I 27.4 25.3 Memorandum Items: Real GDP growth 2.0 3.0 4.5 4.5 5.0 5.0 Inflation 4.3 3.0 2.5 2.5 2.5 2.5 Passive Position with reconstruction Reconstruction fiscal spending of USSl.05 billion in the period 2001.2005 2/ Overall balance -2.8 -4.3 -5.1 -5.0 -4.6 -4.5 Reconstruction fiscal spending 0.0 I.1 1.7 1.6 I.2 I.1 Reconstruction fiscal spending (million dollars) 0 150 250 250 200 200 Underlying overall balance -2.8 -3.2 -3.4 -3.4 -3.4 -3.4 Interest payments 31 1.9 I.7 2.1 2.4 2.7 2.9 Primary balance -0.9 -2.6 -3.0 -2.6 -1.9 -1.6 Public debt I/ 30.2 31.9 34.8 37.1 39.5 41.7 Medium- and long-term debt 24.2 26.6 29.0 29.8 30.8 31.7 Short-term debt 6.0 5.3 5.8 7.3 8.7 10.0 Debt service/central current revenue government 34.0 42.3 36.6 34.3 35.3 36.3 Short-term debt/ central current revenue government 55.2 41.4 51.8 63.1 74.9 85.3 Memorandum items: Real GDP growth 2.0 3.0 3.5 3.5 3.5 3.5 -1.5 -1.5 -1.5 -1.5 -1.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0 0 0 0 0 -1.5 -1.5 -1.5 -1.5 -1.5 1.9 1.8 I.8 1.8 1.8 0.4 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 29.0 28.5 27.9 27.4 27.0 25.6 25.3 24.9 24.6 24.4 3.5 3.2 3.0 2.8 2.6 29.6 26.4 23.7 24.0 23.5 27.2 25.3 23.3 21.6 20.0 5.0 5.0 5.0 5.0 5.0 2.5 2.5 2.5 2.5 2.5 -1.5 -1.5 -1.5 -1.5 -1.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0 0 0 0 0 -1.5 -1.5 -1.5 -1.5 -1.5 2.1 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.1 0.6 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.6 32.6 31.8 30.9 30.2 29.6 29.6 29.0 28.4 27.9 27.4 2.9 2.7 2.5 2.4 2.2 31.7 28.9 26.7 27.5 27.5 23.4 21.7 20.0 18.5 17.2 5.0 5.0 2.5 2.5 5.0 2.; -3.4 0.0 0 -3.4 3.3 -0.1 44.5 31.1 13.4 40.1 Ill.5 3.5 5.0 5.0 2.5 2.5 -3.4 -3.4 0.0 0.0 0 0 -3.4 -3.4 3.0 3.2 -0.4 -0.2 42.7 43.7 31.5 31.3 II.2 12.3 43.3 41.8 95.8 105.5 -3.4 -3.4 0.0 0.0 0 0 -3.4 -3.4 3.5 3.7 0.1 0.3 45.3 46.1 31.0 30.9 14.4 15.2 42.6 44.0 119.5 126.7 3.5 3.5 3.5 3.5 Inflation Sources: Central Bank; and Fund staff estimates. 4.3 3.0 2.5 2.5 2.5 2.5 2.5 2.5 2.5 2.5 2.5 I/ Includes USS353 Eurobond issue in 2001, at 400 basis points spread and IO-year maturity. 2/Assumes official borrowing at 7.5 percent, 20-year maturity, and 5-yeargrace. 3/Market rates are 50bp higher than baseline in 2002 and 1OObps higher from 2003 onward than in baseline Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 30 - Table 8. El Salvador: Balance of Payments, 2000-2006 Active Projection PRl. 2000 2001 2002 Staff Projections 2003 2004 2005 2006 Current account (after ofticiai transfers) Current account (before official transfers) Trade balance Exports, Eab. C0ff.e Other traditional Nontraditional Imports, c.i.f. Non-oil Oil Nonfactor services Maquila Other Factor services (net) Of which Interest payments Private transfers (net) Offlcini transfers Capital account Capital transfers Nonfinancial public sector of which net short-term debt Privatization proceeds Public financial sector Private capital and net errors & omissions Currency substitution (colones for US dollars) Overall balance (deficit -) Change in net international reserves (increase-) Of which Coverage of base money Currency conversion Bank reserves (increase-) Excess net international resewes (increase-) Current account (after official transfers) Current acco”“t (before 0fncl”i transfers) Trade balance Nonfactor services Factor payments (net) Private transfers Ofticiai transfers Capital BcCO”“t Nonfinancial public sector Privatization proceeds Public financial sector Other Currency co”versio” (I” millions of U.S. dollars) -424 -452 -2,5 I7 1,356 298 56 1,003 -3,873 -3,662 -211 514 456 58 -250 292 1,801 28 376 109 293 78 0 -17 -9 -774 -873 -847 -806 -835 -606 -874 -973 -947 -838 -862 -633 -3,285 -3,329 -3,425 -3,524 -3,728 -3,800 1,314 1,468 1,614 1,772 1,943 2,104 I45 192 228 265 304 322 66 63 64 66 68 70 1,103 1,213 1,323 1,442 1,571 1,713 -4,599 -4,797 -5,040 -5,295 -5,671 -5,904 -4,403 -4,6 IO -4,860 -5,115 -5,487 -5,710 -196 -187 -180 -180 -185 -194 778 749 777 887 961 1,120 525 619 731 862 966 1,082 253 130 46 25 -5 38 -354 -47 I -523 -597 -672 -726 349 474 546 609 680 736 1,987 100 -121 180 -180 2,077 100 1,313 44 715 0 245 -31 341 -170 2,225 2,394 100 32 951 923 36 30 526 494 0 0 0 0 -31 -29 421 428 -190 -75 -86 42 86 -42 2,577 27 961 IO 514 0 0 -28 464 270 -270 0 126 -126 2,773 27 741 0 336 0 0 -26 432 0 13s -135 71 80 86 -42 -126 -135 I21 170 190 75 0 0 -50 -90 -104 -117 -126 -135 -250 -350 0 0 0 0 (In percent of GDP) -3.2 -5.5 -3.4 -6.2 -19.0 -23.3 3.9 5.5 -1.9 -2.5 13.6 14.1 0.2 0.7 2.8 7.6 2.2 5.6 0.0 1.4 -@.I -0. I 0.8 0.7 -0.9 -5.8 -5.2 -4.6 -4.5 -3.0 -6.5 -5.9 -4.8 -4.6 -3.1 -22.1 -21.2 -20.3 -19.9 -18.9 5.0 4.8 5.1 5.1 5.6 -3.1 -3.2 -3.4 -3.6 -3.6 13.8 13.8 13.8 13.8 13.8 0.7 0.6 0.2 0.1 8.7 5.9 5.3 5.1 4.7 3.3 2.8 2.7 1.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 -0.2 -0.2 -0.2 -0. I 2.5 2.8 2.6 2.5 -1.1 1.8 -1.2 -0.5 -0.4 0.2 0.0 0.7 0.1 3.7 1.7 0.0 -0. I 2.1 0.0 0.7 Overall baisnee Sources: Central Bank: and Fund staff estimates. -0.4- 1.3 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3l- Table 9. El Salvador: Balance of Paymhts, 2000-2006 Passive Projection Prel. Staff Projections 2000 200 I 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 (In millions of U.S. dollars) Current account (after ofticial transfers) Current account (before offkial transfers) Trade balance Exports, f.o.b. COffCC Other traditional Nontraditional Imports, c.i.f. Non-oil Oil Nonfactor services Maquila Other Factor services (net) Of which interest payments Private transfers (net) -424 -845 -1,079 -1,135 -1,085 -1,100 -865 -452 -944 -1,179 -1,235 -1,118 -1,127 -892 -2,517 -3,356 -3,490 -3,626 -3,659 -3,787 -3,784 1,356 1,314 1,468 1,614 1,772 1,943 2,104 298 I45 192 228 265 304 322 56 66 63 64 66 68 70 1,003 1,103 1,213 1,323 1,442 1,571 1,713 -3,873 -4,670 -4,958 -5,241 -5,43 I -5.73 I -5,888 -3,662 -4,474 -4,773 -5,065 -5,257 -5,555 -5,706 -211 -196 -185 -176 -174 -176 -182 514 778 749 777 887 961 1,120 456 525 619 731 862 966 1,082 58 253 130 46 25 -5 38 -250 -354 -501 -574 -668 -764 -840 292 349 504 597 680 773 850 1,801 1,987 2,063 2,188 2,322 2,463 2,613 Official transfers 28 100 Capital account Capital transfers Nonfinancial public sector Of which net short-term debt Privatization proceeds Public financial sector Private capital and net errors & omissions 316 1,145 109 70 293 861 78 164 0 202 -17 -17 -9 29 Currency substitution (colones for US dollars) Overall balance (deficit -) Change in net international reserves (increase-) Of which -49 49 -121 180 -180 100 100 32 1,506 1,224 1,176 44 36 30 919 818 799 204 292 304 245 0 0 -31 -31 -29 330 402 377 -170 -190 -75 251 -101 16 -257 IO1 -16 27 1,197 IO 831 317 0 -28 384 0 97 -97 27 968 0 677 341 0 -26 317 0 103 -103 Coverage of base money 71 93 IO1 -16 -97 -103 Currency conversion I21 170 190 75 0 0 Bank reserves (increase-) -50 -77 -89 -91 -97 -103 Excess net international reserves (increase-) -250 -350 0 0 0 0 Current account (after official transfers) Current account (before ofticial transfers) Trade balance Nonfactor services Factor payments (net) Private transfers Offkisl transfers Capital account Nonfinancial public sector Privatization proceeds Public financial sector Other Currency conversion (In percent of GDP) -3.2 -6.0 -3.4 -6.7 -19.0 -23.8 3.9 5.5 -1.9 -2.5 13.6 14.1 0.2 0.7 2.8 8.1 2.2 6.1 0.0 1.4 -0.1 -0.1 0.8 0.7 -0.9 -7.2 -7.2 -6.5 -6.2 -4.6 -7.9 -7.8 -6.6 -6.3 -4.7 -23.4 -22.9 -21.8 -21.2 -20.0 5.0 4.9 5.3 5.4 5.9 -3.4 -3.6 -4.0 -4.3 -4.4 13.8 13.8 13.8 13.8 13.8 0.7 0.6 0.2 7.0 4.7 0.0 -0.2 2.4 -0.4 0.1 0.1 6.7 4.7 0.0 -0.2 2.2 0.0 0.5 0.1 10.1 7.7 6.1 5.2 I.6 0.0 -0.2 -0.2 2.5 2.8 5.1 3.6 0.0 -0.1 1.7 -1.1 1.7 -1.2 0.0 -0.4 1.3 -0.6 0.5 Overall balance Sources: Central Bank: and Fund staff estimates. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 32 - APPENDIX I El Salvador: Fund Relations (As of June 30,200l) I. II. III. IV. V. Type Membership Status: Joined: March 14, 1946 Status: Article VIII General resources Account: Quota Fund holdings of currency SDR Million 171.30 171.30 SDR Department: SDR Million Percent of Quota Net cumulative allocation 24.99 100.0 Holdings 24.98 100.0 Outstanding Purchases and Loans: None. Financial Arrangements: Approval Expiration Amount Approved Amount Drawn Date Date (SDR Million) (SDR Million) Stand-by 09123198 02/22/00 Stand-by 02128197 05/30/98 Stand-by 0712 l/95 09/20/96 VI. Projected Obligations to the Fund: None. 37.68 0.00 37.68 0.00 37.68 0.00 Percent of Quota 100.0 100.0 VII. Exchange Rate Arrangement: During the period 1993-2000 the central bank intervened in the foreign exchange market to maintain the value of the colon at C 8.75 per U.S. dollar. Since January 1,200l the authorities allowed the U.S. dollar to be legal tender. The colon is circulating concurrently with the U.S. dollar at an exchange rate of C 8.75 per U.S. dollar. VIII. Recent Executive Board Discussions: On November 5, 1999 the Executive Board concluded the 1999 Article IV consultation. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 33 - APPENDIX I IX. Technical Assistance: Department Dates FAD January-February 2000 October 2000 June 2001 MAE August 1998 STA JuneJuly 1999 November-December 1999 March 2000 May 200 1 X. Financial Sector Assessment: MAE February 2000 April 2000 September 2000 Purpose Tax reform Tax and customs administration Tax administration Monetary programming and indirect instruments of monetary control Issues for the implementation of a dollar standard Balance of payments statistics Legal and institutional framework of the statistical system Money and banking statistics Financial sector stability assessment Financial system stability assessment Final discussions of financial sector assessment program Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 34 - APPENDIX II El Salvador: Relations with the Inter-American Development Bank I. FINANCIAL RELATIONS (In millions of U.S. dollars) A. Operations (as of June 30,200l) Loans Total Energy 251.3 Transportation 283.0 Education 181.4 Health and sanitation 64.4 Environment 59.8 Social investment, local development, emergency 74.1 Reform and public sector modernization 130.1 Agriculture 25.0 TOTAL 1,069.l Disbursed Undisbursed 207.9 34.2 190.9 89.0 69.2 99.1 0.0 61.5 12.5 46.0 29.1 41.2 57.6 68.8 0.0 24.8 567.3 464.4 B. Loan Disbursements 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 Net disbursements 104.2 77.0 100.0 74.2 120.9 Gross disbursements 127.4 131.7 130.7 113.1 178.7 Amortization 23.2 54.7 30.7 38.9 57.8 II. RECENT AND PLANNED ACTIVITIES In 2000, one project was approved for the modernization of the Salvador-an Social Security Institute for US$5.8 million. Operations for 2001 are as follows: Project Name Projected Loan Housing Program Agricultural Modernization Program Peaceful Coexistence Program Local Development Program Multiphase Sustainable Rural Roads Program’ Emergency Program I’ Emergency Program II’ 90.0 25.0 30.0 70.0 58.0 20.0 20.0 TOTAL 313.0 ’ Approved by the Board as of May 3 1,2001. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-35- APPENDIX III El Salvador: Relations with the World Bank Group (As of June 30,200l) ’ I. Financial Relations A. IBRD/IDA/IFC Lending Operations by Sector (In millions of U.S. dollars) Disbursed Undisbursed IBRD/IDA Agriculture Education Transportation Electric power and other energy Structural adjustment Urban development and housing Telecommunication Environment Industry Public sector management Health, population, and nutrition Total IBRD IDA Of which Repaid IDA IBRD Outstanding’ 626.2 187.6 598.3 187.6 28.0 0.0 285.7 12.3 273.4 330.2 IFC investments3 33.8 Loans 32.0 Equity 1.8 34.4 5.6 117.4 118.2 36.5 0.0 100.6 16.6 77.4 0.0 121.9 0.0 19.5 0.0 22.4 27.6 9.8 6.2 60.6 13.4 25.8 0.0 * Net of cancellations. 2 Excluding amounts sold to third parties. 3 IFC commitments consist of disbursed and undisbursed investments as of December 3 1, 2000. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 36 - APPENDIX III B. IBRD/IDA Loan Disbursements 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 Gross disbursements 20.6 35.4 34.4 23.2 34.4 17.9 Amortization (cash) 22.4 24.4 28.5 17.7 18.2 12.6 Net disbursements -1.8 11.0 5.9 5.5 16.2 5.3 Source: World Bank. II. Recent and Planned IBRD Activities The Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for El Salvador was presented to the World Bank Board in February 1997. Since then, two projects have been approved by the Board and are under implementation: the Secondary Education Project (US$58 million) in August 1997, and the Education Reform Project (US$SS million) in May 1988. The latter is an Adaptable Program Loan to support expansion of the EDUCO program in primary education, corresponding to Phase I of the Government’s Ten-Year Education Plan. A Rural Development Study was issued on August 7,1997 (No. 16253-ES) and a Rural Finance Study on April 10, 1998 (No. 17689-ES). A joint IMF/World Bank Financial Sector Assessment Program report was completed in September 2000. The World Bank has been involved in a number of FSAP follow-up missions to review implications of dollarization, advice on payment systems reform, and advisory services on possible legal reforms to the bank exit framework. The World Bank is preparing a new CAS for El Salvador. Although priorities are still being defined with the government, Bank lending support could focus on: modernization of the judicial sector, health, education, local development, and disaster preparedness. In terms of analytical work, proposed tasks include a Poverty Update and a study on decentralization to be completed in FY 2002. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-37- APPENDIX IV El Salvador: Statistical Issues El Salvador has a relatively sound statistical system and the central bank makes data available to the public through regular official publications. However, a number of weaknesses remain. Money and banking statistics Despite important improvements achieved in terms of periodicity and quality of data, some issues need to be addressed. In particular, several financial institutions do not distinguish transactions by resident and nonresident institutional units. Given that Salvadoran banks have been active in lending elsewhere in the region, the lack of reliable information on transactions by residency status and on foreign branch activity is creating difficulty in the interpretation of the monetary and credit aggregates. In the context of the new monetary arrangement, which allows for the co-circulation of colones and U.S. dollars, the use of the principle of residence acquires more importance, since all accounts are denominated in U.S. dollars. Also, there is a need to improve the calculation of Ml by incorporating a measure of dollars circulating in the economy, and of broad money by including all financial intermediaries in the financial system. Public sector statistics The principal outstanding issue for government finance statistics is the compilation of reliable data on the operations of the local governments. The ministry of finance conducts a quarterly survey of 50 local governments, including all the largest. However the reporting of the survey is not consistent, as some local governments provide information with a lag or do not report at all. Real sector statistics The central bank produces both current and constant price (base 1990) annual national accounts, with a lag of around nine months, and also produces quarterly national accounts, using the production approach and disseminates these data three months after the end of the reference period. The compilation of the data follows 1968 SNA, and the central bank was planning to rebase the accounts in 2000. Progress needs to be made in obtaining more timely information from enterprise, household and agricultural surveys. The consumer price index has a sound methodological basis and its coverage is confined to the San Salvador metropolitan area and three departmental capitals representing 85 percent of the urban population. The weights were derived from the National Urban Household Income and Expenditure Survey of 1990/g 1 and require updating. The authorities have recently begun compiling a producer price index, which replaces the wholesale price index. This index is confined to the San Salvador metropolitan area and the departments of La Libertad and Santa Ana and uses weights from the 1992 economic census. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-38- APPENDIX IV External sector statistics The compilation of external trade statistics follows international guidelines, but does not include estimates of informal/illegal transactions. There has been a significant improvement in the coverage and timeliness of balance of payments data in recent years. In particular, the central bank has made significant progress in obtaining information for balance of payments statistics on services, foreign direct investment, private external debt, and goods for processing, as well as for the international investment position statistics. The quality and consistency of the customs declaration, processed electronically, has to improve. Also, a few weaknesses remain in the measurement of cross-border capital flows. External vulnerability indicators The central bank has started to compile information about the external indebtedness of the nonbank private sector. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 39 - APPENDIX IV Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public