DOCUMENT OF INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY SMlO3/282 CONFIDENTIAL August 8,2003 To: Members of the Executive Board From: The Acting Secretary Subject: Saudi Arabia-Staff Report for the 2003 Article IV Consultation Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staff report for the 2003 Article lV consultation with Saudi Arabia, which is tentatively scheduled for discussion on Friday, October 10,2003. At the time of circulation of this paper to the Board, the Secretary’s Department has received a communication from the authorities of Saudi Arabia indicating that they do not consent to the Fund’s publication of this paper. Questions may be referred to Mr. Dridi (ext. 37962) and Mr. Mottu (ext. 34113) in MED. Unless the Documents Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the WTO Secretariat on Monday, August 18,2003. This document will shortly be posted on the extranet, a secure website for Executive Directors and member country authorities. An: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicCONFIDENTIAL INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND SAUDI ARABIA Staff Report for the 2003 Article IV Consultation Prepared by Staff Representatives for the 2003 Consultation with Saudi Arabia Approved by George T. Abed and John Hicklin August 8,2003 . The discussions for the 2003 Article IV consultation were held in Riyadh I?om April 26 to May 10,2003. . The team comprised Messrs. Iqbal (head), Okogu, Al-Ghelaiqah, Dridi, and Mottu (all MED). Mr. Abed (Director, MED) participated in the policy discussions. . The mission met with Dr. Ibrahim Al-Assaf, Minister of Finance, Sheikh Hamad Al-Sayari, Governor of the Saudi Arabian Monetary Agency (SAMA); the vice minister and deputy ministers of the ministries of finance, industry and commerce, petroleum and mineral resources; vice governor and deputy governor of SAMA; and other senior government officials. It also met with the chairman of the Riyadh Chamber of Commerce and representatives of commercial banks. Mr. Al-Turki (Executive Director) also participated in the discussions. . In concluding the last Article IV consultation on October 9,2002, Executive Directors commended the Saudi authorities for their skillful and consistent pursuit, over the last several years, of a comprehensive structural reform strategy and sound macroeconomic policies. However, they considered that the slow economic growth, emerging unemployment, and the increased vulnerability of the fiscal position to oil price fluctuation in recent years underscored the need for an intensified pursuit of the authorities’ stated reform strategy. . Directors therefore welcomed the authorities’ plans to expedite structural reforms and recommended that this be done as part of an integrated medium-term macroeconomic strategy centered on reducing the budget deficit through both a broadening of the non-oil revenue base and a reduction in expenditure. The authorities were encouraged to consider introducing a contingency reserve f&d, and to save any temporary unanticipated increases in oil revenues in order to smooth out future shortfalls, and to consider explicitly defmed fiscal rules to ensure consistent budgetary policy. Directors encouraged the continued application of the offtcial privatization strategy to catalyze private investment, welcomed steps to reduce barriers to inflows of foreign direct investment (FDI), commended the authorities for their effective supervision of the banking system, and supported steps for deepening the financial and capital markets. They encouraged further efforts to improve transparency, data provision, consolidation of public sector accounts, and Saudi participation in the Fund’s General Data Dissemination System (GDDS). . Saudi Arabia has accepted the obligations of Article VIII and maintains an exchange system ti-ee of restrictions on the making of payments and transfers for current international transactions. . The authorities have agreed to issue a Public Information Notice (PIN) following the conclusion of the consultation process. . The principal authors of this report are Messrs. Iqbal and Okogu. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2- Contents Page Executive Summary.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .4 I. Background and Recent Developments ................................................................................. .5 A. Overview.. ................................................................................................................... .5 B. Recent Macroeconomic Developments and Structural Reforms.. ................................ . II. Report on Discussions ........................................................................................................ .12 A. Macroeconomic Policies ........................................................................................... .14 B. Structural Reform ...................................................................................................... .18 C. Trade Policy Developments and Regional Integration.. ............................................ .23 D. Statistical Issues and Technical Assistance.. ............................................................. .24 III. Staff Appraisal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25 Text Boxes 1. Developments Relating to the Oil Market in 2002 and 2003, and the Gas Initiative . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6 2. Developments in Banking Supervision and Regulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .9 3. Implementation of Structural Reforms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11 4. Capital Markets Law . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19 Text Tables 1. Selected Economic Indicators, 2000-08 (Baseline Scenario) ,.... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30 2. Central Government Fiscal Operations, 2000-08 (Baseline Scenario) ,......,........................................................................................... 32 3. Summary of Balance of Payments, 2000-08 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34 4. Monetary Survey, 1998-2003 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35 5. Central Government Fiscal Operations, 2000-08 (Adjustment Scenario) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36 6. Vulnerability Indicators, 1997-2002 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..3 8 Figures 1. Selected Real Sector Indicators, 1997-2003.. ............................................................. .39 2. Central Government Fiscal Indicators, 1980-2003 .................................................... .40 3. External Sector Developments, 199 l-2003.. .............................................................. .4 1 4. Monetary and Financial Developments, 1994-2003 .................................................. .42 5. Stock Market Indicators, 1990-2002 .......................................................................... .43 6. Exchange Rate Indices, January 1990-April 2003 ..................................................... .44 7. Structural Reform Strategy ......................................................................................... .45 8. Fiscal Balances, 1995-2008.. ...................................................................................... .46 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3- Appendices 1. Fund Relations ............................................................................................................ .47 2. Relations with the World Bank.. ................................................................................. .49 3. Statistical Issues.. ........................................................................................................ .50 4. Medium-Term Fiscal Outlook .................................................................................... .56 5. Debt Sustainability Analysis.. ..................................................................................... .59 6. Some Fiscal Policy Issues in Oil-Producing Countries.. ............................................. .62 7. Pension Funds ............................................................................................................. .67 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4- EXECUTIVE SUMMARY Current setting l Saudi Arabia has made tirther progress in implementing its economic strategy, centered on structural reforms designed to promote non-oil growth and create jobs for the rapidly growing workforce, and to strengthen the fiscal accounts to reduce vulnerability to adverse oil revenue shocks, l Macroeconomic conditions weakened in 2002. Real GDP growth slowed, reflecting a decline in oil quota, and continued modest non-oil growth. The fiscal deficit widened, despite some strengthening of fiscal effort, and government debt rose to 97 percent of GDP. Although the current account surplus widened somewhat, SAMA’s net foreign assets declined to the equivalent of nine months of imports due to larger private capital outflows. The performance of the financial sector continued to be strong and the stock market gained. Progress was made on structural reforms with the sale of 30 percent of the shares of the Saudi Telecommunications Company (STC), and a further buildup of the legal and institutional framework. A list of activities targeted for privatization was issued and the Capital Markets Law was approved. A number of other laws, designed to promote private sector activity and foster domestic competition, are at various stages of approval. l In 2003, the macroeconomic position is expected to show significant improvement-driven by favorable developments in the oil market-with a robust real GDP growth; however, non-oil growth is expected to pick up modestly. The central government budget is expected to be in approximate balance and the government debt would contract. The external current account surplus and SAMA’s net foreign assets are projected to increase. Staff appraisal l Under current policies and oil price expectations, macroeconomic imbalances are projected to reemerge over the medium term. In order for the authorities to achieve their stated objectives, they would need to tighten fiscal policy, while accelerating the implementation of structural reforms. l Successful implementation of the reform strategy will require a strengthening of the structure of the budget through broadening the non-oil revenue base and improving expenditure management in order to eliminate prospective budget deficits and reduce the public debt. Linkages between the budget and the public sector would need to be more clearly articulated. On the structural front, a more vigorous implementation of structural reforms and privatization program is called for. The authorities’ focus on establishing the needed legal-institutional foundation for promoting private sector investment is appropriate. The staff agrees with the authorities’ intention to flexibly apply the Saudiization policy, with a view to integrating the segmented labor market and maintaining competitiveness. l Significant progress has been made in improving the collection, coverage, timeliness, and dissemination of economic data. Areas needing further improvement include a more timely release of detailed oil sector data, consolidation of public sector accounts, and information on private capital flows. Participation in the Fund’s GDDS is encouraged. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-5- I. BACKGROUNDANDRECENTDEVELOPMENTS A. Overview 1. Saudi Arabia’s economic strategy over the past several years has focused on (a) structural reforms designed to promote sustained non-oil growth and create jobs for the rapidly growing workforce, and (b) strengthening the fiscal accounts to reduce vulnerability to adverse oil revenue shocks while maintaining a stable monetary and financial environment. Progress has been made toward implementing the strategy in a sequential manner. However, the process for completing the legislative procedures and building the needed consensus has turned out to be more time consuming than expected. 2. Fund surveillance has centered on efforts to accelerate the implementation of the authorities’ reform agenda, which the Fund has endorsed. In line with their plans as described in last year’s staff report and endorsed by the Board, the authorities have made important progress in strengthening administrative capability through a recent ministerial restructuring, by advancing privatization, and by introducing new laws to underpin private sector-led growth. The Capital Markets Law (CML) was approved by the Council of Ministers in June 2003 and will come into effect during 2003. The Insurance Law was also approved in July 2003. Furthermore, the authorities decided in June 2003 to publish government contracts related to capital expenditures. Finally, a number of other laws remain under consideration. However, despite progress on fiscal consolidation, the process remained slow due to difficulties in forging the needed consensus. 3. The 2003 consultation discussions were held against the backdrop of lingering uncertainties in the region and heightened security considerations. While the economic impact of the Iraq war was limited, widely fluctuating oil prices and a weaker-than- anticipated global economic recovery could limit the room for maneuver in accelerating reforms. Nonetheless, the authorities reiterated their commitment to press ahead with the structural reform agenda they had set out and to continue to pursue macroeconomic stability through fiscal consolidation. B. Recent Macroeconomic Developments and Structural Reforms 4. Real GDP growth slowed in 2002 to 1 percent. This was due mainly to a decline in the oil output by 4.4 percent, following OPEC-mandated quota reductions (Box l), while real non-oil growth, at 3.6 percent, was only slightly higher than in the previous year due to near stagnation of private sector investment (Table 1; Figure 1). Inflation was negative and involuntary unemployment stood at about 9 percent. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-6- Box 1. Saudi Arabia: Developments Relating to the Oil Market in 2002 and 2003, and the Gas Initiative Oil market developments in 2002 . Developments in the world oil market in 2002 were driven largely by security concerns in the Middle East, the strike in Venezuela, the after-effects of the September 2001 events, and weak global economic recovery. World oil demand grew by 0.3 percent-about the same level as in 2001- compared to the historical average growth of about 1.2-l .5 percent. This was directly attributable to the slowdown in global economic activity, as well as the effect of the sharp price increases since 2000. The average price of the WE0 basket rose by 2.8 percent for the year, as security concerns and strikes propelled the price upward from the low levels attained in the first quarter of 2002. OPEC quota discipline was mostly lax in 2002, but this did not affect the price much because of the other factors that kept the price high. Developments in 2003 and the medium term . The oil price continued to increase in early 2003, culminating in the Iraq war, with the WE0 oil price reaching a peak of $34.24 on March 7. In response to rising prices, OPEC increased the quotas of its members from 2 1 .SMh/d to 24.5 Mb/d on February 1, and again to 25.4 Mb/d, effective June 1, partly to make up for the shortage from Venezuela and Iraq (as well as to validate the over-quota production of its members that had gone on since the third quarter of 2002). Saudi Arabia’s current quota is 8.256 Mb/d compared with an estimated 7.6 Mb/d in 2002, although it had produced in excess of 9 Mb/d during the first quarter, when the shortage was most acute. Indications are that OPEC would leave present quotas unchanged for now, pending developments relating to the expected return of Iraqi oil to the market. OPEC held informal negotiations with Mexico in early June, with a view to enlisting the cooperation of non-OPEC producers. The timing of Iraq’s return to its pre-war production level is uncertain, but market sources suggest it to be Spring 2004. Oil price levels have continued to be firm because of a variety of nonfundamental factors. However, the expectation is for the average oil price to be lower than the 2002 level. The Saudi authorities expect prices in 2003 to be consistent with WE0 expectations. . As a leading member of OPEC, Saudi Arabia supports the group’s oil price target range of $22-28 per barrel for the OPEC basket. WE0 medium-term projections (July 2003) showed the price declining from $25.50 in 2004 to $2 1.50 per barrel in 2008. Developments on the Gas Initiative . Negotiations on the Gas Initiative, according to the initial plan, are reported to have ended without agreement, as the international oil companies (IOCs) failed to respond positively to the authorities’ deadline to accept or reject the terms on offer. The main issues on which agreement could not be reached include the internal rate of return (IRR) that should be guaranteed to the IOCs, and access to upstream areas reserved for ARAMCO. As the authorities’ are determined to see the Gas Initiative through, they would repackage the projects into separate upstream and downstream segments and offer them to different investors. On July 16,2003, a natural gas exploration project for 200,000 square kilometers in Rub al-Khali region, worth an estimated $2 billion, was awarded to a consortium consisting of Royal Dutch Shell Group (40 percent stake), Total SA (30 percent) and Saudi Aramco Company (30 percent), the Saudi national oil company. On July 22, Saudi Arabia invited some forty IOCs to bid for three additional natural gas exploration projects, each for an area of 30,000-50,000 square kilometers. The IOCs will be able to prequalify to bid for the projects within the next three months. The Gas Initiative is seen as central to attracting foreign direct investment into other sectors of the economy, in addition to the $25 billion investment over a period of 10 years relating specifically to the Initiative. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-7- 5. The fiscal position weakened in 2002 despite stronger fiscal effort. Reflecting a drop in oil revenue and higher-than-budgeted outlays, the overall central government deficit rose to 6 percent of GDP, from 4 percent of GDP in 2001, and domestic public debt rose to about 97 percent of GDP (Table 2; Figure 2).t However, the underlying fiscal position strengthened slightly as the non-oil primary deficit fell in 2002 because of an increase in non-oil revenue (excluding investment income) and a drop in primary expenditure.2 Despite financial constraints, Saudi Arabia has continued to provide considerable concessional economic assistance to developing countries, including heavily indebted poor countries (HIPC).3 6. The external sector’s performance also weakened in 2002. Although the current account surplus widened marginally to 6 percent of GDP, mainly because of an increase in oil and non-oil export receipts, SAMA’s net foreign assets declined to the equivalent of about nine months of prospective imports as capital outflows increased (Table 3; ’ The bulk of the domestic debt (about 77 percent) is owed to Autonomous Government Institutions (AGIs), which include the government-owned Pension Fund, the General Organization for Social Insurance (GOSI), and several development funds. The AGIs are highly liquid and are expected to remain in surplus over a considerable period of time. Therefore, in terms of the overall public sector position, this debt is not viewed by the authorities as a serious concern. Recently, Moody’s upgraded Saudi Arabia’s rating, partly, on the grounds that the bulk of public debt is held by AGIs, which points to a high degree of flexibility in the financing of the government debt. In 2003, Standard and Poor’s began coverage of Saudi Arabia with long-term foreign and local currency ratings of A and A+, respectively. 2 The increase in non-oil revenue reflected an increase in the collection of fees, charges, and other nontax revenues, and higher transfers from the Saudi Telecommunications Company (STC), which more than compensated for a decline in customs receipts due to the full-year effect of the tariff cut in mid-2001 in line with the adoption of the CCC common external tariff (CET). Moreover, improvements in the administration and collection procedures had resulted in 25 percent increase in Zakat collection 2002. The payment of the 13* month salary for civil servants and higher capital expenditure augmented spending, while extra- budgetary outlays related to the clearing of late payments dropped to about 1.7 percent of GDP. 3 Saudi Arabia’s share in debt relief to the HIPC is presently estimated at $175 million (6 percent of the total nonParis Club official bilateral relief) and encompasses 16 countries. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-8- Figure 3).4 However, net foreign assets of AGIs rose to the equivalent of about eight months of imports.’ 7. Domestic liquidity grew strongly in 2002. Broad money stock grew by 15 percent in 2002 as compared with 5 percent in 200 1, partly on account of an increase in domestic credit for bank financing of the fiscal deficit, as well as loans to the private sector and public enterprises; “other items (net)” became expansionary (Table 4; Figure 4). Credit to the private sector grew on the back of low interest rates and low lending risk for collateralized consumer credit. The demand for money also rose in line with the reflow of investment capital from abroad, partly in reaction to the heightened international security considerations and weaker returns on portfolio investments abroad. The average riyal-dollar interest rate differential widened in 2002 (from 24 basis points in 2001 to 53 basis points at end-2002) but has narrowed since then. Concurrently, stock prices rose further in 2002 by 3.6 percent reflecting the impact of strong liquidity growth and the partial privatization of the STC (Figure 5). 8. The riyal depreciated in real effective terms. Reflecting mainly the effective depreciation of the U.S. dollar against other major currencies, and inflation, the Saudi riyal, which is pegged to the U.S. dollar, depreciated in real effective terms (REER) by 4 percent in 2002 and by another 2.9 percent by end-March 2003 (Figure 6). External vulnerability indicators remained comfortable (Table 6). 9. Available indicators suggest that the financial sector continued to perform well during 2002. Banks continued to be well capitalized, well provisioned, profitable, and effectively supervised. All banks were in compliance with the limits on exposure to single customers, as well as with capital adequacy ratios. The risk-adjusted capital/assets ratio remained high at 2 1.3 percent, more than double the Base1 Committee recommended rate; average profits increased by 5 percent; the rate of return on assets and on equity increased by 2 percent and 45 percent, respectively. Nonperforming loans (NPLs) remained low, and NPL provisioning ample (Box 2). The default rate was also low (0.3 percent of total loans), 4 SAMA’s net foreign assets include foreign investments, deposits with banks abroad, reserve position in the Fund, and other assets. At end 2002, liquid foreign exchange reserves, as defined by IFS, stood at $20.8 billion or about 50 percent of net foreign assets. 5 The central government has no external debt; staff estimates show that the external nongovernment debt remained stable at under 15 percent of GDP at end-2002. The authorities do not collect data on nongovernmental debt; staff estimates are based on information from the joint BIS-IMF-OECD-IBRD external debt database. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-9- Box 2. Saudi Arabia: Developments in Banking Supervision and Regulation Saudi Arabia’s financial system consist of SAMA; 11 commercial banks whose activities are universal in r scope; 38 licensed and regulated moneychangers; 5 government-owned specialized credit institutions; several autonomous government agencies; about 100 insurance companies; and a few small and consumer lending companies. Banks are closely supervised, follow international accounting standards (ISA), and are sound (see. Table below). Accounting requirements were strengthened in 2000-01 with the implementation of ISA 34 and 39. Also, the capital/assets ratio is applied consistently with the Basle Accord, and stood at 2 1.3 percent in 2002, about twice the Basle Committee recommended rate. To preserve the integrity of the financial system, SAMA conducts regular on-site inspections, off-site monitoring, and special in-depth inspections. A circular on uniform standards of loan classification and provisioning was finalized and is ready to be circulated to banks for immediate implementation. Assessment of credit risk has been enhanced, with banks expanding their capacity for credit risk analysis and with the support of a credit bureau, which is to start operations at end-2003. The development of a regulatory and supervisory framework was initiated in 1990 to ensure that banks and other financial service providers are not abused for money laundering purposes. In 1995 guidelines were issued to banks for the prevention and control of money laundering activities. AML legislation was adopted in August 2001 and various accompanying measures were taken. The Shura Council approved a new law in June 2003 stipulating stiff penalties for money laundering offences. To monitor closely the implementation of these legal measures, special units were created in SAMA and in each of the commercial banks, Furthermore, a Financial Intelligence Unit was created in the Ministry of Interior and an inter-ministerial committee to coordinate AML measures was established. Training was also provided to about 600 agents to combat money laundering activities. Consistent with their past efforts to enhance the soundness of the financial system, the authorities have recently taken a series of measures, including (a) the acceptance of the New Methodology document related to the 40 FATF’s recommendations on money laundering and the 8 recommendations on terrorism financing. This document contains specific assessment criteria and should be helpful in determining compliance with various standards; (b) a commitment to a Financial Action Task Force sponsored Mutual Evaluation in September 2003. This evaluation will include the 40 recommendations as well as the 8 recommendations; and (c) the institution of a strong framework of controls covering both the policy and operational aspects of charities. In addition, the Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) exercise has been initiated and is targeted to be completed in the first quarter of 2004. Financial Soundness Indicators (In percent of end-period stocks) 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 Banks’ capital-asset ratio 10.0 10.2 9.6 9.3 9.3 Banks’ risk-weighted capital-asset ratio 21.2 21.2 21.0 20.3 21.3 Ratio of banks’ nonperf. loans to total gross loans 8.4 11.4 10.4 9.6 8.8 Loan provisions as a prop of nonperforming loans 83.0 88.0 93.0 106.0 112.0 Banks’ interest rate spread 5.5 4.5 3.9 4.1 4.3 Return on assets 1.8 1.5 2.0 2.1 2.0 Return on equity 30.8 27.6 37.9 42.1 43.0 Liquid assets to total assets ratio 48.9 53.3 56.0 51.0 47.2 Foreign currency deposits to total deposits ratio 21.3 20.1 18.6 17.9 18.2 Source: Saudi Arabian Monetary Authority (SAMA). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-lO- which compared very favorably with international experience (4 percent).6 Saudi Arabia has developed a regulatory framework for preventing money-laundering activities- established well before the September 11,200l events-under the supervision of SAMA (Box 2). The Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) for Saudi Arabia has been initiated. 10. Progress continued to be made on structural reforms (Figure 7 and Box 3). Further progress was made in the establishment of the legal and institutional framework for the reforms, including the merging and restructuring of several ministries in May 2003. In order to allow for greater market-based resource allocation, procurement prices for wheat have been reduced and the purchase of barley from domestic producers was discontinued. Similarly, electricity tariffs now cover current costs of production. However, water remains subject to subsidy and prices cover only one-fifth of the cost of production. The planned establishment of a regulatory authority is expected to reduce this subsidy. 11. The implementation of the privatization strategy advanced. Under the strategy approved in June 2002, a list of 20 activities targeted for privatization was issued in November 2002. The strategy aims at providing a suitable environment, including the promotion of an efficient capital market, skilled human resources, and an appropriate regulatory and legal framework to facilitate private sector investment. In an important step, 30 percent of the equity stake of STC was sold to the public in December 2002. Further, partly in an effort to speed up the privatization process, the electricity portfolio was merged with the Ministry of Electricity and Water effective May 2003. Moreover, the “negative list” for FDI was shortened further while the revised corporate income tax law-which will reduce and clarify tax on foreign corporations-was cleared by the Shura Council. 12. Transparency and availability of data have continued to improve. Several surveys by the Central Department of Statistics (CDS) have improved the quality and availability of data in the areas of national accounts, demography, employment and labor market. In addition, comprehensive data on the banking sector continue to be available with a lag of about one month. 6 The continued good performance was attributed, in part, to an increase in personal loans, especially consumer loans under strict loan servicing practices (including direct deductions from salaries) and stricter loan securitization. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- ll- Box 3. Saudi Arabia: Implementation of Structural Reforms A series of structural reforms have been introduced in Saudi Arabia since 1999, aiming primarily at encouraging foreign investment, enhancing the role of the private sector, and addressing unemployment pressures. Other reforms are under consideration or at an advanced stage of preparation. The main developments and relevant stages are itemized below: Structural Reforms Institutional Restructuring . Establishment of Supreme Economic Council (August 1999) . Establishment of Supreme Council for Petroleum and Mineral Affairs (January 2000) . Human Resource Development Fund (training Saudi nationals for the private sector, November 2000) . Corporatization of the electricity sector (December 1999) . Establishment of Saudi Arabia General Investment Authority (facilitating investment process, including the establishment of one-stop shop, April 2000) . Opening of stock market to all foreign investors through mutual funds (November 1999) . Establishment of the Higher Tourism Authority (encouraging domestic tourism, November 2000) . Guidelines for publication of economic and financial data (May 2001) . Establishment of regulatory agency and regulator for electricity (January 2002) . Establishment of the Saudi Authority for Industrial Estate and Technology Zones (November 2001) . Approval of the privatization strategy (June 2002) . Approval of the executive program of expansion of the railway network through privatization (June 2002) . Approval of private sector participation in desalination projects (June 2002) . Regulation to establish Saudi Postal Company (SPC) and transfer of all postal employees to the SPC (June 2002) . Establishment of the Petroleum Service Company (June 2002) . Administrative reforms (May 2003) Legal Reforms . Approval of the Foreign Investment Law (April 2000) . Approval of sponsorship law (allowing foreign companies to sponsor their expatriate employees, April 2000) . Real estate ownership law (allowing foreigners to own real estate except in the two holy cities, May 2001) . Approval of telecommunications law and establishment of Saudi Telecommunications Authority (May 2001) leading to the privatization of 30 percent of STC in December 2002 . Capital markets law to provide legal and regulatory framework for new financial products and activities (June 2003) . Insurance law (providing legal framework for insurance activity, approved July 2003) Fiscal Reforms . Introduction of the new corporate income tax law (expected to be approved by end-2003) . GCC customs unification in January 2003. This would lower import tariffs of GCC countries to 5 percent . Strengthening of customs and tax administration (under way) . Excises on luxury goods (under consideration) . Raising municipal fees and charges (under consideration) . Civil service reform (focusing on restructuring and training to raise productivity, under active considerations) . Publication of government contracts by the Ministry of Finance to improve transparency and governance (June 2003) Reforms Awaiting Approval . Company law (modernization and adaptation of existing regulations) . Agency law (to remove the requirement for a local agent) . Competition law (toward establishing a level playing field for Saudi and foreign companies in line with WTO rules) . WTO accession negotiations in progress, including trademark and intellectual property law and removal of “technical barriers” to trade . Labor law (to rationalize employment procedures and increase labor mobility) . Mining code (to facilitate investment in the hard minerals sector) Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12- 11. REPORT ON DISCUSSIONS 13. The overall economic position in 2003 is expected to show improvement over 2002. Although oil prices have declined from the highs reached during the run-up to the Iraq war, macroeconomic balances in 2003 are projected to strengthen on account of the higher oil prices and production levels.7 The budget is expected to be in approximate balance as restraint on current expenditures is maintained, and the outstanding public debt is projected to contract to about 88 percent of GDP.’ The primary balance would shift to a surplus of about 4 percent of GDP and the primary non-oil deficit would also contract to 22 percent of GDP (35 percent of non-oil GDP). The external current account surplus is expected to widen to the equivalent of 8 percent of GDP and SAMA’s net foreign assets are projected to increase to the equivalent of 10 months of prospective imports. However, real non-oil GDP growth would increase only marginally to about 3.8 percent, leaving the unemployment rate at near 10 percent; inflation is expected to remain negligible.” 14. Macroeconomic imbalances are projected to re-emerge in the medium term (2004-08) under current policies and an expected decline in oil prices.” Under the baseline scenario, real growth of GDP is projected to decline in 2004, reflecting a weaker oil sector outcome. Subsequently, GDP growth is expected to recover gradually, largely on the strength of non-oil sector growth, fueled by private sector investment and the ongoing structural reforms and privatization. The central government budget is projected to shift to deficits averaging about 5 percent of GDP in 2004-08 (Table 2 and Appendix IV). However, the non-oil primary balance is likely to improve in terms of GDP as non-oil revenues increase modestly and a gradual tightening of discretionary spending is 7 Oil price projections in this report are based on the April 2003 WE0 medium-term projections, which are consistent with an average oil price for Saudi Arabia of about $24 per barrel in 2003. With higher oil price as projected in the July 2003 WEO, the strengthening of macroeconomic balances in 2003 remains valid. ’ The original budget for 2003 was prepared on the basis of oil prices prevailing in the fall of 2002 and expectations at that time for 2003; these, however, turned out to be well below the current outlook. Budgeted expenditure did not include the unanticipated security-related outlays, while capital spending was restricted in light of the then prevailing lower oil reserves. 9 Real GDP growth is projected to rise to 4.7 percent in 2003, mainly as a result of a 6.7 percent increase in real oil GDP. lo As described in Appendix IV, oil prices are projected to decline by about 8 percent in 2004 and by 6 percent in 2005-06 before stabilizing at a level some 18 percent below the average for 2003. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13- maintained. Nonetheless, public debt is projected to resume a gradual upward trend in 2004 and average about 93 percent of GDP during the projection period, signaling continued exposure to potential vulnerabilities (Appendix V). With a possible onset of external current account deficits from 2005 onward, due to expected lower oil export receipts and rising imports (in part, relating to imports under the Gas Initiative), SAMA’s net foreign assets could decline to the equivalent of five months of prospective imports by 2008. AGIs’ net foreign assets would follow a similar trend.” 15. The authorities broadly agreed with the thrust of these projections and recognized the challenges relating to global oil market developments over the medium term.12 While reaffirming their commitment to the reform program, they noted that efforts on fiscal consolidation in the near term would be tempered by possible added spending connected to the regional situation, continued fulfillment of Saudi Arabia’s regional and international obligations, limitations of administrative capacity, and the need to maintain domestic social harmony. Moreover, on the expectation of a firmer oil market beyond the forecast period, they felt that a more moderate adjustment path over the intervening period would be feasible. Macroeconomic policies will be directed at strengthening the structure of the budget to reduce the public debt and vulnerability to oil price shocks. Priority will continue to be attached to an accelerated implementation of structural reforms in order to increase private sector growth, diversify the economy, and enhance employment opportunities. 16. The discussions focused on the authorities’ plans to meet their policy objectives over the medium term. Other issues discussed included progress toward regional economic integration, accession to WTO, and transparency issues. I1 Based on current policies and the expected decline in oil prices. Although non-oil exports are expected to increase by 60 percent, oil export receipts are projected to fall by about 5 percent per year during the forecast period, resulting in total exports contracting by almost 15 percent during the period. l2 The authorities noted the sensitivity of these forecasts to the underlying assumptions, particularly those relating to the oil market. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14- A. Macroeconomic Policies Fiscal policy 17. Notwithstanding the improvement in the fiscal position in 2003, the authorities are cognizant of the need to improve fiscal performance in the medium term to facilitate a reduction in government debt. The mission emphasized that such an adjustment should aim at building up small fiscal surpluses, over the medium term, through additional revenue and expenditure reduction measures equivalent to 3 percent of GDP each by 2008. In the process, the non-oil primary deficit would be almost halved to 12 percent of GDP in 2008 (17 percent of non-oil GDP) (Figure 8). The government debt would fall to less than 70 percent of GDP in 2008 and debt sustainability would be strengthened. In the event, AGIs and commercial banks would have room to reduce holdings of government debt, and diversify their asset portfolios. l3 18. The authorities stressed that, in the circumstances, a more moderate adjustment path was more likely. They were of the view that, with a high wage bill and debt service payments, and taking into account the country’s external obligations, expenditure restraint could be expected to achieve only modest results. Nonetheless, they will continue to focus on compressing expenditure, while taking steps to mobilize non-oil revenue. In the process, the cost of slower fiscal adjustment would be borne by a slower reduction in the government debt ratio. 19. During 2003, expenditure restraint will support a balanced budget target, as oil prices moderate to trend levels. Overall expenditure in 2003 will be reduced by about 5 percentage points of GDP to 32 percent of GDP. While a substantial part of the improvement reflects the nonrecurrence of the 13th month’s wage bill granted in 2002, the authorities intend to reduce discretionary expenditures (services and supplies, subsidies, operation and maintenance, and capital outlays) by 6 percent. Improved expenditure controls will also aim to reduce overdue payments by about 14 percent. The mission urged the authorities to resist pressures to increase spending, should the oil prices turn out to be higher than presently anticipated. Moreover, the improved fiscal position in 2003 should be used to set the stage for medium term fiscal consolidation. I3 Under such a scenario, domestic investment could increase, on average, to 27 percent of GDP to allow non-oil growth rate to average over 5 percent during 2004-08 (broadly in line with the required level to avoid an increase in unemployment) under low inflation. Given the domestic savings pattern, including government savings, FDI would be targeted to increase rapidly, spurred, in part, by the Gas Initiative and more generally by an improved business environment. In the event, the decline in SAMA’s foreign assets would be moderated to the equivalent of seven months of imports by 2008. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 15- 20. Over the medium term, the authorities plan to take the following measures: 0 Enforce a cap on the wage bill to be effected through administrative streamlining following the recent restructuring of government ministries. Moreover, corporatization of state enterprises and their privatization will reduce the government payroll. l4 The growth of the civil service will be limited to education and health. l Reduce subsidies by raising user charges on water, further lowering the purchase price of wheat, and a targeted elimination of subsidy on imported barley. a Reduce late payments as expenditure management systems are tightened. l Introduce the value added tax (VAT) in 2007, at the initial rate of 5 percent, which could generate about SRls 10 billion per year (about one percent of GDP).i5 In light of the planned GCC monetary union, the authorities intend to coordinate with other GCC countries on the introduction and harmonization of new tax measures. l Begin planned implementation of the revised corporate income tax, which will clarify and simplify tax obligations for taxpayers and administrators. Applying uniformity to foreign corporations and individual businesses, it calls for a flat rate of 25 percent, allows for the carry forward of losses, and introduces accelerated depreciation for investments. l6 21. The mission observed that addressing the projected medium-term budgetary pressures and high public debt will require a further strengthening of the budget structure. This will in particular, call for a sustained increase in the non-oil revenue to reduce vulnerability to volatile oil receipts. In this context, the mission proposed accelerating the implementation of the VAT to 2005 at a rate of 10 percent, introducing a number of standard excises (on products including tobacco, soft drinks, fuel, and passenger l4 Areas where corporatization will reduce the wage bill include civil aviation and postal services while privatization will be pursued in telecommunications, I5 A comprehensive study on the application of the VAT and excise taxes was completed in summer 2002. It recommends application of a broad-based VAT with a low single-rate below 10 percent, few exceptions, and a relatively high threshold to limit the number of registered taxpayers. l6 While representing a drop from the current rate of 30 percent, the new tax would accord legal security, which, along with standardization, should encourage foreign investment growth and generate more revenue in the period ahead. The law, once approved by the council of ministers, would come into effect 90 days thereafter. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 16- vehicles) by 2004, and increasing user fees and charges. The mission also encouraged renewed efforts to introduce a general income tax on both Saudi and expatriate income earners. I7 In the event that the VAT cannot be implemented as proposed, a simple sales tax could be put in place pending the introduction of the VAT. Such steps would be consistent with the outcome of the illustrative adjustment scenario. On the expenditure front, the mission stressed the need to minimize extra-budgetary outlays and other contingent liabilities, including through the establishment of reserve or contingency allocations, expand civil service reform, and expedite the intended reduction in the remaining subsidies. The authorities, while being receptive to staff views, preferred a more moderate adjustment path consistent with their administrative capacity and to minimize the social cost of adjustment. 22. The mission also encouraged the authorities to introduce a fiscal policy framework to minimize the procyclicality of fiscal policy. Such a framework would aim at stabilizing aggregate demand principally by minimizing the possible impact of volatile oil revenues on non-oil sector growth.” One approach would be the adoption of a rules- based fiscal policy that targets non-oil related indicators (see Appendix VI for details). Targeting a steady decline in the non-oil primary deficit, (for example, in terms of non-oil GDP) in the context of a rolling medium-term macroeconomic framework based on conservative oil price assumptions, would provide a medium-term anchor that would be unaffected by fluctuations in oil revenues. Such a fiscal rule would need to be accompanied by an accumulation and drawdown of surpluses to meet a well defined expenditure path according to a clear set of criteria. Due to the uncertainty and rapid changes in oil markets, any fiscal rule and the accompanying medium-term framework would need to be subject to periodic review. Over a longer-term horizon, intergenerational equity-a steady increase in wealth per capita-ensured by the transformation of oil wealth into financial and non-oil wealth, could be used as an indicator of the long-term consistency of fiscal policy. Staff calculations indicate that a non-oil deficit of between 15-20 percent of GDP would be consistent with maintaining real wealth per capita. While recognizing that such calculations are subject to wide margins of error, the authorities viewed this assessment as useful and felt that, despite large domestic and international obligations, such levels of deficits were achievable. l7 While the Shura Council had declined to go along with the proposed income tax on expatriate workers, serious considerations should be given to the adoption of at least the “minimal” income tax which was, in part, designed with Fund technical assistance. l8 Fiscal policy in heavily oil-dependent economies can, by being procyclical, develop a deficit bias. Such a policy stance can generate volatile aggregate demand and exchange rate volatility (Appendix VI). In the process, deficit bias may lead to unsustainable fiscal policies in the medium term, if deficits and debt cannot be controlled. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17- 23. The mission noted that the effectiveness of the fiscal policy framework would benefit from consolidation of the general government or public sector so as to more accurately assess the impact of fiscal policy on aggregate demand. In particular, fiscal accounts should incorporate operations of social security and pension funds which also perform some fiscal functions. The authorities recognized the technical merits of public sector consolidation, including transparency, and noted that the consolidated assessment is kept in mind while formulating policies. However, they felt that consolidation would inevitably show a stronger overall financial position than is shown by the budget, and that the dissemination of such information could undermine fiscal discipline.lg They confirmed that the formulation of policies would draw upon a fuller articulation of linkages between the public sector and the central government. Monetary policy and exchange system 24. The authorities intend to follow a cautious monetary policy and to maintain the stability of the exchange rate under a liberal exchange and trade system. They do not, at present, foresee a change in the exchange rate policy of pegging to the U.S. dollar. The staff agreed with the authorities’ policy and welcomed their intention to remain flexible toward the choice of the exchange rate arrangement under the planned GCC monetary union. 25. The growth of broad money is expected to slow to 10 percent in 2003 from 15 percent in 2002. While net foreign assets are expected to increase by about 7 percent of the beginning stock of broad money, credit to the private sector is targeted to grow more moderately by 4 percent. Claims on the government are expected to contract on account of the improved fiscal position2’ Banks’ highly liquid position is sufficient to meet the needed credit growth. The differential between the domestic interest rates and those prevailing in the international capital market is expected to fall further, in light of the receding security premium; since March 2003, the differential has fallen steadily. While the available lg The authorities also stressed that given their obligations toward participants, the two pension funds (which are well funded) needed to be kept apart from the budget. Appendix VII summarizes the operations of the Government Pension Fund and the General Organization for Social Insurance (GOSI) which caters to the private sector. ” “Other items (net),” which had become expansionary in 2002, is expected to return to normal levels in 2003. The authorities have agreed to further examine the fluctuations in “other items (net),” with the aim of reducing its level and, thus, isolating factors in this category accounting for money growth. One factor is the difference between the SAMA fiscal year, which has the suspense accounts in “other items (net)” cleared at end-June, and the presentation of these items on a calendar year basis with suspense accounts not usually cleared at end-December. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 18- instruments to regulate money supply are adequate, the authorities intend to continue working on developing new policy instruments in response to emerging demands in the market, and in a manner consistent with the legal framework for managing liquidity. B. Structural Reform 26. Structural reforms will continue to aim, as a first step, at developing the legal and institutional foundations to promote private sector-led growth under market- determined conditions. These reforms will entail not only privatization of state enterprises but-more importantly-a broadening of the scope of private sector investment (including FDI) into areas hitherto limited to the public sector. Concurrently, the financial sector is to be deepened through the creation of new institutions and instruments to help finance an increase in such investment. The strategy also incorporates efforts at improving the skill mix of Saudi entrants into the labor market. 27. In an important step, the CML was approved by the Council of Ministers in June 2003 (Box 4). The Law provides a unified legal and regulatory framework for all capital market activities. In particular, it provides a framework for new financing instruments including corporate bonds for private sector investment. It also converts the current stock exchange into a privately held and independent Saudi Arabian Stock Exchange (SASE), governed by an independent Securities and Exchange Commission. In addition, the CML eliminates inconsistencies among different existing laws and regulations and establishes criteria for licensing nonbank financial intermediaries. The Law should facilitate mobilization of equity and bond financing and, thus, in an important way, complement existing bank and self financing of private sector activity, while reducing systemic risks. In addition, the Insurance Law, which provides the framework for licensing and operations of insurance companies, including long-term financial planning was approved in July 2003. Other laws which are under discussion include: l The Competition Law to define and control unfair competition, introduce antitrust regulations, and protect trade secrets. l The Company Law, which will aim to modernize rules and regulation governing private companies; the Labor Law, which clarifies rights of employers and employees; and the Agency Law, which regulates distribution and other franchises.21 21 In addition, laws that are under consideration include the real estate joint stock law, the law to combat commercial fraud, the anti-dumping law and procedures, copyright law, the laws to govern pharmaceuticals and laboratories. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 19- Box 4. Saudi Arabia: Capital Markets Law The Capital Markets Law (CML) was approved by the Council of Ministers on June 16,2003. The CML provides a legal framework for new financial instruments, supervision and regulation of the stock exchange, rules for dealing, transparency, and codes of conduct for dealers, in addition to the development of other nonbank financial institutions. It also specifies the roles and competencies of the new institutions responsible for the supervision and operation of capital markets, as well as the delineation between these roles through the establishment of the following institutions: The Saudi Arabian Securities and Exchange Commission (SASEC) will be the primary regulatory body for the Saudi Arabian capital market. Further, the SASEC will be granted its full financial and administrative independence, and will report directly to the Council of Ministers. It will establish rules and regulations aimed at ensuring the transparency and efficiency of capital markets. The SASEC comprises a chair and vice- chair and three other members to be appointed by Royal Decree for a five-year term, with the possibility of a one-time extension. Saudi Arabian Stock Exchange (SASE) as a private sector entity to replace the official stock exchange. The SASE will be responsible for the daily operations of capital markets. This will be the only official stock market where financial instruments are exchanged. It will assume the functions of listing and monitoring of securities; ensure full, timely, and accurate dissemination of market information; and establish and operate a nationwide system for securities trading, settlement clearing, and depository. It will promote higher standards of corporate governance. A committee for resolving disputes regarding financial instruments. This committee will comprise experts in law, trade, and financial matters, and will help resolve complaints and conflicts related to financial instruments. The National Securities Depository Center for financial instruments that will be incorporated with the SASE. The center will be the sole institution in the Kingdom responsible for the deposit, transport, and recording of all the financial instruments exchanged in the market. The new structure also addresses various other issues, including: (a) rules governing the qualifications and responsibilities of financial intermediaries; (b) regulations regarding investment funds; (c) enhancement of data dissemination in the capital markets; (d) problems related to insider trading and spread of erroneous information in the capital markets; and (e) issues related to sanctions against delinquent operators. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-20 - Restructuring and privatization 28. The authorities recognize that private sector investment (including FDI) has shown only a modest pick up over the past few years and that a significant increase in such investment is crucial for meeting the growth and employment objectives. Therefore, structural reforms in the period ahead would continue to be directed at raising such investment. However, they emphasized the need to follow a cautious approach toward the implementation of restructuring and privatization of state enterprises in order to: (a) avoid unemployment pressures, (b) moderate increase in prices, and (c) ensure that privatization is consistent with the capital markets’ absorptive capacity.22 While no timetable has been specified for privatization in the 20 areas identified, it will be governed mainly by the three criteria listed aboveaz3 Progress so far has advanced in the postal and port services and telecommunications. In the near term, focus will be on the privatization of the Saudi Electricity Company, and the water sector.24 Total investment in the electricity sector is targeted to reach SRls 177 billion over the next 25 years. As a step to improve efficiency, the authorities have opened Saudi Arabia’s large domestic aviation sector to domestic competition.25 22 The privatization of state enterprises is being pursued under one of the following avenues: (a) increasing the private sector’s share in government-owned and joint sector companies through new share subscriptions; (b) offering a part of government shares in the stock market on a gradual basis; and (c) rolling the entire government share of these companies to privately-owned venture capital companies listed on the stock market. 23 The authorities recognize the likely impact of privatization on unemployment, which may delay privatization of large public sector activities. However, they have so far not insisted on job loss containment clauses in order not to run the risk of jeopardizing privatization agreements. They also feel that, in some cases, monopolies might be unavoidable in the short term. 24 The water sector is slated for early corporatization and eventual privatization. While no timetable has been prepared at this stage for this process, the authorities intend to use the electricity regulatory authority to adjust water tariffs, especially for agriculture, in order to reduce implicit subsidies. Additionally, plans are afoot to increase production of desalinated water in the private sector at realistic prices. Other areas for potential privatization include the General Railway Organization, existing and proposed railroads, industrial parks, water and sewerage, the Saudi Arabian Airlines, and the National Commercial Bank (NCB). 2s The government is also planning to sell its share in about 10 companies in a variety of sectors including cement manufacturing, the non-oil mining company (Ma’aden), oil shipping, hotels, banks, and utilities. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2l- 29. The mission noted that private sector investment would benefit from a clearer statement of the underlying priorities and sequencing of measures that would further enhance the business environment. In this respect, the introduction of a broad-based corporate income tax applicable to both domestic and foreign investors, a further streamlining of administrative procedures, and a further liberalization of foreign investors’ access to the domestic financial market would encourage FDI. An early clarification of the status of the Gas Initiative and of associated planned investments would catalyze private investment. Financial sector 30. The authorities intend to continue diversifying the financial sector in order to increase the role of banks and the capital market in financing private sector-led growth. This would continue to be driven by (a) development of new institutions and creation of new investment instruments as needed by the market; (b) expansion of the capital market to promote equity financing; and (c) strengthened supervision and regulation. The new CML is expected to play a catalytic role in this regard. 31. The banking system has shown initiative in developing new instruments for lending operations. In particular, the Islamic banking products-ranging in maturities up to 16 years-have grown rapidly and accounted for 17 percent of total bank assets in 2002. The authorities intend to continue working on perfecting the securities underlying such financing in order to ensure an orderly diversification of banks’ asset portfolios. Licensing procedures have been streamlined for foreign banks to operate in Saudi Arabia and the authorities expect the number of commercial banks to increase significantly in the near future.26 Concurrently, banks’ credit risk assessment capacity will be enhanced through the operationalization of the credit bureau by end-2003. Moreover, banks are being encouraged to use uniform standards of loan classification and provisioning. Moreover, an inter- ministerial committee has been established to develop mechanisms for guaranteeing collateral and repayment of loans, thus, enhancing the growth of mortgage financing by commercial banks. 32. Financing for the small- and medium-scale enterprises will be encouraged. The Saudi Industrial Development Fund (SIDF), ministry of finance, and commercial banks have initiated a joint program to provide financing to such enterprises. A special fund of SRls 200 million has been created in the SIDF to provide guarantees to commercial banks. 26 In December 2001, the GCC agreed to allow national banks to operate in member countries; a U.A.E. bank has already been issued a license to operate in Saudi Arabia. The authorities noted that the approval for non-GCC banks would be considered in the period ahead. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 22 - The authorities are cognizant of the fact that the success of such a scheme will crucially depend upon the effectiveness of the monitoring system. 33. The mission noted that a further diversification of banks’ asset portfolios, by avoiding undue dependence on consumer finance and lending to the government, would reduce risks and foster economic diversification and growth. In this context, given the rapidly increasing population, development of the nascent mortgage finance market would be particularly helpful. Moreover, the development of corporate and commercial bond markets under the new CML, and the emergence of an active secondary market in government bonds would allow the much-needed depth to the financial market. The authorities confirmed their intention to proceed with financial market diversification in line with growing demand and prudential considerations. The ongoing FSAP exercise is expected to evaluate financial sector developments, identify vulnerabilities, and assess developmental needs. Labor policies27 34. In conjunction with structural reforms, the authorities have been implementing since 2001 a three-pronged strategy to address the unemployment pressures and to generate the skills required to sustain growth. It includes: (a) educational and vocational training to improve productivity and meet the skill demands in the private sector; (b) Saudiization of the labor force; and (c) changing the institutional and legal framework to facilitate the substitutability of Saudis for expatriates under an open and integrated labor market with market-determined wages.28 35. The Saudiization policy would be applied flexibly. In order to avoid loss of competitiveness, the Saudiization of workforce in 22 of the 105 professions would be 27 Based on a recently completed comprehensive survey, the Saudi Arabian Central Department of Statistics (CDS) placed involuntary unemployment among Saudis at 8.3 percent in 2001 and an estimated 9.1 percent at end-2002. Of the total labor force of 7.4 million in 2002, 3.7 million were Saudis. The government sector accounted for 0.9 million, of which 83 percent were Saudis. The private sector employment stood at 6.4 million, of which 55 percent were non-Saudis. 28 The Human Resources Development Fund (HRDF), which has overall responsibility for training, sets out specific targets for general and higher education, and for technical and vocational training. It provides information on private sector requirements, encourages private companies to hire Saudis by contributing toward the costs of training as well as to the wages of trainees. The HRDF is financed by the employers and through direct transfers from the budget. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-23 - increased but to no more than 30 percent.2p The government also intends to continue pursuing the open-door policy with regard to foreign labor. However, the private sector is being encouraged to progressively move toward technology- and capital-intensive activities in order to reduce excessive dependence on unskilled expatriate workers. In a move toward building a long-term strategy for the labor market, the authorities have decided to fix the ceiling on the number of expatriate workers and their dependents at 20 percent of the total population by 2013, as compared with 26 percent at present; the share of any one nationality would be limited to 10 percent of the total expatriate population. 36. The mission agreed with the authorities that a more flexible application of Saudiization combined with a greater focus on retraining and market-based wage flexibility would facilitate labor market integration.30 An early implementation of the planned Labor Law would be particularly helpful in ensuring appropriate private sector investment decisions. The mission also emphasized the role of streamlining the civil service in enhancing efficiency and encouraging Saudis to seek private sector employment. In order to bridge the compensation gap between the public and the private sectors and, thus, integrate the labor market, the authorities are considering portability of benefits between the Pension Fund and the GOSI.31 C. Trade Policy Developments and Regional Integration 37. Progress is being made toward accession to the World Trade Organization (WTO). While agreements have been reached with 13 bilateral trade partners, negotiations are under way with nine other partners including the United States and the European Union (EU). Primary contentious issues with the latter two relate to telecommunications, financial services, and access to the domestic trade sector. A part of the outstanding issues relates to the differences between international practices on intellectual property rights and domestic religious laws. The authorities expect the differences to be resolved soon. The WTO Working Party on Saudi Arabia is expected to review developments later in the year and the authorities expect to achieve accession by late 2003 or early 2004. 38. Significant progress has been made on trade liberalization and regional integration under GCC. Import duty cuts under the Greater Arab Free Trade Area 2g The Saudiization rate for the remaining other professions has not been set, but it is expected to be less than 30 percent. 3o After initial implementation of Saudiization, the observance of Saudiization rate has been allowed to be applied more flexibly due to difficulties in finding Saudis with skills required by firms. 31 Such an approach would encompass common rules on the minimum number of years to qualify for retirement and the minimum compensation at retirement. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 24 - (GAFTA) have been accelerated and such duties will be eliminated by 2005. With the introduction of the GCC’s Common External Tariff (CET), the tariff rate in Saudi Arabia on 92 percent of total import items has been reduced from 12 percent to 5 percent; only 6 percent of import items remains subject to protective duties at 20 percent.32 The authorities confirmed that nontariff barriers including quotas are not applied and that standard practices are followed to test for specifications. Customs clearance is also being expedited. The antidumping/ countervailing legislation is presently being reviewed in line with the WTO guidelines.33 39. The customs union of the GCC states was launched on January 1,2003-two years ahead of schedule-and the GCC common market is targeted to come into effect in 2007 under a well-defined timetable for intermediate steps. The “negative list” will be kept small and the list of commodities subject to common treatment is targeted to be negotiated in 2003. 40. Effective January 2003, the GCC authorities initiated steps toward the establishment of the GCC monetary union by 2010. As a first step, all GCC countries have formally pegged their currencies to the U.S. dollar. Macroeconomic performance criteria will be established no later than 2005 for the needed policy convergence to support the monetary union. The establishment of an economic and monetary union will create an important regional entity that in 2002 had an estimated combined GDP of about $350 billion and accounted for some 45 percent of the world’s proven oil reserves. The planned monetary union will require careful planning and entail difficult political decisions. Three areas which will be receiving further attention from the GCC members include: (a) prudent fiscal policies to promote economic convergence, including strengthened budgetary procedures; (b) establishment of institutions and rules to support the monetary union including a common central bank; (c) structural reforms, including in the labor market to promote economic integration; and (d) strengthened data quality and establishing common data standards, including a common fiscal accounting framework to facilitate the convergence process. D. Statistical Issues and Technical Assistance 41. The authorities reaffirmed their commitment to continued efforts to improve the coverage, transparency, and publication of economic data. Important improvements in the quality, coverage, currentness, and availability of economic data have been made since the 2002 Article IV consultation. National accounts data and cost of living index for 32 The GCC countries are presently negotiating to develop common lists of import categories subject to the tariff rates at 5 percent. 33 The prohibition on imports from Serbia and Montenegro was lifted in January 2003. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public1968-2002 have been rebased to 1999 following comprehensive household and income expenditure surveys made available in 2003. The Central Department of Statistics (CDS) aims to adopt the 1993 SNA for compiling national account statistics by early 2004. The first detailed database on population, labor force, unemployment, and the private sector wages and salaries was published in September 2002. Steady progress also continues to be made on the compilation of the balance of payments statistics in accordance with theJifth edition gfthe Balance of Payments Manual (BPMS). Data on monetary developments continue to be available with a one-month lag. o improve transparency and governance, t e authorities have lication of government contracts related to the budgeted capital s for further improvement include: (a) timely provision of data on the n the operations of AGIs and state enterprises in order to facilitate compilation of the "general government" fiscal accounts; (c) more comprehensive data on the structure of public debt; and (d) compilation of disaggregated data on private capital movements, including FDI. In addition, there continues to be a need for closer coordination among the various government agencies to ensure consistency of data. Moreover, continued dissemination of information on public sector operations would provide clearer signals to economic agents and to markets. The authorities reaffirmed their commitment to improvements in data quality and availability, recognizing that the planned monetary union and closer policy coordination with other GCC countries will require a more comprehensive and current economic database. The authorities see benefits in participating in the Fund's GDDS and a decision will be made soon in this respect. nicai assistance will eneficial for strengthening the assification, includi ital movements. The authorities have expressed interest in such assistance through a regional STA training workshop. Fund technical advice on policy coordination and adoption of statistical standards in the context of the planned GCC monetary union would also be useful. ropriately aims at essing growing un structural reforms to promote the role of the private sector and FDI, privatization of public enterprises, labor market reforms, and the widening and deepening of the financial and capital markets. These reforms are underpinned by fiscal consolidation in order to durably reduce public debt through increases in non-oil revenue, expenditure restraint, and a more effective budget management. The reform strategy has been implemented in a sequential manner, focusing initially on enacring laws and regulations to expand areas for private sector activities and strengthening legal and institutional foundations for the expansion and regulation of financial and capital markets. The staff supports this strategy. However, Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Publicprogress until recently has been slow because of administrative constraints, and the time required to lay a proper legal and institutional foundation, and to develop the needed consensus around the reforms. 45. After improving temporarily in 2 03 on account o macroeconomie imbalances a to reemerge i resent poEcies an akening oil markets. The fiscal and external positions would weaken and government debt is projected to resume its upward trend from 2004, signaling continued vulnerability to exogenous shocks. The expected decline in SAMA's foreign assets could erode the cushion to address any prolonged terms of trade or other shocks, further complicating macroeconomic management. Moreover, private sector investment and growth may not be sufficient to materially reduce unemployment. e authorities are fully implications of suc rerna~n intent on a they have set out. However, to address the issues raised by the medium term scenario, the authorities need to accelerate the implementation of the reform program. This will require strengthened budgetary policy, supported by prudent monetary policy, and the timely implementation of the legal and institutional framework for stimulating private sector-led growth. In the near term, the staff encourages the authorities to take advantage of higher oil receipts in the past months to ensure, as a minimum, the attainment of their target of approximate fiscal balance and the improvement in non-oil primary balance in 2003. It further encourages the authorities to stand ready to address unforeseen shocks including a faster-than-anticipated drop in oil prices, to ensure meeting their balanced budget target through expenditure restraint. strengthening the structure of the budget and the introduction of a supportive fiscal policy framework. The strategy should seek a significant improvement in the non-oil primary balance, underpinned by steps to reduce expenditures and redirect them towards more productive activities for higher growth, to broaden the non-oil revenue base through action on taxes and fees and charges, and strengthened budget management with a view to eliminating extrabudgetary expenditures. 48. he staff encourages t e authorities to ta obilize non-oil revenues. Wile recognizing that an early implementation of the new corporate income tax would represent an important step toward modernizing the tax system and its administration, the staff reiterates the'need for ensuring a common corporate income tax applying to both domestic and foreign corporations. Although the Shura Council has not approved the income tax on expatriate income earners, the authorities should continue to seek a general income tax on all income earners. The staff recommends an early introduction of a VAT, possibly in 2005, supported by excises on selected consumer goods-in part, to compensate for the loss of customs revenues following the adoption of the GCCYs CET. In the event that the VAT cannot be implemented as proposed, the staff Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Publicrecommends that, as an interim measure, the authorities introduce a simple sales tax as early as possible. The tariffs on water and electricity should also be raised to better allocate resources and allow appropriate targeting of subsidies. The development of a medium-term reform package should include specific expenditure measures, including explicit targets for reducing government employment under a well-defined civil service reform program, and introduction of time-bound and targeted subsidies. A concrete framework to identify, monitor, and dispose of contingent liabilities and unanticipated claims, including extra- budgetary outlays, would go a long way to strengthening expenditure controls. e procyclicality of fiscal policy has a potentially negative impact on the economy and on private sector growth by adding to the volatility of aggregate demand instilling a deficit ias. As a remedy, the staff encourages the authorities to cast the budget in a medium-term macroeconomic framework, consistent with realistic oil price assumptions, thereby limiting the impact of the variability of oil revenue. Given the need to reduce the debt burden, the staff recommends that the authorities consider adopting explicitly well-defined fiscal rules to target a declining non-oil primary deficidnon-oil GDP ratio, Such an approach would help cushion the impact of oil revenue volatility, and highlight the need for diversiwg the revenue base. A longer-term framework could usefully explore considerations of intergenerational equity. The staff also believes that a further articulation of the linkages between the budget and the broadly defined public sector through consolidated fiscal accounts would help a more effective calibration of policies with the government's economic objectives. Dissemination of more infomation on such linkages would also improve transparency and provide clearer signals to economic agents and to markets, thus improving resource allocation. 50. e staff agrees with the aut a legal-insfitutional foundation for private sector investment. In this regard, it commends the authorities for approving the CML and the Insurance law, which are expected to play a central role in the growth of capital markets. It is to be hoped that other laws which are presently being discussed will be implemented without delay. The staff also compliments the authorities on the administrative refom leading to a consolidation of ministries intended not only to reduce current expenditures, but also to streamline implementation of reforms. 51. e staff welcomes recent ste s to autonomize an rivathe state enterprises. The partial sale of the STC is an important signal to the market of the authorities' intentions to move forward in this direction. An early extension of privatization to water, railroads, and mining, associated with the needed adjustments in prices to minimize subsidies, would be particularly beneficial. It is to be hoped that projects underlying the original Gas Initiative can be implemented expeditiously, which could also catalyze FDI in other related sectors. The passage of recent legislations in the context of ongoing structural refcrms should foster a rules-based environment for stronger private sector growth. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public52. anks have continu rofitable, and effectively mission encourages uthorities to ensure t onsumer finance, market-related lending, and financing of the government deficit. In this regard, development of new products including instruments for mortgage finance, investment banking, corporate finance, and other Sharia-compliant products would be particularly beneficial. The staff believes that steps toward the development of a secondary market in government bonds and the growth of primary and secondary markets in corporate bonds would stimulate the growth of the financial sector. It is hoped that an early implementation of the just approved CML and the introduction of the Insurance Law would establish the legislative and regulatory building blocks for the deepening of the financial sector. The ongoing FSAP exercise will address developmental needs in this sector. e staff commen greater focus on training initiated to generate new skills through the Human Resource Development Fund and the establishment of training centers. Attention should continue to be paid to improving skills of local workers and further introducing greater market-based flexibility in wages so that the segmented labor markets can be integrated. In this respect, a revised Labor Law-which will provide greater flexibility in employer-employee relationship-will be helpful. The portability of pension benefits between the public and private sectors will facilitate this process. e staff considers as olicy of maintaining continues toward the economic and financial integration among GCC countries. With regard to the planned GCC monetary union, the staff reiterated the importance of timely progress on the development of mechanisms for effective policy coordination, with clearly defined convergence criteria for key macroeconomic variables, such as budget deficit thresholds and common monetary institutions. Concerning Saudi Arabia's efforts to join the WTO, it is to be hoped that negotiations with the remaining eight trading partners, including the United States and the EU, would be concluded soon, thus paving the way for accession by early in 2004. rogress in improving t himeliness of real sector, external sector, and monetary statistics. However, further improvements to the macroeconomic database are needed to monitor economic developments more closely, allow for in-depth economic analysis, and provide a stronger foundation for macroeconomic management. Specific areas for improvement include an early transition of balance of payments data in line with theJifth edition of the Balance of Payments Manual (E3PM5), consolidated public sector accounts, and increased fiscal accounts transparency and their provision to the Fund in line with the GFS classification. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicFurther technical assistance to assess fiscal data and to help in needed improvements would be beneficial. In addition, the staff recommends that the authorities consider participating in the Fund's General Data Dissemination System (CDDS), which could constitute a comprehensive framework within which further enhancement of macroeconomic statistics could be accomplished. 56. It is recommended that the next Article N consultation take place on the standard 12-month cycle. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 1. Saudi Arabia: Selected Economic Indicators, 2000-08 (Baseline Scenario) Prel. - Proj. 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 National income and prices Crude oil production (million of barrels per day) 11 Average oil export price (in US. dollars per barrel) 21 Yominal GDP (in billions of Saudi riyals) Real GDP Oil Non-oil Real gross domestic income Implicit GDP deflator 3/ Consumer price index (all cities index) 31 External sector Exports f.0.b. Oil Non-oil Imports f.0.b. Current account balance (in percent of GDP) Export volume Import volume Terms of trade FDI (in billions of U.S. dollars) Money and credit Net foreign assets Domestic credit (net) Credit to government Credit to private sector Credit to public enterprises Money and quasi-money (M3) Deposit interest rate (in percent) 31 41 Central government fmances Revenue Ofwhich : oil Expenditure Current. ofwhich: Wage bill Interest payments Capital expenditure Overall fiscal balance Excluding oil revenue Central government's gross domestic debt (Percent change; unless otherwise indicated) (Changes as a percent of beginning money stock) (In percent of GDP) Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 1. Saudi Arabia: Selected Economic Indicators, 2000-08 (Baseline Scenario) Pre!. - Proj. 2000 20C1 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 Resource baiance Gross investment Public Private National saving Public Private Memorandum items: SAMA's total net foreign assets In months of imports of goods and services 5/ Qfwhich: gross official reserves 6/ Official external debt Total external debt 71 Of which : short-term debt on a remaining maturity basis Real effective exchange rate (depreciation -) 31 81 Average exchange rate Saudi riyaliU.S. dollar (In billions of US. dollars; unless otherwise indicated) Sources: Saudi Arabian authorities; and Fund staff projections. 11 Includes production from the Neutral Zone. 21 Includes refined products. 3i Period average. 4/ Three-month Saudi Arabian riyal deposits. 51 Next 12 months. 61 As reported to the IFS. 71 Joint BIS-MF-OECD-World Bank external debt database. 81 For 2003, percent change for average of January-May 2003 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public'fa'lrle 2. Saudi Arabia: Central Gavenlment Fiscal Operations, 2000-08 (Uaseline Scenario) (In billions of Saudi Arabian riyals, unless otherwise indicated) Budget Baseline Proiections 2000 2001 2002 2003 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 Revenue Oil 11 Non-oil lnvestment income 21 Income taxes Fees and charges 3/ Customs Other 4/ Expenditure 51 Of which: Non-interest expenditure Current expend ture * Wage bill 61 Supplies and services Subsidies Foreign aid Interest payments Domestic Foreign Operations and maintenance Capital expenditure Overall balance (In percent of CDP) Primary balance (excluding interest payments) (In percent of GDP) Non-oil primary balance (excluding oil revenue and interest payments) (In percent of GDP) (In percent of non-oil GDP) Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 3. Saudi Arabia: Summary of Balance of Payments (In billions of U.S. dollars) Prel. Proj. - Baseline 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 ~M-.rchandise trade (f.0.b.) Exports Oil exports 11 Other exports 21 Imports Services and transfers Receipts Invesment income Other 31 Payments Freight and insurance Other private services 41 Other government services Of which : interest payments Official transfers Private transfers (net) Current account balance (In percent of GDP) Capital movements (net) Commercial banks Other capital movements Oil sector and other Private capital 51 Of which: Gas Initiative Official borrowing Receipts Amortization AGIs and other 6/ Overall balance (In percent of GDP) Financing 7/ Changes in net foreign assets of SAMA (- increase) Memorandum items: SAMA's net foreign assets (stocks) (In months of prospective imports) 8/ AGIs net foreign assets Ext. short-term debt remaining maturity (in US. dollars) ' 15.4 Sources: Saudi Arabian Monetary Agency; and Fund staff estimates and projections. !/ Excluding bunker oil. 21 Including re-exports. 31 Including bunker oil exports. 41 Oil sector payments and payments for other private services. 5/ Including valuation adjustments and errors and omissions. 61 Autonomous Government Instirutions. 7/ From monetary survey. 8/ Imports of goods and services over the next 12 months excluding imports for transit trade. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 4. Saudi Arabia: Monetary Survey, 1998-2003 (In billions of Saudi Arabian riyals) March Pro j, 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2002 2003 2003 Foreign assets (net) SAMA Commercial banks Domestic credit (net) Net claims on government Claims on government (net) Govemment deposits at SAM4 1/ Net claims on state enterprises Net claims on private sector Money and quasi-money (M3) Money (M 1) Currency outside banks Demand deposits Quasi-money Time and savings deposits Other quasi-money deposits Other items (net IiabiIities) Memorandum items: Net foreign assets of AGIs Foreign assets (net) Domestic credit (net) Net claims on government Government deposits (increase -) Net claims on state enterprises Net claims on private sector Money and quasi-money Other items (net liabilities) Foreign assets (net) Domestic credit (net) Net claims on government Government deposits (increase -) Net claims on state enterprises Net claims on private sector Money and quasi-money Other items (net liabilities) Memorandum items: Ratio of currency to deposits Ratio of M3-to-GDP Ratio of net domestic credit to GDP (Changes in percent of beginning broad money stock) 10.9 1.9 -3.5 -6.0 -1.4 8.4 9.2 7.9 -4.1 4.2 3.2 2.5 -7.4 0.6 -1.3 0.0 -0.6 -0.5 0.3 -0.3 3.3 4.7 5.7 5.7 4.5 5.0 15.2 5.1 5.0 5.3 -9.4 3.6 (Annual changes in percent) 18.0 2.8 -5.2 -8.6 -1.7 10.9 11.3 -17.3 22.6 14.7 -72.3 3.3 -8.1 -13.3 -13.0 10.6 6.2 8.6 10.0 4.5 5.0 15.2 11.8 11.7 -19.4 (Ratios in percent) 19.4 17.5 15.9 44.5 48.1 53.9 34.5 39.4 42.6 Sources: Saudi ArabiaE Monetary Agency (SA'MA.); and Fund staff estimates. l! Includes deposits other than the central government. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 5. Saudi Arabia: Central Government Fiscal Operations, 2000-08 (Adjustment Scenario) (In billions of Saudi Arabian riyals, unless otherwise indicated) Budeet Projection 2000 2001 2002 2003 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2evenue Oil 11 Non-oil Investment income 21 Income taxes Fees and charges 31 Customs Other 41 Expendimre 51 Of which: Non-interest expenditure Current expenditure Wage bill 61 Supplies and services Subsidies Transfers 21 Foreign aid Interest payments Domestic Foreign Operations and maintenance Capital expenditure 3verall balance (In percent of GDP) *rimary balance (excl. interest payments) (In percent of GDP) \;on-oil pnmary balance (excluding oil revenue and interest payment) (In percent of GDP) (In percent of non-oil GDP) -. - ~nancing Domestic (net) Bank financing (net) Nonbank financing (net) Of which: Privatization proceeds Regularization of late payments External (net) Discrepancy 71 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 5. Saudi Arabia: Central Government Fiscal Operations, 2000-08 (Adjustment Scenario) (In billions of Saudi Arabian riyals, unless otherwise indicated) Budrzer Projection 2000 2001 2002 2003 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 Memorandum items: Non-oil revenue, excluding investment income 38.2 (In percent of non-011 GDP) 9.4 Late payments and extrabudgetary outlays 31.0 Non-oil overail balance (excl. oil revenue) -191.8 (In percent of GDP) -27.1 (In percent of non-oil GDP) -47.0 Overall balance, authorities' presentation 81 62.4 (In percent of GDP) 8.8 Non-oil primary balance, authorities' presentation 81 -120.0 (In percent of GDP) - 17.0 (In percent of non-oil GDP) -29.4 Central government gross domestic debt 616.2 643.2 685.2 (In percent of GDP) 87.2 93.7 97.1 Sources: Ministry of Finance; and Fund staff projections. 1/ Derived as 76 percent of projected oil export receipts from 2003 onwards. 2/ Excluding privatization proceeds (classified as revenue by the authorities). 31 Charges and fees for communications, post office, water, air rights, landing, telephone licenses, residence, and passports. 41 Zakat. government sales of property, fines, rental of government property, and others. 51 Inc!uding late payments, in part in 2000 and in full from 2001 onwards (including in the 2003 budget, although presented as financing by the authorities). 61 Including the exna month salary according to Hijri calendar in 1997 and 2000 (SRls 8.8 billion), 2002 (SRls 9.5 billion), 2005, and 2008. 7! Difference between budget deficit and financing, considering net bank financing as reported by S.4MZ4. 81 Excluding late payments and 13th month salary; including privatization proceeds as revenue. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 6. Saudi Arabia: Vulnerability Indicators, 1997-2002 (In percent; unless otherwise indicated) Prel. - 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 External solvency indicators REER (CPI based -period average) External debt (in billions of U.S. dollars) 11 Short-term debt (on a remaining maturity) 21 External debtiGDP External debtitotal exports of goods and services Short-term debt (remaining maturity basis)/ total exports of goods and services External debt serviceltotal exports of goods and services Public sector solvency indicators Central government's gross domestic debtlGDP Total debt service!total revenue Interest paymentsltotal revenue Distribution of the public domestic debt by holders: Local commercial banks Autonomous government institutions (AGIs) Other Oil revenueltotal revenue External Liquidity Indicators Total official net foreign assets (in billions of U.S. dollars) SAMA AGIs SAMA's gross foreign assets (in billions of US. dollars) In months of imports of goods and services 31 Vis-8-vis short-term external debt (remaining maturityj Vis-84 MO Vis-a-vis M1 Total official net foreign assetsiM3 Commercial banks net foreign assets (in billions of US. dollars) Foreign assets Foreign liabilities Oil exponsitotal exports Financial sector indicators Foreign currency deposits/total deposits Risked adjusted capitailasset ratio Nonperforming loansltotal assets Net domestic credit (percent change) Private sector credit (percent change) Net domestic creditlGDP Private sector creditlnon-oil GDP Private sector credititotai assets of banks , Market assessment/Financial market indicators Stock market index (percent change; period average) Banking sector stock market index (period average) Interest rate spread (basis points, quarter IV average) 41 Moody's investor services rating 5/ Sources: Saudi Arabian authorities; and Fund staff estimates. 11 BIS-IMF-OECD-World Bank database. 21 Includes amortization of the medium- and long-term due in the period. 31 Imports of goods and services projected for the next 12 months. 41 Spread between 3-month Saudi rlyals and eurodollar deposits. 51 Long-term bonds and notes. Upgraded in m~d-2003. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicFigure 1. Saudi Arabia: Selected Real Sector Indicators, 1997-2003 1/ (Annual change in percent) 10 10 8 Real GDP 8 6 6 3 4 2 2 0 0 -2 -2 -4 -4 -6 EEiEE3 Real non-oil GDP -6 -8 -8 25 25 20 20 15 P # Real GDI 2/ 15 10 P \ .i 2, 10 5 5 0 0 -5 -5 -10 -10 -1 5 -15 1997 1998 1999 2000 200 1 2002 2003 Sources: Data provided by the Saudi Arabian authorities; and Fund staff estimates. I/ 2003 based on Fund staff projections. 2/ Real GDP adjusted for terms of trade effects. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicFigure 2. Saudi Arabia: Central Government Fiscal Indicators, 1980-2003 li (In billions of Saudi Arabian riyals; unless otherwise indicated) 400 Total Revenue and E n Total revenue L7 Total expenditure 350 350 Revenue Expenditure 300 300 D Interest payments El Non-oil revenue 21 I Capital expenditure 250 Investment income 250 Non-interest current mpenditur t9 Oil revenue 200 200 150 150 100 100 50 50 0 0 13 10 - Fiscal Balance (In percent of GDP) Current balance 31 P i' #' / Overall balance ' 130 / Gross Domes~c Debt Sources: Data provided by the Saudi Arabian authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections. 21 2003 data are projections. 21 Excludes investment income. 31 Total revenue minus total current emenditwe. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicFigure 3. Saudi Arabia: External Sector Developments, 1991-2003 11 (In billions of U.S. dollars) 60 50 - External Sector Balances Trade balance 40 - Current account balance ---,I Exportq of goods /--- Oil exports 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 20 15 Service Flows Government services Private services .,ail-- ., 11- 'C L -L-*=.I.I I"1112L'- - -- --- I) - I - Private transfers Sources: Data provided by the Saudi Arabian authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections, I/ Data for 2003 are projections. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicFigure 4. Saudi Arabia: Monetary and Financial Developments, 1994-2003 9 %months Deposit Interest tes and Eurodollar Rates, 1994 - 2003 8 Saudi Arabian riyal deposits Eurodollar deposits 199441 199541 199641 199741 199841 199941 200041 200141 200241 200341 Sources: Data provided by the Saudi Arabian authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicAPPENDIX I (As of April 30,2003) I. II. III. N . V. VII. Status: joined 8/26/57; Article VTII. General Resources Account: Quota Fund holdings of currency Reserve position in Fund Financial transactions plan SDR Department: Net cumulative allocation Holdings None Financial Arrange None Lending to the Lending in association with PRGF Saudi Arabia has consented to the Fund's fourth amendment. It has an associated lending agreement for an amount up to SDR 1.5 billion with the General Arrangements to Borrow (GAB), which was renewed for another five-year period from December 26, 2998. It is also a participant in the New Arrangement to Borrow (NAB) for an amount up to SDR 1.78 billion. In March 2001, Saudi Arabia agreed to support the PRGF-HIPC Trust with deposits totaling SDR 94.4 million. As of end-June 2001, SDR 69.5 million was received as scheduled. Saudi Arabia maintains an exchange rate system free of restrictions on the making of payments and transfers for current international transactions except for restrictions against Iraq in accordance with Decision 144 (5215 1). The Saudi Arabian riyal was formally pegged to tbe US. dollar, effective January 2003 as part of GCC preparations towards adopting a common currency in 2010. Prior to that, it was officially pegged to the SDR at the rate of SRls 4.28255=SDR 1, with margins of 7.25 percent even though in practice it has been pegged to the US. dollar since 1986, with a middle rate of SRls 3.7450= US$1. (a) Saudi Arabia is on the standard 12-month consultation cycle. The last Article N consultation uras held during May 1-1 5,2002. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public(b) The staff report (SMl021252) and the associated Selected Issues and Statistical Appendix (SW021255) were considered by the Executive Board on October 9,2002 (SUW021255). nical Assistance: S: Regional seminar for GCC countries, November 1997. Regional seminar for GCC countries, May 1998. Regional seminar for GCC countries (Design of Fiscal Policies), May 1999. STA: Balance of payments statistics, March-May 1997. Government finance statistics, September 1997. Money and Banking (international reserves), May 1998. National accounts statistics, August-September 1998. Balance of payments statistics, January-February 200 1. FAD: Reform of customs administration, June and November 1997. Strengthening of tax administration, February-March 1998. Tax and customs administration seminar, March 1998. Customs administration, September-November 1998. Tax and customs administration, June 1998. Customs administration information advisor, November 1998-November 1999. Tax administration advisor, November 1998-November 1999. Tax and customs administration, October-November 1998. Study group to review domestic tax departments, December 1998. Tax and customs administration, February-March 1999. Tax reform implementation, June 24-July 13, 1999. Evaluation of current approach to customs modernization, October 6-17, 1999. Modernization of the Department of Zakat and Income Tax, May 22-June 1,2000. LEG: Reform of income tax system, March 1997. Income tax, June 19-29, 1999. MFD: Pre-FSAP mission, January l8-20,2003. A MFD expert undertook prepararory FSAP work in conjunction with the Article IV consultation mission during April 26-May 10. The main FSAP mission is expected to take place in early 2004. XI. Resident Representative: No resident representative is stationed in Saudi Arabia. However, the term of the FAD resident advisor on tax administration expired on October 22,2002. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicAPPENDIX I1 i Arabia: Relations with the 1. The JVorld Bank maintains a special relationship with Saudi Arabia by providing reimbursable services through the Technical Cooperation Program (TCP), the largest such program for the Bank. It also provides a limited amount of nonreimbursable services. The program, which was initiated in FY l975/76, peaked at 32 staff years in the mid- 1980s, declined in the following years, but has risen again to around 13 staff years in FY2001/02. The Bank's main counterpart is the Ministry of Finance and hiational Economy (MOFNE). 2. Historically, the bulk of the technical assistance has been for infrastructure and for information systems. In the 1990s, however, the emphasis shifted toward policy advice and implementation. As a result of the 1997 Country Economic Memorandum (CEM), Private Sector development (PSD) emerged as an area of considerable activity. In FY 2002, important initiatives were completed, among them: Creation of three important regulatory authorities for the telecommunications, electricity and industrial estates sectors; completion of the Kingdom's first BOT transaction with the signing of a 20-year contract for rehabilitation and operation of the wastewater treatment plant at the Jeddah Industrial City; and Recruitment of Financial Advisers and initiation of the privatization transaction for the King Fahd Medical City. There was also a strengthening of Saudi Arabian General Investment Authority and the completion of a landmark Administrative arriers Study for them and finalization of all arrangements for a major international symposium on e Future Vision for the Saudi Economy, under the patronage of the Crown Prince. The Bank undertook some assignments in new areas such as the Saudi Gified Children Use of Technology in Teacher Training. The Maritime Strategy and the Ports Strategy were finalized and presented to the Government. 3. Several joint ministry-Bank workshops and symposia have been held, including on Frontiers of Infrastructure Finance, BOT (with the participation of the Islamic Development Bank) and Privatization (with the participation of the Saudi Council of Chambers of Commerce and Industry), E-Government, Gifted Children Program, Technology in Teacher Training, Private Sector Participation in Education. Seventy-Three professional papers from international authors and local experts were finalized in preparation for the symposium on Future Vision for Saudi Economy in October 2002. 4. Capacity building continues to be a priority for the government, and the Bank has been carrying out such work with different ministries, including the Supreme Economic Commission and the PIF (regarding implementation of privatization transactions); the Saudi Arabian General Investment Authority; and the Ministry of ?laming, among others. 5. About 60 video conferences were organized to deliver cost-effective, just-in-time policy advice, and promote knowledge sharing with the participation of high-level officials, including several deputy ministers. 6. Also, the World Bank Institute is actively involved in offering courses for and in cooperation with the Kingdom's Institute of Public Administration (PA). Preparations for setting up a distance-learning center at PA and Islamic Development Bank are advanced. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicNational accounts an APPENDIX I11 1. Data on GDP, value added per sector at current and constant prices, and GDP deflators are available on an annual basis. The Central Department of Statistics (CDS) completed in 2002 several major surveys and censuses, which aimed at providing a more accurate picture of sectoral developments, household income and expenditures, and demographic and labor force developments. However, the agricultural data included in the national accounts, although re-based to 1999, continue to follow an outdated methodology and the last agricultural census took place in 1981. Following the completion of the 1999 household and income expenditure survey, the CDS revised national accounts data for the period 1996-99 and 2000 on the expenditure side based on the results of the survey and adopted 1999 as a base year (against 1970 before) for the computation of aggregates in constant prices. On the production side, 2000 data are still estimated. For 2001, the establishment survey generated estimates for both expenditure and production. Those estimates will be finalized once oil sector data (exports and imports of oil and gas by quantity and value, intermediate consumption, and revenue and expenditures of companies in the oil sector) become available to the CDS. The building of a new base year is the first step in a global plan for the progressive passage from the 1968 UN System of National Accounts (SNA) based accounts to the 1993 SNA. The objective of the CDS is to change all national accounts to the 1993 SNA by end-2003 or early 2004. For that purpose, the CDS introduced long questionnaires for its 1999 establishment expenditure survey so as to derive the information necessary to reconstruct the data according to the 1993 SNA. As a second step toward this objective, it intends to start publishing many tables in the 1993 SNA format during 2003. 2. The completion of the 1999 household expenditure and income survey enabled the CDS to construct a new CPI based on an updated basket (the current cost-of-living index is based on a basket dating back to 1985 in terms of items and weights). The new weights are currently being finalized. The index, which was set to become operational by end-2002 and start generating numbers in January 2003, will cover all 13 regions and all main cities within those regions, in addition to rural areas, and will include 420 goods and services (versus 180 for the current index). 3. The CDS initiated by end-200 1 quarterly surveys on all sectors of activity except agriculture. It is now preparing a genegal economic and population census slated to start in January 2004 and last for 9 months. This census will include all sectors and agents (public, private, agriculture, nonprofit, foreign companies, and households) in all cities (the 1993 census covered only private establishments, excluded agriculture, and covered only 158 cities). Another project still on the drawing board is the general GCC population census of 2010. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicAPPENDIX 111 4. WiIore recent progress in the implementation of surveys and censuses conducted and planned by the CDS are as follows: The annual economic survey of establishments for 2000 was completed in May 2002. The 1999 manufacturing sector five-yearly census was completed. The next census, which will be part of the above-mentioned 2004 census, will cover all establishments. The transportation sector census of 1998 was completed. The next census is scheduled for 2003, but is likely to be postponed until the global census of 2004 and performed in conjunction with it. The above-mentioned 1999 household expenditure and income survey was completed by end- 1999. The annual household-based labor force survey for 2001 has been completed and the 2002 survey is been processed. The five-yearly census for 2001 on establishment-based wages and salaries was completed and 2001 data on private sector wages for all activities were published on the web (see below). The agricultural sector census for 1999 was completed (by the Ministry of Agicu!ture) and the census-based data were published. The next census will be part of the 2004 global census. The annual demographic survey of 2000 was completed. The annual survey for the compilation of import and export price indices, which started in 2001, has been completed. The five-yearly survey for the compilation of the input and output of industrial production indices was expected to be completed by end-2002. The processed surveys will allow the publication of the national accounts statistics in accordance with the 1968 and 1993 SNA presentation in the forthcoming CDS annual report. 6. The authorities have also developed databases on labor markets available for use by the regional labor offices. These databases have regularly been updated. The preliminary results for the employment in 2000 by sector and large establishments (more than 20 employees) are also available. 7. The CDS established in July 2001 an internet website through which it started disseminating: {a) national accounts data for 1996-2001 (with the new base 1999); (b) population and labor force data for 2001; (c) private sector wages and salaries for 2001 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Publicfor all activities; (d) all surveys from 1996 to 1999; (e) cost-of-living index; (f) exports and imports up to 2001; and (g) tables, definitions, and methodology. 8. Coordination between the CDS and SAMA and the Ministry of Finance are well- established. The CDS collects data on imports and exports of merchandise, which are directly inputted into an on-line database shared with SAMA. There are also weekly coordination meetings between the CDS and SAMA's research Department to settle outstanding data issues. With regards to the Ministry of Finance, the CDS receives data from the ministry on a regular basis and reclassifies them according to the SNA methodology, which differs from the aggregation used by the ministry for budgetary control purposes. In contrast to the above, there is no effective coordination between the CDS and the Ministry of Petroleum, except through the forrnal quarterly setting of the Data Committee which includes the CDS, Budget's Final Accounts specialists, SAMA, and the Petroleum Ministry. Typically, oil and gas data are received by the GDS after a long lag following the end of the reference period. In May 2002, data on oil and gas for 2001 were still unavailable to the CDS, with a result that the 2001 national accounts has to be prepared using estimations for the oil sector. iscal sector 9. During the consultation missions, the authorities provided detailed information on the operations of the central government, including the stock of the gross domestic debt, the distribution of government debt by holders, amortization payments, and the breakdown of the fiscal financing between bank and nonbank sources. In addition, statistical information is provided on the Saudi Fund for Development and some data on the PIF, as well as on four other lending institutions (Saudi Agricultural Bank, Saudi Credit Bank, Saudi Industrial Development Fund, and Real Estate Development Fund). However, although authorities have recently given more attention to the publishing of detailed fiscal data and presenting a consolidated situation of the public finances (central government, PF, and AGIs), there has been no progress on this front. 10. Following recommendations by the September 1997 Fund technical assistance mission on fiscal accounts, the authorities are working to fully address remaining weaknesses in the fiscal data. As a first step, expenditure on wages and salaries has been reclassified to be fully captured in line with the UN System of National Accounts (SNA) methodology. Also, the MOFNE has taken some steps in using Government Finance Statistics (GFS) definitions to put national data in a format consistent with the 1993 SNA. 1 1. Most monetary and financial data are readily available in SAIvlA's Monthly Statistical Bulletin, published with about one-month lag and available since March 2000 on website. In particular, commercial bank data are adequate and are provided on a regular basis. Information on deposit interest rates is included (and published on a daily basis in the national press), but not interest rates on government securities. Monetary data for SAhU are provided to the Fund on a monthly basis. More disaggregated data on SAMA's Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicAPPENDIX In liabilities are only provided during consultation missions. The timeliness of data, however, has improved dramatically starting with the April 2001 submission. Prior to that time, there had been long lags in reporting SAMA's data, but after that time the lags were cut dramatically to one month. Information on aggregates related to the stock market and mutual fund transactions are available monthly on SAMA's website. More detailed data on the stock market, including selected data on listed companies such as share prices, dividend announcement, are instantaneously available on the new electronic platform TADAWUL which has, since October 2001, replaced the former electronic ESIS system for stock trading, clearing, and settlements. 12. The authorities have revised the definition of official international reserves in light of the recommendations of a STA-MED mission (May l 6-1 9, 1998) and reported revised data for January 1996 and onward. The authorities noted that the foreign exchange cover of the currency in circulation with the public was included in the revised definition, as were other investments in foreign marketable instruments in conformity with a strict interpretation of the balance of payments manual. No detailed information has been provided on the composition of foreign assets that were excluded from the revised official international reserves data. 13. Progress has been made in several areas to improve the balance of payments statistics, although the data are not yet compiled or reported according to the Balance of Payments Manual, Fifth Edition (BPrVI5). Only the major items of the balance of payments are presently reported, and limited breakdown is provided. However, steps are underway to address the remaining issues, such as improvement in the compilation of data on services, income, and transfers, as well as on the financial and capital accounts, reconciliation between oil sector statistics published in SAMA's annual reports and those in the real sector, improvement on the classification of public sector imports and services. The 1997 STA mission on the balance of payments assisted the authorities in reclassifying the BOP data according to Fund methodology, and recommended new collection methods that would allow SAMA to convert the balance of payments to the new BPMS presentation within a relatively short period. SAMA has made significant progress in implementing these recommendations, particularly in the design and dispatch of survey forms used for data collection, including from: the MOFNE and several other government agencies and ministries; a large number of private sector companies. including telecommunication and transportation companies; and financial institutions. Specifically, the coverage of establishments has increased to about 100 companies, in addition to financial institutions from which SAMA already receives data on a regular basis. The rate of response to the questionnaires has risen to about 25 percent. To ensure continued progress in this regard, SAMA7s BOP committee of 11 officers (with weekly meetings) have continued their work of reviewing progress in the collection and usage of BOP data; some of the material is also being used for training, with a view to improving data collection. Finally, to improve the compilation of balance of payments data in accordance with the BPMS, the authorities together with STA organized a seminar in JanuaryiFebruary 200 1. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicAPPENDIX 111 14. Publication is generally limited to officially finalized and approved data. Data on real sector, national accounts, financial sector, limited budgetary accounts, and balance of payments are published in official documents, such as the CDS and the SAMA annual reports. h addition, as mentioned above, main financial data are available in SAMA's Monthly Statistical Bulletin with about one-month lag and since March 2000 on the SAMA website. The budget document is not published but limited actual fiscal data are published in SMA's annual report. Data provided to the consultation missions are available in the Fund documents and intended for internal circulation only. The authorities issued in May 2001 a directive requiring departments and ministries to publish relevant data, including information on GDP and other vital statistics on a regular basis. As a result of the new directive, a Data Committee was established in 2002, including the CDS, Budget's Final Accounts specialists, SAMA, and the Petroleum Ministry. The Committee meets in principle on a quarterly basis to discuss data issues and decide about the publication of quarterly data. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicAPPENDIX 111 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicAPPENDIX IV Saudi Arabia: 1. The staff discussed two medium-term fiscal scenarios with the authorities for the period 200408. The baseline scenario is based on current and planned policies and developments (Table 2). It assumes a gradual tightening of the discretionary fiscal stance, although the overall deficit would increase because of the projected decline in oil revenue. ustment scenario is based on further strengthening of the fiscal stance through additional revenue and expenditure measures, leading to small fiscal surpluses throughout the projection period (Table 5). Macroeconomic assumptions, including world oil prices and demand, remain the same under the two scenarios. aseline Scenario 2. The baseline scenario suggests that, after positive fiscal developments in 2003, imbalances would reemerge in the medium term. The baseline scenario assumes weakening oil prices to $19.9 per barrel in 2006 (down from $24.1 in 2003); and a gradual decline in oil production up to 2005-06 (due to Iraq's full return to the market), followed by a pick-up thereafter along with anticipated growth in world demand. Based on these assumptions and unchanged policies, the overall fiscal balance is projected to return to a deficit in 2004 (2.1 percent of GDP), following a 12 percent drop in oil revenue. After a further 10 percent decline in oil revenue in 2005, the deficit would increase to about 5% percent of GDP, and remain bemeen 4%-6 percent of GDP in 2006-08.' The overall deficit would average about 5 percent of GDP during the projection period (2004-08), with non-oil deficits remaining high at 24 percent of GDP on average (35 percent of non-oil GDP). Government debt would resume its upward trend in 2004 and stabilize at around 94 percent of GDP, even if a part of privatization proceeds (assumed for the purpose of this scenario at about SRls 5 billion per year) is used to pay down the government debt. 3. This deterioration in the overall fiscal position would take place despite a gradual tightening of the discretionary fiscal stance. The non-oil primary deficit would decline fiom 35 percent of non-oil GDP in 2003 to 25 percent in 2008, mainly on account of assumed tight expenditure policies and the introduction of the VAT in 2007. More specific assumptions are as follows, based on current and planned policies in the fiscal area: 8 Oil revenue is 76.1 percent (historical average) of projected oil export receipts; @ The VAT is introduced in 2007,at a rate of 5 percent; B) The wage bill increases annually by 3 percent in nominal terms (plus the 13th month salary payment in 2005 and 2008). Discretionary current expenditure (supplies and Swings in the overall deficit are mostly due to the impact of the projected 13'~ month salary payment in 2005 and 2008, due to the Hijri calendar. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicAPPENDIX TV services, operations and maintenance) increases by 1 percent per year in nominal terms, but is adjusted by half of the change in oil revenue to reflect the procyclicality of expenditure. Capital expenditure increases along with nominal GDP, also adjusted by one-half of the change in oil revenue; Q Late payments decline by one-fourth annually from SR!s 12 billion in 2002 (1.7 percent of GDP) to SRls 2.4 billion in 2008 (0.3 percent of GDP); and a, Interest payments increase gradually, as the average effective interest rate on government debt is adjusted to account for the increase in world interest rates starting 62004. 4. While the debt-to-GDP ratio would stabilize, its high level signals potential vulnerabilities to exogenous shocks. Any negative shock affecting the economy or the budget could put public finances on an unsustainable course, as illustrated in the debt sustainability analysis (Appendix V). With lower oil prices from 2004 onward (by $3 per barrel) and unchanged policies, the deficit would reach 8% percent of GDP by 2008 and debt would increase to 105 percent of GDP. Similarly, with higher marginal interest rates over the period (by 3 percentage points), the deficit would rise to 7% percent of GDP by 2008, and debt to 98 percent of GDP. < . The adjustment scenario builds upon the fiscal surplus projected in 2003 and assumes strengthening the fiscal stance through revenue and expenditure measures equivalent to about 6 percent of GDP. If fully implemented, these measures would lead to small overall surpluses of between $4-1 % percent of GDP over the projection period (2004-08), despite the anticipated fall in oil prices. The non-oil budget deficit would be reduced to about 22 percent of GDP (to 34 percent of non-oil GDP) in 2004 and to 16 percent of GDP in 2008 (23 percent of non-oil GDP). As a result, public debt would decline both in nominal terms and in relation to GDP, from 97 percent of GDP in 2002 to 70 percent of GDP in 2008. The stronger fiscal position would improve the central government's capacity to withstand terms of trade and interest rate shocks. In the event of exogenous shocks, including oil price and interest rate increases, public debt would resume the desired downward trend after a temporary increase. 6. Tbe adjustment scenario calls for a significant intensification in the implementation of the reform program. The targeted improvement in the fiscal position would require strengthening the structure of the budget, restraining expenditure growth, and durably increasing non-oil revenue to about 10% percent of GDP in 2008. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicAPPENDIX N 7. On the revenue side, the adjustment scenario assumes that the following measures would be taken, yielding 2% percent of GDP by 2008: 8 Introducing the VAT at a rate of 10 percent in 2005 already;2 8 Introducing a number of standard excise taxes (tobacco, soft drinks, fuels, passenger vehicles) by mid-2004, yielding about 0.9 percent of GDP on an annual basis; and 8 Increasing user fees and charges, including on utilities? by 10 percent. 8. On the expenditure side, measures would reduce primary spending by 3.1 percentage points of GDP by 2008 by: a3 Containing the nominal growth of the civil service wage bill to less than 1 '/z percent per year by limiting hiring, encouraging early retirement under civil service refom, and privatization; @ Reducing discretionary current expenditure (supplies and services, operations and maintenance) and capital spending by 15 percent and 5 percent, respectively, relative to the baseline; and a3 Gradually reducing product subsidies by two-thirds. ' In the event that the VAT cannot be implemented, a simple sales tax would be put in place in 2005. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicAPPENDIX V t Sustainability Analysis Following the methodology set out in SM/02/166, the staff conducted a sensitivity analysis of the baseline scenario for 2004-08 presented in the staff report, by modifying key macroeconomic parameters (real GDP growth, interest rates, the primary balance, oil revenues, and debt-creating flows). The main results are summarized as follows (Table 1; Figure 1). 0 While the debt ratio would stabilize at about 94 percent of GDP in the baseline scenario, adverse shocks or delayed implementation of policies would lead either to a growing debt ratio or to stabilization at a higher level. 0 If the main macroeconomic and policy variables (real GDP growth, interest rates, and the primary balance) remain at their historical levels during the projection period 2004-08, the debt ratio would take an upward trajectory, growing indefinitely (stress test 1). Consequently, as reflected in the baseline scenario, stabilizing the debt ratio would involve active measures to reduce the primary deficit below historical averages, and pursue appropriate macroeconomic policies to increase real growth. e Adverse interest rate and GDP growth developments would lead to a higher, albeit stable, debt ratio than in the baseline (stress tests 2 and 3)' 0 A weaker primary fiscal balance in 2004-05, due to lower oil revenues and a slower pace of implementation of fiscal adjustment, would imply stabilizing the debt ratio at the much higher level of about 114 percent of GDP (stress test 41.~ 0 Similarly, a combination of shocks (but of smaller magnitude)' affecting simultaneously real GDP growth, interest rates, and the primary balance would throw Stress tests 2-4 apply (separately) a shock to real GDP growth, nominal interest rates, and the primary balance such that these variables would be set, for 2004-05, at their hstorical average (1993-2002) plus or minus two standard deviations, and then would return to their projected baseline level. Since the volatility of nominal interest rates was historically low, the impact of this stress test is small. * The large adverse impact of stress test 4 is due to the magnitude of the assumed shock. Since the primary balance was very volatile historically because of sharp variations in oil revenues, the primary deficit implied by this stress test is 9.5 percent of GDP in 2004-05 instead of an approximate balance assumed in the baseline. The stress test thus reflects mostly the impact of a drop in oil revenues. One standard deviation only. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicAPPENDIX V the debt ratio off-course up to 109 percent of GDP in 2005, but the debt ratio would return to a declining path afterwards (stress test 5). e Finally, a shock affecting oil revenues in 2004-05 would push the debt ratio upward to about 110 percent of GDP (stress test 6), but the debt ratio would remain stable afterward. The shock corresponds to a drop in oil revenues to their historical average minus two standard deviations, which would be equivalent to assuming an oil export price of $13.4 per barrel instead of $22.3 per barrel in 2004, and $12 per barrel instead of $20.9 per banel in 2005. Table 1. Saudi Arabia: Central Government Debt Sustainabiliry, 1997-2008 (In penmt of GDP, unless olhmse indicated) 1. Baseline hiedium-Tcrm Projn'nono Central government debt oiw iompcumncy denominated Chengc in cenhdl government dsbt Identified debtrnanng flown Rimry deiicit Automahc debt dpamlos I1 Other idnilfied debt-creahng now 3 Res~dual, ineluding ffiser changes Central government debt-to-nvenue ratio Key Mncroeconomic and Fiscal Assumptions Red GO? growth (in pacent) 2.6 2.8 -0.7 4.9 1.3 1.0 4.7 2.1 2.3 3.3 3.7 4.2 Average noirdnal intenst rate on public debt (in penen:) 31 5.5 5.3 4.8 5.1 5.1 4.4 4.1 4.2 4.5 4.8 5.1 5.4 Exchange rate (LC pn US dollar) 3.7, 3.7 3.7 3.7 3.7 3.7 3.7 3.7 3.7 3.7 3.7 3.7 Nominal appreciation (increase m US dollar value of local currency, in percent) 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Infiation rare (GDP deflator. in percent) 20 -14.0 11.2 11.6 -4.1 1.8 2.6 -1.4 -0.7 0.0 1.2 1.5 Growth of mi pmry ding (deflated by GDP deDaror, in pRceN) 10.6 -2.8 -14.3 16.1 14.7 -0.3 -9.5 -0.1 4.8 3 0.9 5.8 If. Strm Tests Lr Centrat Government Debt Rado I. Real CD? growth, real interest rate, and pnmary balance are at h'storical avmges in 2004-2008 2. Normnal interst rate is at hmoncal averaec plus two srandard devlahons in 2004 and 2005 -. 3. Real GDP growth is at hisoncal average minus IWO smndard devisnons in 2004 and 2005 4. ?&my balance is at historical average muli Wo srandard dcviauons in 2004 and 2005 5. Carnbinaoon of 2.4 using onssiandard deviahon shocks 6. Oil mmue is at historical averdp minus IWO standard deviatioiu in 2004-05 Historical StatLrnn for Key Vnrifibla (past 10 years, 1993-2002) Primary deficit Real GDP growth (in percent) Nominal interest rate (in percent) 3/ Oil revenue I/ Derived as [(r - x( l+g) - g + a~.(l+r)Y(l*gr;tgn)) times prcvlous period debt raoo, wtth r = u~tmst rate: n = growrh rate oiGD? deflator: g = nal GDP growth rate: a =share of forcqp-currency denommated debt and a - nomnal exchengc rate depreciation (equal to zero). U Rivatization receipts hum 2003 onvjsrd (negauve sip). 31 lknved as nonumi intenst upendim dirided by pmous period debt stock Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicAPPENDIX V Figure 1. Saudi Arabia: Debt Sustainability Analysis, 1997-2008 (Cenml government debt. in percent of GDP) - Baseline 4. Lowerprimatyjiscol balance - .. 1. Variables at historical averages --.... 2. Higher interest rate 2. Lower growth 6. Lower oil revenue - 4. Lower primary fiscal balance b - -5. Cornbinzuon of 2-4 -I --- Q' 5. Conlbinarion ofi-4 0 6. Lower oil revenue / .--.._._ ..._..-A *- / 3. Lowergrowrh f ;' ;: Yanabies ql Aisroncai &ages 2. Higher interesf rare ,' /A*...."-.-.............. . .- Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicAPPENDIX VI Saudi Arabia: Some Fiscal Policy Issues in Oil-Producing Countries 1. This appendix briefly presents some fiscal policy issues that generally affect oil- producing countries, including Saudi Arabia.' A. Fiscal Policy Framework and Fiscal Rules 2. Fiscal policy in oil-producing countries tends to be procyclical in the short and medium terns, and is often characterized by a deficit bias. e Oil prices and output are volatile and uncertain, creating unpredictable periods of boom and bust for the economy as a whole. Budgetary oil and non-oil revenues usually follow the oil cycle (although the latter is generally more a-cyclical because of narrow and inelastic tax bases). As a result, total budgetary resources are generally subject to large swings that follow variations in oil revenues. e Public expenditure generalIy follows available resources on the upside. When budget revenues are high, expenditures increase because of political and economic pressures associated with the usually large social and economic needs that have to be satisfied. When revenues decline, expenditures tend to contract. However, often the adjustment is only partial and occurs with a lag because of the downward rigidities and the costs associated with a rapid reduction in expenditure. rocyclical fiscal policy has a potentially negative impact on the economy and on private sector growth in particular, as volatile aggregate demand causes costly reallocation of resources, increased risks for private investors, and real exchange rate volatility. Demand for non-tradables put pressure on prices and toward real exchange rate appreciation, without a corresponding easing on the downside. Moreover, volatile public expenditure may entail fiscal costs affecting the quality and efficiency of spending. Finally, the deficit bias may lead to unsustainable fiscal policies in the medium term, if deficits and debt cannot be controlled. 4. Figure 1 shows the procyclicality of fiscal policies in Saudi Arabia between 1992- 2003. The overall fiscal balance broadly followed oil prices during that period, as budgetary revenues and expenditure closely followed oil receipts. Primary expenditure also followed oil prices, with an approximate one-year lag, between 1995-2003. References include: Stabilization and Savings Funds for Nonrenewable Resources, by J. Davis, R. Ossowsh, J. Daniel, and S. Barnett, IMF Occasional Paper No. 205,2001; Operational Aspects of Fiscal Policy in Oil-Producing Countries, by S. Barnett and R. Ossowski, IMF Working Paper WP/02/177,2002. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicFigure 1. Saudi Arabia: 011 Price and Fiscal Indicators, 1992-2003 (in percent of GDP or in $ per barrel) 45 Oii Export Price (in Spb, IeJ 5. To promote growth, fiscal policy should aim at stabilizing aggregate demand and the macroeconomic environment. Policy options to minimize the procyclicality of public finances generally involve the adoption of a rule or a medium-term framework that insulates fiscal policy from the vagaries of oil revenues and stabilizes public expenditure. 6. Smoothing the path of public finances, in particular public spending, in the face of oil revenue fluctuations can be achieved by implementing various types of fiscal rules or medium-term frameworks. The main options for oil-producing countries are the following: (t cator (i.e., exclu vagaries of oil arket~.~ Such indicator reveals whether discretionary fiscal policy is ti@ or expansionary, and it can be related to long-term fiscal sustainability and intergenerational equity objectives (see below). The primary non-oil deficit (excluding interest payments) as a ratio of non-oil GDP would represent the preferred indicator in this regard because both the numerator and the denominator are independent from the evolution of the oil sector. - The non-oil fiscal balance is equal to the overall fiscal balance excluding oil-related revenues and expenditures (if any). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Publica rice rule: Formulating the annual government budget under conservative long- term oil price and oil production assumptions, and targeting a fiscal balance consistent with medium-term sustainability objectives (e.g., a balanced budget), is a simple and straightforward rule, partially followed by several oil-producing countries. However, defining an average or long-term oil price is not straightforward given the unstable properties of oil prices. a iture rule: Adopting an expenditure rule, such as a limit on real public expenditure growth, or a ceiling on the absolute level of real spending or components thereof, directly achieves the objective of stabilizing public expenditure. The drawback of such rule, if adopted without qualifications, is that it does not ensure a sustainable fiscal position, as revenue growth may be insufficient to finance the targeted growth in expenditure. Consequently, it has to be complemented by an assessment of the overall fiscal position in the short and in the long terms. e : Creating a stabilization fund to channel and withdraw oil revenue during the ups and downs of oil markets is a well-known response to oil price volatility. However, stabilization funds have many drawbacks in terms of governance and the potential fkagrnentation of fiscal management, and they should be complemented by clear and transparent fiscal rules related to the management of non- oil expenditure and revenue. In fact, since it is mainly a liquidity management device, a fund is not necessary to achieve the desired outcome of insulating public finances from oil revenue swings, since this objective can be achieved by the appropriate use of the fiscal rules described above. o Nom-oil revenue: Expanding the non-oil tax base may provide alternative sources of revenue, although the non-oil sector is likely to be somewhat correlated to the oil sector. is can be achieved by casting the annual budget in a medium-term roiling macroeconomic fkamework, consistent with realistic oil price assumptions. Moreover, in addition to smoothing public finances in the short term, long-term fiscal sustainability objectives should also be considered. In this regard, targeting an overall balance in the long run, or setting an overall debt ceiling remains crucial to achieving a steady and irreversible decline in public debt and the accumulation of assets for future generations. 8. Figure 2 illustrates the application of hypothetical fiscal rules for Saudi Arabia over the period 1995-2004, based on targeting the non-oil primary balance. In 1995, the authorities announced their intention to reach an overall balanced budget by 2000-a policy that would have implied a reduction in the non-oil primary deficit of about 1.5 percent of non-oil GDP per year during 1995-2000. Applying such fiscal rule would have led to a tighter fiscal stance during the upswing in 1997 and 2000, and to less fiscal tightening during Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicAPPENDIX VI the downswing in 1998-99. Another hypothetical fiscal rule that would have targeted a gradual decline in the non-oil primary deficit of about 1.4 percent of non-oil GDP per year over the period 1998-2008 (leading to a non-oil primary deficit of about 25 percent of non- oil GDP in 2008, as in the baseline scenario) would have smoothed out the oil cycle over the period 1998-2003. Finally, targeting a decline in the non-oil primary deficit of about 2.7 percent of non-oil GDP per year starting in 2001 (to reach a non-oil primary deficit of about 25 percent of non-oil GDP in 2008) could have potentially helpedin pre;enting the sharp deterioration of fiscal balances in 200 1-02 due to increases in expenditure. Figure 2. Saudi Arabia: Non-Oil Primary Fiscal Balance, 1995-7004 (in percent of non-oil GDP) -20 Acrual ~~~~h~tj~~l ~i~~~, ~~i~ (1995- H~~olheflcoi Fiscal Rule 11997- 2008) _ , - # / e .*- # /--' , H~ J - ' .=' ,,' P _ - " kvpotheacul fiscal Rule (29d ,'-- P / /~ropction / / / 9. The oil wealth of an oil-producing country, defined as the present discounted value of future oil revenue, is finite and will eventually be depleted as extraction proceeds-unless new oil reserves are discovered. Intargenerational equity-preserving the oil wealth across generations-could be used as an indicator of the appropriateness of fiscal policy in the long run. In this context, preserving wealth over time is ensured by the gradual transformation of oil wealth into financial wealth, through the saving of an appropriate portion of oil revenue to be invested in other assets. Another formulation of the same principle is that the total government wealth {oil and financial wealth) is preserved as long as consumption is limited to the permanent income derived from it. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 66 - APPENDIX VI 10. A previous paper prepared by Fund staff on Saudi Arabia (SM/00/2 15) presented estimates of the permanent income and the associated maximum government consumption consistent with maintaining total government wealth. The paper estimated the permanent income from oil to be between 14--25 percent of GDP in 2000-05, representing the maximum sustainable non-oil deficit over that period. The upper bound estimate considered maintaining constant total wealth, while the lower bound assumed a constant wealth per capita and, thus, required tighter fiscal policy. At the time of the study, as well as under current conditions (the non-oil fiscal deficit stood at close to 30 percent of GDP in 2002), fiscal policy in Saudi Arabia did not meet any of these two criteria, suggesting insufficient public savings and a declining total government wealth. The paper recommended reducing government consumption to the estimated permanent income to achieve the objective of intergenerational equity. 11. These estimates and recommendations remain valid. If anything, given the increased uncertainty affecting inter alia future oil prices and interest rates, more conservative assumptions might be warranted today. These would lead to a lower estimate for the permanent income from oil and for the associated non-oil deficit consistent with preserving long-term government wealth. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicAPPENDIX VII 1. This appendix presents general information, provided by the authorities, on the operations of the two pension fimds in Saudi Arabia, namely the Government Pension Fund (for civil servants) and the General Organization for Social Insurance (for private sector and government employees). e Government 2. The Pension Fund is a defined-benefits system with partial funding, created in 1958. Contribution rates amount to 18 percenr for civilian employees (9 percent paid by employees and 9 percent by the govement employer) and 22 percent for military personnel (9 percent plus 13 percent). The fund's revenue also includes investment income. The retirement age is 60 years (earlier for military, after less years of contribution). Maximum benefits require 40 years of contribution and amount to the full last salary received before retirement. Short of 40 years, there is a penalty equal to 2.5 percent per missing year.1 The minimum contribution period to receive a pension is 25 years; below that period, beneficiaries receive a lump-sum payment. Officials indicated that there was little risk of manipulation of the system through salary increases during the last year of service, since such increases were small and tightly controlled in the civil service. Because of the prevailing low inflation rates, pensions are not automatically indexed, but there are periodic ad hoc adjustments. 3. As of May 2003, there were 324,000 pensioners, of which 240,000 were alive and 84,000 had passed away, but whose dependants (346,000 individuals) still received benefits. There were 2 1,500 new pensioners (or recipients of a lump-sum payment) last year. A total of SRls 1 18 billion in benefits to 840,000 beneficiaries have been paid since the inception of the fund. Every month, the fund makes payments of about SRls 1,240 million, mostly by electronic direct deposit. Records of beneficiaries are checked with the central records of rihe ministry of interior. The Board of directors includes government and private sector representatives. A portability arrangement between the pension fund and GOSI is close to being adopted by the Shura council; after it is adopted, it will be reassessed every three years. 4. Representatives of the Pension Fund indicated that its financial situation was sound. However, it was only partially funded, and conhibutions did not cover future liabilities. Nevertheless, actuarial studies point to a sound position for the next 50 years, with minor parametrical adjustments. While the system is generous, it performs important social functions. ' The formula to calculate benefits is the last salary multiplied by the number of years of contribution divided by 40. Consequently, retiring after only 25 years of contribution would earn a pension equal to 62.5 percent of the last salary. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicAPPENDIX VII 5. The Pension Fund invests a large share of its surpluses in government bonds, according to an investment strategy of diversification of risks, instruments, currencies, and maturities. Buying government bonds is purely an investment decision. The fund has some foreign investments in first-grade bonds and equities, but as a long-term investor, it has not been directly affected by the downturn in world stock markets. The fund is also a shareholder in about 25 domestic corporations (including 5 percent of the telecommunications company STC). No financial statements were made available to Fund staff. e General Organization for Social nsurance (60s 6. The GOSI covers private sector and government employees. There are two separate branches: the pensions branch, which is reserved to Saudi nationals, and the occupational hazards branch (workers compensation) is open to both Saudis and non-Saudis in the private sector (excluding government employees). The pension fund is a defined-benefits system with partial funding. A new law governing the fund was introduced in April! 2001, aimed at improving the level of benefits; increasing coverage to all economic sectors; and reducing loopholes, evasion, and abuses by tightening enforcement. 7. Contribution rates for pensions were raised over the last two years to a total of 18 percent (9 percent for both employees and employers). They stand at 2 percent for workers compensation insurance, paid by employers. Coverage has been expanded to most economic sectors over the past two years. Single-employee companies are eligible, as well as self-employed (contributing the full 18 percent). Compliance was increased by making registration mandatory to receive a commercial license or get government contracts. In one year, the number of registered employers grew from 32,000 to 57,000. Regarding employees, the increase was 11 percent. All public enterprises (such as SABIC, ARAMCO, STC, the electricity company), which are covered by the labor law, contribute to GOSI. As of March 2003, there were 2,233,158 contributors, of which 2,086,734 in the private sector and 146,424 in the government sector. Of these, 473,223 (Saudi nationals) contributed to the pensions branch, of which 326,799 in the private sector and 146,424 in the government sector. 8. enefits are generous: after contributing 40 years, retirees receive their full average salary of the last 2 years of employment. There are regulations governing the maximum salary increase authorized during the last 2 years of employment. Early retirement is allowed after a minimum of 25 years of contributions (with a 2.5 percent penalty per year below 40 years of contribution), as in the government pension fund. Two recent government decisions have imposed an additional burden on the fund. First, the favorable conditions for early retirement (permitted after 25 years of contributions, with no age limit) were recently adopted to match the rules of the government's pension funds. Second, the imposition of a minimum pension of SRls 1,500 per beneficiary caused a 30 percent increase in benefit payments. Early retirees often get another job. Pension benefits paid in 2001 in the form of monthly pensions or lump-sum payments amounted to SRls 1.63 1 billion (0.2 percent of CDP) to 65,3 17 beneficiaries (including insured members and heirs). Payments under the occupational hazards insurance amounted to SRls 186.5 million in 2001. A portability Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 69 - APPENDIX VII arrangement between the Government Pension Fund and the Pension Fund branch of the GOSI is close to being adopted by the Shura Council. 9. Representatives of GOSI indicated that the fund's financial situation was sound in the medium term, but that imbalances were projected in the long run. An actuarial study will be conducted in a few months, and will probably conclude that imbalances will appear earlier than previously projected. Already, contributions do not cover future liabilities, which implies that every new member in the fund adds to the actuarial deficit. However, representatives of GOSI were confident that the fund would be in a healthy position in 20 years, despite the actuarial imbalances. h their view, given the demographic profile, the fund had much more time to adjust than, say, pension funds in the OECD. 10. No financial accounts were available, although GOSI representatives indicated that assets totaled SRls 174 billion (about 25 percent of GDP). The GOSI invests a large share of its surpluses in government bonds, but is also a major shareholder in most publicly listed Saudi companies. Investments are decided by an investment committee: which does not include government representatives, and follows an investment strategy designed with the help of a reputable international firm. GOSI representatives noted that the investment strategy shielded the fund from being forced to invest in government paper, and that in any event, it would avoid having an excessive exposure to the government. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public