DOCUMENT OF INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY FOR I AGENDA SM/04/19 January 28,2004 To: Members of the Executive Board From: The Secretary Subject: Seychelles-Staff Report for the 2003 Article IV Consultation Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staff report for the 2003 Article IV consultation with Seychelles, which is now tentatively scheduled for discussion on Friday, February 20,2004. At the time of circulation of this paper to the Board, the Secretary’s Department has not received a communication from the authorities of Seychelles indicating or not they consent to the Fund’s publication of this paper; such communication may be received after the authorities have had an opportunity to read the paper. Questions may be referred to Mr. Clifton, INS (ext. 38796). Unless the Documents Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the WTO Secretariat on Thursday, February 5,2004; and to the African Development Bank and the European Commission, following its consideration by the Executive Board. This document will shortly be posted on the extranet, a secure website for Executive Directors and member country authorities. Att: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicINTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND SEYCHELLES Staff Report for the 2003 Article IV Consultation Prepared by the Staff Representatives for the 2003 Consultation with Seychelles Approved by Juan Carlos Di Tata and Juha Kahkiinen January 26,2003 l A staff team visited Seychelles during July 7-2 1 and September 19- October 2, 2003 to conduct the Article IV consultation discussions and to discuss a possible staff-monitored program (SMP). The discussions continued by phone and e-mail through end-November 2003. The team met with President Rene, Vice President and Minister of Finance Michel, Mr. Chang-Leng, Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Finance and Governor of the Central Bank of Seychelles (CBS), Mr. Valabhji, Economic Advisor to the President, other senior government officials, and representatives of the opposition and civil society. a The staff team on both missions included Mr. Clifton (head, INS), Mr. Zejan (AFR), Ms. Carare (INS), and Ms. Vladkova-Hollar (PDR). Mr. Camard (EXR), Mr. Masalila (AFR, Special Appointee), and Mr. Ould-Abdallah (RA, AFR) participated in the first mission. Mr. Yao (AFR) and Ms. Cone11 (Senior Administrative Assistant, AFR) participated in the second mission. Mr. Francis (OED) attended some of the meetings during the first mission, and Mr. Callaghan (Executive Director for Seychelles) and Ms. Moorty (World Bank) during the second mission. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2- Table of Contents Page I. Introduction .*,,.............,,....,........* . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 II. Background ., ., , , .,.........,.., , ,........,.,. ,...... ,. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ,. ,. ,.......,........ , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ., .., ., .4 III. Recent Developments ,.........,.,,...............,..,,.,......,,......................,.....,................. . . . . . . . . . . . . 5 IV. Policy Discussions ........................................................................................................ 10 A. Macroeconomic Framework for 2003-04 .................................................................... 10 B. Fiscal Policy ............................................................................................................... 10 C. Exchange Rate and Monetary Policies ........................................................................ 12 D. Financial Sector Reform ............................................................................................. 13 E. Structural Policies ...................................................................................................... .13 F. External Debt .............................................................................................................. 15 G. Medium-Term Outlook and Debt Sustainability Analysis ........................................... 16 H. Risks .......................................................................................................................... 19 I. Statistical Issues ........................................................................................................... 19 V. Staff Appraisal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19 Boxes 1. Macroeconomic Reform Program . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6 2. Current Exchange Rate System.. . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .9 Figures 1. Indian Ocean Countries: Real GDP Growth and Nominal GDP per Capita ............. -23 2. Indian Ocean Countries: Inflation and Effective Exchange Rates, 1997-2002 ......... .24 3. Indian Ocean Countries: External Sector Developments ........................................ .25 4. Indian Ocean Countries: Fiscal Developments ........................................................ 26 5. Indian Ocean Countries: Monetary Developments .................................................. 27 6. Seychelles: Debt Ratios and Gross External Financing Need, 2002-08.. .................. .28 Tables 1. Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 2000-04 ............................................. 30 2. Expenditure on Gross Domestic Product, 2000-04.. ................................................ .3 1 3. Consolidated Government Operations, 2000-04 ...................................................... 32 4. Consolidated Government Operations, Quarterly, 2002-04 ..................................... .33 5. Monetary Survey, 2000-04 ...................................................................................... 34 6. Balance of Payments, 2000-04 ................................................................................. 36 7. External Public Debt Stock and Arrears, 1998-2002 ................................................ 37 8. External Public Debt Services, by Major Creditor Group, 2002-04 ......................... .38 9. Medium-Term Outlook, Authorities’ Scenario, 2002-08 .......................................... 39 10. Medium-Term Outlook, No-New-Money Scenario, 2002-08 .................................. .40 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3- 11. Medium-Term Outlook, Devaluation Scenario, 2002-08.. ....................................... .41 12. Comparison of Medium-Term Outlook, Illustrative Scenarios, 2002-08.. ................ .42 13. Public Sector Debt Sustainability Framework, 2001-08 .......................................... .43 14. External Debt Sustainability Framework, 200 l-08 .................................................. ,44 15. Indicators of External Vulnerability, 1998-2003 ............... ...................................... .45 Appendices I. Relations with the Fund .......................................................................................... .46 II. Relations with the World Bank Group ..................................................................... 49 III. Statistical Issues ...................................................................................................... 5 1 IV. Social and Demographic Indicators .......................................................................... 53 V. Public Information Notice (PIN) .............................................................................. 54 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4- 1. INTRODUCTION 1. At the conclusion of the last Article IV consultation, on July 31, 2002, Executive Directors regretted the deterioration in economic conditions over the previous two years. Directors considered that a return to faster growth and a sustainable balance of payments position would require a fundamental reorientation of economic policies, including a substantial strengthening of the public finances, the establishment of a market-clearing exchange rate, and the elimination of foreign exchange and price controls. Directors noted the social costs associated with these adjustments; they encouraged the staff and the authorities to develop a carefully sequenced and effective adjustment program that takes account of the country’s special circumstances. 2. Seychelles has accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2(a), 3, and 4. However, it maintains restrictions on payments and transfers for current international transactions subject to Fund approval, including restrictions on the transfer of profits and dividends, a foreign exchange allocation system, and external payments arrears, which the Board did not approve during the last consultation.’ II. BACKGROUND 3. Since gaining independence in 1976, the authorities have largely followed an economic policy framework based on state control and intervention in the economy, with a large role for public investment and state-owned enterprises. These policies had impressive achievements in terms of per capita growth and social indicators (Figures 1-5; Appendix IV) but, in recent years, their sustainability has been threatened by growing macroeconomic imbalances and structural problems that have made the economy less efficient and competitive. During the 199Os, high fiscal expenditure, fueled by ambitious capital projects and a steady growth in social welfare spending, led to excess demand pressures (Table 1). With a relatively rigid official exchange rate (the Seychelles rupee is pegged to a basket of currencies), these pressures were reflected in strong import demand, shortages of foreign exchange, external arrears, and a substantial premium in the illegal parallel exchange market (roughly 100 percent). 4. Government intervention and controls led to serious disruptions in economic activity. Foreign exchange shortages hampered businesses, especially those in sectors without preferential access to foreign currency, by creating difficulties in obtaining timely supplies of imported inputs. Price controls (including on the exchange rate, markups on imported goods, and interest rates) and direct interference in the allocation of resources (via the foreign exchange allocation mechanism or the system of import permits) distorted relative prices, thereby inhibiting efficient resource allocation and the growth of the private sector. In addition, the government directly participated in manufacturing, distribution, and * Relations with the Fund, including recent technical assistance, and with the World Bank are summarized in Appendices I and II, respectively. Statistical issues appear in Appendix III. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-5- other economic activities through its parastatals-particularly the Seychelles Marketing Board (SMB)-which oflen benefit from effective monopoly power or special privileges. 5. In mid-2001, the authorities reacted to the growing economic imbalances by intensifying price controls and foreign exchange restrictions, and by contracting external loans secured by future export receipts. As a result, the total external debt rose to more than 100 percent of exports of goods and nonfactor services at end-2002. While this strategy bought time-which was important given the election cycle-its continuation in 2003 became increasingly difficult, with imports being limited to what could be paid for by current nonpledged export receipts and remaining disbursements of multiyear credits, 6. The total public debt, at 200 percent of GDP by end-2002, is a heavy burden on the economy.* Commercial creditors hold over half of the external public debt, and 55 percent of this portion of the debt is collateralized. Moreover, the domestic public debt is held almost exclusively by the banking system, constituting some 85 percent of banks’ total assets. 7. The authorities recognized that the continuation of their past strategy was not viable, and, in July 2003, they launched a Macroeconomic Reform Program (MERP). The program envisages a substantial fiscal adjustment and includes a package of limited liberalization measures in the areas of foreign exchange, prices, and trade (Box 1). 8. President RenC of the Seychelles People’s Progressive Front (SPPF), who has been in office since 1977, is serving his final term. Elections for the National Assembly, held in December 2002, were won by the SPPF with a popular vote of 54.3 percent. The next presidential elections are scheduled for 2006. III. RECENTDEVELOPMENTS 9. Economic conditions remained difficult in 2002 and, according to the latest data, in 2003. Output grew by an estimated 0.3 percent in 2002 following a contraction of 2.2 percent in 2001 (Tables 1 and 2). This improvement reflected higher activity in the manufacturing sector. In contrast, tourism (the major sector) contributed marginally to GDP growth. Production and tourism statistics indicate that activity was subdued in the first half of 2003. Output in the two most important manufacturing sectors-tuna canning and beverage production-fell relative to the first quarter of 2002. At the same time, tourist arrivals up to June 2003 were 5 percent below those corresponding to the fust half of 2002, owing to concerns about terrorism and severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS). * The public sector debt-to-revenue ratio was about 500 percent at end 2002. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-6- Box 1. Seychelles: Macroeconomic Reform Program On July 1, 2003, a macroeconomic reform program was launched, including the following measures (status in italics): Generate a significant strengthening of fiscal policy by means of the following: Revenue measures (done) - convert a narrowly applied 7 percent GST into a broad-based 12 percent GST; - apply the business tax to agriculture, fisheries and leasing; - closely monitor dividends Corn parastatals; - revise various fees and charges; Expenditure measures - freeze current levels of personal emoluments (done); - cap recurrent budgets of ministries for the period 2003-08 (donefor 2003); - decrease subsidies to parastatals (donefor 2003); - set up a centralized government purchasing unit (donefor two ministries); - reduce membership fees paid to international organizations (done); - cap capital expenditure for the next four years (donefir 2003); - eliminate net lending to parastatals and other organizations (to be done); Financing measures (to be done) - clear existing advances with the central bank within the next year; - restrict the issue of government securities; - extend the average maturity of government securities; and - increase privatization and sales of fmed assets. Reexamine the role of parastatals and services provided by government (to be done). Reform incentives for tourism and other productive sectors (to be done). Reform the welfare system (to be done). Introduce an appreciation limit on the exchange rate of the rupee against the U.S. dollar but allow it to depreciate according to calculations based on a basket of currencies (done). Find new external financing (to be done). Liberalize the economy over a period of time, including the foreign exchange allocation system and controls on prices and imports (to be done). Review the civil service (to be done). Source: Republic of Seychelles, Macroeconomic Reform Program, June 2003. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-7- 10. Consumer prices rose by 0.2 percent during 2002, and this trend continued during the first half of 2003. The low rate of inflation was in large part due to the impact of price controls on imported items. In July 2003, the price level jumped by about 4 percent because of the introduction of a new indirect tax, but underlying inflation remained low. 11. Employment increased further in 2002 partly because of a rise in government social spending late in the year. Employment rose across most sectors, with higher rates of increase in social and community services, construction, and commerce. Along with the overall increase in employment, average wages rose by 1.4 percent in 2002. Disincentives to work, resulting from a generous welfare system, have contributed to the emergence of a significant expatriate labor force employed mainly in construction, tourism, and tuna canning. 12. The overall fiscal deficit rose to 18.7 percent of GDP in 2002 from 10.5 percent in 2001, but significant progress toward fiscal consolidation was made in the first half of 2003, even before the start of the implementation of the MEW (Tables 3 and 4). While the deficit was contained in the first three quarters of 2002, pre-election spending surged in the last quarter, During the fist half of 2003, the authorities reduced capital expenditure in line with the 2003 budget; this led to a decline in the fiscal deficit to about 9 percent of the period’s GDP, compared with 12 percent in the first half of 2002. 13. Fiscal revenue in 2002, at 40 percent of GDP, was little changed from recent years, and this trend continued in the first half of 2003. In January-June 2003, revenue was 37.2 percent of the period’s GDP, which is broadly in line with the outcome in the first halfof 2002. As the implementation of a new tax on goods and services (GST) on July 1, 2003 was anticipated, imports of highly taxed vehicles and gasoline surged in the second quarter, which compensated for softness in other revenue categories. 14. Fiscal expenditure rose by 10 percentage points of GDP in 2002 to almost 59 percent of GDP, but this climb began to be reversed during the first half of 2003. Most of the increase in 2002 was devoted to Gnancing capital projects of the government or state-owned enterprises; public housing programs; and election-driven community projects. Wage and pension payments, in contrast, were held constant in nominal terms. Higher interest payments on public debt also contributed to the rise in spending. 15. Fiscal policy was tightened further following the launching of the MERP. Preliminary data for the third quarter of 2003 indicate that overall tax revenue was basically in line with the authorities’ plans, and that there were deeper-than-planned reductions in non- wage current expenditures, including goods and services, domestic interest payments (reflecting lower interest rates due to an easing of monetary policy) and transfers. As a result, the overall surplus in the third quarter was 10.8 percent of the period’s GDP, compared with a forecast of 7.2 percent of GDP. 16. Monetary developments have been strongly affected by the fiscal outcome. Broad money increased by 13 percent in 2002, or much faster than nominal GDP, reflecting mainly the government’s credit needs (Table 5). At the same time, credit to the private sector rose Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-8- sharply, albeit from a relatively low base, owing mainly to an expansion of credit for tourism. The loose monetary stance (as measured by the decline in real interest rates) exacerbated pressures on the foreign exchange market, leading to a decline in the banking system’s net foreign assets. During the fast six months of 2003, broad money growth slowed to 5% percent as the government was able to reduce its net indebtedness to banks and credit to the private sector grew at a slower pace. 17. With a record growth of tourism receipts, the external current account experienced a deficit of about 16 percent of GDP in 2002 (Table 6). The growth of tourism receipts in 2002 was partly offset by government imports and the acquisition of an oil tanker by the state oil company, SEPEC. In addition, the government allowed a foreign bank and an overseas airline to repatriate substantial profits. Preliminary data for the first three quarters of 2003 point to weaker tourism receipts, with a 7 percent drop in arrivals over 2002, and initially stronger imports triggered by the announcement of the GST. Import growth is expected to slow following the implementation of the tax and as the foreign exchange shortage increases. For 2003 as a whole, staff expects an improvement in the current account compared to 2002 in part because of lower profit repatriation and the cut in government expenditures. 18. The rupee is pegged to a trade and tourism-weighted basket of currencies, with the euro and the U.S. dollar heavily weighted (Box 2). During 2002, a stronger euro contributed to an appreciation of the rupee against the U.S. dollar. In February 2003, the authorities introduced a floor of 5.5 rupees on the cross-currency rate against the U.S. dollar. Recent data indicate that the authorities are keeping the rupee’s exchange rate against the U.S. dollar constant, at the floor. Measures of the real effective exchange rate using official price statistics are of limited use because of domestic price controls. With that caveat, the rupee has generally appreciated in real effective terms in recent years but, since February 2003 when the new exchange rate policy was introduced, it has depreciated by some 10 percent (Figure 2). Limited information is available on the premium in the illegal parallel exchange market since the authorities vigorously prosecute violations of exchange regulations, but it appears that the premium has been roughly stable recently, on the order of 100 percent. 19. At end-2002, the total public external debt stood at US$560.5 million (80 percent of GDP) (Tables 7 and 8) with public sector external payments arrears, mostly to multilateral and bilateral creditors, reaching US$Sl million. No payments were made in 2002 to either the African Development Bank or the World Bank (to which total arrears are roughly US$650,000). This reflects the de facto subordinated nature of these creditors’ claims, brought about through the decision to collateralize commercial loans. The largest collateralized loan (25 percent of the external public debt stock) was disbursed in September 2002 by a syndicate of banks, arranged by Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi (BTM). The loan introduced significant rigidity into the public debt structure through the pledging of future receipts of foreign exchange earnings, and it is associated with over $40 million of blocked reserves. The collateralization of commercial debt also has severely complicated prospects for a near-term normalization of relations with official external creditors (see below). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-9- Box 2. Seychelles: Current Exchange Rate System Seychelles has a fixed exchange rate regime based on a basket of six currencies. The Central Bank of Seychelles (CBS) also publishes daily the maximum authorized buying rates for hotels and restaurants, which are about 7 percent more appreciated than the official rate. There is a foreign exchange allocation system in place. Each bank receives foreign exchange from its clients (due to repatriation and surrender requirements) and allocates it at the rate established by the central bank. Residents, except banks and a few other permitted cases, have to repatriate all foreign exchange earnings. Net inflows of foreign exchange into commercial banks are divided into two parts: 45 percent is surrendered to the CBS, and 55 percent is retained by the banks. Furthermore, the amount retained by banks is allocated according to a strict system: 27 percent is earmarked for essential imports; another 13 percent has to be kept in a special account at the banks and later transferred to the CBS for meeting external debt service obligations of the government; and an additional 10 percent is allocated for the clearance of arrears to the extent that bank clients with import permits have deposited the local currency counterpart. Bank clients can only join queues for purchasing foreign exchange from banks if they have been granted an import license by the government. 20. In 2003, the shortage of foreign exchange has continued to manifest itself in growing arrears by both the government and the private sector, which have been accumulating at the rate of US$4.5 million per quarter. No payments were made to multilaterals in the first quarter, and only a late partial payment was made to the World Bank in May 2003. In September 2003, the authorities were able to extend the repayment date on the first tranche of the BTM loan. The extension of the repayment date did not represent a rescheduling as the loan contract contains a provision entitling the borrower to request a deferral of the original repayment date of the first tranche for a year. 21. Despite the track record of nonpayment and the de facto subordination of the claims of noncommercial creditors, a few creditors (e.g. the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries, the Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa, and the Abu Dhabi Fund) have continued to extend project financing. Several state enterprises have also contracted large external loans directly and repayments of these loans may also increase the claims on foreign exchange reserves. In July 2003, the government issued instructions prohibiting state enterprises from contracting further external debt without government approval. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- lo- IV. POLICY DISCUSSIONS 22. In past discussions, staff and the authorities have broadly agreed on the challenges facing the economy, but there have been long-standing differences of view about the need for more decisive actions, particularly on the exchange rate, to address these problems. Staff has emphasized the need to tackle the substantial overvaluation of the rupee, put the fiscal balance on a sustainable path, regularize relations with creditors, and undertake economic liberalization. The authorities have recognized the need to deal with economic imbalances, but they have been unwilling to consider a substantial exchange rate adjustment as they believe the social costs of such an adjustment would be too high. 23. In the 2003 discussions, the openness and intensity of the dialogue between the authorities and staff improved. In May, the authorities visited headquarters to present their macroeconomic adjustment and reform program and to request Fund assistance. During two subsequent staff visits to Seychelles, in addition to covering the regular Article IV consultation issues, the discussions focused on policy measures that could potentially be included in a staff-monitored program (SMP). These discussions are ongoing but unlikely to be concluded in the immediate future, in part because the authorities are not ready to commit to a broad-based economic liberalization effort. More generally, the authorities have yet to acknowledge that broader reforms would be needed as part of a comprehensive solution to Seychelles’s debt problem. A. Macroeconomic Framework for 2003-04 24. The authorities’ macroeconomic program for 2003-04 is based on a dramatic tightening of fiscal policy against a background of a generally unchanged level of the exchange rate. This policy mix is expected to dampen domestic demand and improve the external current account balance. The decrease in demand would result from a large cut in government expenditure, particularly public investment, and a broadening of the coverage of the GST, which would reduce private consumption. The external current account is expected to improve mainly as a result of import contraction. 25. Reflecting the fiscal tightening, real GDP is projected to decline by 5 percent in 2003 and 2 percent in 2004. The mission pointed out that this scenario would require that a sizable financing gap for 2004 be filled. In the absence of this financing, the fall in output could be much larger. The introduction of the GST would lead to some increase in the price level, but inflation would be contained at about 7 percent in 2003 and 5 percent in 2004, owing to reduced demand pressures. B. Fiscal Policy 26. The authorities’ fiscal program contemplates a reduction in the fiscal deficit from 18.7 percent of GDP in 2002 to 3.5 percent in 2003, and a shift to a surplus of 6.8 percent of GDP in 2004 (Government Finance Statistics definition). About one-fourth of the fiscal adjustment is expected to come from the revenue side and three-fourths horn the expenditure side. Given the front-loaded fiscal strategy, the authorities’ fiscal performance Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- ll- for 2003 focused on turning around the fiscal stance, while in 2004 and onward the objective will be to maintain momentum and fiscal discipline. Available data for 2003 indicate that the authorities’ 2003 target was met. 27. Total revenues were projected to rise by 4 percentage points of GDP in 2003 and by an additional 3% percentage points of GDP in 2004 as a result of the full-year effect of the revenue measures taken in 2003. In addition to the introduction of a broad-based GST, revenue measures include an increase in the payment of dividends by state enterprises as well as other changes to taxes and fees (see Box 1). The mission expressed concern about whether such a large increase in the tax burden was the appropriate strategy, given the authorities’ desire to promote private sector growth. The authorities thought that the negative impulse of the revenue measures would be limited because of the existing excess liquidity. They also noted that state enterprises had rarely paid dividends to the government in the past. Since many were profitable, this measure could be implemented without major difficulty. 28. Expenditure savings will result from a reduction in current expenditure and a substantial decline in capital outlays (including development grants to state enterprises). The decline in current outlays would result partially t?om a decrease in subsidies to state enterprises. In addition, current levels of personal emoluments will remain in place, and spending on goods and services will be trimmed by 10 percent through across- the-board spending cuts and more effective expenditure control. For many years, Seychelles has been investing heavily in infrastructure and a series of major projects-arguably sufficient for the country’s needs over the next few years-have recently been completed. Thus, the authorities envisage capping expenditure on capital projects at about 1% percent of GDP for the next three years, compared with an average of about 10 percent of GDP in recent years. 29. Further fiscal savings are planned to come from a review of the extensive social protection programs under the Social Security Fund. Under the authorities’ plan, four programs (with a total cost of about 1% percent of GDP a year) will be reviewed. While the authorities expressed concerns about the political impact of any significant cuts in welfare programs, the mission recommended a stricter application of rules governing benefits and a more extensive use of means testing for social services. 30. A main goal of the authorities’ fiscal program is to reduce the public debt to a sustainable level over the medium term. The authorities intend to achieve this result through the maintenance of a primary surplus averaging about lo-12 percent of GDP a year over the medium term which they view as necessary for reversing the past buildup of public sector debt and reducing excess liquidity. The authorities’ original intention was to use these surpluses largely for reducing the stock of domestic debt, which at end-2002 was about 120 percent of GDP. 31. The mission welcomed the ambition of the authorities’ proposed fiscal adjustment but expressed concern about the feasibility of the measures and their sustainability. By way of comparison, the size of the authorities’ proposed primary surplus is large compared even to recent periods of fiscal tightness in Seychelles (e.g., 1990) when Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12- the primary surplus reached some 8% percent of GDP but was maintained at that level only for a year. In addition, the mission pointed out that a large external financing gap would remain even if their measures were implemented, emphasizing the need for a broader adjustment and liberalization program that would help reduce the debt burden (see below). 32. Beyond the stance of fiscal policy, the mission also stressed that it was important to improve external debt management. In this regard, it recommended establishing a loan repayment account for the government at the central bank and to start accumulating counterpart funds in rupees that could be used to service exceptional financial assistance. This action would help to build the confidence of external creditors that the public sector intends to meet its obligations. C. Exchange Rate and Monetary Policies 33. As during previous Article IV missions, the staff expressed concern about the over-valuation of the rupee. Typical measures of the real effective exchange rate based on relative consumer prices underestimate the problem because of domestic price controls, but even these measures suggest that the rupee is significantly overvalued. Moreover, anecdotal evidence suggests that many domestic prices are consistent with the exchange rate in the illegal parallel market, which would indicate a much larger degree of overvaluation. 34. The authorities’ view was that their fiscal policy would lead to a sharp contraction of domestic demand and would reduce pressure on the exchange rate. The mission recognized that a liquidity squeeze via a fiscal tightening could help reduce the demand for foreign exchange but, as previous Article IV missions, favored the adoption of a more balanced policy mix consisting of a less ambitious fiscal adjustment accompanied by substantial action on the exchange rate. In particular, the mission was skeptical that the competitiveness of the rupee would improve much, given the downward rigidity of domestic prices and wages. Moreover, the mission argued that an exchange rate change should make the tourism industry more competitive. The staff favored introducing a market-clearing exchange rate now-for example, through an up-front devaluation followed by the introduction of a system to guide policy adjustments. However, the authorities expressed their preference for the chosen policy mix and hoped that they would be able to demonstrate its effectiveness by mid-2004. 35. The authorities also noted that, given the shortage of foreign exchange, it would be very difficult to maintain a stable exchange rate in the absence of administrative controls. The mission explained that adjustments to the exchange rate could be necessary to enhance competitiveness, and that the CBS could use a set of indicators to determine the need for these adjustments. The authorities were not fully convinced that they would be able to prevent a substantial depreciation of the rupee without recourse to administrative controls, but they agreed to consider developing a preliminary indicators system to determine whether an adjustment in the policy stance was needed. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13- 36. The authorities’ monetary program seeks to reduce the monetary overhang created in past years and to increase net international reserves. Broad money is projected to fall by more than 20 percent over the two-year period 2003-04, consistent with an increase in velocity back to the levels existing before the buildup of the monetary overhang. Based on the envisaged fiscal effort, the program provides for an expansion of credit to the private sector of some 14 percent over 2003-04. The staff encouraged the authorities to achieve their monetary policy targets by relying on market-based instruments. The authorities argued that the introduction of market-based mechanisms would take some time, but they agreed to start examining how such a system might be implemented. D. Financial Sector Reform 37. The banking system is relatively healthy, notwithstanding the economic difficulties, but very vulnerable to any deterioration in the value of government debt. With some 85 percent of their assets in government debt, potential asset quality problems depend almost entirely on the government’s ability to service its domestic debt in the future. Reported nonperforming loans are very low, on the order of 2-3 percent of total loans. However, this information must be interpreted with caution given that loan classification and provisioning rules have not been introduced. 38. The CBS has made progress in establishing a credible supervision framework but additional steps are necessary to bring the legal and regulatory system in line with international practices and standards. The mission urged the authorities to strengthen the prudential framework by introducing regulations on net open foreign exchange positions, loan classification and provisioning, and large exposure limits, in line with recommendations made by Fund technical assistance missions. The 2002 Offshore Financial Center Module 2 assessment by Fund staff found only moderate compliance with international standards for anti-money laundering and a lack of specific criminal provisions defming terrorism or terrorist financing. During the consultation discussions, the authorities did not provide specific information on proposed changes to anti-money laundering and combating the financing of terrorism (AMLKFT) legislation but they stressed their commitment to strengthen the regulatory and supervisory regime in these areas to bring it into compliance with international standards. E. Structural Policies 39. Views diverged on economic liberalization between the authorities and the staff. The staffs view was that liberalization was essential to return to faster rates of growth and to restore a sustainable balance of payments position. As noted above, since independence, the economy has been characterized by a high degree of government intervention and regulation. While this policy has contributed to a higher level of social and demographic indicators than in other African and Indian Ocean economies, it has also led to a large buildup of public debt. The sharp rise in government debt has crowded out private activity and has led to a vicious cycle characterized by efforts to rollover debt, further accumulation of payments arrears, and more restrictions on economic activity. A return to satisfactory rates of economic Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14- growth requires the development of a business-friendly environment to encourage a significant increase in private sector investment, including from abroad. 40. The authorities’ view was that, in the context of an isolated, small-island economy, the government had needed to take a leading role in economic development because of a lack of economies of scale and monopolistic practices by some local traders. The authorities recognized that the high level of government spending, combined with the limited tax base, had led to a shortage of foreign exchange for the private sector. They thought, however, that the government’s role in the economy had contributed to private sector development by providing an adequate infrastructure. With the private sector now ready to assume its proper place, the authorities recognized that the role of the government could be gradually scaled back. 41. The differing emphasis placed by the authorities and the staff on the need for economic liberalization had significant implications for their views on the timing of reforms. Whereas the staff viewed liberalization as essential and necessary to get the economy moving and for foreign funds to start flowing in, the authorities saw liberalization as something that should be done only after economic stability had been achieved and the availability of foreign exchange had improved. 42. Despite differences on the timing of economic liberalization, there was agreement in general on the content of the most important steps. First, it is necessary to rid the exchange system of restrictions on current transactions that limit trade and investment. Second, import controls should be removed to enhance competition. Third, several reforms, including privatization, are required to improve the domestic business environment. 43. In the staffs view, the removal of restrictions on current external payments would significantly boost confidence, both domestically and externally, and should over time lead to an increase in foreign investment in Seychelles. The authorities felt, however, that the removal of restrictions could lead the exchange rate to overshoot substantially its long-run value, and that it should not be contemplated until the central bank had built up its foreign reserves and was in a position to defend the exchange rate. 44. The trade policy measures discussed with the authorities included both the elimination of non-tariff trade barriers and reductions in tariff rates. Discussions on the removal of non-trade tariff barriers focused on the abolition of the import control system and a significant reduction in the number of products for which the state has an import monopoly (see below). Tariff rates are expected to be reduced considerably starting in 2005. The authorities indicated that tariffs are planned to be lowered from the current unweighted average tariff rate of 25 percent to 15 percent for most products, and to five percent for a considerable number of items, in 2006. 45. The staff recommended to the authorities that, as part of their program of trade liberalization, they abolish the current import control system. The staffs proposal was that the government could retain the requirement that importers obtain permits only as a device to monitor the flow of goods into the country, rather than to control or restrict their Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 15- entry. While not opposed in principle to this proposal, the authorities indicated that its implementation was feasible only once the supply of foreign exchange in the economy had significantly increased. Otherwise, the authorities feared that growing queues for foreign exchange to pay for imports would harm confidence in the reform program. 46. Reform of the domestic business environment will need to focus on the SMB. The dismantling of the privileges of the SMB would send a major signal to markets of the government’s determination to liberalize the economy. To establish a more level playing field for private sector suppliers, the mission urged the authorities to eliminate the SMB’s monopoly over imports of various goods, its de facto control over the granting of import licenses, and its privileged access to foreign exchange. The authorities agreed to begin phasing out the SMB’s import monopoly. 47. Beyond reforming the SMB, the staff recommended removing price controls that hamper economic efficiency and which, in Seychelles, are enforced through a 30 percent limit on the markup of imported items. The authorities argued that this measure could not be implemented at the time of a dire foreign exchange shortage because domestic prices would overshoot. 48. The government intends to complete its withdrawal from the hotel sector by selling all remaining public investments in hotels. This step is important not only to increase competition but also to generate financial resources, particularly from abroad, that could be used to reduce government debt and rebuild foreign exchange reserves. 49. The authorities reiterated their intention to implement reforms gradually. In particular, the 2004 budget speech delivered to the National Assembly by the Vice President on December 2, 2003, envisaged a gradual elimination of the foreign exchange allocation system, the removal of the import and price controls, and the phasing out of the SMB monopoly. However, a concrete date was given only for the latter measure, which is to be implemented starting in January 2004. The authorities also reconfirmed their commitment to publish a list of entities to be privatized and to complete the privatization of the industrial land areas by end-2004. F. External Debt 50. The authorities intend to regularize relations with external creditors. As a first step, they plan to reach an agreement with multilateral creditors on a schedule to clear outstanding arrears. They also hope that once an agreement with Fund staff on an SMP is reached, the SMP will pave the way for an upper-credit-tranche financial arrangement with the Fund that will set the stage for a rescheduling with Paris Club creditors and the regularization of relations with other bilateral lenders. The authorities intend to pursue good faith efforts at securing equal treatment from commercial lenders in their negotiations on debt rescheduling. The implementation of this strategy, however, is severely complicated by comparability of treatment issues among creditors, given the existence of collateralized commercial debt. Furthermore, the share of Paris Club creditors in total debt service is small, and a flow rescheduling is unlikely to provide much relief. The World Bank’s lending Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 16- program is likely to be constrained by the negative pledge clause of loans already received from the Bank, as well as by existing arrears. In addition, the African Development Bank has indicated to the authorities its readiness to appraise a policy-based loan in collaboration with the Fund and the World Bank, once arrears are cleared. G. Medium-Term Outlook and Debt Sustainability Analysis 51. The authorities’ medium-term scenario assumes that the macroeconomic policies and structural measures included in their program will contribute to reinvigorating economic activity and improving the external position (Table 9). As noted above, the tiscal plan seeks to maintain a primary surplus of lo-12 percent of GDP over the medium term. Following the initial contractionary impact of the fiscal adjustment on economic activity, the authorities’ policy scenario envisages a gradual increase in real GDP growth up to four percent a year in 2008, concentrated in the main export industries.3 In the medium term, external current account surpluses would rise to some 3% percent of GDP and declining front-loaded debt service would remove some of the pressure on the financial account. At the same time, foreign direct investment inflows are expected to improve with the liberalization of the economy. Overall balance of payments surpluses would help increase the stock of non- pledged international reserves to ten weeks of imports by 2008. Inflation would return to its historical low levels, following a gradual removal of price controls and the freeze on the public wage bill. 52. The fiscal effort envisaged by the authorities, if sustained, will put the total public debt, now equivalent to about 200 percent of GDP, on a declining path. The public domestic debt would drop li-om 120 percent of GDP in 2002 to 51 percent in 2008, while the external public debt would decline much more slowly through 2005, as shortages of foreign exchange are expected to continue to result in external payment arrears through mid-2004. 53. Assuming the implementation of the authorities’ strategy and after taking into account possible debt reschedulings from bilateral creditors and private creditors without collateralized loans which the authorities are seeking, the staff identified a residual financing gap of some US$lSO million in 2004 in the authorities’ scenario.4’5 The authorities agree on the magnitude of this gap and hope that the implementation of their program will assist them in obtaining support from potential lenders to fill it. The staff 3 This scenario contains staff estimates based on the authorities’ projections and assumes the full implementation of their intended policies. 4 The residual fmancing gap includes US$60 million for reserve build-up, which the authorities see as a necessary precondition for introducing exchange rate flexibility during the eventual liberalization of the exchange rate system. 5 A small fmancing gap of about US$6 million is identified for 2005. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17- advised the authorities that, if such assistance did not materialize in the amounts expected, they will need to implement other measures, including action on the exchange rate. 54. The mission had a number of concerns about the authorities’ strategy. l On the fiscal adjustment, even though the mission persuaded the authorities to scale back somewhat their expectations about the outcome of the proposed Iiscal adjustment, the authorities’ scenario still appeared to be overly optimistic. As already noted, the mission was concerned that the authorities may not be able to maintain their proposed fiscal adjustment over the long period necessary to signiticantly ease Seychelles’s debt problem. Without this adjustment, the public debt to GDP ratios would look considerably worse over the medium term than in the authorities’ scenario. l So far the authorities have been unsuccessml in obtaining external fmancing to till the large gap for 2004, which calls into question the realism of the authorities’ overall strategy and the related growth projections. l Without significant economic liberalization, the staff was unclear on the sources of the increased private sector growth that the authorities expect. In the staffs view, long-term growth in the authorities’ scenario was unlikely to reach the projected 4 percent per annum which, among other things, would imply that the public debt to GDP ratios would be higher than envisaged by the authorities. 55. The staff has explored the implications of an alternative scenario in which the fiscal policies described in the MERP are retained, but external financing does not materialize and exchange controls are tightened relative to the authorities’ scenario, with the exchange rate remaining administratively fixed (Table 10). Under this scenario, merchandise imports would decline sharply relative to their 2003 level, and foreign exchange allowances for foreign travel would be significantly cut back.6 The initial contraction in economic activity and imports would be significantly larger than in the authorities’ baseline scenario, with the resulting overall balance of payments deficit being fmanced through a hu-ther accumulation of public debt-service arrears, and with payments continuing primarily on commercial debt. Under this scenario, the external debt (including arrears) initially declines faster than in the baseline, owing to the absence of both new borrowing and a flow rescheduling, but the inferior growth performance significantly slows the rate of debt reduction over the medium term7 6 This scenario includes an intensification of administrative controls, especially on capital flows in the outer years, due to the lack of foreign exchange. 7 The relatively low external debt ratios in the medium term under this scenario are potentially misleading, as output is valued using the (highly overvalued) official exchange (continued) Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 18- 56. The staff has also prepared a second alternative scenario that examines the effects of a more comprehensive policy package comprising the same fiscal measures, a stronger privatization effort, and a removal of exchange restrictions accompanied by a depreciation of the official exchange rate to close to the illegal parallel market rate (Table 11). The depreciation brings about an improvement in the external current account relative to the two previous scenarios, mainly associated with a larger import contraction, with the package resulting in an overall balance of payments surplus of about 2l% percent of GDP. The improvement in the balance of payments allows for an accumulation of useable foreign exchange reserves starting in 2005 and the gradual repayment of accumulated external debt arrears starting in 2006. The effect on the budget outturn, however, is more modest than under the authorities’ scenario: although the depreciation raises tax revenue, primary expenditures associated with imports increase as well. 57. The deterioration in the primary balance is compounded by a significant rise in the interest bill, both on external and domestic debt. As a result of the devaluation, the total public debt stock (of which 40 percent is external debt) spikes to 213 percent of GDP in 2004. In the medium term the policy package succeeds in producing a more efficient allocation of foreign exchange, increased competition, stronger foreign direct investment inflows, and, thus a higher medium term growth rate of about 4 percent. However, the effect on the debt stock, which declines to about 130 percent of GDP by 2008, is significant but not sufficient to ensure sustainability. Consistent with cross-country experience, this indicates the difficulty of simply “growing out” of a debt stock of such magnitude. A comparison of the three scenarios is presented in Table 12. 58. The staff prepared a debt sustainability analysis (DSA) based on the authorities’ scenario (Tables 13-14; Figure 6). While the planned fiscal adjustment does put the debt stock on a declining path, a more comprehensive view of sustainability raises doubts about the viability of the authorities’ one-sided strategy (i.e., sole reliance on a massive fiscal adjustment). While impressive, the projected decline in the total public debt leaves the Seychelles with a debt stock close to 100 percent of GDP in 2008, with the economy remaining very vulnerable to external shocks. Furthermore, if the fiscal adjustment cannot be sustained, the rate of reduction in the stock of debt would be significantly reduced. For instance, with a smaller primary fiscal surplus of 4 percent of GDP in the medium term (primary surpluses of this level were maintained during the early 1990’s, a period of relatively tight fiscal policy in Seychelles), the total public debt stock would still be equivalent to 125 percent of GDP in 2008. rate, which overstates the ability of the economy to service this debt. Despite the fiscal adjustment, which should reduce the liquidity overhang and relieve some of the pressure on the exchange rate, the intensification of controls under this scenario would likely widen the wedge between the illegal parallel rate and the official rate. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 19- H. Risks 59. Risks to the authorities’ program are significant (Table 15). On the fiscal side, the magnitude of the proposed adjustment itself is a considerable risk. The expenditure adjustment, however, is mainly based on a sharp reduction in capital spending, and is less likely to be derailed by the type of pressures that can emerge when adjustment is more heavily weighted toward sensitive wage and social spending. However, the long-term effect of the new GST on consumption and import demand is uncertain. With respect to structural measures, there is a serious risk that the authorities may not implement the removal of exchange controls on schedule, given their very cautious approach in this area. This also casts doubt on the authorities’ growth projections, which are diflicult to justify in the absence of a meaningful liberalization effort and resources to close the financing gap. 60. There are also risks associated with how the financing gap will be closed. The staff advised the authorities to cover the fmancing gap through a combination of debt rescheduling, the contracting of commercial loans without pledged receipts or collateralization of other government or central bank assets, and exchange rate adjustment. However, if financing prospects do not materialize, the authorities may choose to close the gap through an intensification of controls and a larger-than-planned accumulation of arrears. In addition, there is a considerable risk that the authorities could contract a collateralized commercial loan even larger than the BTM loan, with stricter conditions that would exacerbate the rigidity of the external debt profile. I. Statistical Issues 61. The quality of economic and financial statistics reported by Seychelles to the Fund is not satisfactory, although it has improved recently. Deficiencies in the national income accounts (including foreign trade statistics) and fiscal accounts limit their usefulness for surveillance, economic analysis, and policy formulation. The authorities noted that delays reflected the limited number of staff assigned to statistical activities and staff turnover in the unit covering trade statistics. The authorities agreed that they will provide sufficient resources to strengthen the statistical office’s staffing and administrative capacity in order to improve the quality, periodicity, and timeliness of national accounts statistics. In the fiscal sector, inconsistencies between above-the-line data and fmancing items limit their usefulness for program monitoring. V. STAFFAPPRAISAL 62. Economic performance in Seychelles has weakened over the last year and a half. Seychelles has made impressive progress since independence in reducing poverty and establishing a world-class infrastructure, but the high level of government spending associated with these outcomes has also raised the public sector debt to an unsustainable level. The extremely high public debt and its rigid structure have left the country extremely vulnerable to external shocks, such as the war in Iraq and SARS, which hit the economy hard this past year. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 20 - 63. In view of Seychelles’s economic difficulties, at the conclusion of the last Article IV consultation, Directors encouraged the staff and the authorities to work together to develop a sequenced and effective adjustment plan that took account of the country’s special circumstances. The staff is pleased to note that progress has been made. Over the past six months, there has been an improvement in the dialogue and cooperation with the authorities, and the staff hopes that this will continue over the coming months. Staff urges the authorities to continue to implement the macroeconomic adjustment and reform program launched in July 2003, forcefully and consistently, in order to pave the way for a bolder reform effort in 2004. 64. The policy framework announced by the authorities seeks to address the excessive fiscal deficits, which have been the main source of the economic difficulties. The size of the fiscal adjustment effort proposed by the authorities is very ambitious and, if sustained over the medium term, should dramatically improve the unfavorable public sector debt dynamics of recent years. However, while the authorities have implemented their fiscal program successfully so far, achieving the ambitious fiscal targets set for the next several years will require steadfast and decisive implementation. In particular, strong efforts will be needed to withstand the likely intensification of expenditure pressures as the next election approaches. 65. Fiscal adjustment alone will not be enough to address Seychelles’s debt problem. A large external financing gap remains to be filled. There is a need for a comprehensive economic reform and liberalization program, including privatization and improvements in debt management. 66. A basic problem with the authorities’ program is that it delays the implementation of key economic liberalization measures until more foreign exchange becomes available. However, in the absence of key liberalization measures, the supply of foreign exchange is unlikely to increase significantly, except for high cost collateralized borrowings. This could leave a large financing gap for 2004 which, if unfilled, would result in a further contraction of economic activity. 67. In the staffs view, the official exchange rate is substantially overvalued, and private sector economic activity is already functioning on the basis of the more depreciated illegal parallel market exchange rate. As a result, restoring macroeconomic balance through the unification of the exchange rate should have only a limited adverse impact on economic growth. Introducing a market-clearing exchange rate now-through an up-front devaluation followed by the introduction of a system to guide policy adjustments- should promote medium-term growth by allowing for the elimination of the extremely burdensome foreign exchange allocation system and related controls, attracting private capital flows, and making the tourism industry more competitive. 68. Economic liberalization is essential to putting the economy on a path of sustained growth without relying on a buildup of debt that increases economic vulnerability. At present, investment by foreigners and residents is hampered by direct state participation in commercial business activities and invasive government regulation. The Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-21- elimination of the extensive privileges given to the Seychelles Marketing Board, for example, would send a strong signal to markets of the government’s commitment to reform. The removal of government regulations like the foreign exchange allocation system, import permit requirements, and price controls would encourage private sector investment and growth. In addition, selling remaining public sector investments in the hotel industry should generate financial resources, including from abroad, that could be used to reduce government 69. debt and rebuild foreign exchange reserves. More generally, the staff recommends that the authorities work together with international institutions in designing a broad-based privatization strategy and its expeditious implementation. 70. Substantial efforts are required to normalize relations with external creditors. In recent years, external arrears, including to official multilateral and bilateral creditors, have risen markedly, and private creditors now demand elaborate collateralization techniques to provide limited new fmancing. Prompt agreement should be reached with the World Bank and the African Development Bank on a plan to clear the arrears with these institutions, Relations with private creditors should be improved, and the authorities should stop relying on collateralized sources of fmance which limit Seychelles’s flexibility to respond to external shocks and have severely complicated the task of normalizing relations with official creditors. In addition, conditions should be developed that would allow much more reliance on non-debt creating capital flows, including foreign direct investment. 71. While the fiscal policies included in the authorities’ program are certainly ambitious, the structural reform program represents only a start, and much remains to be done. Successful implementation of the structural measures will demonstrate the authorities’ resolve and capacity to tackle the difIicult challenges facing Seychelles. However, further reforms and a track record would be needed to pave the way for financial support from the Fund. The staff stands ready to work together with the authorities in developing a carefully sequenced timetable for economic liberalization that would put the economy on a sustainable path. 72. All in all, in the staff’s view, the authorities’ program has substantial risk, both regarding implementation and economic impact. Besides the unfilled financing gap discussed above, the extent of the authorities’ commitment to economic liberalization remains to be demonstrated, and the large fiscal adjustment planned by the authorities may mean that a restoration of growth is further away than they expected. Also, even under an optimistic prediction of the effects of the fiscal adjustment, the public sector debt stock will remain high for many years, leaving Seychelles very vulnerable to external shocks. 73. The provision of reliable economic and financial data is essential for effective macroeconomic management, program monitoring, and Fund surveillance. In particular, the authorities need to improve the national accounts, fiscal, and foreign trade and external debt statistics. It would be important to devote adequate resources for this purpose. 74. Seychelles maintains restrictions on payments and transfers for current international transactions subject to approval by the Fund under Article VIII, Sections Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 22 - 2(a), 3, and 4. These include restrictions on the transfer of profits and dividends, a foreign exchange allocation system, and external payments arrears. In the absence of a clear timetable for the removal of these restrictions, the staff does not recommend their approval and urges their speedy elimination. 75. It is recommended that the next Article IV consultation with Seychelles be held on the standard 12-month cycle. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 23 - z P 2 i d 5 4 + 2 E ;; m .c, 2 : i% ; 0 lzz :.:.:.:.:. ,.,.. :.:.:.:.: ,..:.:.:.:.:.: . . . . . . . . ; :::::::::: i:;:;:;:;: . . . . . . . . 4 ~:::::::::::::;:$;:; .:::::::::>:::::::::: ..:.:.:.:...: . . . . . . . . . . 8 :~~.$$?.;g . . . ..C... :...,I 0 ::::::::::.:.:.: 9 ::::::::: j::::: Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 24 - Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 25 - ,I / * ff c l l . I I . / / Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 26 - , I I I I , I I , I I I I I 1 I I I 5 I s 5 ' CL z ' -zr 6 l-1 I , I I \ : ’ I i I I i c r-4 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 27 - \ I I I I s N - c Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 28 - Figure 6. Seychelles: Debt Ratios and Gross External Financing Need, 2002-08 140 110 80 50 20 500 400 300 200 100 0 External Debt-to-GDP Ratio (In percent) I I I -Baseline (Authorities’ scenario) -Baseline (Authorities’ scenario) --- --- Alternative scenario, devaluation in 2004 Alternative scenario, devaluation in 2004 ~ Alternative scenario, no-new-money in 2004 ~ Alternative scenario, no-new-money in 2004 I I - Second-most-extreme stress test - -Most extreme stress test Gross External Financing Need l/ (In millions of U.S. dollars) -Baseline (Authorities’ scenario) 1-1 Alternative scenario, devaluation in 2004 ~ Alternative scenario, no-new-money in 2004 I I - Second-most-extreme stress test - -Most extreme stress test ,I - - I - l \ 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 Source: IMF staff calculations and projections for 2003 to 2008. I/ Defined as non-interest current account plus debt amortization payments due. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 29 - Figure 6 (continued). Seychelles: Debt Ratios and Gross External Financing Need, 2002-08 230 Debt-to-GDP Ratio (In percent) 200 - 170 - 140 - 110 - x0 - 50 - -Baseline (Authorities’ scenario) --- Alternative scenario, devaluation in 2004 ~ Alternative scenario, no-new-money in 2004 - I - Second-most-extreme stress test -----Most extreme stress test 20 1 I I , I I 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 Source: IMF staff calculations and projections for 2003 to 2008. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 30 - Table 1. Seychelles: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 2000-04 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 Est. Proj. Proj. (Annual percentage change, unless otherwise indicated) National income and prices Nominal GDP (in millions of Seychelles rupees) 3,544 3,618 3,830 3,889 Real GDP 4.8 -2.2 0.3 -5.1 GDP deflator (I 986= 100) 1.5 4.4 5.5 7.0 Retail price index I/ 6.2 6.0 0.2 7.0 (Annual change in percent of beginning-of-period broad money, unless otherwise indicated) Money and credit Domestic credit Net claims on government Net claims on the rest of the economy Broad money Velocity (GDP/a&rage M2) Interest rate (six-month deposits; weighted average) Savings and investment Gross national savings Ofwhich : government savings 21 Gross investment Of which : government investment Private sector balance Government budget Total revenue, excluding grants Identified expenditure and net lending Current expenditure Capital expenditure and net lending Overall balance, including grants Total public debt 31 o/w public domestic debt o/w public external debt External sector Current account balance after official transfers 41 -7.2 -4.0 -16.3 -2.8 0.7 13.8 12.6 16.6 12.5 10.5 13.7 1.3 2.1 2.8 8.2 Il.4 13.1 1.11 1.04 0.98 5.0 5.2 5.2 22.1 30.2 12.0 16.2 19.0 -2.5 -4.3 -8.2 -1.4 8.4 29.3 34.3 28.3 19.0 18.3 13.7 5.8 9.4 2.3 I.6 6.7 6.5 2.4 0.7 -6.2 39.4 37.8 39.9 43.9 47.4 54.2 48.7 58.7 47.5 40.6 42.0 42. I 48. i 45.2 3910 12.2 6.6 10.5 2.3 1.6 -13.9 -10.5 -18.7 -3.5 6.8 154.3 177.4 199.7 192.7 168.5 101.8 102.9 119.4 115.3 88.4 52.4 74.5 80.3 77.4 80.0 (In percent of GDP) -14.5 -16.4 1.9 -9.4 , 0.98 . . . (In millions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise indicated) Overall external balance Gross official reserves (end of year) In weeks of imports, c.i.f. Exchange rate Seychelles rupees per US$I (end of period) Seychelles rupees per US$ I (period average) -28.3 -35.4 10.5 -51.6 43.2 36.6 69.7 69.7 6.8 3.8 9.6 10.4 6.27 5.75 5.06 5.50 5.71 5.86 5.49 5.40 4,002 -2.0 5.0 5.0 -27.8 -28.4 0.6 -12.0 I.13 . . . -49.4 129.7 21.0 . . . . . . Sources: Ckntral Bank of Seychelles; Ministry of Finance; and staff estimates and projections. 11 Annual averages. The official retail price index is believed to understate substantially the rate of inflation because the consumption basket cohtains a large proportion of commodities whose prices are subject to price controls. 2/ Govemmtnt expendikres for 2000-04 include net lending expenditures, therefore for those years government savings - government investment balance does not equal overall fiscal balance including grants. 31 Including arrears. 4/ Excluding long-term lease of aircraft (equivalent to 18 percent of GDP) in 200 1. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-31- Table 2. Seychelles: Expenditure on Gross Domestic Product, 2000-04 (In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated) 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 Est. Proj. Proj. Consumption 74.9 72.8 78.0 79.2 74.9 Public 32.0 31.8 36.7 35.1 30.3 Private l/ 42.9 41 .o 41.4 44.1 44.7 Investment 29.3 34.3 28.3 19.0 18.3 Public 13.7 5.8 9.4 2.3 1.6 Private 15.7 28.4 18.9 16.8 16.8 Total expenditure 104.2 107.1 106.3 98.2 93.3 Exports minus imports Statistical discrepancies 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Gross domestic product at market prices 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 Net factor income from abroad -5.1 -2.0 -10.4 -5.0 -6.2 Gross national product at market prices 94.9 98.0 89.6 95.0 93.8 Transfers 18.4 17.9 17.9 17.9 17.9 Memorandum items: Current account balance 2/ Fiscal deficit Private balance (residual) Private consumption and investment Real GDP growth rate (percentage change) Change in GDP deflator (percentage change) 4.8 1.5 -2.2 4.4 Real private consumption and investment (percentage change) -12.6 15.9 Sources: Management and Information Systems Division (MISD); and staff estimates and projections. -4.2 -7.1 -6.3 1.8 6.7 -7.2 -4.0 -16.3 -2.8 0.7 -13.9 -10.5 -18.7 -3.5 6.8 6.7 6.5 2.4 0.7 -6.2 58.6 69.4 60.3 60.8 61.4 0.3 5.5 -5.1 7.0 -2.0 5.0 -12.9 -4.2 -1.0 l/ Calculated as the residual. 2/ The 2001 figure is adjusted to remove the effect of the long-term lease of aircraft. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 32 - Table 3. Seychelles: Consolidated Government Operations, 2000-04 li 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 Proj. Proj. Total revenue and grants Total revenue TaX Ofwhich: goods and services tax (GST) Nontax External grants 1,428.g 1,382.0 1,531.l 1,710.5 1,897.5 1,397.o 1,368.0 1,529.g 1.705.4 1,896.5 1,116.l 1,112.7 1.202.4 1.307.0 1.507.2 262.0 284.9 280.5 425.0 654.8 280.9 255.3 327.3 398.4 389.3 31.8 14.0 1.4 5.1 1.0 Expenditure and net lending 1.920.5 1,763.5 2,247.3 1,848.3 1,623.5 Current expenditure 1,486.9 1.524.7 1,843.5 1.758.4 1,560.2 Of which : wages and salaries 502.5 513.8 525.2 545.4 542.6 interest payments due 261.9 269.7 325.8 296.1 222.1 Foreign interest 49.2 45.9 45.8 38.7 31.4 Domestic interest (incl. through CBS) 212.7 223.8 280.0 257.4 190.8 Capital expenditure 484.9 211.5 360.7 88.8 62.5 Net lending -51.4 27.3 43.1 1.1 0.8 Overall balance, accrual basis (Governmenf Finance .Vafi.Hics) -491.7 -381.5 -716.1 -137.8 274.0 Arrears accumulation 0.0 0.0 0.0 22.7 3.3 Overall balance, cash basis (GF.5) -491.7 -381.5 -716.1 -115.1 277.3 Financing Foreign financing (cash basis, net) Foreign fmancing (accrual basis, net) Grossborrowing Amortization Change in arrears Rescheduling of debt service Domestic financing, net 21 CBS CBS advance 491.7 381.5 279.1 151.7 183.6 -13.5 216.6 1.1 -33.0 -14.6 95.5 165.2 0.0 0.0 395.8 384.2 103.3 77.7 Cash balance movements Commercial banks Commercial bank securities Commercial bank advance Nonbank purchase (sale) of securities Sales of fored assets and privatization receipts Other 31 278.0 14.4 21.1 -204.3 270.3 36.2 12.0 -166.3 716.1 115.1 -277.3 671.4 30.7 610.3 585.6 43.3 675.2 1,10x.5 64.2 781.5 -522.9 -107.5 -106.4 85.7 74.0 -113.3 0.0 0.0 48.5 708.0 -334.8 -1,073.5 682.8 -526.3 -802.8 619.7 -287.3 -670.8 63.1 -206.0 0.0 80.8 -230.1 -270.7 -132.8 566.3 127.7 213.6 -796.4 -398.4 -55.6 421.6 0.0 73.5 65.5 188.0 -736.8 353.8 -2.2 (In percent of GDP) Total revenue and grants Total revenue TaX Of which : goods and services tax (GST) NOntaX External grants Expenditure and net lending Current expenditure Of which : wages and salaries interest Capital expenditure Net lending 40.3 38.2 40.0 44.0 47.4 39.4 37.8 39.9 43.9 47.4 31.5 30.8 31.4 33.6 37.7 7.4 7.9 7.3 10.9 16.4 7.9 7.1 8.5 10.2 9.7 0.9 0.4 0.0 0. I 0.0 54.2 48.7 58.7 47.5 40.6 42.0 42.1 48.1 45.2 39.0 14.2 14.2 13.7 14.0 13.6 7.4 7.5 8.5 7.6 5.6 13.7 5.8 9.4 2.3 1.6 -1.4 0.8 1.1 0.0 0.0 Overall balance, accrual basis (GFS) -13.9 -10.5 -18.7 -3.5 6.8 Arrears (net; reduction -) 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.6 0.1 Overall balance, cash basis (GFS) -13.9 -10.5 -18.7 -3.0 6.9 Primary surplus, accrual basis (GF.S) -6.5 -3.1 -10.2 4.1 12.4 Other fmancing 31 -5.8 Public domestic debt 101.8 Public external debt 52.4 -4.6 102.9 74.5 -19.2 9.1 -0.1 119.4 115.1 88.4 80.3 77.4 80.0 (In millions of Seychelles rupees) Sources: Ministry of Finance; Socia! Security Fund; Central Bank of Seychelles (CBS); and staff estimates and projections. I/ Includes the central government and the social security system. 2/ Excluding sales of fured assets and privitization receipts. 3/ This represents the difference between identified budget revenues and expenditures, and the fmancing of the consolidated budget. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public33 - Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 36- Table 6. Seychelles: Balance of Payments, 2000-04 (In millions of U.S. dollars) 2000 PrlYJ. 200 1 PKW. 2002 PKOV. 2003 Proj. 2004 Proj. Current account -44.8 -145.4 -113.9 -20.3 5.1 Trade balance -109.4 -198.6 -139.4 -92.4 -65.8 Credit 194.8 216.6 236.3 251.4 256.0 Debit -304.1 -415.1 -375.1 -349.8 -321.8 Services 93.1 67.2 95.1 105.2 114.7 Credit 269.3 282.0 306.1 303.1 309.1 Ofwhich : tourism income through commercial banks 105.0 110.8 128.7 127.5 134.0 Debit -175.6 -214.7 -211.0 -198.0 -194.4 Income, net -31.6 -17.4 -72.4 -35.9 -44.8 Credit 10.9 9.2 7.4 9.5 9.3 Ojwhich: compensation of employees 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 Ojwhich: investment income 10.7 9.1 1.2 9.3 9.1 Debit -42.5 -26.7 -79.8 -45.4 -54.1 O/which: compensation of employees -3.4 -3.1 -3.4 -3.1 -3.0 Ofwhich: investment income -39.1 -23.6 -76.4 -42.3 -51.1 scheduled interest payments -33.0 -19.1 -22.7 -17.8 -16.2 profit repatriations l! -6.1 -4.5 -45.3 -20.0 -25.0 Current transfers 2.6 3.3 2.8 2.8 1.0 General government, net 8.7 9.1 12.8 11.8 9.6 Credit 8.8 9.5 12.9 12.0 9.8 Debit -0.1 -0.4 -0.2 -0.2 -0.2 Other sectors, net -6.1 -5.8 -10.0 -9.0 -8.6 Capital and financial account 84.4 98.9 140.0 -31.4 -54.4 Capital account 8.8 9.4 5.0 5.0 5.0 Financial account 75.6 89.5 135.0 -36.4 -59.4 Direct investment, net 13.8 21.6 37.6 34.0 32.0 Abroad -10.5 -11.1 -8.7 -8.0 -8.0 In Seychelles 24.3 32.1 46.3 42.0 40.0 Portfolio investment, net 0.9 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 Other investment 60.8 66.9 96.4 -71.4 -92.5 Assets -14.9 -8.8 -9.8 -9.0 -10.0 Liabilities 75.1 75.7 106.2 -62.4 -82.5 Central Bank of Seychelles, net 41.8 8.5 79.1 -39.8 -54.1 Government and government guaranteed borrowing, net 24.4 -31.8 -0.1 -16.8 -20.0 Disbursements 38.0 0.1 11.8 11.9 1.6 Amortization -13.6 -31.9 -11.9 -28.7 -27.6 Parastatal loans, net 3.3 -16.5 38.0 2.0 0.0 Disbursements 19.4 1.0 43.2 2.0 0.0 Amortization 16.1 18.0 -5.2 0.0 0.0 Banks, net 1.6 -2.3 -5.1 -4.8 -4.8 Private sector, net -1.5 -2.1 -2.5 -2.5 -2.5 Other sectors. net 0.0 0.2 0.0 -0.5 -0.5 Net errors and omissions -67.9 11.2 -15.6 0.0 0.0 Overall balance -28.3 -35.4 10.5 -51.6 -49.4 Financial Requirement Identified Financing Change in gross international reserves (- equals an increase of assets) Effect of possible debt rescheduling (+ means debt relief) Change in arrears (+ means accumulation) 21 28.3 35.4 -10.5 51.6 49.4 28.3 35.4 -10.5 51.6 -99.0 11.6 7.2 -25.8 0.0 -60.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 11.6 16.7 28.2 15.3 51.6 -50.3 Remaining financing gap Sources: Central Bank of Seychelles; and Fund staff estimates and projections. l/ Indian Ocean Tuna profits reclassified in 2002.’ 21 Public debt and commercial payment arrears. 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 148.1 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-37- Table 7. Seychelles: External Public Debt Stock and Arrears, 1998-2002 1998 1999 2000 2001 I/ 2002 21 Government external debt (year’s end) 31 Bilateral loans Ofwhich: Paris Club Multilateral loans Commercial loans Suppliers’ credits Financial institutions Of which: collateralized Of which: BTM 4/ (In millions of U.S. dollars) 155.5 264.1 296.3 76.3 77.7 68.2 . . . . . 48.7 60.4 50.7 30.5 126.1 177.4 . . . . . . 30.5 126.1 177.4 . . . . . 327.4 109.9 . . . 61.2 156.4 . . 156.4 45.1 25.0 560.5 176.4 96.4 100.7 283.4 . . 283.4 151.5 138.5 Of which: public sector Arrears (year’s end) . 15.4 26.7 53.9 81.5 Bilateral . . 14.7 20.5 33.0 53.2 Paris Club . . . . 30.7 49.8 Non-Paris Club . . . . . . . 2.3 3.4 Multilateral . . . 0.3 5.7 14.7 21.9 Of which: Afi-ican Development Bank . . . . . . . . . 13.1 20.0 Commercial . . . 0.4 0.5 6.2 6.4 (In percent) Share in total debt stock 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 Bilateral loans 49.1 29.4 23.0 33.5 31.5 Multilateral loans 31.3 22.9 17.1 18.7 Commercial loans 19.6 47.7 59.9 47.8 50.6 Total external debt-to-GDP ratio 31 Of wh ich: arrears Debt service as a percent of: Exports of goods’and services Same less reexports and bunker sales 25.6 42.4 49.8 52.1 80.3 . . . . . . . . . . . 10.8 6.0 6.4 10.5 13.4 20.7 6.6 7.0 12.4 15.3 23.0 Sources: Ministry of Finance; Central Bank of Seychelles; and World Bank and Fund staff estimates. l/ From 2001 on, includes both central government and all parastatal debt 2/ A comprehensive database on public external debt stocks has only been in place since 2000. A large share of the implied flows between 2001 and 2002 represents data deficiencies stemming from recording problems. Based on the more reliable flow data for 2002, the net increase in the debt stock is US$ll6 million. Net lending during 2002, by creditor, is as follows: US$2.9 million from bilaterals, US$l million from multilaterals, and US$112 million from commercial creditors. 3/ Calculated including arrears. Numbers prior to 2002 may not match the data in other tables due to difference in sources of data. 4/ The 2002 Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi (BTM) loan replaced two smaller collateralized loans: a previous BTM loan and a loan from Citibank. , Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 38 - Table 8. Seychelles: Scheduled External Public Debt Service, by Major Creditor Group, 2002-04 l/ 2002 2003 2004 Scheduled AChXl Scheduled Actual (Sept 03) Multilateral 1.2 0.9 7.0 0.2 6.4 Of which: African Development Bank 5.0 0.0 5.6 0.0 4.2 World Bank 0.5 0.0 0.5 0.1 0.5 Arab Bank for Economic Development in A!Yica 0.2 0.5 0.2 0.1 0.4 European Investment Bank 0.1 0.Q 0.2 0.0 0.4 Bilateral 9.2 0.9 15.8 0.4 13.8 Paris Club Creditors . 0.4 10.1 0.3 5.9 Non-Paris Club creditors 0.5 5.6 0.1 7.9 Commercial: 41.8 112.3 64.5 37.4 75.8 of which: Collateralized 2/ . . . . 47.4 33.1 61.8 Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi 2/ 14.9 14.9 43.6 30.7 58.2 Total debt-service payments 3/ 58.2 114.1 87.3 38.0 95.9 Memorandum items: Amortization Multilateral Bilateral Commercial 40.9 95.3 69.2 32.4 82.2 5.1 0.4 5.1 0.1 4.1 7.1 0.6 11.0 0.3 11.7 28.7 94.3 53.0 32.0 65.8 Interest Multilateral Bilateral Commercial Sources: Ministry of Finance and staff estimates. 17.3 18.8 18.1 5.6 13.7 2.1 0.4 1.9 0.1 1.7 2.1 0.3 4.8 0.1 2.1 13.2 18.1 11.5 5.4 9.9 l/ Public debt is defined as general government debt plus parastatal debt guaranteed by the government. Directly serviced parastatal debt is included. 2/ Collateralized with receipts of foreign exchange earners. In 2004, the payments could be higher by about UZX3.5 million, due to new collaterization of an existing loan in mid-2003. 3/Actual payments made in 2002 reflect the effect of retiring existing commercial loans with part of the proceeds from new borrowing. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 39 - Table 9. Seychelles: Medium-Term Outlook, Authorities’ Scenario, 2002-08 l/ 2002 Est. 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 Proj. Proj. Proj Proj Proj. Proj, (Annual percentage change, unless otherwise stated) 1 National income and prices Nominal GDP (in millions of Seychelles rupees) Real GDP GDP deflator (1986=100) Retail price index 2/ Savings and investment Gross national savings Ofwhich : government savings 31 Gross investment Ofwhich : government investment Private sector balance Government budget 4/ Total revenue, excluding grants Identified expenditure and net lending Current expenditure Capital expenditure and net lending Primary balance Overall balance, including grants Net foreign financing Gross borrowing Repayments Net domestic financing Ofwhich: privatization External sector Current account balance after official transfers Debt Total public debt 5/ Public domestic debt Public external debt 5/ Real interest rate 61 Overall external balance Gross official nonpledged reserves (end of year) In weeks of imports, c.i.f. Exchange rate Real exchange rate index (2002=100) 71 3,830 3,889 0.3 -5.1 5.5 7.0 0.2 7.0 12.0 16.2 19.0 21.5 24.6 26.8 21.7 -8.2 -1.4 8.4 11.1 10.1 9.5 8.5 28.3 19.0 18.3 20.3 21.2 23.2 24.1 9.4 2.3 1.6 1.5 1.4 2.4 2.2 2.4 0.7 -6.2 -8.5 -5.4 -3.6 -2.1 39.9 43.9 47.4 48.3 45.1 42.7 39.9 58.7 47.5 40.6 38.6 36.3 35.5 33.6 48.1 45.2 39.0 37.2 35.0 33.2 31.4 10.5 2.3 1.6 1.5 1.4 2.4 2.2 -10.2 4.1 12.4 15.1 13.2 10.8 9.5 -18.7 -3.5 6.8 9.7 8.8 1.2 6.3 15.3 -1.1 16.9 -1.1 -3.5 -3.6 -3.3 28.9 1.7 19.5 3.6 0.7 0.0 0.0 -13.7 -2.8 -2.7 -4.7 -4.2 -3.6 -3.3 20.4 -6.9 -22.1 -10.8 -4.4 -2.0 -1.6 1.9 1.7 4.7 1.6 1.5 0.3 0.2 -16.3 -2.8 0.7 1.2 3.4 3.6 3.6 199.7 192.7 168.5 145.3 124.4 lQS.0 93.6 119.4 115.3 88.4 72.9 62.8 56.9 51.3 80.3 77.4 80.0 72.4 61.7 51.1 42.2 -0.4 -2.9 -2.0 -0.6 0.2 0.2 0.2 10.5 -51.6 -49.4 -29.4 3.3 13.1 26.2 6.0 6.0 66.0 66.0 66.0 68.1 83.4 0.7 0.8 9.1 8.7 8.6 8.6 10.1 100.0 4,002 4,203 -2.0 1.0 5.0 4.0 5.0 4.0 (In percent of GDP) 4,416 4,685 5,019 2.0 3.0 4.0 3.0 3.0 3.0 3.0 3.0 3.0 (In millions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise indicated) 88.7 90.2 94.8 96.0 97.1 98.2 Sources: Central Bank of Seychelles; Ministry of Finance; and staff estimates and projections. l/ Staff estimates based on the authorities’ projections and assuming the full implementation of their intended policies. 2/ Annual averages, The official retail price index is believed to understate substantially the rate of inflation because the consumption basket contains a large proportion of commodities whose prices are subject to price controls. 3/ Government expenditures for 2000-04 include net lending expenditures, therefore for those years government savings - government investment does not equal overall fiscal balance including grants. 4/ Government Finance Statistics definition, accrual basis. 5/ Including’arrdars. 61 As derived from the debt sustainability analysis. The nominal interest rate is the implicit interest rate from debt interest payments. 71 Bilateral vis-a-vis the euro, since 90 percent of exports go to the euro area. Increase denotes appreciation. The real depreciation in 2003 is due to a nominal depreciation of the SR vis-a-vis the euro. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 40 - Table 10. Seychelles: Medium-Term Outlook, No-New-Money Scenario, 2002-08 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 Est. Proj. Proj. Proj. Proj. Proj Proj (Annual percentage change, unless otherwise stated) Nattonal income and prices Nominal GDP (in milhons of Seychelles rupees) Real GDP GDP deflator (19X6=100) Retail price index I/ 3,830 0.3 5.5 0.2 Savings and investment Gross national savings Of which : government savings 21 Gross investment Of which : government investment Private sector balance 12.0 16.2 23.8 24.5 25.6 26.9 26.9 -8.2 -1.4 2.7 8.2 8.4 7.8 7.5 28.3 19.0 18.4 19.4 21.3 24.0 24.4 9.4 2.3 I.6 1.6 I.5 2.7 3.1 2.4 0.7 4.3 -1.5 -2.7 -2.3 -1.9 Government budget 31 Total revenue, excluding grants Identified expenditure and net lending Current expenditure Capital expenditure and net lending Primary balance Overall balance, m&ding grants 39.9 43.9 45. I 49.4 48.6 47.4 46.7 58.7 47.5 44.0 42.8 41.7 42.3 42.4 48. I 45.2 42.4 41.3 40.2 39.6 39.3 10.5 2.3 1.6 1.6 I.5 2.7 3.1 -10.2 4.1 9.0 14.2 13.8 II.4 10.3 -18.7 -3.5 I.1 6.6 6.9 5.1 4.4 Net foreign financing 15.3 -1.1 -1.6 -0.7 -2.5 -2.0 -1.8 Gross borrowing 28.9 1.7 I.1 2.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 Repayments -13.7 -2.8 -2.7 -2.7 -2.5 -2.0 -1.X Net domestic financing 20.4 -6.1 -1.6 -6.8 -3.6 -1.2 1.6 Ofwhich: privatization 1.9 1.7 4.8 I.7 1.7 0.3 0.3 External sector Current account balance aRer official transfers -16.3 -2.8 5.5 5.1 4.2 2.9 2.5 Debt Total public debt 41 Public domestic debt Public external debt 41 Real interest rate 51 199.7 193.5 182.4 164.8 150.0 141.6 137.3 119.4 116.1 111.6 102.1 94. I 90.8 90.2 80.3 77.4 70.8 62.7 55.9 50.9 47.0 -0.4 -2.9 0.1 1.4 2.4 2.5 2.5 Overall external balance Gross official nonpledged reserves (end of year) In weeks of imports, c.i.f. Exchange rate Real exchange rate index (2002-100) 61 10.5 6.0 0.7 100.0 3,883 3,959 -4.0 -1.0 4.0 3.0 4.0 3.0 (In percent of GDP) 4.038 4,119 0.0 2.0 2.0 (In millions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise indicated) -51.6 -17.0 -5.7 -3.8 -3.2 7.3 6.0 6.0 6.0 6.0 6.0 11.3 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 I.4 88.7 89.3 93.0 93.2 93.4 93.6 0.0 2.0 2.0 4,202 0.0 2.0 2.0 Sources: Central Bank of Seychelles; Ministry of Finance; and staff estimates and projections. I/ Annual averages. The official retail price index is believed to understate substantially the rate of inflatton because the consumption basket contains a large proportion of commodities whose prices are subject to price controls. 2/ Government expenditures for 2000-04 include net lendmg expenditures, therefore for those years government savings government investment does not equal overall fiscal balance including grants. 31 Governmenr Finance Sfatisfics definition, accrual basis. 4/ Including arrears 51 As derived from the debt sustainability analysis. The nominal interest rate is the implicit interest rate from debt interest payments. 6/ Bilateral viw-vis the euro, since 90 percent of exports go to the euro area. Increase denotes appreciation. The real depreciation in 2003 is due to a nominal depreciation of the SR vts-&vis the euro. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4l- Table 1 I. Seychelles: Medium Term Outlook, Devaluation Scenario, 2002-08 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 Est. hJ. Proj. PrOJ. Proj. Proj Proj. National income and prwxs Nominal GDP (in millions of Seychelles rupees) Real GDP GDP deflator (19X6=100) Retad price index I/ Savings and investment Gross national sawngs Of which : government savmgs 2/ Gross investment Of which : government investment Private sector balance 12.0 16.2 28.6 26.0 29.2 28.0 28.4 -8.2 -1.4 -11.4 -2.6 -0.5 0.4 0.5 28.3 19.0 18.8 20.3 23.0 22.3 23.3 9.4 2.3 2.0 0.4 I.1 0.4 0.4 2.4 0.7 23. I 8.8 7.9 5.8 4.9 Government budget 31 Total revenue, excluding grants Identified expenditure and net lending Current expenditure Capital expenditure and net lending Primary balance Overall balance, including grants 39.9 43.9 40.8 42.4 40. I 38.6 37.0 58.7 47.5 54.2 45.4 41.7 38.6 36.9 48.1 45.2 52.2 45.0 40.6 38.2 36.5 10.5 2.3 2.0 0.4 I.1 0.4 0.4 -10.2 4.1 3.9 8.3 6.6 7.5 7.2 -18.7 -3.5 -13.3 -3.0 -1.6 0.0 0.1 Net foreign financing 15.3 -1.1 3.8 Gross borrowing 28.9 1.7 7. I Repayments -13.7 -2.8 -3.3 Net domestic financing 20.4 -6.9 Il.8 Of which: prtvatizatton 1.9 1.7 4.1 External sector Current account balance after official transfers -16.3 -2.8 9.8 Debt Total public debt 4/ Public domestic debt Public external debt 41 Real interest rate 5/ Overall external balance Gross official nonpledged reserves (end of year) In weeks of imports, c.i.f. Exchange rate Real exchange rate index (2002= 100) 71 3,830 3,889 0.3 -5.1 5.5 7.0 0.2 7.0 199.7 192.7 212.9 119.4 115.3 111.8 80.3 77.4 101.1 -0.4 -2.9 -14.3 10.5 -51.6 16.2 24.0 28.0 29.0 36.0 6.0 6.0 6.0 28.0 48.0 68.0 88.0 0.7 0.8 0.9 4.0 6.4 8.6 10.5 100 88.7 77.1 62.7 64.7 65.4 66.2 (Annual percentage change, unless othawise stated) 4,617 5,09 I -5.0 5.0 25.0 5.0 30.0 5.0 (In percent of GDP) 1.3 5.3 -4.1 -1.5 1.3 5.7 177.4 94.0 83.4 0.9 5,588 6,013 6,442 4.5 4.5 4.0 5.0 3.0 3.0 5.0 3.0 3.0 -2.4 -2.7 -2.3 1.0 0.0 0.0 -3.4 -2.7 -2.3 4.6 4.4 3.7 1.2 0.5 0.5 6.3 5.7 5.1 156.3 142.0 129.7 89.0 86.7 84.2 67.3 55.3 45.5 0.1 2.3 2.4 (In millions of U.S. dollars, unless othewise indicated) Sources: Central Bank of Seychelles; Mintstry of Finance; and staff estimates and projections I/ Annual averages. The official retail price index is believed to understate substanttally the rate of mflatton because the consumption basket contains a large proportion of commodities whose prices are subject to price controls. 21 Government expenditures for 2000.04 include net lending expenditures, therefore for those years government savings - government investment does not equal overall fiscal balance including grants. 31 Governmenr Finance Sfafislics definitton, accrual basis. 41 Including arrears. 51 As derived from the debt sustamabtltty analysis. The nominal interest rate LS the implicit interest rate from debt mterest payments. 61 Bilateral vis-8-vis the euro, since 90 percent of exports go to the euro area. Increase denotes appreclatlon. The real depreciatton in 2003 is due to a nominal depreciation of the SR VW8.vis the euro. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 42 - Table 12. Seychelles: Comparison of Medium-Term Outlook, Illustrative Scenarios, 2002-08 2002 2003 Est. Proj 2004 Proj 2005 Proj 2006 Proj 2007 Proj 2008 Proj. (Annual percentage change) 4.0 0.0 4.0 Real growth Authorities’ scenario 1/ 0.3 -5.1 No-new-money scenario 0.3 -5.1 Devaluation scenario 0.3 -5.1 -2.0 1.0 -4.0 -1.0 -5.0 5.0 Merchandise imports, in millions of U.S. dollars Authorities’ scenario li -9.7 -6.9 -8.0 3.8 2.0 3.0 4.0 No-new-money scenario -9.7 -6.9 -10.0 2.0 2.0 3.6 3.6 Devaluation scenario -9.7 -6.9 -17.0 7.0 6.8 5.7 5.9 (In millions of U.S. dollars) Overall balance of payments Authorities’ scenario l/ 10.5 -51.6 -49.4 -29.4 3.3 13.1 26.2 No-new-money scenario 10.5 -51.6 -17.0 -5.7 -3.8 -3.2 7.3 Devaluation scenario 10.5 -51.6 16.2 24.0 28.0 29.0 36.0 (Percent of GDP) Overall fiscal balance, GFS, accrual basis Authorities’ scenario 1/ -18.7 -3.5 6.8 9.7 8.8 7.2 6.3 No-new-money scenario -18.7 -3.5 1.1 6.6 6.9 5.1 4.4 Devaluation scenario -18.7 -3.5 -13.3 -3.0 -1.6 0.0 0.1 Total public debt Authorities’ scenario l! 199.7 192.7 168.5 145.3 124.4 108.0 93.6 No-new-money scenario 199.7 193.5 182.4 164.8 150.0 141.6 137.3 Devaluation scenario 199.7 192.7 212.9 177.4 156.3 142.0 129.7 Public domestic debt Authorities’ scenario I/ 119.4 115.3 88.4 72.9 62.8 56.9 51.3 No-new-money scenario 119.4 116.1 111.6 102.1 94.1 90.8 90.2 Devaluation scenario 119.4 115.3 111.8 94.0 89.0 86.7 84.2 Public external debt Authorities’ scenario l/ 80.3 77.4 80.0 72.4 61.7 51.1 42.2 No-new-money scenario 80.3 77.4 70.8 62.7 55.9 50.9 47.0 Devaluation scenario 80.3 77.4 101.1 83.4 67.3 55.3 45.5 (Index, 2002=100) Real Exchange Rate 21 Authorities’ scenario I/ 100.0 88.7 90.2 94.8 96.0 97.1 98.2 No-new-money scenario 100.0 88.7 89.3 93.0 93.2 93.4 93.6 Devaluation scenario 100.0 88.7 77.1 62.7 64.7 65.4 66.2 l/ Staff estimates based on the authorities’ projections and assuming the full implementation of their intended policies. 2/ Bilateral vis-a-vis the euro area (exports to the euro area represent 90 percent of total exports). An increase denotes an appreciation. The real depreciation in 2003 is due to a nominal depreciation of the SR vis-a-vis the euro. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 43 - Table 13. Seychelles: Public Secfor Debt Sustainability Framework, 2001-08 (In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated) Actual ProjectIons 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 I. Baseline (Authorltlrr’ Scenario) Projections l! 192.7 71.4 168.5 67.5 145.3 49.4 124.4 42.7 108.0 93.6 34.3 27.7 I Public sector debt 21 o/w foreignsurrency denominated 177.4 199.7 67.9 83.8 2 Change in public sector debt 23. I 22.3 3 Identified debt-creating flows (4+7+12) 21.7 -1.6 4 Primary deficit 3.1 10.2 5 Revenue and grants 38.2 40.0 6 Primary (noninterest) expenditure 41.3 50.2 7 Automatic debt dynamics 31 -0.7 -10.2 8 Contribution from interest rate/growth differential 4/ 4.3 -1.3 9 Of which contribution from real interest rate 1.0 -0.8 10 Of which contribution from real GDP growth 3.3 -0.6 11 Contribution from exchange rate depreciation 51 -5.0 -8.9 12 Olbcr identified debt-creating flows 19.4 -1.7 13 Privatization reccipls (negative) 0.0 -1.7 14 Recognition of implicit or contingent liabilities 0.0 0.0 15 Other (specify, e.g. bank recapitalization) 19.4 0.0 16 Residual, including asset changes (Z-3) I.4 24.0 Public sector debt-to-revenue ratio 2/ 464.4 -2.2 4.9 0.5 9.0 4.4 -13.7 499.6 438. I 355.3 300.7 275.6 252.8 234.4 Key Macroeconomic and Fiscal Assumptions Real GDP growth (in percent) Average nominal interest rate on public debt (in percent) 6/ Average real interest rate (nominal rate minus change in GDP deflator, in percent) Nominal appreciation (increase in US dollar value of local currency, ln percent) Inflation rate (GDP deflator, in percent) Growth of real primary spending (deflated by GDP deflator, in percent) -7.0 -24.2 -23.2 -20.9 -16.4 -14.5 5.4 -17.0 -19.1 -17.1 -15.5 -14.6 -4.5 -12.5 -15.2 -13.3 -10.9 -9.6 44.0 47.4 48.3 4s. 1 42.7 39.9 39.5 34.9 33.2 31.9 31.8 30.3 11.6 0.2 -2.6 -2.5 -3.4 -3.9 5.0 0.2 -2.6 -2.5 -3.4 -3.9 -5.0 -3.5 -1.0 0.2 0.1 0.1 10.0 3.7 -1.6 -2.8 -3.5 -4.0 6.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 -1.7 -4.7 -1.3 -1.3 -1.2 -1.1 -1.7 -4.7 -1.3 -1.3 -1.2 -1.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 -12.4 -7.3 -4.1 -3.8 -0.9 0.2 0.3 -5.1 -2.0 1.0 2.0 3.0 4.0 5.1 4.1 3.0 3.4 3.2 3.2 3.2 -0.4 -2.9 -2.0 -0.6 0.2 0.2 0.2 13.8 -8.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 5.5 7.0 5.0 4.0 3.0 3.0 3.0 21.9 -25.4 -13.3 -4.1 -1.9 2.7 -0.8 I. Real GDP growth, real interest rate, and primary balance arc at historical averages in 2004-2008 2. Real intcrcsl rate is at historical average plus hw standard deviations in 2004 and 2005 3. Real GDP growth is al historical average minus hvo standard deviations in 2004 and 2005 4. Primary balance is at historical average minus two standard deviations in 2004 and 2005 5. Combination of 2-4 using one standard deviation shocks 6. One time 30 percent real depreciation in 2004 71 7. IO percent of GDP incrcasc in other debt-creating tlows in 2004 8. Revenue-to-GDP ratio is al historical average minus two slandard deviations in 2004-05 9. Primary Balance declines lo a surplus of 4 percent of GDP in 2005-2008 l0.XRmovcstoI2SR/Sin2004 Hlstorlcnl Statistics for Key Variables (past 10 years) Historical Slamlard AVWagC Average Deviation 2003-08 Primary deficit 4.9 2.6 -11.0 Real GDP growth (in percent) 1.5 2.6 0.5 Nominal interest rate (in percent) 61 6.2 1.9 3.4 Real inleresl rate (in percent) 1.4 2.7 -0.8 Inflation ralc (GDP deflator. in percent) 4.8 2.9 4.2 Revenue lo GDP ratio 41.1 3.1 44.6 II. Stress Tests for Public Debt Ratio 192.7 185.8 185.4 185.3 188.2 192.2 192.7 184.4 173.4 152.0 134.9 119.4 192.7 171.7 155.7 133.6 116.2 100.7 192.7 191.1 193.0 171.2 153.6 137.5 192.7 198.0 201.4 178.9 160.4 I43.5 192.7 209.8 186.1 164.5 147.0 131.1 192.7 178.5 155.1 134.1 117.4 102.6 192.7 181.0 171.1 149.8 132.7 117.3 192.7 168.5 156.5 144.7 134.6 124.8 192.7 259.3 234.7 212.3 193.5 175.9 II SlafI estimates based on the aulhorilies’ projections and assuming the full implementatKm of their intended policies. 2l Central govcmmcnt, parastatals, and central bank debt 31 Derived as [(r - x( l+g) - g + a~( l+r)]/( l+g+n+gx)) times previous period debt ratio, with r = interest rale; x = growth rate of GDP deflator; g = real GDP growth rale; a = share of foreign-cumncy denominated debt; and B = nominal exchange rate depreciation (measured by increase in local currency value of U.S. dollar). 41 The real interest rate contribution is derived from the dcnommaloi in footnote 3/as r _ n (l+g) and the real growth contribution as -g. St The exchange rate contribution is derived from the numeralor in footnote 31 as a&( ]+I). 61 Derived as nommal interest expenditure divided by previous permd debt stock. 71 Real dcprccialmn is defined as nominal depreciation (measured by percentage fall in dollar value of local currency) minus domestic inflation (based on GDP deflator). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 44 - s Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-45 - Table 15. Scycl~cllcs: Indicators of External Vulnerability, 1998 - 2003 (In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated) 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 Est. Proj. Financial indicators Total public sector debt Broad money (percent change; 12-month basis) Claims on government (net, percent change; 12-month basis) l/ Interest rate (six-month deposits; weighted average, in percent) External indicators Exports, f.o.b. (including reexports, percentage change) Imports, f.o.b. (merchandise, percentage change) Terms of trade Current account balance after official transfers 21 Gross official reserves (end of year; in millions of U.S. dollars) In weeks of imports, c.i.f. Total external debt outstanding 3/ Total scheduled external debt service 4/ Seychelles rupees per US$l (period average) 136.8 141.6 154.3 177.4 199.7 16.4 19.1 8.2 11.4 13.1 35.4 16.8 13.1 10.6 13.9 8.3 4.7 5.0 5.2 5.2 7.3 18.9 8.9 -17.6 21.1 2.5 . . . 3.7 5.26 17.7 33.7 11.2 9.1 8.9 7.4 -18.8 36.5 9.7 -6.9 -1.6 -12.4 13.3 10.7 -11.9 -17.1 -7.2 -23.1 -16.3 -2.8 29.8 43.2 36.6 69.7 69.7 4.3 6.8 3.8 9.6 10.4 285.1 333.9 513.2 560.5 557.5 4.4 9.6 17.7 21.0 15.4 5.34 5.71 5.86 5.49 5.40 192.7 -9.4 -16.5 Sources: Central Bank of Seychelles; Ministry of Finance; and staff estimates and projections li Banking system’s claims. 21 Including long-term lease of aircraft (equivalent to 18 percent of GDP) in 200 1. 31 Calculated including arrears, in millions of U.S. dollars. Numbers prior to 2002 may not match the data in other tables due to difference in the sources of data. 41 In percent of exports of goods and nonfactor services. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 46 - APPENDIX I I. II. III. IV. V. VI. Seychelles: Relations with the Fund (As of November 30,2003) Membership Status: Joined 6/30/77; Article VIII General Resources Account SDR Million Quota % Quota 8.80 100.0 Fund holdings of currency 8.80 99.99 Reserve Position in Fund 0.00 0.02 SDR Department Net cumulative allocation Holdings SDR Million 0.41 0.00 % Allocations 100.0 0.71 Outstanding Purchases and Loans: None Financial Arrangements: None Project Obligations to Fund (SDR Million: based on existing use of resources and present holdings of SDRs): Principal Charges/interest 2003 2004 0.00 0.01 Forthcoming 2005 0.01 2006 2007 0.01 0.01 Total 0.00 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 VII. Implementation of HIPC Initiative: Not Applicable VIII. Safeguards Assessments: Under the Fund’s safeguards assessment policy, the Central Bank of Seychelles is subject to an assessment with respect to any possible arrangement. The necessary documentation was requested on June 10, 2003 and received on July 11, 2003 from the authorities. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 47 - APPENDIX I IX. Exchange Rate Arrangement: The Seychelles rupee is pegged to a trade- and tourism-weighted currency basket. As of September 22, 2003, the rate was US$l = SR 5.51. The weights used are as follows: the euro (37.7 percent), the U.S. dollar (25.7 percent), the pound sterling (15.7 percent), the South African rand (10.5 percent), the Singapore dollar (7.7 per- cent), and the Japanese yen (2.7 percent). Exchange rates for various currencies are quoted on the basis of their New York closing rates for the U.S. dollar on the previous day, using the U.S. dollar rate for the Seychelles rupee as derived from the fixed parity to the currency basket. X. Article IV Consultations: Seychelles is currently on a 12-month consultation cycle. The 2002 Article IV consultation was concluded by the Executive Board on July 3 1, 2002. XI. Technical Assistance (1995- April 2003): Department Head of Mission Subject FAD Mr. Schiller Review the revenue system. STA/AFR Mr. Dublin STA Mr. Pritchett MAE Mr. Ouanes FAD MAE Mr. Sunley Ms. Brenner Assess statistical databases. Advise on government finance statistics. Advise on liberalizing the foreign exchange system; introducing indirect instruments of monetary management; strengthening prudential regulations; and restructuring the domestic debt. Review indirect taxes, including customs duties. Module 2 assessment of offshore fmancial center and measures to combat money laundering and the financing of terrorism. Date July 1995 March 1999 March 2000 June 2000 June 2000 June/July 2002 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicAPPENDIX I MFD/LEG Ms. Vadasz Advise on the redrafting of the Central Bank of Seychelles Act and the Financial Institutions Act. January/ February 2003 XII, Resident Representative None Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 49 - APPENDIX II Seychelles: Relations with the World Bank Group (As of October 1,2003) Seychelles joined the World Bank (IBRD) in 1980, the International Finance Corporation (IFC) in 198 1, and the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA) in 1992. Given the country’s small size and its access to commercial lending sources, the Bank has provided only modest assistance in Seychelles, mainly in infrastructure rehabilitation and environment protection, and it has provided technical support in building institutional capacity in preparation of the multiyear public investment programming. The IFC portfolio consists of three projects in the hotel and banking sectors. MIGA does not currently have any guarantees in the Seychelles but is underwriting one project in the financial sector, with total potential coverage of $38 million. The status of IBRD and IFC operations is summarized in the attached table. The Bank’s main objectives in Seychelles are to (i) assist the government in restoring macroeconomic balance and to create an environment conducive to improving economic prospects in the medium and long term; and (ii) provide support for environmentally sustainable economic activities and the preservation of the environment. To this end, the Bank has cooperated with other donors on macroeconomic policy advice and on environmental protection through Global Environmental Facility (GEF) grants, In this regard, a Bank team visited Seychelles in June-July 2000 to advise the authorities on developing a privatization program, encourage private sector development, and liberalizing domestic and foreign trade system. Bank teams visited Seychelles again in May and October 2002 to assess social and economic conditions. Most recently, a visit took place in October 2003 to prepare a Development Policy Review and participate in government-IMF discussions on a staff-monitored program. Seychelles has been in nonaccrual status with the Bank since August 15,2002 and had arrears totaling US$65 1,000 as of August 1, 2003. The current nonaccrual status precludes fmancial assistance (grants and loans) from the Bank. However, the Bank remains engaged in Seychelles by maintaining a dialogue on key macroeconomic and social issues. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 50 - APPENDIX II Seychelles: Relations with the World Bank Group I. Statement of the World Bank Loans and IDA Credits (as of June 1,2003) No IBID or IDA loans, credits, or grants are currently active. II. Statement of IFC Investments (as of June 1,2003) Year Company 1995 AEF Acajoux 1995 Beau Vallon 1998 Nouvobanq Loan Loan IFC held ($m) IFC disbursed 0.21 0.21 1.22 1.22 3.02 3.02 Total 4.45 4.45 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-51- APPENDIX III Seychelles: Statistical Issues The quality of economic and financial statistics reported to the IMF is not satisfactory. There are long time lags (up to 12 months) between the end of a year and the first available estimate of GDP for that year. Even longer delays, ranging from one to three years, have arisen for statistics on government finance. The mission will discuss these issues with the authorities and stress the importance of reporting data more promptly. The authorities have previously indicated that efforts are under way to improve the timeliness with which national accounts and trade statistics are reported to the Fund by the Management and Information Systems Division (MISD). Real sector National accounts data are prepared on a calendar-year basis. Currently, national accounts at constant prices use 1986 as a base year. There are considerable delays in compiling GDP deflators; the most recent official estimate of real GDP is for 2001. Data on average earnings and employment by sector are collected on an annual basis by the MISD. Tourism statistics are compiled monthly and reported to the IMF in a timely fashion. The retail price index @PI) is calculated on the basis of prices mandated by the government and, therefore, takes no account of prices in the parallel market. The most recent revisions to the RPI were published beginning in January 2003; the revised index utilizes expenditure weights reflecting a 1999-2000 household expenditure survey, and base period of the last three months of 2001. Government finance Annual data on consolidated central government transactions are reported only through 2000 for publication in the Government Finance Statistics (GFS) Yearbook. Authorities have stopped reporting quarterly data on central government budgetary operations for publication in International Financial Statistics (IFS), since 2001. Government finance statistics have been recorded on a cash basis. An STA mission that visited Victoria in March 1999 concluded that the methodology used to consolidate fiscal data (for the central government, including the Social Security Fund) was broadly consistent with the Government Finance Statistics Manual (1986). Monetary accounts Monetary data are reported regularly for publication in IFS, with the timeliness improving recently. The latest data for the Central Bank of Seychelles and for the commercial banks were reported to STA with less than a one-month lag. The monetary and credit aggregates are generally consistent with the Fund’s methodological standards. Balance of payments Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 52 - APPENDIX III The authorities have made substantial progress in adopting the balance of payments methodology outlined in the fifth edition of the Balance ofPayments Manual. Trade data are reported on a quarterly basis, but with some delay. Balance of payments data are reported to the Statistics and African Departments on an annual basis, nine months after the reference period (provisional data are generally provided to Fund missions seven months after the reference period). The quality of balance of payments data is impaired by the thriving foreign exchange parallel market’s diversion of transactions away from the banking system and into the informal sector. In contrast, the authorities have made considerable progress in collecting data on public sector debt, debt-service obligations, and payments arrears over the past few years. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 53 - APPENDIX III t h , d 4 k 0 Y w E E c E E r 2 z E Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 54 - Seychelles: Social and Demographic Indicators APPENDIX IV GDP (2001) Total (in million of U.S. dollars) 595.9 Per capita (in U.S. dollars) 7,338.5 Area (sq. km.) Of which : agricultural (in percent) 455.3 22.2 Population characteristics (1999; in percent, unless otherwise indicated) Life expectancy at birth (years) 72.4 Male 67.4 Female 78.2 Child death rate (aged l-4) 2.0 Population under age 15 26.8 Median age (years) 26.0 Education Primary school enrollment, population aged 6- 13 (2000; in percent) Pupil-to-teacher ratio (2000) 88.0 14.6 Population Total (mid-200 1) Growth (percent a year, average 1996-2001) 81,202 1.3 Density (1999; per sq. km.) Total Ofwhich : agricultural 773.0 760.8 Health (1999) Population per physician Population per hospital bed Infant mortality rate (1999; per thousand births) Access to safe water (1997 census; in percent) Urban population Rural population 773.0 181.0 10.3 90.0 80.0 Nutrition (1980-86) Per capita daily calorie supply 2,317.0 Per capita daily protein supply (in grams) 49.0 Sources: Management and Information Systems Division (MISD); and World Bank. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 55 - APPENDIX V Public Information Notice (PIN) No. FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE International Monetary Fund 700 lgth Street, NW Washington, D. C. 20431 USA IMF Concludes 2003 Article IV Consultation with Seychelles On February xx, 2004, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded the Article IV consultation with Seychelles.’ Background Since independence, the authorities have largely followed an economic policy framework based on state control and intervention in the economy. These policies had impressive achievements in terms of per capita growth and social indicators but, in recent years, their sustainability has been threatened by growing macroeconomic imbalances and structural problems. During the 199Os, high fiscal expenditure, fueled by ambitious capital projects and a steady growth in social welfare spending, led to excess demand pressures. With a relatively rigid official exchange rate, these macroeconomic imbalances were reflected in strong import demand, shortages of foreign exchange, external arrears, and a substantial premium in the illegal parallel exchange market. In mid-2001, the authorities reacted to the growing economic imbalances by intensifying price controls and foreign exchange restrictions, and by contracting external loans secured by future export receipts. As a result, the total external debt rose to more than 100 percent of exports of goods and nonfactor services at end-2002. While this strategy bought time, its continuation became increasingly difficult, with imports being limited to what could be paid for by current nonpledged export receipts and remaining disbursements of multiyear credits. l Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial information, and discusses with officials the country’s economic developments and policies. On return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the country’s authorities. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 56 - APPENDIX V Economic conditions remained difficult in 2002 and the first half of 2003. Output grew by an estimated 0.3 percent in 2002 following a contraction of 2.2 percent in 2001. This improvement reflected higher activity in the manufacturing sector. In contrast, tourism (the major sector) contributed marginally to GDP growth. Production and tourism statistics indicate that activity was subdued in the first half of 2003. Output in the two most important manufacturing sectors- tuna canning and beverage production-fell relative to the first quarter of 2002. At the same time, tourist arrivals up to June 2003 were 5 percent below those corresponding to the first half of last year, partly owing to concerns about terrorism and SARS. The overall fiscal deficit in 2002 reached 18.7 percent of GDP, compared with 10.5 percent of GDP in 2001, but progress toward fiscal consolidation was made in the first half of 2003. The authorities recognized that the continuation of their past strategy was not viable, and, in July 2003, they launched a Macroeconomic Reform Program. The program envisages a substantial fiscal adjustment and included a package of liberalization measures in the areas of foreign exchange, prices, and trade. Executive Board Assessment <Begin Typing Here> Public information Notices (PINS) are issued, (i) at the request of a member country, following the conclusion of the Article IV consultation for countries seeking to make known the views of the IMF to the public. This action is intended to strengthen IMF surveillance over the economic policies of member countries by increasing the transparency of the IMF’s assessment of these policies; and (ii) following policy discussions in the Executive Board at the decision of the Board. 1 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 57 - APPENDIX V Seychelles: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 2000-04 National income and prices Nominal GDP (in millions of Seychelles rupees) Real GDP GDP deflator (1986=100) Retail price index l/ Money and credit Domestic credit Net claims on government Net claims on the rest of the economy Broad money Interest rate (six-month deposits; weighted average) Savings and investment Gross national savings Of which: government savings Gross investment Of which: government investment Government budget Total revenue, excluding grants Identified expenditure and net lending Current expenditure Capital expenditure and net lending Overall balance, including grants Total domestic government debt 2/ External sector Current account balance after official transfers 3/ -7.2 -4.0 -16.3 -2.8 Exchange rate Seychelles rupees per US$l (end of period) 6.27 5.75 5.06 5.50 Seychelles rupees per US$l (period average) 5.71 5.86 5.49 5.40 2000 2001 2002 Est. 2003 2004 Proj. Authorities’ Proj. (Annual percentage change, unless otherwise indicated) 3,544 3,618 3,830 3,889 4,002 4.8 -2.2 0.3 -5.1 -2.0 1.5 4.4 5.5 7.0 5.0 6.2 6.0 0.2 7.0 5.0 (Annual change in percent of beginning-of-period broad money, unless otherwise indicated) 13.8 12.6 16.6 -14.5 12.5 10.5 13.7 -16.4 1.3 2.1 2.8 1.9 8.2 11.4 13.1 -9.4 5.0 5.2 5.2 (In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated) 22.1 30.2 12.0 16.2 19.0 -2.5 -4.3 -8.2 -1.4 8.4 29.3 34.3 28.3 19.0 18.3 13.7 5.8 9.4 2.3 1.6 39.4 37.8 39.9 43.9 47.4 54.2 48.7 58.7 47.5 40.6 42.0 42.1 48.1 45.2 39.0 12.2 6.6 10.5 2.3 1.6 -13.9 -10.5 -18.7 -3.5 6.8 101.8 102.9 119.4 115.3 88.4 Sources: Central Bank of Seychelles; Ministry of Finance; and staff estimates and projections. li Annual averages. The retail price index understates inflation because in part it covers goods subject to price controls. 21 Including government debt held by the Social Security Fund. -27.8 -28.4 0.6 -12.0 . 0.7 .** . . . Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public