DOCUMENT OF INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND NOT FOR PUBLIC USE FOR AGENDA SM/O1/233 CONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION July 19,200l To: Members of the Executive Board From: The Acting Secretary Subject: United Arab Emirates-Staff Report for the 2001 Article IV Consultation Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staff report for the 2001 Article IV consultation with the United Arab Emirates, which will be brought to the agenda for discussion on a date to be announced. At the time of circulation of this paper to the Board, the Secretary’s Department has not received a communication from the authorities of the United Arab Emirates indicating whether or not they consent to the Fund’s publication of this paper; communication may be received after the authorities have had an opportunity to read the paper. Questions may be referred to Mr. Fasano (ext. 36972) and Mr. Wilson (ext. 37098). Unless the Documents Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the WTO Secretariat on Friday, July 27,200l; and to the Arab Monetary Fund, following its consideration by the Executive Board. Att: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicCONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND UNITED ARAB EMIRATES Staff Report for the 2001 Article IV Consultation Prepared by the Staff Representatives for the 200 1 Consultation with the United Arab Emirates Approved by P. Chabrier and M. Ahmed July 18,200l l Discussions for the 2001 Article lV consultation were held in Abu Dhabi, Dubai, and Sharjah from May 14-28,200l. The staff team included Messrs. Fasano (head), Wilson, Hallaert, and Guerami (all MED). Messrs. Abrams (MAE) and Conroy (World Bank), heads of the joint IMF-World Bank Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) team, together with Mr. Shaalan, Executive Director for the U.A.E., participated in the policy discussions, which included the recommendations of the FSAP. l The mission met with the Minister of State for Finance and Industry, the Governor of the Central Bank of the U.A.E., Under Secretaries of the Ministries of Planning, and of Labor and Social Affairs, as well as other senior officials of the federal government and the Emirates of Abu Dhabi, Dubai, and Sharjah. It also met with managers of commercial banks and chief executives of several public enterprises. l At the conclusion of the 2000 Article IV consultation, on June 9,2000, Executive Directors commended the authorities’ commitment to developing a well-managed, outward-oriented, and diverse economy. They encouraged the authorities to take advantage of the upswing in global oil prices to implement measures to enhance the role of the private sector and to strengthen the public finances by containing government employment, phasing out subsidies, and broadening the revenue base. Directors also stressed the importance of fiscal transparency and urged the authorities to take concrete steps to improve the coverage and quality of national statistics. l The U.A.E. has accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2,3, and 4 and maintains an exchange system free from restrictions on the making of payments for current international transactions. It has also accepted the Fourth Amendment of the Fund’s Articles of Agreement. l The authorities intend to issue a Public Information Notice (PIN) following the conclusion by the Fund’s Executive Board of the U.A.E.‘s 2001 Article IV consultation report. l The principal author of this report is Mr. Fasano. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2- Contents Page Executive Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 I. Background and Recent Developments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 Il. Discussions on Prospects and Policy Issues ................................................................. 8 A. Outlook for 2001 and the Medium Term ............................................................... 8 B. Policy Discussions ................................................................................................ .9 C. Statistical Issues ................................................................................................... 16 III. Staff Appraisal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17 Text Boxes 1. Free Zones in the United Arab Emirates ...................................................................... 6 2. Federal Government: Fiscal Reforms Underway ....................................................... 13 3. Main Recommendations of the Financial Sector Assessment Program .................... 14 Figures 1. The U.A.E. and Other GCC Countries: Selected Indicators, 1995-2000.. ............... .20 2. Consolidated Public Finance Indicators, 1995-200 1 ................................................. 21 3. External Sector Indicators, 1995-200 1 ..................................................................... .22 4. Medium-Term Baseline and Alternative Fiscal Scenario, 1999-2006 ..................... .23 5. Indicators of Competitiveness, 1993-2000 ................................................................ 24 . Tables 1. Selected Economic Indicators, 1996-200 1 ................................................................ 25 2. Consolidated Government Finances, 1996-200 1 ...................................................... 27 3. Balance of Payments, 1996-2001 .............................................................................. 28 4. Monetary Survey, 1996-200 1 .................................................................................... 29 5. Selected Indicators of External Vulnerability, 1996-2000 ........................................ 30 6. Medium-Term Baseline Scenario, 1999-2006 .......................................................... 31 Appendices 1. Fund Relations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32 2. Statistical Issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3- EXECUTIVE S-Y Background The strong recovery in world oil prices since mid-1999 has led to a strengthening of the U.A.E.‘s financial position and a sizeable build-up of official external assets. In 2000, the consolidated fiscal and external current account balances reached large surpluses, despite rapidly rising current expenditures. Amid low inflation, real GDP growth accelerated owing to higher oil and gas output, while non-oil growth remained strong. According to findings of the recent Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP), the banking system is strong, posing minimal near term systemic risk. Important steps were taken last year to address deficiencies in the securities markets and adopt anti-money laundering legislation. A comprehensive public expenditure management reform and other fiscal reform initiatives, including the adoption of an electronic government project, are currently under way in the federal government. Policy issues l The U.A.E. should implement structural reforms and achieve a long lasting strong fiscal position to maintain its growth momentum and enhance investor confidence. The mission indicated that these reforms should aim at improving the consolidated budget structure, promoting private foreign and local investment in nonfree zones, and increasing the long- term employability of the local labor force through training and education. To restructure the budget, the mission suggested that the authorities diversify the revenue base, limit nonproductive expenditure growth, phase out subsidies, and redirect spending toward human capital development. It also recommended casting fiscal policy in a medium-term framework under a conservative long-nm oil price for both revenue and expenditure to sustain a strong fiscal position over time. l Regarding financial sector issues, the mission urged the authorities to implement the FSAP’s recommendations, in particular the modernization of the financial sector’s legal framework and improvement of securities supervision and insurance supervision and regulation. l Economic information in the U.A.E. reflects the complexities of its political (federal) structure. Its economic data systems still suffer from several important deficiencies. The mission welcomed the steps taken to address these deficiencies, but urged the authorities to adopt all the recommendations made by Fund technical assistance missions, establish a centralized national statistical system, and solve remaining problems of coordination and cooperation between federal and emirate agencies and key public enterprises to collect national statistics. It recommended that the authorities participate in the General Data Dissemination System (GDDS), and urged them to report key macroeconomic data to the Fund between consultations, including broadening the data sent for publication in the Fund’s International Financial Statistics. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4- 1. BACKGROUNDANDRECENT DEVELOPMENTS 1. U.A.E. economic development over the past decades has been based on a highly liberal, business-friendly, and market-oriented strategy aimed at diversifying the economy and expanding non-oil exports. The establishment of free zones has also been an integral part of this strategy (Box 1). Thus, non-oil activities (notably petrochemicals, aluminum, tourism, and entrepot trade) have experienced strong growth, particularly in the 1990s (about 9 percent a year on average in real terms). Also, the U.A.E.‘s external current account has remained in surplus in those years despite the volatility in global oil prices, while most macroeconomic indicators have performed well by comparison to other members of the Cooperation Council of the Arab States of the Gulf (GCC) (Figure l).’ The U.A.E. has a relatively small national working age population -albeit rapidly rising and mainly relying on government jobs-and is, therefore, highly dependent on a large expatriate labor force. The country also has an open trade (the effective import tariff is less than 4 percent) and economic system in which access to foreign exchange is free of restrictions for current and capital transactions. A pegged exchange rate-effectively fixed to the U.S. dollar-has served as a nominal anchor for the economy since the early 1980s. 2. This development strategy, together with prudent macroeconomic policies, has also contributed over the years to a large external accumulation of financial wealth. The emirate of Abu Dhabi-which accounts for most of the U.A.E.‘s crude oil reserves and production-holds much of this wealth administered by the Abu Dhabi Investment Authority (ADIA), a subnational organization. ADIA resources have provided ample latitude to respond to oil price fluctuations and financial sector difficulties, as well as to develop the country (which has remained a net creditor nation) without recourse to foreign borrowing.2 3 The Abu Dhabi government main objective is long-term capital preservation of these resources; thus, in general, only their income is usually used to finance fiscal deficits or other financing ’ The U.A.E., together with Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, and Saudi Arabia, established the GCC in the early 1980s to foster close economic cooperation and regional integration. 2 Some available details of ADIA’s operations indicate that most of its assets are broadly diversified and invested abroad, but some are also invested locally, mostly in the financial sector and real estate. No other information is available on ADIA operations. However, the authorities have provided data on the stock of ADIA assets through end-2000, although this data remain highly confidential. 3 Comprehensive official data on the U.A.E.‘s total external debt (including private liabilities) are not available. According to the BIS’s external debt database, the country’s total liabilities to reporting banks reached US$14.2 billion at end-2000 and total claims, US$40.6 billion. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-5- needs, but on some occasions, it has been necessary to liquidate some assets. However, despite the successful economic diversification drive and large accumulation of financial wealth, important regional disparities persist, reflecting the uneven distribution of oil and gas among individual emirates.4 Also, the quality, coverage, and timeliness of national statistics have lagged behind the U.A.E.‘s rapid economic development, reflecting the complexities of its political structure-a federation of seven emirates, each retaining considerable political, judicial, financial, and economic autonomy. 3. The recovery in global oil prices that began in mid-1999 and continued into 2000 led to a substantial improvement in the U.A.E.‘s financial situation. Crude oil export earnings jumped by about US$9 billion (or 14 percent of GDP) to US$21.6 billion in 2000. Consequently, the consolidated fiscal position moved into a surplus equivalent to almost 5 percent of GDP last year, compared to deficits of about 6 percent of GDP during 1998-99 (Tables 1 and 2; Figure 2).’ This improvement took place even though the non-oil fiscal deficit deteriorated by 14 percent in absolute terms in 2000-although in percent of GDP it declined slightly to close to 18 percent because of the rapid rise in nominal GDP-on account of higher current expenditures, particularly subsidies.6 Higher oil prices and output also contributed to a surge in the external current account surplus to US$16.9 billion (24.9 percent of GDP) in 2000. Part of this surplus went to an increase in government assets abroad (estimated at US$2.7 billion) and in commercial banks net foreign assets (Table 3). In addition, the central bank’s international reserves also rose by almost US$3 billion, reaching US$l4 billion at end-200O-equivalent to almost six months of imports of goods and 4 The largest emirate, Abu Dhabi, accounts for more than half of the country’s total GDP and is the major contributor to the federal budget. Dubai, the second largest emirate, has been at the forefront of developing non-oil activities, including tourism and trade, in anticipation of the depletion of its oil reserves over the next decade. The economies of the other smaller emirates are based on a mix of trade and light manufacturing, and depend on transfers from the federal government. 5 The consolidated fiscal position is a combination of federal and the three largest emirates (Abu Dhabi, Dubai, and Sharjah) fiscal activity. In addition, following internationally accepted methodology, consolidated government revenue includes investment income from ADIA’s domestic and foreign assets (estimated by the Fund staff). Official statistics include this income as a budget financing item. 6 The non-oil (or oil-adjusted) overall fiscal deficit is defined as non-hydrocarbon revenue, including investment income, minus total expenditure. This indicator is a more reliable measure of discretionary fiscal policy than the traditional overall fiscal balance because the latter is subject to oil revenue instability. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-6- services and about two and one-half times the level of total short-term external debt on a remaining maturity basis (Tables 1 and 3; Figure 3).’ Box 1: Free Zones in the United Arab Emirates Within the U.A.E.‘s development strategy to diversify and liberalize the economy, Free Zones (FZs) have played an important role in encouraging non-oil and nontraditional economic activities and exports. FZs were established to promote international flows of trade, attract foreign direct investments (FDI), generate foreign exchange, facilitate transfer of technology, managerial shills and know-how, and create jobs. In addition, the FZs were expected to set up a blueprint for the mainland to follow suit. There are currently about ten FZs in the U.A.E&-a member of the WTO. Companies established in the zones (most of them from Asia, the Middle East, and Europe) engage in diverse operations ranging from manufacturing and processing to trade, services, storage, handling, production, and redistribution of goods and commodities. Although each emirate in the country has by now established free zones, these are particularly important in the emirate of Dubai, where the first one, the Jebel Ali Free Zone, was created in 1985. Other FZs have been established more recently, including the Dubai Internet and Media City (the world’s first FZs for e-commerce and media related enterprises), and the Saadiyat Free Zone in Abu Dhabi (under development due to be completed by 2003) will operate an international financial and commodities center. The FZs have been very successful in attracting a large number of companies and FDI, as well as expanding net non-oil exports More than 3,000 companies currently operate in all the zones (about half of them installed in Jebel Ali), which have invested over US$4 billion, with an estimated trade of about US$8 billion in 2000. The share of FZs exports in total U.A.E. non-oil exports increased from 22 percent in 1990 to 57 percent last year. The net exports of FZs have risen over time as well, reaching US$l.4 billion in 2000. In addition, port service fees and charges have become an important source of foreign income for the country, while nonfree zone businesses have benefited from the rapid growth in demand for services from enterprises in the FZs. The success of the FZs in the U.A.E. reflects several factors: sound economic policies, political stability, simple and fast administrative procedures to meet all the requirements of the guest companies, strategic geographic location, and a modem, efficient provision of infrastructure and communication systems. In addition, investment incentives-most of them also offered to nonfree zone companies-are also provided. These include 111 foreign company ownership (as opposed to up to 49 percent in nonfree trade zones), customs duty exemptions (however, goods produced in the FZs have to pay duties to enter the U.A.E. mainland and other GCC countries if they are not produced by national industrial license companies), no corporate income tax for several decades, no personal income tax, real estate ownership for foreigners through long-term leases, full repatriation of capital and profits, easy access to abundant and relatively cheap energy sources, no employment quotas for hiring nationals, and a one stop investment shop for application processing and licensing. I I 7 Balance of payments statistics in the U.A.E. are of poor quality as reflected in large errors and omissions that have averaged 13 percent of GDP during the 1990s and reached 11 percent in 2000 (see Appendix II for further details on deficiencies in balance of payments statistics). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-7- 4. Amid low inflation, real GDP growth accelerated to almost 8 percent in 2000, reflecting a strong performance in the oil sector. After declining by almost 5 percent in 1999, real oil GDP grew by some 13 percent, with crude oil output rising by slightly less than 10 percent in line with OPEC quota agreements to stabilize global oil prices.’ Non-oil real growth remained robust at 6 percent, supported by strong manufacturing and trade activities following the recovery in Asian and other GCC economies. Concerning monetary developments, domestic liquidity, as measured by broad money, picked up in 2000 to 15 percent as a result of the rapid expansion of net foreign assets of both the central bank and commercial banks, even though net domestic assets declined on account of a large increase in government deposits following the sharp improvement in the fiscal position (Table 4). The growth of private sector credit remained moderate at about 8 percent, while domestic interest rates continued to follow closely developments in U.S. dollar rates. Also, most vulnerability indicators have shown an important improvement over the past few years (Table 5). 5. The banking sector is strong according to findings of the recent Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP).’ Banks are broadly profitable, well supervised and capitalized, and show signs of improving credit quality, while posing minimal near term systemic risk. The commercial banks’ capital to assets ratio has remained above 20 percent over the past few years, and banks comply with international accounting standards in preparing financial statements. In contrast, the insurance and securities industries are smaller, less developed, inadequately supervised, and vulnerable, but they are not systemically important. The Central Bank of the U.A.E. (CBU) largely complies with the Base1 Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision and observes the Transparency Code in the areas of banking supervision, monetary policy, and payment systems. 6. Important steps were taken in 2000 to address deficiencies in the securities markets that led to extreme volatility and the loss of investor confidence in 1997-98. These steps included the enactment of the Federal Securities Law, the creation of the Emirates Securities and Commodities Markets Authority (ESCMA), the requirement that all intermediaries, exchanges, clearance, and settlement facilities be licensed by the ESCMA, and that all shares be listed on a licensed exchange and be dematerialized. Also, the country’s first formal stock exchange, the Dubai Financial Market, opened in March 2000, followed by the Abu Dhabi Securities Market last November. These markets are intended to replace the current informal over-the-counter market. Moreover, to improve transparency, all listed 8 The U.A.E.-an OPEC member-is one of the world’s largest oil exporters, and has the third largest oil reserves (9.4 percent of world total), which are estimated to last more than 100 years at the current production rate. The country also has the fourth largest reserves of natural gas in the world. ’ For further details, see the Financial Sector Stability Assessment (FSSA) report. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-8- companies are now required to publish quarterly financial reports. Despite these measures, the stock market declined by about 16 percent in 2000, but it is showing signs of a modest recovery during the current year. On a parallel development, Emaar Properties, a large local government-owned property developer, recently became the first listed company to amend its by-laws to allow foreign investors to buy its shares-albeit only up to 20 percent of its capital.” 7. Regarding other developments, in accordance with the Arab Free Trade Area Agreement (effective since January 1, 1998), the U.A.E. has continued to reduce gradually its average tariff on imports of manufactured goods from member countries by 0.4 percent a year, reaching 2.4 percent last year. In addition, efforts have been stepped up to prepare the economy for the challenges of globalization. The federal law on protection of industrial property for patents and other laws are under revision to make them compatible with WTO requirements. II. DISCUSSIONS ON PROSPECTS AND POLICY ISSUES A. Outlook for 2001 and the Medium Term 8. Given the favorable outlook for the global oil market in 2001, the U.A.E. will likely experience another year of strong financial performance-albeit with lower surpluses. The country’s average oil export price is forecast to decline by only US$l in 200 1 to US$26.3 per barrel, and oil export earnings by US$l.5 billion to US$21.8 billion (Table 6).l* Lower oil revenue will in all likelihood reduce the consolidated fiscal surplus by about half to 2.5 percent of GDP, even though, based on limited available budget information, particularly at the emirate level, expenditure growth is forecast to slow down to less than 3 percent.12 Despite this moderate increase in spending, the non-oil fiscal deficit will deteriorate further by 6 percent in absolute terms to over 18 percent of GDP in 200 1. The external current account surplus will likely narrow to about US$13 billion (18 percent of GDP) owing to both lower oil prices and output. In the real sector, total real GDP growth is estimated to decelerate to about 3 percent in 2001 since the cuts in crude oil production, in line with the January and March 2001 OPEC agreements, are likely to result in a contraction in real oil GDP of about 2 percent-assuming that the quota remains at the March 2001 level lo By law, foreigners in the U.A.E. can own up to 49 percent of the shares of a company located in nonfree zones, but companies can determine in their by-laws the full extent of foreign participation within that limit. ” The projected world crude oil prices in 2001 and over the medium term are based on the IMF’s World Economic Outlook (WEO) projections of June 2001. I2 Only the federal budget, which accounts for about one-fourth of the consolidated fiscal position, is usually announced and published-albeit with a considerable lag. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-9- through the end of the year. In contrast, non-oil growth is projected to remain robust at 5 percent in real terms, driven by expected strong activity in trade and construction. 9. Over the medium term (2002-06), projected lower world oil’prices will likely weaken the U.A.E.3 financial position. These prices are projected to decline by about US$7 per barrel to US$21 by 2006 from their peak in 2000, leading to a loss in oil export receipts of some US$7 billion over that period (Table 6). Even assuming a moderate growth of expenditures (about 3 percent a year), the consolidated fiscal balance is projected to swing into a deficit of 6 percent of GDP by 2006, and the non-oil fiscal deficit to worsen to the equivalent of almost 20 percent of GDP, since no non-oil revenue enhancing measures are currently planned. The external current account surplus is expected to decline to less than 1 percent of GDP by 2006 in spite of non-oil exports (including re-exports) being forecast to grow, on average, by 6 percent a year in nominal terms during 2002-06. Thus, central bank reserves in months of imports of goods and services will likely decline during the projected period, but will remain comfortable at about 6 months of imports. Real GDP growth prospects, particularly of non-oil sectors, remain favorable over the medium term. While oil output is forecast to remain stable in the period ahead, non-oil activities would grow at 5 percent a year, on average, in real terms through 2006, supported by construction of segments of a regional gas project, new power and water desalination stations, and large residential and tourism projects. B. Policy Discussions Overview 10. The success of the U.A.E. in maintaining its growth momentum and meeting its development challenges hinges on the continued implementation of both structural reforms and prudent fiscal and monetary policies. Although these reforms may differ somewhat across individual emirates because of their diverse resources, they should aim at improving the budget structure, promoting private investment by lifting remaining impediments to foreign investments in nonfiee zone areas, and enhancing the long-run employability of the national labor force through training and education. Among other desirable reforms, the authorities should address remaining weaknesses in the financial system, particularly in the insurance and securities sectors, and improve the national statistical systems in most areas, as well as fiscal transparency. Fiscal Policy 11. Although spending remained relatively restrained during the recent upturn in oil prices, allowing for a replenishment of government foreign assets, there was a sharp deterioration in the structure of expenditure, particularly at the level of emirates. Total spending rose by less than 10 percent in 2000 with respect to 1999, but the mission expressed concern about the almost 21 percent increase in current expenditure (on top of a similar growth during the period 1998-99) because of the permanent nature of some of these outlays Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-lO- and the deterioration in the non-oil fiscal deficit.13 In this context, given global oil price uncertainty and adjustment costs, the mission stressed that fiscal policy should be cast in a medium-term framework under a conservative long run oil price for both revenue and expenditure.14 Under this framework, the authorities should aim at bringing the non-oil fiscal balance (including investment income) into line with U.A.E. permanent income from oil wealth, and avoiding the shift into a projected overall consolidated fiscal deficit of 6 percent of GDP by 2006, as indicated in the previous section.” This approach would have the advantages of preserving the government’s foreign assets, making fiscal policy more predictable (avoiding cuts in capital expenditure as a first line of defense in periods of declining oil prices), strengthening private sector confidence, as well as ensuring intergenerational economic equity. The mission, therefore, recommended revenue and expenditure adjustment measures that would gradually bring the non-oil fiscal deficit into line with the estimated U.A.E.‘s permanent income by 2006, sustaining a strong fiscal position despite the expected sharp decline in oil revenue, while improving the budget structure (Figure 4).16 l3 The increase in current expenditures in the period 1998-2000 resulted from the rise in the wage bill, subsidies and transfers (mostly agricultural subsidies), and other current expenditures (which include defense spending). Consequently, the share of current expenditures in total spending increased from about 76 percent in 1997 to 86 percent in 2000. l4 Currently, a conservative oil price is used to estimate revenue in the budgets but an implicit higher one is used to estimate expenditures given that budgets usually forecast a deficit. l5 Countries in which wealth is derived from a nonrenewable resource, such as oil, need to determine what constitutes a sustainable level of consumption from the viewpoint of also providing for future generations. One way to look at this question is to calculate the present value of expected future government revenue from oil. The notional income stream from this stock of wealth is the permanent income that can be consumed indefinitely (including capital depreciation). In practice, a sustainable fiscal policy over the long run would be one in which the government’s non-oil fiscal deficit (including investment income) would be less than (for precautionary motives) or equal to the estimated permanent income. l6 The U.A.E.‘s permanent income fi-om oil wealth was estimated at about Dh 40.5 billion over the next decade under the reasonable assumptions of preserving this wealth constant in real terms over time (a government’s objective), and a conservative oil price projection of US$l8 per barrel in the long run. This permanent income compares to an estimated non-oil fiscal deficit (including investment income from financial wealth) of Dh 47 billion in 2001, which is projected to rise to Dh 59 billion by 2006. However, estimates of the permanent income are very sensitive in particular to the projected long-run oil price. In fact, if the latter (continued.. .) Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- ll- 12. On the revenue side, measures should aim at diversifying the revenue base.17 With the share of oil revenue in total revenue still ranging from 90 percent (in the emirate of Abu Dhabi) to almost 50 percent (in the emirate of Dubai), the mission: emphasized that relying mainly on increases in fees and charges to expand the non-oil revenue base is regressive and has adverse distributional effects. Also, fees and charges are not good automatic stabilizers. The mission also noted that despite the rapid growth in non-oil activities, non-oil revenue (excluding investment income) has declined over the past few years to less than 11 percent of non-oil GDP in 2000. Thus, to diversify the revenue base, the authorities could consider broadening the corporate income tax to the manufacturing sector and local banks, reduce exemptions on import duties, and introduce a property tax.” They could also consider the advantages of adopting a low-rate broad-based consumption tax on services.‘g These revenue measures will likely increase the elasticity of government revenue to changes in non-oil GDP, whose share in total GDP is expected to keep rising over the medium term. The authorities agree with the need to diversify the revenue base, but indicated that changes in tax policy and rates would have to be harmonized with other GCC countries because of their open borders for trade and services and their ongoing efforts to coordinate macroeconomic policy. On the expenditure side, the mission recommended that the authorities restrain current expenditure growth, particularly the wage bill, which increased by 30 percent during the second half of the 1990s. Also, subsidies (including those on utilities and water rates), which rose almost twofold over the same period to over 4 percent of GDP by 2000, should be phased out for efficiency reasons and reduce waste, while substituting some of them for targeted transfers to address social concerns. These measures will allow the were US$21 per barrel, the U.A.E.‘s permanent income would reach Dh 48.9 billion over the next decade. I7 Much of this diversification should take place at each emirate level since the federal government relies mostly on transfers from the emirate of Abu Dhabi. ‘* In the U.A.E., foreign and local companies do not pay taxes, except foreign banks, which are taxed on profits at about 20 percent, and oil and gas companies that also pay royalties. Indirect taxes include a 10 percent tax on hotel services in Dubai and a low tax on annual rent of residential and commercial properties in most emirates. In contrast, in other GCC countries, a corporate income tax is levied on foreign industrial companies and banks, and in Oman, also on local corporations and banks. In Saudi Arabia, nationals and citizens of other GCC countries who carry businesses in the country are subject to Zakat, an Islamic direct tax on property and income. No GCC country has yet adopted a personal income tax or a consumption tax, such as a value added tax. rg The adoption of a common external tariff by March 2005, under the three-band structure (from zero percent to 7.5 percent) agreed to among GCC countries, could raise customs receipts by about 18 percent in that year. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12- redirecting of expenditure toward human capital development and sustained investment in physical and social infrastructure. 13. The authorities indicated that a comprehensive public expenditure management reform is currently underway at the federal government to maintain expenditure growth under control and ensure greater efficiency in public spending. The mission welcomed this reform that seeks to gradually introduce a performance-oriented budget. Following recommendations of a recent technical assistance provided by FAD, performance indicators have been developed for five pilot federal ministries, including Education, Health, and Public Works. The federal government is also restructuring support services to ministries. A government-owned autonomous corporation that will compete with private companies for these services is planned to start operations by year-end, probably contributing to a reduction in the level of federal employment. Other important reform initiatives are also taking place, including the development of electronic government (Box 2). The federal government expects that all these initiatives will also be adopted at the emirate level in the coming years. Monetary and Financial Policies 14. The authorities have continued to gear monetary policy toward supporting the pegged exchange rate arrangement, while fostering a sound financial system. They have also continued to rely on indirect monetary instruments for liquidity management (such as the issuance of certificates of deposits (CDs) by the central bank) as well. The mission pointed out that the full development of a repo facility could contribute to further financial deepening and reduce credit risk. To this end, the authorities should consider increasing the early redemption penalty rate on CDs and limiting the daily access to CDs so as to encourage more active interbank trading. The authorities indicated, however, that their current priority is to expand long-term financing instruments. To this end, the establishment of an independent rating agency could facilitate the development of a corporate bond market in the country, In addition, although the authorities considered the banking sector to be highly competitive, they plan, as a first step, to open it up in the near term to banks already established in other GCC countries.20 15. Based on the assessment of the FSAP, the authorities should focus in the period ahead on improving the financial sector’s legal framework, securities supervision, and insurance supervision and regulation. Efforts to strengthen banking supervision- particularly of groups containing banks and the methods used to pre-approved holdings in banks exceeding 5 percent-and payment systems should continue to ensure that financial 2o New licenses for foreign banks have been suspended since the mid-1980s. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13- market developments proceed in a sound and prudent manner. Other main FSAP recommendations are highlighted in Box 3. Box 2: Federal Government-Fiscal Reforms Underway The federal government is currently engaged in implementing the International Organization for Standardization’s quality management system (known as IS0 9000), in carrying out an electronic government project (or “e-government”), and adopting an electronic dirham system. The Ministry of Finance and Industry has achieved important benefits by standardizing the execution of activities and putting in place a clearer and more transparent system of the decision making process in line with IS0 quality management principles.” Given the success of this ministry, the government has decided, as a next step, that all other federal ministries implement IS0 9000 standards within the next three years to become more efficient, produce services that consistently meet customer requirements, and reduce cost. The improved performance would be measured against internationally recognized benchmarks. As part of improved quality management objectives, the federal government is also carrying out an Electronic Government Project. This is expected to increase productivity and efficiency by simplifying procedures through the use of the Internet, facilitate and expedite the provision of services, speed up the response time, significantly reduce red tape, as well as contribute to creating a detailed, up-to-date, financial and statistical database. As initial steps, the government recently introduced the first two online services, industrial permits and government procurement systems, allowing direct electronic transactions with private agents that provide key services to the government. The electronic dirham system is designed to streamline and improve fee collection for government services by using electronic smart cards commercialized by banks. The full adoption of this system will likely eliminate traditional means of collection, improve efficiency, provide convenient, easy service, and reduce operating costs. This system has already been introduced for transactions with the Ministries of Finance and Industry, Interior (residency and naturalization), and Labor and Social Affairs in the areas of Abu Dhabi, Dubai, and Sharjah. Other ministries, including Health, Economy and Trade, and Education, and government agencies are expected to follow suit in the coming months. 16. The authorities broadly agree with the FSAP assessment and recommendations. Banking supervision regulations will be updated in the near term based on these recommendations, while a dialogue has already commenced regarding follow up technical assistance, notably in the areas of insurance and securities. The newly upgraded central bank web page represents a significant improvement on transparency issues in the areas of monetary policy, banking supervision, and payment systems. The mission praised the 21 The emirate of Dubai has adopted IS0 management standards since the mid-1990s. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14- ongoing efforts to step up anti-money laundering regulations and measures, including the creation of the National Anti-Money Laundering Committee.22 Box 3: Main Recommendations of the Financial Sector Assessment Program The legal framework for the financial sector is generally sound, but it needs to be modernized. The growing sophistication of the U.A.E.‘s financial markets is placing increasing strains on the legal and regulatory structure, and the past willingness to accept a lack of legal and regulatory clarity may become a serious constraint on attempts to further develop the financial sector. There is an urgent need to strengthen supervision and improve the legal and regulatory framework in the insurance sector. This should begin by naming an insurance commissioner and increasing the number of qualified supervisory staff. A full review of the insurance law and regulations should be undertaken to bringing it up to current best practice. While the proposed amendments to the Insurance Law are a welcome step, they do not address several important areas, including governance, market conduct, and international cooperation. With securities sector supervision at the earliest stages of development, efforts should be made to make the Emirates Securities and Commodities Market Authority (ESCMA) fully operational as rapidly as possible. This will require providing it with qualified full time staff and a sufficient budget. The respective securities sector regulatory responsibilities of the ESCMA, the CBU, and the Ministry of the Economy and Commerce should also be clarified. Integration of the existing formal securities markets, as contemplated under the securities law, should likewise proceed expeditiously. Payment system vulnerabilities were seen as limited at present. Nevertheless, the CBU should review its procedures for providing overdrafts and implement a system in which it only provides such advances against proper collateral. The CBU should consider greater automation and computerization of the existing systems to prepare for increases in transaction volume and reduce reliance on manual procedures. To improve transparency practices in the areas of monetary policy, banking supervision, and payments, the CBU should consider publishing more data and other information on itself, its responsibilities, and its operations. 17. Backed by large foreign assets, the authorities indicated that the exchange rate peg has served the U.A.E. well both in terms of stabilization and development. Over the past few years, the U.S. dollar has appreciated against other major currencies, leading to an appreciation of the real effective exchange rate of the dirham of about 30 percent between end-1995 and early 2001. However, there are no indications that such real appreciation has adversely affected the competitiveness of nonhydrocarbon exports, such as aluminum, 22 The anti-money laundering amendment to the Banking Law was introduced as an addition to the both the proposed new and existing Banking Law, since the new law may take some time to be enacted. For further details on anti-money laundering initiatives see the FSSA report. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 15- petrochemicals, and manufacturing. In fact, the volume of these exports (excluding re-exports and nonmonetary gold) has grown, on average, at 16 percent a year during 1995-2000; as these exports have continued to benefit from the availability of a large expatriate workforce at internationally competitive wages and from relatively large economies of scale. Indeed, an estimated unit labor cost based real effective exchange rate showed that the dirham actually appreciated by less than 10 percent between 1995 and 2000, while U.A.E. products maintained their market share in partner countries (Figure 5). The mission agreed with the authorities’ view and emphasized that sustained fiscal discipline and a sound banking system are crucial elements to support the current exchange rate peg, particularly under high capital mobility. Structural Reforms and the Labor Market 18. The pace of structural reforms has varied among the emirates. In power generation and water desalination, Abu Dhabi has taken the lead with the recent opening of its utility sector to local and foreign private investors through joint ventures with the government on a build-operate-own (BOO) basis. As a result, several independent power projects are currently under ay in the emirate. Other emirates are planning build-operate- transfer (BOT) projects for power and water. At the federal level, following the recent establishment of a Federal Electricity and Water Authority, the government plans to fully privatize over the medium term the electricity sector that serves the Northern emirates.23 The authorities indicated that, with the exception of the energy sector, there is not much room for further privatization because the federal and emirate governments only own a few companies, which are managed on a commercial basis. They intend, however, to increase further the role of the private sector in the economy by contracting out government-run services, privatizing the management of these services, and establishing joint ventures with the private sector (both domestic and foreign) in different areas. In this context, the mission suggested that the authorities remove impediments to foreign investment in nonfree zones to benefit the country from the know-how and technology brought by this type of investment. Also, privatization could be strengthened and expanded, particularly in those areas where the government still maintains an important presence, such as telecommunications, financial institutions, and manufacturing, by gradually selling its remaining shares in these sectors to boost the nascent securities markets and enhance private sector development. 19. Although labor statistics are scant, the U.A.E. does not seem to currently face serious unemployment pressures among nationals. However, demographic dynamics point toward emerging strains in the employment market in the period ahead owing to a rapidly 23 Although the restructure and partial privatization of the power sector seem to have reduced the cost structure, electricity tariffs in the U.A.E. still remain highly subsidized at the consumer level. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 16- rising young labor force. Thus, given that the economy generates more jobs that can be fulfilled by nationals, the policy challenge facing the authorities is to create employment opportunities for nationals by bridging the gap between their qualifications and wage expectations and the requirements of the market. In this context, the mission welcomed the flexible policy that the authorities have adopted on the hiring of nationals and expatriate workers. In particular, it agreed with the emphasis on education and training to enhance the long-term employability of the domestic workforce, while, in general, avoiding mandatory measures, such as quotas.24 In addition, a National Human Resources Development and Employment Authority was recently established to finance training and help with employment search efforts. To improve the attractiveness of employment in the private sector, the government recently established a pension fund that now also covers nationals working in that sector, but the mission cautioned against providing generous benefits under the new scheme.25 C. Statistical Issues 20. The authorities indicated that they remained committed to improve the dissemination and quality of U.A.E. data.26 In fact, it appears that the flow of fiscal information between the federal and individual emirate governments has improved since the Inter-Ministerial Statistical Committee (ISC)--recently broadened to include federal as well as key local government agencies-was reactivated early last year. The ISC’s strategy is to focus in the short term on improving the coordination and dissemination of available macroeconomic statistics and social indicators. Over the medium term, its objective is to improve the quality of national statistics by adopting internationally accepted standards and codes and supporting capacity-building. The mission welcomed these ongoing efforts and strongly recommended that the authorities participate in the Fund’s General Data Dissemination System (GDDS). 21. The mission urged the authorities to move forward the objective of improving the quality of national statistics.27 The authorities should fully implement the 24 The banking sector is the only one in the U.A.E. subject to mandatory measures-albeit flexibly applied-as banks are expected to increase the proportion of nationals in their workforce by 4 percent a year. 25 Expatriates are not covered by the new expanded pension scheme, but are provided with an end-of-service payment. 26 In general, although the mission received enough information to conduct surveillance, including on ADIA investments, some fiscal and balance of payments data remained highly consolidated, hindering the analysis/assessment of economic developments in the U.A.E. 27 The quality of economic and financial data, excluding monetary statistics, remains poor. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17- recommendations made by STA technical assistance missions, including the adoption of an international transaction report system (ITRS), and build on the current good institutional base that exists at the CBU and the Ministry of Planning for the collection and compilation of macroeconomic statistics (see Appendix II for more detailed recommendations).28 Moreover, they could also establish a centralized national statistical system that would encompass all agencies, both federal and emirate, with responsibility for the collection and compilation of statistics. This centralized system would help improve the development of primary sources of information through the use of regular national surveys and reports. In addition, both the manpower and physical resources devoted to the collection of national statistics should be strengthened, while fully addressing remaining problems of coordination and cooperation between federal and local agencies and key public enterprises to collect these statistics. 22. The mission emphasized that modernizing the federal and emirate budgets’ current presentation will likely make them a better tool of fiscal policy and economic analysis. To this end, public finance statistics could be improved by adopting international standards, particularly regarding the economic classification of expenditures, and by incorporating data on domestic and foreign investment income, as well as on capital or other expenditure currently under the control of the respective Rulers’ Offices, or off budget. This will also facilitate comparison of fiscal developments across emirates and the federal government, and vis-a-vis other GCC countries, as well as enhance the transparency of fiscal data. 23. While money and banking data are reported to the Fund regularly, other statistics lag behind. The mission encouraged the authorities to report key macroeconomic data to the Fund between consultations, including broadening the information sent for publication in the IMF’s International Financial Statistics to include data on balance of payments, and national and consolidated fiscal accounts. Also, it urged the authorities to collect regularly and disseminate labor statistics, while at the same time improving balance of payments data, particularly regarding capital movements and direct investment. III. STAFF APPRAISAL 24. The U.A.E.3 development strategy, together with prudent financial policies, has resulted in strong growth and contributed over the years to a large accumulation of external financial wealth. As a result, economic diversification has advanced rapidly, supported by an increasing role of the private sector. With the recent recovery in global oil prices, the country’s financial situation strengthened significantly, as reflected in record surpluses in the external and consolidated fiscal positions in 2000, while, amid low inflation, 28 The CBU has a well-developed data system, allowing it to focus on the conditions of the banking system and on providing regularly information on monetary developments. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 18- oil production increased in line with OPEC-agreed quotas, and non-oil growth remained buoyant. Given the favorable trend in the global oil market in 2001, the U.A.E. will likely experience another year of strong financial performance. However, over the medium term, as a result of the projected decline in global oil prices, the country will possibly experience a weakening in its financial position, with the consolidated fiscal balance (including investment income) moving into a large deficit, even assuming the restrained growth of expenditures. 25. To maintain the growth momentum, the U.A.E. should implement structural reforms and sustain a strong fiscal position. These reforms (which would further insulate the economy from future exogenous shocks) should aim at moving forward with the much needed restructuring of the consolidated budget structure; promoting private investment by lifting remaining impediments to full foreign ownership of companies in nonfree zones; and enhancing the long-term employability of the national labor force through training and education, as well as a flexible labor policy. Remaining government shares in the telecommunication and other sectors could be also sold to boost the nascent securities markets and the role of the private sector. 26. A strong fiscal position could be sustained by diversifying the revenue base and containing expenditure growth. Thus, the authorities should consider broadening the corporate income tax to the manufacturing sector and local banks, reducing exemptions on import duties, while also introducing a property tax. The adoption of a low-rate broad-based consumption tax on services should be given some consideration, as well. These measures will increase the elasticity of non-oil revenue in relation to non-oil GDP whose share in total GDP is expected to keep rising over the medium term. Following the recent rapid jump in current spending, particularly the wage bill and subsidies, spending growth should be restrained, and subsidies phased out to allow for the redirection of expenditure towards human capital development and sustained investment in physical and social infrastructure. In this context, the staff welcomes the ongoing move towards a performance-oriented budget at the federal level, as well as other reforms underway, to ensure greater efficiency in public spending. Moreover, given high oil price uncertainty, the authorities are also encouraged to cast fiscal policy in a medium-term framework that assumes a conservative long-run oil price for both revenue and expenditure, ensuring intergenerational economic equity. 27. Although there is no evidence of near term systemic risk in the U.A.E.3 banking sector, efforts to strengthen banking supervision and the payment systems should continue. Also, in line with other recommendations of the Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP), the authorities should focus in the period ahead on modernizing the financial sector’s legal tmrnework and improving securities supervision and insurance supervision and regulation. The staff commends the authorities for the important efforts underway to adopt anti-money laundering regulations and legislation. Regarding monetary policy, the authorities are encouraged to consider the advantages of developing a repo facility to reduce both credit risk and transaction costs, while promoting long-term financing instruments, including corporate bonds. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 19- 28. The pegged exchange rate arrangement, amid an open trade and economic system, as well as a good record of macroeconomic management, has anchored economic stability, kept inflation low, and strengthened confidence, Although the economy and non-oil exports have continued to experience robust growth over the past years, the staff emphasizes that fiscal discipline and a sound banking system, particularly under high capital mobility, remain crucial elements to support the peg, while private sector and human capital development will likely further enhance competitiveness. 29. The authorities’ renewed commitment to improving the coverage, quality, and timeliness of U.A.E. national statistics is welcome. In this context, the reactivation of the Inter-Ministerial Statistical Committee was a step in the right direction. However, with the exception of monetary statistics, the country’s economic data systems still suffer from several important deficiencies that could hinder the formulation of economic policy and negatively affect the decisions of private investors. Thus, the authorities should fully implement the recommendations made by Fund technical assistance missions, including the adoption of an international transaction report system (ITRS). They could also consider the benefits of establishing a centralized national statistical system that would encompass federal and emirate agencies, as well as developing primary sources of information through the use of regular national surveys and reports. Remaining problems of coordination and cooperation to collect national statistics between these agencies and key public enterprises must be fully addressed to achieve a lasting improvement in the quality of national statistics. In addition, to enhance the transparency of fiscal data, internationally accepted economic classification of expenditures should be adopted, and data on investment income and other currently off- budget spending incorporated in the individual emirate budgets. The staff recommends that the authorities participate in the Fund’s General Data Dissemination System (GDDS) and urges them to report key macroeconomic data to the Fund between consultations, including broadening the information sent for publication in the IMF’s International Financial Statistics to include data on balance of payments, and national and consolidated fiscal accounts. 30. The next Article IV consultation with the U.A.E. is expected to be held on the standard 12-month cycle. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2o- Figure 1. The U.A.E. and Other GCC Countries: Selected Indicators, 1995-2000 85 80 75 70 65 60 55 50 45 0 U.A.E. OMAN QATAR . KUWAIT Non-d exports/total exports I/ 0 10 20 30 40 50 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 Real non-oil GDP gmvth 30 25 Current account balance In percent of GDP 125 , / 20 - / / / 5 - OtherGCC2/ -5 - -10 - -15 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 33 31 29 27 25 23 21 19 17 15 In percent of GDP /\ . . 0 \ lJAE . 0 \ --- / ‘\ \ \ \ \ Other GCC 2l \ 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 110 - SAUDI 95 1 ARABIA 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 25 - \ \ 23 - \ 21 \ - L--N UAE -\ 19 - -+-. 17 - 15 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 Sources: Data provided by the U.A.E. authorities; and Fund staff estimates. l/ Average in the period 1995-2000. 21 Weighted average. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2l- Figure 2. U.A.E.: Consolidated Public Finance Indicators, 1995-2001 95000 85000 75000 65000 55000 c Expenditure an? D ---- ,7~. ~.-!I,:-..- -2 45000 35000 25000 Total federal government expenditure 15000 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 50000 30000 10000 0 Revenue Trends (In millions of dirhams) q Oil revenue n Non-oil revenue q Investment income 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 25000 , 1 7nnnn Expenditure Trends (In millions of dirhams) El Wages and salaries 0 Development expenditure n Subsidies and transfers --“_” 15000 10000 5000 0 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 0 Other expenditure Sources: Data provided by the UAE authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public6C 60 Trade and Current Account Balance 50 40 30 20 10 0 - - Current account (percent GDP) 50 40 30 20 10 0 -22- Figure 3. U.A.E.: External Sector Indicators, 1995-2001 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 Commodity Composition of Foreign Trade, 2000 n Petroleum products q GAS Fl Non-oil q Reexport q Food and live animals n Textile 0 Machinery and equipment q Other m-oil Exports l/ --I- -Real growth rate - - - - - - Share in total exports 30 25 20 15 10 5 0 0 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 Sources: Data provided by the authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections. l! Excludes re-exports. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-23 - Figure 4. U.A.E.: Medium-Term Baseline and Alternative Fiscal Scenario, 1999-2006 7 6 Consolidated Fiscal Balance - (In percent of GDP) 5 - 4 - 3 - 2 - Alternative Scenario 1 - 0 - \ -1 \ - \ \ -2 - -3 - , Baseline Scenario \ -4 \ - ‘. -5 -. - -6 - -7 I I I I I I I 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 -30 -35 -40 -45 -50 -55 -60 Non-oil fiscal Balance (In billions of dirhams) \ U.A.E. long-term permanent income (Dh 40.5 billions) \ \ Alternative Scenario -\ -+. -\ . . . -\. Baseline Scenario Sources: Data provided by the authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-24- Figure 5. U.A.E.: Indicators of Competitiveness, 1993-2000 130 120 110 100 90 80 70 Index (1993=100) , REER (CPI based) REER (ULC based) l’ A \ / \ / \ \ / \ RR \ / ---J L0 \ / / ---- 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 Est. 200 I 1 180 160 140 120 100 80 60 40 20 0 f q Export market share index - All partners (1990=100) 2’ s9 Imports of Goods and services in percent of domestic expenditure I 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 Est. Sources: Data provided by the authorities; Information Notice System; and Fund staff estimates. I/ With respect to advanced partner countries. No information available prior to 1993. 2/ Export market share is defined as the index of U.A.E.‘s non-oil export volume relative to the index of partner countries’ import volume. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-25 - Table 1. United Arab Emirates: Selected Economic Indicators, 1996-200 1 1996 1997 1998 1.999 Prel. Est. 2000 2001 GDP at market prices 176.2 Oil production and exports Crude oil production Of which: condensates Average price (U.S. dollars per barrel) 2.23 0.07 19.87 Natural gas production and exports Natural gas production LNG exports NGL exports 33.8 6.3 8.2 National income and prices Real GDP (at factor cost) Oil Non-oil Consumer prices 6.1 1.2 8.3 3.0 Investment and saving Gross domestic investment Government Nongovernment 28.1 5.8 22.3 National saving 41.2 Government 1.2 Nongovernment 40.0 Consolidated government finances Revenue Oil Non-oil revenue Ofwhich : Investment income Expenditure Current Development l! Current balance Overall balance (excluding oil revenue) Government domestic debt 2/ 35.1 35.6 34.0 31.5 37.5 35.7 21.0 21.9 14.3 13.9 22.5 21.0 14.1 13.7 19.6 17.6 14.9 14.7 6.2 5.5 10.3 9.5 7.9 8.0 42.0 34.1 40.3 36.9 32.7 33.1 33.9 25.9 29.6 28.9 28.2 28.3 8.1 8.2 10.7 8.0 4.5 4.8 1.2 9.7 4.4 2.6 9.3 7.4 -7.0 1.5 -6.3 -5.4 4.7 2.6 -28.0 -20.4 -20.6 -19.3 -17.8 -18.4 5.3 4.3 6.5 7.3 4.7 4.6 Money and credit Broad money (M2) Foreign assets (net) Domestic assets Of which : Claims on government (net) Claims on private sector 6.9 9.0 4.2 11.4 15.3 -0.6 -1.2 0.4 4.3 19.2 7.4 10.3 3.8 7.1 -3.8 2.6 0.7 -1.3 1.1 -9.6 8.6 13.0 13.9 7.6 9.0 (In billions of U.A.E. dirhams) 188.0 178.1 201.8 249.2 (In millions of barrels per day) 2.39 2.21 2.11 2.41 0.11 0.11 0.11 0.22 18.80 12.57 17.48 27.21 (In billions of cubic meters per year) 35.8 36.5 37.0 6.2 6.0 5.8 8.9 9.6 8.9 (Annual percentage changes) 8.3 1.4 3.9 5.9 -7.6 -4.5 9.2 5.0 6.9 2.9 2.0 2.1 (In percent of GDP) 28.3 30.6 28.0 5.8 7.9 6.8 22.5 22.8 21.1 38.9 35.9 38.8 9.7 4.4 2.6 29.2 31.6 36.2 37.5 40.1 5.2 5.2 10.9 11.0 7.6 3.3 12.7 -1.8 6.1 5.0 1.4 1.2 22.0 23.2 4.5 4.6 17.5 18.6 46.9 41.4 9.3 7.4 37.6 33.9 (Changes in percent of beginning M2 stock) 254.9 2.37 0.22 26.30 9.1 12.0 -2.9 -2.4 7.8 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 26 - Table 1. United Arab Emirates: Selected Economic Indicators, 1996-200 1 1996 1997 1998 1999 Prel. Est. 2000 2001 Interest rates 3/ Dirham (three-month interbank) Lending rate External sector Exports, Of which : Crude oil Gas Non-hydrocarbon exports Re-exports Imports, f.o.b. Services (net) Income (net) Transfers (net) 37.3 40.5 33.8 36.5 47.6 46.1 14.6 13.7 9.4 12.3 21.6 20.1 2.1 2.3 2.0 2.2 3.8 3.0 8.5 11.7 9.1 8.0 8.4 9.4 10.5 10.8 11.6 11.8 12.1 12.0 -26.9 -30.0 -28.7 -27.9 -28.6 -30.4 -5.8 -6.1 -6.0 -5.9 -6.1 -6.5 4.8 4.8 7.0 7.3 8.0 7.5 -3.2 -3.6 -3.7 -3.9 -4.0 -4.1 Current account balance (In percent of GDP) Central bank reserves In months of imports of goods and services As percent of reserve money As percent of short-term debt 41 Total external debt 51 6.3 5.5 2.6 6.0 16.9 12.6 13.1 10.7 5.3 10.9 24.9 18.2 8.2 8.6 9.3 10.9 13.8 16.0 3.3 3.6 4.0 4.6 5.5 6.0 216.4 209.5 210.4 199.8 250.2 274.2 249.8 276.2 147.6 218.7 251.3 286.7 12.2 16.9 18.1 18.5 18.2 18.5 Exchange rate Dirham/U.S. dollars (end-of-period) 3.6710 3.6725 3.6725 3.6725 3.6725 3.6725 Real effective exchange rate 61 108.2 116.5 124.6 125.2 132.0 137.3 5.44 10.18 (In percent per annum, end-of-period) 5.63 5.31 6.24 9.14 9.00 9.50 (In billions of U.S. dollars) 6.59 5.09 9.80 9.17 Sources: U.A.E. authorities; BIS-&IF-World Bank joint external debt database; and Fund staff estimates. l/ Including loans and equity. 2/ Gross due to resident banks; no debt securities or external debt outstanding. 3/ 2001 observations are through March. Lending rate is unweighted average for business loans. 41 Debt due within one year, from BIS statistics compiled from partial, outside banking sources. 5/ Central bank and commercial bank foreign liabilities, plus private nonbanks. 61 Index 1990 = 100; available through March 2001. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 27 - Table 2. United Arab Emirates: Consolidated Government Finances, 1996-2001 (In millions of U.A.E. dirhams) 1996 1997 1998 Est. Proj. 1999 2000 2001 Total revenue 61,832 66,837 60,486 63,601 93,434 91,124 Hydrocarbons 37,007 41,140 25,500 28,054 56,200 53,546 Non-hydrocarbon 24,825 25,697 34,986 35,547 37,234 37,578 customs 1,427 1,676 1,821 1,886 1,823 1,842 Profit transfers 1,989 2,652 3,051 3,462 3,936 3,387 Income tax l/ 3,302 2,925 1,679 2,179 3,944 3,364 Fees and charges 4,669 5,039 5,554 4,581 4,179 4,499 Investment income 21 10,912 10,326 18,272 19,137 19,589 20,505 Other 2,525 3,079 4,609 4,302 3,763 3,980 Total expenditure 74,080 64,101 71,730 74,538 81,616 84,494 Current 59,784 48,623 52,696 58,338 70,287 72,232 Wages and salaries 3141 12,655 13,138 12,533 14,771 15,501 16,921 Goods and services 41 18,259 18,993 19,657 19,368 18,730 18,719 Subsidies and transfers 51 19,343 7,098 8,017 11,440 15,471 16,903 Foreign grants 789 1,203 1,209 518 715 970 Other 61 8,738 8,192 11,280 12,241 19,870 18,719 Development 10,261 10,912 13,987 13,765 11,229 11,762 Loans and equity (net) 71 4,035 4,566 5,047 2,435 100 500 Overall balance -12,248 Financing 12,248 Resident banks 2,148 Loans to government -2,473 Deposits from government -4,62 1 Other 81 10,100 2,736 -11,244 -10,937 11,818 6,630 -2,736 11,244 10,937 -11,818 -6,630 597 -1,248 1,109 -10,530 -3,017 -1,215 3,469 3,086 -2,854 -27 -1,812 4,717 1,977 7,676 2,990 -3,333 12,492 9,828 -1,288 -3,614 Memorandum items: Overall balance, excluding hydrocarbon revenue Excluding investment income Non-hydrocarbon revenue, excluding investment income -49,255 -38,404 -36,744 -38,991 -44,382 -46,916 -60,167 -48,730 -55,016 -58,128 -63,971 -67,42 1 Hydrocarbon share of total revenue (in percent) 13,912 59.9 15,371 16,714 16,410 17,645 17,073 61.6 42.2 44.1 60.1 58.8 Sources: U.A.E. authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections. l! Mainly income taxes on gas fnms in Abu Dhabi. 2/ Fund estimates, based on fiscal accounts and other sources. 31 Excludes military wages and salaries. These are in goods and services. 41 Abu Dhabi water and electricity expenditures allocated 25 percent to wages and salaries and 75 percent to goods and services. 5/ 1996 value includes settlement of BCCI obligations. 61 Includes defense and other expenditures made by Abu Dhabi on behalf of the federal government, but that are not included in the federal government accounts. 7/ Mainly subsidized loans to finance construction and housing loans for nationals. 81 Includes changes in government foreign assets. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 28 - Table 3. United Arab Emirates: Balance of Payments, 1996-200 1 (In billions of U.S. dollars) 1996 1997 1998 1999 Prel. Est. 2000 2001 Trade balance Exports Crude oil and products Crude oil Petroleum products l/ GCiS Non-hydrocarbon Of which: Exports (by Emirates) Free zone exports Non-monetary gold Re-exports 21 10.5 10.4 5.2 8.6 19.0 15.7 37.3 40.5 33.8 36.5 47.6 46.1 16.3 15.7 11.2 14.4 23.3 21.8 14.6 13.7 9.4 12.3 21.6 20.1 1.7 1.9 1.8 2.1 1.7 1.7 2.1 2.3 2.0 2.2 3.8 3.0 8.5 11.7 9.1 8.0 8.4 9.4 1.4 1.7 1.7 1.7 1.7 1.9 3.2 4.0 4.3 4.5 4.8 5.4 3.9 6.0 3.1 1.8 1.9 2.1 10.5 10.8 11.6 11.8 12.1 12.0 Imports (f.o.b.) Imports by Emirates Free zone imports Non-monetary gold Investment income, net Banking system and private 31 Government -26.9 -20.4 -2.6 -3.9 4.8 2.0 2.9 Services, net -5.8 Credit 1.3 Debit -7.1 Transfers (net) -3.2 Private -3.0 Official -0.2 Current account balance (in percent of GDP) Financial account balance (net) Private capital Commercial banks Private nonbanks Official capital 41 Errors and omissions Overall balance 6.3 13.1 3.1 1.4 0.7 0.7 1.6 -8.7 0.6 Change in central bank net foreign assets (increase in net assets -) -0.6 -0.3 -0.8 -1.5 -2.8 -2.2 -30.0 -20.7 -3.1 -6.2 4.8 2.1 2.7 -6.1 1.7 -7.8 -3.6 -3.4 -0.2 5.5 10.7 0.9 -0.4 0.6 -1.0 1.3 -6.1 0.3 -28.7 -22.3 -3.2 -3.2 7.0 2.1 4.9 -6.0 1.9 -7.9 -3.7 -3.4 -0.2 2.6 5.3 2.7 -0.8 0.6 -1.4 3.4 -4.5 0.8 -27.9 -22.8 -3.2 -1.9 7.3 2.1 5.1 -5.9 2.1 -8.0 -3.9 -3.6 -0.3 6.0 10.9 4.3 1.7 0.4 1.3 2.7 -8.8 1.5 -28.6 -23.2 -3.4 -2.0 8.0 2.8 5.3 -6.1 2.2 -8.3 -4.0 -3.7 -0.3 16.9 24.9 -6.3 -3.6 -2.9 -0.7 -2.7 -7.7 2.8 -30.4 -24.5 -3.7 -2.3 7.5 2.1 5.4 -6.5 2.3 -8.7 -4.1 -3.8 -0.3 12.6 18.2 -5.7 -2.6 -2.0 -0.7 -3.0 -4.8 2.2 Sources: Abu Dhabi Oil Company (ADNOC); Emirates customs departments; U.A.E. Central Bank; and Fund staff estimates. l/ Includes fertilizers and lubricants. 2/ Estimated at 40-50 percent of Emirates imports. 3/ Includes central bank. 41 Includes changes in government external assets. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 29 - Table 4. United Arab Emirates: Monetary Survey, 1996-2001 Est. End of Period 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 Net foreign assets 63,430 62,365 62,737 67,000 88,111 103,321 Foreign assets 100,825 108,151 116,080 121,971 141,112 156,743 Central bank 30,263 31,431 34,148 40,163 50,759 58,880 Commercial banks l/ 70,562 76,720 81,932 81,808 90,353 97,863 Foreign liabilities 37,395 45,786 53,343 54,97 1 53,001 53,422 Central bank 75 52 11 403 587 750 Commercial banks l/ 37,320 45,734 53,332 54,568 52,414 52,672 Domestic assets 23,553 32,488 36,087 43,128 38,889 35,191 Claims on government (net) -8,156 -7,559 -8,807 -7,698 -18,228 -21,245 Claims 9,314 8,099 11,568 14,654 11,800 11,773 Deposits 17,470 15,658 20,375 22,352 30,028 33,018 Claims on public sector enterprises 5,069 5,511 5,236 5,581 5,780 5,896 Claims on private nonbanks 21 81,397 92,735 105,895 113,430 123,313 133,195 Capital and reserves (-) -24,8 19 -26,981 -3 1,430 -33,517 -35,833 -36,859 Other assets (net) -29,938 -31,218 -34,807 -34,668 -36,143 -45,796 Central bank -13,455 -12,906 -13,933 -16,261 -26,292 -32,052 Commercial banks l/ -16,483 -18,312 -20,874 - 18,407 -9,85 1 -13,744 Domestic liquidity (M2) 86,983 94,854 98,824 110,128 127,000 138,512 Money 22,266 25,368 27,783 30,250 34,067 36,271 Currency outside banks 6,767 7,366 8,194 10,270 10,017 11,019 Dirham demand deposits 15,499 18,002 19,589 19,980 24,050 25,253 Quasi-money 64,717 69,486 71,041 79,878 92,933 102,241 Foreign currency deposits 17,311 18,570 19,731 23,354 28,428 31,286 Dirham time and savings deposits 47,406 50,916 51,310 56,524 64,505 70,956 Memorandum items: Dh-denominated liquidity Reserve money Foreign currency deposits/total deposits (in percent) CBU foreign assets/reserve money (in percent) 69,672 13,986 21.6 216.4 76,284 79,093 86,774 98,572 15,006 16,233 20,099 20,288 21.2 21.8 23.4 24.3 209.5 210.4 199.8 250.2 (Growth in percent of initial M2 stock) -1.2 0.4 4.3 19.2 10.3 3.8 7.1 -3.8 107,227 21,470 24.5 274.2 Net foreign assets Domestic assets Of which : Claims on government (net) Claims on private sector Domestic liquidity (M2) -0.6 7.4 12.0 -2.9 2.6 0.7 -1.3 1.1 -9.6 -2.4 8.6 13.0 13.9 7.6 9.0 7.8 6.9 9.0 4.2 11.4 15.3 9.1 (In millions of U.A.E. dirhams) Sources: U.A.E. Central Bank, and Fund staff estimates. l/ Including the restricted license bank. 2/ Including nonbank nonfinancial companies. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3o- Table 5. United Arab Emirates: Selected Indicators of External Vulnerability, 1996-2000 (In percent; unless otherwise indicated) 1996 1997 1998 Prel. 1999 2000 External indicators REER (CPI-based, percent change, annual average) 3.9 7.7 7.0 0.5 5.4 REER (ULC-based, percent change, annual average) 11 5.5 -0.4 9.5 -9.0 4.2 Total external debt (in billions of U.S. dollars) 12.2 16.9 18.1 18.5 18.2 Short-term debt (BIS source) 21 3.3 3.1 6.3 5.0 5.5 Total external debt/GDP (percent) 25.4 32.9 37.4 33.6 26.9 Short-term debt/total exports of goods and services (in percent) 8.5 7.3 17.6 13.0 11.0 Consolidated public sector indicators Overall fiscal balance/GDP Government domestic debt/GDP 31 Oil revenue/total revenue Investment income/total revenue Non-oil revenue (excl. investment income)/non-oil GDP Non-oil balance/GDP -7.0 1.5 -6.3 -5.4 4.7 5.3 4.3 6.5 7.3 4.7 59.9 61.6 42.2 44.1 60.1 17.6 15.4 30.2 30.1 21.0 11.7 11.7 11.9 10.9 10.8 -28.0 -20.4 -20.6 -19.3 -17.8 External liquidity indicators Central bank foreign assets (in millions of U.S. dollars) In months of imports of goods and services As percent of Ml As percent of short-term external debt 21 As percent of commercial bank foreign liabilities 8,244 8,562 9,298 10,936 13,821 3.3 3.6 4.0 4.6 5.5 135.9 124.0 122.9 132.8 149.0 249.8 276.2 147.6 218.7 251.3 81.1 68.8 64.0 73.6 96.8 Commercial banks’ net foreign assets (in millions of U.S. dollars) Foreign assets Foreign liabilities Crude oil exports/total exports 9,055 8,437 7,788 7,417 10,331 19,221 20,890 22,310 22,276 24,603 10,166 12,453 14,522 14,859 14,272 39.1 33.9 27.8 33.7 45.4 Financial sector indicators Foreign currency deposits/total deposits Net domestic credit (annual change in percent) Private sector credit (annual change in percent) Private credit/total assets of banks Interest rate spread against U.S. dollar (in basis points) 41 21.6 21.2 21.8 23.4 24.3 34.5 37.9 11.1 19.5 -9.8 9.5 13.9 14.2 7.1 8.7 43.9 45.7 47.2 47.3 46.5 21.4 22.1 23.3 18.1 7.8 Banking system indicators 51 Commercial banks’ capital to assets ratio Gross nonperforming loans/total lending Return on assets Return on equity Average interest rate spread (in percentage points) 61 20.8 19.4 20.0 20.5 20.2 15.2 14.4 13.5 13.6 12.7 1.9 2.0 2.0 1.5 1.8 17.1 18.3 17.7 12.8 14.9 4.7 3.5 3.7 3.8 3.2 Sources: U.A.E. authorities; and Fund staff estimates. 11 Staff estimates, only vis-a-vis advanced partner countries due to lack of data for other partner countries. 21 On a remaining maturity basis. 31 Net of government domestic deposits. 41 Spread between one month CBU CDs and one month average LIBOR rates. 51 Supervisory data compiled by the 200 1 FSAP missions. 61 Difference between deposit and lending interest rates in local currency. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3l- Table 6. United Arab Emirates: Medium-Term Baseline Scenario, 1999-2006 Prel. Est. -- Baseline Scenario Projections 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 Crude oil production (mill. bbl/day) l! Crude oil exports (mill. bbl/day) l/ Average U.A.E. oil export price (US$ibbl) 2/ 2.11 1.93 17.48 2.41 2.37 2.33 2.33 2.33 2.33 2.18 2.10 1.96 1.96 1.96 1.96 27.21 26.30 24.00 22.00 21.00 20.50 (Annual percentage change; unless otherwise indicated) 2.33 1.96 20.50 Nominal GDP (in billions of dirhams at market prices) 201.8 249.2 Nominal GDP 13.3 23.5 Real GDP (at factor cost) 3.9 7.6 Oil -4.5 12.7 Non-oil 6.9 6.1 Consumer prices 2.1 1.4 254.9 257.2 263.1 2.3 0.9 2.3 3.3 3.5 3.9 -1.8 -1.4 0.0 5.0 5.0 5.0 1.2 1.3 1.4 (In percent of GDP) 272.9 285.0 299.5 3.7 4.4 5.1 3.9 4.0 4.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 5.0 5.0 5.0 1.4 1.4 1.4 National saving 38.8 46.9 41.4 37.0 34.3 32.0 30.5 29.2 Government 2.6 9.3 7.4 4.8 2.6 1.1 0.0 -0.5 Nongovemment 36.2 37.6 33.9 32.2 31.6 31.0 30.5 29.8 Gross domestic investment 28.0 22.0 23.2 24.9 26.4 27.4 28.1 28.6 Government 6.8 4.5 4.6 4.8 5.0 5.1 5.2 5.3 Nongovernment 21.1 17.5 18.6 20.1 21.4 22.3 22.9 23.3 Consolidated fiscal accounts Revenue Hydrocarbons Non-hydrocarbon Ofwhich: Investment income Expenditure Of which : Current Development Overall balance (Excluding oil revenue) 31.5 37.5 35.7 33.7 31.6 29.8 28.3 27.1 13.9 22.5 21.0 18.7 16.7 15.4 14.4 13.7 17.6 14.9 14.7 15.0 14.9 14.4 13.9 13.5 9.5 7.9 8.0 8.2 8.2 7.8 7.4 6.8 36.9 32.7 33.1 33.9 34.2 34.1 33.7 33.1 28.9 28.2 28.3 28.9 29.0 28.8 28.3 27.7 6.8 4.5 4.6 4.8 5.0 5.1 5.2 5.3 -5.4 4.7 2.6 -0.2 -2.6 -4.3 -5.4 -6.0 -19.3 -17.8 -18.4 -18.9 -19.3 -19.6 -19.8 -19.7 (In billions of U.S. dollars) External accounts Exports Of which : Crude oil and oil products Imports, f.o.b. Services (net) Investment income (net) Transfers (net) Current account balance (In percent of GDP) Central bank reserves (in months of imports of goods and services) 36.5 47.6 46.1 44.3 43.9 44.4 45.7 47.7 14.4 23.3 21.8 18.8 17.2 16.5 16.1 16.1 -27.9 -28.6 -30.4 -32.3 -34.4 -36.5 -38.8 -41.2 -5.9 -6.1 -6.5 -6.9 -7.3 -7.8 -8.3 -8.8 7.3 8.0 7.5 7.6 7.8 7.9 7.9 7.8 -3.9 -4.0 -4.1 -4.2 -4.4 -4.5 -4.7 -4.9 6.0 16.9 12.6 8.5 5.6 3.4 1.9 0.5 10.9 24.9 18.2 12.1 7.9 4.6 2.4 0.6 10.9 13.8 16.0 17.6 19.0 20.2 20.6 20.6 4.6 5.5 6.0 6.2 6.3 6.2 6.0 5.7 Sources: U.A.E. authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections. l/ Includes condensates, which are not subject to the OPEC quota. 21 Based on June 2001 WE0 oil price projections. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 32 - APPENDIX I United Arab Emirates: Fund Relations I. II. III. IV. V. VI. VII. (As of May 3 1,200l) Membership Status: Joined g/22/72; accepted Article VIII status in February 1974. General Resources Account: Quota Fund holdings of currency Reserve position in Fund Operational budget transfers (net) SDR Million Percent of Quota 611.70 100.0 420.85 68.8 190.85 31.2 SDR Department: Net cumulative allocation Holdings SDR Million Percent of Allocation 38.74 100.0 2.36 6.1 Outstanding Purchases and Loans: None Financial Arrangements: None Projected Obligations to Fund: None Exchange Rate Arrangement: The U.A.E. dirham, though officially pegged to the SDR at the rate of Dh 4.76190 = SDR 1, has been fixed to the U.S. dollar since November 1980. The mid-point between the official buying and selling rates for the dirham vis-a-vis the U.S. dollar has been Dh 3.6725 = US$l since November, 1997. VIII. Exchange System: The U.A.E. maintains restrictions on transactions with the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) pursuant to resolutions of the U.N. Security Council. Ix. Article IV Consultation: The last Article IV consultation discussions were held during February 22 to March 7,2000, and the Staff Report (W/00/91) was considered by the Executive Board on June 9,200O. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-33 - APPENDIX I X. Technical Assistance: STA Multisector June, 1993 STA Data collection and balance of payments December, 1995 STA Terms of reference and arrangements for April, 1997 resident advisor in balance of payments STA International Reserves May, 1998 FAD Government financial management June, 1994 FAD Public Expenditure Management November, 2000 FSAP Financial Sector Assessment Program Feb.-March, 2001 XI. Resident Representative: None Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 34 - APPENDIX II United Arab Emirates: Statistical Issues This appendix reviews the status of principal statistical issues for the U.A.E. Currentness of data on core economic indicators is summarized in Attachment I. I. Background The U.A.E.‘s economic data systems suffer from important shortcomings. These reflect inadequate data gathering techniques, insufficient resources assigned to data compilation, and lack of coordination and cooperation between federal and emirate agencies and key public enterprises, such as the Abu Dhabi National Oil Company (ADNOC). In fact, the latter does not provide national accounts compilers at the Ministry of Planning (MOP) and at the Central Bank of the U.A.E. (CBU) with information on oil and gas production, exports, and prices. As a result of these deficiencies, the provision of information to the Fund between consultation missions remains inadequate. ’ The U.A.E. received several STA missions during the 1990s to help the authorities address these data shortcomings. In June 1993, a multi-sector statistical mission examined the methods of compilation of U.A.E. statistics and assessed their suitability for economic analysis and monitoring.2 This mission concluded that major enhancements were needed, including the development of additional data sources and the application of internationally accepted methodologies. It also noted that there was a need for strengthening cooperation among data collection agencies. Based on these recommendations, an action plan was agreed upon with the authorities during the 1995 Article IV consultation mission, reviewed by the 1996 and 1997 missions. Under this plan, further Fund technical assistance was envisaged to provide on-the-job training for U.A.E. staff. An STA technical assistance mission visited the U.A.E. in December 1995 and reviewed progress in balance of payments data compilation. In April 1997, another mission discussed the terms of reference and arrangements for a resident advisor in balance of payments statistics. During this mission, the authorities also asked for the appointment of a resident advisor in national accounts statistics and the compilation of economic indicators. Subsequently, the authorities decided that the number of qualified staff in CBU and MOP was insufficient to support the proposed advisors or implement their recommendations. ’ Some core statistics (emirates’ fiscal accounts, balance of payments, and national accounts) are only available on an annual basis and provided to consultation missions. ‘United Arab Emirates: Aide-Wmoire on the Multisector Statistics Mission, August 1993. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 35 - APPENDIX II II. Data issues a. Real sector The main weakness in national accounts statistics is a lack of basic information for all sectors except government, financial institutions, and agriculture. With regard to the production account, basic data are inadequate for manufacturing, construction, wholesale and retail trade, and most of the service sectors. Oil sector data are also estimated because the Abu Dhabi oil company, ADNOC, does not provide statistics on output, sales, and prices of oil and gas. National compilers are therefore forced to rely on “internationally published sources. ” 3 Moreover, because national accounts data are produced only on an annual basis, there are no short-run indicators of economic activity. Concerning price statistics, the old consumer price index (CPI) was replaced during 1997-98. Retail and wholesale prices for individual commodities and certain services were published monthly since 1982 for each of the seven emirates. It appears, however, that compilation of the CPI was suspended entirely around the end of 2000; MOP staff indicates it may be resumed late in 200 1. None of these data are regularly reported to STA or to MED. b. Government finances Principal deficiencies relate to the lack of coordination among the emirates and the low frequency in reporting government financial operations. The Ministry for Finance and Industry (MOFI) compiles data for the federal government only. The largest emirates provide annual fiscal data to consultation missions, which consolidate these with the federal accounts. The individual emirates finance departments generally provide basic data but in some cases in a very aggregate format, hindering the analysis of fiscal developments. Annual data reported by MOFI to STA for publication in the GFS Yearbook cover only the federal government. Neither the federal government nor the emirates provide any detail on financing of fiscal balances; indications are that several emirates have their financing entries inappropriately intermixed in their “expenditure” outlays. None of the emirates include investment income among their revenues. In the case of Abu Dhabi, this omission seriously distorts the overall balance. C. Balance of payments The BOP statistics suffer from the lack of primary data sources for many transactions. Only one staff member in the CBU is assigned to BOP compilation, and cooperation from other government agencies is negligible. Many entries, including oil and gas exports, are estimated based on incomplete (or unofficial) information, and some important transactions are not 3 The official national accounts statistics have more than once come into conflict with mission estimates, which at least benefit from limited data provision by ADNOC. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-36- APPENDIX II reported at all. Major gaps afflict unilateral transfers; payments and receipts by oil companies; private and official investment income; foreign direct investment transactions for the hydrocarbon sector and the free-trade zones; and private sector and the emirates’ financial transactions. An exception is transactions by commercial banks, which are reasonably well covered by data compiled by the CBU. Thus, U.A.E. BOP statistics are of limited analytical use. In fact, errors and omissions have averaged 13 percent of GDP during the 1990s. The U.A.E. does not report balance of payments or IIP data for publication in Fund’s International Financial Statistics or the Balance of Payments Statistics Yearbook (BOPSY). Reporting of data on external trade has been irregular. The December 1995 STA technical assistance mission reviewed progress in implementing recommendations of previous technical assistance missions.4 It suggested that data collection procedures be introduced to gather information directly from U.A.E. sources on oil and oil-related international transactions; and that a system of enterprise surveys be established to measure services transactions, as well as direct investment flows. The CBU both discloses to consultation missions and publishes its foreign assets. It also discloses to missions their breakdown between balances abroad, investments abroad, gold, IMF reserve position, and other assets. Neither the CBU nor any level of government (federal or emirate) have significant foreign liabilities. d. Monetary statistics There are no significant issues in monetary statistics, other than better clarification of personal loans and foreign currency lending which are, in part, limitations of detail in the current bank returns. III. Proposed action plan The recommendations of the 1993 multi-sector statistical mission and 1995 balance of payments data compilation are still valid. a. Real sector The Fund’s technical assistance suggested establishing direct national surveys to create new information sources and intensifying the use of existing data sources in other areas. The highest priority was accorded to final consumption by households; the production of the non- financial private sector, including manufacturing, the free trade zone, and construction activities; constant price data on construction; and production prices. 4United Arab Emirates: Report on the Balance of Payments Statistics Mission, December 1995. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 37 - APPENDIX II In the short run, it was expected that the authorities would use the existing official records to enhance the data reporting and establish new data collection systems. In the long run, however, the action plan envisaged conducting regular surveys for manufacturing, wholesale and retail trade, land transportation, and construction; developing a plan for undertaking a household expenditure survey immediately after the preliminary results of the population census were available (end of 1996); and compiling short-term indicators. A sine qua non for improvement of the national accounts is active cooperation of ADNOC in providing the U.A.E.‘s national accounts compilers with a regular flow of information on the hydrocarbon sector. b. Government finances It was proposed that the MOFI establish a database for the government sector on the basis of the methodology of the Fund’s Manual ofGovernment Finance Statistics. In the short run, the new database would cover the operations of the federal government, and those of the governments of Abu Dhabi, Dubai, and Sharjah. In the long run, coverage would be expanded to include the operations of the other emirates, as well as of extra budgetary accounts and of municipalities’ accounts at the emirate level. There has been little progress on this front so far. C. Balance of payments There is an urgent need to establish a systematic approach to gathering relevant data on a regular and consistent basis. The Fund’s technical assistance missions suggested specific improvements in the current classification and in the estimates of a few balance of payments items. Specifically, separate entries were to be shown in the current account of the balance of payments for transportation, travel, government services, investment income, and workers’ remittances. In the financial accounts, separate entries were also to be shown for direct investment abroad, for changes in foreign assets and liabilities of commercial banks, as well as for short-term liabilities of the central bank.5 For the long run, it was also recommended the development of an international transactions reporting system (ITRS) for foreign exchange transactions through the banking system and moneychangers, supplemented with surveys of enterprises to broaden existing sources of information. Also, a few periodic surveys that collect primary data for transportation, government services, and travel were recommended. 5 In collaboration with the 2000 and 2001 Article IV consultation missions, some of this detail has been added to the BOP accounts (e.g., breakdown of services and banking system transactions), but no new sources have been developed, and the poor state of cooperation from other public sector entities has not improved. Even potentially available sources (such as investment in free zones and operations of the U.A.E. Offsets Croup) have not been explored so far. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-38 - APPENDIX II ATTACHMENT I Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public