DOCUMENT OF INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY FOR 17 AGENDA SM/03/266 July 3 1,2003 To: Members of the Executive Board From: The Secretary Subject: Thailand-Staff Report for the 2003 Article Consultation Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staff report for the 2003 Article IV consultation with Thailand, which is tentatively scheduled for discussion on Monday, August At the time of circulation of this paper to the Board, the Secretary’s Department has not received a communication from the authorities of Thailand indicating whether or not they to the Fund’s publication of this paper; such communication may be received after the authorities have had an opportunity to read the paper. Questions may be referred to Mr. Zanello (ext. 34708) and Mr. Jarvis (ext. 35661) in APD. Unless the Documents Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the WTO Secretariat on Friday, August 8, 2003; and to the Asian Development Bank and the European Investment Bank, following its by the Executive Board. This document will shortly be posted on the extranet, a secure website for Executive Directors and member country authorities. Att: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicINTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND THAILAND Staff Report for the 2003 Article IV Consultation Prepared by Staff Representatives for the 2003 Consultation with Thailand Approved by Wanda Tseng and Leslie Lipschitz July 30,2003 . The 2003 Article IV consultation mission held discussions in Bangkok during May 19- June 3, 2003. The staff team consisted of Messrs. Zanello (Head), Jarvis, Baqir, Becker (all APD), Ms. Schaechter (MFD), Ms. Daseking (PDR), and Mr. Bamett (Resident Representative). Ms. Duriyaprapan, Advisor to the Executive Director, also participated. Ms. Kongsamut (APD) assisted the team at headquarters. . A 34-month, SDR 2.9 billion (268 percent of quota, equivalent to US$4 billion) Stand-By Arrangement for Thailand expired on June 19,200O. The arrangement was part of a $17.2 billion official financing package from multilateral institutions and bilateral contributors, $14.3 billion of which was drawn. Outstanding obligations are being repaid on an advance repurchase schedule and will be completed by July 3 1,2003. . At the conclusion of the 2002 Article IV consultation last August, post-program monitoring was discontinued. Directors noted that Thailand’s macroeconomic framework and policies had contributed to a reduction in external vulnerability. They praised the supportive monetary stance and planned fiscal consolidation. However, Directors cautioned that domestic weaknesses are still pervasive and that stepped-up reforms in the corporate and banking sectors are needed to accelerate growth over the medium-term. . Thailand’s statistical base is adequate to conduct effective surveillance. Data issues are discussed in Annex V. . Thailand has accepted the obligations under Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4, and maintains an exchange rate system free of restrictions on the making of payments and transfers for current international transactions. . The staff report for the last consultation was not published. The authorities agreed to consider publication of this report but have not yet indicated their consent. . This report represents a team effort led by Mr. Zanello. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2- Contents Page Executive Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 I. Introduction and Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 II. Recent Developments ................................................................................................... .5 A. Macroeconomic and Market Developments ............................................................ .5 B. Corporate and Financial Sector Developments.. ...................................................... .8 III. Policy Discussions ......................................................................................................... 9 A. Macroeconomic Outlook and Risks .......................................................................... 9 B. Macroeconomic Policies ......................................................................................... 11 C. Other Matters .......................................................................................................... .16 IV. Staff Appraisal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16 Boxes 1. Recent Fiscal Initiatives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6 2. Fiscal Policy and Debt Sustainability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12 Figures 1. Real Sector Developments and Outlook ...................................................................... 19 2. Monetary and Inflation Developments ........................................................................ 20 3. External Developments and Vulnerability.. ................................................................ .2 1 4. Financial Market Developments and Confidence ........................................................ 22 5. Corporate Sector Developments .................................................................................. 23 6. Banking Sector Developments.. .................................................................................. .24 Tables 1. Selected Economic Indicators, 1999-2004 .................................................................. 25 2. General Government Operations, 1998/99-2003/04 .................................................. .26 3. Balance of Payments, 1999-2008.. ............................................................................. .27 4. Monetary Survey, 1997-2003 ...................................................................................... 28 5. Indicators of External Vulnerability, 1998-2003 ....................................................... .29 6. Medium-Term Scenario, 1999-2008 ......................................................................... ..3 0 Annexes I. Public and External Debt Sustainability ..................................................................... .3 1 II. Fund Relations ........................................................................................................... ..3 5 III. Relations with the World Bank Group ......................................................................... 37 IV. Relations with the Asian Development Bank .............................................................. 39 V. Statistical Issues ........................................................................................................... 40 VI. Social and Demographic Indicators of Selected Asian Countries (200 1). .................. .43 VII. Press Information Notice ............................................................................................. 44 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3- EXECUTIVE SUMMARY Thailand’s four year-old recovery gained momentum in 2002. Policies-a well- timed fiscal stimulus, an accommodative monetary stance, and government initiatives to promote credit to targeted constituencies, including SMEs-supported the upturn. On the back of the improved macroeconomic performance, Thailand is expected to complete early repayment of the 1997 official financing package in July 2003. Inflation is very low. Core inflation has been close to zero for over a year, increasing the risk of falling prices. The near-term outlook remains favorable but there are risks. Growth prospects are clouded by global uncertainties, and the risk of deflation. However, with favorable prospective balance of payments developments, a shrinking external debt, and a flexible exchange rate, external vulnerabilities are substantially reduced. Incomplete structural adjustment still limits medium-term growth. Notwithstanding some improvement, corporates remain over-geared and bank balance sheets saddled by nonperforming assets. Government actions to address these vulnerabilities have had limited success. The fiscal stance has appropriately turned to consolidation this fiscal year, but faster than planned. Over-performance is partly the result of underspending due to temporary administrative disruptions. An expenditure catch-up to meet budgetary allocations is warranted to make the pace of consolidation more in line with plans and mitigate the impact of SARS. Further fiscal adjustment will be needed over the medium term given the prospective costs of financial sector restructuring and other contingent liabilities. Quasi-fiscal activities and credit-based fiscal initiatives raise issues of transparency and excessive interventionism. The mission noted potential costs to the budget and the financial sector as well as the fact that these activities hinder policy formulation and assessment. The authorities outlined initial steps to contain these risks. Monetary policy has eased. The Bank of Thailand in late June reduced its policy rate as recommended by the mission. Given near-zero core inflation and appreciation pressures on the baht, the rate cut reinforces the credibility of the inflation targeting framework and flexible exchange rate regime. An easing bias remains justified by the low inflation environment. Tackling structural issues remains a priority. The mission reiterated the need for greater disclosure by the TAMC and further steps to accelerate NPL resolution at private banks. Resolution of NPLs would be helped by stepped-up legal reforms. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4- I. INTROIWCTIONANDBACKGROUND 1. Thailand’s four year-old recovery gained momentum in 2002 while inflation remained very low. Growth was the fastest since the crisis and among the highest in the region. First quarter data show continued strength, although adverse shocks in early 2003 will dampen activity in mid year. Core inflation is at risk of breaching the floor of the Bank of Thailand’s (BOT) target range. With favorable prospective balance of payments developments, a shrinking external debt, and a flexible exchange rate, external vulnerabilities are substantially reduced. 2. The authorities’ strategy is to strengthen the economy’s resilience to external shocks through greater dynamism in domestic demand and a better balanced pattern of growth. Its implementation has both a macroeconomic and a microeconomic dimension. At the macro level, the strategy involves a commitment to fiscal deficit reductions and inflation targeting. At the micro level, the focus is on initiatives to support private investment and consumption through expanded operations of specialized financial institutions (SFIs), increased lending by state banks, and other quasi-fiscal activities. This “credit-based fiscal policy” has taken center stage in the authorities’ approach to attain a high-growth path. 3. Longstanding structural weaknesses have received less attention in the policy agenda. Since the expiration of the Fund-supported program in 2000, the thrust of macropolicies has broadly been in line with Fund advice, but the authorities have largely charted their own course on structural issues. Board recommendations on strengthening bankruptcy procedures, enacting key economic laws, privatizing state-owned banks, and improving disclosure at the state-owned asset resolution agency have mostly not been implemented. The authorities have shown interest in, but not yet undertaken, key ROSCs and an FSAP which would help them identify priority areas for reform. 4. Against this background, the 2003 Article IV discussions focused on the unfinished reform agenda, as well as risks arising from the authorities’ strategy and very low inflation. Medium-term growth remains constrained by weak balance sheets in the corporate and financial sector. Credit-based fiscal initiatives, while providing short-term demand stimulus, could weaken the credit culture and the financial system, and increase contingent liabilities. Persistent low inflation has made Thailand vulnerable to deflation in the event of adverse shocks. 5. The government continues to enjoy strong popularity and a commanding parliamentary majority. Elections are scheduled for late 2004. Under the leadership of Prime Minister Thaksin, Thailand has become increasingly active in promoting both political and economic regional initiatives. One of these recently came to fruition with the launch of the Asian Bond Fund designed to foster the development of regional capital markets through the investment of some official reserves in high-quality bonds issued by local entities and sovereigns. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-5- 11. RECENT DEVELOPMENTS A. Macroeconomic and Market Developments 6. Growth rebounded through the first quarter of 2003 (Figure 1, Table 1). After growing only 1.9 percent in 2001, real GDP increased 5.3 percent in 2002, and 6.7 percent in the first quarter of 2003 (year-on-year). 12 I: Growth was broadly balanced between private Quarterly Real GDP Growth domestic and external demand. Rising 10 (Y/Y, I” percent) I( employment and farm incomes, as well as easier credit, supported households’ consumption; private investment responded to rising profitability and capacity utilization, lower interest rates, and incentives to promote home-ownership; and exports recovered strongly from the 200 1 slump, outstripping real demand growth in partner countries.’ 7. In spite of the acceleration in activity, inflation remains very low. With an outpu gap remaining and softer import prices, inflation pressures continue to be subdued. Core inflation (which excludes raw food and energy items) has hovered around 0.2 percent since the second half of 2002, compared to the BOT’s target range of O-3% percent. In part as a result of lower energy prices, headline inflation has been trending down after cresting at about 2 percent in January (Figure 2). 8. The monetary stance continues to be accommodative. In response to dimmer growth prospects, low inflation, and a stronger external position, the BOT cut its policy rate in January and November 2002, and-after the mission-in June 2003. Deposit and lending rates have declined recently and might fall further in response to the latest easing. 9. Fiscal policy provided timely countercyclical Thaiand Nonhancd pubbc sector fiscal opcrat,ona, z000,0, 2003,04 l, (Pcrccnt of fiid y&r GDP) support in the fiscal year 2ooo,o, lo!i!lu ZMzLoi LQ!u!Q4 Year-on-year change Eat. Pro,. Fro, 2001m 2002103 2003,04 that ended in September 1. Cenlrnl balance gO”er”mPnl -1.6 2.1 00 0.4 -0.5 2.” 05 2002 (FY 2001/02), but has h&wary Extrabudgetary CC”hd iii& gOYCmm”t ~2.9 13 -2 “7 8 x.9 09 -05 “9 -0.6 01 0, 19 04 “1 since become contractionary, ‘. Lnca’goWmmcn’ba’ancc “3 04 “3 03 0.1 -0, ~“1 notwithstanding new quasi- 3. Genera, balance + -, 3 -17 01 4 Idcntllicd pmernmmt off budget BL.tl”I1ICs 2 (I 1) -0 I 1.2 0.1 -0.2 “7 -0.4 -II 20 I 2 -02 04 fiscal activities (Table 2). An 5 N”nhanclvl pubhc c”lcrpnscs 03 “8 0.1 “4 0.4 -06 03 assessment of the fiscal stance 6. PDF m,crcit “9 09 In 07 -0.1 0.1 0, 7. Comprehenrive public sector brlance (3 + 43 - 6) -2 0 3.1) -05 o* -I” 2s “7 is complicated by the li The Lid year rum frum Octabcr I to Sepmbcr 3” authorities’ recourse to 2 includes the “lllagc Fund. debt b”lpC”u”” fur famers, Wld rctmd cd servant bcnctitr measures implemented off-budget. In some cases (notably, the Village Fund and the debt moratorium for farmers, described in Box 1) the direct costs are brought on-budget over ‘In dollar terms, more than half of export growth was accounted for by increased trade with ASEAN (an association of ten South-East Asian nations), China, and Hong Kong SAR. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-6- Box 1. RECENT FISCAL INITIATIVES Since taking office in February 2001, the government has embarked on a number of initiatives to boost domestic demand as a complement to export-led growth. Many of these initiatives aim to increase credit to the economy, often through the intermediation of government-owned Specialized Financial Institutions (SFIs) which in turn have largely financed themselves using their rising deposit base. As such, they have been referred to as elements of a “credit-based fiscal policy.” Information on the direct budgetary impact of-or the likely contingent liabilities from-most programs is scant. Staff estimates that, on balance, the stimulus from the credit-based fiscal policy moderates-but does not fully offset-the fiscal withdrawal from consolidation in the headline fiscal balances. This box provides details on credit-based initiatives and other recent ad hoc fiscal measures, Credit-based fiscal initiatives Credit for small- and medium-sized enterprises. SFIs and state-owned banks were encouraged to extend new loans ofup to B 225 billion (4 percent of GDP) between January 2002 and June 2003. However, actual credit extension on record has been less-about B 95 billion by February 2003 of which about half was provided by SFIs. Based on balance sheet data, SF1 credit (excluding mortgages) increased by about 0.4 percent of GDP in the first half of FY 2002103 (after 1.3 percent of GDP in FY 2001/02). Overall, the stimulus for FY 2002103 from SFIs could be % to 1% percent of GDP. Subsidized mortgages for public sector employees. Employees of the government and public enterprises have been offered cheap mortgages through an SFI. As of February 2003 the total credit extended under this program is estimated at about % percent of GDP. The stimulus for FY 2002103 under this program is estimated at about ‘% percent of GDP. Retired civil servant benefits. Civil servant retirees are being offered an opportunity to take a lump-sum advance against future benefits. The expected drain on the budget is about 0.2 percent of GDP in FY 2002/03 and 0.4 percent in FY 2003104 and is already reflected in the fiscal tables in this report under the heading “off-budget activities”. Housing for the poor. This program aims at providing 1 million homes for the poor over several years. About 600,000 homes will be built by the National Housing Authority (an SOE) and sold at subsidized prices to low income people. SFIs will finance both the construction and the purchase of these homes. For the remaining 400,000 homes, SFIs will provide affordable financing. The authorities estimate the subsidy costs to the govcmment would amount to about 1 percent of GDP over the life of the program. The total cost for the 600,000 units to be built by the NHA is estimated at about 5 percent of GDP and contingent liabilities would arise if the NHA cannot sell these units or if borrowers default. However, the initial phases of the program involve small projects intended to test the viability of the initiative. The impact on the FY 2002/03 budget is expected to be minimal, while next fiscal year the budgetary costs are likely to be less than ‘/s percent of GDP. The Village Fund. This program established a revolving credit facility in all villages. The total cost was around B 75 billion (roughly 1% percent of GDP), originally financed by an SFI. The budget, however, will reimburse the SF1 over eight years and made the first payment in 2001102. The program is recorded as an extra-budgetary fund in the authorities’ GFS data and is included in the fiscal table of this report under the heading “off-budget activity”. Debt suspension for farmers. This program granted one-time relief to farmers on loans from the agricultural SFI. The program is over, and the costs+riginally borne by the SFI-are being reimbursed by the budget with the last payment in the 2003104 budget; cumulative costs to the budget will be around B 20 billion (less than % percent of GDP), In the aggregate, the impact of initiatives not already included in Table 2 for FY 2002/03 could range from 1 to 2 percent of GDP. Other fiscal initiatives . The 30 baht healthcare scheme. This scheme allows access to healthcare at a fixed cost per visit. The cost is on budget, and has increased as the program expands to full capacity. The total cost is estimated to be about 1% percent of GDP per year, but the incremental cost net of other pm-existing health programs, is only around % percent of GDP. . Petroleum subsidy. Retail petroleum prices were temporarily subsidized during the spike in oil prices in the first quarter of 2003. The program was implemented using an existing extra-budgetary fund, with bridge financing from an SFI. Ultimately, the scheme proved to be self-financing as world oil prices fell. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-7- time-and are therefore included in the staff projections of headline balances. In other cases (notably, most of the credit-based fiscal activities launched this fiscal year), there are no direct budgetary implications as yet. Thus, headline fiscal data do not fully capture the impact on demand of fiscal policy. However, the stimulus from the credit-based fiscal initiatives (for example, policy-related new lending to small- and medium-sized enterprises, SMEs) is difficult to pinpoint since their scope is not known with precision. a The expansion in FY 2001/02 at the general government level was short of target as a result of revenue buoyancy, improved tax administration, and underspending. Greater stimulus-about 1 percent of GDP-came from off-budget initiatives such as the Village Fund and the moratorium on debt repayment for farmers. a In the current fiscal year, the general government balance is projected to improve by 2 percent of GDP as revenues continue to over-perform and spending retrenchment is proceeding faster than planned. Additional consolidation is expected from the unwinding of the Village Fund. However, the fiscal withdrawal is mitigated by new quasi-fiscal initiatives aimed at boosting rural incomes and home ownership, as well as credit extension to SMEs and civil servants. Most of these initiatives involve expanded operations of SFIs. On current trends, these initiatives will reduce, but not reverse, the fiscal tightening. 10. With an improving external position, appreciation pressures persist and official reserves continue to be built up (Table 3, Figure 3). Balance of payments developments reflect both a higher current account surplus (6 percent of GDP in 2002) and a reduction in net capital outflows, notwithstanding a drop in net FDI.2 Regional comparisons of movements in real effective exchange rates and the strong export performance suggest that Thailand’s competitiveness is currently not a concern. Predominantly one-sided (sterilized) interventions have helped limit the appreciation of the baht against the U.S. dollar, and the currency has depreciated modestly in nominal effective terms since mid 2002. Official gross reserves stood at over US$39 billion at end-June 2003. On the strength of the improved external position, Thailand started in January 2003 advance repurchases of the outstanding obligations under the 1997 official financing package. This will be fully repaid by end-July 2003, about two years ahead of schedule. 11. Capital market developments so far have also been favorable (Figure 4). The Stock Exchange of Thailand (SET) index increased about 17 percent in 2002, and over 30 percent more through June 2003, one of the best performances in emerging markets. Strong private capital inflows, ample liquidity, low deposit rates, subdued inflation, and reduced risk premia are keeping bond yields low. All major credit rating agencies now share a positive outlook for the sovereign rating. 2The 2002 decline in FDI partly reflects global trends (net FDI to developing countries and emerging economies fell by one quarter in 2002) and partly special factors. These accounted for more than half of the fall in net FDI, and included financial restructurings of some multinational companies, reduced need for inter-company loans, and sales of restructured assets by foreign asset management companies. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-8- 12. B. Corporate and Financial Sector Developments The faster pace of activity has brought forth only limited adjustment in the corporate and financial sectors: 0 While enterprises made some advances in de-leveraging, their balance sheets remain fragile (Figure 5). Higher profitability in the upswing has supported a reduction of indebtedness. The debt-to-equity ratio for nonfinancial SET firms fell to below two in mid 2002 from 2.5 one year earlier, but it is still among the highest in the region, and varies significantly across firms. 0 Banks’ financial positions, though improving, are still weak (Figure 6).3 Private banks are now making profits. Interest margins, however, have been constrained by nonperforming loans (NPLs) and heightened competition for prime customers. State banks’ profitability has improved, on the back of large NPL transfers to state-owned asset resolution vehicles and aggressive lending. Even though all banks are in compliance with regulatory requirements and some have been upgraded by rating agencies, capital adequacy remains a concern for others, given problem loans still on their books and less-than-robust provisioning.4 13. Lending activity has gathered some steam, but mostly at state-owned institutions. Credits outstanding by commercial banks were up about 3.4 percent (once debt write-offs and transfers to Asset Management Companies (AMCs) are factored in) through April 2003, after expanding 3.2 percent in 2002 and only about 0.7 percent in 2001 (Table 4).5 ‘An overview of the banking sector is provided m the Selected Issues paper to accompany this report. ‘Provisioning requirements were eased late in 2002 and are net of (possibly over-valued) collateral. Since late 2002, NPLs cover all classified loans, including fully-provisioned ones that were previously excluded. This change resulted in an increase in reported NPLs in December. ‘The relationship between credit growth and economic growth is discussed in the Selected issues paper. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-9- Consumer credit enjoyed a strong increase from a low base which leaves room for further growth.6 However, demand for new loans from creditworthy commercial customers has been limited. The bulk of the growth in bank’s performing loans was accounted for by state-owned banks which, like other state-owned financial institutions, have been encouraged by the government to meet ambitious lending targets. 14. Notwithstanding a renewed push from the BOT, NPL resolution at private banks continues to be slow. Distressed assets in the system remain stubbornly high, raising questions about the effectiveness of the asset resolution mechanisms in place and the legal framework. The BOT announced last year plans to act as a mediator to accelerate restructurings, setting guidelines on how banks should proceed and establishing bank- specific timelines for tackling NPLs at different stages of resolution. Implementation of the plan, however, has been slow. 15. While the Thai Asset Management Corporation (TAMC) met its targets for resolving NPLs, an assessment of its effectiveness continues to be hindered by lack of transparency. Aside from a few prominent cases, details of asset resolution have not been made public, even in an aggregate form. The TAMC records a debt workout as resolved once its Executive Committee agrees to it. However, full resolution is often contingent on the borrower taking additional steps, including raising more financing. It is unclear how many of the approved restructurings have met these conditions. The TAMC has yet to process a large number of foreclosures and tens of thousands of accounts involving primarily smaller cases. III. POLICY DISCUSSIONS A. Macroeconomic Outlook and Risks 16. Recent external events have weakened near-term growth prospects and increased the risk of a falling price level. Tourism has been badly affected by SARS, which is projected to knock almost 3/4 percentage points off 2003 growth. Moreover, trends in energy prices and the appreciation of the baht are adding to downward pressures on inflation. Core inflation is unlikely to pick up significantly from its near-zero rate in the year ahead and headline inflation is projected to decline.7 17. Nevertheless, the momentum for growth in 2003 and 2004 is strong. In spite of SARS, GDP growth is projected at around 4% percent for this year and 5 percent for the next. %Zredit card loans were still only 1 percent of total loans at end 2002. The share of housing and personal consumption loans was about 12 percent. The credit card delinquency rate is reportedly low (less than 5 percent in 2002). Nonetheless, on concerns about aggressive marketing, the BOT tightened credit card regulations in December. 7 Since 1999, headline inflation has averaged 1.1 percent, or about 4% percentage points less than during 1990-98. The low inflation environment has reflected underutilized capacity, lower domestic prices of imports, price controls on basic utilities and key public services, and a decline in house rents. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-lO- The slowdown in 2003 reflects a reduced contribution from the external sector, on the assumption that export volume growth moderates from the exceptionally strong rate of 2002, and that the tourism sector absorbs a sharp-but short-lived-impact of SARS.8 However, domestic demand is projected to remain robust, and base effects, especially the recovery of tourism, will push up growth in 2004. 18. The risks to the outlook are broadly balanced. A delayed recovery in advanced economies and SARS-affected regional partners could depress exports; very low core inflation makes Thailand vulnerable to hard-to-reverse price dynamics in the event of an adverse shock; and the possibility of a disorderly adjustment in global current account imbalances remains a concern. The tourism sector could also suffer from a more protracted impact or a recurrence of SARS. On the upside, Thailand has shown resilience in coping with recent shocks, and carries momentum into 2003, especially from strong growth in exports in the first quarter. 19. Overall, Thailand’s external vulnerability continues to decline (Table 5). Balance of payments prospects remain good under plausible scenarios. The current account is projected to remain in surplus for some years and the capital and financial account is expected to improve significantly, once repayment of the financing package is completed. Furthermore, external debt dynamics are favorable and appear robust to a range of adverse shocks (Annex I). Risks are further contained by a comfortable reserve cushion, the flexible exchange rate regime, hedging of short-term exchange rate exposures, and the country’s diversified export base.’ 20. However, growth is expected to increase slowly over the medium term, unless structural reform is accelerated. In the staffs medium-term macroeconomic scenario structural reforms will advance only slowly, and will be incomplete. Therefore the transition to a higher growth path will be gradual, and the medium-term growth rate below what Thailand could achieve (Table 6).” The projections assume an increase in private investment, and a parallel trend in the current account toward a deficit. Fiscal consolidation is expected to continue, and external debt and debt service to decline steadily. However, given remaining vulnerabilities in corporates’ and banks’ balance sheets, the economy’s resilience in the face of adverse shocks remains weak.” The authorities were in broad agreement with 8Tourist arrivals were down some 50 percent in April and May, but industry surveys point to a recovery from the third quarter onward. Tourism accounted for about 6 percent of GDP in 2002. 9An aggregate balance sheet analysis, confirming the decline in Thailand’s vulnerability since the crisis, is presented in the Selected Issues paper. lo Under the staffs projection, the implied per capita income growth is below 5 percent, compared with an average rate of almost 6 percent in the Asian NIEs since 1970. l1 For example, should one third of already restructured loans become non-performing again, and be recovered at the average rate of current NPLs, banks’ losses would amount to the equivalent of about 4 percent of GDP and about 50 percent of regulatory capital. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- ll- these projections, although they took a somewhat more upbeat view on investment and growth prospects, on the strength of improved corporate balance sheets and their efforts to revitalize SMEs’ activity. B. Macroeconomic Policies Fiscal policy 21. The authorities intend to pursue a strategy of consolidation over the medium term, and the 2002/03 budget marked a beginning of this process. A budget surplus is targeted for 2008 at the latest. The 2002/03 budget called for a reduction in the deficit to 3.3 percent of GDP, with a structural consolidation of 1 percent of GDP. The mission supported the government’s plans, noting that fiscal risks arising from the prospective costs of financial sector restructuring, ongoing fiscal decentralization, and quasi-fiscal activities, warrant a continued commitment to fiscal prudence (Box 2). 22. However, fiscal adjustment has proceeded faster than intended, and the mission supported plans for a more measured pace of consolidation. Spending targets in the first half of this fiscal year have been undershot, partly as a result of temporary disruptions associated with a reorganization of ministries and spending agencies. There was agreement that an expenditure catch-up to meet budget targets would provide timely support to domestic demand to offset the impact of SARS, and would limit the fiscal overperformance (about 2% percent of GDP) from stronger-than-projected revenues. Taking this year’s likely outturn into account, in the staffs projections, the fiscal outturn for FY 2003/04 would involve a further adjustment on the order of % percent of GDP at the level of the central government. The more measured consolidation would-inter alia-safeguard needed capital projects.12 23. Quasi-fiscal activities and credit-based fiscal initiatives raise issues of transparency and excessive interventionism. Policy lending by public SFIs and credit extended by state-owned commercial banks could create contingent liabilities to the budget and are nontransparent. l3 The staff argued that an expanded role of these financial institutions also undermines market-based intermediation and worsens prospects for the unsubsidized private banking sector. The authorities thought that credit-based initiatives empower the less well-off, have beneficial supply-side effects, and bypass impaired channels of transmission of more conventional macropolicies. They also argued that SFIs are just fulfilling their development mandates, and that the state-owned banks operate on commercial terms, bringing welcome competition into the banking sector. Finally, they noted that the imminent introduction of a revamped accounting system to separate out the costs of the SFIs’ policy- 12The comprehensive public sector is expected to be in surplus for the first time since the crisis. 13These issues and their debt implications are discussed further in the Selected Issues paper. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12- Box 2. FISCAL POLICY AND DEBT SUSTAINABILITY This box explains the differences between the authorities’ and staffs debt projections and argues that continued fiscal consolidation at a measured pace is important to offset potential risks to the debt trajectory. After rising rapidly during the crisis, public debt has stabilized in recent years. Between fiscal years 1995196 and 1999100 (October-September) public debt in percent of GDP rose by about 43 percentage points. Most of the increase was due to costs of financial sector restructuring but some was also the result of primary deficits in the wake of the crisis. Since 1999/00 the debt ratio has declined modestly as the pace of fiscal expansion slowed. However, greater-than-expected consolidation in the last two years has led to significant reductions in the debt ratio by end-2001/02 which is well below early projections. Recent developments in public debt dynamics compare favorably with those in neighboring countries. ThaIland: Public Debt (I” percent “f fiscal yea GDP) Change in Pubhc Sector Debt, 2000 2002 Ii (Percent of GDP) In the authorities’ plans for medium-term fiscal consolidation, the public debt is expected to fall to 45% percent of GDP by FY 2006/07. The framework envisions fiscal surpluses beginning 2003/04 and a marked increase in primary surpluses in the outer years. The framework also calls for not exceeding a debt-to-GDP ratio of 60 percent and a debt service ratio of 16 percent of budgeted spending. Staffs baseline projections are for a somewhat higher debt path, reaching 50 percent of GDP by FY 2006/07. Compared to the authorities’ projections staff build in somewhat lower buoyancy in revenues and a more gradual path of expenditure consolidation-for 2006107 the revenue projection is 0.3 percent of GDP lower and primary expenditure 1.3 percent of GDP higher than the authorities’. (A sharp reduction in the expenditure ratio may be difficult to achieve-and indeed undesirable- given that the average primary expenditure ratio in the early 1990s was close to 15% percent while the authorities project it falling to about 13 percent by 2006107). The staffs projection for liabilities of the agency bearing the cost of financial sector restructuring (FIDF) are also greater than the authorities’ and assumes that off-balance sheet liabilities amounting to about 10 percent of GDP will be brought on balance sheet between 2003/04 and 200.5/06. Other reasons for the differences between the staffs and the authorities’ projections include higher net recoveries assumed by the authorities and amortization of FIDF debt from profits of the Bank of Thailand. Securing a downward debt trajectory over the medium term-through modest fiscal effort each year-is important on account of uncertainties in the realization of the future financial sector restructuring costs, risks from fiscal devolution, and the possibility of slower growth. The staffs baseline projections assume a modest rise in the primary balance of the central government from about % percent of GDP in 2002/03 to 2% percent hS of GDP by 2009/1O+r about 0.3 percent of GDP a year on average. Thahnd Tofal Pubhc Debt Prqccmnr The baseline incorporates direct government costs associated with the construction of about 600,000 low-cost housing units amounting to about 1 percent of GDP. The baseline also assumes that the increased transfers to local governments as part of the ongoing fiscal devolution process will be fully offset by reduction in central government expenditures. In the event that central government expenditures are not reduced, public debt would be about 15 percent of GDP higher in 2009110. A slower growth profile for the medium I”Cmi\C I” PDF llabhtira term-2 percent less each year than the 5.1 percent assumed over the ?j ;~~ ~.~~~~i\~‘h~~u~s~~i~l~e~!l~~~~---.-..~~~~~J~~~ ~~~~~ horizon-would also lead to a considerably higher debt stock. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13 - related activities will improve accountability, and that plans to strengthen the regulatory framework are under consideration.‘4 24. The mission was concerned about the ongoing fiscal devolution process. The law calls for local revenues (inclusive of transfers from the central government) to rise to 35 percent of total by FY 2005/06, 13 percentage points more than currently. With still limited local tax-raising capacity, l5 achieving this target will require greater central government subsidies and could raise the debt-to-GDP ratio to about 60 percent by FY 2005/06. Transfer of expenditure responsibilities has been constrained by weak local administrative capacity and shortage of qualified personnel. Furthermore, uncertainties regarding intergovernmental grants complicate fiscal management at the local level, and poor information on local finances hampers policy design at the center. l6 The mission suggested that an amendment to the law may be necessary to defer the increase in local government revenue share until local taxes could be increased and expenditure functions transferred, and offered technical assistance on implementing the devolution strategy. The authorities did not rule out an amendment to the law, but thought that the macroeconomic risks from the devolution process could be kept manageable. They also noted the planned establishment of a specialized center to improve fiscal information on local governments. 25. There is scope for strengthening the fiscal system in other areas. The mission noted that the fiscal framework is undermined by lack of flexibility in the budgetary process and biases toward underspending and revenue overperformance. In the mission’s view, these inadequacies limit the scope for countercyclical policy, complicate policy assessment, and may motivate the resort to off-budget activities. The authorities argued instead that flexibility has been safeguarded by judicious recourse to on-budget contingency funds. On tax reform issues, there was agreement that increasing the VAT rate appears less urgent in light of the progress in fiscal consolidation, but should still be considered in the context of plans to overhaul the tax structure.‘7 Monetary and exchange rate policies 26. The authorities thought that the monetary and exchange rate framework-a managed float in the context of inflation targeting-continues to serve Thailand well. In the low inflation environment, the BOT has maintained an accommodative stance to keep growth on track in spite of tighter-than-expected fiscal policy. In the authorities’ view, external stability has also been enhanced through a build-up of reserves ahead of the 14A system of Public Service Accounts has been designed with the assistance from the Asian Development Bank and will become operational by year end. “Enactment of a new Property Tax Law is not expected until 2005. 16Data on local governments becomes available with a two-year lag. l7 The Fund provided technical assistance on reform of the personal income tax in 2000, and a technical assistance mission on the taxation of financial services took place in July 2003. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14- repayment of the official package. Looking ahead, they thought that monetary settings would have to take into account the risks arising from the still weak global economy, the impact of SARS, a further depreciation of the U.S. dollar, and the possibility of an international transmission of deflation, particularly from China and Japan. 27. The staff agreed that the monetary framework was sound, but saw scope for further easing of monetary policy. Near-zero core inflation, with the risks identified by the authorities, strengthened the case for a further reduction in the policy rate, together greater exchange rate flexibility. Adverse shocks or a further weakening of baht import prices could lead to negative core inflation and deflationary expectations. An interest rate cut would provide insurance against these possibilities and carried few risks. The authorities, while also concerned about deflationary risks, expected core inflation to recover over the relevant policy horizon, given the monetary stimulus in the pipeline. They were also concerned that a rate cut would adversely affect savers’ income. Furthermore, in their view, deflationary pressures arising from the pass-through to domestic prices of a baht appreciation could be contained by intervention. Nevertheless, they said that policy settings would be kept under review. The mission argued that lower interest rates would be more effective in addressing the problem at the root, while also safeguarding the credibility of the monetary and exchange rate framework, which limits the purpose of intervention to the smoothing of short-term volatility. 28. Subsequent to the mission, the BOT reduced its policy rate. In an unscheduled meeting on June 27, the BOT Monetary Policy Committee reduced the policy rate by 50 basis points to 1% percent, in the wake of a quarter-point cut by the Fed and sizeable short-term capital inflows. It cited concerns about external uncertainties and the risk of core inflation turning negative as the main reasons for its decision. 29. Discussions covered other aspects of the monetary framework. The staff suggested raising the floor of the BOT inflation target range to focus inflationary expectations firmly around a positive value. The authorities thought that this could be considered in time, but attached greater urgency to improving some operational aspects of the framework, as regards the use of their monetary policy instruments. (1MF technical assistance on this is forthcoming). On the issue of a formal recognition of central bank independence, they were confident that the relevant legislation would be enacted soon. Finally, the authorities said that they did not intend to make substantive changes to the Currency Act, noting that emergency decrees could be issued to allow free use of official reserves, if necessary. Structural reforms 30. There was broad agreement that further steps are needed to improve the health of the banking system. In the authorities’ view, the BOT-led initiative will in time bear fruit, and slow progress to date largely reflects the fact that the remaining NPLs of private banks are tougher cases to resolve. They did not see a more vigorous exercise of regulatory powers as helpful under the circumstances. Other options are nonetheless under consideration. The mission argued that, at least in some instances, forbearance on provisioning requirement weakens incentives to restructure bad assets and masks inadequacies in the capital base. The mission also supported the search for alternative approaches to accelerate NPL resolution, such as a re-opening of the TAMC to private banks. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 15 - 31. Views differed on the significance of progress made by the TAMC in corporate restructuring. The authorities pointed to the large value of restructurings already achieved and to evidence that special legal powers had been used effectively against recalcitrant debtors. They also noted improvements in the transparency of operations, (including the publication of an annual report in English and the opening of a public information center) and plans to establish vehicles for the disposition of foreclosed assets. The mission acknowledged these accomplishments, but noted that operational restructurings and seizures of assets have occurred only in a handful of cases. Furthermore, the low cash recoveries to date raise concerns that the balance may be unduly tilted toward rehabilitation of distressed firms over protecting the public purse and minimizing moral hazard. However, lack of information on projected cash recoveries makes judgment difficult.18 32. The mission encouraged the authorities to complete the unfinished agenda of legal reforms. Key economic laws remain to be enacted. In particular, amendments to the Bankruptcy Law are still under review; the Cabinet has not yet endorsed a final version of the Financial Institutions Act; and drafts of the Secured Transaction Law and the Deposit Insurance Law remain in the works. The mission stressed that delays in enacting these laws, as well as other weaknesses in the legal system, hold back corporate restructuring and a revival of bank intermediation. 33. The authorities pointed to broad-based efforts to strengthen the capital markets. Several high-level committees are at work to improve corporate governance and accounting standards. A World Bank-led ROSC in these areas is slated for the second part of the year. Amendments to the Public Company and Securities acts are in the works, but more needs to be done to promote participation of institutional investors in capital markets. There was agreement that strict enforcement of the relevant regulations remains key to market development in the longer term. 34. Privatization has gone slower than expected. The authorities thought that the pre- commitment to a timetable for privatization has proved unworkable, and a more pragmatic approach which gives due weight to market developments and progress in business reorganization will be followed, going forward. Several enterprises, including the national airline and the largest state bank, are slated for (partial) public sale soon. The mission noted that a resumption of privatization would have a beneficial impact on investor sentiment and the development of capital markets. 35. While Thailand remains committed to the multilateral process, recent trade liberalization has focused on regional and bilateral agreements. At the start of this year, import tariffs within the ASEAN Free Trade Area (AFTA) were capped at 5 percent, implying a projected effective tariff rate of 3 percent among ASEAN members. At the same time, Thailand has been negotiating FTAs with a number of countries, including China and Japan. Thailand’s average applied tariff outside AFTA, however, is still above 15 percent, and with a maximum tariff rate of 80 percent, dispersion remains considerable within a complex system. In this context, the government’s plan of creating a three-rate tariff system “Corporate restructuring is discussed further in the Selected 1sssues paper. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 16- is welcome-as would be improvements in customs administration. As regards protective measures confronting its own exports, the Thai authorities perceive agricultural policies in advanced countries as the largest barrier. C. Other Matters 36. The mission presented to the authorities the Executive Board’s views on the use of Collective Action Clauses and offered Fund technical assistance of the matter. The authorities noted that the latest issuance of Thailand’s sovereign paper in the international market (an oversubscribed US$300 million issue of 5-year Floating Rate Notes) was governed by English law and included such provisions. 37. A data ROSC is tentatively scheduled for early 2004. The mission encouraged the authorities to accelerate plans for a fiscal transparency ROSC and an FSAP. 38. Thailand stands ready to participate in the September-November 2003 Fund’s Financial Transactions Plan. IV. STAFF APPRAISAL 39. Thailand’s economy has continued to gain strength. Growth accelerated substantially in 2002 and was broadly based, while the external position improved further. These developments set the stage for the authorities’ decision to repay early the 1997 official financial package, for which they should be commended. 40. Policies have supported the recovery but not fully secured prospects for sustained growth. Demand management to stimulate the economy has not been sufficiently complemented by structural reforms. Fragilities arising from over-geared corporates and impaired assets in the financial system, have been mitigated only marginally by the rebound in activity and continue to limit the headroom for growth over the medium term. The current expansion should not lead to complacency but be seen as a propitious setting to step up structural reforms. 41. The BOT’s accommodative stance is appropriate. The decision in June to reduce the policy rate provides welcome insurance against deflation risks, and reinforces the credibility of the inflation targeting framework. Very low inflation still makes Thailand vulnerable to hard-to-reverse price dynamics in the event of negative shocks and an easing bias should be maintained. In time, the BOT could also consider raising the floor of its target range to firmly anchor inflationary expectations around a positive level. 42. Exchange rate management should reflect a commitment to two-way flexibility. With comfortable reserves, interventions beyond what is needed to smooth short-term volatility could lead to perceptions of an implicit exchange target, creating risks, and should be avoided. The recent monetary easing (instead of further intervention) has been helpful in supporting the credibility of an exchange rate regime that is serving Thailand well. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17- 43. Fiscal policy has played a useful counter-cyclical role, duly balancing this objective with that of medium-term consolidation. The fiscal stimulus in 2002 was well timed and the shift to a more contractionary stance in the current fiscal year appropriate. However, spending below target in the first half of the fiscal year has contributed to budgetary overperformance. The authorities are correct in aiming for higher disbursement rates for the remainder of the year to bring the pace of consolidation more in line with plans and offset the effects of the SARS shock on tourism. 44. Over the medium term, fiscal adjustment remains key to strengthening the public finances. Consolidation has proceeded faster than anticipated, but the authorities’ strategy to reduce the debt-to-GDP ratio further remains appropriate given the costs of financial sector restructuring and other contingent liabilities. The authorities could also strengthen fiscal management by implementing fiscal decentralization carefully, improving the tax structure, and addressing inadequacies in the budgetary process. A reassessment of the time-line of the devolution process and of the target rate for revenue transfers would lower fiscal risks and provide time to address institutional shortcomings. A gradual increase of the VAT rate in the context of the authorities’ medium-term plans for a broader reform would enhance the efficiency of the tax system and could support revenues. Greater flexibility in the budget process would make policy more responsive and transparent. The authorities are also encouraged to undertake as soon as possible a fiscal ROSC to chart the course ahead. 45. The strategy of reliance on quasi-fiscal activities, including those supported by SFIs, should be reconsidered. These activities may have legitimate development or redistributive objectives but undermine the accountability and transparency of the budgetary process as well as the assessment and formulation of policy, and should be brought on budget. Furthermore, an expansion of credit-based initiatives could jeopardize the authorities’ objective of medium-term fiscal consolidation and weaken the credit culture. The authorities’ intention to better record policy-related activities of SFIs through improved accounting procedures is a step in the right direction. As regards commercially-oriented operations of these institutions, the authorities should speedily implement their plans to enhance the supervisory and regulatory framework to contain risks to the financial sector. More broadly, SFIs should not be used as instruments of counter-cyclical fiscal policy, and their operations should be in accordance with narrowly defined mandates. 46. Rapid growth in lending by state-owned banks, which has increased their market share, is cause for concern. This may reflect the absence of a level playing field or excessive risk-taking, and could have adverse consequences for the banking sector as a whole. State banks should be monitored closely to ensure that they are run on a commercial basis, under appropriate risk-management practices. Their early privatization would go a long way to ensuring a fair and competitive financial sector. 47. Continued progress with corporate and banking sector restructuring is needed to accelerate medium-term growth. The TAMC has made progress in some areas, but a substantial amount of work remains to be done, including finalizing deals, taking possession of foreclosed properties, and disposing of acquired assets. Its effectiveness could be better assessed with greater disclosure on the progression of restructuring cases, cash recovery Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 18- targets and their achievement, and asset disposal. The BOT-led initiative to spur NPL resolution at private banks should be vigorously pursued. Options such as a re-opening of the TAMC to private banks under fair and transparent rules could also be considered. Regulatory powers should be used to ensure that problems in weaker banks are resolved, either through increases in their capital or consolidation in the sector. Participation in an FSAP would help identify priority areas for action. 48. The authorities should carry out their agenda of legal reforms. Resolution of NPLs would be greatly helped by an enabling legal environment and improved judicial procedures. In particular, the creation of a predictable framework for restructuring debt that strikes an appropriate balance between the interests of debtors and creditors is crucial for rehabilitating the corporate sector and encouraging new credit. Other pending financial sector legislation should also be enacted as quickly as possible. 49. It is recommended that the next consultation with Thailand take place on a standard 12-month consultation cycle. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 19- Figure 1. Real Sector Developments and Outlook . ..with strong contributions from both domestic demand and net exports. 16 ‘ontributions to GDP growth n percem :J 14 i 12 Thegrowth momentum has been sustained through thefirst quarter of 2003 . . . 12 , I 12 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 0 -2 -4 -6 Real GDP Growth (percent change) -I 10 -3 L 99ql 99q3 OOql ooq3 Olql Olq3 02ql 02q3 03ql 99ql 99q3 OOql ooq3 Olql Olq3 02ql 02q3 03ql Manufacturingproduction and capacity utilization continue to rise . . . Manufacturing Production Index .a. leading forecasters to revise growth expectations upward. 6 Monthly Real GDP Consensus Forecasts (in percent, through June 2003) 6 120 70 100 60 80 50 60 2 1 (Source: Asia-Pacitic Consensus Porecast) 12 Jan-02 Mar-02 May-02 Jul-02 Sep-02 Now02 Jan-03 Mar-03 May-03 Jan-97 Jan-98 Jan-99 Jan-00 h-01 Jan-02 Jan-03 . . . private investment remains on the upswing. Although indicators ofprivate consumption have become more mixed ,.. 20 Consumption Indicators (thousands, seasonally adjusted, 18 160 150 140 130 120 110 100 90 80 70 60 50 180 7 180 Private Gross Fixed Capital Formation Components (1999ql = 100) / 160 I Private Equipment 140 120 100 I V X0/ 1 ” ’ 99ql 99q3 OOql ooq3 0lql Olq3 02ql ozq3 03ql 80 3month MA, through May 2003) J t Dec.99 Jun-00 Dee-00 Jun.01 Dec.01 Jun.02 Dec.02 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 20 - Figure 2. Monetary and Inflation Developments (in percent, unless otherwise indicated) With core inflation falling to the bottom of the target range... 6 - CPl and Core Inflation, 1999 -June 2003 0 4 1nnation target (core) 4 2 2 0 0 -2 -2 OL 1 0 Jan-99 Jan-00 Jan-O 1 Jan-02 Jan-03 Jan-99 Jan-00 Jan-O 1 Jan-02 Jan-03 Bank interest rates have continued to fall . . . . . . and credit growth is recovering but remains weak. 12 h Bank Interest Rates, 1999 - May 2003 6 4 Deposit rate 2 0 0 Jan-99 Jul-99 Jan-00 Jul.00 Jan-01 Jul-01 Jan-02 Jul.02 Jan-03 Bank liquidity is ample... 0.25 7 0.25 :ommercial Banks, Liquid Asset Ratio, 1999 -April 2003 0.20 0.15 0.10 0.05 Jan- Jul- Jan- Jul- Jan- Jul- Jan- Jul- Jan- 99 99 00 00 01 01 02 02 03 . . . the BOT has eased monetary policy further. 4 4 Overnight Repurchase and Interhank Rates, 1999 _ June 2003 \ Intcrbank rate *. . ‘..*,.. . Overnight repo (Icfl axis) 10 8 Broad Money and Commercial Bank Private Credit Growth, 1999 - May 2003 (12-month percent change) I/ 2/ 10 8 -2 Credit, adjusted y/y -4 -6 -8 -10 - -10 -12 \ -12 -14 -14 Jan-99 Jul-99 Jan-00 Jul-00 Jan-01 Jul-01 Jan-02 Jul-02 Jan-03 . . . allowing commercial banks to wind down their foreign liabilities. Commercial Bank Net Foreign Assets, 1999 - April 2003 I .__\ IO *-. Foreign assets -- *_,-.. *.. \ -’ __ 5 1 Jan-99 Jul-99 Jan-00 Jul.00 Jan-01 Jul-01 Jan-02 Jul.02 Jan-03 7 35 30 25 l/ Private sector credit is adjusted for transfers of bad debt to AMCs and write-offs. 2/ M2A growth was negative in September and October 2002 as depositors withdrew funds to purchase FIDF bonds. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2l- Figure 3. External Developments and Vulnerability Competitiveness remains broadly unchanged . . . Continued strength in exports has kept the current account balance in surplus. 12 Current Account Balance, Export and Import Values - 180 lo (in billions ofU.S. dollars, Jan 1997=100, through May 2003) - 160 130 110 90 70 50 30 130 Regional Real Effective Exchange Rates (June 1997=100; CPI based, through June 2003) 110 - Malaysia . 00 Current Account Balance 3c Jan-97 Jan-98 Jan-99 Jan-00 Jan-01 Jan-02 Jan-03 Nonetheless, a diversified export base has helped lower vulnerability. Jan-97 Jan-98 Jan-99 Jan-00 Jan-0 1 Jan-02 Jan-03 . . . though export growth may haveplateaued. 70 65 60 55 50 45 40 35 US Leading Indicator and Growth of Thai Exports l/ 40 30 20 10 0 -10 -20 1 I/ US Institute for Supply Management (ISM) New Orders Index. J L Jan-99 Jul-99 Jan-00 J&O0 Jan-01 Jul-01 Jan-02 Jul-02 Jan-03 . ..and reserves have increased, despite repayment of the offlcialfinancingpackage. Foreign Exchange Reserves of the BOT (In billions of dollars, through May 2003) In addition, external debt has been reduced significantly, particularly short-term . . . 160 160 External Debt 140 r (in billions of dollars, through Ql, 2003) - 140 30 15 0 80 60 40 20 0 0 -15 r J -15 Aug-97 Jun-98 Apr-99 Feb-00 Dee00 Ott-01 Aug-02 97ql 97q4 98q3 99q2 ooq 1 ooq4 Olq3 02q2 03ql Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-22- Figure 4. Financial Market Developments and Confidence 150 130 110 90 70 Since the beginning of the year, the stock . ..notwithstanding some volatility in market has outpaced others in the region... portfolio flows. Regional Stock Markets 400 through June 30,2003, 5-day moving averages, Jan I, 2002 = 100) 15o Net Stock Market Purchases by Foreign Investors (through June 2003, monthly flows, in millions of US dollars) 300 130 110 90 Jan-02 Mar-OZMay-02 Jul-02 Sep-02 NW-02 Jan-03 Mar-03 May-03 While the baht has appreciated against the dollar, it has depreciated in effective terms . . . 78 34 Exchange Rates (through June 30,2003) 76 66 64 J; m-00 Jul-00 Jan-01 Jul-01 Jan-02 Jul-02 Jan-03 Jan-00 Jun.00 NW-00 Apr-01 Sep-01 Feb.02 Jul.02 Dee-02 May-03 110 100 90 80 60 50 40 Consumer and business sentiment may be on the rebound after SARS . . . Consumer Conlldence and Business Sentiment Indices (throughJune2003) 60 300 200 100 0 -100 -200 20 18 lb 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 0 400 I ’ -200 Ian-02 Apt-02 Jul-02 act-02 Jan-03 Apr.03 . . . and expected volatility remains broadly stable. 20 Baht Option Implied Volatilities, l-m and l-y contracts (in percent, through June 30,2003) 18 , 16 Source: Bloomberg LP I-month 2 “’ 0 . . . and the sovereign bond spread has narrowed. 800 Government Bond Yield and Bond Spread 200 (in basis points, through June 30,2003; lo-day MA) 600 500 400 300 I T-band (right axis) Y 150 100 2001 , I l5o Jan-01 May-01 Sep-01 Jan-02 May-02 Sep-02 Jan-03 May-03 Jan-00 Jun-00 NW-00 Apr.01 Sep-01 Feb.02 Jul.02 Dec.02 May-03 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-23 - Figure 5. Corporate Sector Developments l/ 0.10 0.05 0.00 -0.05 -0.10 -0.15 -0.20 F c L In listed nonfinancial firms, returns are recovering to pre-crisis levels . . . Return on Assets 1 L 92ql 93q3 95ql 96q3 98ql 99q3 Olql 02q3 94ql 95q2 96q3 97q4 99ql 0092 Olq3 0294 0.10 0.05 0.00 -0.05 -0.10 -0.15 -0.20 Reported interest costs have been declining... . ..and liquidity indicators are improving. 1.6 0.05 Interest/Assets 1.0 1.0 Liquidity Indicators (medians) 0.8 0.03 0.02 0.01 0.0 0.00 92ql 93q3 95ql 96q3 98ql 99q3 Olql 02q3 While aggregate corporate sector debt has . ..it remains high, although not so for the come down . . . median firm. 9 / I 9 :I Debt/sales -~ - 6 Aggregate \ -I- 5 Median ’ * ‘., -13 O’,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,~,,,,,,,,,,,,i 0 94ql 95q2 96q3 97q4 99ql OOq2 Olq3 02q4 . ..as are interest coverage ratios. 8 Interest Coverage Ratio 0.6 0.6 0.4 III> I1III III,,, / I / ,,,I, II /I/I I ,,I ,I 0.4 94ql 95q2 96q3 97q4 99ql 0092 Olq3 02q4 5.0 4.5 Debt/Equity 5.0 4.5 3.5 3.0 - 2.5 - 2.0 Aggregate Median e ’ - * . - . - . - - - - - - . o,5 94ql 95q2 96q3 97q4 99ql ooq2 Olq3 0294 l/ Aggregate figures are the sum of the relevant variables over all firms in each time period. The aggregates are thus analogous to a size-weighted average. The median figures are the median values across firms for the variable concerned in each time period. 2/ Quick ratio = (current assets - inventory)/current liabilities Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 24 - Figure 6. Banking Sector Developments . . . the uncertain quality of restructured NPLsposes risks . . . While NPLs have fallen, distressed assets remain high . . . 90 30 Commercial Bank NPLs, 1998-2002 (percent of loans) x0 I NPLs in Prwate 20 30 20 10 0 -10 -20 -30 -40 90 80 70 60 50 40 30 20 10 0 r Contributions to Cumulative Change in NPLs (in percent, 1999q3 to 2002q4) New NPLs Reversion “f-l, Da* 70 ‘NPLs in state Bd.5 - - Total NPLs -60 lo tul II II -DIStEs?dAsSets 50 0 Restruc. WriteoffslAhK 98q2 99ql 99q4 ooq3 Olq2 02ql 02q4 -40 Afterprovisioning at end 2002, bank profitability is recovering, but is still low. . ..as shown by the volatility of re-entry of NPLs. (percent of previous periods loans outstanding) 1.2 1.0 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0.0 10 , , 10 Return on Assets of Banks, 19974003ql (annualized) I Private banks I 5 0.6 Ott-99 Apr-00 Ott-00 Apt-0 1 Ott-01 Apr-02 Ott-02 97ql 98ql 99ql OOql Olql 02ql 03ql . . . but increased holdings of bonds have increased exposure to interest rate risk. Commercial BankInvestment in Government Securities, 19974003ql (percent of total assets) 25 20 15 10 5 0 Net interest income has picked up recently . . . 20 16 12 8 0 Interest Expense 12 8 -4 provisions 97ql 98ql 99ql OOql Olql 02ql 03ql 25 20 15 10 5 0 l - I 97ql 97q4 98q3 99q2 OOql OOq4 Olq3 02q2 03ql Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 25 - Table 1. Thailand: Selected Economic Indicators, 1999-2004 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 Real GDP growth (percent) Consumption Gross fixed investment 4.4 4.6 1.9 5.3 4.5 5.0 4.1 4.5 3.6 4.1 4.4 4.7 -3.2 5.3 0.9 6.3 4.9 9.0 Inflation Headline CPI (end period, percent) 0.7 1.4 0.8 1.6 0.5 0.4 Headline CPI (period average, percent) 0.0 1.7 I.5 0.6 1.4 0.1 Core CPI (end period, percent) 0.7 0.8 I.2 0.3 0.4 1.0 Core CPI (period average, percent) 1.8 0.7 1.3 0.4 0.4 0.8 Saving and investment (percent of GDP) Gross domestic investment Private, including stocks Public Gross national saving Private, including statistical discrepancy Public Foreign saving 20.5 22.7 23.9 23.8 25.4 26.4 Il.2 14.6 16.2 17.0 18.9 19.9 9.3 8.2 7.7 6.8 6.5 6.5 30.7 30.3 29.3 29.9 30.2 30.9 24.9 23.7 21.4 22.6 22.0 22.0 5.8 6.7 7.9 7.3 8.2 8.9 -10.2 -7.6 -5.4 -6.0 -4.7 -4.6 Fiscal accounts (percent of GDP) l/ Budgetary central government balance Revenue and grants Expenditure and net lending General government balance 2/ Comprehensive public sector balance 3/ Public sector debt -3.5 -2.9 -2.9 -2.8 -0.9 -0.5 15.5 15.5 15.0 15.8 16.2 16.3 18.9 18.4 17.9 18.6 17.1 16.8 -3.1 -2.5 -1.3 -1.7 0.3 0.7 -6.0 -4.1 -2.0 -3.0 -0.5 0.2 55.6 57.3 57.4 54.5 54.0 52.4 Monetary accounts (end period, percent) M2A growth MO growth 1.3 2.2 4.6 -0.1 30.8 -15.2 5.5 13.7 -3.2 -0.1 0.7 3.2 Private sector credit growth, adjusted 41 Balance of payments (billions of US$) Current account balance (Percent of GDP) Exports, f.o.b. Growth rate (in dollar terms) Imports, c.i.f. Growth rate (in dollar terms) Capital and financial account balance S/ Overall balance Gross official reserves (end year) (Months of following year’s imports) (Percent of maturing external debt) Forward position of BOT (end year) 12.5 9.3 6.2 7.6 6.4 6.5 10.2 7.6 5.4 6.0 4.7 4.6 56.8 67.9 63.2 66.9 16.4 80.6 7.4 19.5 -6.9 5.8 14.2 5.5 47.5 62.4 60.7 63.4 73.3 78.7 16.9 31.3 -2.8 4.6 15.5 7.5 -8.2 -10.8 -3.6 -2.0 -8.0 -4.9 4.3 -1.4 2.6 5.6 -1.6 I.6 34.8 32.7 33.0 38.9 36.9 38.5 6.7 6.5 6.3 6.4 5.6 5.4 122.7 119.1 127.0 150.7 176.2 194.7 4.8 2.1 2.1 0.5 0.0 0.0 External debt In percent of GDP In billions of U.S. dollars Public sector Private sector Medium- and long-term Short-term (including portfolio flows) Debt service ratio 6/ 77.6 65.0 58.5 46.8 37.4 31.6 95.1 79.7 67.5 59.3 50.4 45.1 36.2 33.9 28.3 23.5 17.9 16.9 58.8 45.8 39.2 35.8 32.6 28.2 39.4 31.1 26.0 22.7 19.9 15.8 19.4 14.7 13.2 13.1 12.7 12.5 19.8 15.8 21.1 18.4 15.6 9.6 Sources: Information provided by the Thai authorities; and Fund sraff estimates. l/ On a cash and fiscal year basis. The fiscal year ends on September 30. 2/ Includes budgetary central government, extrabudgetary funds and local governments. 3/ Includes general government, nonfinancial public enterprises, interest costs of financial sector restructuring (FIDF) and some off-budget activities. 4/ Adjusted for bad debt transfers to Asset Management Companies and write-offs. 5/ Includes errors and omissions. 6/ Percent of exports of goods and services. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 26 - Table 2. Thailand: General Government Operations, 1998/99-2003/04 l/ (In percent of GDP, unless otherwise stated) 1998199 1999/00 2000/01 200 l/O2 2002/03 2003/04 -- Art. IV Est. Proj. Proj. I. Central Government Total revenue and grants 15.5 15.5 15.0 15.5 15.8 16.2 16.3 Tax revenue 13.5 13.6 13.4 13.5 14.2 14.6 14.6 Taxes 011 iucome and profits 4.4 4.6 4.6 4.7 4.9 5.1 5.1 Taxes on consumption 21 6.9 6.5 6.3 6.7 6.8 6.9 6.9 Taxes on international trade 1.4 1.7 1.8 1.8 1.8 1.9 1.9 License fees ad other taxes 0.8 0.7 0.7 0.3 0.7 0.7 0.7 Nontax rewnue 1.9 1.8 1.6 2.0 1.6 1.6 1.7 Grants 0.1 0. I 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Expenditure and net lending IX.9 18.4 17.9 19.5 18.6 17.1 16.8 Current expenditure 13.6 13.9 13.9 14.2 14.3 13.4 13.2 Wages and salaries 6.5 6.3 5.9 6.7 5.8 5.8 5.8 Interest 1.0 1.2 1.3 1.5 1.3 1.5 1.7 Other goods alId services 4.0 3.4 3.7 2.6 3.5 2.8 2.6 Subsidies and current transfers 2.2 3.0 3.0 3.3 3.7 3.3 3.1 Capital expenditure 5.3 4.5 4.0 5.3 4.3 3.7 3.6 Net lending 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Budgetary central government Extrabudgetary Funds Central government halance -3.5 -2.9 -2.9 -4.0 -2.8 -0.9 -0.5 0.4 0.2 1.3 0.7 0.7 0.9 0.9 -3.1 -2.7 -1.6 -3.3 -2.1 0.0 0.4 II. Local governments RWlXUXS Ofwhich: VAT Decentralization Act Expenditures Local government halance 31 2.1 2.1 2.2 1.8 0.0 0.2 3.1 3.2 3.3 3.7 3.7 0.2 0.3 0.3 0.7 0.7 2.8 2.9 2.9 3.3 3.4 0.3 0.3 0.4 0.3 0.3 III. General government balance -3.1 -2.5 -1.3 -3.0 -1.7 0.3 0.7 Financing External Domestic 41 3.1 2.5 1.3 3.0 1.7 -0.3 1.1 0.7 0.4 0.4 -0.6 -0.5 2.0 1.8 0.8 2.6 2.3 0.2 Memorandum items: Fiscal year GDP (in billions of h&t) Primary central government balance Interest costs of financial sector restructuring Debt service (percent of cent. govt. revenue) Identified off-budget activities 6/ Nonfmancial public enterprises (NFPE) Retained income Capital expenditure NFPE balance 4607 4846 -2.1 -1.5 0.9 0.7 14.4 18.1 5090 5287 5329 5669 5995 -0.3 -1.8 -0.8 1.4 2.1 0.9 0.9 0.9 1.0 0.7 17.6 18.7 17.8 18.9 18.3 -0.1 -1.0 -1.2 0.1 -0.2 Comprehensive public sector halance 71 Total public debt Central government FIDF NFPE 2.2 2.6 3.3 2.1 3.0 2.4 2.7 4.2 3.5 3.0 2.6 2.2 2.3 2.3 -2.0 -0.9 0.3 -0.6 0.8 0.1 0.4 -6.0 -4.1 -2.0 -5.4 -3.0 -0.5 0.2 55.6 57.3 57.4 60.9 54.5 54.0 52.4 20.8 22.6 24.8 27.7 31.4 30.4 32.5 17.7 16.1 13.7 14.6 6.3 7.9 5.6 17.1 18.6 18.9 18.6 16.7 15.6 14.3 Sources: Data provided by the Thai authorities; and Fund staff estimates. li The fiscal year funs from October 1 to September 30. Differs from GFS in the treatment of fmancial sector restructuring that government principal costs are excluded. 21 For 2000101 and beyond, the transfer of VAT for the Decentralization Act is shown as local instead of central governmen Central government revenues projections have been revised downward to exclude the transfer of VAT for the Decentralizatb 31 Estimated from below the line for 2001/02 using changes in deposits of local governments in the banking system (M3). 41 Estimated. Includes discrepancy. 51 Includes interest costs of financial sector restructuring (FIDF). 61 Includes the Village Fund, debt suspension for farmers, and retired civil servant her&its 71 Includes general government, NFPEs, FIDF, and some off-budget activities. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 27 - Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 28 - Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 29 - Table 5. Thailand: Indicators of External Vulnerability, 1998-2003 (In percent of GDP, unless other&c indicated) 1998 1999 2000 2001 Financial indicators Public sector debt li Broad money (M2A, 12.month pcrccnt change) Private sector credit (percent change, 12 month basis) Extcmal Indicators Exports (pcrccnt change, 12-month basis in US$) Imports (percent change, 12-month basis in US$) Terms of Trade (percent change, 12 month basis) Current account balance Capital and financial account balance (in US$ billion) ofwhich: Portfolio investment Foreign direct investment Other invcstmcnt (loans, trade credits etc.) Gross official rcscrves (in US$ billion) (in months of imports of the following year) Gross reserves of the bankmg system (in US$ bilhon) (in months of imports of the following year) Official reserves/Broad money (M2A) Official rcscrvcsiNarrow money (MO) Total short term external debt by original maturity (in US$ billion) Total short term cxtemal debt by remaining maturity (in US$ billion) Total short term external debt to reserves by remaining maturity (in pcrccnt) Total short term cxtcmal debt to total debt by remaining maturity (in percent) Total external debt (in US$ billion) of which: Public and Publicly guaranteed debt (in US$ billion) Corporate debt (in US$ billion) Total external debt to exports of goods and services External intcrcst payments to exports of goods and scrviccs External amortization payments to exports of goods and services Exchange rate (per US& period average) REER appreciation (+) (12 month basis) NFA of commercial banks (in USS bn.) Financial Market Indicators 2/ Stock market index Foreign currency debt ratings Moody’s Standard and Poor’s 45.3 55.6 57.3 57.4 54.5 54.0 7.1 1.3 2.2 4.6 -0.1 -9.7 -3.2 -0.1 0.7 3.2 -6.X 7.4 19.5 -33.8 16.9 31.3 -5.9 1.3 -8.9 12.8 10.2 7.6 -10.4 -x.2 -10.1 0.3 -0.1 -0.7 7.4 5.7 3.4 -18.1 -13.8 -12.7 29.5 34.8 32.7 7.5 6.7 6.5 12.6 15.2 16.7 3.2 2.9 3.3 0.2 0.3 0.3 2.3 2.1 2.7 28.4 19.5 14.7 38.0 28.4 27.4 128.8 81.5 83.9 36.2 29.8 34.4 105.1 95.1 79.7 31.6 36.2 33.9 45.2 41.1 33.6 159.0 133.0 97.5 8.3 6.3 5.0 13.5 13.5 10.8 41.4 37.8 40.1 -15.6 5.1 -3.1 -16.5 -4.0 3.6 -6.9 5.8 14.2 -2.8 4.6 15.5 -9.4 -1.5 -2.4 5.4 6.0 4.7 -3.8 -3.2 -7.9 -1.2 -2.3 -1.7 3.7 1.0 0.6 -6.2 -1.8 -6.X 33.0 38.9 36.9 6.3 6.4 5.6 16.9 16.8 3.2 2.8 0.3 0.3 2.7 2.7 13.4 13.8 13.3 26.0 25.8 21.0 78.8 66.3 56.8 38.6 43.6 41.6 67.5 59.3 50.4 28.3 23.5 17.9 29.8 27.7 25.6 88.6 72.4 55.8 4.4 2.9 2.3 16.7 15.4 13.3 44.4 43.0 -4.2 2.5 .,. 6.5 5.1 356 482 269 304 357 486 Bal Bal Baa3 Baa3 Baa3 Baa3 BBB- BBB- BBB- BBB- BBB- BBB- 2002 2003 Proj Sources: Data provided by the Thai authorities; and Fund staff estlmatcs. li Refers to debt stock at end of fiscal year (i.e., end-Scptcmbcr of respective year). 21 Data for 2003 as of July 22. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 30 - Table 6. Thailand: Medium-Term Scenario, 1999-2008 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 Real GDP growth (percent) Consumption Gross tixcd investment 4.4 4.6 1.9 5.3 4.5 5.0 4.8 5.0 5.3 5.5 4.1 4.5 3.6 4.1 4.4 4.7 4.4 4.9 5.3 5.5 -3.2 5.3 0.9 6.3 4.9 9.0 9.8 10.6 11.0 11.0 Contributions to growth, of which: Private consumption Private investment Public expenditure Net exports 2.3 2.6 2.0 2.6 2.5 2.7 2.6 2.8 2.9 3.1 -0.4 1.9 0.6 1.7 1.2 1.5 1.7 1.8 2.0 2.2 0.0 -0.6 -0.1 -0.4 0.1 0.5 0.5 0.7 0.9 0.8 0.9 -1.1 0.1 1.4 0.8 0.2 -0.1 -0.4 -0.6 -0.6 Headline CPI inflation (period average, percent) 0.0 1.7 1.5 0.6 1.4 0.1 0.3 0.5 1.1 1.5 Core CPI inflation (period average, percent) 1.8 0.7 1.3 0.4 0.4 0.8 1.5 2.0 2.0 2.0 Saving and investment (percent of GDP) Gross domestic investment Private, including stocks Public Gross national saving Private, including statistical discrepancy Public Foreign saving (- = current account surplus) 20.5 22.7 23.9 23.8 25.4 26.4 27.2 28.2 29.2 30.4 11.2 14.6 16.2 17.0 18.9 19.9 20.8 21.6 22.5 23.7 9.3 8.2 7.7 6.8 6.5 6.5 6.4 6.6 6.7 6.7 30.7 30.3 29.3 29.9 30.2 30.9 30.5 30.1 29.8 29.6 24.9 23.7 21.4 22.6 22.0 22.0 20.9 20.3 19.4 19.0 5.8 6.7 7.9 7.3 8.2 8.9 9.6 9.8 10.4 10.6 -10.2 -7.6 -5.4 -6.0 -4.7 -4.6 -3.3 -1.9 -0.5 0.8 Fiscal accounts (percent of GDP, fiscal year basis) Comprehensive public sector balance General government balance Budgetary central government balance Revenue and grants Expenditure and net lending -6.0 -4. I -2.0 -3.0 -0.5 0.2 1.9 1.6 1.8 1.9 -3.1 -2.5 -1.3 -1.7 0.3 0.7 1.4 1.6 1.9 2.2 -3.5 -2.9 -2.9 -2.8 -0.9 -0.5 0.2 0.5 0.8 1.1 15.5 15.5 15.0 15.8 16.2 16.3 16.4 16.4 16.5 16.6 18.9 18.4 17.9 18.6 17.1 16.8 16.1 16.0 15.7 15.4 Balance of payments (billions of US$) Exports, f.o.b. (Volume growth) Imports, c.i.f. (Volume growth) Trade balance Current account balance (Percent of GDP) Capital account balance li Overall balance 56.8 67.9 63.2 66.9 76.4 80.6 86.2 92.2 99.0 106.3 11.1 22.2 -5.5 14.0 7.9 4.6 6.2 6.2 6.5 6.4 47.5 62.4 60.7 63.4 73.3 78:7 85.6 93.6 103.1 113.7 22.5 22.3 -10.7 10.9 6.5 7.4 8.3 8.7 9.1 9.2 9.3 5.5 2.5 3.5 3.1 1.9 0.6 -1.4 -4.1 -7.4 12.5 9.3 6.2 7.6 6.4 6.5 5.0 3.2 1.0 -1.5 10.2 7.6 5.4 6.0 4.7 4.6 3.3 1.9 0.5 -0.8 -8.2 -10.8 -3.6 -2.0 -8.0 -4.9 -4.0 -2.9 -1.0 1.5 4.3 -1.4 2.6 5.6 -1.6 1.6 1.0 0.3 0.0 0.0 Gross official reserves (end year) 34.8 32.7 33.0 38.9 36.9 38.5 39.5 39.8 (Months of following year’s imports of goods) 6.7 6.5 6.3 6.4 5.6 5.4 5.1 4.6 39.8 39.8 4.2 221 225 (Percent of short-term debt by remaining maturity) 123 119 127 151 176 195 203 209 External debt (percent of GDP) 77.6 65.0 58.5 46.8 37.4 31.6 25.9 21.4 Debt service ratio (percent of exports of gnfs) 19.8 15.8 21.1 18.4 15.6 9.6 8.4 8.1 18.2 16.5 7.6 6.4 Sources: Information provided by the Thai authorities; and staff estimates. li Includes errors and omissions. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3l- ANNEX I PUBLIC AND EXTERNAL DEBT SUSTAINABILITY This Appendix discusses the baseline for Thailand’s public and external debt projections against historical averages for the key underlying variables and the sensitivity of the debt dynamics to a number of shocks. A. Public Debt Sustainability 1. Public debt has stabilized in recent years but is expected to rise modestly in the following two years before subsequently declining to below current levels. The rise in the public debt ratio is predicated on the realization of estimated contingent liabilities related to the costs of financial sector restructuring. The longer term improvement is based on growth rising gradually to 5.5 percent in the outer years and a slightly declining share of primary expenditure in GDP. Excluding the estimates of contingent liabilities would remove the “hump” in the projected debt ratio and show an accelerated decline. 2. The key vulnerabilities arise from shocks to the primary fiscal balance and GDP growth. Both shocks reflect the effects of the crisis years-GDP growth and the primary balance were much stronger in the pre-crisis periods. The primary balance shock amounts to a primary deficit of nearly 4% percent in 2004 and 2005 and would raise the debt ratio to about 71 percent before subsequently declining. Similarly, the growth shocks amounts to negative growth of about 7% percent in 2004 and 2005 and would push the debt ratio to 70 percent at its peak. These scenarios are illustrative of debt developments in case of a severe growth slowdown accompanied by counter-cyclical fiscal stimulus. Other risks to the primary balance arise from the on-going fiscal devolution process if the envisaged increase in transfers to the local governments is not off-set by reduction in central government spending. In such a scenario (without additional macroeconomic shocks) public debt could be 10 percentage points of GDP higher by FY 2007/08 than in the baseline. The debt projections are also sensitive to further increases in contingent liabilities and interest rates, but less so to an exchange rate shock because of the small share of external debt in total public sector debt (less than 30 percent). B. External Debt Sustainability 3. The baseline projections foresee a gradual fall in the external debt ratio from 47 to 17 percent of GDP, primarily as a result of sizeable (non-interest) current account surpluses. While these surpluses are projected to decline over the medium term, their cumulative contribution would reduce the debt-to-GDP ratio by more than 20 percentage points through 2008. In addition, moderate net FDI inflows and favorable endogenous dynamics are each projected to shave another 4-5 percentage points from the debt ratio over the medium term. 4. Stress tests illustrate the robustness of Thailand’s external debt outlook to macroeconomic shocks. First, the reduction in debt ratios would be even faster than in the baseline, if key variables were at their historical levels (stress test 1). This result is driven by Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 32 - ANNEX I historically higher current account surpluses and larger net FDI inflows than projected for the future. Moreover, even though the debt dynamics would be considerably less favorable under some of the other stress tests-which include, as the most dramatic shocks, a non- interest current account deficit of 12% percent of GDP over two consecutive years (stress test 5); a combined two-year shock involving (in each year) a drop in real GDP of 2% percent, an exchange rate depreciation of 11 percent, and a non-interest current account deficit of 4% percent of GDP (stress test 6); and a replication of the 1997-98 crisis (stress test S)- none of the simulations would bring the debt ratio back above its 2000 level of 65 percent of GDP. Finally, only in stress test 5 would the entire gross external financing needs exceed the current level of gross official reserves of nearly $40 billion. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 33 - ANNEX I Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 34 - ANNEX I Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-35- ANNEX II THAILAND: FUND RELATIONS (As of April 30,2003) I. Membership Status: Joined 05/03/1949; Article VIII. II. Article VIII Status: Thailand has accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4, and maintains an exchange system free of restrictions on the making of payments and transfers for current international transactions. III. IV. V. VI. VII. General Resources Account: Quota 1,081.90 100.0 Fund holdings of currency 1,219.38 112.71 Reserve position in Fund 0.02 0.0 SDR Department: Net cumulative allocation 84.65 100.0 Holdings 2.35 2.77 Outstanding Purchases and Loans: Stand-By Arrangements Financial Arrangements: Approval Expiration Type Date Date 1. Stand-By 8120197 6/19/2000 2. Stand-By 6114185 1213 l/86 3. Stand-By 1 l/17/82 1213 l/83 SDR Million SDR Million SDR Million 137.50 Amount Approved (SDR Million) 2,900.OO 2,500.OO 400.00 260.00 271.50 271.50 Percent of Quota Percent of Allocation Percent of Quota 12.71 Amount Drawn (SDR Million) Projected Obligations to Fund (SDR million, based on existing use of resources and present holdings of SDRs): Overdue 4/3Q/2003 2003 Forthcoming 2004 2005 2006 2007 Principal 87.50 50.00 -- -- -- Charges/Interest 3 60 91.10 2.01 1.45 1.45 1.45 Total 52.01 1.45 1.45 1.45 VIII. Exchange Rate Arrangement: After more than a decade when the baht was effectively pegged closely to the U.S. dollar through a basket of currencies, the exchange rate regime was changed on July 2, 1997. The exchange rate system is now a managed floating regime with no Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 36 - ANNEX II preannouced path for the exchange rate and occasional central bank intervention limited to smoothing operations. IX. Last Article IV Consultation, EBS/02/128,(8/2/02): Directors noted that Thailand’s macroeconomic framework and policies had contributed to a reduction in external vulnerability. They praised the supportive monetary stance and planned fiscal consolidation. However, Directors cautioned that domestic weaknesses are still pervasive and that stepped up reforms in the corporate and banking sectors are needed to accelerate growth over the medium term. X. Recent Technical Assistance: FAD: A number of FAD missions took place in 1998: in February on tax policy and structure; in July to help establish an Office of Macroeconomic-Fiscal Analysis; and in November on pension reform. Customs, tax administration, and tax policy advisors have also been working in Bangkok. A tax policy mission took place in July 2003. LEG: Staff have advised on the reform of bankruptcy and secured lending, including visits in January, April (as part of a World Bank mission), and June 1998, and November 1999, and February 2000. MFD: In 1997, MFD consultants participating in an APD mission focused on the soundness of the financial sector, and two MFD missions provided assistance on monetary instruments and monetary management under a floating exchange rate regime. Also, an MFD mission with World Bank participation outlined a strategy for financial sector reform, and MFD helped integrate this strategy into Thailand’s program with the Fund. Since 1997, MFD has provided support in fmancial sector restructuring with several MFD missions and participation in APD review missions. The most recent took place during the March 2001 staff visit to assess progress in the setting up of a national AMC. Long-term resident advisors on banking supervision have been assigned to the BOT since June 1998. A mission to take stock of operational issues related to inflation targeting is scheduled for September 2003. STA: Thailand has received a series of technical assistance missions in recent years on national accounts statistics (December 1996, October 1997, March and September-October 1998, March and August 1999) mainly to improve the quality and timeliness of quarterly data. Furthermore, missions on producer price indices (June-July 1999) and on balance of payments statistics (September-October 1998, January 2002) reviewed the methodology of several price indices and the balance of payments compilation system. There have also been missions on the areas of banking statistics (April and June-July 1998, and January-February 2001), data dissemination issues (July 1996, and April-May, June, and November 1997) and Government Finance Statistics (March 2002). A mission to assist preparation for a Data ROSC in early 2004 took place in April 2003. XI. Resident Representative: The IMF office in Thailand has been operating since December 1, 1997. Mr. Bamett began his assignment as the current Resident Representative on September 15, 2002. It is envisaged that the post will be closed in September 2003. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 37 - ANNEX III THAILAND: RELATIONS WITH THE WORLD BANK GROUP’ (As of June 30,2003) (In millions of U.S. dollars) IBRD IDA Total Agriculture Education Electric Power and Energy’ Environment Finance Industry Mining Multi-sector Oil and Gas Population, Health, and Nutrition Public Sector Management Social Protection Telecommunications Transportation Urban Development Water Supply and Sanitation Total2 Commitments: FY 1998 FY 1999’ FY 2000 947 38 985 384 55 439 1,565 0 1,565 148 0 148 835 0 835 90 0 90 140 0 140 941 0 941 585 0 585 0 33 33 432 0 432 300 0 300 304 0 304 1,129 0 1,129 86 0 86 95 0 95 7,981 126 8,107 1,300.o 400.0 0.0 0.0 380.0 1,300.o 400.0 ‘Includes the Bank’s partial guarantee for $300 million bond issued by EGAT in October 1998 20f which $7,121.5 million has been disbursed. The World Bank relations with Thailand currently comprise of lending and development partnership programs with Thailand. In terms of lending, since the Bank began lending to Thailand in October 1950 it has extended 127 loans amounting to approximately US$8.4 billion and 6 IDA Credits amounting to US$l25 million. Currently, there are six ongoing loan projects2 with original commitments ‘Prepared by World Bank staff. 2They are (1) Secondary Education Quality Improvement, (2) University Science & Engineering Education, (3) Metropolitan Distribution Reinforcement, (4) Distribution Automation & Reliability Improvement, (5) Financial Sector Implementation Assistance, and (6) Social Investment Project Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 38 - ANNEX III amounting to US$785.3 million. However, of this amount US$l34.1 million has been cancelled, leaving the net commitment at US$65 1.2 million. About 86 percent of this amount has been disbursed and half of these six projects will be closed by the end of the Bank’s fiscal year 2004 (i.e., by June 30, 2004). In 2002, the Bank has prepared a new Partnership for Development3 with Thailand. The broad strategy of the Bank’s continued involvement in Thailand is on the basis of the Comprehensive Development Partnership (CDP) approach, which envisages the provision of policy advise and technical assistance, to sustain the momentum of reforms begun under the EFAL, PSRL, and SIP loans as well as assist in other critical areas of reforms such as education and environment. The CDP approach might also be associated with a limited amount of lending, though most of the funding will be from nonlending sources and counterpart funding. The Country Development Partnershiops (CDPs) that have been launched are the Corporate and Financial Competitiveness (C), Governance (G), Poverty (P), and Social Protection (SP). Other CDPs envisioned for FY2003-20054 includes the CDPs in education, knowledge economy, environment, and infrastructure . Ina addition to the CDPs, the Bank continues to conduct monitoring and diagnostic work. They will be carried out through the Monitor series and by occasional in-depth diagnostic reports, all done in collaboration with Thai counterparts. Several types of “Monitor” series-economic, social and environment-serve to review the progress in the relevant areas and to provide analytical and advisory services on a special topic often covering a core diagnostic area. In- depth diagnostic reports to be conducted will explore in more depth issues of relevance to the national agenda and of support to the midyear review of the Ninth Plan. ‘Formerly called the Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for Thailand 4The World Bank’s FY2003 runs from 1 July 2002 to 30 June 2003. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 39 - ANNEX IV THAILAND: RELATIONS WITH THE ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK’ (As of June 30,2003) (In millions of U.S. dollars) Total Lending Number Amount of Loans of Loans Percent Energy 27 1,632.3 31 Transport and Communications 17 1,214.5 23 Social Infrastructure 15 758.7 14 Multisector 13 709.1 13 Financial 1 500.0 9 Agriculture and Natural Resources 9 494.5 9 Industry and Nonfuel Minerals 1 39.0 1 Total’ 5,348.1 100 ‘Includes two private sector loans. The Asian Development Bank (AsDB) pledged $1.2 billion at the Tokyo Meeting in August 1997 to support the Government of Thailand’s stabilization and structural adjustment program, focused on the financial and social sectors. Lending by the AsDB increased from $330 million in 1996 and 1997, to $550 million in 1997, $630 million in 1998 (excluding guarantee operations of $950 million), and $364 million in 1999. From 2000 to 2002 no loans were made to the Government. During 2002, the Government prepaid $1.28 billion of ADB pool based loans. In 2002, ADB approved a small scale, technical assistance for Revenue and Expenditure Management at the Fiscal Policy Office of the Ministry of Finance ($0.15 million). Technical assistance was also provided for Pension System Design ($0.6 million) and to support Accountability Mechanisms II ($0.15 million). In January 2003, another small-scale grant was provided towards the Institutional Support for the International Institute for Trade and Development ($0.15 million). ‘Prepared by AsDB staff. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 40 - ANNEX V THAILAND:STATISTICALISSUES Thailand has subscribed to the Special Data Dissemination Standard (SDDS). The bulk of the information used by the staff in surveillance work is obtained directly from the Bank of Thailand (BOT): key financial data are reported daily, with more general economic data reported regularly via the Resident Representative. In addition, the BOT publishes a statistical monthly release, basic data on monetary aggregates, the balance of payments, investment and manufacturing production, and the overall fiscal cash surplus (all with a lag of one-two months). The BOT also posts a wide range of economic data on the World Wide Web (www.bot.or.th). Further details are obtained from the BOT’s monthly and quarterly reports. In addition, the BOT has been publishing quarterly inflation reports since July 2000. The Thai authorities responded to the crisis by greatly improving provision of economic data together with a commitment to increased data transparency. For example, data on the key assets and liabilities of the BOT are now published regularly, including net forward obligations. In addition, the BOT has made considerable efforts to improve the reporting of comprehensive data on the position of financial institutions (including nonperforming loans and capital adequacy), data on external debt positions and rollover rates, and, continues to provide data to the Fund to facilitate effective post-program monitoring of the Thai economy. The quality and timeliness of Thailand’s data differ across sectors: 1. REALSECTOR Quarterly national accounts have been published since early 1999, and are currently available with one quarter lag. Their introduction was tied to Thailand’s subscription to the Special Data Dissemination Standard (SDDS), and was developed with technical assistance from STA. Hqwever, a number of technical problems remain, essentially reflecting deficiencies in the underlying source data, but also technical problems in benchmarking the quarterly to the annual data. Labor market data are scarce. Monthly data on wages, employment and unemployment do not exist. However, the Labor Force Survey is now conducted every quarter, instead of two to three times a year. 2. Fiscal Sector Although the authorities provide data to the Fund consistent with the GFS, their own budget presentation to Parliament and public at large does not conform to GFS, causing confusion among market participants. The transparency of the official statistics with regard to the quasi-fiscal activities of the government also needs to be addressed. 3. Monetary Sector Existing data collection arrangements adversely affect the quality and timeliness of the monetary statistics. The compilation of monetary statistics in the BOT’s Data Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4l- ANNEX V Management Group is based on a reporting system that serves primarily bank supervision purposes. Although efforts have been made within the BOT to modify the reporting format to meet the needs of monetary statistics, the reports submitted by the financial institutions are not fully compatible with statistical standards. The banking survey and monetary aggregates M2A and M3 are compiled with a lag of six weeks. A STA technical assistance mission in early 200 1 has made recommendations to remedy these problems. There are consistency problems in the interbank and intra sectoral positions in the monetary statistics compiled by the BOT. A cursory review of the underlying data undertaken by STA missions revealed significant discrepancies between asset and liability positions reported for the same group of financial institutions. These discrepancies indicate that there are inconsistencies in the sectoral classification of assets and liabilities that diminish the analytical usefulness of the monetary data. It was agreed that the authorities would review in greater detail the consistency of the interbank and intra sectoral positions and examine the causes of the discrepancies. 4. External Sector While the methodology for compiling balance of payments data remains adequate, a number of weaknesses in the data collection system need to be addressed in order to fully capture developments following the relaxation of the foreign exchange controls. These include: (1) an inadequate coverage of transactions by nonresidents in Thailand and by Thai residents abroad (other than banks); (2) a lack of noncash activity, such as reinvested earnings; and, more generally, (3) a deterioration in the quality of data reported under the exchange control system, partly in consequence of the increased pressure on the reporting system that resulted from the sharply increased scale of transactions. Thailand publishes official reserves and foreign currency liquidity data in the international reserves template under the SDDS. The BOT website displaying the template is updated on a monthly basis at the end of each month and the data contained therein is in accordance with template standards. Data on external debt and debt service has significantly improved since the introduction of a quarterly survey of private nonbank external debt. A few weaknesses remain regarding coverage. For example, a debt service breakdown along the same lines as that available for external debt would be useful. Data on the international investment position was released in line with SDDS guidelines; the latest available is from 200 1. Data for 2002 is scheduled to be released at end-June 2003, in line with timeliness standards. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 42 - ANNEX V Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-43 - ANNEX VI Social and Demographic Indicators of Selected Asian Countries (200 1) Thailand Philippines Korea Indonesia Malaysia POPULATION Total population, mid-year (millions) Growth rate (percent annual average) Urban population (percent of population) Total fertility rate (births per woman) POVERTY (2000) !EiZl2Zf~t”,‘:Tiiex Urban headcount index Rural headcount index 61.2 78.3 47.3 209.0 23.8 0.7 2.1 0.6 1.3 2.1 20.0 59.3 82.4 42.0 58.1 1.8 3.3 1.4 2.4 2.9 40.6 20.3 22.5 17.8 51.2 22.0 INCOME GDP per capita (US$) 6,400 3,840 15,090 2,940 8,750 Consumer price index (1995=100) 125 150 126 253 118 Food price index (1995=100) 126 139 126 296 129 INCOME/CONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION Gini index Lowest quintile (percent of income or consumption) Highest quintile (percent of income or consumption) SOCIAL INDICATORS Public expenditure (2000) Health (percent of GDP) Education (percent of GNP) Social security and welfare (percent of GDP) Net primary school enrollment rate (2000) (percent of age group) Total Male Female 41.4 46.2 31.6 36.5 48.5 6.4 5.4 7.5 8.0 4.5 48.4 52.3 39.3 44.9 53.8 1.7 1.7 2.5 0.6 1.3 4.8 3.4 3.7 1.4 4.9 1.1 1.9 0.9 1.4 88 100 100 99 100 87 100 100 100 100 89 100 100 99 100 Access to safe water (2000) (percent ofpopulation) Total Urban Rural 80 87 92 76 89 89 92 97 91 100 77 80 71 65 94 Immunization rate (percent under 12 months) Measles DPT Child malnutrition (percent under 5 years) (2000) Life expectancy at birth hears) Total Male Female Mortality 94 96 75 97 59 92 70 99 60 97 30 34 20 69 70 74 66 73 67 68 70 65 70 71 72 77 68 75 Infant (per thousand live births) Under 5 (per thousand live births) Adult (15-59) (2000 except Indonesia) Male (per 1,000 population) Female (per 1,000 population) Maternal (per 100,000 live births) 24 29 5 33 8 28 38 5 45 8 229 190 186 230 186 144 142 81 178 110 44 170 20 450 39 Source: 2000 World Development Indicators CD-ROM, World Bank. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 44 - ANNEX VII EXTERNAL RELATIONS DEPARTMENT Public Information Notice (PIN) No. FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE International Monetary Fund 700 lgth Street, NW Washington, D. C. 20431 USA IMF Concludes 2003 Article IV Consultation with Thailand On August 25, 2003, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded the Article IV consultation with Thailand.’ Background Thailand successfully completed a 34-month, SDR 2.9 billion (268 percent of quota, equivalent to US$4 billion) Stand-By Arrangement on June 19, 2000. The arrangement was part of a $17.2 billion official financing package from multilateral institutions and bilateral contributors, $14.3 billion of which was drawn. Thailand completed repayment of this package on July 31, 2003, some two years ahead of schedule. Real GDP increased 5.3 percent in 2002, and 6.7 percent in the first quarter of 2003 (year-on- year). Growth was broadly balanced between private domestic and external demand. In spite of the acceleration in activity, inflation pressures continue to be subdued. Core inflation has hovered around 0.2 percent since the second half of 2002, compared to the BOT’s target range of O-31/2 percent. In part as a result of lower energy prices, headline inflation has been trending down after cresting at about 2 percent in January. ’ Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial information, and discusses with officials the country’s economic developments and policies. On return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the country’s authorities. This PIN summarizes the views of the Executive Board as expressed during the [August, 25, 20031 Executive Board discussion based on the staff report. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 45 - ANNEX VII The BOT cut its policy rate in January and November 2002, and again in June 2003. Deposit and lending rates have declined recently and could fall further in response to the latest easing. Fiscal policy provided timely countercyclical support in the fiscal year that ended in September 2002 (FY 2001/02), but in the current fiscal year the general government balance is expected to improve by 2 percent of GDP, due mostly to stronger-than-expected revenues. The economic impact of fiscal consolidation is partially offset by new quasi-fiscal initiatives, in particular expanded operations of state-owned specialized financial institutions (SFls) aimed at boosting credit and home ownership. Export performance was very strong in 2002, and the current account is projected to remain in surplus in 2003. Official gross reserves stood at over US$39 billion at end-June 2003, and Thailand’s vulnerability to external shocks continued to be reduced. The Stock Exchange of Thailand (SET) index increased about 17 percent in 2002, and over 30 percent more through June 2003, one of the best performances in emerging markets. Bond yields are low and all major credit rating agencies now share a positive outlook for the sovereign rating. However, prospects for sustained high growth depend on action to address remaining structural weaknesses, especially in the corporate and banking sectors. While enterprises made some advances in de-leveraging, their balance sheets remain fragile. Banks’ financial positions, though improving, are still weak. Lending activity has gathered some steam, but mostly at state- owned institutions, and resolution of nonperforming loans (NPLs) at private banks continues to be slow. While the Thai Asset Management Corporation (TAMC) met its targets for resolving NPLs in 2002, many approved restructurings or foreclosures have yet to be completed. Executive Board Assessment <Begin Typing Here> Public hformation Notices (PINS) are issued, (i) at the request of a member country, following the conclusion of the Article IV consultation for countries seeking to make known the views of the IMF to the public. This action is intended to strengthen IMF surveillance over the economic policies of member countries by increasing the transparency of the IMF’s assessment of these policies; and (ii) following policy discussions in the Executive Board at the decision of the Board. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public