. ? i DOCUMENT OF INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND NOT FOR PUBLIC USE FOR AGENDA m/00/1 87 CONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION August 7,200O To: Members of the Executive Board From: The Secretary Subject: Syrian Arab Republic-Staff Report for the 2000 Article IV Consultation Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staff report for the 2000 Article IV consultation with the Syrian Arab Republic, which will be brought to the agenda for discussion on a date to be announced. A draft decision appears on page 23. Mr. Elhage (ext. 36370) and Ms. Farhan (ext. 34380) are available to answer technical or factual questions relating to this paper prior to the Board discussion. Unless the Documents Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the Arab Monetary Fund and the Islamic Development Bank, following its consideration by the Executive Board. Att: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicCONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND sYR.IA.N ARAB REPUBLIC Staff Report for the 2000 Article IV Consultation Prepared by the Staff Representatives for the 2000 Consultation with the Syrian Arab Republic Approved by Paul Chabrier and Shigeo Kashiwagi August 3,200O Contents Page Executive Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 I. Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .... 4 II. Background and Recent Developments ................................................................................ . A. Background.. ............................................................................................................ .5 B. Developments in 1999 and Early 2000 .................................................................... .6 C. Prospects for 2000.. .................................................................................................. .9 III. Policy Discussions ............................................................................................................... 9 A. Growth Strategy.. ................................................................................................... .10 B. Structural Policies ................................................................................................... 11 C. Demand Management ............................................................................................. 15 D. Statistical Issues ...................................................................................................... 18 IV. Medium-Term Scenario .,.......,...............................................................,.............,,........,,., 19 V. Staff Appraisal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20 - Proposed Decision . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2- Text Boxes 1. Losses of the PSF and Credit to the General Organization for Cotton Ginning and Marketing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .7 2. Main Points of the New Decrees Issued in 2000 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13 Figures 1. Real Sector Indicators, 1994-2000.. .......................................................................... ..2 4 2. Investment and Real GDP Growth, 1990-99 ............................................................. .25 3. Monetary Sector Indicators, 1994-99 ......................................................................... .26 4. Monetary Indicators, 1990-99 .................................................................................... .27 5. Exchange Rate Developments, 1994-2000 ................................................................ .28 6. Public Finance, 1994-2000 ......................................................................................... .29 7. External Sector Indicators, 1994-2000.. ..................................................................... .30 8. Production and Exports of Crude Oil .......................................................................... .3 1 Text Tables 1. Selected Economic Indicators, 1994-2000.. ............................................................... .32 2. Summary of Fiscal Operations, 1994-2000 ................................................................ .3 3 3. Monetary Survey, 1994-99.. ....................................................................................... .34 4. Balance of Payments, 1994-2000.. ............................................................................. ,3 5 5. Summary of the Exchange Rate System ..................................................................... .36 Appendices I. Fund Relations .............................................................................................................. 37 II. Relations with the World Bank Group.. ...................................................................... .40 III. Statistical Issues.. ........................................................................................................ .41 IV. Social and Demographic Indicators,, ......................................................................... ..4 5 Annex Medium-term Framework (2000-2005) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46 Annex Table Macroeconomic Framework, 1994-2000 ,,...................,.......................................................... 47 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3- EXECUTIVESUMMARY Developments in 1999 l There was an estimated 1.2 percent drop in economic activity caused by the worst drought in several decades. The implementation of fiscal policy was clouded by the fact that the budget was not issued until end-December 1999. Based on preliminary financing data, staff estimates that the fiscal deficit may have been about 0.5 percent of GDP. Consumer prices declined by 2.1 percent. l Favorable oil prices and a significant improvement in the financial account helped Syria maintain a strong external position. Official reserves were built up further, and the free-market exchange rate remained stable against the U.S. dollar. No significant progress was made in resolving outstanding debt issues. Prospects for 2000 and the Medium Term l Growth is expected to rebound to 4-5 percent due to the end of the drought and a planned fiscal stimulus. The staff expects the fiscal deficit to widen to about 4 percent of GDP and the external current account to shift to a deficit of about 1.5 percent of GDP. Inflation is expected to increase to about 3 percent. l Medium-term growth prospects are constrained by a number of factors, in particular, the limited potential in oil and traditional agricultural activities. However, with the coming on-stream of additional gas supplies in 2001 and prudent financial management, the external position should not come under pressure. Views of the Authorities l The authorities reiterated their determination to open up the economy in order to attract private investment, foreign and domestic. They emphasized, however, Syria’s commitment to maintaining social stability and avoiding undue increases in prices of essential goods and taxes in the midst of a recessionary environment. Staff Appraisal l The recent steps taken to reinvigorate structural reforms and open the economy are welcome. However, despite these reforms, administrative controls remain cumbersome and continue to prevent the Syrian economy from realizing its full potential. The shift to more expansionary fiscal policy cannot be a substitute for structural reform in sustaining higher growth. Outstanding external debt issues should be addressed promptly to help restore access to external financing. Greater efforts to address statistical deficiencies and to improve the timeliness and quality of data for surveillance between consultations are required. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4- 1. INTRODUCTION 1. The 2000 Article IV consultation discussions with Syria took place in Damascus during May 7-23, 2000.’ The mission met with H.E. Mohammed Al-Imady, Minister of Economy and Foreign Trade, H.E. Khaled Al-Mahayni, Minister of Finance, H.E. Issam Al-Zaim, Minister of Planning, and The Honorable Mohammad B. Kabbarah, Governor of the Central Bank of Syria, as well as with other senior government officials and with representatives of the private sector. 2. In concluding the 1999 Article IV consultation on July 2, 1999, Executive Directors underscored the need for a comprehensive reform package in the financial, trade, and exchange systems. Directors considered the reforms to be essential to promote private sector activity and investment, and to raise the underlying growth rate so as to generate employment opportunities for a rapidly growing labor force. Directors also urged the authorities to intensify their efforts in resolving outstanding debt issues with bilateral creditors to facilitate additional foreign financing and enhance private sector confidence. Syria continues to avail itself of the transitional arrangements of Article XIV, and also maintains exchange measures that are subject to approval under Article VIII. 3. Limited progress in improving Syria’s statistical base had been made, with inputs of technical assistance by the Fund’s Statistics Department and the European Union (EU). However, significant weaknesses remain in terms of coverage, consistency, periodicity, and timeliness which have hampered the staffs ability to conduct economic analysis and effective surveillance.* 4. A long-expected cabinet reshuffle took place in early March 2000.3 The discussions took place shortly before the death of President Al-Assad and the first meeting of the party congress in 15 years. In recent speeches, the new President of Syria, Bashar Al-Assad has called for renewal in Syria and expectations are that he will push for economic reform. ’ The mission comprised Messrs. Dhonte (head), Elhage, Iradian, Wang, and Ms. Farhan (all MED). Mr. Shaalan, Executive Director, and Mr. Himani, Advisor, attended the policy meetings. * Syria’s relations with the Fund and the World Bank are summarized in Appendices I and II, respectively. Statistical issues are discussed in Appendix III, and social demographic indicators are shown in Appendix IV. 3 The Minister of Economy and Foreign Trade, the Minister of Finance, as well as the Governor of the Central Bank have retained their positions. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-5- II. BACKGROUNDANDRECENTDEVELOPMENTS A. Background 5. In analyzing the Syrian economy, it is important to place its performance and structure in a longer-term context. Throughout the 1970s and 198Os, the Syrian authorities pursued protectionist and inward-oriented economic policies. Most aspects of economic activities including production, distribution, pricing, finance, and foreign trade, were regulated and dominated by the public sector. As a result of these policies, the Syrian economy experienced severe difficulties, including declining living standards, low savings rates, high inflation rates, negative real interest rates, supply shortages, and chronic balance of payments difficulties. 6. In the late 198Os, the Syrian authorities recognized the need to change their economic system, and a multi-pronged reform program was initiated with the aim of strengthening the incentive system and improving market signals. The most important elements of the reform program were: the opening of new areas of economic activity and provision of fiscal incentives to private investors (Law No. 10 of 1991); exchange rate simplification with a series of moves toward fewer and more depreciated exchange rates; price and foreign trade liberalization; and increases in administered prices, including agricultural procurement prices. In addition, with a few exceptions, areas previously monopolized by the public sector have been opened to the private sector, export taxes have been virtually eliminated, food subsidies limited to three commodities, and an increasing number of prohibited imports liberalized. At the same time, residents have been allowed to open foreign exchange accounts, laying the foundations for the establishment of a foreign exchange market in Syria. 7. The reform policies, together with a high level of oil output, elicited a strong supply response, evidenced by a high rate of economic growth during 1991-95 (annual real GDP growth averaged 7.5 percent), a significant increase in private sector exports and imports, and sharp gains in agricultural production. Also, the private sector made substantial inroads in many areas of economic activity which were previously dominated by the public sector. 8. In the absence of further reforms output growth slowed in the second half of the 1990s. According to staff estimates, real GDP growth averaged 3.2 percent per year in 1996-99 (Table 1; Figure l), a disappointing figure relative to the rapid population growth (3.3 percent) and the earlier performance. The slowdown can be ascribed to a variety of reasons: (a) the agricultural sector was affected by recurring droughts; (b) oil output leveled off; and (c) private investment performance, which had responded strongly to earlier reform, relapsed as the reforms ebbed (Figure 2). More generally, the slowing growth also reflected the absence of an well-articulated growth-oriented strategy, and the economy is still characterized by a dichotomy between a stagnant public sector and a resilient but constrained private sector. A cumbersome regulatory system, continuing state controls, and a complicated trade and exchange system make it difficult for Syria to compete with other developing countries that have adopted more market and outward-oriented development strategies. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-6- 9. Meanwhile, the Syrian pound strengthened, steadily moving over the decade from weak currency status, reflected in multiple exchange rates, high inflation, and negative real interest rates, to a strong position with a greatly simplified exchange system, no inflation, and strongly positive real interest rates. This was achieved by consistently tight monetary _ policies, typified in a strong increase in NFA (Figure 4). The exchange system was greatly simplified in 1998 but continued to comprise several official fixed rates and two unofficial market-determined rates, although the spread between these rates has recently declined markedly (Figure 5; Table 5). 10. In response to the growth slowdown the authorities have recently implemented a set of long-awaited measures to encourage private and foreign investment and reform the currency laws. These measures include the extension of the tax exemption period for a total of up to 13 years, allowing non-Syrians to own land and buildings, allowing businesses to exchange foreign currency at the free-market rate and retain all their foreign exchange export proceeds (subject to special authorization). These reforms should improve the operating environment of the private sector, and their positive effects are likely to be felt in the period ahead. B. Developments in 1999 and Early 2000 11. The authorities’ concern about the growth slowdown was heightened by the drop in economic activity in 1999, when GDP is estimated to have contracted by 1.2 percent4 The deceleration was mainly the result of a significant decline in agricultural output (8.3 percent) caused by the worst drought in several decades. A stagnation of nonagricultural output growth was also evident, with the manufacturing and construction sectors being especially affected. This was partly driven by a slump in real estate prices. 12. Consumer prices declined further by 2.1 percent in 1999 after a 0.4 percent decline in 1998. The decline reflected a 7 percent drop in import prices, slight appreciation in the free- market exchange rate, and weak domestic demand. Nevertheless, there remained some repression of inflation as administered prices of major staples and strategic commodities (mainly bread, rice, sugar, and petroleum products) have not been raised since 1994. 13. While final data on the 1999 fiscal outturn is not available, based on preliminary financing data, it is likely to be significantly better than the deficit of 4.4 percent of GDP estimated by the authorities at the time of the discussions, and close to the 1998 outturn (Table 2; Figure 6). In addition, quasi-fiscal costs related to the Price Stabilization Fund (PSF) subsidies not financed by the budget are estimated at 2.3 percent of GDP, while those related to the General Organization of Cotton are estimated at 1.4 percent of GDP (Box 1). 4 Staff estimates. The authorities believe that growth was about 1 .O percent, reflecting better agricultural output than estimated by the staff. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-7- Box 1: Syrian Arab Republic: Losses of the PSF and Credit to the General Organization for Cotton Ginning and Marketing PSF subsidies cover mainly wheat (flour) and other smaller subsidies, which apply to sugar and rice. A key player in the implementation of wheat policy is the General Organization for Cereals Production and Trade (GOCPT). In 1999, farmers received LS 11,800 per ton of wheat. This was significantly above the average international price, which was about LS 5,603 per ton (on a f.o.b. basis, and LS 50 per USSl). The GOCPT then sold enough wheat to the mills to satisfy domestic consumption requirements, and part of the excess supply was exported. The GOCPT incurred an immediate loss on its wheat exports, as the export price of wheat was below its domestic procurement price. It charged mills about LS 18,300 per ton of wheat; the mills then sold the flour to bakeries at the fixed price of only LS 7,100 per ton and charged the loss to GOCPT. The GGCPT then turned to the PSF to cover its losses. Total GOCPT losses from wheat in 1999 cost the PSF LS 28.7 billion (3.6 percent of GDP), while the smaller subsidies amounted to LS 0.5 billion. These losses were financed from two sources: budgetary transfers and bank credit. In 1999, the PSF received LS 1 billion from earmarked revenues and LS 10 billion from budgetary transfers (of which LS 4.5 billion for wheat exports); revenue from these two sources was far below the required LS 29.2 billion required to cover the GOCPT losses and other consumer subsidies. The PSF continued to borrow heavily from the domestic banking system to finance this shortfall; this borrowing is channeled through public enterprises, notably the GGCPT, and will eventually have to be paid back from fiscal resources. In addition, the government’s farm policy also entails quasi-fiscal costs that are not included in the PSF accounts. These are the holding costs of the cotton stocks, which are purchased from farmers at the support price and currently can only be sold at the lower world market price. Bank credit to the General Organization of Cotton rose by LS 11.2 billion in 1999 (1.4 percent of GDP). During 1994-99, the cumulative increase was LS 53.9 billion equivalent to 12.4 percent of money and quasi-money in 1999. 14. The growth of broad money accelerated to 11.5 percent in 1999, as net foreign assets continued to grow (Table 3). Net claims on the government declined further while claims on public enterprises and the private sector registered a modest increase. Velocity of circulation fell further (Figure 4), while the composition of money stock continued to shift from currency to deposits. As a result of the large drop in prices, real interest rates rose further. Nominal interest rates, which are between 4 percent and 8 percent for savings and term deposits and 9-13 percent for nonagricultural loans to the private sector, have not been adjusted since 198 1.’ - 5 Including a variety of fees and transaction taxes. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-8- 15. Tight demand management policies and favorable oil prices helped Syria maintain a strong external position in 1999. Despite a 4 percent decline in non-oil exports (due mainly to lower cereals exports associated with the drought), overall exports increased by 21 percent due largely to higher international oil prices (Table 4; Figure 7). Imports (excluding gas project related imports) remained stagnant and significantly below their 1994-96 level. As a result, the trade balance registered a surplus of US$216 million compared to US$l78 million deficit in 1998. Also, there was a significant improvement in the financial account due to higher direct investment associated with a major gas-related project. An overall surplus of about US$260 million enabled the central bank to buildup foreign exchange reserves to US$2.1 billion (7.1 months of merchandise imports). 16. Reflecting the strong demand for Syrian pounds, the free-market exchange rate has been stable against the U.S. dollar in recent years. During 1999, the average monthly exchange rate in the free-market varied between LS 5 1.2-LS 52.4 per USS 1; at end- May 2000, this rate appreciated to LS 48-LS 49, thereby reducing the gap with the official rate (LS 46.5 per US$l) to about 5 percent (Figure 5; Table 5). Since the prices of most traded goods reflect the free-market exchange rate, external competitiveness in Syria is best measured through movements in the real effective free-market rate. The cumulative appreciation of this rate over 1995-99 was about 10 percent. Nonetheless, given that other countries in the region have also experienced appreciating real effective exchange rates since 1995, Syria’s price competitiveness has improved vis-&is Egypt, Jordan, Lebanon, and Turkey. ;; . Syria’s officially acknowledged external debt at the end-1999 was US$5.6 billion e ulvalent to 33.2 percent of GDP).6 Of this amount, staff estimates that about 65 percent are owed to bilateral creditors, especially Germany and Japan, 10 percent to multilateral institutions, and 25 percent (mostly short-term) to banks and suppliers. Syria has been pursuing a strategy to reduce its external arrears bilaterally, as they have successfully done with most European countries.7 Total external arrears outstanding are estimated by the staff at US$2.2 billion (excluding arrears to the Russian Federation (RF)), with the largest amounts owed to Germany, Japan, and the United States. As of April 30,2000, the outstanding interest arrears owed IBRD amounted to US$l4 1 million. In 1999, Syria agreed on a debt repayment schedule with Iran. 6 Officially acknowledged debt excludes ruble debt to the Russian Federation and probably excludes late interest obligations on debt to Paris Club. Information is not available because of inadequate debt reporting system (which is being upgraded with assistance from the World Bank). 7 During 1991-98, debt settlements were reached with Belgium, Bulgaria (in part), Denmark, France, Hungary, The Netherlands, Romania (in part), Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, and United Kingdom. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-9- C. Prospects for 2000 18. In an effort to stimulate economic activity, the government decided to follow an expansionary fiscal policy with the 2000 budget. Accordingly, development expenditures are projected to increase by about 47 percent relative to the preliminary outturn for 1999, and the budget envisages a deficit of about 10.5 percent of GDP. However, in Syria, revenue estimates are usually quite cautious and actual development expenditures are typically lower than budgeted.* Making allowance for this and for a higher average export price of oil (US$22.51 per barrel)’ than that used in the budget (US$19.62 per barrel), the staff projects a fiscal deficit of about 4.1 percent of GDP, a sharp increase from the staff estimate of a 0.5 percent of GDP deficit in 1999; in addition, support for the PSF and cotton financing would continue, although on a somewhat reduced scale. 19. Growth should rebound in 2000, as a result of the end of the drought and the fiscal stimulus.” The Syrian representatives and the mission agreed that growth is likely to rebound to about 4-5 percent, reflecting mainly a projected rebound in agricultural output (8.1 percent), reinforced by more than 2 percent of GDP increase in public investment. The increase in the domestic financing requirement, coupled with an increase in import prices, would result in some inflationary pressures; consumer prices are projected to increase by about 3 percent. Despite a rise in oil export prices, the external current account would register a deficit of about 1.3 percent of GDP as imports of the public sector are projected to recover strongly Corn the low levels of the previous two years, due to the projected increase in public investment. III. POLICVDISCUSSIONS 20. The authorities emphasized their determination to open up the economy further in order to attract private investment, foreign, and domestic. While they would pay due regard to the possible social and political implications of policy shifts, they would encourage private sector participation in ail economic activities through tax holidays and easing of restrictions. They stressed moreover, that, in order to stimulate growth in 2000, they intended to pursue an expansionary fiscal policy driven by a significant increase in development expenditure. In their assessment, the decline in private and foreign investment since 1994 (Figure 2) had contributed to the sluggish economic growth; they were determined to make up for this by increasing public investment. * Actual development expenditures averaged about 8 1 percent of the budgeted amounts in 1997-98. 9 Based on June WE0 oil price assumption. lo However, it appears that rainfall, while much better than in 1999, has still been below average (in all but the coastal areas). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- lo- 21. While welcoming the opening up of the economy, the staff expressed concern that the impact of the measures taken to encourage private sector activity, liberalize foreign trade and the exchange regime, was dampened by the lack of a well-articulated policy framework. Also, in the staffs view, the planned expansionary fiscal policy cannot be a substitute for the needed comprehensive structural reform. As such, discussions centered on how the authorities intend to reinvigorate growth while maintaining financial stability. A. Growth Strategy 22. The authorities pointed out that for the period ahead, the government’s strategy is to continue to develop private initiative while maintaining a strong public sector. Also, they indicated that a gradual and measured pace of reform was consistent with Syria’s political and social systems. The staff expressed concern that the incremental reform approach the authorities intend to follow may have neither the critical mass nor credibility to create an environment for a rebound in private and foreign investment. In the staffs view, to bring Syria back on the high growth track of the early 1990s and unleash the economy’s vast potential major policy initiatives are required. 23. In particular, a growth strategy would have to shift f?om traditional growth sources (e.g., oil, import substitution in manufacturing, and expansion in irrigated land) to export- driven growth led by the private sector and supported by further liberalization in trade, payments, and prices. To achieve that, the staff argued, it is essential that a friendlier environment be established for private sector activity to strengthen confidence and encourage higher investment. This strategy would require a determined and concrete effort to alleviate remaining distortions in the economy. This would entail unifying the exchange system at the free-market rate, liberalizing trade and payments systems, and simplifying the regulatory system. In addition, significant reforms would be necessary in the banking system to provide the financial deepening necessary to channel investment to their most productive uses and to encourage mobilization of private savings. The increased openness of the economy will allow investors to import new technologies that would raise productivity and enable them to meet foreign competition in both export and domestic markets. 24. The authorities indicated general agreement with the thrust of the above strategy, but emphasized the need for careti timing. They reemphasized that one of their main policy objectives in the coming years was to promote private sector activity and to have growth mostly driven by exports. In their view, Syria’s comparative advantage is agriculture and with further liberalization of the economy agricultural exports can increase significantly. They pointed out that they had gradually liberalized the trade, payment, and price environment surrounding private sector activity and they intended to continue with the gradual implementation of further measures. Their effort, as detailed below, would be to establish an environment more conducive to private sector initiative, by giving fiscal incentives and reforming the trade and exchange system. Meanwhile, they would maintain a strong public sector, and its efficiency would be boosted by a system of “management by objectives” as explained below. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 11 - B. Structural Policies Exchange regime 25. The authorities noted that the simplification of the exchange regime in 1998 had represented a major step in eliminating the distortive effects of multiple exchange rates. Their aim continued to be the unification of the exchange system at a market-based level and the stability of the market rate thereafter. In order to expand the role of the free-market rate, they had recently allowed investors under Law No. 10 to obtain local currency for their projects at the free-market rate. Also, to enhance the development of the free-market exchange rate in March 2000, the possession of foreign exchange was legalized, but penalties were maintained for unofficial (outside the banking system) foreign currency trading. The staff noted that this restriction should be phased out altogether, and the remaining surrender requirement should be abolished. The authorities believed however that there was a need to control unofficial currency trading to avoid speculative attacks on the Syrian pound. 26. While noting the small spread between the free-market exchange rate and the official rate, the staff stressed that, given the oil resources and the persistence of trade and exchange restrictions, the free-market exchange rate was an unreliable indicator of competitiveness. In the staffs view, in order to restore private sector confidence and enhance incentives for exporters, there was a need to simplify and remove the remaining distortions in the exchange and trade system. Also, the current strength of the Syrian pound in the free-market and its appreciation against the European currencies provided a good opportunity to move the official rate closer to the market rate. The authorities indicated that they intended to continue to close the gap between the two rates gradually as they had done thus far. Trade policy 27. The authorities indicated that they would continue to gradually liberalize the trade, payment, and price environment surrounding both the private and public sector activities. While recognizing that since 1990, trade liberalization has been extensive,” the staff indicated that the present system of import restrictions is cumbersome and nontransparent, and a major consolidation of restrictions into a short negative list would be helpful. The authorities agreed with the staff that most import regulations constituted an unnecessary burden on private sector transactions, and they intended to simplify these regulations futher.12 In 2000, they planned to introduce the Harmonized System of Tariff Classification, ” Appendix I, Section IV in the RED gives a list of the major foreign trade decisions implemented since 1990. l2 There are three classes of permitted imports: (a) goods that may be financed from any source; (b) which must be financed from export proceeds; and (c) which must be financed with workers’ remittances. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12- unify customs valuation exchange rates, and remove anomalies in the tariff system.13 ln addition, tariffs on imports from the Arab Free Trade Area (Egypt, Syria, and the six nations of the GCC) countries would continue to be reduced annually by 10 percent and with Lebanon by 25 percent until these tariffs are eliminated. However, the authorities indicated that there had been little real impact from these reductions so far as they had largely been put into effect under earlier bilateral agreements with Arab trading partners. While negotiations were underway with the European Union toward an Association Agreement, the authorities thought that existing preferences already earned them much of the benefits to be expected from the agreement. 28. While welcoming these steps, the mission pointed out that the negative list now applicable to imports from the Arab Free Trade Area countries could be extended to all imports and, over the medium term, the number of goods on the list could be gradually reduced. The staff believed that, beyond its trade performance component, the Association Agreement with the European Union under negotiations had the potential to be a vehicle to improve the overall efficiency of the economy. Promoting private sector investment 29. The authorities explained that the thrust of government policy was to promote private sector activity by allowing price flexibility, access to foreign exchange, and other production inputs in virtually all spheres of economic activity. They stated that the easing of restrictions and increased price flexibility since the early 1990s had improved the cost-price relationship and enhanced production incentives. They explained that, de facto, all sectors of economic activity except banking and insurance were now open to private sector initiative. The staff pointed out that, in many instances, even when the private sector is allowed into an industry, state regulations on pricing and marketing often act as a hindrance. The authorities’ intent was to further encourage private sector activities and recent amendments to Investment Law No. 10 were a testimony of such a commitment. These amendments included (Box 2): allowing Arab and foreign investors to own land and buildings; allowing 100 percent foreign ownership of companies; increasing tax holidays (under certain conditions) to a total of 13 years up from 7 years previously; allowing investors to exchange foreign currency to pay local currency costs at the free-market rate rather than the official rate,14 and allowing the Supreme Investment Council to authorize, on a case-by-case basis, exporters to retain more than 75 percent of their nonagricultural export earnings. l3 Inconsistencies in rate differentiation include higher duty rates applied to goods of lower degrees of processing than goods of higher degrees of processing, which may result in higher rates of effective protection. I4 These transactions will take place at the Commercial Bank of Syria. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public. - 13- Box 2. Syrian Arab Republic: Main Points of the New Decrees Issued in 2000 I. Amendments to Investment Law Number 10: Some amendments are subject to a case-by-case approval of the Supreme Investment Council (SIC). The main points of these amendments are: . . . . . . . . . . . II. . . . III. . . . Arab and foreign investors have the right to own land and buildings, rather than rent them only, as was previously the case. Total tax exemptions have been increased to a total of up to 13 years, up from a total of up to seven years previously. These are subject to certain conditions, such as, if a project exports more than 50 percent of its total output; if it contributes significantly to economic growth, technological transfer, exports, or employment; or if it was located in one of the designated rural “development” areas (Rakkah, Hassakeh, or Deir el Zour). Investors may exchange foreign currency to pay the local currency costs of the project at the free market rate, rather than the previously stipulated neighboting country rate. The SIC may authotize the establishment of holding companies under the Law. The SIC may authorize the retention by the exporters of more of their hard currency receipts than previously stipulated. The previously stipulated 25 percent surrender requirement may therefore be waived. Investors will be exempted from the stamp tax levied on the registration of joint-stock companies. After five years in operation, investors are permitted to repatriate abroad the equivalent of the net capital, which was initially invested. The SIC may permit an investor to open a foreign bank account to provide financing and meet other obligations related to the project, on condition that the amount deposited in this account does not exceed 50 percent of the paid-up capital in foreign currency. Investors may transfer, when needed, part of their foreign currency deposits abroad and convert into Syrian pounds to cover local expenses, at the neighboring country exchange rate. After the expiry of the tax exemption period, a maximum profit tax rate of 25 percent will be applicable on joint-stock companies set up under this law. A company may be 100 percent foreign-owned, and the owners may be allowed to specify their own company laws, and assign their own management. Future changes to the law may be introduced by decree rather than by legislation, as was previously required. ‘! Main Amendments to Law 24 on Foreign Currency Dealings: Decree No. 6 of 2000 was issued, revoking the original law on foreign exchange possession and dealing (Decree No. 24 of 1986). The possession of foreign currencies shall not be punishable by law. However, trade (outside the banking system) in foreign currencies is punishable by imprisonment of up to three years. Authority to modify regulations has been devolved to ministerial level. Other Main Changes in Recent Decrees: Inheritance tax on bank savings accounts, retirement pensions, life insurance benefits, and the main residence is abolished. Export duties on cotton produced in Syria are abolished. Cotton and its products are also exempted from the agricultural production tax. As a result of the severe 1999 drought, agricultural loans to farmers that are due through December 2000 are exempt from interest payments, fines, and late penalties. The balances on the loans due through December 1999 shall be payable by annual installments over a period of five years. These installments must be paid on time otherwise penalties will be imposed. li As a result of this change, future changes to Law No. 10 can be approved by the Minister of Economy instead of requiring presidential approval. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14- 30. While welcoming the amendments to Investment Law No. 10, the mission stressed that many impediments to the operations of the private sector remain, and it was important that the reform measures implemented thus far be complemented by reforms in other areas. In addition to adopting a transparent exchange regime, the new commercial and rental laws which had been under preparation for some time need to be introduced rapidly; the regulatory framework eased; the trade regime simplified; and the banking system revitalized. Public enterprises . 31. The Syrian representatives commented that while the government’s strategy is to develop private initiative, the public sector is expected to continue to play an important role in the economy, and the authorities’ intention was to continue to improve the performance of public enterprises. To this effect, in 1999, they had introduced a pilot project of “management by objectives” for four major public enterprises (yarn, textiles, pharmaceuticals, and glass); whereby management would be given broad freedom to achieve agreed goals. The mission welcomed this approach, but noted that this should be a first step toward a more comprehensive reform which would make public enterprises subject to tight budget constraints, reduce their reliance on the government budget, eliminate subsidized borrowing, and allow full flexibility in employment decisions, wage policy, pricing, and access to foreign exchange. Banking system 32. The mission noted that the banking system had been little affected by the reform program undertaken since the early 1990s. The banking sector remained fully in the public domain and was dominated by the Commercial Bank of Syria (the CBoS). This sector which lacked modem banking and financial skills essentially focused on financing public enterprises.” As a result of years of protection and regulation, the banking sector was characterized by low intermediation and the level of savings and private sector credit were small. 33. The Syrian representatives took exception to this assessment, noting in particular that they had taken specific steps to improve trade financing. Moreover, in order to give the private sector greater access to financing, the Post Office Savings Fund (POSF) had been authorized to begin lending activities in April 1999, which meant that its resources were redirected from financing public enterprises to financing the private sector.16 They I5 Enterprises and individuals adapt by seeking better banking services from abroad, in particular from banks in Lebanon, which has very liberal exchange arrangements. l6 Previously, the main task of the POSF was to accept deposits from the public, and transfer most of these deposits to the Treasury. Ninety percent of deposits were lent to the government at 8.75 percent. The POSF acts as a state-holding company, by managing the (continued.. .) Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 15- acknowledged that fundamental reforms were required in the banking system and in bank supervision. However, because of weaknesses of skills and infrastructure, premature reforms could have adverse consequences, They indicated that progress was being made in the modemization of accounting and payment systems and the training of staff. Once complete, this upgrading would permit the introduction of greater competition within the sector. Allowing the entry of fully privately owned banks was not being considered at this time. As an interim step to better serve the private sector in its export activities, an Export Promotion Bank is being considered, as is a joint public-private bank. However, a formal decision has not been taken. 34. At the end of June 2000, a new law allowing foreign banks to operate in the so-called “Free Zones” was announced (these are areas designated as special development zones, to encourage growth and employment). Once implemented, this should improve the private sector’s access to capital-despite this facility being limited to the Free Zone areas and not the whole economy- and represents a small first step towards liberalizing and reforming the country’s archaic banking sector. 35. The mission recognized the need for training and for introducing new technology, but called for some initial policy reforms. For example, specialized banks could be allowed to participate in limited foreign exchange currency operations, such as conducting trade-related transactions and taking foreign currency deposits. 36. The mission also underscored the need to restore the legal authority and enhance the capabilities of the central bank to exercise effective oversight of bank activity and to develop supervision capabilities. The Syrian representatives responded that the authorities were reviewing the draft Central Bank Law produced in 1996 with MAE technical assistance, which would give the central bank the authority to conduct monetary policy and to oversee the financial system. C. Demand Management Fiscal policy 37. In 2000, in response to the slack in the economy, the authorities had altered the traditionally tight stance of financial policies. The significantly expansionary fiscal policy would result mainly from an increase in expenditures. They indicated that the increase in development expenditure would primarily go to the completion of existing projects, and could therefore be implemented without loss of efficiency. They noted that current expenditures would be driven by the biannual 9 percent salary increase, increased subsidies government’s shares in private-public joint ventures. As of April 1, 1999, it started to provide credit to the private sector. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 16- to support wheat and cotton exports, and, significantly, larger appropriations for external debt service. 38. The staff accepted that, given the slack in the economy and unemployment, the low public debt, and the absence of effective monetary instruments that could be used to stimulate growth a somewhat supportive fiscal stance (deficit of about 4 percent of GDP) was manageable at this time and was consistent with domestic and external financial stability. However, the staff was concerned that a significantly higher deficit than that would clearly put pressure on prices and foreign exchange reserves. Also, the staff was concerned that fiscal policy was not clearly cast in the context of an explicit monetary framework, and the tradeoffs between monetary financing of the deficit, credit to the economy, and changes in net foreign assets were not explicitly recognized. The staff also cautioned that the expansionary policies could not be a substitute for structural reform in providing a lasting solution to Syria’s growth problem. 39. Regarding the medium term, a further concern arose from the diverging trends of fiscal revenue and current expenditure, The share of revenues as a percent of GDP was falling as a result of external tariff reductions, reduced surcharges from petroleum products, and of delayed adjustments in fees and charges. Also, the tax exemptions given to private investors under Investment Law No. 10 may contribute to the erosion of the tax base. By contrast, current expenditures reflected the need to improve civil service salaries and the costs of the agricultural policy. To reduce these pressures, the staff suggested that beyond 2000, the budget structure should be strengthened to maintain the fiscal deficits at levels that are consistent with non-inflationary growth. Consequently, a combination of revenue- enhancing measures and expenditure restraint was required to ensure that the deficit remained at a sustainable level. The Syrian representatives noted that they were considering the introduction of a sales tax; however, some time would be needed to muster political support for tax and price increases. The authorities felt confident that necessary measures would be taken beyond 2000 to keep the budget deficit under control. 40. In the staffs view, the narrow tax base, mostly depending on oil revenues and individual income taxes, would have to be broadened to increase the tax ratio (relative to GDP) and thus finance structural reforms over the medium term. The main measures that the authorities need to introduce are a sales tax at the manufacturing and import level, income tax reform to reduce exemptions, and an increase in fuel and gas oil prices which are priced well below international levels and have been unchanged since 1994. . 41. Subsidies through the PSF-which cover wheat (flour), sugar, and rice-continued to be a burden on the economy, rising from 3.3 percent of GDP in 1994, when consumer prices of subsidized commodities were last changed, to 3.7 percent in 1999. Starting in 1997 these subsidies also included export subsidies on wheat, as export of surplus wheat has been sold at prices below procurement prices paid to farmers. Furthermore, following the sharp rise in petroleum prices in 1999, domestic prices of fuel oil and gas oil were priced at Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17- 23 percent and 76 percent of international prices, respectively.” As a result, the petroleum products surcharges transferred to the budget have been declining. The mission argued that it would be more advisable and efficient to replace subsidization of bread, sugar, and rice by targeted social assistance. Also, subsidies on petroleum products should be initially reduced and later eliminated to improve resource allocation and provide the budget with revenue. The authorities observed that the quasi-fiscal losses of the PSF and the cotton marketing board would be reduced in 2000, as increased appropriations had been made in the budget to cover the PSF subsidies and the losses made on the export of cotton. While welcoming this step, in the staffs view, to improve the transparency of fiscal accounts all subsidies should be explicitly accounted for in the budget. Monetary policy 42. While commending the authorities for their steady implementation of tight financial policies that had resulted in the strengthening of the Syrian pound, the mission noted, the absence of a comprehensive framework for the design and conduct of monetary policy, and expressed concern that monetary policy continued to focus on the merits of sectoral credit plans rather than on explicit consideration of broad monetary aggregates.‘* While this policy had been consistent with the noted strengthening of the pound over the past decade, in a context of fiscal restraint and reliance on public sector enterprises, the staff was concerned that this approach did not ensure a balanced distribution of credit, especially in the new context of increased reliance on the private sector; and was inadequate to warn of incipient pressures on external reserves in the new environment of expansionary fiscal policies. 43. The mission further noted that the banking system had not been able to provide adequate support to the private sector. Since end-1995, credit to the private sector had risen only by about LS 12 billion, equivalent to less than 3.0 percent of money and quasi-money in 1999. In the mission’s view, credit policy was geared to the requirements of the public sector which received more than two-thirds of total bank credit, especially in agriculture. In 1999, about 92 percent of total outstanding credit to public enterprises was allocated to financing subsidy-related deficits of the General Organization for Cereals Trade and Production, and for Cotton Ginning and Marketing, thereby crowding out the remaining public enterprises. ” As of end-April 2000. I8 Monetary policy is conducted through an annual credit plan formulated by a ministerial economic committee and the credit policy is implemented through direct credit allocation and control. Policy instruments such as the discount rate and reserve requirement ratio have not been used in many years. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public. - 18- 44. The authorities, however, questioned this interpretation of recent credit developments, arguing that the limited expansion of credit was not a deliberate monetary policy. They explained that banks formulate yearly credit plans involving projected credit growth and sectoral allocation of credit consistent with the relevant sector’s development plans produced _ by the respective ministries and asserted that these plans were implemented flexibly. They pointed to their record of eradicating inflation and strengthening the Syrian pound as proof of effective fiscal and monetary coordination. As to eventual pressures arising from monetary financing of the budget, they indicated that they would continue to monitor the growth of the money supply and would not allow it to become excessive. They would allow a drawdown in the external position of the commercial bank in 2000 if this was caused by an upsurge in business activity, but did not expect the central bank to lose external reserves. 45. The staff stressed that in the new economic environment of increased reliance on the private sector, there is a need to shift to a market-based mechanism in order to improve credit allocation. In the staffs view, a first step in this direction would be to introduce flexibility in the setting of interest rates. Nominal interest rates, which are between 4 percent and 8 percent for savings and term deposits and 9-13 percent for nonagricultural loans to the private sector, have not been changed since 1981 .I9 Given the significant drop in inflation since 1996, real interest rates have become highly positive. The staff believes that a modest reduction in nominal rates would be helpful as a signal of the supportive policy stance and, critically, as a first move towards a policy of interest rate flexibility. External debt 46. The mission observed that limited progress had been made in 1999 in resolving outstanding debt issues under the authorities’ bilateral approach and urged prompt settlement with creditors. The authorities stressed that efforts were being made to improve Syria’s international relations and that they were keen to clear, through bilateral negotiations, all outstanding payments arrears and remain current thereafter. D. Statistical Issues 47. The mission noted that important shortcomings in the quality, coverage, and consistency of data made it difficult to monitor developments closely, and constrained in- depth analysis and policy formulation. These shortcomings had so far prevented the supply of - core data to the Fund on a regular basis. The mission also noted however that some progress in improving Syria’s statistical base (Appendix III) had been made. The national accounts in constant prices had been rebased from 1985 to 1995, a new industry survey had been introduced, and work was continuing on moving to the 1993 SNA methodology. The compilation lag in the provision of monetary data by the central bank and some specialized banks had been shortened considerably. The Syrian representatives acknowledged data I9 Including a variety of fees. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 19- . banks had been shortened considerably. The Syrian representatives acknowledged data deficiencies, but indicated that the upgrading of the accounts and computerization at the Ministry of Finance now underway would be a basis for further improvement. The mission urged the authorities to join the General Data Dissemination System (GDDS) which provides a framework for steady improvement in a country’s data system over a long period. The Syrian representatives indicated that the implementation of this system, while desirable, was very difficult at this stage. IV. MEDIUM-TERM SCENARIO 48. In developing a medium-term macroeconomic scenario, the staff took account of a number of factors limiting future growth: 0 Oil output has peaked and production from existing oil wells is expected to continue to decline. However, the authorities discount this prospect noting in particular that additional gas now being developed will free up an estimated 33,000 barrels of oil per day for export, thereby adding US$150-200 million per year to export revenue. l In agriculture, the price incentives which have driven the rapid expansion of wheat and cotton have reached their limit since procurement prices for both crops have been exceeding world prices for the last two years. a The banking system is yet to be modemized. This sector remains closed to private initiative and lacks modern banking and financial skills. 49. Against this background, the staffs illustrative medium-term policy scenario shown in Annex I is based on continued gradual implementation of measures to liberalize the trade and exchange system, as well as a modest tightening of fiscal policy starting in 2001 in response to the increase in the deficit in 2000. The annual average fiscal deficit (including PSF subsidies) during 2001-2005 is projected to be about 3.6 percent of GDP. This projected outcome reflects the gradual removal of price distortions, and partial fiscal adjustment, but without a comprehensive package of self-reinforcing measures that would fully restore private confidence, boost investment, and raise productivity. Such a deficit could be financed without difficulty given recent trends in external financing, and expected new sources such as the EIB and the IFC. Under these policies and constraints, real growth would stabilize at about 3.540 percent per year. Such a growth rate would not be sufficient to provide employment opportunities for the 15O,OOO-200,000 new entrants to the labor force each year. However, under WEO-based oil export price assumptions and the coming on-stream of additional gas supplies in 2001, the external position should not come under pressure. In the staffs opinion however, higher growth rates could be attained, if a comprehensive package of credible steps including exchange and trade liberalization and the introduction of private banking was taken to entice higher private investment. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 20 - V. STAFFAPPRAISAL 50. The Syrian authorities have signaled their intention to emphasize structural measures aimed at allowing greater room for private sector initiative and increase the openness of the economy. The modifications to the investment code and to the foreign exchange regulations introduced earlier this year remove some of the legal restrictions on private sector operations and enhance the financial incentives. The staff welcomes these initiatives which build upon the achievements of the past decade, address key impediments to growth, and respond to the need for faster employment creation. However, the staff believes that a comprehensive reform package along the lines suggested during the 1997-99 Article IV consultations is needed to stimulate private sector exports and reorient the Syrian economy towards global markets while taking into account the social and political constraints facing Syria. The focus should be on removing remaining impediments to private sector activity and paving the way towards a more effective monetary policy. 51. A major impediment to private sector activity is the poor quality of banking services. In the period ahead, the banking system will be called upon to play a critical role in mobilizing savings and allocating them more efficiently, and in establishing a foreign exchange market in Syria. Accordingly, the Central Bank would be expected to have more autonomy in setting policy and fulfilling supervisory role, and the Commercial Bank of Syria would need to be restructured to better serve the needs of a growing market-based economy and improve financial intermediation. The authorities should also consider easing entry restrictions to commercial banking activities, and encourage the development of an interbank domestic market. 52. Trade policy is also of great importance. While, over time, trade liberalization has been extensive, the present system of import restrictions is unduly cumbersome and nontransparent and a major consolidation of restrictions into a short negative list would be helpful. The negative list now applicable to imports from Arab Free Trade Area countries could be extended to all imports and, over the medium term, the number of goods on the list could be gradually reduced. The progress in negotiating various bilateral and regional trade agreements is welcome; moreover, beyond its trade preference component, the Association Agreement with the EU under negotiation has the potential of becoming a vehicle to improve the overall efficiency of the economy. 53. More generally, the legal environment of economic activity is in need of extensive clarification and simplification to liberalize foreign exchange regulations, and establish a level playing field between the private and the public sector. Of particular urgency are the legalization of transactions in foreign exchange and the abolition of the surrender requirement. 54. The staff recognizes the authorities’ emphasis on maintaining a strong public sector and improving its performance. To achieve that, public enterprises should not be penalized by restrictive regulations nor should they benefit from preferential treatment. Their exports and imported inputs should be priced at the market exchange rate and they should be given Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2l- greater control over their management so they can effectively compete with the private sector. In this connection, the staff welcomes the introduction of management by objectives, which will give enterprises the needed flexibility to achieve agreed goals. 55. Turning to financial policies, the staff notes the authorities’ intent to conduct expansionary fiscal policies in 2000 in order to stimulate demand and boost activity. The staff welcomes the success of the authorities over the past decade in strengthening the pound and eradicating inflation, which sets the stage for providing some demand support in the current conditions of weak economic activity without threatening domestic and external financial stability. However, the staff is concerned that a deficit higher than 4 percent of GDP would put pressure on prices and foreign exchange reserves. Another concern of the staff arises from the design of fiscal policy in Syria which is not embedded in a comprehensive monetary policy framework. Moreover, an assessment of the stance of financial policies is complicated by the limited information available on actual fiscal plans and execution. The staff would stress that the need for improved information and policy coordination becomes more pressing as fiscal policy turns more expansionary, because it becomes increasingly necessary to anticipate their impact on monetary conditions. In the staffs view, while a fiscal deficit of about 4 percent of GDP was manageable in 2000, such policy could not be a substitute for structural reform in providing a lasting solution to Syria’s growth problem. 56. A further concern over the medium term arises from the diverging trends of fiscal revenue and expenditure. Strengthening the structure of the budget would require a broadening of the tax base and a prioritization of expenditures, particularly with respect to development projects. To that end, the staff recommends the implementation of a general sales tax at the manufacturing and import level and revision of the corporate income tax to unify and lower the rates, and reduce exemptions. Since preparations have been completed, the Harmonized System of Tariff Classification and the unification of the customs valuation rates should be introduced over a relatively short period of time. These measures would be needed to offset the revenue loss stemming from the reduction in import duties under the Arab Free Trade Area and the prospective association with the EU. On the expenditure side, the subsidization of bread and rice is untargeted and subsidization of wheat and cotton exports may be indicative of exchange rate over-valuation. It would be advisable to replace these subsidies by targeted social assistance. Also, subsidies on petroleum products should be initially reduced and later eliminated to improve resource allocation and provide the budget with revenue. - 57. In view of the price deflation, the sluggish pace of activity, and the fact that interest rates have not been adjusted since 198 1, the staff believes that a modest reduction in interest rates would signal a supportive policy stance and serve as a first move toward a policy of interest rate flexibility. The staff would further suggest that the authorities consider setting up a Treasury bill auction system. 58. The narrowing of the spread between the free-market and the official exchange rate is a significant achievement. However, in the staffs view, the authorities should seize the Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 22 - opportunity of an environment of low inflation and stable exchange rate to further reduce the spread between the free-market and official rates. The expansionary fiscal stance in 2000 may result in pressures on the exchange market. While reserves are more than ample to face such eventual pressures, the authorities are urged to keep the exchange rate policy under review. 59. Although Syria took significant steps during 1991-97 to regularize its external debt situation with bilateral creditors and the World Bank, little additional progress was made in 1998-99 and arrears are outstanding. In order to assert Syria’s credit worthiness, this process would need to be accelerated in the period ahead. 60. Some progress has been made in improving Syria’s statistical base. However, significant weaknesses remain in terms of coverage, consistency, periodicity, and timeliness which have hampered the staffs ability to conduct economic analysis and effective surveillance. Efforts to address the weaknesses in Syria’s statistical base, must cover a wide range of sectors, including national accounts, customs data on trade transactions, public finances, monetary, private capital movements, labor market data, and external debt statistics. The authorities are committed to bring about major improvements in this area. The staff believes that, these efforts could be strengthened through participation in the Fund’s General Data Dissemination System. 61. Syria continues to maintain, under Article XIV, restrictions on payments and transfers for current international transactions, including the administrative allocation of foreign exchange. Syria also maintains exchange measures that are subject to Fund approval under Article VIII. In the absence of specific measures to eliminate the restrictions and multiple currency practices in a timely manner, the staff does not recommend that the Executive Board grant approval for the retention of the exchange practices under Article VIII. The staff urges the authorities to eliminate these restrictions as soon as possible, and to accept obligations of Article VIII. 62. It is proposed that the next Article IV consultation take place on the standard 12-month cycle. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 23 - Proposed Decision The following draft decision is proposed for adoption by the Executive Board: 1. The Fund takes this decision relating to the Syrian Arab Republic’s exchange measures subject to Article VIII, Sections 2(a) and 3, and in concluding the 2000 Article XIV consultation with the Syrian Arab Republic, in the light of the 2000 Article IV Consultation with the Syrian Arab Republic conducted under Decision No. 5392-(77/63), adopted April 29, 1977, as amended (Surveillance over Exchange Rate Policies). 2. As described in SM/00/187, the Syrian Arab Republic maintains restrictions on payments and transfers for current international transactions under Article XIV, Section 2. In addition, the Syrian Arab Republic maintains measures subject to approval under Article VIII. The Fund encourages the Syrian Arab Republic to eliminate the measures maintained under Article XIV, Section 2 as soon as its balance of payments position permits, and urges the Syrian Arab Republic to eliminate the measures that are subject to approval under Article VIII as soon as possible. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 24 - 25 20 15 10 5 0 -5 -10 Figure 1. Syrian Arab Republic: Real Sector Indicators, 1994-2000 (Annual percentage change; unless otherwise indicated) Real GDP Real non-agricultural I994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 Est. 2000 Proj. Consumer Price Index 25 20 15 10 5 0 -5 -10 18 1 18 16 1 - 16 I 14 - \ - 14 12 . ‘\ I I - 12 I 10 - ‘LO---, ; - 10 8 i - i - 8 6 - ‘\ i i . 6 4 - i - 4 2 H - - 2 0 - -v -w ,i/ - 0 -2 - ---./ ! I l -2 -4 -4 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 Est. 2000 Proj. Savings and Investment (in percent of GDP) 35 35 I Gross domestic investment i 30 i n 30 i 25 i . SE+=- .. *“,.-I .,,. :/ ), ,VM,i.?. i - 25 ,,. 20 . I Private investment - 20 I I5 I - i - 15 ----- -------a__ i 10 - I - 10 I i 5 - i - 5 i 0 + Aa 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 Est. Source: Data provided by the Syrian authorities; and staff estimates. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicFigure 2. Syrian Arab Republic: Investment and Real GDP growth, 1990-99 20 15 10 5 0 -5 (In percent of GDP unless olherwise indicated) Private Investment Public Investment Red GDP w-4 I . I I l I l l I \ \ \ \ \ b t ’ \ I \ \ _l...,l.,................... _._” ,..,....__....,,..........,................ _ . . . .._. _ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . -.- .._._l.....C”......--........,..-..” . . -..- .._..............I.....~-.......................,........~ - .-..-- . ..” -...................,...............-....”..........................,...........................-- * _...,.,,.....,.._ \ 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 Est. Source: Data provided by the Syrian authorities; and staff estimates. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public250,000 0.50 0.40 0.30 0.20 0.10 0.00 - 26 - Figure 3. Syrian Arab Republic: Monetary Sector Indicators, 1994-99 Money and Credit m Claims on nongovemment (Left scale) l! 450,000 400,000 350,000 300,000 250,000 200,ood 150,000 100,000 50,000 0 0.60 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 Structure of Credit to the Non-government Sector (In percent) 1999 0% 7% 10% Agriculture Commerce 2 q Manufacturing El Construction q Services EI Other ::,-.‘:.‘. 73% 71% Money and Credit Ratios MZIGDP -- -.... --__ “--- --. (lefi scale) -I-..._ -..--- +-- C-- -- -___-_- L..-.-- - ( I Ml/M2 21 (right scale) Credit to public entmprises/GDP 31 (left scale) -- Credit to the private sectodGlW 41 (left scale) 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 1.80 3.78 0.76 0.74 0.72 0.70 Source: Central Bank of Syria. II Comprises public enterprises, cooperatives, mixed privatspublic joint ventures and private enterprises. 2/ Ml = currency outside banks+demaud deposits; M2 = Ml+ time, savings and foreign currency deposits. 3/ Combined share of General Organization for Cotton Ginning and Marketing and General Organization for Cereals Trade and Production in total credit to public enterprises averaged 86% over 1994-98. 4/ .Private sector includes cooperatives and mixed private-public joint ventures. _---. -.-- -... Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 27 - -\ ‘* \‘, A Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 28 - Figure 5. Syrian Arab Republic: Exchange Rate Developments, 1994-2000 60 - 50 -- Exchange rate, January 199%May 2000 (Syrian pounds per U.S. dollar) Rate “in neighbouring countries” 21 ..F Budget accounting rate i I I Real Effective Exchange Rate, Dec. 1994-Dec. 1999 160 150 140 130 120 110 100 90 7 60 - 50 I I - 40 - 30 - 20 - 10 40 (1995=100) 1 1 Source: Central Bank of Syria; IMF, Information Notice System; and Fund sta.fT estimates. 160 1 I Average of daily quotations in Amman and Beirut. 2/ On January 1,1998, the rate in neighboring countries and the budget accounting rate were unified. 3/ Average of Beirut and Amman market determined rates; weights of trading partners are those of the Ih4F’s Information Notice System Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 29 - Figure 6. Syrian Arab Republic: Public Finance, 1994-2000 (In percent of GDP) Fiscal Balance 35 30 25 20 20 15 10 5 0 Projection Revenue Trends 2000 Proj. l Oil-related revenue 0 Non-oil related revmue E 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 Est. 2000 Proj. Expenditure Trends n currant expenditure E Wage bill El Dwolop~ 0xpaIditllro 25 20 15 10 5. 0 1.1.1.: .*::. . . . :.>:.I . . . k :.:.:.: . . . *.-.-: :*:.:.: *.. **a..: a**.-: .::: ..-:: .::: :.:.:.I *.. . . . . 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 Eat. 2000 Proj. SOUDXS: Data provided by the Syrian authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 30 - . . . I \ . 8 . . . ..- . . . . --.-. “-i* 1^1._ . -1 . ‘\ ‘: ’ .A.- \ :) /’ . i \ \ . . . . - . . ..-. “. .“.“..“..._ i . . . “..“.. . . --” ““... .““” ” . . . . . . . . . . . . . -““.., Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public700 600 500 400 300 200 100 0 Figure 8. Syrian Arab Republic: Production and Exports of crude oil , 1988-99 (In thounsand bpd) Exports 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 700 600 500 400 300 200 100 0 I w c ‘I Source: Syrian Petroleum Company. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 32 - Table 1. Syrian Arab Republic: Selected Economic Indicators, 1994-2000 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 SW- Stti Est. Proj 1999 2000 National income and prices Nominal GDP (LS billions) Real GDP at market prices 11 Crude oil production (‘000 b/d) Oil export price (USS per barrel) CPI period average CentraI government finances Revenue Expenditure 2/ Overall balance Money and credit Money and quasi-money Net domestic assets Credit to government Credit to public enterprises Credit to private sector Interest rate (6-month deposit rate, percent) Balance of payments Exports f.o.b., Ofwhich: Oil exports Imports, f.o.b. Current account (including official transfers) In percent of GDP Overall balance Reserves Gross official reserves (end period) m months of imports of goods) Deb:. External debt (percent of GDP) 3/ Debt service ratio (payments basis) Exchange rates LSAJS$ (end period) official rate “in neighboring countries” Budget accounting rate Market rate (Beirut/Amman) Average exchange rate (period average) 4/ Real effective exchange rate (change in percent) 5/ Terms of trade (change in percent) (Change in percent; unless otherwise indicated) 506.1 571.0 691.0 745.6 795.7 795.5 867.3 7.7 5.8 4.4 1.8 7.6 -1.2 4.4 584.9 616.9 603.9 576.8 572.7 576.0 568.2 16.06 16.48 19.08 18.01 11.33 15.43 22.51 15.3 7.7 8.9 1.9 -0.4 -2.1 3.0 24.1 25.4 24.6 26.5 25.7 24.5 27.3 26.7 24.8 25.6 26.2 24.9 -3.2 -1.4 -0.2 0.9 -0.5 -0.5 (Change in percent of beginning period money stock) 24.6 28.7 -4.1 10.0 8.8 9.3 7.7 9.6 11.5 0.1 -4.1 -5.7 -6.0 -0.1 1.0 -3.3 -1.5 -6.3 -5.9 -2.7 -11.2 -15.6 7.1 2.2 5.3 -1.2 5.2 2.7 4.1 1.0 2.0 -0.2 0.8 7.0 7.0 7.0 7.0 7.0 7.0 (In billions of US dollars, unless otherwise indicated) 14.5 14.3 5.7 4.6 2.3 7.0 3.3 3.9 4.2 4.1 3.1 3.8 4.8 2.0 2.5 2.5 2.5 1.6 2.3 3.1 4.6 4.0 4.5 3.6 3.3 3.6 4.4 -0.9 0.3 0.0 0.3 0.2 0.0 -0.2 -5.6 1.7 -0.1 2.0 0.9 0.2 -1.3 0.7 0.8 1.0 0.4 0.4 0.3 0.0 1.1 1.3 1.7 1.6 1.9 2.1 2.1 2.8 4.0 4.5 5.4 6.7 7.1 5.8 28.9 27.8 27.0 28.4 31.4 33.4 30.7 22.2 18.6 17.3 28.3 22.9 23.0 22.0 43.0 44.0 11.25 11.25 50.2 50.1 33.2 34.4 -0.6 3.6 1.7 0.3 44.0 45.5 46.5 46.5 46.5 23.0 35.0 45.5 46.5 46.5 50.1 51.4 52.0 51.6 39.2 44.9 47.7 47.7 . 4.6 4.9 -7.2 3.7 9.8 0.6 -16.8 21.0 Sources: Information provided by the Syrian authorities; and staff estimates. I/ Staff estimates differ from those of the authorities. The authorities figures for real GDP growth for the 1996 to 1998 period are 7.3, 2.5, and 7.8 respectively, 21 Excludes Price Stabilization Fund (PSF) losses and includes budgetary transfers to PSF. 3/ Excludes obligations to the Russian Federation. 41 A weighted average of the nominal exchange rates applying to individual transactions. 51 Using the market exchange rate and partner country weights of the IMF’s information notice system. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 33 - Table 2. Syrian Arab Republic: Summary of Fiscal Operations, 1994-2000 Auth. Staff Staff Prel. Est. Budg. Proj . - 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 1999 2ooo 2000 Total revenue Oil-related proceeds Tax revenue Puonoil nontax revenue Total expenditure Current expenditure Wage bill I/ Goods and services Interest payments Others Of which : transfers to PSF and wheat exports Development expenditure Foreign grants Overall fiscal balance Total financing External Domestic bank financing net Non-bank financing and discrepancy Memorandum item: PSF deficit 21 Total revenue Oil-related proceeds Tax revenue Nontax revenue Total expenditure Current expenditure Development expenditure Budget balance Total financing External Domestic bank financing net Non-bank financing and discrepancy Memorandum item: PSF deficit Overall fiscal balance 121.8 144.8 169.8 197.2 204.5 174.8 194.6 183.9. 213.6 48.1 52.2 73.5 83.6 85.1 76.9 88.0 86.1 103.6 53.6 67.8 65.7 79.4 82.3 71.1 79.8 65.5 77.4 20.1 24.1 30.6 34.3 37.0 26.8 26.8 32.3 32.6 138.4 152.7 171.6 190.6 208.6 210.0 198.5 275.4 249.0 73.4 84.9 92.3 100.2 114.3 120.0 118.0 143.4 143.4 50.6 55.2 62.9 63.9 67.8 66.4 66.4 76.8 76.8 12.4 16.3 13.4 15.3 17.3 17.1 17.1 17.6 17.6 2.7 3.7 5.4 8.7 15.2 12.9 12.9 19.6 19.6 7.6 9.7 10.6 12.2 14.0 23.6 21.6 29.5 29.5 5.4 7.8 7.6 6.2 9.0 10.0 10.0 15.0 15.0 65.0 67.8 79.3 90.4 94.3 90.0 80.5 132.0 105.6 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.3 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 -16.4 -7.9 -1.7 6.9 -4.0 -35.2 -3.9 -91.5 -35.4 16.4 7.9 1.7 -6.9 4.0 35.2 3.9 91.5 35.4 25.3 19.7 17.2 16.0 11.6 20.2 20.2 24.3 10.4 -8.5 -4.2 -19.2 -19.6 -9.8 -43.6 -43.6 67.2 25.0 -0.4 -7.7 3.7 -3.3 2.2 58.6 27.3 0.0 0.0 14.0 13.9 20.5 24.1 25.4 24.6 9.5 9.2 10.6 10.6 11.9 9.5 4.0 4.3 4.4 27.3 26.7 24.8 14.5 14.9 13.4 12.8 11.9 11.5 -3.2 -1.4 -0.2 3.2 1.4 0.2 5.0 3.5 2.5 -1.7 -0.7 -2.8 -0.1 -1.3 0.5 21.3 21.5 18.2 (In percent of GDP) 26.5 25.7 22.0 11.2 10.7 9.7 10.7 10.3 8.9 4.6 4.7 3.4 25.6 26.2 26.4 13.4 14.4 15.1 12.1 11.9 11.3 0.9 -0.5 -4.4 -0.9 0.5 4.4 2.1 1.5 2.5 -2.6 -1.2 -5.5 -0.4 0.3 7.4 18.2 14.1 14.1 24.5 21.2 24.6 11.1 9.9 11.9 10.0 7.5 8.9 3.4 3.7 3.8 24.9 31.8 28.7 14.8 16.5 16.5 10.1 15.2 12.2 -0.5 -10.6 -4.1 0.5 10.6 4.1 2.5 2.8 1.2 -5.5 7.7 2.9 3.4 0.0 0.0 2.8 2.4 3.0 2.9 2.7 2.3 2.3 1.6 1.6 -6.0 -3.8 -3.2 -2.0 -3.2 -6.7 -2.8 -12.2 -5.7 (In billions of Syrian pounds) Sources: Ministry of Finance; and staff estimates and projection. 1 i Includes civilian and military wages. 21 PSF operations are not consolidated into the central government budget. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-34 - Table 3. Syrian Arab Republic: Monetary Survey, 1994-99 End of period 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 Prel. 1999 Foreign assets (net) 133,177 169,037 214,325 259,891 294,448 335,651 Central bank 16,885 24,591 39,329 40,208 42,447 54,795 Commercial bank 116,292 144,446 174,996 219,683 252,001 280,856 Domestic assets (net) 145,163 133,790 116,673 96,750 96,407 100,268 Claims on government (net) 61,158 56,982 37,759 18,155 8,385 -35,238 Claims on public enterprises 120,773 140,545 147,308 164,686 160,487 180,801 Claims on private sector 52,270 63,590 66,528 73,220 72,486 75,468 Other items (net), Of which: -89,038 -127,327 -134,921 -159,311 -144,951 -120,763 Import and restricted deposits -24,408 -26,706 -27,181 -33,234 -22,774 -20,240 Capital accounts -35,944 -46,554 -58,652 -67,895 -78,02 1 -79,417 Valuation adjustment (net) -19,175 -30,866 -3 1,525 -34,346 -30,051 -33,973 Other -9,510 -23,201 -17,564 -23,836 -14,105 12,867 Money and quasi-money 278,340 302,827 330,998 356,641 390,855 435,919 Money 207,107 225,039 244,032 260,928 282,019 311,517 Currency outside banks 135,021 143,800 153,252 159,808 177,978 182,334 Demand deposits 72,085 81,239 90,781 101,120 104,041 129,183 Quasi-money 71,234 77,788 86,966 95,713 108,836 124,402 Foreign assets (net) Domestic assets (net) Claims on government (net) Claims on public enterprises Claims on private sector Other items (net) Foreign assets (net) Domestic assets (net) Claims on central government (net) Claims on public enterprises Claims on private sector Money and quasi-money Memorandum item: Velocity of money l/ (In millions of Syrian pounds) (Change in percent of beginning broad money stock) 9.9 12.9 15.0 13.8 9.7 10.5 0.1 -4.1 -5.7 -6.0 -0.1 1.0 -3.3 -1.5 -6.3 -5.9 -2.7 -11.2 -15.6 7.1 2.2 5.3 -1.2 5.2 2.7 4.1 1.0 2.0 -0.2 0.8 16.3 -13.8 -2.5 -7.4 4.0 6.2 (Own rate of change, in percent) 23.3 26.9 26.8 21.3 13.3 14.0 - 0.2 -7.8 -12.8 -17.1 -0.4 4.0 -12.2 -6.8 -33.7 -51.9 -53.8 -520.3 -24.6 16.4 4.8 11.8 -2.5 12.7 17.4 21.7 4.6 10.1 -1.0 4.1 10.0 8.8 9.3 7.7 9.6 11.5 1.78 1.83 1.90 1.81 1.82 1.66 Source: Central Bank of Syria, and stafT estimates, 1/ Ratio of non-mining nominal GDP to average-period stock. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Publicm -35 - Table 4. Syrian Arab Republic: Balance of Payments, 1994-2000 (In millions of U.S. dollars; unless otherwise indicated) Prel. Proj. - - 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 Current account balance (in percent of GDP) Trade balance Exports, f.o.b. Oil Non-oil Imports, f.o.b. Services (net) Receipts Freight and insurance Travel and tourism Other Payments Of which : interest I/ Transfers Of which : workers’ remittances Capital and financial account Migrants’ transfers Financial account Direct investment Long-term loans Receipts Payments 21 31 Short-term loans (net) Errors and omissions Overall balance Financing Net monetary movements (increase -) Of whzch: Central bank Memorandum items: Oil export price (US% per barrel)) Central bank reserves (millions of U.S. dollars) Central bank reserves (months of merchandise imports) External debt (millions of U.S. dollars) 3/ 4/ External debt (percent of GDP) 3/ 4/ Debt service ratio 3/ 5/ Real effective exchange rate (apprec. +) 6/ -852 -5.6 -1,275 3,329 1,995 1,334 4,604 -168 2,501 342 1,146 1,013 -2,669 -219 591 570 1,388 102 1,286 251 339 829 490 696 157 693 -693 -693 -230 287 1.7 -143 3,858 2,499 1,359 -4,001 -177 2,423 237 1,338 848 -2,600 -191 607 598 541 20 521 100 33 335 -302 388 11 839 -839 -839 -243 -22 336 -0.1 2.0 -338 45s 4,178 4,057 2,748 2,509 1,430 1,548 -4,516 -3,603 -308 -617 2,367 2,025 245 214 1,206 1,035 916 776 -2,675 -2,642 -260 -301 624 499 618 490 808 83 26 18 782 65 89 80 200 -134 405 380 -205 -514 493 119 201 30 987 449 -987 449 -987 -449 -326 193 16.06 16.48 19.08 1,087 1,343 1,709 2.8 4.0 4.5 4,415 4,620 4,760 28.9 27.8 27.0 22.2 18.6 17.3 -0.6 3.6 4.6 157 32 -240 0.9 0.2 -1.3 -178 216 392 3,142 3,806 4,764 1,615 2,342 3,089 1,527 1,464 1,675 -3,320 -3,590 -4,372 -196 -648 -1,107 2,234 1,903 2,005 257 240 252 1,216 910 920 761 236 246 -2,430 -2,551 -3,112 -249 -262 -315 531 464 475 505 440 455 204 267 251 8 8 10 196 259 241 82 263 325 173 187 95 390 412 340 -217 -225 -245 -59 -191 -247 73 -40 0 434 259 IO 1134 -259 -10 -434 -259 -10 -185 -253 0 18.01 11.33 15.43 22.51 1,624 1,860 2,110 2,110 5.4 6.7 7.1 5.8 4,710 5,242 5,574 5,669 28.4 31.4 33.4 30.7 28.3 22.9 23.0 22.0 4.9 -7.2 3.7 Sources: Central Bank of Syria; and staff estimates and projections, 11 Official data are on a cash payments basis and exclude interest payments on short-term debt. This presentation includes staff estimates of short-term interest payments up to 1998, and of total interest payments thereafter. 2/ Off&l payments data up to 1998 and staff estimates of payments including under debt reschedulings by France (1996) and the World Bank (1997) for 1999. 3/ Officially acknowledged debt; excludes military debt, and obligations in rubles to the Russian Federation as negotiatrons regarding their valuation in U.S. dollar terms are ongoing. 41 Debt to the Russian Federation at end-l 996 was Rub. 7,173 million, US$188.2 million, and UKf 76 million. Converting ruble debt at the official exchange rate of US$l=SUR 0.6 and applying the upfront discount of 65 percent as agreed with the Paris Club would imply a debt to the RF of USS4.4 billion (27 percent of GDP). 5/ Calculated as the ratio of debt service payments to receipts of goods, services, and workers’ remittances. Information on debt service obligations is not available. 61 Calculated using the market exchange rate. Weights of trading partners are those of the Information Notice System. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 5. Syrian Arab Republic: Summary of the Exchange Rate System (As of May 30,200O) TYPE OF TRANSACTION EXCHANGE RATE l/ RECEIPTS PAYMENTS I. Official Rates 21 Official rate + Public sector exports of crude oil and petroleum 4 Public sector imports including petroleum products and (LS 46.45f46.50) products. subsidized goods. + External loans and grants. 6 Debt service payments not related to bilateral payments On January 1,199s tbe “rate in + 25 percent of non-agricultural private sector export agreements. neighboring countries” and the budget proceeds 4 Approved student allowances, tourism, and medical rate were unified at LS 45.45f45.50 and + Exports by public sector enterprises. 51 expenses. effectively became the official rate. 3/ 4/ + 25 percent of earnings of government employees on leave 4 Domestic expenses of foreign oil companies. and working abroad. + Earnings in foreign currencies of staff of UN. or diplomatic missions in Syria. + Domestic expenditures by foreign companies and tourists. II. Unofficial Rates Market rate 61 (Currently at about LS 48 = US% I “Export Proceeds Market” rate (Currently at about LS 53 = USS 1) Source: Central Bank of Syria. 6 Private exports except surrender requirement and retained + Payment for all private sector imports, except for goods earnings sold in export proceeds market; private sector specified on the “export proceeds” list. remittance and services receipts; and private capita1 inflows. + All private sector service payments. + Retained export proceeds sold to importers of a + Payment for a specific list of private sector imports-the specific list of imports. “export proceeds” list. I / Buying/selling rates. 2/ The legally designated offtcial rate remains in effect-the rate of LS 1 I .00/l 1.25-hut it applies only to a few debt service payments relating to bilateral payments agreements. 3/ The budget exchange rate (applying to central government foreign transactions) was changed from LS 1 I .00/l I .25 to LS 22.95123.00 on January I, 1996, and to LS 34.95135.00 on January I, 1997. 41 The rate in neighboring countries was changed from LS 43.5144.00 = US%1 to LS45.45145.50 = US.%1 on July 15, 1997 and to IS 46.45146.50 on August 8, 1998. 5/ Public sector enterprises may retain 100 percent of their export proceeds in special foreign currency accounts at the Commercial Bank of Syria and use the proceeds to import goods on the permitted list, subject to prior approval, or they may sell the proceeds to other public enterprises at the official rate. 6/ Average of daily rates for the Syrian pound in Amman and Beirut, rate as of end-May 2000. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicI. II. III. Iv. V. VI. VII. - 37 - Syrian Arab Republic: Fund Relations (As of April 30,200O) Membership Status: Joined 4/l O/47; Article XIV General Resources Account: SDR Million Quota’ 293.6 Fund holdings of currency 293.6 Reserve position in Fund 0.01 SDR Department: SDR Million Net cumulative allocation 36.56 Holdings 0.38 Outstanding Purchases and Loans: None Financial Arrangements: None APPENDIX I % Quota % Allocation 100.0 1.0 Projected Obligations to Fund: (SDR million; based on existing use of resources and present holdings of SDRs): Charges/Interest Total Exchange Rate Policy: Overdue Forthcoming 02/29/00 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 me 1.1 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5 -- 1.1 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5 On January 1, 1998 all official exchange rates were unified at the “rate in neighboring countries” of US$l = LS 45.45/45.50. This rate was depreciated to US$l = LS 46.45/46.50 on August 8, 1998. There are two non-official exchange rates. Private sector exporters retained foreign exchange proceeds can be used to finance their own imports or those of others. Some specified goods may only be imported by using foreign exchange generated through exports. In this case, importers may purchase foreign exchange earnings retained by exporters in the unofficial export proceeds market. The exchange rate in this market is determined freely, and averaged US!§l = LS 53 during 1999. The free market rate for the Syrian pound in other countries in the region is currently about US$ 1 = LS 48. Virtually all private sector transactions take place at this rate. - ‘Under the Eleventh General Review. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-38- APPENDIX I VIII. Article IV Consultations: (a) Syria is on the annual consultation cycle. The last consultation was held in April 1999 and was completed on July 02,1999. (b) The staff report for the 1999 Article IV consultation (%4/99/l 37) was issued on June 16, 1999. The Executive Board’s decision (Decision No. 12006-(99/73) was as follows: 1. The Fund takes this decision relating to the Syrian Arab Republic’s exchange measures subject to Article VIII, Sections 2(a) and 3, and in concluding the 1999 Article XIV consultation with the Syrian Arab Republic, in the light of the 1999 Article IV consultation with the Syrian Arab Republic conducted under Decision No. 5392-(77/63), adopted on April 29,1977, as amended (Surveillance over Exchange Rate Policies). 2. As described in SM/99/137, the Syrian Arab Republic maintains restrictions on payments and transfers for current international transactions in accordance with Article XIV, Section 2. In addition, the Syrian Arab Republic maintains measures subject to approval under Article VIII. The Fund encourages the authorities to eliminate the restrictions maintained under Article XIV, Section 2 as soon as its balance of payments position permits, and urges the Syrian Arab republic to eliminate the measures that are subject to approval under Article VIII as soon as possible. IX. Technical Assistance: (4 In August 1998, a FAD mission provided follow up assistance on the work of the previous mission of November 1997. (b) In November 1997, FAD provided technical assistance on conversion of the tariff nomenclature to the Harmonized System and unification of the exchange rate for customs valuation. w In March 1 l-24,1997 an MAE mission advised on central bank and banking legislation. 09 statistics. In April 1996, STA and MED provided technical assistance on monetary (a In March 1996, MAE provided technical assistance on modemization of the Central Bank, banking supervision, monetary policy issues, and development of the financial sector. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-39- APPENDIX I (0 In January 1996, STA provided technical assistance on balance of payments. (g> accounts. In December 1995, STA provided technical assistance on national income 01) In February 1993, an MAE staff member visited Syria for a few days to ascertain the authorities’ position on banking reform. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 40 - APPENDIX II Syrian Arab Republic: Relations with the World Bank Group 1. In July 1997 Syria and the World Bank reached an agreement for the settlement of Syria’s arrears. Syria had not paid debt service to the World Bank since 1986, except for intermittent monthly payments over a three-year period during 1992-95. By mid- 1997 arrears had risen to the equivalent of US$526 million. Under the terms of the agreement, Syria repaid all of the principal arrears outstanding as of September 1,1997 in the amount of US$270 million, and, starting October 1,1997, has made monthly payments in the amount of US$6.1 million. The monthly payments at this level cover new debt service falling due and payment of interest arrears over a period of five years from October 1,1997. 2. As of April 30,200O the outstanding interest arrears owed IBRD amounted to US$141 million. The amount of outstanding (but not yet due) principal amounted to the equivalent of US$61 million, of which the equivalent of US$30.80 million was to IDA and US$30.20 million for IBRD (as of May 30,200O). 3. Subsequent to the agreement on arrears, the World Bank has begun to provide non- lending services to Syria. The 111 scope and nature of the assistance program continues to be under discussion with the Syrian authorities. Initial activities include support for the Ministry of Finance and the Central Bank of Syria in accounting and the establishment of an external debt management system in the form of grants from the Institutional Development Fund; planning and implementation grants supporting Year 2000 remediation efforts; the Global Environment Fund biodiversity project; and reviews of the trade regime (including export promotion), transportation, urban water, and sanitation sectors. At the same time, the IFC has begun to identify possible private sector projects for support through IFC equity investments or loans without government guarantee. In December 1999, the IFC approved its first project in Syria, making a US$l million equity investment in an irrigation technology company that designs and manufactures systems that address the critical problem of water scarcity in the Middle East. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-41- APPENDIX III Syrian Arab Republic: Statistical Issues 1. Outstanding Statistical Issues a. Real sector The Central Bureau of Statistics has made steady progress in implementing the recommenda- tions of the December 1995 STA national accounts statistics mission. The mission found that the aggregate estimates of GDP, compiled at current and constant prices by industry of origin and by final use, were based on a substantial database and an appropriate methodology. However, the mission also indicated several shortcomings. The production-based GDP estimates suffered from undercoverage of activities, particularly in trade and private services. In response, the authorities introduced a new industrial survey in 1997 which has a larger sampling of private sector activity. They also intended to implement a multipurpose services survey in 1998 that would focus on the trade sector. The STA mission also found that the estimates of final expenditures on GDP were incomplete in that household final consumption expenditures were calculated as a residual, and included changes in inventories since the latter was not estimated separately. In response, the authorities have begun to collect data on inventory changes in the public sector, and are considering whether a survey of inventories in the private sector is feasible. They had planned to use the results of a new household expenditure survey (see below) as a check on their estimates of final consumption expenditure. The other shortcomings identified by the STA mission have not been able to be addressed as yet. These are that the consumption of fixed capital is estimated as a constant ratio of output, and that net income flows between residents and nonresidents derived from the balance of payments are unsatisfactory, so that the estimates of saving, investment, and net borrowing from abroad are unreliable. In addition, household final consumption expenditures should be estimated through a commodity flow analysis, and a new capital stock series should be developed. Beginning in 1995, the authorities have been preparing for the conversion of the national accounts to the methodology outlined in the 1993 System of National Accounts (SNA). Two years data have been compiled, and the new series will be published when 5 years data are available. The major changes include the revision of the production and expenditure classifications; cotton ginning is moved from manufacturing to agriculture, repairs from personal services to wholesale trade, and expenditure on health and education from government collective consumption to individual consumption. Also, the new industry survey now covers some 20 categories of manufacturing activity rather than the 9 formerly. In 1999, the base year for national accounts data in constant prices was changed from 1985 to 1995. A new household expenditure survey was initiated in October 1996 and was completed in September 1997. The authorities were processing the survey results to introduce the new consumer price index in January 1999. The present retail price index (1990=100) is based on the 1985/86 household expenditure survey which does not reflect current consumption patterns. It is compiled monthly for each region in the country and is reported quarterly. The Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 42 - APPENDIX III wholesale price index (1990=100) is compiled and reported annually but is not representative as most prices are those of public sector enterprises. Submission of IFS real sector data to STA is irregular. b. Government finance Foreign financing as reported in the budgetary accounts cannot be confirmed by the balance of payments accounts. The accounting system of the Ministry of Finance (MOF) does not permit an accurate breakdown between interest and principal payments on domestic and foreign debt, and debt servicing is reported on a cash rather than an accrual basis. However, in 1997 the Central Bank initiated the process of separating interest and amortization payments on external debt with the cooperation of the MOF and the State Planning Commission. With regard to net credit to Government, there are sizable discrepancies between the monetary survey and the fiscal accounts. The reasons for these discrepancies are not clear, even after making allowance for the Ministry of Finance’s classifying commercial bank credit extended to the Price Stabilization Fund outside the budget. However, they probably include differences in coverage and timing and differences between cash and accrual. Similarly, the Central Bank of Syria (CeBS) occasionally assumes the accumulated debt of public enterprises to the banking system through the issuance of government bonds; such operations are not reflected in the fiscal or monetary accounts. Moreover, coverage includes only some extrabudgetary units and there is a need for reclassification of some tax revenue items to nontax revenues. Syria regularly reports GFS annual data for publication in the GFS Yearbook. However, the reported data are partial, too aggregated, misclassified (for some revenue component items) and do not include extrabudgetary and social security accounts. No data on financing and debt are provided; there is no breakdown for current and capital expenditure, and lending minus repayments is reported as zero. Syria does not report GFS data for publication in IFS. C. Monetary accounts The CeBS has made considerable progress in implementing the recommendations of the April 1996 STA/MED technical assistance mission. All sectorization, classification, and valuation errors in the monetary statistics that were identified by the mission have been corrected. Reporting lags also have been reduced significantly. The preliminary balance sheet of the CeBS is now available with only a three-month lag, and is estimated by the CeBS’s Research Department by drawing on the reports of operational departments and holding at constant value entries for which data are not available. The fmal CeBS balance sheet is now available with a six-month lag. These final data are reported to STA for IFS publication, Similarly, a preliminary consolidated commercial banks’ balance sheet is available with a three-month lag and the final balance sheet with a six-month lag. The April 1996 mission recommended that the authorities reconcile CeBS and Ministry of Finance data on the financing of the government deficit by the domestic banking system (see above), and the authorities have now agreed to begin this task. Another difficulty remains with the accounting of foreign exchange reserves, which are booked by the CeBS in Syrian pounds, at - Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 43 - APPENDIX III the exchange rate in effect at the time of the underlying transaction. These underlying transactions have not been made available to the staff; consequently there can be no confirmation of the official valuation of Syria’s international reserves. In addition, the Commercial Bank of Syria continues to book foreign exchange at the 1995 exchange rate quoted in neighboring countries of LS42 = US$l , ignoring the devaluations that have since taken place. The institutional coverage of the monetary data could be improved, in particular with regard to the inclusion of the Post Office Savings Fund (POSF) which, effective April 1, 1999, was authorized to begin lending activities. In this connection, the CeBS intends to include the POSF in Syria’s monetary accounts, once the appropriate legislation has been changed. d. Balance of payments The January I996 STA technical assistance mission found that balance of payments data suffer from incomplete coverage and valuation problems arising from the presence of multiple exchange rates. At that time the current account data did not include re-exports and temporary imports; this has now been corrected. In 1997, the CBoS also began to collect data on foreign transactions by the communications and postal authorities to improve the estimates of government and other services. However, military imports are still excluded from the balance of payments, and private transfers do not fully reflect remittances by Syrians working abroad. Estimates of travel, including both credit and debit, could also be improved. In addition, the statistics in the balance of payments for official transfers differ significantly from figures provided from other sources such as donors, and data on long-term capital inflows and amortization are not consistent with the data provided by the Ministry of Finance on the external financing of the budget deficit. Data on external debt continue to be incomplete and exclude military debt. External debt service obligations and arrears are not recorded in the balance of payments statistics. Coverage deficiencies also include incomplete data on private capital movements. Trade data are compiled monthly by the Customs Department and reported quarterly by the Central Bureau of Statistics with a 6-month lag. The balance of payments is compiled annually on a provisional basis with about an 8-month lag. The 1996 technical assistance mission recommended that the CBS assign more staff to balance of payments compilation, undertake surveys to improve the coverage of a number of services and financial account items, develop closer liaison with various government agencies for the provision of balance of payments data, and that the balance of payments be compiled according to BMPS methodology; this methodology was implemented beginning with 1996 data. However, staffing constraints within the CBS have not permitted additional resources to be directed to the balance of payments work, so that the compilation lag is unlikely to be reduced in the near future. - 2. Core data Due to irregularity of receipt and lack of timeliness, core data provided to the Fund are inadequate for surveillance between consultations. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicSyrian Arab Republic: Core Statistical Indicators as of May 3 1,200O Date of Latest Observation Date Received Frequency of Data Frequency of Reporting Source of Update Mode of Reporting l/ Confidentiality 21 Frequency of Publication Exchange Rates Convertible International Reserves Central Bank Reserve/ Balance Base Sheet Money Broad Money Consumer Current Overall External interest Price Exports/ Account Government Debt/Debt Rates Index Imports Balance Balance GDP/GNP Service May 2ooo June 2000 M M Central Bank Fax U M M M M M Q Q Q Q 4-a-k A I Q I Q I Q May March 2000 2ooo May June 2000 2ooo Dec. 1999 May 2ooo Dec. 1999 May 2000 Dec. 1999 May 2000 Dec. 1999 May 2ooo Dec. 1998 Apr. 1999 ~“IMIMl A I A 1 A I A I A Q Q A A A A I Central CClltrd Central Bureau of Central ~ Bank Central Ministry of Bureau of Ministry of Statistics Bank Bank Finance Statistics Finance V Fax V V V V V U U U U U U C Q Q A A A A -- I/ V = sta.K visit, generally the annual Article IV consultation mission. 2/ U = unrestricted; C = confidential. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-45 - APPENDIX IV Syrian Arab Republic: Social and Demographic Indicators l/ Area Population (1998) GDP Per Capita (1998) 185,180 sq. km. 26.4 percent arable land (1994) Popnlation characteristics (1998) Life expectancy at birth (years) Crude birth rate (per thousand) Crude death rate Infant mortality (per thousand live births) 1995 Percentage age distribution (1995) 15-64 Percentage Urban (1998) Rnral(l998) Access to safe water (1993) Education Percent of population 87 Adult literacy, percentage (Age 15+) (1998) 15.6 millions US$ 1,040 Rate of growth: 3.3 percent per anmun Density: 84.9 per sq lan 69 30.2 5 28 54.56 Access to electricity 53.6 46.4 Nutrition (1989) Per capital supply of calories (per day) Health Physicians per 1000 people (1998) Percent of population with access to healthcare (1991) Percentage of dwellings with ektricity (1993) Electric power consumption (Km per capita> Primaq school enrollment, percentage (1998) Primq school pupil-teacher ratio (1998) 3,003 1.4 99 82 698 76.6 101 23.5 l/ World Bank Social Indicators of Development, 2000; Central Bureau of Statistics; Statistical Abstract, 1997. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 46 - ANNEX The Medium-Term Framework (2000-2005) The medium-term scenario shown in the attached table assumes the continued gradual implementation of partial steps to liberalize trade and exchange systems, the gradual removal of price distortions, and partial fiscal adjustment, but without the comprehensive package of self-reinforcing measures that would fully restore private sector confidence, boost investment, and raise productivity. Consequently, private investment is assumed to recover slowly from the low level of 9 percent of GDP in 1997 to reach 12 percent of GDP in 2003 and stabilizes at this level through 2005. The volume of private sector exports would increase by an average 5 S percent per year over the projection period. Private savings would recover slowly from the low of 10.5 percent of GDP in 1997, reaching 15.5 percent of GDP in 2005. National private savings would exceed gross private investment throughout the period. Prospects for growth would also be constrained by the expected decline in oil production and the projected stability in the international oil prices at about US$2 1 per barrel during the projection period. The reduction in oil revenues would, in the absence of a sizable domestic revenue mobilization effort, constrain both current fiscal expenditures and public investment. Only new gas-related revenues would enable public investment to be maintained at about 12 percent of GDP during 2000-2005. However, without a broad-based sales tax and significant price adjustments for subsidized goods fiscal revenue will decline gradually reaching about 24 percent of GDP at the end of the projection period. In all, public savings would remain low at an average of 9.3 percent of GDP during the projection period, and the overall deficit (including PSF subsidies) would average about 4.0 percent of GDP during the period. The modest private sector savings and investment response to the gradualist policy approach would limit productivity growth so the overall GDP growth would average about 3.7 percent per year. This would be insufficient to prevent higher unemployment if the population continues to increase at the current rate of 3.3 percent per year. Nonetheless, the balance of payments would not come under pressure. The external current account deficit would average less than 1 percent of GDP, assuming private import growth of 4.5 percent per year in real terms. This deficit could easily be financed by capital inflows from existing sources -regional countries and multilateral institutions-and new sources such as the EIB and IFC. Gross official reserves would rise gradually to the equivalent of 7.5 months’ of merchandize imports and the external debt ratio would stabilize at about 27 percent of GDP. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicSyrian Arab Republic: Macroeconomic Framework, 1994-2004 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 Prel. Projections 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 Real GDP at market prices 7.7 5.8 4.4 1.8 Crude oil production (‘000 b/d) 585 617 604 577 Average oil export price (USWbarrel) 16.06 16.48 19.08 18.01 Consumer price index 15.3 7.7 8.9 1.9 (Change in percent) 7.6 -1.2 4.4 573 576 568 11.33 15.43 22.51 -0.4 -2.1 3.0 (In percent of GDP) 3.5 3.6 3.6 3.6 3.7 562 552 546 546 535 19.60 18.01 18.00 18.00 18.07 3.5 3.5 3.5 3.5 3.5 Domestic savings 23.5 29.0 23.5 24.6 23.4 22.8 25.7 26.9 25.7 24.9 24.9 24.5 National savings 24.5 28.9 23.8 23.2 23.2 21.8 23.0 25.0 24.6 24.2 24.2 23.9 Public 9.2 10.5 11.5 12.7 11.4 9.8 8.3 11.7 9.3 8.8 8.8 8.4 Private 15.3 18.4 12.3 10.5 11.7 12.0 14.7 13.3 15.3 15.3 15.3 15.5 Gross domestic investment 30.2 27.2 23.9 21.2 22.3 21.6 24.3 25.0 25.1 25.0 25.0 24.5 Public 12.8 11.9 11.5 12.1 12.5 10.6 12.8 13.5 13.1 13.1 13.0 12.5 Private 17.4 15.3 12.4 9.0 9.8 11.0 11.5 11.5 11.5 12.0 12.0 12 Public finance Total revenue, including grants Oil-related Non-oil Total expenditure Current Development Budget balance PSF deficit Overall balance 24.1 25.4 24.6 26.5 25.7 24.5 24.6 27.6 25.1 24.6 24.1 23.6 9.5 9.2 10.6 11.2 10.7 11.1 11.9 15.0 12.3 11.7 11.0 10.3 14.6 16.2 14.0 15.3 15.0 13.5 12.7 12.6 12.8 12.9 13.1 13.3 27.3 26.7 24.8 25.6 26.2 24.9 28.7 28.9 28.6 28.3 28.1 27.6 14.5 14.9 13.4 13.4 14.4 14.8 16.5 16.1 16.1 15.9 15.8 15.6 12.8 11.9 11.5 12.1 11.9 10.1 12.2 12.8 12.5 12.4 12.3 11.9 -3.3 -1.4 -0.2 1.0 -0.5 -0.5 -4.1 -1.4 -3.5 -3.7 -4.0 -4.0 2.8 2.4 3.0 2.9 2.7 2.3 1.6 1.0 0.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 -6.1 -3.8 -3.2 -1.9 -3.2 -2.8 -5.7 -2.4 -4.0 -3.7 -4.0 -4.0 (In billions of U.S. dollars) Balance of payments Expo- Oil Non-oil Imports Services and transfers (net) Current account tn percent of GDP External debt l/ External debt service 2/ 3.33 3.86 4.18 4.06 3.14 3.81 4.76 4.61 2.00 2.50 2.75 2.51 1.62 2.34 3.09 2.80 1.33 1.36 1.43 1.55 1.53 1.46 1.68 1.80 -4.60 -4.00 -4.52 -3.60 -3.32 -3.59 -4.37 -4.17 0.42 0.43 0.32 -0.12 0.33 -0.19 -0.63 0.43 -0.85 0.29 -0.02 0.34 0.16 0.03 -0.24 0.00 -5.6 I.7 -0.1 2.0 0.9 0.2 -1.3 0.0 4.4 4.6 4.8 4.7 5.2 5.6 5.7 5.8 22.2 18.6 17.3 28.3 22.9 23 22 20.5 4.84 4.84 2.91 2.79 1.93 2.05 -4.32 -4.54 -0.50 0.40 0.02 -0.10 0.1 -0.5 6.0 6.1 20.6 21.3 4.88 5 2.70 2.67 2.19 2.33 -4.76 -4.94 -0.3 1 -0.21 -0.19 -0.15 -0.8 -0.6 6.3 6.5 21.5 21.6 - Sources: Data provided by the Syrian authorities; and staff estimates and projections. I/ Officially acknowledged debt; excludes military debt and obligations in rubles to the Russian Federation. 2/ Calculated as the ratio of debt service payments to receipts of goods, services, and workers’ remittances. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public