DOCUMENT OF INTERNATIONAL MONETARY AND NOT FOR PUBLIC USE FOR i----l AGENDA sM/o2/20 1 CONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION July 52002 To: Members of the Executive Board From: The Acting Secretary Subject: Salvador-Staff Report for the 2002 Article IV Consultation Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staff report for the 2002 Article IV consultation with El Salvador, is tentatively scheduled for discussion on Friday, July 19,2002. At the time of circulation of this paper to the Board, the Secretary’s Department has not received a communication from the authorities of El Salvador indicating whether or not they consent to the Fund’s publication of this paper; such communication may be received after the authorities have had an opportunity to read the paper. Questions may be referred to Mr. Rennhack (ext. 37350) and Mrs. Coronel (ext. 34330) in WHD. Unless the Documents Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the WTO Secretariat on Monday, July 15, 2002; and to the European Commission, the European Investment Bank, and the Inter-American Development Bank, following its consideration by the Executive Board. Att: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicCONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND EL SALVADOR Staff Report for the 2002 Article IV Consultation Prepared by the Staff Representatives for the 2002 Consultation with El Salvador Approved by Claudio M. Loser and G. Russell Kincaid July 3, 2002 . The Article IV consultation discussions were held in San Salvador during April 16- 26,2002. The mission comprised Messrs. Rennhack (Head), Druck, and Martin, and Ms.-Coronel (all WHD). The mission met with the Ministers of Finance, Economy, Agriculture and Labor; the President of the Central Bank; the Superintendents of the Financial System, the Stock Exchange, and the Pensions System; and private sector representatives. . El Salvador is in observance of the SDDS. Its statistics allow for a close monitoring of economic developments, and only a few weaknesses remain in the statistical system. . El Salvador has accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4, and maintains an exchange system free of multiple currency practices and restrictions on the making of payments and transfers for current international transactions. El Salvador has no outstanding obligations to the Fund. Relations with the Fund are described in Appendix I. . At the conclusion of the last Article IV consultation in July 2001, Executive Directors noted the authorities’ good policy track record, especially in adopting reforms to enhance the role of the private sector and open the economy. They encouraged the authorities to secure the full benefits of dollarization by strengthening fiscal policy, building up net international reserves, and setting transparent rules on central bank operations. They emphasized the importance of a prudent minimum wage policy and a flexible labor market to maintain the competitiveness of exports, now that the exchange rate instrument is no longer available. With regard to the FSSA, Directors welcomed the advances in financial supervision, and stressed the need to adopt an eflicient bank resolution framework. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2- Contents Page Executive Summary., . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 I. Background ................................................................................................................... .4 A. Developments in 200 1 ....................................................................................... 4 B. Developments in 2002 ....................................................................................... 9 II. Policy Discussions ...................................................................................................... .l 1 A. Fiscal Policy ..................................................................................................... 11 B. Financial Sector .............................................................................................. .15 C. Operations of the Central Bank.. ..................................................................... .17 D. Structural Issues .............................................................................................. .18 E. Medium-Term Outlook.. ................................................................................. .18 III. Staff Appraisal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20 Boxes 1. Main Features of the Monetary Integration Law . . . . . . . . .,..... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5 2. Main Findings and Recommendations of the Financial Stability Assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15 Figures 1. External Competitiveness Indicators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10 2. Medium-Term Public Indicators.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .14 Tables 1. Macroeconomic Flows.. .............................................................................................. .22 2. Consolidated Operations of the Overall Public Sector .............................................. ..2 3 3. Operations of the Financial System.. .......................................................................... .24 4. Indicators of Financial Soundness .............................................................................. .25 5. Balance of Payments, 1998-2002.. ............................................................................. .26 6. Medium-Term Financing Scenarios ........................................................................... .27 7. Indicators of External Vulnerability ........................................................................... .28 8. Balance of Payments, 2001-07 (Current Policies Projection). ................................... .29 9. Balance of Payments, 2001-07 (Preferred Policies Projection) ................................. .30 Appendices I. Fund Relations ............................................................................................................. 3 1 II. Relations with the World Bank Group ........................................................................ .33 III. Relations with the Inter-American Development Bank.. ............................................ .35 IV. Statistical Issues .......................................................................................................... .36 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3- EXECUTIVESUMMARY In 200 1, the authorities adopted the monetary integration law, which introduced the U.S. dollar as legal tender starting on January 1, while retaining the coldn. They also planned to anchor macroeconomic policies on a sound fiscal policy aimed at reducing the overall public sector deficit from about 3 percent of GDP in 2000 to 1% percent of GDP by 2003, supported by ongoing structural reforms. In 200 1 real GDP growth slowed to 1.8 percent, as two earthquakes and several other shocks hit the economy. Inflation fell to 1.4 percent during the year. The authorities’ overall public sector deficit target for 200 l-05 was revised to incorporate reconstruction costs of about 1% percent of GDP a year. In the event, the underlying public sector deficit (excluding reconstruction costs) rose to 3.1 percent of GDP in 2001, with the overall deficit increasing to 4% percent of GDP. The transition to dollarization advanced, as the central bank converted 55 percent of currency in circulation into U.S. dollar notes. Domestic interest rates declined significantly, largely in response to the easing of U.S. monetary policy. The private financial system remained sound, while public banks continued to experience some difficulties. The external current account deficit narrowed to 1.3 percent of GDP, as insurance reimbursements picked up sharply to 3 percent of GDP. So far in 2002, real economic growth appears to be moderate, and inflation remains under control. The nonfinancial public sector deficit was 1.1 percent of GDP through April, while about 80 percent of currency in circulation had been converted into U.S. dollars as of end- May. The external current account deficit has probably widened somewhat, as insurance reimbursements are returning to normal. The Article IV discussions centered on the authorities’ plans to improve the country’s growth prospects. The authorities were pleased with the economic performance in the first year of the new monetary regime. While growth slowed in 200 1, it remained above the Latin American average in a year with many shocks. The new regime had gained broad acceptance, aided by the sharp decline in domestic interest rates. The authorities expected real GDP growth to rise to 3 percent in 2002, as the U.S. economy recovered, and to 4 percent a year over the medium term. Notwithstanding the adoption of several fiscal measures, the underlying public sector deficit is expected to increase further to 3.5 percent of GDP in 2002. The authorities are now aiming to reduce the underlying deficit to 1% percent of GDP by 2005 instead of by 2003, as earlier envisaged, given the time needed to secure congressional approval of further fiscal measures. The staff considered the authorities’ outlook for growth as realistic, provided economic policies were strengthened. It pointed out that to secure the full benefits of dollarization, it would be crucial to follow through with the implementation of supporting policies. The authorities were encouraged to stick to the plan to put fiscal policy on a sustainable footing by 2003, minimize contingent liabilities, strengthen the quality of financial assets, define central bank operations more clearly, and continue with reforms in the labor market and the electricity and financial sectors. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4- 1. BACKGROUND 1. In recent years, El Salvador has had a good policy track record, but real economic growth has remained low. After the end of the civil war in 1992, the authorities maintained a sound fiscal policy, which helped reduce public debt from about 50 percent of GDP in 1992 to 3 1 percent of GDP by end-2000. They implemented key structural reforms, such as privatization and trade liberalization, and in 1993 moved from -5 a floating exchange rate to a de-facto fixed to base money (in percent) exchange rate peg. These policies helped strengthen the external position and reduce 199219931994199519961997 199819992000 inflation to 4 percent in 2000. Nonetheless, after recovering rapidly in the period 1992-95, real GDP rose by an average of about 3 percent a year in 1996-2000, while the population expanded by 2 percent a year. As a result, poverty remained significant, with an infant mortality of 3 5 per 1,000 live births and an illiteracy rate of about 20 percent in 2000. In 1996, over 50 percent of the population lived on less than US$2 per day. A. Developments in 2001 2. In 2001 the authorities planned to reinforce their policy strategy with a view to creating the conditions for faster economic growth in the range of 4-5 percent a year, which would help reduce poverty. 0 The strategy retained many elements ofprevious policies. Macroeconomic policies were to continue to be anchored on a sound fiscal policy, with a planned decline in the overall public sector deficit from 2.9 percent of GDP in 2000 to 2 percent of GDP in 2002 and 1 l/z percent of GDP in 2003 and beyond. Structural reforms were to focus on strengthening public banks, improving financial supervision and further expanding the role of the private sector. The authorities also intended to continue to address other structural impediments to growth (poor infrastructure, limited levels of education and health, concerns about the judicial system and costs imposed by crime). 0 Concurrently, the authorities adopted (In percent) the monetary integration law, which introduced the U.S. dollar as legal 2 _~ ~- tender starting on January 1,2001, Real lending rate 15 - I ‘. . while retaining the coldn (Box 1). For i ,_ - ** *. 10 .’ several years, the authorities had been _-mm--- 5 l-T/ I Real GDP growth . concerned that the de facto exchange - 0 / 7-I rate peg had not become sufficiently ,’ -7--7j -5 ” f credible and had created a currency risk -10 !-.-~-- -1 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 19992000 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-5- premium, which drove up domestic real interest rates, reduced investment, and slowed growth. At the same time, they believed external competitiveness was adequate, with labor costs under control, and rapid growth in maquila and nontraditional exports. Under the new regime, all financial system accounts were converted into U.S. dollars at the prevailing exchange rate in January 2001. The central bank may not print new colbn notes or coins, although it can draw on the stock of such notes printed before 2001 and no deadline was set for the conversion of existing currency into U.S. dollars. Over time as the colh notes and coins wear out, U.S. dollars would become the principal currency in circulation. The central bank planned to build up a significant cushion of net international reserves in excess of base money to provide backing for exceptional repurchase operations in the event of a systemic liquidity crisis. Box 1. Main Features of the Monetary Integration Law 1. All financial system accounts were converted from &ones to U.S. dollars at the exchange rate of C 8.75 per U.S. dollar starting January 1, 2001. 2. Allowed prices, wages, and salaries to be denominated in colones or in U.S. dollars. 3. Eliminated the central bank’s authority to print new currency notes and issue new coins. The central bank may issue currency from its inventory of coldn notes. The law did not set a deadline for the conversion of existing currency notes in colones into U.S. dollar notes. Coins are imported. 4. Central bank was barred from extending direct credit to financial institutions. However, it retained the power to issue bonds and conduct transactions in securities and portfolio and investment documents. 5. Restructured lender of last resort function. Specifically: (i) the previous reserve requirement (20 percent of deposits) was converted into a remunerated liquidity requirement that banks can access to cover short-term liquidity needs; (ii) the first 25 percent of this requirement can be used free of interest, while the second 25 percent can be drawn by banks at a market interest rate. The remaining 50 percent of the bank reserve requirement is available only in coordination with the superintendency of banks; (iii) banks that exhaust their liquidity requirement are to be intervened, and the deposit insurance fund (IGD) would pay out up to US$6,250 per depositor of liquidated banks; and (iv) the central bank may conduct repurchase operations of U.S. treasury bills or central bank securities, financed by the government in the event of exceptional circumstances that provoke systemic problems. 6. The ministry of finance will become responsible for all central bank liabilities. 3. Economic performance in 2001 was mixed, as two earthquakes and several other shocks hit the economy. The earthquakes caused damage to housing and other infrastructure estimated at 16 percent of GDP and created considerable uncertainty. The U.S. recession dampened the demand for exports, especially in the maquila sector, and slowed the growth in remittances from Salvadorans living in the United States. World coffee prices fell to Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-6- unprecedented lows, mainly reflecting new sources of supply, while a drought hurt agricultural production. As a result, real GDP growth fell to 1.8 percent, as private investment declined in relation to GDP and offset a surge in public investment related to earthquake reconstruction (Table 1). The fall in world oil prices late in 2001 reduced domestic electricity and gasoline prices and cut inflation to 1.4 percent during the year. 4. The medium-term fiscal plan was adapted to support the earthquake reconstruction effort. The authorities continued to aim at reducing the overall public sector deficit excluding reconstruction costs (“underlying deficit”) to 1% percent of GDP by 2003, but planned to let the total deficit rise in the period 2001-05, as the government incurs reconstruction costs. As a result, the overall public sector deficit was expected to rise from nearly 3 percent of GDP in 2000 to a peak of almost 4 percent of GDP in 2002-03 and then decline to 1 ‘/z percent of GDP by 2006, once the reconstruction is finished. Total public debt was projected to rise to a peak of about 33 percent of GDP by 2004-05 and then decline to about 30 percent of GDP by 2008-10. 5. In the event, the overall public sector deficit increased to 4% percent of GDP in 200 1, reflecting reconstruction spending of 1.4 percent of GDP and an underlying deficit of 3.1 percent of GDP (Table 2). This deficit was financed by net disbursements from multilateral and official creditors, short-term treasury bills placed domestically, and the proceeds of a US$350 million ten-year international bond issue at a spread of 350 basis points, which was largely placed with residents. 6 Public Sector Operations (In percent of GDP) 5 4 3 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 l/ Includes reconstruction expenditure. 6. The underlying deficit in 2001 rose for several reasons. Central government tax revenues rose by % percentage point of GDP to 10% percent of GDP, reflecting the full-year effect of a broadening of the VAT base approved in mid-2000, but nontax revenues and grants declined in relation to GDP by % percentage points of GDP. The central government’s nonreconstruction expenditure declined significantly, as the government reduced employment,’ cut the electricity subsidy, and lowered capital transfers to public banks. The operating surplus of public enterprises fell in relation to GDP as the drought helped drive up electricity costs. The operating balance of the central bank shifted from a small surplus in 2000 to a small deficit in 2001, because the dollarization law included a provision to fully remunerate banks’ liquid reserves. Total public debt rose to 34 percent of GDP. r The government dismissed 7,300 public sector employees in 2001, which resulted in a reduction in the wage bill equivalent to 0.5 percent of GDP. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-7- (In percent) 7. The transition to 18 dollarization advanced Domestx rate for colon-denommated one-yeart loans I/ in 2001, as the central bank converted 55 percent of currency in circulation into U.S. dollar notes. Bank deposit and lending interest rates each dropped by almost 500 basis points between October 2000 (the month before the announcement of the dollarization law) and end-200 1, when these rates reached 3.9 percent and 9.1 percent at end- 200 1, respectively. U.S. industrial 82 two-year bonds Mar-97 Sep-97 Mar-98 sep-9.3 Mar-99 sep-99 Mar-00 Sep.00 Mar-01 Sep.01 Mar-02 Sources: Central Reserve Bank of El Salvador; and htematlonal Financial Statistics. li Since January I, 2001 all loans are denominated in U.S. dollars. However, it is difficult to disentangle the effect of the 475 basis point decline in the U.S. federal funds rate from the effect of the new monetary regime. Under the dollarization law, the central bank retained some scope for credit operations. During the year, the central bank refrained from intervening in the interbank market, but increased slightly its stock of open market securities with a view to offsetting some use of government deposits in the central bank. Net domestic assets of the central bank contracted slightly in 200 1. Net international reserves in excess of base money increased from US$47 million at end-2000 to US$86 million at end-2001 (Table 3). 8. The private financial system remained sound. The risk weighted capital asset ratio for private banks increased to an 11.8 percent average by end-2001, above the required minimum of 10 percent (Table 4). Banks took advantage of the new monetary regime to boost their profits by cutting average deposit rates faster than average lending rates. Private banks’ nonperforming loans amounted to 3.6 percent of total loans and were more than fully covered by provisions. However, repossessed collateral amounted to an additional 4.7 percent of total loans at end-2001, compared with 0.8 percent at end-1999. Even though interest rates declined, credit from the domestic financial system to the private sector stagnated, as domestic banks faced increased competition from foreign banks to lend to the best-rated local firms. Central bank data indicate that direct foreign loans to Salvadoran residents picked up, suggesting that actual credit expansion may have been faster than reported by bank balance sheets. At the same time, bank deposits grew in line with economic activity,2 and the bank liquidity ratio rose from 3 1 percent at end-2000 to 35 percent at end- 2 Total broad money expanded slower that economic activity, because coldn currency in circulation declined during the process of dollarization. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-8- 200 1. Banks expanded lending to firms in neighboring countries and purchased securities of regional governments, such as Mexico, Costa Rica, and Nicaragua. 9. Public banks continued to experience some difficulties. The social housing fund (FSV), which provides subsidized mortgages to low-income households, faced ongoing difficulties in recovering its loans, while taking compulsory investments from private pension funds at market interest rates. By end-2001, the Agricultural Development Bank (BFA) and the Mortgage Bank (BH) together had nonperforming loans of 25 percent of total loans, with about 75 percent of these loans covered by provisions. The staff estimated that the three public banks together generated operating losses of about 0.2 percent of GDP in 2001. 10. Bank loans to the coffee sector have received special treatment. About US$250 million of bank loans (5 percent of total loans) to the coffee sector were restructured through the Coffee Trust Fund (FICAFE), which was set up by the government and involved a government guarantee of US$40 million (0.3 percent of GDP). The restructuring operation extended l-year working capital loans to 20-year loans at significantly lower interest rates. The loans would be passed to FICAFE, who in return would give a bond to the banks. Banks were allowed to phase in higher provisioning against these loans (starting at 10 percent of the restructured loans and rising by 2% percent of the outstanding balance each year), as opposed to facing significantly higher provisioning requirements (50 percent on significantly downgraded loans). Moreover, the loans to the coffee sector are recorded at face value on the balance sheets of FICAFE, even though the restructuring resulted in a loss in net present value. In addition, the government has guaranteed about US$l 10 million (0.8 percent of GDP) in other assistance to coffee producers.3 11. The external current account deficit narrowed to 1.3 percent of GDP in 2001, as insurance reimbursements picked up sharply by 2% percent of GDP (Table 5). The trade balance widened, as coffee exports fell by over 60 percent and the U.S. recession cut the growth of net maquila and nontraditional exports. The growth of family remittances (about 14 percent of GDP) slowed to 9 percent in 2001, compared to 14 percent a year on average during 1998-2000. Net inflows to the public sector doubled, reaching 2.7 percent of GDP, reflecting financing to support reconstruction and other projects, and the portion of the bond issue sold to nonresidents.4 However, net private capital registered an outflow. Commercial banks placed a growing share of their excess liquidity in investments abroad, because the central bank stopped expanding the supply of its open market securities that could absorb this liquidity. Also many private residents deposited their insurance reimbursements abroad, and 3 This includes a government-guaranteed international bond issue of US$SO million in 2000 by the Salvadoran Coffee Institute; and working capital for the new crop cycle in 2002, which carries a partial government guarantee. These loans are included in total public debt. 4 Salvadoran banks and private pension funds typically purchase a significant share of the international bond issues. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-9- will probably draw them down over time. Foreign direct investment increased significantly to US$270 million (2 percent of GDP), reflecting projects in the electricity, telecommuni- cations, and financial sectors. While the overall balance of payments registered a surplus, net international reserves declined by US$178 million, as the equivalent of US$286 million of coldn currency notes were converted into U.S. dollars. By end-2001 net international reserves amounted to 105 percent of base money, and 98 percent of public and private short-term debt on a remaining maturity basis. B. Developments in 2002 12. So far in 2002, these trends have continued. In the first quarter, the monthly index of real economic activity rose by an estimated 1% percent year on year. Twelve-month inflation increased to 1.8 percent in May, owing to higher fuel prices. The nonfinancial public sector deficit was 1.1 percent of GDP through April (compared with 1.8 percent of GDP in the same period of last year) reflecting higher tax revenues and lower public consumption. In early April, the government placed a 30-year US$500 million bond in international markets with a spread of 265 basis points over comparable U.S. treasury securities. Residents bought an estimated 2/3 of this bond issue. 13. The central bank contracted its net domestic assets by US$ll6 million through end-May, largely reflecting higher government deposits following the bond placement. As a result, net international reserves in excess of base money reached US$200 million. However, the government is gradually drawing down its deposits to finance expenditure or retire short- term debt. Through end-May, about 80 percent of currency in circulation at end-2000 had been converted into U.S. dollar notes. Interest rates on 180-day deposits had declined to 3.4 percent, while interest rates on new loans of one year or more stood at 8.6 percent. The growth in bank deposits slowed to about 2 percent year on year, while bank credit to the private sector fell by about 2 percent year on year. Nonperforming loans for private banks rose slightly to 3.8 percent at end-May. 14. The external current account deficit has probably widened so far this year. Through April, the value of nontraditional exports rose by about 4 percent year on year, while net maquila exports declined by 10 percent year on year. However, imports through April fell by 2% percent year on year. Through May, family remittances rose by 5 percent year on year. El Salvador has signed a free trade agreement with Panama; and the United States announced that it would begin discussing a free trade agreement with Central America. 15. External competitiveness appears to have remained adequate. The CPI-based real effective exchange rate appreciated by 1 percent in the first five months of the year (Figure 1). While the CPI-based real effective exchange rate index shows a significant appreciation between 1993 and 2001, an index based on relative unit labor costs shows a moderate real depreciation between 1990 and 2000, reflecting in large part the decline in the minimum wage in real terms. In 2001, labor costs remained under control, as the wage- Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-lO- setting council5 decided to keep the nominal minimum wage constant for the third consecutive year. A prudent minimum wage policy has been crucial to encouraging the expansion of employment by exporters of maquila and nontraditional products, who tend to hire low-skilled workers from the large informal sector and pay wages linked directly to the minimum wage. Figure 1. External Competitiveness 180 --~- Real effective exchange rates 160 (1990=100) 140 - 60 Based on unit labor costs 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 .._______ exports growth 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 110 - 105 I Real minimum domestic wages in U.S. dollars 1oo (1990=100) I \ 75 -. 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 5 This council consists of representatives of unions, government, and businesses and sets the minimum wage once a year. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- ll- II. POLICY DISCUSSIONS 16. The discussions centered on the authorities’ plans to improve the country’s medium-term growth prospects. The authorities were pleased with economic performance in the first year of the new monetary regime. While economic growth was low in 2001, it remained above the average of Latin America in a year with many shocks to the economy. The new monetary regime had gained broad acceptance, aided by the sharp decline in domestic interest rates, and the supreme court had upheld the constitutionality of the monetary integration law. The authorities saw a free-trade agreement with the United States as the next step in their plan to fully integrate El Salvador with the world economy, yet they were aware that completing negotiations and securing legislative approval may take several years. For 2002, the authorities expected real GDP growth to pick up to 3 percent, as exports and private investment rise in response to the recovery in the United States and the additional spending to repair the earthquake damage. Consumer prices are expected to rise by 3 percent in 2002, because of higher energy prices. Over the medium term, they projected real GDP growth of 4 percent a year, with continued low inflation. 17. The authorities’ outlook for growth is ambitious, requiring a quick response to strengthen economic policies, while inflation will be largely externally determined. The staff agreed that performance under the new monetary regime had been favorable. It commented that preliminary evidence suggested that dollarization may explain 50 to 100 basis points of the decline in domestic interest rates. Also, there were some early signs of changes in financial markets, with some lengthening of maturities. Nonetheless, the staff pointed out that to secure the full benefits of dollarization, it would be crucial to follow through with the implementation of supporting economic policies. For this reason, the staff encouraged the authorities to stick to the plan to put fiscal policy on a sustainable footing by 2003, minimize contingent fiscal liabilities, strengthen the quality of financial assets, define clearly central bank operations, and continue with reforms in the labor market and the electricity and financial sectors. These policies would preserve confidence in the new regime and provide a fiscal and international reserve cushion to help insulate the economy better against the effects of adverse shocks, such as a rise in oil prices, slower than expected growth in the United States, or spillover effects from difficulties elsewhere. A. Fiscal Policy 18. The authorities stressed that they remain committed to reducing the underlying deficit to sustainable levels. They noted that they had succeeded in securing approval of many small revenue measures, including a fuel tax to fund additional spending on road maintenance, eliminating the standard corporate income tax deduction, and improving the administration of the VAT and customs duties.6 They have maintained tight control on 6 The tax administration measures include simplification of custom procedures, use of automated cross-checking systems, better definition of tax infractions, increased sanctions for (Continued) Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12- spending, including by freezing nominal wages in the central government for several years. Also, the government restructured its debt to the central bank at a market interest rate, which is sufficient to eliminate the central bank’s small operating loss. 19. The government also began to reduce the significant increase in its net pension costs following the 1998 pension reform, which set up a quick transition to a fully funded private system of individual retirement accounts and phased out the pay-as-you-go (PAYG) social security system. As a result, government revenues have declined as pension contributions now go to the private accounts, while expenditures continue to include benefits to retirees under the PAYG system and payments to retirees under the private system in compensation for their contributions to the old system. In late 2001, congress agreed to spread over 15 years the payments to retirees in recognition of their past contributions to the old social security system, which will lower the government’s net pension payments significantly in 2003-05. The government is still deciding whether to address a favorable early retirement provision, which allows a worker to retire after 30 years of contributions regardless of age (which implies that a worker could retire in his or her 40s). 20. The authorities intend to continue to press for the adoption of further measures that have been under consideration for some time. These measures include raising excise taxes on alcohol, cigarettes and soft drinks, extending income tax to transactions with foreign banks, and improving the administration of VAT rebates to exporters. The authorities plan to continue to improve the efficiency of public enterprises by selling concessions for the operation of the port of Acajutla and some airport services. They noted that the state electricity enterprise (CEL) recently found a strategic partner to invest in an expansion of geothermic capacity and that there was some discussion about whether to privatize CEL over the medium term. 21. Despite these efforts, the authorities now plan to reach the sustainable underlying deficit of 1% percent of GDP by 2005, instead of by 2003, given the time needed to secure congressional approval of further fiscal measures. For 2002, they are planning an underlying deficit of 3 percent of GDP (compared with 2 percent of GDP in the original plan), and with reconstruction costs estimated at 1.8 percent of GDP, the overall fiscal deficit would widen to 4.8 percent of GDP. The total deficit would be financed through the proceeds from the April 2002 international bond issue, a US$300 million bond to be placed later this year, and net disbursements from official creditors. Part of this financing would be used to repay about US$270 million (1.8 percent of GDP) of short-term debt. 22. The staff supported the authorities’ efforts to adopt additional measures, while cautioning them that their fiscal projections seemed overly optimistic. In 2002, the staff estimated that the underlying deficit would rise to about 3% percent of GDP, and the total tax evasion and incentives to encourage the use of invoices. A resident advisor from FAD on tax administration has been working with El Salvador and Honduras since mid-200 1. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13- overall public sector deficit would reach about 5% percent of GDP. The staff projects that better tax administration would yield only 0.2 percent of GDP of additional revenue, which is consistent with the experience of other countries. The revenue measures approved so far were estimated to raise tax revenue by 0.6 percent of GDP to 11.1 percent of GDP, compared with a gain of 1 .O percent of GDP projected by the authorities. However, the operating surplus of public enterprises is expected to deteriorate. CEL won an arbitration decision to cancel an expensive contract to purchase energy, which will yield annual savings of 0.2 percent of GDP starting in 2003, but CEL must first pay a fine equivalent to 0.6 percent of GDP in 2002. As a result, total revenues and grants are likely to fall by 0.4 percent of GDP. Nonreconstruction expenditure would remain constant at about 18 percent of GDP. A freeze on nominal wages as well as lower capital outlays are expected to compensate for rising interest payments and higher purchases of goods and services. 23. For 2003 and beyond, the staff projected that current policies would keep the underlying deficit at about 3% percent of GDP, under the assumption of modest gains from tax administration and moderate growth in nominal government wages. The overall public sector deficit would decline to 4 percent of GDP by 2005 and to 3% percent of GDP in 2006, once reconstruction spending comes to an end. With this fiscal position, total public sector debt would rise from 34 percent of GDP in 2001 to 45 percent of GDP by 2010, as the government would continue to access international bond markets for long-term financing and rely on domestic issuance of short-term treasury securities. As a result, short-term debt would initially decline from 67 percent of central government current revenues in 2001 to 30 per- cent in 2003, reflecting the use of the 2002 Eurobond to repay short-term debt, but short-term debt would return to 65 percent of central government current revenues by 2010. This scenario would require a larger primary surplus to offset the sharply increasing interest payments and leave the underlying deficit at 3% percent of GDP. The steady growth in total public debt would probably lead to higher domestic interest rates and limit real GDP growth to 3 percent a year. 24. The discussions turned to the benefits of the staff’s preferred policy of reaching the sustainable underlying deficit of 1% percent of GDP by 2003. The staff noted that with a more rapid pace of adjustment, total public sector debt would peak at 36 percent of GDP in 2003-05 and then decline to 33 percent of GDP by 2010. Short-term debt would decline to 11 percent of central government current revenue by 2010, and there would be no need to rely on continued access to international capital markets for long-term financing. The staff stressed that the private sector remained concerned about the sustainability of the fiscal and external positions, and that a strengthening of policies would preserve confidence in the new monetary regime, even as interest rates rise in the United States over the next few years, and as El Salvador goes through elections in 2003 and 2004. A solid fiscal stance would also allow the government to shift to a countercyclical fiscal position in the event of a sizable recessionary shock. The staff advised the authorities to move quickly to secure approval of the measures they have been considering. It also encouraged the authorities to consider the elimination of the favorable provision for early retirement under the old social security system. The advice of FAD on possible revenue measures, which could include the creation of an effective property tax, may also prove useful. The authorities replied that they were not Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14- wavering from their commitment to reduce the underlying deficit to sustainable levels, but cautioned that it would be counterproductive to advance fiscal reforms at a politically unrealistic pace. Figure 2. Medium-Term Public Debt Indicators Preferred policies Current policies 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 60 50 40 30 20 10 60 Public debt (In percent of GDP) Current policies 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 Debt service (In percent of central government revenues) 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 15- B. Financial Sector 25. The government has continued to implement the main recommendations of the FSSA completed in 2001 (Box 2). In particular, the authorities have improved supervision of nonbank financial intermediaries and insurance companies, upgraded the payments system, developed prudential and accounting disclosure for financial conglomerates, and improved asset classification. They have enhanced on-site supervision, improved training for supervisors, and issued regulations for anti-money laundering. They are also beginning to implement consolidated supervision with Panama. The authorities are preparing revisions to the banking law to permit closed-bank resolution, introduce a graduated system of prompt corrective action, and strengthen prudential norms, including those to mark-to-market bank investments abroad. Box 2. Main Findings and Recommendations of the Financial System Stability Assessment The financial system operates in a volatile environment, with fluctuations in the terms of trade, economic activity, and real interest rates affecting loan portfolio quality. Protection against external liquidity shocks can be provided by a strong international reserve position, high reserve requirements, adjustable general provisioning requirements and funding of the IGD to a level of 5 percent of deposits. Dollarization should strengthen banks’ balance sheets. It could also lead to less volatile interest rates, accelerate the modernization of the financial system, and broaden access to capital. However, it could make the system more exposed to cycles in capital flows. The enhanced access to offshore financing may increase competitive pressures on local banks, and compress margins and profitability. The private banking system is under some stress, with profits being squeezed by the need to constitute provisions in the face of rising nonperforming loans. The excess of capital over the required levels has shrunk, and there may be significant under-provisioning. Stress tests point to credit risk as the most important risk facing the banking system. Credit growth is likely to remain low in coming years, for both supply and demand reasons. Performance of public banks is poor. Substantial fiscal exposure to the financial system exists in a number of areas, including the central bank, the pension system, the deposit insurance fund (IGD), and the public banks. Key recommendations included: (i) better enforcement of loan classification and provisioning; (ii) implement consolidated supervision of financial conglomerates; (iii) reform provisioning norms; (iv) generate reliable CAMELS-based rating of banks; (v) strengthen the supervision of insurance companies; (vi) improve financial safety net and crisis management, especially through introduction of framework for least-cost, closed-bank resolution; and (vii) develop institutional capacity of IGD. 26. The authorities agreed to move more aggressively to improve the financial health of the public financial institutions. In 200 1, they had begun to press these institutions to reduce costs, cut nonperforming loans, and tighten lending criteria, and were Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 16- concerned that these institutions, especially the FSV, remained in weak condition. However, they commented that privatization of these institutions was not a politically realistic option. They were willing to consider developing detailed, monthly programs to improve the financial situation of these institutions and placing the bad loans in an asset management corporation. They agreed that it would be useful to move forward with an IDB-supported plan to strengthen the FSV.7 The staff also suggested that it would help to set legal limits on the operations of public banks to minimize the discretion available to government officials. 27. The authorities agreed that continued low coffee prices pose a risk to the financial system. The FICAFE scheme assumed that world coffee prices would return to their average level of the 1990s (about US$l.O4 per pound). However, world prices remain at about US$O.63 per pound, and WE0 forecasts only a moderate recovery to US$O.79 per pound by 2006. The authorities recognized that banks may need to write off some of the loans to the least efficient coffee producers, and commented that the government would provide technical assistance to help some producers become more efficient and help others switch to the production of other crops. They agreed that the government should resist pressures for additional regulatory forbearance for the banks or further guarantees for lending to the sector. 28. The asset quality of banks and private pension funds could be improved. Banks’ excess liquidity is likely to expand further in 2002, as broad money rises in line with economic activity, while bank lending to the private sector grows slowly. Banks may increase their holdings of domestic government securities and foreign Investments of Private Pension Funds investments. The authorities noted that the P”“& cmqxmes 2% Ban* and lhncra, revision to the banking law would give the C”lTCcs Emergency Fund financial superintendent the authority to regulate banks’ investments of their excess liquidity. The private pension funds place about 80 percent of their assets central Bank (US$620 million or 4.5 percent of GDP) in 15% public securities, FSV bonds and government-guaranteed coffee bonds, and this amount is expected to increase by 1.5 percent of GDP every year. The pension funds are barred from investing abroad, and have few other investment opportunities. The authorities commented that congress recently voted against a government 7 The plan consists in adopting more stringent lending criteria and more transparent accounting. The FSV would charge market interest rates on new mortgages and grant explicit subsidies with resources partially financed by an IDB loan. Interest rates on existing mortgages would be increased gradually. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17- proposal to let pension funds diversify their assets by holding high-quality investments abroad, but they added that they would continue to press for this reform. 29. The resources of the deposit insurance fund remain low at about US$30 million, well below the US$300 million needed to back about US$6 billion of banking system deposits. The FSSA urged the authorities to raise bank premia to allow for a faster accumulation of resources. The authorities noted that they were discussing with several creditors a contingent credit line to back the fund while it accumulates sufficient resources. C. Operations of the Central Bank 30. The central bank intends to conduct limited credit operations in 2002. Base money would decline by about 4 percent, as coldn currency continues to be converted into U.S. dollars, while bank liquid reserves rise at the same pace as bank deposits. Net domestic assets would contract by US$22 million as central bank credit to banks and nonbank financial institutions decline in line with projected repayments. The stock of open market securities and net credit to the nonfinancial public sector is expected to remain constant. As a result, net international reserves in excess of base money would rise slightly to about US$ 110 million. 31. The staff also discussed the central bank’s use of its inventory of currency notes printed before 2001, which is allowed under the dollarization law. The staff noted that the inventory was large (equivalent to US$750 million at end-March 2002 or 40 percent of base money), reflecting the inventory at end-2000 as well as currency that had been replaced by U.S. dollars. The staff expressed concern that this situation created the potential for reversing dollarization, which could undermine the credibility of the new regime. The authorities replied that they had no intention of going back to the previous exchange regime. They added that the central bank has been following the regular procedure for destroying worn out currency notes, which will resolve this problem over time. In their view, it would be counterproductive to modify the monetary integration law to deal with this issue. 32. The staff commented that-while central bank operations have been limited-it would be useful to develop guidelines for credit operations. These guidelines could spell out what the central bank has done so far-keep its stock of open market instruments relatively stable, avoid intervention in the interbank market, and maintain a floor for government deposits in the central bank. While the private sector seemed satisfied with central bank policy, the staff pointed out that the central bank could come under pressure during a period of rising interest rates. Moreover, published guidelines might help insulate the central bank from these pressures and reinforce the credibility of the new monetary regime. The authorities agreed in principle with these suggestions. 33. The staff encouraged the authorities to build up further net international reserves in excess of base money. These excess reserves would back the exceptional repurchase operations that are allowed under the new regime in the event of systemic bank difficulties, and the staff reiterated its recommendation of building up over time a cushion of US$500-600 million of excess reserves. The authorities want to build up a cushion of this Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 18- magnitude, but preferred to proceed cautiously, financing the reserve build up with sales of government assets. For example, they would like to sell the government’s remaining shares in the telephone company, but want to wait for a recovery in share prices in the telecommunications sector. 34. In a few years, the role of the central bank will be limited, although the exact functions are still being defined. The law specifies that the government is to assume all central bank liabilities, and starting in 2003 commercial banks may begin to gradually transfer their liquidity requirements from the central bank to any foreign bank. In this situation, the central bank is likely to act as the fiscal agent and macroeconomic research institute for the government, and it may establish a close relationship with other public institutions, such as the Superintendency of Financial Institutions. D. Structural Issues 35. With the exchange rate instrument no longer available, the authorities plan to intensify structural reforms to ensure that the economy stays competitive. Further trade liberalization is critical. El Salvador’s trade regime is relatively open, with a rating of 4 on the Fund’s trade restrictiveness index, based on a simple average tariff of less than 6 percent and a moderate incidence of nontariff barriers. The authorities intend to press for the conclusion of a free trade agreement with the United States, which they consider a crucial growth-enhancing reform. For example, the domestic value-added of maquila operations could rise under such an agreement. Nonetheless, several years will be required to complete this agreement, and it is premature to make any specific projections about its effect on economic growth in the medium term. They also plan to reach free trade agreements with Chile and Canada. El Salvador’s labor market is already reasonably flexible, with significant emigration to the United States, large underemployment and few restrictions on hiring and firing workers. However, overtime pay is extremely high and firms must pay wages by the half day. The government has prepared draft legislation to reduce overtime pay and allow firms to pay wages by the hour. The government also intends to continue a prudent minimum wage policy, which will help sustain growth in employment. E. Medium-Term Outlook 36. The medium-term outlook highlights the importance of maintaining strong economic policies to help insulate the economy from risks, such as difficulties in funding the fiscal deficit, higher world oil prices, or the spillover effects of economic difficulties elsewhere in the region. The staff prepared a baseline scenario based on the continuation of current policies, that results in an underlying deficit of about 3% percent of GDP in 2002 and beyond, with real GDP rising by 3 percent a year and inflation remaining under control. In 2002, the total public sector deficit would rise to over 5 percent of GDP, with reconstruction spending of 1.8 percent of GDP. The external current account deficit would widen to over 4 percent of GDP in 2002, as insurance reimbursements return to normal and the fiscal deficit rises. The external current account deficit would decline gradually to 3% percent of GDP by 2006-07, as public investment falls as reconstruction spending comes to an end. Total Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 19- exports would rise by about 7 percent a year in U.S. dollar terms, as vigorous growth in maquila and nontraditional exports would offset weak growth in coffee exports, while total imports would rise by 8 percent a year in U.S. dollar terms. Family remittances are conservatively assumed to rise in line with the growth in the U.S. economy with no new migration. 37. The projection assumes that the central bank builds up net international reserves only to back the liquid reserve requirement of banks. It would also raise excess reserves to US$250 million by 2006 through programmed repayments of credits from the Multisectoral Investment Bank, a public second tier bank, and the sale of the government’s shares in the telephone company in 2004. (In 2003, banks are assumed to place 5 percent of their liquid reserve requirement abroad in high-quality investments). As a result, the overall balance of payments surplus would average about 0.5 percent of GDP a year in 2005-07. With an external current account deficit of 3% percent of GDP, the country would need net capital inflows of a similar magnitude, which would reflect net inflows to the public sector and foreign direct investment. This implies that banks and nonfinancial enterprises invest resources abroad, because the central bank would not purchase excess holdings of U.S. dollars. 38. In the absence of shocks, this outlook appears reasonable. However, it leaves the economy in a vulnerable position, especially because fiscal policy is the only policy instrument. The public sector would face significant funding risks. The gross financing requirement (the overall deficit plus the stock of short-term debt plus amortization of medium- and long-term debt) would amount to about 10 percent of GDP in 2003 and then rise to 13-14 percent of GDP by 2010, mainly because short-term debt would rise in relation to GDP. Moreover, the government would need ongoing long- term financing from the Eurobond market. With total public debt rising to 48 percent of GDP, the public sector’s average cost of borrowing would rise to 8.6 percent by 2010. A temporary 200 basis point increase in the cost of borrowing in 2003-04 would push total debt up to about 50 percent of GDP by 2010, and slower growth of 2 percent a year over the medium term would leave total public debt at 55 percent of GDP by 2010. The external current account 55 (In percent of GDP) ,/’ ,’ ,’ ,’ ,’ ,’ 50 ,,I' ,' . ___-- Scenario 1. Temporary rise in interest rates Scenario 2. Real GDP growth of 2 percent in medium term 30 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 deficit is vulnerable to swings in the terms of trade or slower growth in the United States. For example, political developments in the Middle East could lead to a surge in world oil prices. A US$lO per barrel increase in the world price of oil, if sustained for a year, would raise the external current account deficit by about 1% percent of GDP to around 5 percent of GDP, which together with a weak fiscal position, could weaken confidence. Economic difficulties Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 20 - elsewhere in the region could limit market access for the entire region, and possibly could generate private capital flight at the same time. 39. The staff prepared an alternative projection based on a decline in the underlying deficit to 1% percent of GDP in 2003 and beyond. It was assumed that real GDP would rise by 4 percent a year and inflation would remain under control, as the stronger fiscal stance would translate into lower domestic interest rates and faster growth by reducing the vulnerability to shocks. In addition, the government is assumed to sell more assets to build excess international reserves to about US$500 million by 2004. In this scenario, the external current account deficit would rise to about 3 percent of GDP in 2002 and then decline to about 2% percent of GDP in the medium term. These deficits could be financed by net external financing of the public sector and foreign direct investment, and banks and the rest of the private sector would invest excess holdings of U.S. dollars abroad. A key advantage of the stronger fiscal policy is the sharp reduction in funding risk, with the gross financing requirement falling to about 5 percent of GDP by 2010. Moreover, the government would not have to access Eurobond markets to secure long-term financing. The country would also be in a better position to weather shocks, like a jump in world oil prices, that could widen the external current account deficit. III. STAFF APPRAISAL 40. The Salvadoran economy performed reasonably well in the first year of the new monetary regime. The country experienced numerous shocks, including two major earthquakes and the U.S. recession, yet real economic growth remained above the regional average, while annual inflation fell to 1.4 percent. Domestic interest rates fell by about 500 basis points, largely reflecting the decline in U.S. interest rates and also the effects of dollarization. The new monetary regime appears to have gained broad acceptance and has survived several constitutional challenges. This relatively smooth transition reflects the macroeconomic stability El Salvador had achieved prior to introducing the new regime. 41. Nonetheless, the authorities need to follow through by strengthening economic policies. The pace of fiscal adjustment in 2001 and 2002 appears to have slowed, and the central bank retains some scope to conduct credit operations, even though it has limited its operations so far. The authorities should not take the broad acceptance of the new regime for granted. The Salvadoran private sector remains concerned about the sustainability of the fiscal and external positions, and the new regime needs to be tested during a period of rising interest rates and the upcoming political cycle in 2003 and 2004. Against this background, the staff has emphasized the importance of building up net international reserves as quickly as possible to safeguard against government funding risks and to backstop liquidity support to banks. Moreover, a solid fiscal stance would also allow the government to shift to a countercyclical fiscal position in the event of a sizable recessionary shock. 42. Thus, it is advisable that the authorities adhere to their plan to put fiscal policy on a sustainable footing by 2003. The authorities are considering additional fiscal measures aimed at reducing the underlying deficit to 1% percent of GDP. Nonetheless, the staff is of Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2l- the view that these measures need to be supplemented with modifications to the generous early retirement provision and possibly with some revenue measures, to ensure that the fiscal target is attained by 2003. It would be useful to adopt these policies soon, especially before the next political cycle begins. In this regard, the staff stands ready to provide technical assistance to analyze the options for fiscal adjustment. 43. The authorities continued to make progress in strengthening financial supervision, but several risks remain. A more aggressive approach to handling the public financial institutions would help resolve the major weakness of the financial system and limit potential fiscal liabilities. The pension funds are overexposed to the government, and investing abroad is the only way the pension funds can diversify their risk and safeguard the value of pensions. Banks are turning to investing their excess liquidity abroad, now that the central bank has stopped absorbing this excess liquidity, and the government is wisely planning to give the superintendent of banks the authority to regulate this part of the banks’ portfolios. With the prospect for weak world coffee prices over the medium term, the government will need to resist pressures for further regulatory forbearance and should carry out its plans to help the less efficient coffee producers increase productivity or shift to other sectors. 44. The central bank has limited its credit operations, even though the dollarization law gives it some scope for credit policy. By publishing guidelines for its credit operations, the central bank would help insulate itself from pressures that may arise when interest rates in the United States begin to drive up domestic interest rates. 45. The government has undertaken comprehensive structural reforms during the last few years, but some challenges remain. Other reforms to reinforce competitiveness in the dollarized economy include making the labor markets more flexible by reducing overtime pay and allowing for the setting of wages per hour, privatizing the electricity company, and selling concessions for the operation of an important port and the airport. A prudent minimum wage policy is also crucial to keep labor costs competitive in the maquila and nontraditional export sectors, which generate employment for low-skilled workers who had been in the informal sector. 46. It is proposed that the next Article IV consultation be held on the standard 12-month cycle. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 22 - Table 1. El Salvador: Macroeconomic Flows Average 1990-95 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 Prel. Proj. 11 2001 2002 (Annual percentage change) Income and prices Real GDP 3.3 1.7 4.2 3.7 GDP detlator 11.1 6.8 3.5 3.9 Consumer prices (end of the year) 12.4 7.4 1.9 4.2 3.4 2.2 1.8 3.0 0.3 3.2 2.7 3.3 -1.0 4.3 1.4 3.0 Consumer prices (average) Monetary sector Domestic credit Liabilities to private sector 21 Interest rate (annual rate, time deposits) 3/ External sector Export volume 13.0 25.6 24.4 14.9 15.8 9.8 4.5 2.5 0.5 2.3 3.7 2.2 5.4 18.5 18.0 4.1 1.1 -0.7 1.6 7.3 12.3 12.7 6.5 3.6 2.6 3.5 2.0 12.7 10.7 10.8 9.3 5.5 12.2 25.9 1.0 Import volume 15.3 -5.1 14.6 6.1 Terms of trade 1.0 -5.9 5.5 0.3 Real etrective exchange rate 4/ 3.2 4.7 4.8 1.3 (In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated) Current account (including official transfers) -2.0 -1.6 -0.9 -0.8 -1.9 -3.3 -1.3 -4.3 Trade balance -17.4 -12.0 -10.0 -10.9 -10.9 -13.2 -13.9 -15.1 Exports including maquila 10.7 17.3 21.7 20.5 20.3 22.6 21.1 21.2 Imports including maquila -28.1 -29.4 -31.7 -31.4 -31.2 -35.8 -35.0 -36.3 Factor payments (net) -1.5 -0.9 -0.8 -1.3 -2.3 -1.9 -1.9 -2.1 Private transfers 11.4 11.6 11.7 12.3 12.5 13.5 14.3 14.1 Other 5.5 -0.3 -1.8 -0.9 -1.2 -1.6 0.2 -1.1 Capital account 3.9 3.2 4.1 3.3 3.6 2.9 0.0 3.9 Transfers 0.9 0.0 0.0 0.2 0.6 0.8 1.4 0.9 Public sector 5/ 1.8 3.2 2.0 5.5 1.7 1.3 2.4 4.0 Private sector 1.2 0.0 2.1 -2.5 1.2 0.8 -3.9 -0.9 International reserves (increase -) -1.9 -1.6 -3.3 -2.5 -1.7 Gross domestic investment 18.4 15.3 14.8 17.4 16.4 Public sector 6/ 3.8 4.3 3.7 3.7 3.1 Private sector 13.7 11.5 12.3 13.0 12.9 Change in inventories 1.0 -0.6 -1.3 0.8 0.4 0.3 16.8 2.9 14.0 -0.2 13.5 -0.4 13.9 3.3 1.3 0.3 16.0 16.6 4.4 4.6 12.1 12.2 -0.5 -0.2 National savings 16.4 13.6 13.9 16.7 Public sector 0.9 2.2 2.2 1.4 Private sector 15.5 11.5 11.7 15.2 External savings (after official transfers) 2.0 1.6 0.9 0.8 14.5 0.4 14.1 1.9 14.7 -0.4 15.1 1.3 12.3 -0.6 13.0 4.3 Overall public sector 7/ Overall balance (before grants) Overall balance (after grants) -3.2 -2.4 -1.7 -2.3 -2.8 -3.7 4.9 -5.4 -1.6 -2.2 -1.5 -2.2 -2.6 -2.9 -4.5 -5.2 Financing 1.6 2.2 1.5 2.2 2.6 2.9 4.5 5.2 External financing 1.8 2.7 2.0 -0.2 1.0 0.7 2.7 4.2 Privatization proceeds -0.2 0.0 0.0 6.8 1.3 0.0 0.1 0.0 Domestic tinancing 0.0 -0.5 -0.6 -4.4 0.3 2.2 1.7 1.0 Memorandum items: Nominal GDP (in millions of U.S. dollars) 6,764 10,316 11,135 11,974 12,467 13,139 13,739 14,613 5.3 15.8 -3.6 0.8 15.4 0.8 -4.5 -3.6 -0.1 0.9 5.1 1.0 1.6 8.6 0.0 Sources: Central Bank; Ministry of Finance; and Fund staff estimates and projections. l/ Staff projections. Assumes that US$257 million externally t-manced are spent in reconstruction in 2002. 2/ Starting from 1998 includes Banco de Foment0 Agropecuario as part of the banking system. 3/ Annual average of monthly interest rates for 180 days time deposits. 4/ End of period; a positive change indicates an appreciation. 51 Includes privatization proceeds. 6/ Since 2001 includes building of temporary houses to replace those destroyed by the earthquakes and debris removal. 7/ The average for 1990-95 refers to the nonfinancial public sector. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-23 - Table 2. El Salvador: Consolidated Operations of the Overall Public Sector (In percent of GDP) 1998 1999 2000 Prel. 2001 Proj. l! 2002 Revenues and grants 15.2 15.1 15.8 14.8 14.4 Current revenue 15.1 Tax revenue 10.1 Nontax revenue 3.2 Operating surplus of public enterprises 1.4 Operating surplus of the central bank 0.4 Capital revenue 0.0 Official grants 0.1 Expenditure and net lending 17.4 14.9 14.9 10.4 10.2 3.4 3.9 0.8 0.6 0.2 0.2 0.0 0.1 0.3 0.8 17.7 18.7 14.4 15.3 11.0 11.2 8.3 8.4 2.7 2.8 1.4 1.5 2.0 2.6 14.4 10.5 3.6 0.3 -0.1 0.0 0.4 17.9 Current expenditure Consumption Wages and salaries Goods and services Interest payments 21 Current transfers Of which Pensions Capital expenditure Fixed capital formation Capital transfers Net lending 13.7 10.2 7.7 2.5 1.5 2.0 14.7 10.9 7.9 3.0 1.5 2.4 14.2 11.1 3.3 -0.3 0.0 0.0 0.2 17.9 14.8 10.8 7.6 3.2 1.8 2.3 0.5 3.8 3.6 0.1 0.0 Underlying balance -2.2 0.6 0.8 0.7 0.9 3.2 3.3 3.2 3.0 3.1 2.9 3.0 2.8 0.1 0.4 0.1 0.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 -2.6 -2.9 -3.1 -3.5 Reconstruction expenditure Fixed capital formation Other . . . . . . . . . . . 0.4 -0.4 -1.2 -1.3 -2.8 -3.7 -2.6 -2.9 2.6 2.9 1.0 0.7 0.3 2.2 1.3 0.0 1.4 1.8 1.3 1.8 0.1 0.0 -0.4 -0.6 -3.0 -3.4 -4.9 -5.4 -4.5 -5.2 4.5 5.2 2.7 4.2 1.7 1.0 0.1 0.0 Current account balance Overall primary balance Overall balance before grants Overall balance after grants Financing External Domestic Privatization proceeds Memorandum item: Total public debt/GDP 1.4 -0.7 -2.3 -2.2 2.2 -0.2 -4.4 6.8 27.5 29.7 30.6 34.1 36.8 Sources: Ministry of Finance; Central Bank; and Fund staff estimates and projections. l/ Staff projections. 2/ Interest payments of the nonfinancial public sector. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 24 - Table 3. El Salvador: Operations of the Financial System 1998 1999 2000 Prel. 2001 Proj. l/ 2002 (End-of-period stocks; in millions of dollars) Net international reserves Net domestic assets Nonfinancial public sector Central government Rest of public sector Commercial banks Credit Nonbank fmancial institutions Open market operations Medium- and long-term foreign liabilities Other Money base Currency issue Currency in circulation Cash in vault Liquidity requirements Net foreign assets Net domestic assets Nonfinancial public sector Central government Rest of public sector Private sector Medium- and long-term foreign liabilities Other Liabilities to the private sector Of which Money Quasi-money Net domestic assets Of which Nonfinancial public sector Private sector Liabilities to the private sector Credit to the private sector Liabilities to the private sector Of which Currency in circulation Money Quasi-money Memorandum items: Credit to the private sector (12-month percentage change) Income velocity of broad money I. Central Reserve Bank 1,767 1,969 12 35 72 74 143 107 -71 -33 93 148 93 148 298 326 -451 -572 -171 -165 171 225 1,779 2,004 476 652 403 539 73 113 1,303 1,352 Il. Financial System 1,580 1,814 4,183 4,324 -218 -145 155 158 -373 -303 5,341 5,558 -443 -490 -497 -599 5,763 6,138 1,013 1,140 4,130 4,283 (Percentage changes) 21 4.7 2.4 -9.5 1.3 15.9 3.8 12.7 6.5 (In percent of GDP) 3/ 41.2 43.7 45.4 47.7 3.2 3.8 8.1 8.6 32.4 33.7 1,891 1,710 1,662 -47 -86 -109 84 113 113 102 124 124 -18 -11 -11 117 103 93 117 103 93 326 262 230 -629 -641 -641 -150 -126 -101 204 202 197 1,844 1,623 1,553 557 270 84 449 220 50 107 50 34 1,287 1,353 1,469 1,812 1,827 2,069 4,546 4,696 4,684 57 207 151 361 551 455 -304 -344 -304 5,618 5,578 5,664 -521 471 -464 -608 -618 -667 6,358 6,523 6,753 1,147 1,171 1,061 4,385 5,030 5,349 3.6 2.4 -0.2 3.3 2.4 -0.9 1.0 -0.6 1.3 3.6 2.6 3.5 42.5 40.7 38.5 47.5 46.9 45.4 3.8 2.4 0.9 8.7 8.4 7.6 33.0 34.3 35.5 18.0 4.1 1.1 -0.7 1.6 2.2 2.1 2.1 2.1 2.2 Sources: Central Reserve Bank of El Salvador; and Fund staff estimates and projections. l/ Staff projections. 2/ In relation to the stock of liabilities to the private sector at the beginning of period. 3/ Average stocks in proportion of GDP. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-25 - Table 4. El Salvador: Indicators of Financial Soundness 1998 1999 2000 Prel. 2001 (In percent) Broad money (12-month basis) 12.7 Private sector credit (12-month basis) 18.0 Private sector credit over GDP (average) 41.2 Loan-deposit ratio Financial system 99.6 Commercial banks 99.6 (In percent of total loans) 6.5 3.6 2.6 4.1 1.1 -0.7 43.7 42.5 40.7 99.3 95.1 88.5 99.3 95.1 88.5 Loans in arrears (end period) l/ Commercial banks 5.0 (In percent of loans in arrears) 5.5 Provision for loans in arrears (end period) Commercial banks l! (In percent) 67.8 89.0 84.9 109.9 Share of loans to real estate sector Capital and related credit 13.2 12.1 Actual risk-weighted capital ratio (RWCR) 9.2 Required risk-weighted capital ratio (RWCR) 8.9 10.5 9.2 0 Institutions with RWCR below required Actual credit to related parties (percent of net worth) Limits on actual credit to related parties (percent of net worth) Institutions with credit to related parties above 20 percent of total loans Profits after tax To equity capital To total assets Memorandum items: Net international reserves Central bank Rest of the financial system Net foreign assets 2/ Central bank Rest of the financial system 1 9.3 15.0 0 7.4 15.0 0 11.4 11.6 9.6 10.0 0 0 3.2 3.2 5.0 5.0 0 0 3.7 4.5 6.0 12.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 1.0 (In millions of U. S. dollars) 1,580 1,814 1,812 1,827 1,767 1,969 1,891 1,710 -186 -156 -79 117 1,138 1,324 1,291 1,356 1,597 1,806 1,742 1,585 -459 -482 -451 -229 5.0 4.3 15.6 19.4 Sources: Central Reserve Bank; and Fund staff estimates. l/ Loans in arrears for 90 days or more. 2/ Short, medium- and long-term net foreign assets. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 26 - Table 5. El Salvador: Balance of Payments, 1998-2002 1998 I999 2000 Prel. 2001 Proj. 11 2002 Current account (after official transfers) Current account (before official transfers) Trade balance Exports, fo.b. Exports f.o.b. excluding maquila Coffee Other traditional Nontraditional Maquila Imports, fo.b. Imports Eo.b. excluding maquila Non-oil Oil Maquila Nonfactor services (net) Factor services (net) Of which Interest payments Private transfers (net) O&ial transfers -91 -137 -1,306 2,460 1,275 324 99 852 1,185 -3,765 -2,9 18 -2,832 -87 -847 -157 -155 293 1,482 45 Capital account Capital transfers Public capital Nonfinancial public sector Of which Bonds net Net short-term debt Privatization proceeds Public financial sector 395 29 661 -31 0 -141 810 -119 Foreign direct investment Banks net private capital and net errors and omissions Currency conversion (colones for US%) 294 -29 -560 0 Overall balance (deficit -) 2/ Change in net international reserves (increase-) Of whxh 303 -303 -240 -430 -268 -458 -1,356 -1,739 2,534 2,963 1,201 1,354 245 298 62 56 894 1,001 1,333 1,609 -3,891 -4,702 -2,936 -3,549 -2,821 -3,339 -115 -211 -955 -1,153 -183 -235 -282 -253 331 378 1,553 1,769 28 28 442 384 79 109 216 166 121 175 128 22 -42 69 127 0 -32 -9 89 173 29 -34 30 -30 0 0 202 -46 -202 46 Coverage of base money Currency conversion Bank reserves (increase-) Excess net international reserves (increase-) 31 Current account (after official transfers) Current account (before oftkial transfers) Trade balance (including maquila) Nonfactor services (net) Factor payments (net) Private transfers Official transfers (In percent of GDP) -0.8 -1.1 -10.9 -1.3 -1.3 12.3 0.4 Capital account Nonfinancial public sector Of which Short-term debt Privatization proceeds Public financial sector Other Currency conversion 3.3 -0.3 -1.2 6.7 -1.0 -2.2 0.0 Overall balance 2.5 -1.9 -3.3 -2.1 -3.5 -10.9 -13.2 -1.5 -1.8 -2.3 -1.9 12.5 13.5 0.2 0.2 3.6 2.9 1.0 1.3 -0.3 0.5 1.0 0.0 -0.3 -0.1 1.9 1.7 0.0 0.0 1.7 -0.3 Memorandum item: Net maquila exports 338 379 456 (In million of U.S. dollars) -177 -623 -211 -656 -1,913 -2,202 2,90 1 3,102 1,249 1,304 115 110 90 94 1,045 1,100 1,652 1,798 -4,814 -5,304 -3,652 -4,049 -3,484 -3,878 -169 -170 -1,162 -1,255 -2 -200 -266 -311 420 453 1,969 2,057 34 33 -4 575 198 127 331 585 371 616 104 240 66 169 0 0 -40 -31 268 220 -235 -265 -280 95 -286 -187 -181 -48 181 48 221 70 287 187 -66 -116 -39 -22 -1.3 -1.5 -13.9 0.0 -1.9 14.3 0.3 -4.3 -4.5 -15.1 -1.4 -2.1 14.1 0.2 0.0 3.9 2.7 4.2 0.5 0.0 -0.3 -0.3 -2.1 -1.3 490 1.2 0.0 -0.2 1.2 -1.3 -0.3 543 Sources: Central Reserve Bank, and Fund staff estimates and projections. li Staffprojections. 21 Differs from change in net international reserves shown in Table 3, because of gold valuation adjustment of US$32 million 31 International reserves minus base money. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 27 - Table 6. El Salvador: Medium-Term Financing Scenarios (In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated) Reconstruction fiscal spending of US$84 1 million in the period 200 l-05 Prel. Projections l/ 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 Current Policies Projection Overall balance -4.5 -5.2 4.6 -3.8 -3.9 -3.5 -3.5 -3.5 -3.5 -3.5 ,Reconstruction fiscal spending Reconstruction fiscal spending (million dollars) 1.4 1.8 1.4 0.5 0.5 .,. 195 257 218 83 88 .._ Underlying overall balance -3.1 -3.5 -3.2 -3.3 -3.4 -3.5 -3.5 -3.5 -3.5 -3.5 Interest payments 2/ 1.7 1.7 2.4 2.7 2.9 3.2 3.2 3.4 3.6 3.7 Primary balance -2.8 -3.5 -2.3 -1.1 -1.0 -0.4 -0.3 -0.1 0.0 0.2 Public debt 34.1 36.8 39.4 41.1 42.9 44.0 45.1 46.2 47.2 48.2 Medium- and long-term debt 26.7 31.6 35.8 36.3 36.9 36.8 36.8 37.9 39.0 40.0 Short-term debt 7.4 5.1 3.5 4.8 6.0 7.2 8.2 8.3 8.3 8.2 Debt service/central government current revenue 25.2 51.2 32.7 35.8 37.7 41.3 41.9 37.2 38.5 39.7 Short term debt/ central government current revenue 66.6 43.7 29.4 39.2 48.2 57.7 65.9 66.3 66.1 65.5 Total debt/ central government current revenue 306.3 312.7 327.5 336.1 345.4 351.8 360.4 369.1 377.6 385.7 Memorandum items: Real GDP growth 1.8 3.0 3.0 3.0 3.0 3.0 3.0 3.0 3.0 3.0 Inflation 1.4 3.0 2.5 2.5 2.5 2.5 2.5 2.5 2.5 2.5 Average interest rate on total debt 5.6 5.8 7.1 7.7 8.0 8.3 8.3 8.4 8.5 8.6 Real growth of overall public sector revenue 4.9 0.7 8.4 3.1 2.9 2.6 2.7 2.7 2.9 2.9 Real growth of overall public sector expenditure 4.9 5.2 3.8 -1.3 3.4 0.3 3.1 2.9 2.9 2.9 Preferred Projection Overall balance 4.5 -3.8 -2.9 -2.0 -2.0 -1.5 -1.5 -1.5 -1.5 -1.5 Reconstruction fiscal spending 1.4 1.8 1.4 0.5 0.5 Reconstruction fiscal spending (million dollars) 195 257 218 83 88 Underlying overall balance -3.1 -2.0 -1.5 -1.5 -1.5 -1.5 -1.5 -1.5 -1.5 -1.5 Interest payments 2/ 1.7 1.7 2.3 2.5 2.5 2.5 2.4 2.4 2.4 2.4 Primary balance -2.8 -2.1 -0.6 0.5 0.5 1.0 0.9 0.9 0.9 0.9 Public debt 34.1 35.3 36.1 35.8 35.6 34.7 34.0 33.3 32.8 32.2 Medium- and long-term debt 26.7 31.6 33.4 33.8 33.7 33.0 32.3 31.8 31.3 30.9 Short-term debt 7.4 3.7 2.6 2.0 1.9 1.8 1.7 1.6 1.5 1.4 Debt service/central government current revenue 25.2 47.1 29.1 30.5 30.9 32.9 32.3 27.1 27.6 28.4 Short-term debt/ central government current revenue 66.6 28.5 20.0 14.9 13.9 13.1 12.3 11.7 11.1 10.5 Total debt/ central government current revenue 306.3 274.5 272.2 267.3 262.9 256.3 253.2 250.9 248.9 247.1 Memorandum items: Real GDP growth 1.8 3.0 3.5 4.0 4.0 4.0 4.0 4.0 4.0 4.0 Inflation 1.4 3.0 2.5 2.5 2.5 2.5 2.5 2.5 2.5 2.5 Average interest rate on total debt 5.6 5.8 7.1 7.6 7.8 8.0 7.9 8.0 8.0 8.1 Real growth of overall public sector revenue 4.9 11.0 9.4 3.6 2.8 2.9 3.2 3.1 3.2 3.1 Real growth of overall public sector expenditure 4.9 5.1 4.1 -1.3 3.2 0.1 2.9 3.3 3.2 3.1 Sources: Central Bank, Ministry of Finance; and Fund staff estimates and projections. l/ Staff projections 2/ Interest payments of the overall public sector Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 28 - Table 7. El Salvador: Indicators of External Vulnerability 1998 1999 2000 Prel. Proj. l/ 2001 2002 Merchandise exports (12-month percent change) 21 Merchandise imports (12-month percent change) 3/ Terms of trade (percentage change) Current account balance, after grants (in percent of GDP) Central bank net international reserves In months of imports of next year’s goods and services In percent of base money In percent of M2 In percent of short-term debt on a remaining maturity basis 41 Public sector external debt (in percent of GDP) Public sector external debt service to exports of goods and services REER appreciation (+) (12-month percentage change) 1.8 6.6 0.3 -0.8 -5.4 99.2 31.7 109.7 21.9 14.5 1.3 3.0 3.3 -4.5 -1.9 -5.0 98.3 33.4 113.0 22.6 10.0 0.9 Sources: Central Bank of El Salvador; and Fund staff estimates and projections. l/ StatTprojections. 2/ Includes maquila exports. 31 Includes maquila imports. 4/ Includes banking and corporate debt. 16.9 20.9 -3.6 -3.3 -4.7 102.6 30.8 135.3 22.1 7.0 5.1 -2.1 6.9 2.4 10.2 -0.1 0.0 -1.3 -4.3 -4.0 -3.5 105.3 107.0 27.4 25.8 98.0 84.9 23.4 26.1 7.7 8.1 1.0 . . . Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 29 - Table 8. El Salvador: Balance of Payments, 2001-07 (Current Policies Projection) Prel. 2001 2002 2003 Proiections l/ 2004 2005 2006 2007 Current account Trade balance Exports, f.o.b. Exports, f.o.b., excluding maquila Maquila Imports, f.o.b. Imports, Eo.b., excluding maquila Maquila Nonfactor services (net) Factor services (net) Of which Interest payments Private transfers (net) Official transfers -111 -623 -631 -636 -629 -645 -685 -1,913 -2,202 -2,287 -2,396 -2,489 -2,663 -2,823 2,901 3,102 3,412 3,763 4,139 4,518 4,977 1,249 1,304 1,410 1,527 1,658 1,768 1,897 1,652 1,798 2,002 2,236 2,481 2,750 3,081 -4,814 -5,304 -5,700 -6,160 -6,629 -7,181 -7,801 -3,652 -4,049 -4,315 -4,628 -4,944 -5,330 -5,748 -1,162 -1,255 -1,385 -1,532 -1,684 -1,850 -2,053 -2 -200 -204 -204 -215 -224 -197 -266 -311 -350 -373 -393 -430 -509 420 453 545 622 684 748 791 1,969 2,057 2,178 2,305 2,436 2,639 2,812 34 33 33 33 33 32 32 Capital account -4 515 296 714 682 711 725 Capital transfers 198 127 125 125 125 125 125 Public capital 331 585 209 484 438 382 437 Nonfinancial public sector 371 616 240 438 466 409 444 Privatization proceeds 0 0 0 75 0 0 0 Public financial sector -40 -31 -31 -29 -28 -26 -7 Foreign direct investment 268 220 250 215 300 320 330 Banks net -235 -265 -179 -8 -40 0 -18 Private capital and net errors and omissions -280 96 -54 -100 -135 -116 -149 Currency conversion (colones for US$) -286 -187 -56 -2 -6 0 0 Overall balance (deficit -) Change in net international reserves (increase-) Of which. Coverage of base money Currency conversion Bank reserves (increase-) Excess net international reserves (increase-) 2/ -181 -48 -335 138 53 66 40 -181 48 335 -138 -53 -66 -40 221 70 350 -43 -38 -51 -40 287 187 56 2 6 0 0 -66 -116 294 -45 -44 -51 -40 -39 -22 -16 -97 -15 -15 0 (In percent of GDP) Current account Trade balance (including maquila) Nonfactor services (net) Factor payments (net) Private transfers Official transfers -1.3 -4.3 -13.9 -15.1 0.0 -1.4 -1.9 -2.1 14.3 14.1 0.3 0.2 -4.1 -3.9 -3.7 -3.6 -3.6 -14.9 -14.8 -14.7 -14.9 -14.9 -1.3 -1.3 -1.3 -1.2 -1.0 -2.3 -2.3 -2.3 -2.4 -2.7 14.2 14.3 14.4 14.7 14.8 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 Capital account Nonfinancial public sector Privatization proceeds Public financial sector Other Currency conversion 0.0 3.9 2.7 4.2 0.0 0.0 1.9 4.8 4.0 4.0 3.8 1.6 2.7 2.7 2.3 2.3 0.0 0.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 -0.2 -0.2 -0.2 -0.1 0.0 0.9 1.8 1.5 1.8 1.5 -0.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Overall balance -0.3 -0.2 -0.4 1.2 -2.1 -1.3 -1.3 -0.3 -2.2 0.9 0.3 0.4 0.2 Savings-Investment Savings Private Public Foreign savings Investment Private Public 14.7 12.3 12.4 12.6 13.4 13.7 14.0 15.1 13.0 13.1 13.4 14.3 14.6 14.8 -0.4 -0.6 -0.7 -0.8 -0.9 -0.9 -0.9 1.3 4.3 4.1 3.9 3.7 3.6 3.6 16.0 16.6 16.5 16.5 17.1 17.3 17.6 11.6 12.0 12.5 13.5 14.1 14.8 15.0 4.4 4.6 4.0 3.0 3.0 2.5 2.6 490 542.9 617.4 704.1 796.6 899.5 1028.0 Memorandum items: Net maquila exports NlR in relation to base money 105.3 107.0 110.4 117.7 118.3 118.7 118.3 Sources: Central Reserve Bank; and Fund staff estimates and projections. l! Staff projections. 2/ International reserves minus base money. (In millions of U.S. dollars) Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 30 - Table 9. El Salvador: Balance of Payments, 2001-07 (Preferred Policies Projection) Prel. Projections l/ 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 (In millions ofU.S. dollars) Current account Trade balance Exports, f.o.b. Exports, f.o.b., excluding maquila Maquila Imports, f.o.b. Imports, f.o.b., excluding maquila Maquila Nonfactor services (net) Factor services (net) Ofwhich Interest payments Private transfers (net) Official transfers -117 -423 -422 -436 -462 -460 -481 -1,913 -1,997 -2,087 -2,2 16 -2,350 -2,514 -2,665 2,901 3,131 3,397 3,747 4,122 4,518 4,977 1,249 1,333 1,395 1,511 1,641 1,768 1,897 1,652 1,798 2,002 2,236 2,481 2,750 3,081 -4,814 -5,129 -5,484 -5,963 -6,472 -7,032 -7,643 -3,652 -3,873 -4,099 -4,43 1 -4,788 -5,182 -5,590 -1,162 -1,255 -1,385 -1,532 -1,684 -1,850 -2,053 -2 -200 -204 -204 -215 -224 -197 -266 -316 -343 -355 -366 -393 -463 420 393 479 526 568 616 648 1,969 2,057 2,178 2,305 2,436 2,639 2,812 34 33 33 33 33 32 32 Capital account -4 315 343 585 521 539 550 Capital transfers 198 127 125 125 125 125 125 Public capital 331 370 403 398 346 275 313 Nonfinancial public sector 371 401 196 363 386 322 342 Privatization proceeds 0 0 250 75 0 0 0 Public financial sector -40 -31 -43 -40 -40 -47 -30 Foreign direct investment 268 220 260 280 305 330 345 Banks net -235 -245 -272 -87 -101 -66 -96 Private capital and net errors and omissions -280 89 -117 -129 -142 -125 -137 Currency substitution (colones for US$) -286 -187 -56 -2 -6 0 0 Overall balance (deficit -) Change in net international reserves (increase-) Of which: Coverage of base money Currency conversion Bank reserves (increase-) Excess net international reserves (increase-) 2/ -181 -48 -79 149 65 79 69 181 48 79 -149 -65 -79 -69 221 70 345 -53 -50 -65 -65 287 187 56 2 6 0 0 -66 -116 289 -55 -56 -65 -65 -39 -22 -266 -96 -15 -15 -4 (In percent of GDP) Current account -1.3 -2.9 -2.7 -2.7 -2.1 -2.5 -2.4 Trade balance (including maquila) -13.9 -13.7 -13.5 -13.5 -13.5 -13.6 -13.5 Nonfactor services (net) 0.0 -1.4 -1.3 -1.2 -1.2 -1.2 -1.0 Factor payments (net) -1.9 -2.2 -2.2 -2.2 -2.1 -2.1 -2.3 Private transfers 14.3 14.1 14.1 14.1 14.0 14.2 14.2 Official transfers 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 Capital account 0.0 2.6 2.2 3.6 3.0 2.9 2.8 Nonfinancial public sector 2.7 2.7 1.3 2.2 2.2 1.7 1.7 Privatization proceeds 0.0 0.0 1.6 0.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 Public financial sector -0.3 -0.2 -0.3 -0.2 -0.2 -0.3 -0.1 Other -0.4 1.3 0.0 1.2 1.1 1.4 1.2 Currency conversion -2.1 -1.3 -0.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Overall balance -1.3 -0.3 -0.5 0.9 0.4 0.4 0.3 Savings-Investment Savings Private Public Foreign savings Investment Private Public 14.7 14.7 15.1 15.1 15.5 15.5 16.0 15.1 13.8 14.1 14.1 14.6 14.5 15.0 -0.4 0.9 1.0 1.0 0.9 1.0 0.9 1.3 2.9 2.7 2.7 2.7 2.5 2.4 16.0 17.6 17.9 17.8 18.1 18.0 18.4 11.6 13.0 13.8 14.8 15.1 15.5 15.8 4.4 4.6 4.0 3.0 3.0 2.5 2.6 Memorandum items: Net maquila exports 490.0 542.9 617.4 704.1 796.6 899.5 1,028.O NIR in relation to base money 105.3 Sources: Central Reserve Bank; and Fund staff estimates and projections. l/ Staff projections. 2/ International reserves minus base money. 107.0 131.0 137.3 137.0 136.3 134.0 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3l- APPENDIX I I. II. III. IV. V. VI. VII. VIII. ELSALVADOR:FUNDRELATIONS (As of May 3 1,2002) Membership Status: Joined March 14, 1946; Article VIII General Resources Account: SDR Million Quota 171.30 Fund holdings of currency 171.30 Reserve position in Fund 0.00 SDR Department: SDR Million Net cumulative allocation 24.99 Holdings 24.98 Outstanding Purchases and Loans: None Financial Arrangements: Amount Approval Expiration Approved Type Date Date (SDR million) Stand-By 09-23-98 02-22-00 37.68 Stand-By 02-28-97 05-30-98 37.68 Stand-By 07-21-95 09-20-96 37.68 Projected Obligations to the Fund: None Safeguards Assessments: Percent of Quota 100.00 100.00 0.00 Percent of Allocation 100.00 100.00 Amount Drawn (SDR million) 0.00 0.00 0.00 TRE has completed the off-site safeguards assessment of the Central Reserve Bank of El Salvador (CRB). The overall findings of the off-site safeguards assessment indicated that the CRB’s safeguards appear generally adequate, and a Stage Two (on- site) assessment was not considered necessary. Nevertheless, staff recommended that the BCR: (i) publish the entire financial statements with the auditor’s opinion beginning with the 2001 financial statements, by end-April 2002; (ii) consider restructuring the Audit Committee to have a majority representation of independent directors to ensure objectivity and effectiveness by year-end 2002; and (iii) continue its migration to financial statements that would be fully compliant with International Accounting Standards (IAS) by year-end 2002. Exchange Arrangements: Effective January 1, 2001, the dollar became legal tender and circulates freely. The dollar is used as a unit of account and a medium of exchange, with no limitations. All payments may be made in either dollars or colones. The CRB is obligated to exchange colones in circulation for the dollar upon request from banks at a Iixed and Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 32 - APPENDIX I IX. X. XI. unalterable exchange rate of C 8.75 per US$l. As a result, El Salvador’s exchange rate arrangement has been reclassified from the conventional pegged category to the exchange rate with no separate legal tender category. Article IV Consultation: The last Article IV Consultation was concluded on July 23, 2001 (SM/01/215 of July 9,200l; SUR/O l/8 1 of July 25,200l). El Salvador is under the standard 12-month cycle. FSAP Participation and ROSCs: El Salvador participated in the FSAP with the following missions: February 2000 Financial sector stability assessment April 2000 Financial system stability assessment September 2000 Final discussions of financial sector assessment program The FSSA report was discussed by the Executive Board on July 23,200l (SM/01/155 MAE STA of May 29,200 1). A FAD mission conducted ROSC in May 2002. Technical Assistance: Department Dates FAD January-February 2000 September 2000 October 2000 June 200 1 April 2002 August 1998 June-July 1999 November-December 1998 March 2000 May 2000 May 200 1 August 2001 Purpose Tax policy Tax administration reform Tax and customs administration Install a regional expert Reports on standards and codes Monetary programming and indirect instruments of monetary control Issues for the implementation of a dollar standard Balance of payments statistics Legal and institutional framework of the statistical system Balance of payments statistics Money and banking statistics Regional visit on data template XII. Resident Representative: None Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-33 - APPENDIX II ELSALVADOR:RELATIONSWITHTHE WORLD BANK GROUP (As of May 3 1,2002) ” I. Financial Relations A. IBRD/IDA/IFC Lending Operations by Sector (In millions of U.S. dollars) Disbursed &disbursed IBRIMDA Agriculture Education Transportation Electric power and other energy Structural adjustment Urban development and housing Telecommunication Environment Industry Public sector management Health, population, and nutrition 38.2 1.8 146.9 88.7 36.5 0.0 107.7 9.4 77.4 0.0 121.9 0.0 19.5 0.0 28.1 21.9 11.5 4.5 62.1 11.9 25.8 142.6 Total 675.6 280.8 IBRD 647.6 280.8 IDA 28.0 0.0 Of which Repaid IDA IBRD Outstanding 21 311.5 13.1 298.4 354.4 IFC investments 3/ 47.6 Loans 44.0 Equity 3.6 A. IBRD/lDA Loan Disbursements 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 Gross disbursements 35.4 34.4 23.2 34.4 49.5 17.8 Amortization (cash) 24.4 28.5 17.7 18.2 25.1 13.0 Net disbursements 11.0 5.9 5.5 16.2 24.4 4.8 Source: World Bank. l/ Net of cancellations. 2/ Excluding amounts sold to third parties. 3/ IFC commitments consist of disbursed and undisbursed investments as of December 3 1,200 1. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 34- APPENDIX II II. Recent and Planned IBRD Activities The Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for El Salvador was discussed by the World Bank Board on December 4,200 1. It aims to promote faster growth and deepen the poverty agenda with reconstruction investment coupled with a medium-term development strategy. It also fosters private sector-led growth with a series of interrelated activities focused on deregulating, enhancing competitiveness and supporting micro-enterprises development. The CAS includes a base case lending scenario of US$270 million. The Bank’s portfolio in El Salvador includes eight active projects, totaling US$484 million net of cancellations, of which about US$280 million remain undisbursed as of May 3 1, 2002. Net disbursements have been positive since 1997. All projects are rated satisfactory for both development objective and implementation progress. Bank-financed projects, mostly those in the education sector, were restructured to provide about $40 million to address earthquake reconstruction/rehabilitation needs (mostly school reconstruction). The Earthquake Emergency Reconstruction and Health Services Extension Project (US$142.6 million) represents about half of the CAS base case scenario. A Judicial Reform Project (US$18 million) is scheduled for Board presentation in July 2002. In addition, there are two other proposed projects under preparation, Rural Community Development and Secondary Education. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-35 - APPENDIX III ELSALVADOR:RELATIONSWITHTHEINTER-AMERICANDEVELOPMENTBANK I. Financial Relations (In millions of U.S. dollars) A. Operations (as of May 31,2002) Loans Total Disbursed Energy 281.3 218.5 Transportation 225.0 214.5 Education 144.1 53.9 Health and sanitation 64.4 2.1 Environment 73.8 18.9 Social investment, local development, emergency 257.7 60.6 Reform and public sector modernization 147.2 101.2 Agriculture 83.0 0.0 Total 1,276.5 669.7 B. Loan Disbursements Net disbursements Gross disbursements Amortization 1998 1999 2000 2001 77.0 100.0 74.2 111.0 131.7 130.7 113.1 169.8 54.7 30.7 38.9 58.8 II. Planned Activities Project Name Projected Loan Support to the Social Peace Program’ 27.9 Multisectoral Credit Program’ 42.4 Financial System Modernization Program 100.0 Competitiveness Sectoral Program 100.0 Total 270.3 Undisbursed 62.8 10.5 90.2 62.3 54.9 197.1 46.0 83.0 606.8 2002 95.1 156.9 61.8 ’ Approved by the Board in January 2002. 9 Approved by the Board in April 2002. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 36 - APPENDIX IV ELSALVADOR-STATISTICAL&SUES El Salvador has a relatively sound statistical system and the central bank and other public agencies make data available to the public through regular official publications and through their websites. However, a few weaknesses remain. Money and banking statistics The periodicity and quality of data is good, but some issues need to be addressed. In particular, several financial institutions do not distinguish transactions by resident and nonresident institutional units. Given that Salvadoran banks have been active in lending elsewhere in the region, this creates difficulty in the interpretation of the monetary and credit aggregates. In the context of the new monetary arrangement, which allows for the co- circulation of &ones and U.S. dollars, the use of the principle of residence acquires more importance, since all accounts are denominated in U.S. dollars. Also, there is a need to improve estimates of money, if any, by incorporating a measure of dollars circulating in the economy, and of broad money by including all financial intermediaries in the financial system. Public sector statistics The outstanding issues for government finance statistics are the adequate compilation of consolidated central government data that includes budgetary, extra-budgetary and social security accounts, the consistency of domestic debt data with financing transactions and the processing of data on the operations of the local governments for publication in the GFSY. Regarding the local government operations, the ministry of finance conducts a quarterly survey of 50 local governments, including all the largest. However the reporting of the survey is not consistent, as some local governments provide information with a lag or do not report at all. Also, information on the financing of the fiscal deficit needs to be improved. Real sector statistics The central bank produces both current and constant price (base 1990) annual national accounts, with a lag of around four months, and also produces quarterly national accounts, using the production approach, with a lag of three months. Progress needs to be made in obtaining more timely information from enterprise, household and agricultural surveys. The consumer price index has a sound methodological basis and its coverage is confined to the San Salvador metropolitan area and three departmental capitals representing 85 percent of the urban population. The weights were derived from the National Urban Household Income and Expenditure Survey of 1991/92. The authorities are planning to implement a new survey in 2003 to update the consumer price index. They have recently begun compiling a producer price index, which replaces the wholesale price index, Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 37 - APPENDIX IV External sector statistics There has been a significant improvement in the coverage and timeliness of balance of payments data in recent years. In particular, the central bank has made significant progress in obtaining information for balance of payments statistics on services, foreign direct investment, private external debt, and goods for processing, as well as for the international investment position statistics. The quality and consistency of the customs declaration, processed electronically, has to improve. Also, a few weaknesses remain in the measurement of cross-border capital flows. El Salvador compiles and disseminates International Reserves and Foreign Currency data. The Central Bank sent methodology notes describing the compilation methods for balance of payments statistics which were included in Part 3 of the 2001 Balance of Payments Statistics Yearbook. External vulnerability indicators The central bank has started to compile information about the external indebtedness of the nonbank private sector. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-38 - APPENDIX IV Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public