DOCUMENT OF INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY FOR AGENDA SM/10/34   February 9, 2010   To:  Members of the Executive Board  From:  The Secretary  Subject: Kingdom of Swaziland—Staff Report for the 2009 Article IV Consultation—Response of the Authorities   Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the response of the authorities to the staff report for the 2009 Article IV consultation with the Kingdom of Swaziland. The response, together with the staff report (SM/10/33, 2/9/10), is part of the pilot on innovating Article IV consultations and is tentatively scheduled for discussion on Monday,  February 22, 2010. At the time of circulation of this paper to the Board, the Secretary’s Department has not received a communication from the authorities of the Kingdom of Swaziland indicating whether or not they consent to the Fund’s publication of this paper; such communication may be received after the authorities have had an opportunity to read the paper.  Questions may be referred to Mr. Toe (ext. 36557) and Mr. Fontaine (ext. 37937) in AFR.   Unless the Documents Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the WTO Secretariat on Thursday, February 18, 2010; and to the African Development Bank and the European Commission, following its consideration by the Executive Board.   This document will shortly be posted on the extranet, a secure website for Executive Directors and member country authorities.    Att: (1)  Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:59 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public   Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:59 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public    INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND  KINGDOM OF SWAZILAND  Staff Report for the 2009 Article IV Consultation—Response of the Authorities  February 4, 2010  Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:59 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTelephone:  40448145-9 MINISTRY OF FINANCE Fax: 40443187 PO BOX 443 Telex: 2109 WD MBABANE  SWAZILAND    THE KINGDOM OF SWAZILAND  DATE:  21 January 2010.  Norbert Toe Mission Chief International Monetary Fund  Washington  Sir,   RE: KINGDOM OF SWAZILAND Government’s Response to the Concluding Statement of the IMF Mission for the 2009 Article IV Consultation  Following the Article IV mission that was in Swaziland between the 18th of November and the 2nd of December 2009 and the Concluding Statement by the Fund’s mission, please find attached our response on some of the issues raised during our consultations.    The Government of the Kingdom of Swaziland wishes to thank the Fund for the frank and robust discussions that we have had with the mission. Just like in previous years, the Kingdom of Swaziland has once gain benefited immensely from the Article IV consultations through the enrichment of our policy debates.  In conclusion, may I promise the Fund that we are taking the policy issues raised by this mission seriously in an endeavour to improve the welfare of the people of Swaziland.   Please accept the assurances of my highest esteem.     D. E. Masilela Principal Secretary 2Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:59 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicKINGDOM OF SWAZILAND Government’s Response to the Concluding Statement of the IMF Mission for the 2009 Article IV Consultation  1.      We wish to thank the Fund for the opportunity to report in writing the government’s response to the Concluding Statement of the recently concluded Article IV consultation mission. We agree with the Fund on the key issues highlighted during the consultation process, which was focused on restoring fiscal sustainability, preserving external stability, further strengthening the health of the financial sector, and promoting private sector-driven growth. Of critical importance to the Swazi government is ensuring medium-term fiscal sustainability, particularly in view of the sharp decline in government revenue as a result of a sudden drop in transfers from the Southern African Customs Union (SACU). The question of preserving external stability also features highly on our agenda as we seek to take appropriate measures to contain external imbalances. Our ability to adequately respond to those challenges will be determined by our efforts at fostering sustained economic growth over the long term, and implementing the necessary expenditure cuts that would allow us to both restore fiscal sustainability and maintain the credibility of the peg.   2.      Over the years, growing SACU transfers enabled our government to record a strong fiscal performance despite rising expenditure levels. As such, we were able to register successive budget surpluses and build up our level of international reserves to over four months of imports. However, the global economic slowdown and the contraction of South Africa’s economy have significantly deteriorated the fiscal outlook. Following a budget deficit of only 0.2 percent of GDP in 2008/09 we are estimating the deficit to be 8.3 percent of GDP for the current fiscal year ending in March 2010. More worrisome to us are the projected fiscal deficits going forward, which would exceed 12 percent of GDP through 2014. We concur with the assessment of the mission that deficits of such magnitude are unsustainable, calling for the adoption of a credible adjustment path to restore fiscal sustainability over the medium term.   3Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:59 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public3.      The most pressing issue for us is to deal with the huge reduction in SACU revenue for 2010/11,  which is now less than 50 percent of the budgeted figure. Compounding this situation is the fact that we recently settled a salary adjustment negotiation with civil servants at 12%, which was in a way forced by the recent surge in inflation that eroded their purchasing power. We have agreed to immediately begin to look for areas where we can reduce spending and will take a closer look at the salary increases. We have also communicated to Ministries that they should identify reductions of about 14% in their budget proposals for the coming financial year. We are intensifying procurement reform to improve efficiencies in expenditure and are revamping the Central Transport Administration, which has for a long time been a huge drain of government resources.   4.      Our government remains committed to cutting expenditure in the medium term while we reorient our spending to ensure that priority social and growth-enhancing expenditures are maintained. We are aware, as was rightly pointed out by the mission, that decisive action on the wage bill is key to containing expenditures. In that regard, we are looking at ways of making the Voluntary Early Retirement Program more attractive, and will also be considering other measures to reduce the wage bill. Through the Ministry of Public Service, we are proceeding with an exercise to identify and eradicate ghost workers in the service. We are also looking at freezing vacant positions, particularly in non-priority sectors.  5.      Another area that our government is looking to make some savings is in reducing the budgets for goods and services, and transfers and subsidies. As mentioned above, we are targeting the Central Transport Administration (CTA), which is arguably the biggest drain of public resources and are reviewing procurement practices to further improve efficiency of our expenditure, and will continue to support the efforts of the Anti-Corruption Commission as another way of tackling waste within the system.  4Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:59 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public6.      Consistent with Fund and World Bank policy advice, we will work on improving the quality of spending and strengthening public financial management, which we believe is crucial for the success of the fiscal adjustment. This will include modernizing of the ministry of finance, and consolidating expenditure reporting.  7.      We concur with the mission that increased domestic revenue mobilization should be an integral part of the fiscal adjustment. As such, we intend to improve taxpayers’ compliance and broaden the tax base to ensure that the tax regime remains competitive in the region. As a first step we will operationalize the Revenue Authority and set up a large taxpayer unit by mid-2010. We have already completed the drafting of VAT legislation, which we expect to push through Parliament next year, with implementation of VAT expected by 2012 to allow for full preparation and sensitization.  8.      We recognize that even after implementing these expenditure- reducing and revenue-raising measures, sizeable deficits will remain. In the short term, we aim to finance the deficit by seeking budget support from entities such as the African Development Bank, drawing down on the deposits accumulated at the Central Bank of Swaziland and issuing Government securities to the public. In seeking ways to finance the budget, it is important to ensure that going forward, our public debt remain sustainable. To this end we intend to ensure that we fully finance consumption spending from domestic revenues. We also intend strengthening our debt management capacity. Assistance is already available from the World Bank.   9.      We acknowledge the need to maintain confidence in the peg as a means of fostering external stability. To this end, our government considers the importance of effective fiscal consolidation and implementation of structural reforms to help in realizing that goal. While we have previously outlined our commitment to fiscal consolidation, implementing structural reforms will prove to be more challenging. However, the reduction in SACU revenue, which has been seen in some quarters as a 5Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:59 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Publicmere scare tactic by the Ministry of Finance rather than something that is imminent, has brought about a sense of urgency in embarking on structural reforms.   10.      Consistent with the mission’s recommendations we have started to look more closely at the competitiveness issues including ways in which we can reduce some of the high costs to doing business. Already, we have streamlined licensing arrangements and reduced days for advertising to 7 days. The Swaziland Investment Promotion Authority (SIPA) has undertaken an audit on the Investor Roadmap and has developed a strategy to address the outstanding issues such as the Companies Act which has gone through Parliament and is now law. A draft investment policy has been prepared, with the assistance of USAID Trade Hub, for consideration by government. The policy will go a long way in providing protection to investors. Government through the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs is in the process of establishing small claim courts to facilitate processing of minimal cases. Government is working together with the African Development Bank to undertake a diversification study to explore sectors that can the country has comparative advantage on.  The outcome of the study will enhance the Authority’s drive to promote foreign direct investments. 11.      At the time of the consultation, we agreed with the mission that we would discuss further the 50 bps differential with a view to determining its full impact and in making a decision on whether we should bring it on par to the SARB’s rate. It must be appreciated that whatever action must be underpinned by the prevailing economic climate. The most prudent way to align this without raising any concerns in the local economy is to wait for SARB to drop theirs, which is likely in their next MPC meeting.  12.      We concur with the mission’s assessment on the health of the financial sector and with its focus on the supervision of the savings and credit cooperatives and the non bank financial institutions. In that regard, we believe the passage of the Financial Services Regulatory Authority Bill to be an important first step in allowing us to more effectively regulate that sector. Also, the measures implemented by the Central Bank of Swaziland to further strengthen on-site and off-site inspections of the commercial banks, as well as 6Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:59 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Publicimplementing risk-based supervision are contributing to maintaining a healthy and vibrant financial system.  13.      There is a perception that the inflow of liquidity created by the domestic asset requirements for pension funds and insurances companies is creating some distortion in the financial market. We disagree strongly with this perception. Firstly, at present the regulations are not tight enough to ensure that these funds are retained within our economy. The repatriated funds find their way back to South Africa through commercial banks, a thing which we need to look into closely. Secondly, there are a lot of development projects that require financing in the country, which will utilize these funds. Government is proceeding to create financial instruments through which the Institutions can invest. We strongly believe that Swazi savings should finance Swazi development and therefore have no plans to revisit this policy decision.  14.      We agreed with the mission on the need to create an enabling environment for strong private sector led growth in an attempt to address poverty levels in Swaziland. In the recent past, and largely on account of the global recession, we have witnessed the contraction of the wood pulp industry, which has affected employment levels, growth and exports. We also continue to experience difficulties within the textile sector. Notwithstanding these setbacks, our government continues to pursue an expansion of the private sector.  In the past we have invested heavily in infrastructure and continue to pay close attention to those sectors that can help spur growth.    15.      On improving the investment climate, our government recently set up a Cabinet sub-committee comprising the ministers of finance, trade, and enterprise, who are charged with setting policy related to improving the investment climate, and pursuing the reforms outlined in the Swaziland Investor Roadmap Study (2005). We also intend to prepare a policy framework for Public Private Partnerships (PPPs) to facilitate private involvement in the provision of public infrastructure. We firmly believe such PPPs would provide yet another investment vehicle for pension funds and insurance companies. With regards to increasing the level of investment to spur growth, we continue to face the issue 7Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:59 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Publicof high recurrent expenditures and as we work on our fiscal adjustment program we will eventually be able to free up more resources for investment purposes. 16.      The mission asserts that the lack of TA implementation recommendations reflects both capacity limitation and unclear commitment to its effective use. We would agree with the first reason but strongly disagree with the latter one. It must be obvious to all that no one would approach the IMF for TA on an issue they have no commitment to. An example is the Ministry of Finance, which received two TA programmes in the last three years, one to look at Revenue Administration and the other to look at the restructuring of the Ministry of Finance. Both TA programmes were requested by the Ministry. The first produced a report which we have tried to implement but because of the structure of the Revenue administration departments, it has been possible. We are proceeding to set up the Revenue Authority, and are utilizing the ideas that came up in this report to ensure that we start it on the correct footing. The second report requires follow up action as it did not deliver what we hoped it would deliver. The mission that undertook this TA also acknowledged the fact that we would need follow up TA to be able to deliver what we want. We believe good progress is being made and we will continue to pursue implementation because we understand the importance of having good and timely data, which are critical for making policy and execution.  With these comments may I once again thank the mission.   Yours Faithfully,    D. E. Masilela Principal Secretary 8Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:59 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public