DOCUMENT OF INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND NOT FOR PUBLIC USE SM/02/252 CONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION August 8,2002 To: Members of the Executive Board From: The Secretary Subject: Saudi Arabia-Staff Report for the 2002 Article IV Consultation Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staff report for the 2002 Article IV consultation with Saudi Arabia, which will be brought to the agenda for discussion on a date to be announced. At the time of circulation of this paper to the Board, the Secretary’s Department has received a communication from the authorities of Saudi Arabia indicating that they do not consent to the Fund’s publication of this paper. Questions may be referred to Mr. Okogu (ext. 37116) and Mr. Al-Ghelaiqah (ext. 34380) in MED. Unless the Documents Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the WTO Secretariat on Friday, August 16, 2002. Att: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicCONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND SAUDI ARABIA Staff Report for the 2002 Article IV Consultation Prepared by the Staff Representatives for the 2002 Consultation with Saudi Arabia Approved by George T. Abed and Shigeo Kashiwagi August 7,2002 . The consultation discussion was held in Riyadh during May 1-15, 2002. . The s&team comprised Messrs. Iqbal (head), Thai, Hussein, Okogu, Abdallah, and Al-Ghelaiqah (all MED). Mr. Chabrier participated in the policy discussions. . The Saudi representatives were Dr. Ibrahim Al-Assaf, Minister of Finance and National Economy; She&h Hamad Al-Sayari, Governor of the Saudi Arabian Monetary Agency (SAMA); the Vice Minister and Deputy Ministers of the Ministries of Finance and National Economy, Industry and Commerce; Petroleum and Mineral Resources; and Planning; the Vice Governor and the Deputy Governor of SAMA, and other senior government officials. The mission also met with representatives of commercial banks; the Chairman of the Riyadh . Chamber of Commerce and Industry; and with officials of the Cooperation Council for the Arab States of the Gulf @CC). Mr. Al-T&i, Executive Director of Saudi Arabia, participated in the meetings. . In concluding the 200 1 Article IV consultation in October 2001, Executive Directors noted that prudent macroeconomic policies, strengthened structural reform, and higher oil prices have contributed to a substantial improvement in economic performance and the maintenance of a credible exchange rate peg and a liberal exchange rate and trade system. However, given the vulnerability to downside oil price risks, the authorities were encouraged to expedite the implementation of structural reforms, and stand prepared to tighten fiscal policy further, if needed. Directors stressed that the budget structure should be strengthened to bring about a lasting improvement in the fiscal position and reduce public debt. Directors encouraged further efforts to improve transparency, data provision, and the adoption of the Fund’s General Data Dissemination System (GDDS). . Saudi Arabia accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4 on March 22, 1961. . Saudi Arabia has accepted the Fourth Amendment of the Fund’s Articles of Agreement. . The authorities have agreed to issue the Public Information Notice (PIN) following the conclusion of the consultation process. . The principal authors of this report are Messrs. Iqbal and Hussein. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2- Contents Page Executive Summary.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 I. Background and Recent Developments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5 II. Report on Discussions ............................................................................................ 12 A. Fiscal Policy ................................................................................................ 13 B. Monetary Policy and the Exchange System .................................................. 15 C Structural Reforms ....................................................................................... 16 . D. Trade Policy and Regional Integration ......................................................... 22 E. Statistical Issues ....................................................................................... ..... 22 F. Technical Assistance .................................................................................... .23 III. Staff Appraisal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24 Text Boxes 1. Oil Market Developments and the Gas Initiative. ..................................................... .6 2. Developments in Banking Supervision and Regulation .............................................. 9 3. Capital Market Developments ................................................................................ 10 4. Institutional and Structural Reforms ....................................................................... 11 5. Labor Markets and Policies .................................................................................... 21 Text Tables 1. Selected Economic Indicators, 1999-2007 ............................................................ 2. Budgetary Developments (Baseline Scenario), 2000-07 ........................................ 3. Summary of Balance of Payments, 1999-2007 ...................................................... 4. Monetary Survey, 1997-2002 ............................................................................... 5. Budgetary Developments (Adjustment Scenario), 2000-07 ................................... 6. Vulnerability Indicators, 1997-200 1. ..................................................................... 28 30 32 34 35 37 Figures 1. Selected Real Sector Indicators, 1997-200 1. .......................................................... 3 8 2. Central Government Fiscal Indicators, 1980-2002 .................................................. 39 3. External Sector Developments, 199 l-2002 ............................................................ 40 4. Monetary and Financial Developments, 1994-2002 ................................................ 4 1 5. Exchange Rate Indices, January 1990-April 2002 ................................................... 42 6. Stock Market Indicators, 1990-2002 ..................................................................... 43 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3- Appendices I. Fund Relations ....................................................................................................... 44 II. Relations with the World Bank ............................................................................... 46 III. Statistical Issues.. ................................................................................................... 48 IV. Medium-Term Fiscal Outlook ................................................................................ 54 V. Privatization Strategy ............................................................................................. 57 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4- EXECUTIVE SUMMARY Current Setting l Saudi Arabia has been gradually implementing a reform strategy since 1998. It is focused mainly on structural reforms underpinned by cautious demand management in order to reduce the vulnerability to oil price shocks and to accelerate non-oil growth so as to address unemployment pressures. In 200 1, the budget shifted to a deficit of about 4 percent of GDP from a surplus of 3 percent of GDP in 2000 on account of the fall in oil prices and overspending, and the government domestic debt increased to 92 percent of GDP. At the same time, non-oil growth decelerated, and involuntary unemployment remained close to 10 percent. However, the external current account remained in large surplus as non-oil exports rose and import growth fell; Saudi Arabian Monetary Agency’s (SAMA) net foreign assets rose slightly to the equivalent of 11 months of prospective imports. The financial sector performance continued to be strong and the stock market registered gains. However, progress on the structural front remained cautious. 0 In 2002, the macroeconomic position is expected to remain under pressure. The medium- term forecasts show that, under the current policy stance, fiscal and external positions would worsen and the economy would remain vulnerable to a fall in oil prices or a strong pick up in interest rates. Staff Appraisal a The achievement of the dual objectives underlying the reform strategy will call for tight fiscal policy in support of an accelerated implementation of structural reforms. The staff welcomes the authorities’ intentions to strengthen fiscal policy in order to eliminate the budget deficit by 2005 and expedite the development of the legal and institutional foundations for structural reforms. a Implementation of the strategy will benefit from: (a) more concerted and early steps to broaden the non-oil revenue base, strengthened expenditure management, and a reduction in current outlays to improve the structure of the budget; (b) articulation of a clearer timetable for structural reforms and privatization; (c) an early introduction of the Capital Markets Law; and (d) expedited integration of the segmented labor market and a narrowing of the cost differentials between domestic and expatriate workers. a Progress has been made in the development and dissemination of economic data. Areas ‘for further progress include streamlining the process of information dissemination; more current data on the oil sector; and information on private capital flows, consolidated public sector accounts, and the operations of the Autonomous Government Institutions (AGIs). Participation in the General Data Dissemination System (GDDS) is encouraged. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-5- I. BACKGROUNDANDRECENTDEVELOPMENTS 1. The Saudi authorities have been implementing a reform strategy since 1998 which aims to reduce the vulnerability to oil price shocks and accelerate non-oil growth so as to create employment opportunities for the rapidly growing Saudi work force. However, reforms have been constrained by administrative bottlenecks and the length of time required in establishing the needed legal and institutional foundations. 2. The 2002 consultation discussions were held against the backdrop of a weaker- than-expected macroeconomic and financial position, increased regional security concerns, and uncertain global oil markets. The focus of official strategy remained on addressing the dual challenges of accelerating growth in order to meet growing unemployment pressures and reducing the vulnerability of macroeconomic balances to oil price fluctuations. 3. Overall real growth slowed substantially in 2001. Oil output dropped following OPEC-mandated production cuts (Box 1) and growth of real non-oil GDP slowed to 2.9 percent as private investment stagnated (Table 1; Figure l).’ The world economic slowdown, together with the effects of events of September 2001 also seemed to have temporarily affected business confidence that year, and a wait-and-see attitude tended to prevail with respect to investment in selected sectors. The CPI-based inflation was negative and fell further to -0.8 percent as import prices continued to decline. 4. Fiscal performance also weakened considerably in 2001. The overall central government budget balance shifted to a deficit of 3.9 percent of GDP from a surplus of 3.2 percent of GDP in 2000 (the first surplus achieved since 1983) mainly reflecting a fall in oil revenue, sluggish non-oil revenues, and overspending (Table 2; Figure 2). The weak performance of non-oil revenue resulted mainly from the drop in customs receipts following the cut in import duties from 12 percent to 5 percent. Total expenditure increased by about 8 percent relative to actual 2000 (or about 19 percent over the budget), largely because of extrabudgetary outlays of about SRls 30 billion (4 percent of GDP), predominantly to settle late payments.2 The deficit was financed by domestic borrowing from banks and the AGIs. ’ National accounts were revised in 2002 on the basis of the 1999 household and expenditure surveys and shows higher nominal and real GDP for the period 1995-2001 than in the past. However, the growth rate has remained broadly unchanged. 2 The late payments predate 1995-96 when oil prices were weak and ministries entered into contracts without the authorization of the Ministry of Finance and National Economy (MOFNE). None of the late payments were accumulated in the past few years with the adoption of expenditure safeguards and guidelines to prevent emergence of new late payments. The authorities expected settlement of late payments in 2002 and 2003 to be much (continued. . ) Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-6- Box 1. Oil Market Developments and the Gas Initiative Oil Market Developments in 2001 l The world oil market was weak in 2001, with zero demand growth, compared to 1 percent growth in 2000, and a historical annual average growth of about 1.2-l .5 percent during the 1990s. The weak oil demand was the direct result of the slowdown in global economic activity. This was further compounded in the fourth quarter of the year by the September 11 events, which affected economic confidence generally, including the airline industry (the demand for aviation fuel in the U.S., for example, dropped by 15 percent). The average price of the WE0 basket fell by 14 percent compared to 2000, mostly due to the price weakness in the fourth quarter. During the year (on January 17, March 16, and July 25,2001), OPEC preemptively cut its quota ceiling by a total of 3.5 Mb/d in response to the weakening demand and sliding prices. During the year, Saudi Arabia’s oil output fell to a weighted average of 7.9 million barrels per day as compared with 8.1 million barrels per day in 2000. Developments in 2002 and the Medium Term l The sharp price decline in the fourth quarter of 2001 led to the decision of OPEC to cut output by a further 1.5 Mb/d effective January 1,2002, conditional on major non-OPEC producers reducing their output by 0.5 Mb/d. Following a period of intense negotiations in late 200 1, this group (Angola, Mexico, Norway, Oman, and Russia) agreed to a total cut of about 362,000 b/d and paved the way for the present OPEC quota ceiling of 21.7 Mb/d. Saudi Arabia’s current quota is 7.05 Mb/d, compared to a weighted average of about 7.9 Mb/d in 200 1. Most market sources suggest that major non-OPEC producers largely adhered to their quota ceiling. Iraq, which is not part of the OPEC quota system, placed a one month embargo on oil exports from early April, but has since resumed normal trading activity under the UN arrangements. Oil price levels so far in 2002 have included a security premium, following continuing concerns about political and security developments in the Middle East, as fundamentals have remained weak. Against this background, OPEC decided to leave the quota ceiling unchanged at its June 26,2002 meeting, and to revisit the issue again at its September meeting. l As a leading member of OPEC, Saudi Arabia continues to support the Group’s oil price target range of US$22- 28 per barrel for the OPEC basket. . Current WE0 medium-term projections show the oil price moving in the range of US$21-23 per barrel between 2002 and 2007. The Gas Initiative l Detailed negotiations have been continuing since the signing on June 3,200 1 of the preparatory agreements with eight IOCs. Although two earlier negotiation deadlines have been missed, both sides have agreed to continue with the talks in order to iron out the remaining areas of differences. The core of these ventures involves allowing the IOCs to explore for and produce natural gas for use in three downstream activities (water desalination, electricity production, and petrochemicals). A total of US$25 billion is expected to be invested under the Gas Initiative over a period of 10 years. . The projects underlying the Gas Initiative are complex, encompassing both upstream, midstream, and downstream aspects, making the negotiations more difficult than for other regular projects. The main issues on which agreement is yet to be reached include the internal rate of return (IRR) that should be guaranteed to the IOCs, the price to charge for the water and electricity output, the “prospectivity” (the size of gas reserves) in the allotted zones, and the level of Saudi equity participation in the various projects. In order to facilitate the process, the Saudi authorities have put in place a regulatory framework on the terms of engagement, including the of&&e arrangement for water and electricity, and the applicable price; the fiscal regime; and technical specifications that will underpin the operation of the Gas Initiative. The details of these are not yet available, as they are the subject of ongoing negotiations. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-7- Government domestic debt increased from 87 percent of GDP at end-2000 to 92 percent of GDP at end-2001 .3 5. The external current account surplus remained broadly unchanged at 7.8 percent of GDP (Table 3; Figure 3). The decline in oil export receipts was partially offset by a sharp rise in non-oil exports, mostly on account of expanded exports of petrochemical products and manufactured goods. At the same time, reflecting the economic slowdown, growth of merchandise imports decelerated and the deficit on the services and transfers account narrowed sharply. Even though the capital account (including errors and omissions) recorded a large net outflow, SAMA’s net foreign assets rose slightly to the equivalent of 11 months of prospective imports of goods and services, or 101 percent of Ml and about four times the stock of short-term debt.4 In addition, the AGIs’ net foreign assets stood at the equivalent of about 7.5 months of imports of goods and services.5 6. The growth of domestic liquidity picked up modestly in 2001. While growth of net foreign assets decelerated, net domestic credit rose to over 8 percent of beginning money stock mainly to finance the fiscal deficit and an increase in consumer credit to the private sector (Table 4; Figure 4). The latter reflected not only the decline in interest rates but also the introduction of new instruments for consumer lending. The average riyal-dollar interest rate differential remained virtually unchanged in 2001 (at about 24 basis points) over 2000, with a temporary spike in the last quarter of 2001 following the September 11 events. The differential widened slightly in the first quarter of 2002, reflecting in part the faster drops in U.S. dollar deposit rates and the increase in the government’s demand for credit. Reflecting mainly the effective appreciation of the U.S. dollar against other major currencies and, despite a fall in inflation, the Saudi riyal appreciated in real effective terms (REER) by 2.3 percent by end-2001 over end-2000; the riyal depreciated slightly in the first half of 2002 along with the U.S. dollar (Figure 5). External vulnerability indicators, however, remained strong in 2001 (Table 6). 3 The bulk (about 77 percent) of domestic debt is owed to the AGIs, which include the government-owned Pension Fund, the General Organization for Social Insurance (GOSI), and several development funds. 4 The authorities maintain that a large part of such outflows was intended to take advantage of the fall in equity prices in international capital markets. The commercial banks’ capital outflow was attributed to their attempt to take advantage of their highly liquid position to reduce their foreign liabilities, given the relatively low interest rates on assets. 5 The central government has no external debt, and staff estimates show that external nongovernmental debt remained stable at about 18 percent of GDP at end-2001. The authorities do not collect data on nongovernmental debt; staff estimates are based on information from the joint BIS-IMF-OECD-IBRD external debt statistical database. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-8- 7. Available indicators suggest that the financial sector performed well in 2001. Banks appear to be well capitalized, well provisioned, profitable, and effectively supervised (Box 2)’ All banks were in compliance with the limit on exposure to single customers and capital adequacy requirements. The risk-adjusted capital/assets ratio remained high, profits continued to increase as did the rates of return on assets and on equity, nonperforming loans were relatively low, and provisioning was ample. Banks’ good performance is attributed, in part, to stricter loan servicing practices and risk management. The stock market continued to rise after a temporary drop following the September 11 events, and registered an 8 percent increase during the year followed by an increase of 11 percent in the first seven months of 2002 (Box 3; Figure 6). 8. Progress on the structural front in 2001 continued and was focused on building the legal and institutional foundations for long-term reform (Box 4). On the privatization front, laws and regulatory authorities for the telecommunications and electricity sectors were established. The state monopoly of telecommunications is ending and steps were taken to open this sector for foreign investment. Progress was made in legislating the income tax law, and improvement of the tax and customs administration continued.’ In order to improve the employability of Saudi workers, the Human Resources Development Fund (HRDF) started to set out specific targets for education and technical and vocational training, provide information on private sector requirements, encourage private companies to hire Saudi workers, and contribute toward meeting the costs of training as well as to the wages of trainees. 9. Under the Gas Initiative, international oil companies (IOCs) were selected and preliminary agreements signed for development of the upstream gas sector and associated investment in power generation, water desalination, and petrochemicals. Meanwhile, the authorities continued negotiations to finalize detailed agreements with the selected IOCs through early 2002 (Box 1). 10. Transparency and availability of economic information were boosted with the issuance of guidelines in mid-2001 for publication of economic and financial data. Information on national accounts, international trade, prices, population, and labor is being disseminated; data on monetary developments are available with a one-month lag. 6 Processing of the results of the self-assessment conducted by SAMA in 2001 in accordance with the October 1999 Core Principles Methodology was postponed in order to address more pressing post-September 2001 matters. ’ Steps included putting into operation of the Large Tax Payers Unit (LTU) and the Taxpayer Identification Number (TIN), the recruitment and training of staff, and computerization of the Department of Zakat and Income Tax (DZIT), along with the Customs Department. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-9- Box 2. Developments in Banking Supervision and Regulation Saudi Arabia’s financial system consists of the SAMA; 11 commercial banks whose activities are universal in scope (traditional banking, brokerage activity, bond dealing, insurance, and leasing); 38 moneychangers; 5 government-owned specialized credit institutions; several autonomous government agencies; about 100 insurance companies; and a few, small leasing and consumer lending companies. Banks are closely supervised and follow international accounting standards (US). Accounting requirements were strengthened in 2000-O 1 with the implementation of IAS 34 and 39, pertaining to interim financial reporting and recognition and measurement of financial instruments. SAMA conducts regular on-site inspections, off-site monitoring, and special in-depth inspections. A draft on uniform standards of loan classification is under review. Banks’ internal capability for credit risk analysis has been enhanced; a credit bureau was established in December 200 1 to facilitate the adoption of the proposed new Base1 capital standards by 2005. SAMA is conducting a self-assessment of its supervisory system in’ relation to the Base1 Core Principles, using the 1999 “Core Principles Methodology”. A regulatory and supervisory framework has been developed for AML activities. Legal measures include: adoption of legislation to implement the UN resolutions on AML; enforcement of the 40 recommendations issued by the Financial Action Task Force relating to the prevention of money laundering; adoption of legislation to combat money laundering activities in the nonfmancial sector (August 200 1); requirements for all financial transactions to go through the banking system; and prohibition for nonresidents to open bank accounts unless authorized by SAMA. Administrative measures include: creation of an AML unit in SAMA and in each bank; a Financial Intelligence Unit in the Ministry of Interior; issuance of guidelines to banks on AML measures; establishment of an inter-ministerial committee to coordinate AML activities; and training of some 600 persons to combat money laundering. Records of all financial transactions are to be kept for 10 years. The banking sector’s financial soundness indicators are summarized below: Financial Soundness Indicators, 1997-2001 (In percent) 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 I Banks’ capital-asset ratio Banks’ risk-weighted capital-asset ratio Ratio of banks’ nonperfotming loans to total gross loans Loan provisions as a proportion of nonperforming loans Banks’ interest rate spread Return on assets Return on equity Liquid assets-total assets ratio Foreign currency deposits-total deposits ratio 10.0 10.0 10.2 9.6 9.3 22.5 21.2 21.2 21.0 20.3 9.3 8.4 11.4 10.4 9.6 78.0 83.0 88.0 93.0 106.0 5.5 5.5 4.5 3.9 4.1 1.7 1.8 1.5 2.0 2.1 28.9 30.8 27.6 37.9 42.1 54.3 48.9 53.3 56.0 51.0 19.8 21.3 20.1 18.6 17.9 Source: Saudi Arabian Monetary Authority (SAMA). I Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-lO- Box 3. Capital Market Developments The authorities have recently stepped up their efforts to develop the capital market. The capital market is presently limited to the stock market and the primary market for government securities, Secondary trading in government securities is minimal. Markets for commercial paper and corporate bonds are practically nonexistent. Insurance products have been offered, but the insurance industry is neither regulated nor supervised. The stock market which has expanded considerably over the past decade, still lacks depth and liquidity due mainly to the relatively few number of listings. Foreign participation has been liberalized over time through mutual funds; however, foreigners are excluded from activities on the “negative list” that includes insurance, telecommunications, wholesale trade, and retail distribution services, The overall index increased by 11.3 percent in 2000. In January-September 2001 period, the index gained 15.5 percent, which was eliminated within a month following the September events. The index climbed back in October to finish 2001 with 7.6 percent gain over 2000 and another 11 percent increase during January-July 2002. The recent strength of the market reflected, in part, the high level of liquidity, the continued downward drift in the interest rates, and good corporate profitability in a number of areas, especially banking, cement, and the electricity sectors. The boost in the stock market performance has also resulted t?om the introduction in October 2001 of the Tadawul, a new advanced electronic platform for instantaneous trading, clearing, and settlements to replace the ESIS system. Owing to the stock performance, the mutual funds also expanded rapidly during 2001 with their assets increasing by 29.5 percent to SRls 50 billion (about 7 percent of GDP). The debt market consists mainly of the primary market for government securities, having maturities ranging from one week to seven years held mainly by pension funds, insurance companies, and commercial banks, The trading in the secondary market is minimal. The limited secondary market and the lack of rating of those securities have constrained the participation of foreign investors. The markets for corporate bonds and commercial paper are at a rudimentary level. This is in part owing to the cultural reluctance to deal with interest and the preference for other sources of financing (e, g., own resources), and the lack of a clear legal framework to regulate such activity. A limited amount of corporate bonds and mortgage loans have been floated. In order to foster development of the capital market, the authorities are planning on introducing in 2002 a CML, and an Insurance Law, and taking steps for the perfection of securities underlying mortgage fmance. The CMLwill provide a unified legal and regulatory framework for new financial instruments; financial activities, such as corporate financing by specialized investment companies; secondary markets for securities; supervision and regulation of the stock exchange; trading rules, codes of conduct for dealers, protection for investors, as well as listing and disclosure requirements. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- ll- Box 4. Institutional and Structural Reforms A series of structural reforms have been introduced in Saudi Arabia since 1999 aimed primarily at encouraging foreign investment, enhancing the role of the private sector, and addressing unemployment pressures. Other reforms are under consideration or are at an advanced stage of preparation. The main developments and relevant stages are itemized below: Institutional and Structural Reforms Adopted Structural reforms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Establishment of the Supreme Economic Council (August 1999) Corporatization of the electricity sector (December 1999) Approval of the Foreign Investment Law (April 2000) Approval of the Sponsorship Law (allowing foreign companies to sponsor their expatriate employees, April 2000) Establishment of the SAGJA (facilitating foreign direct investment process, including the establishment of one-stop shop, April 2000) Opening of the stock market to all foreign investors through mutual funds (November 1999) Real Estate Ownership Law (allowing foreigners to own real estate except in the two holy cities, May 2001) Human Resource Development Fund established in November 2000 (training Saudi nationals for the private sector) Establishment of the Higher Tourism Authority (encouraging domestic tourism, November 2000) Approval of Telecommunications Law and establishment of Saudi Telecommunications Authority (paving the way for ending state monopoly, establishment of the STC, and opening the sector to foreign capital, May 2001) Regulations for transfers of employees from the Ministry of Telecommunications to the STC (May 2001) Guidelines for publication of economic and financial data (May 2001) Introduction of a levy on water usage to ensure a more economical use of water in the agricultural sector (2001) Establishment of the regulatory agency for electricity (early 2002) Approval of the privatization strategy (June 2002) Approval of the executive program of expansion of the railway network through privatization (June 2002) Allowing private sector participation in desalination projects (June 2002) Regulation to establish Saudi Postal Company (SPC) and transfer of all postal employees to the SPC (June 2002) Establishment of the Petroleum Service Company (June 2002) Fiscal reforms . Introduction of the Income Tax Law, including taxation of expatriates (expected to be approved by end-2002) . Reduction in import tariff rates from 12 percent to 5 percent (May 2001) . Strengthening of customs and tax administration (under way) . Excises on luxury goods (under consideration) . Raising municipal fees and charges (under consideration) . Civil service reform (focusing on restructuring and training to raise productivity, under consideration) Reforms Awaiting Approval 0 0 0 3 3 3 3 3 Company Law [modernization and adaptation of existing regulations) Agency Law (to remove the requirement for a local agent) CML to provide legal and regulatory framework for new financial products and activities (expected to be implemented by end-2002) Insurance Law (providing legal framework for insurance activity, expected to be approved during 2002) Competition Law (toward establishing a level playing field for Saudi and foreign companies in line with WTO rules) WTO accession negotiations in progress, including trademark and intellectual property law and removal of “technical barriers” to trade Labor Law (to rationalize employment procedures and increase labor mobility) Mining code (to facilitate investment in the hard minerals sector) Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12- II. REPORT ON DISCUSSIONS 11. The policy discussions focused on the authorities’ short- and medium-term policies to strengthen macroeconomic balances and to accelerate structural reforms. The authorities’ initiatives toward improving the transparency, availability, and dissemination of economic information and cooperation under Article VIII, Section 5 were also reviewed. A PIN will be issued at the conclusion of the consultation process. 12. The near- and medium-term outlook remains sensitive to global oil price developments. Although oil prices have firmed up in the first half of 2002, the macroeconomic position is expected to weaken during the year on account of lower oil export receipts (Table 1). The central government budget in 2002 is estimated to register a deficit equivalent to 3.7 percent of GDP as against a targeted balance. This outcome reflects a 20 percent fall in oil revenues over 2001 and extrabudgetary expenditures mainly on the settlement of overdue payments (1.7 percent of GDP) dating back to the pre-1996 period. Given their structure, non-oil revenues, which are mainly dependent upon fees and charges, are unlikely to be responsive in the remainder of 2002 to the anticipated recovery in economic activity. Despite the planned stricter expenditure controls the deficit excluding oil revenue would remain large at 25 percent of GDP in 2002 and government domestic debt would increase to about 95 percent of GDP. The external current account surplus is expected to contract sharply but SAMA’s net foreign assets would remain comfortable. 13. Under an unchanged policy stance and the present outlook for oil prices, it is expected that there will be some pick up in growth in the medium term (2003-07), but the macroeconomic position would remain weak (Table 1 and Appendix IV). Gross investment is projected to rise to about 25 percent of GDP-financed in part by the anticipated increase in FDI-and, spurred by the private sector activity, real non-oil GDP growth would pickup moderately over the forecast period. Domestic savings would stagnate with negative savings by the government sector. The central government budget deficit over the medium term is likely to average about 4.5 percent of GDP, even if strict expenditure restraints are enforced, and government debt would continue to grow. The external current account would shift to a deficit rising to the equivalent of over 6 percent of GDP by 2007. Despite the anticipated increase in capital inflows linked mainly to the Gas Initiative, SAMA’s net foreign assets could decline to the equivalent of six months of imports of goods and services8 The persistence of macroeconomic imbalances and the increasing ’ These results are highly sensitive to oil market developments. A price path of US$5 a barrel below that underlying the above forecast would, under unchanged policies, cause the budget and external current account deficits to increase by 5 percent and 7.5 percent of GDP, respectively. The consequent financing requirements would increase economic vulnerability and negatively impact growth and employment-generating capacity. Similarly, an increase in interest rates from the present historically low levels would worsen the budget deficit, negatively impact growth, and heighten fiscal vulnerability. For example, a 3 percentage point (continued. ) Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13 - claims of the government on national savings could weaken growth impulses in the private sector. 14. Fully cognizant of the medium-term challenges, the authorities stressed their intention to intensify the implementation of their reform program. Demand management will be tightened to strengthen the fiscal position and reduce vulnerability to oil price shocks, and structural reforms will be accelerated to facilitate private sector investment, including foreign direct investment (FDI). A. Fiscal Policy 15. The staff emphasized that even though the fiscal deficit is likely to be contained in 2002 inherent structural weaknesses of the budget continue to constrain fiscal policy. The inelasticity of non-oil revenue and the rising share of current outlays (wages and interest payments) have weakened the capacity to address the fall in oil revenues and led to a built-in bias towards deficits. These limitations are borne out by the medium-term fiscal forecasts which, even under a tight expenditure stance, imply continuation of large overall deficits for the next five years. Therefore, an early strengthening of the budget structure would be needed to not only reduce vulnerability to terms of trade shocks and thus, ensuring expenditure smoothing, but also to eliminate the built-in deficit bias. 16. Concerted early steps under a medium-term budgetary framework would be needed to ensure strengthening of the fiscal position. These would include a sustained increase in non-oil revenues, reduction in current expenditures, and strengthened expenditure management in order to eliminate extrabudgetary spending including overdue payments. The illustrative adjustment scenario (Appendix IV; Table 5) describes such a strategy whereby the overall deficit would be curtailed sharply in 2003-04, leading to an approximate balance in 2005, and surpluses in 2006-07. The ratio of government debt to GDP would be put on a durable declining path, and the non-oil deficit would fall to about 14 percent of GDP by 2007 as compared with 20 percent under the unchanged policy stance. Such an approach would allow higher levels of national savings and investment, and, combined with the Gas Initiative, facilitate acceleration of non-oil growth without adversely affecting the external position. 17. The authorities reaffirmed their determination to address the fiscal imbalances as an integral component of their overall economic reform program. They envisage fiscal balance in the medium term with a possible surplus by 2005, broadly in line with the increase in the average interest rate would raise the budget deficit to 7 percent of GDP, resulting in government debt rising to about 107 percent of GDP by 2007, as compared with the baseline 95 percent of GDP, with the average interest rate exceeding non-oil growth rate by 4 percentage points. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14- staff adjustment scenario. The authorities felt that attempts at an early and substantial reduction in expenditures may be difficult on account of the pressures for additional spending on health and education to address the rapid increase in population. However, any unanticipated oil revenue shortfall will be met by expenditure restraints. The bulk of adjustment would be through revenue measures. 18. As part of a broad strategy, the following fiscal steps have been initiated in 2002 or are envisaged for early enactment9 a The new Income Tax law is targeted for implementation in 2002. It will: (a) ratify the introduction of taxation on foreign corporate income at a flat rate of 30 percent; and (b) introduce income tax on expatriate workers. The authorities view the latter as a mechanism to equalize the tax burden with Saudis who are subject to Zakat at 2.5 percent of net worth and contribute toward social security. lo a An upward adjustment is targeted in fees and charges including for passports, work permits, and for exit/entry visas. a Expected realization of higher receipts from fees on sales of telecommunication services and privatization proceeds from the sale of shares in the Saudi Telecommunications Company (STC).” l Ongoing improvement in the collection of revenues, especially Zakat and customs. l2 l Crown Prince Abdullah has already directed the government to undertake concrete measures to strengthen expenditure management and minimize extrabudgetary ’ Given that many of these measures are still being discussed, it is difficult to accurately project their potential budgetary impact. Table 2 attempts quantification of the likely budgetary effect of revenue measures presently in the pipeline. lo In order to ensure adjustment of work contracts, the tax on expatriate income earners will become effective two years after enactment. l1 In addition, a VAT is under study but is unlikely to be introduced before 2005. While a proposed luxury sales tax on selected imports and competing domestic products is presently not under active consideration, the authorities are assessing room for the introduction of a number of fees and charges. l2 Significant modernization of the Department of Zakat and Income Tax (DZIT) and of the Customs Department has been undertaken over the past few years with Fund technical assistance. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 15- allocation. l3 Strengthened expenditure management would be undertaken through: (a) the use of performance contracts; (b) merger or consolidation of a number of ministries and government departments; (c) creation of a separate Ministry of Water to reduce duplication; and (d) savings on the wage bill through the privatization of various services and an increased role of the private sector. The mission felt that stronger budget management and expenditure controls would be crucial to avoiding extrabudgetary spending. l4 19. The mission was of the view that these measures would need to be supplemented in order to meet the authorities’ objective of fiscal balance by 2005 and to ensure an early and sustained structural strengthening of the budget so as to reduce the built-in bias toward deficits. In particular, some of the planned tax measures will not generate an early increase in revenues. Therefore, additional tax measures should be considered to increase the elasticity and buoyancy of non-oil revenue. In this context, the income tax should be extended to all income earners and implementation expedited. In addition, the implementation of a number of tax measures currently under consideration should be accelerated, particularly the VAT; the removal of any remaining implicit and explicit subsidies on publicly supplied goods and services speeded up; and steps taken, (including civil service reform to reduce the wage bill) to curtail expenditures under a medium-term budget framework with broadly quantified targets. B. Monetary Policy and the Exchange System 20. Monetary policy has been focused mainly on ensuring the stability of the exchange rate under a liberal exchange and trade system. The authorities intend to pursue a cautiously accommodative monetary policy in 2002 to support private sector growth in an environment free of inflationary pressures. Reflecting the anticipated rise in non-oil growth, broad money is expected to grow slightly faster than in 200 1. Given its comfortable liquidity position, the banking system should be able to accommodate the anticipated rise in the private sector credit growth to about 10 percent from less than 9 percent in 200 1. l5 21. The staff agreed with the authorities that the peg to the U.S. dollar was appropriate under the current circumstances. Responding to staffs query about the I3 Expenditure management guidelines have been put in place to prevent emergence of new late payments and an inter-ministerial committee has been established to audit outstanding claims. I4 The introduction of explicit performance contracts would be highly resource-intensive and could be considered only in the medium term. l5 The ratio of free reserves to statutory reserves stood at 77 percent at end-March 2002. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 16- long-term role of exchange rate policy, the authorities noted that they would be guided by the evolving adjustment requirements in the future; the planned introduction of a monetary union among GCC countries would also govern exchange rate policy. Saudi Arabia has accepted the obligations of Article VIII and maintains an exchange system free of restrictions on the making of payments and transfers for current international transactions. In addition, capital flows are liberal and inflows have recently been opened up through relaxation of regulations on FDI portfolio and equity flows. Saudi Arabia has also continued to provide highly concessional financial assistance to developing countries including heavily- indebted poor countries (HIPC). l6 C. Structural Reforms 22. The structural reform strategy has so far been focused mainly on developing the environment for the privatization of state enterprises, enhancing the private sector’s role (including FDI), and deepening and expanding the financial markets to facilitate mobilization and allocation of financial resources. Increasing attention has also been paid to address unemployment pressures through retraining, increasing the substitutability of Saudi workers for expatriate workers, labor market integration, and civil service reform. In the immediate period, the focus of structural reform will be on further developing the legal and institutional foundations for accelerating the ongoing shift toward market-based resource allocation by the private sector. However, the authorities emphasized that such reforms were time-consuming and that any hasty steps could be counter- productive. The status of various structural measures and laws is summarized in Box 4. Restructuring and Privatization 23. A new privatization strategy was announced in early June 2002. The strategy endorses the establishment of the legal and institutional framework to facilitate sequential implementation of privatization under which autonomization of management would be followed by deregulation and privatization. Revenues from the sale of state enterprises will be used to reduce government debt. The authorities noted that the pace of privatization so far has been slow on account of complex legal issues which need to be addressed carefully, administrative bottlenecks, time required in introducing regulatory practices, concerns about unemployment pressures, and possible cost of living implications. The authorities are considering a number of modalities to implement their privatization strategy (see Appendix V for details). I6 Saudi Arabia has agreed to provide relief to Mauritania on Cologne terms and has recently completed negotiations with Uganda on a concessional rescheduling of debt. Some US$40 billion in assistance has been provided by Saudi Arabia in the past 20 years, far exceeding the official development assistance (ODA) target (0.7 percent of GDP). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17- 24. While there is no precise timetable, the authorities expect that the pace of privatization would be quickened. It will follow the enactment of the various laws aimed at defining the role of the private sector, liberalization of the financial and capital markets, and clarification of property rights; however, the process will be governed by the capacity of the domestic stock market to absorb sales. In the near term, the authorities are focusing on the privatization of telecommunications and electricity companies, transportation (railroads), water and sewage, education, health services, postal services, and industrial parks. Approximately 20-30 percent of STC shares will be sold in 2002 to the private sector followed by another targeted 1 O-20 percent in 2003. The privatization of the water sector will proceed following the consolidation of water-related activities under the new Ministry of Water during 2002, as will the establishment of a regulatory authority, in part, with the aim of further reducing subsidies. The private sector will participate in desalination, in part, in conjunction with the Gas Initiative. The Saudi Postal Authority will be autonomized under an independent joint public-private sector board of directors as a prelude to privatization.17 Finally, a Petroleum Service Company will be set up in 2002 as a joint stock holding company with private sector participation to serve the major sectors such as oil, gas, petrochemicals, and utilities. 25. The mission noted that the reform strategy would benefit from taking advantage of the momentum generated by the announcement of the privatization strategy and that an acceleration of the privatization process under market-based prices would help avoid future budgetary pressures. Given the current highly liquid financial markets in Saudi Arabia, increased sales of public sector assets would not disrupt the stability of the stock market. 26. While there are signs of growth in private investment, FDI inflows are yet to increase significantly. The authorities expect that the planned privatization process- combined with steps being taken to lay the legal and institutional framework-will encourage foreign capital inflows. Steps are also being prepared to reduce administrative barriers to FDI inflows. The authorities noted that in order to ensure a level playing field for domestic and foreign investors, discriminatory practices have been reduced through a variety of steps, including the provision of access to foreign investors to concessional credit from the Saudi Industrial Development Fund (SIDF), reduction in the corporate income tax, and liberalization of rules governing the ownership of real estate. The authorities confirmed that the “negative list” for FDI will be progressively curtailed, but certain activities will remain closed to foreign investment. l8 They noted that early agreements with IOCs under l7 The privatization of postal services under the newly announced privatization strategy would result in the transfer of about 11,000 employees to the private sector. l8 The authorities have contended that the exclusion of certain activities-such as retail and wholesale trade-not only reflects the desire to maintain a “social balance” by ensuring national access to a large segment of the economy and thus ameliorating the unemployment (continued. ) Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 18- the Gas Initiative to develop gas reserves and investment in downstream activities would provide the much-needed impetus for foreign investment inflows (Box 1). Financial sector 27. The authorities reaffirmed their commitment to continue opening up the financial sector to foreign competition in order to ensure mobilization and allocation of resources for efficient private sector development. The needed deepening and widening of the financial sector will continue through: (a) the development of the capital market; (b) diversification of the banking sector’s asset portfolio in line with the evolving market requirements; and (c) creation of new institutions to address emerging needs of the private sector. Legal reforms are presently under active consideration to underpin these initiatives (Boxes 2 and 3). These include: a The new Capital Market Law (CML), which is expected to be approved during 2002, will provide a unified legal and regulatory framework for all capital market activities. lg In particular, the law will provide a framework for new financing instruments including corporate bonds for private sector investment. It will also convert the current stock exchange into a privately held independent, entity governed by a Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). 0 The Insurance Law also targeted for introduction by end-2002 will establish the legal and regulatory framework to facilitate the development of the insurance sector.20 It will in particular target long-term financial planning including for education and retirement. 28. In order to further enhance assessment of credit risk in the banking sector, a credit bureau was established in late 2001 which will become operational in 2002. This will allow collection and centralization of data on all bank customers into a database which could be pressures, but also the imperatives of ongoing negotiations for accession to WTO which will entail agreements on trade in service and related activities. lg The draft CML will also eliminate inconsistencies among different existing laws and regulations. 2o Presently there is one publicly-owned insurance company-the National Company for Cooperation and Insurance (NCCI). In addition, some insurance services are provided by private companies which are presently not supervised. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 19- accessed by banks. Moreover, the draft uniform standards of loan classification and provisioning are being discussed with the banks (Box 2).21 29. The mission welcomed the proposed reform of the capital market and liberalization of the banking sector and noted that early implementation according to a well-defined timetable will be particularly helpful to the expansion of private sector investment. It noted that early development of the secondary market in government paper and the establishment of the primary market in corporate bonds should be viewed as a natural complement of the ongoing institutional reform of the financial system. The former would call for a more diversified distribution of government bonds, rating of securities, and steps to facilitate access to such bonds by international investors. It is to be hoped that the establishment of a clear legal framework under the CML will encourage the development of corporate and commercial bonds. The authorities are receptive to an early financial sector assessment program (FSAP) exercise with the Fund and the World Bank in order to identity vulnerabilities and developmental needs of the financial sector. 30. SAMA has developed a comprehensive framework, including guidelines to banks, for prevention and control of money laundering activities which pre-dates the September 11,200l events. As elaborated in Box 2, the 40 recommendations of the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) have already been enforced and extended to the nonfinancial sector. All fund transfers are required to be made through the banking system, making informal transfers, such as through Hawala, illegal. In addition to curbing misuse of the domestic banking system by nonresidents, the anti-money laundering (AML) rules require the financial institutions to report all suspicious transactions to law enforcement agencies and SAMA. About 210 suspicious cases have so far been prosecuted. Labor policies 31. The authorities recognize that while structural reforms and privatization will spur growth and thus employment opportunities, the rapidly expanding national labor force should be equipped to fill the emerging employment opportunities.22 The medium-term reforms aim at developing new skills needed by the economy, improving productivity, and developing an open and integrated market with market-determined wages, thus bridging 21 The circular on standards for loan classification will give the banks flexibility to follow their internal classification procedures as mandated by their head offices. Banks generally have a five-category classification covering: (a) loan risk or standard; (b) special mention (meaning special attention and watch list); (c) fairly risky and substandard (i.e., well-defined weakness); (d) doubtful; and (e) loss (eminent loss or virtually uncollectible). 22 In 1999, the latest period for which data are available, expatriate workers accounted for 56 percent of total workforce. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 20 - differences of compensation between the government and the private sector. The strategy, as elaborated in Box 5, which has remained broadly unchanged since 2001, aims at: (a) providing the educational and vocational training to meet the skill requirements of the private sector; (b) fostering the Saudiization of the labor force; and (c) changing the institutional and legal framework to facilitate the substitutability of national for expatriate workers. Moreover, technology- and capital-intensive activities will be encouraged to reduce demand for unskilled expatriate workers. 32. The Saudiization policy will continue to be applied flexibly in order to ensure competitiveness while addressing unemployment pressures.23 The government intends to continue pursuing the open door policy with regard to foreign labor to ensure the competitiveness of the private sector. It will, however, offer incentives (including priority in public sector contracts) for companies meeting the Saudiization requirements. In order to ensure greater market determination of wages, the authorities are actively considering integrating the social security system and the pension fund which would reduce disparity in benefits and promote labor mobility between the public and the private sectors. The introduction of a minimum wage in the private sector is also being considered to bridge part of the salary gap between expatriate and national workers. In addition, the new labor law to improve relations between employees and employers is expected to be announced by end- 2002, which would also reduce uncertainties for FDI. 33. The mission felt that the challenge in the period ahead will be to pursue balanced policies that will enable adequate Saudiization-without adversely affecting competitiveness of the private sector -and enhancing non-oil private sector growth to generate the needed employment opportunities. Such polices should include more determined and accelerated steps toward reducing civil service employment and greater market-orientation of wage determination. Noting that increased hiring in the education and health sectors would be required to address the needs of the rapidly rising population, the mission stressed that accelerated privatization and subcontracting, combined with wage restraints in the public sector, would facilitate the needed reorientation of workers toward the private sector. 23 The Saudiization program requires all companies with staff of 20 or more to increase their Saudi staff by 5 percent annually. In 2002, such companies are required to raise the ratio of Saudi workers in total to 30 percent. Moreover, companies are required to consider nationals before seeking expatriate workers. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2l- Box 5. Labor Markets and Policies 1. The rapid population growth over the past two decades has substantially expanded the Saudi labor force. Forty six percent of the Saudi population is below the age of 14 years with about 71 percent below the age of 29 years. The population is officially estimated to grow at about 3.5 percent per year over the 2000-04 period and is forecast to double by 2020. The Saudi labor force is projected to grow at an annual rate in excess of 5 percent during the current decade and average 4.7 percent for the 1999-2020 period. 2. The labor market is segmented. Expatriate workers, who constitute 48 percent of total manpower and arc available at internationally competitive wages, work primarily in the small- and medium-size enterprises in the private sector. Saudi workers work primarily in the government sector at higher wages. With constraints on the public sector’s ability to absorb the rapidly growing indigenous labor force, and, given the mismatch of skills supply required by the private sector, unemployment has grown. The involuntary unemployment of Saudi workers is officially estimated at closer to 10 percent in 2001 and is likely to further increase in the period ahead. In addition, privatization of state enterprises is also likely to intensify unemployment pressures. 3. The official strategy aims at, on the one hand, an acceleration of employment opportunities in the private sector through reforms aimed at removing institutional and legal barriers to private investment, including foreign direct investment, and on the other hand, developing skills required by the private sector, integrating the labor market, ensuring that wages become market-determined and consistent with productivity. . In the short run, unemployment pressures are being addressed through: 0 retraining of Saudi workers under a joint government-private sector initiative through the newly created HRDF, and by a number of other educational and vocational training institutions; 0 using the existing labor database to match Saudi nationals with jobs in the private sector; l 3 flexible implementation of the Saudiization policy under which private firms are required to replace expatriate workers with Saudi workers under a national quota system; and + provision of incentives to the private sector to encourage hiring of Saudi workers . In the medium and long term, it is expected that the acceleration of non-oil private sector growth will generate additional employment opportunities. The labor strategy aims at: + reforming the educational system so as to encourage greater production of skills required by the private sector; 0 restructuring the civil service to improve efficiency; and 0 reducing wage differentials and eliminating market segmentation through bridging the gap in nonwage benefits by integrating social security and pension fund, introducing a minimum wage in the private sector closer to that prevailing in the public sector, and instituting income taxation on expatriate workers. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 22 - D. Trade Policy and Regional Integration 34. Limited progress has been made toward accession to the World Trade Organization (WTO). Saudi Arabia has offered an action plan to implement WTO agreements on: (a) trademarks and intellectual property rights; (b) import licensing; (c) technical barriers to trade (TBT); (d) customs valuation; and (e) sanitary and phytosanitary measures (SPS). While bilateral agreements have been reached with 11 trade partners, negotiations are underway with a number of others including the United States and the EU. Areas where Saudi Arabian offers are being negotiated include market access to the services sector (telecommunications, banking, insurance, and distribution trade). The authorities have contended that concessions in these areas should not conflict with the prevailing religious law, should not be subjected to qualification requirements (e.g., banking), or impact the employment of nationals (wholesale and retail distribution trade).24 The authorities are, however, optimistic that these issues would be ironed out in the near future. Progress also remains slow on the establishment of the planned free trade area between the GCC and the EU. It is hoped that the planned implementation of the GCC common external tariff (CET) will expedite the establishment of the free trade area. 35. Significant steps are planned to enhance economic integration among GCC countries. The CET will be implemented by January 2003 rather than the original 2005. Saudi Arabia and Bahrain have already conformed their tariff schedules to the proposed CET. It has also been agreed to create a monetary union among GCC member countries by 2010. All GCC countries will officially peg their currencies to the U.S. dollar by end-2002 followed by the introduction of a single GCC currency by 2010. Economic performance criteria will be established by no later than 2005 for the needed policy convergence to support the monetary union. E. Statistical Issues 36. There have been improvements since the last Article IV consultation in the preparation and sharing of economic data with the Fund and the market at large. National accounts have been revised based on the 1999 household and expenditure surveys. In addition, comprehensive labor, wage, and demographic surveys were completed in 2001, and the first detailed database on labor and population will be available in 2002. Progress continues to be made on the compilation of the balance of payments statistics in line with the fifth edition of the Balance of Payments Manual (BPMS); this process is expected to be completed in two to three years. The authorities are presently working on the consolidated public sector accounts which is time-consuming and calls for substantial training. An Inter- 24 An anti-dumping law is under active consideration and is expected to be approved soon. The law would establish a standing committee to deal with anti-dumping complaints from local importers as well as from other countries. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-23 - Ministerial Data Committee under the official directive on data publication was established in early 2002 to foster the needed interagency coordination and data publication.25 A variety of data including on prices, national accounts, external trade, monetary accounts, exchange rates, labor, and wages are presently published. 37. The authorities underlined their continued commitment to further improvements in the availability, transparency, and publication of data, all of which they believed would be helpful to them in improving their policymaking process. Areas for further improvement include: (a) provision of more current data on the oil sector; (b) compilation of data on private sector capital movements and FDI; (c) closer coordination among government agencies in the collection and dissemination of data; (d) concrete steps to fully assess the size of late payments and mechanisms for their settlement; and (e) wider dissemination of financial and fiscal data to facilitate more informed private sector investment decisions. Adoption of agreed-upon international standards, including the IMF’s GDDS would ensure better market response and improve the needed policy coordination among GCC countries as a prelude toward monetary integration. The mission noted that a well-defined timetable would be helpful in ensuring an orderly improvement in data compilation and dissemination. 38. On the provision of information on Saudi Arabia’s international investment position, the authorities stressed that they were providing all the information on official foreign assets (including SAMA and the AGIs). With respect to the foreign investment position of other state enterprises-such as ARAMCO and SABIC-the authorities noted that these enterprises operate as autonomous corporations and publish their annual reports consistent with international accounting standards. However, these reports do not provide detailed data on the foreign investment position. The authorities are receptive to seeking information on these corporations’ foreign investment position and share it with the Fund. There is no system in place at present to collect information on the private sector’s international investment position. The authorities emphasized that apart from the need to share information on such investments with the Fund, its availability would be particularly helpful to them in the formulation of appropriate policies. F. Technical Assistance 39. The Fund’s technical assistance has been helpful in strengthening the administration of Zakat, income tax, and customs. However, considerable work remains to be done to establish the groundwork needed for the mobilization of non-oil revenue, particularly the VAT, and strengthening of expenditure management. Continued Fund technical assistance in these areas will be important. Similarly, Fund technical assistance 25 The data committee consists of the Central Department of Statistics (CDS), MOFNE, SAMA, and the Ministry of Petroleum. It meets on a quarterly basis. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 24 - would be helpful in facilitating the implementation of the authorities’ ongoing program for strengthening national accounts and price statistics. The authorities expressed interest in seeking training in these areas through the IIWSTA courses. The authorities would welcome Fund technical assistance to help them determine the nature of additional information required on foreign investment position and establish mechanisms to collect the relevant data. III. STAFFAPPRAISAL 40. Over the past few years, the Saudi Arabian authorities have followed a comprehensive reform strategy in order to accelerate non-oil growth so as to generate employment opportunities for the rapidly growing Saudi manpower, and reduce vulnerability to oil price fluctuations. The strategy has centered on promoting the role of the private sector, FDI, privatization of state enterprises, labor market reforms, and widening and deepening the financial sector to facilitate resource mobilization for private sector investment. Given the complex and time-consuming nature of institutional changes required, unanticipated fluctuations in oil prices, administrative constraints, and cumbersome legal procedures, structural reforms have progressed gradually. 41. The economic and financial position weakened in 2001 on account of the fall in oil prices and budgetary overspending. In 2002, the macroeconomic position is estimated to remain under pressure. Over the medium term, staff forecasts show that fiscal and external positions would worsen and government debt is likely to rise. Despite the anticipated increase in capital inflows associated with the Gas Initiative, SAMA’s net foreign assets could decline substantially. The economy would, therefore, remain vulnerable to fall in oil prices and a pickup in interest rates from their present historically low levels. Unless addressed effectively and expeditiously, macroeconomic imbalances could weaken confidence, discourage investment, and reduce non-oil growth, thus making it more difficult to achieve the employment objective. 42. The authorities are fully aware of these implications and the staff welcomes their determination to tighten demand management in support of an expedited implementation of the reform strategy, focusing on the development of the legal and institutional foundations for more market-based growth. The buildup of public debt and the consequent increase in debt service payments, combined with the large and rising wage bill, have increased the structural rigidity of the budget, making it difficult to reduce current expenditures in the face of declining capacity to fund them reflecting the inelastic non-oil revenue system. Effective demand management will, therefore, require early and concrete steps aimed at strengthening the structure of the budget, leading to a durable reduction in the volatility of fiscal outcomes and elimination of the built-in deficit bias. 43. The staff endorses the authorities’ plans to target a steady reduction in the budget deficit toward a balance or a small surplus by 2005 under the current oil price outlook. This will call for: (a) broadening the non-oil revenue base to make it more income Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-25 - elastic and buoyant, thus reducing dependence on oil revenues; and (b) reducing expenditure and strengthening its controls in order to eliminate extrabudgetary expenditures. Such measures should also be accompanied by budget planning under a medium-term macroeconomic framework and governed by explicitly defined fiscal rules to protect against the downward rigidity in expenditures spurred by temporary increases in oil revenues. It should incorporate mechanisms to save and appropriately allocate any oil price windfalls in order to smooth out shortfalls. It is crucial that steps are clearly articulated according to a well-defined timetable to achieve the needed reform and ensure that fiscal policy is directed at a permanent and steady decline in government debt consistent with a sustainable non-oil fiscal balance. 44. The staff encourages early steps to expand the revenue base and reduce expenditures. In particular, the implementation of the proposed income tax should be expedited and extended to Saudi income earners. While fees and charges are adjusted upward, a temporary sales tax at a low rate-to be replaced by the planned VAT-could’be applied to domestic as well as imported goods. In addition, consideration should be given to speeding up the removal of any remaining explicit or implicit subsidies on goods and services provided by the public sector. Fund technical assistance to support the modernization of the revenue administration, and the preparation for a VAT will be desirable. 45. The staff welcomes official plans to merge various ministries and departments in order to reduce current expenditures. Such endeavors would benefit from improved identification of the sources of extrabudgetary expenditures (including late payments), assessing their potential in the medium term, and formulating plans to avoid them. In this context, a contingency reserve within the budget could be used to address unanticipated outlays. Crown Prince Abdallah’s directive to minimize extrabudgetary outlays could be reinforced through concrete steps to strengthen budget management, including performance-based accountability, incorporation of off-budget activities in the budget, and rationalization of social spending. These steps should, however, follow the implementation of fundamental public expenditure management (PEM) reforms including compliance-based controls. In addition, the authorities should apply explicit and easy to monitor targets for reduction in government employment under a well-defined civil service reform combined with the stimulation of private sector employment and generation of the needed skills. Finally, introduction of time-specific and targeted subsidies, together with a better planning of capital expenditures within a medium-term budget framework should be encouraged. 46. The recent articulation of the comprehensive privatization strategy is a welcome development that will help catalyze private investment including FDI. The authorities’ focus on the establishment of legal and institutional foundations for orderly growth of the private sector and the financial sector is also appropriate. However, the privatization process would benefit from a clearer statement to the market of the timetable and steps that will be taken to execute the strategy. It is also hoped that a narrowing of the “negative list” along with the streamlining of administrative procedures and Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 26 - the finalization of agreements under the Gas Initiative would spur additional FDI. In the same vein, while the planned reduction in the corporate income tax rate and accelerated depreciation of assets would be helpful in encouraging FDI inflows, an early movement toward the application of a simple, nondiscriminatory, broad-based tax to both domestic and foreign investors, combined with liberalization of rules governing access to the domestic financial and capital markets, would be crucial in promoting further FDI. 47. The banking system has continued to diversify its asset portfolio in line with the evolving market conditions and has been effectively supervised. An early introduction of the planned strengthening of the credit risk assessment by banks and broadly uniform standards of loan classification would further enhance the efficiency of the banking system. The staff welcomes steps being taken to resolve legal constraints to the development of longer-term financing instruments, including for mortgage finance which, given the rapidly growing population, could provide an important vehicle for spurring non- oil growth. An early approval and implementation of the Capital Market and Insurance laws would be crucial in clarifying the legal and regulatory structure for the growth of the financial sector and the development of secondary markets. The staff supports an early FSAP exercise which would, in addition to identifying vulnerabilities, highlight developmental needs in the financial sector. The staff welcomes the recent additional steps to control money-laundering and regulate informal flows of funds. 48. The authorities have appropriately decided to address the unemployment problem mainly in the longer-term context through developing skills that are required by the private sector rather than by accelerated and mandatory Saudiization. However, the success of this strategy will hinge crucially on policies to narrow the gap between the cost of employing domestic and expatriate workers, as well as between the government and the private sector employment of Saudi workers. In this regard, care should be taken to ensure that income tax on expatriate workers does not result in a loss of competitiveness. The proposed transfer of benefits between the pension fund and the social security system and the extension of the former to small enterprises in the private sector would help reduce cost differentials of employing Saudis and help their mobility to the private sector. However, it should be ensured that the extension of social security benefits for nationals working in the private sector will not increase the burden on the budget. More determined steps toward the reform of the civil service and realignment of public sector benefits to those in the private sector would further encourage mobility away from the public sector, and thus make room for increased hiring in the education and health sectors. 49. The staff considers the authorities’ policy of maintaining the pegged exchange arrangement under the open exchange and trade system as appropriate under the current circumstances. Significant progress is being made toward economic and financial integration among members of the GCC with the targeted customs union in 2003. Initiatives toward a monetary union by 2010 should focus on developing mechanisms for effective policy coordination. Clearly defining convergence criteria for critical macroeconomic policies such as the overall budget deficit and design of common institutions such as the Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 27 - central bank will be crucial. It is hoped that the remaining bilateral agreements would be reached soon with Saudi Arabia’s trading partners to enable accession to the WTO without further delay. 50. Saudi Arabia has made further progress in the development and dissemination of economic data. The recent revisions of the national accounts, population, and labor, statistics have improved the quality of the database. Provision of economic and financial information under the directive on data publication has improved. The staff welcomes the authorities’ willingness to provide additional information on Saudi Arabia’s international investment position, and supports the authorities’ request for Fund technical assistance to expedite the process and hope that such information will be available shortly. Areas for further improvement include streamlining the process of information dissemination and closer coordination among various government agencies under the directive; provision of more current data on the oil sector and on the consolidated public sector accounts, including more comprehensive information on the AGIs, and steps to collect data on private capital movements. Participation in the IMF’s GDDS would further signal the authorities’ commitment to adhering to international standards in the compilation and dissemination of statistics. 51. It is recommended that the next Article IV consultation take place on the standard 12-month cycle. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-28 - Table 1. Saudi Arabia: Selected Economic Indicators, 1999-2007 Prel. Proj. Baseline Scenario 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 National income and prices Crude oil production (in million of barrels per day) l! 7.6 Average oil export price (in U.S. dollars per barrel) 21 17.2 Nominal GDP (in billions of Saudi riyals) 603.6 Real GDP -0.8 Oil -7.5 Non-oil 3.1 Real gross domestic income 9.7 Implicit GDP deflator 3/ 11.3 Consumer price index (all cities index) 3/ -1.3 External sector Exports f.o.b. Oil Non-oil Imports f.o.b. Current account balance (in percent of GDP) Export volume Import volume Terms of trade F’DI (in billion U.S. dollars) 30.7 38.0 -7.0 -6.6 0.3 -9.2 -4.1 41.6 0.0 Money and credit Net foreign assets Domestic credit (net) Credit to government Credit to private sector Credit to public enterprises Money and quasi-money (M3) Deposit interest rate (in percent) 3/ 4/ -10.9 10.9 1.9 8.1 -0.8 7.8 10.9 -3.5 3.6 0.5 3.3 4.7 -3.3 -0.6 -0.5 6.8 4.5 5.0 6.1 6.7 3.9 Central government finances Revenue Of which: oil Expenditure Current Of which Wage bill Interest payments Capital expenditure Overall fiscal balance Excluding oil revenue Central government’s gross domestic debt 24.4 36.5 32.7 28.1 27.4 26.1 25.5 i6.0 25.3 17.3 30.3 26.3 21.8 20.6 19.0 18.0 17.3 16.3 30.5 33.3 36.5 31.8 32.1 30.3 29.9 30.7 29.0 27.7 29.5 32.0 28.6 28.8 26.9 26.3 27.1 25.3 17.1 4.5 2.8 -6.0 -23.3 103.5 92.1 95.1 95.0 96.3 96.2 96.0 94.9 (Percent change; unless otherwise indicated) 8.1 7.9 7.2 7.4 7.4 7.4 7.5 7.5 26.8 23.0 21.5 20.9 19.9 19.9 19.9 19.9 706.7 698.4 690.2 716.6 739.2 775.4 817.5 860.1 4.9 1.2 0.7 3.3 3.1 3.5 4.1 3.9 6.9 -1.2 -5.9 1.7 0.0 0.0 1.7 0.0 3.9 2.9 3.9 4.0 4.5 5.0 5.0 5.5 21.6 -3.1 -1.1 2.3 2.0 3.7 4.3 4.2 11.7 -2.3 -1.8 0.5 0.0 1.3 1.3 1.2 -0.6 -0.8 0.0 1.1 1.0 0.9 0.8 0.7 52.8 -5.9 -15.2 0.2 -2.2 2.0 -4.5 3.2 57.9 -8.8 -18.3 -1.5 -5.2 -0.6 1.5 -0.7 13.9 25.8 9.1 9.7 13.4 13.4 16.0 16.2 7.9 3.3 4.7 11.2 12.4 12.2 14.5 11.2 7.6 7.8 2.1 0.2 -2.7 -4.3 -5.5 -6.6 8.5 -0.3 -7.2 2.5 1.3 1.5 3.9 2.5 12.8 6.1 4.9 9.4 10.9 10.7 13.3 10.1 56.2 -10.4 -5.5 -3.9 -4.9 -0.9 -0.7 -0.5 1.0 1.0 1.5 2.5 3.3 4.1 6.5 6.5 16.3 4.5 3.8 3.2 -27.1 87.2 (Changes as a percent of beginning money stock) 15.9 16.2 17.5 16.3 16.0 16.9 15.3 4.5 4.1 4.2 4.2 4.1 4.2 4.2 4.5 3.2 3.3 3.5 3.6 3.7 3.7 -3.9 -3.7 -4.7 -4.2 -4.4 -4.8 -3.7 -30.2 -25.4 -25.4 -23.2 -22.4 -22.1 -20.0 -1.9 7.3 . 1.8 . 5.6 . -0.1 5.4 . . . . . . . . (In percent of GDP) ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 29 - Table 1. Saudi Arabia: Selected Economic Indicators, 1999-2007 Prel. Proj. Baseline Scenario 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 Resource balance Gross investment Public Private National saving Public Private Memorandum items: SAMA’s total net foreign assets In months of imports of goods and services 51 Ofwhich Gross official reserves 61 Ollicial external debt Total external debt 71 Of which Short-term debt on a remaining maturity basis Real effective exchange rate (depreciation -) 3/ Average exchange rate Saudi riya1LJ.S. dollars (In percent of GDP) 18.9 18.6 18.5 20.7 22.3 23.3 24.7 24.5 25.0 2.1 2.3 2.5 3.2 3.3 3.5 3.6 3.7 3.7 16.7 16.3 16.0 17.5 19.0 19.8 21.1 20.8 21.3 19.1 26.2 26.3 22.8 22.5 20.6 20.4 19.0 18.4 -3.3 7.1 0.7 -0.5 -1.4 -0.8 -0.8 -1.1 -0.1 22.4 19.2 25.6 23.3 23.9 21.3 21.2 20.0 18.5 (In billions of U.S. dollars; unkw otherwise indicated) 37.9 47.6 48.4 47.2 47.8 47.5 44.9 43.1 38.4 8.1 10.9 11.0 9.9 9.3 8.4 7.2 6.4 5.7 17.2 16.6 17.4 16.2 16.8 16.4 13.9 12.1 7.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 30.4 29.8 29.4 29.1 .., 15.4 15.2 15.2 14.6 ._. -4.5 2.3 2.3 3.745 3.745 3.745 3.745 3.745 3.745 3.745 3.745 3.745 Sources: Saudi Arabian authorities; and Fund statf projections. l/ Includes production from the Neutral Zone. 21 Includes refined products. 31 Period average. 41 Three-month Saudi Arabian riyal deposits. 5/ Next 12 months. 61 As reported to the IFS. 7/ Joint BIS-IMF-OECD-World Bank external debt database. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public!z -3 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-31- Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 32 - Table 3. Saudi Arabia: Summary of Balance of Payments, 1999-2007 (In billions of U. S. dollars) Prel. Proj Baseline 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 Merchandise trade (f.o.b.) 24.9 49.6 44.2 31.8 28.5 23.1 19.7 16.4 13.0 Exports 50.6 77.4 72.8 61.8 61.9 60.5 61.7 64.5 66.6 Oil exports l/ 44.8 70.7 64.5 52.7 51.9 49.2 48.9 49.7 49.3 Other exports 21 5.8 6.6 8.3 9.1 10.0 11.3 12.8 14.9 17.3 Imports -25.7 -27.7 -28.6 -30.0 -33.3 -37.5 -42.1 -48.2 -53.6 Services and transfers -24.5 -35.3 -29.7 -27.9 -28.2 -28.4 -28.6 -28.5 -28.1 Receipts 11.3 8.3 9.5 10.7 11.4 12.3 13.3 14.8 16.4 Investment income 5.8 3.3 4.1 4.9 5.2 5.5 5.9 6.2 6.6 Other 31 5.5 5.0 5.4 5.8 6.2 6.8 7.4 8.6 9.9 Payments -35.8 -43.6 -39.2 -38.6 -39.6 -40.7 -41.9 -43.2 -44.6 Freight and insurance -2.3 -2.5 -2.6 -2.7 -3.0 -3.4 -3.8 -4.3 -4.8 Other private services 41 -10.0 -11.3 -9.2 -9.4 -9.8 -10.2 -10.7 -11.2 -11.7 Other government services -9.4 -14.3 -12.1 -10.9 -10.9 -10.9 -10.9 -10.9 -10.9 Of which Interest payments Official transfers Private transfers (net) Current account balance (In percent of GDP) 0.0 -0.1 -14.0 0.4 0.3 Capital movements (net) -7.9 -4.6 -13.7 Commercial banks 0.7 1.0 -0.8 Other capital movements -10.0 -3.2 -12.8 Oil sector and other -0.8 -1.9 0.0 Private capital 5/ -9.2 -1.3 -12.8 Official borrowing 61 0.0 0.0 0.0 Receipts 0.0 0.0 0.0 Amortization 0.0 0.0 0.0 AGIs and other 7/ 1.4 -2.3 -0.1 Overall balance -7.5 9.7 0.8 (In percent of GDP) -4.7 5.2 0.4 Financing 81 Change in reserves and other net foreign assets of SAMA (- increase) 7.5 7.5 SAMA 7.5 -9.7 -0.8 0.0 0.0 -0.1 -0.1 -15.4 ,15.1 14.3 14.5 7.6 7.8 -9.7 -0.8 -9.7 -0.8 0.0 0.0 -0.1 -0.1 -15.4 -15.8 3.9 0.3 2.1 0.2 -5.0 0.2 0.5 1.2 -4.0 0.5 -1.0 -0.5 -3.0 1.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 -1.5 -1.5 -1.2 0.6 -0.6 0.3 1.2 -0.6 1.2 -0.6 1.2 -0.6 0.0 -0.1 -16.1 -5.3 -2.7 5.0 1.5 3.5 0.3 3.3 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 -0.3 -0.2 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.0 0.0 0.0 -0.1 -0.1 -0.1 -16.4 -16.7 -17.1 -8.9 -12.1 -15.1 -4.3 -5.5 6.4 10.3 1.6 1.8 4.8 8.5 0.8 2.0 4.1 6.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 -2.5 -1.9 -1.2 -0.8 2.5 1.9 2.5 1.9 2.5 1.9 -6.6 10.5 2.0 8.5 2.0 6.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 -4.6 -2.0 4.6 4.6 4.6 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-33 - Table 3. Saudi Arabia: Summary of Balance of Payments, 1999-2007 (In billions of U.S. dollars) Prel. Proj. Baseline 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 Memorandum items: SAMA’s net foreign assets (stocks) (In months of prospective imports) 91 AGI net foreign assets External short-term debt remaining maturity 37.9 47.6 48.4 47.2 47.8 47.5 44.9 43.1 38.4 8.1 10.9 11.0 9.9 9.3 8.4 7.2 6.4 5.7 30.4 32.7 32.8 34.3 35.8 35.8 35.8 35.8 35.8 15.4 15.2 15.2 14.6 . . . . . . Sources: Saudi Arabian Monetary Agency; and Fund staff estimates and projections, l/ Excluding bunker oil. 2/ Including re-exports. 31 Including bunker oil exports. 4/ Oil sector payments and payments for other private services. 5/ Including valuation adjustments, errors, and omissions. 61 The foreign borrowing in 1990-91 equivalent to US$4.5 billion was repaid in 1994 (US$2.7 billion) and in 1995 (US$1.8 billion). 71 Autonomous Government Institutions. 8/ From monetary survey. 91 Imports of goods and services over the next 12 months excluding imports for transit trade. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 34 - Table 4. Saudi Arabia: Monetary Survey, 1997-2002 (In billions of Saudi Arabian riyals) 1997 1998 1999 2000 Proj. March 2001 2002 2001 2002 Foreign assets (net) SAMA Commercial banks 266.7 212.9 182.2 215.0 221.1 214.9 227.0 207.5 213.2 170.0 141.8 178.3 181.3 176.9 183.3 164.1 53.5 42.8 40.3 36.8 39.8 38.0 43.7 43.4 Domestic credit (net) 189.2 224.9 247.8 245.5 270.1 294.1 248.3 273.7 Net claims on government 34.7 40.6 71.3 60.8 72.2 78.2 63.8 71.8 Claims on government (net) 83.2 89.4 102.3 112.3 123.8 129.8 112.4 120.6 Government deposits at SAMA 11 -48.5 -48.7 -31.0 -51.5 -51.6 -51.6 -48.6 -48.7 Net claims on state enterprises 20.9 23.6 14.3 12.4 10.8 10.4 12.0 10.9 Net claims on private sector 133.7 160.7 162.2 172.2 187.1 205.5 172.5 190.9 Money and quasi-money (M3) 272.0 282.1 301.1 314.6 330.3 348.1 321.3 337.8 Money supply (M2) 21 218.4 223.7 242.0 256.3 271.1 287.3 265.2 278.6 Money (Ml) 141.2 140.3 156.7 165.5 179.4 193.2 172.6 187.4 Currency outside banks 45.8 45.0 55.1 51.0 49.2 51.5 50.1 49.2 Demand deposits 95.4 95.3 101.6 114.5 130.2 141.7 122.5 138.3 Quasi-money 130.8 141.8 144.5 149.1 150.9 154.9 148.7 150.4 Time and savings deposits 77.2 83.4 85.3 90.8 91.7 94.1 92.6 91.2 Other quasi-money deposits 53.6 58.4 59.1 58.3 59.2 60.8 56.1 59.2 Other items (net) 183.9 155.7 128.8 145.9 160.8 160.8 . . . 153.9 143.4 Memorandum items Net foreign assets of AGIs 104.2 118.9 113.8 122.8 127.9 123.6 130.4 (Changes in percent of beginning broad money stock) Foreign assets (net) 3.9 -19.8 Net domestic assets 21.4 2.7 Domestic credit (net) 11.3 13.1 Net claims on government 5.8 2.2 Government deposits (increase -) -1.2 -0.1 Net claims on state enterprises 1.6 1.0 Net claims on private sector 3.9 9.9 Money and quasi-money 5.2 3.7 Other items (net) 10.0 -10.4 -10.9 10.9 1.9 -1.9 -1.4 4.9 12.6 7.3 8.1 -0.8 7.8 7.3 10.9 -3.5 3.6 1.8 6.3 -6.8 0.0 0.0 -3.3 -0.6 -0.5 -0.1 0.5 3.3 4.7 5.6 6.8 4.5 5.0 5.4 -9.5 5.7 4.8 0.0 (Annual changes in percent) -14.4 18.0 2.8 -2.8 10.2 -0.9 10.0 8.9 75.4 -14.7 18.8 8.3 36.4 -66.1 -0.2 0.0 -39.2 -13.3 -13.0 -4.2 1.0 6.2 8.6 9.8 6.8 4.5 5.0 5.4 -17.3 13.2 10.3 0.0 ( Ratios in percent) 49.9 44.5 47.3 50.4 41.1 34.7 38.7 42.6 13.6 -6.0 5.7 0.0 6.8 7.9 2.6 2.5 -1.3 0.0 -1.7 -0.3 5.9 5.7 6.3 5.1 14.1 -3.3 Foreign assets (net) 4.0 -20.2 Domestic credit (net) 18.3 18.8 Net claims on government 75.7 17.1 Government deposits (increase -) -6.6 -0.5 Net claims on state enterprises 24.9 13.1 Net claims on private sector 8.2 20.2 Money and quasi-money 5.2 3.7 Other items (net) 16.4 -15.3 22.1 -8.6 14.4 12.6 11.9 7.3 -30.2 -8.7 11.5 10.7 38.3 -6.9 6.3 5.1 38.3 -6.9 Memorandum items: Ratio of M3 -to-GDP Ratio of net domestic credit to GDP 44.0 51.6 30.6 41.1 . . . . . . . . . . . . Sources: Saudi Arabian Monetary Agency (SAMA); and Fund SW estimates. l/ Includes deposits other than the central government. 2/ Ml plus time and savings deposits. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-35 - Table 5. Saudi Arabia: Budgetary Developments (Adjustment Scenario), 2000-07 (In billions of Saudi Arabian riyals) 2000 Proj. Adjustment Scenario 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 Total revenue Oil Non-oil Investment income Income taxes Fees and charges 11 Customs Other (incl. VAT) 21 Sales tax Total expenditure Current expenditure Wage bill 31 Supplies and services 41 Of which Subsidies Foreign aid Interest payments Domestic Foreign Operations and maintenance Capital expenditure Current balance 5/ (In percent of GDP) Overall balance (In percent of GDP) Financing (net) Domestic Net bank financing Net nonbank financing Privatization proceeds External borrowing (net) Discrepancy 61 258.1 228.1 193.7 214.4 183.9 150.1 43.7 44.2 43.6 5.5 5.6 6.0 2.2 1.9 1.9 20.8 22.3 24.4 9.7 8.5 4.4 5.5 5.9 6.9 235.5 255.1 219.2 224.8 214.4 215.5 227.3 220.4 208.3 223.5 197.2 201.0 188.7 187.8 197.3 189.0 114.9 110.8 111.9 122.2 113.9 113.9 123.4 113.9 24.4 46.0 27.5 20.8 16.1 16.4 16.8 17.1 9.4 7.9 5.8 3.8 2.8 1.8 1.8 1.8 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 32.0 31.4 28.5 30.0 31.0 30.0 29.0 29.0 32.0 31.4 28.5 30.0 31.0 30.0 29.0 29.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 27.1 26.9 23.0 23.7 24.4 25.1 25.9 26.7 27.2 31.6 22.0 23.8 25.7 27.7 29.9 31.4 49.8 4.6 7.1 0.7 22.6 -27.0 3.2 -3.9 -22.6 27.0 -39.0 27.0 -10.5 11.5 -18.5 15.5 0.0 0.0 16.3 0.0 206.3 210.8 216.2 231.5 240.4 148.0 140.3 139.4 141.5 140.5 58.3 70.4 76.8 90.0 99.8 7.2 7.4 7.4 7.6 7.6 2.3 4.0 5.9 6.5 7.1 32.2 35.0 34.2 37.0 40.3 4.9 5.5 6.1 7.0 7.8 7.2 8.2 15.5 24.7 35.9 4.6 10.4 7.7 7.2 1.1 -3.4 5.3 22.0 28.4 34.2 51.4 -0.5 0.7 2.9 3.6 4.1 5.7 -25.4 -18.5 -3.6 0.7 4.3 20.0 -3.7 -2.6 -0.5 0.1 0.5 2.2 25.4 18.5 3.6 -0.7 -4.3 -20.0 25.4 18.5 3.6 -0.7 -4.3 -20.0 6.0 4.4 0.9 -0.2 -1.0 -4.7 19.4 4.1 2.8 -0.5 -3.3 -15.3 12.0 10.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 36 - Table 5. Saudi Arabia: Budgetary Developments (Adjustment Scenario), 2000-07 (In billions of Saudi Arabian riyals) 2000 Proj Adjustment Scenario 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 Memorandum items Extrabudgetary outlays including late payments Central government’s gross domestic debt (As percent of GDP) Overall balance (excluding oil revenue) (In percent of GDP) Overall balance (excluding late payments and extrabudgetary) (In percent of GDP) Overall balance (excluding oil revenue and late payments etc.) (In percent of GDP) 31.0 30.0 12.0 5.0 616.2 643.2 656.6 665.1 668.8 668.0 663.8 87.2 92.1 95.1 92.2 89.3 84.5 78.8 -191.8 -210.9 -175.6 -166.5 -143.9 -138.7 -137.2 -27.1 -30.2 -25.4 -23.1 -19.2 -17.5 -16.3 53.6 3.0 -13.4 -13.5 -3.6 0.7 4.3 20.0 7.6 0.4 -1.9 -1.9 -0.5 0.1 0.5 2.2 -160.8 -180.9 -163.6 -161.5 -143.9 -138.7 -137.2 -120.5 -22.8 -25.9 -23.7 -22.4 -19.2 -17.5 -16.3 -13.5 643.8 71.9 -120.5 -13.5 Sources: Ministry of Finance and National Economy; and Fund staff projections. l! Includes charges for communications, post office, water, air rights, landing fees, telephone license fees, residence fees, and passport fees. 2/ Includes Zakat, government sales of property, fines, rental of government property, income tax, and VAT. 31 Includes extra month salary according to Hijri calendar in 2000 (SRls 8.8 billion); and in 2003 and 2006. 4/ Includes some expenditure on remunerations and wages and salaries of temporary employees; in 2000 includes small part of extrabudgetary outlays including late payments; in 2001 and 2002 includes all such payments. 51 Total revenue less current expenditure. 61 Difference between the budget deficit and the various sources of budget financing, considering net banking sector financing as reported by SAMA. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 37 - Table 6. Saudi Arabia: Vulnerability Indicators, 1997-200 1 (In percent; unless otherwise indicated) 1997 1998 1999 2000 Prel. 2001 External solvency indicators REER (CPI based - period average) External debt (in billions of U.S. dollars) 11 Short-term debt (on a remaining maturity) 21 External debt/GDP External debt/total exports of goods and services Short-term debt (remaining maturity basis)/total exports of goods and services External debt service/total exports of goods and services Public sector solvency indicators Central government’s gross domestic debt/GDP Total debt service/total revenue Interest payments/total revenue Distribution of the public domestic debt by holders: Local commercial banks Autonomous government institutions (AGIs) Other Oil revenue/total revenue External Liquidity Indicators Total official net foreign assets (in billions of U.S. dollars) SAMA AGIs SAMA’s gross foreign assets (in billions of U. S. dollars) In months of imports of goods and services 3/ Vis-a-vis short-term external debt (remaining maturity) Vis-a-vis MO Vis-a-vis Ml Total official net foreign assets/M3 Commercial banks net foreign assets (in billions of U. S. dollars) Foreign assets Foreign liabilities Oil exports/total exports Financial sector indicators Foreign currency deposits/total deposits Risk adjusted capital/asset ratio Nonperforming loans/total loans Net domestic credit (percent change) Private sector credit (percent change) Net domestic credit/GDP Private sector credit/non-oil GDP Private sector credit/total assets of banks Market assessment/Financial market indicators Stock market index (percent change; period average) Banking sector stock market index (period average) Interest rate spread (basis points, quarter IV average) 4/ Moody’s investor services rating 51 5.0 3.5 -4.5 2.3 2.3 21.3 28.9 30.4 29.8 29.4 8.6 13.8 15.4 15.2 15.2 12.9 19.8 18.9 15.8 15.8 30.1 58.6 49.1 34.7 35.7 18.5 27.9 24.9 17.7 18.4 9.0 11.3 8.5 5.7 6.2 77.2 102.2 103.5 87.2 92.1 29.7 61.8 48.2 31.2 29.5 11.9 18.0 18.2 12.4 13.8 17.4 16.0 16.4 18.2 19.2 78.6 79.4 77.2 76.9 76.9 4.0 4.6 6.4 4.9 3.8 77.9 56.5 70.8 73.2 80.6 84.7 77.2 68.3 80.4 82.6 56.9 45.4 37.9 47.6 48.4 27.8 31.7 30.4 32.8 34.1 58.5 46.9 39.4 49.0 48.5 14.8 11.9 8.5 11.2 11.3 447.4 340.5 255.2 323.0 320.1 478.0 390.1 267.7 359.8 369.5 155.1 125.2 94.1 110.9 101.4 116.7 102.4 84.9 95.7 93.6 14.3 11.4 10.8 9.8 10.6 26.6 22.9 24.4 27.0 26.5 12.3 11.5 13.7 17.2 15.9 87.8 83.9 88.5 91.4 88.6 19.8 21.3 20.1 i8.6 17.9 22.5 21.2 21.2 21.0 20.3 9.3 8.4 11.4 10.4 9.6 18.3 18.8 10.2 -0.9 10.0 8.2 20.2 1.0 6.2 8.6 30.6 41.1 41.1 34.7 38.7 35.3 42.1 41.3 42.5 44.5 35.0 39.7 39.1 38.0 39.6 27.9 41.0 28.2 -27.8 43.6 11.3 7.6 -22.4 48.2 12.3 7.9 111.0 29.2 28.0 54.7 Baa3 Baa3 Baa3 Baa3 Sources: Saudi Arabian authorities; and Fund staff estimates. 11 BIS-IMF-OECD-World Bank database. 21 Includes amortization of the medium- and long-term due in the period. 31 Imports of goods and services projected for the next 12 months. 41 Spread between 3-month Saudi riyals and eurodollar deposits. 51 Long-term bnnds and notes. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-38- Figure 1. Saudi Arabia: Selected Real Sector Indicators, 1997-2001 (Annual change in percent) 8 , I -v 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 20 10 0 -10 -20 Real GDP and GDI 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 4 CPI and Import Prices 2 - 0 ~~___I._---- .-..__ ---d.-- ------------ . . .._-- -- -2 Import Prices -I---- - - -- *. -- - -. - _ _- I o+ -.c -._ -- d--- - -. _. -4 ,, -- - N -- ..- * __ .C. .” / CPI ..@ d / - J P P -8 B - -1” 1997 1998 1999 2000 200 1 Sources: Data provided by the Saudi Arabian authorities; and Fund staff estimates. 11 Real GDP adjusted for terms of trade effects. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 39 - Figure 2 Saudi Arabia: Central Government Fiscal Indicators, 1980-2002 (In millions of Saudi Riyals, unless otherwise indicated) 350 300 250 El Total revenue H Total expenditure 1980 1981 1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 l/ 350 300 250 200 150 100 50 0 13 10 I 4 1 -2 -5 -8 -11 -14 Revenue q Non-oil revenue 88[ Investment income El7 Oil revenue 1993 1996 1999 2002 l/ Fiscal Balance (In percent of GDP) Current Balance 2/ / / I / / B \ / .” .C ’ Overall Balance 350 300 250 200 150 100 50 0 120 100 80 60 40 20 0 + 1 Expenditure q Interest payments S Capital expenditure H Non-interest current expenditure 993 1996 1999 Gross Domestic Debt (In percent of GDP) 1993 1996 1999 2002 11 1993 1996 1999 2002 li Sources: Data provided by the Saudi Arabian authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections. l/ Projections. 2/ Total revenue minus total current exoenditure. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 40 - Figure 3. Saudi Arabia: External Sector Developments, 199 l-2002 (In billions of U.S. dollars) 5O _ External Sector Balances Trade Balance 40 - 30 - 20 - ‘---------., Overall Balance 10 - 0 - -10 - ..------ --- -20 - x Current Account Balance -30 es- - --l” 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1991 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002Proj. 80 60 40 20 Trade Flows Oil Exports - -----.-__ :.:, :.,I ,, ,,,, .,., .:.: .A ‘.V A’ .A .‘.’ :‘a v. . . . . . . . . ,.,, ,.,I . . . . ,.,. ,,,, . ,.,, ,:,, ,:,. ,, ,:,: ..,. ..., :.:. ( ,:,, ” Imports of Goods -20 ---- w--m- --- ----3-m-_ -40 1 I 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002Proj. 10 - Service Flows Investment income 5 - ----.-------- -....--e _____I --‘,Z _ -. _.. _~ I _ TV - - - - I - - ----- - - _ I ,.” I - -- -------~-....--.----- _ I I _ I _.. - - “.:, 0 _ Other Receipts Private Services -5 - Government Services -10 - # yI . - - -15 - * - l 4 ----- <-1-L, - I -20 - I I Private Transfers I -25- l -30 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002Proj. Sources: Data provided by the Saudi Arabian authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4l- Figure 4. Saudi Arabia: Monetary and Financial Developments, 1994-2002 1994 1995 1996 1991 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002Proj. 600 , I 1996 1998 2002Proj. 8.0 3-months Deposit Interest Rates and Eurodollar Rates, 1994-2001 Ql Eurodollar Deposits P 3.0 - \ \ 2.0 - -” 1.0s ‘I ““““‘~‘~““““1 “I’ * “‘I 1994Ql 199541 1996Ql 199741 1998Ql 199941 200041 200141 200241 Sources: Data provided by the Saudi Arabian authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 42 - Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 44 - APPENDIX I Saudi Arabia: Fund Relations (As of May 30,2002) I. II. III. IV. V. VII Membership Status: joined 8/26/57; Article VIII. General Resources Account: SDR Million Quota 6,985.50 Fund holdings of currency 4,649.59 Reserve position in Fund 2,335.92 Financial transactions plan 139.00 % Quota 100.00 66.56 33.44 N/A SDR Department: Net cumulative allocation Holdings SDR Million % Allocation 195.53 100.00 , 216.23 110.59 Outstanding Purchases and Loans: None Financial Arrangements: None Lending to the Fund: Lending in association with PRGF SDR Million 49.50 Saudi Arabia has consented to the Fund’s Fourth Amendment. It has an associated lending agreement for an amount up to SDR 1.5 billion with the General Arrangements to Borrow (GAB), which was renewed for another five-year period from December 26, 1998. It is also a participant in the New Arrangement to Borrow (NAB) for an amount up to SDR 1.78 billion. In March 2001, Saudi Arabia agreed to support the PRGF-HIPC Trust with deposits totaling SDR 94.4 million. As of end-June 2001, SDR 69.5 million was received as scheduled. VIII. Exchange Rate Arrangement: Saudi Arabia maintains an exchange rate system free of restrictions on the making of payments and transfers for current international transactions except for restrictions against Iraq and the former Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) in accordance with Decision 144 (52/5 1). The Saudi Arabian riyal is formally pegged to the SDR at the rate of SRls 4.28255=SDR 1, with margins of 7.25 percent; however, since mid-198 1, observance of margins has been suspended. In practice, the Saudi Arabian riyal has been pegged to the U.S. dollar since 1986; the middle rate of the riyal against the U.S. dollar is SRls 3.7450= US$l. IX. Article IV Consultation: (a) Saudi Arabia is on the standard 12-month consultation cycle. The last Article IV consultation was held during May 16-30, 2001. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-45 - APPENDIX I (b) The staff report (W/01/282) and the associated Statistical Appendix (W/01/283) were considered by the Executive Board on October lo,2001 (suR/ol/lo9). X. Technical Assistance: INS: STA: FAD: LEG: Regional seminar for GCC countries, November 1997. Regional seminar for GCC countries, May 1998. Regional seminar for GCC countries (Design of Fiscal Policies), May 1999. Balance of payments statistics, March-May 1997. Government finance statistics, September 1997. Money and banking (international reserves), May 1998. National accounts statistics, August-September 1998. Balance of payments statistics, January-February 2001. Reform of customs administration, June and November 1997. Strengthening of tax administration, February-March 1998. Tax and customs administration seminar, March 1998. Customs administration, September-November 1998. Tax and customs administration, June 1998. Customs administration information advisor, November 1998. Tax administration advisor, November 1998. Tax and customs administration, October-November 1998. Study group to review domestic tax departments, December 1998. Tax and customs administration, February-March 1999. Tax reform implementation, June 24-July 13, 1999. Evaluation of current approach to customs modernization, October 6-17, 1999. Modernization of the Department of Zakat and Income Tax (DZIT), May 22-June 1,200O. Reform of income tax system, March 1997. Income tax, June 19-29, 1999. XI. Resident Representative: No resident representative is stationed in Saudi Arabia. However, there is currently a long- term FAD resident advisor on tax administration; his term will expire on October 22, 2002. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 46 - APPENDIX II Saudi Arabia: Relations with the World Bank 1. The World Bank maintains a special relationship with Saudi Arabia by providing reimbursable services through the Technical Cooperation Program (TCP), the largest such program for the Bank. It also provides a limited amount of non-reimbursable services. The program, which was initiated in FY1975/76, peaked at 32 staff years in the mid-1980s declined in the following years, but has been rising again to around 13 staff years in FY2000/01, The Bank’s main counterpart is the MOFNE. 2. Historically, the bulk of the technical assistance has been for infrastructure and for information systems. In the 1990s however, the emphasis shifted toward policy advice and implementation. As a result of the 1997 Country Economic Memorandum (CEM), Private Sector development (PSD) emerged as an area of considerable activity. In FY 2002, important initiatives were completed, among them: creation of three important regulatory authorities for the telecommunications, electricity, and industrial estate sectors. Completion of the Kingdom’s first Build Operate and Transfer (BOT) transaction with the signing of a 20-year contract for rehabilitation and operation of the wastewater treatment plant at the Jeddah Industrial City. Recruitment of financial advisers and initiation of the privatization transaction for the King Fahd Medical City. Strengthening of SAGIA and the completion of a landmark Administrative Barriers Study for them. Finalization of all arrangements for a major international symposium on the Future Vision for the Saudi Economy, under the patronage of the Crown Prince. The Bank undertook some assignments in new areas such as the Saudi Gifted Children Program and Use of Technology in Teacher Training. The Maritime Strategy and the Ports Strategy were finalized and presented to the government. 3. Several joint ministry-Bank workshops and symposia have been held, including on Frontiers of Infrastructure Finance, BOT (with the participation of the Islamic Development Bank) and Privatization (with the participation of the Saudi Council of Chambers of Commerce and Industry), E-Government, Gifted Children Program, Technology in Teacher Training, Private Sector Participation in Education. Seventy-three professional papers from international authors and local experts were finalized in preparation for the symposium on Future Vision for Saudi Economy scheduled for October 2002. 4. Capacity building continues to be a priority for the government, and the Bank has been carrying out such work with different ministries, including the Supreme Economic Commission and the Public Investment Fund (PIF) (regarding implementation of privatization transactions); the SAGIA; and the Ministry of Planning, among others. 5. More than 55 video conferences were organized to deliver cost-effective, just-in-time policy advice, and promote knowledge sharing with the participation of high level officials including several deputy ministers. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 47 - APPENDIX II 6. Also, the World Bank Institute is actively involved in offering courses for and in cooperation with the Kingdom’s Institute of Public Administration (IPA). Preparations for setting up a distance-learning center at IPA and Islamic Development Bank are advanced. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 48 - APPENDIX III Saudi Arabia: Statistical Issues National accounts and price indices 1. Data on GDP, value added per sector at current and constant prices, and GDP deflators are available on an annual basis. The Central Department of Statistics (CDS) completed in 2002 several major surveys and censuses, which aimed at providing a more accurate picture of sectoral developments, household income and expenditures, and demographic and labor force developments. However, the agricultural data included in the national accounts, although re-based to 1999, continue to follow an outdated methodology and the last agricultural census took place in 1981. Following the completion of the 1999 household and income expenditure survey, the CDS revised national accounts data for the period 1996-99 and 2000 on the expenditure side based on the results of the survey and adopted 1999 as a base year (against 1970 before) for the computation of aggregates in constant prices. On the production side, 2000 data are still estimated. For 2001, the establishment survey generated estimates for both expenditure and production. Those estimates will be finalized once oil sector data (exports and imports of oil and gas by quantity and value, intermediate consumption, and revenue and expenditures of companies in the oil sector) become available to the CDS. The building of a new base year is the first step in a global plan for the progressive passage from the 1968 UN System of National Accounts (SNA) based accounts to the 1993 SNA. The objective of the CDS is to change all national accounts to the 1993 SNA by end-2003 or early 2004. For that purpose, the CDS introduced long questionnaires for its 1999 establishment expenditure survey so as to derive the information necessary to reconstruct the data according to the 1993 SNA. As a second step toward this objective, it intends to start publishing many tables in the 1993 SNA format during 2003. 2. The completion of the 1999 household expenditure and income survey enables the, CDS to construct a new CPI based on an updated basket (the current cost-of-living index is based on a basket dating back to 1985 in terms of items and weights). The new weights are currently being finalized. The index, which is set to become operational by end-2002 and start generating numbers in January 2003, will cover all 13 regions and all main cities within those regions, in addition to rural areas, and will include 420 goods and services (versus 180 for the current index). 3. The CDS initiated by end-2001 quarterly surveys on all sectors of activity except agriculture. It is now preparing a general economic and population census slated to start in January 2004 and last for 9 months. This census will include all sectors and agents (public, private, agriculture, nonprofit, foreign companies, and households) in all cities (the 1993 census covered only private establishments, excluded agriculture, and covered only 158 cities). Another project still on the drawing board is the general GCC population census of 2010. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 49 - APPENDIX III 4. The following provides the status of progress as of May 2002 of all surveys and censuses conducted and planned by the CDS: The annual economic survey of establishments for 2000 was completed in May 2002. The 1999 manufacturing sector five-yearly census was completed. The next census, which will be part of the above-mentioned 2004 census, will cover all establishments. The transportation sector census of 1998 was completed. The next census is scheduled for 2003, but is likely to be postponed until the global census of 2004 and performed in conjunction with it. The above-mentioned 1999 household expenditure and income survey was completed by end-1999. The annual household-based labor force survey for 2001 was completed and results were expected by June 2002. The 2002 survey has just been completed in the field. The five-yearly census for 2001 on establishment-based wages and salaries was completed and 2001 data on private sector wages for all activities were published on the web (see below). The agricultural sector census for 1999 was completed (by the Ministry of Agriculture) and the publication of census-based data is expected for July 2002. The next agricultural census will be part of the 2004 global census. The annual demographic survey of 2000 was completed. The 2001 survey is in progress. The annual survey for the compilation of import and export price indices, which started in 2001, is still underway. The five-yearly survey for the compilation of the input and output of industrial production indices is expected to be completed by end-2002. The processed surveys will allow the publication of the national accounts statistics in accordance with the 1968 and 1993 SNA presentation in the forthcoming CDS annual report. 6. The authorities have also developed databases on labor markets available for use by the regional labor offices. These databases have regularly been updated. The preliminary results for the employment in 2000 by sector and large establishments (more than 20 employees) are also available. 7. The CDS established in July 2001 an internet website through which it started disseminating: (a) national accounts data for 1996-2001 (with the new base 1999); (b) population and labor force data for 2001; (c) private sector wages and salaries for 2001 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 50 - APPENDIX III for all activities; (d) all surveys from 1996 to 1999; (e) cost-of-living index; (f) exports and imports up to 2001; and (g) tables, definitions, and methodology. 8. Coordination between the CDS and SAMA and the Ministry of Finance are well- established. The CDS collects data on imports and exports of merchandise, which are directly inputted into an on-line database shared with SAMA. There are also weekly coordination meetings between the CDS and SAMA’s research Department to settle outstanding data issues. With regards to the Ministry of Finance, the CDS receives data from the ministry on a regular basis and reclassifies them according to the SNA methodology, which differs from the aggregation used by the ministry for budgetary control purposes. In contrast to the above, there is no effective coordination between the CDS and the Ministry of Petroleum, except through the formal quarterly setting of the Data Committee which includes the CDS, Budget’s Final Accounts specialists, SAMA, and the Petroleum Ministry. Typically, oil and gas data are received by the CDS after a long lag following the end of the reference period. In May 2002, data on oil and gas for 2001 were still unavailable to the CDS, with a result that the 2001 national accounts has to be prepared using estimations for the oil sector. Fiscal sector 9. During the consultation missions, the authorities provide detailed information on the operations of the central government, including the stock of the gross domestic debt, the distribution of government debt by holders, amortization payments, and the breakdown of the fiscal financing between bank and nonbank sources. In addition, statistical information is provided on the Saudi Fund for Development and some data on the PIF, as well as on four other lending institutions (Saudi Agricultural Bank, Saudi Credit Bank, Saudi Industrial Development Fund, and Real Estate Development Fund). However, although authorities have recently given more attention to the publishing of detailed fiscal data and presenting a consolidated situation of the public finances (central government, PIF, and AGIs), there has been no progress on this front. 10. Following recommendations by the September 1997 Fund technical assistance mission on fiscal accounts, the authorities are working to fully address remaining weaknesses in the fiscal data. As a first step, expenditure on wages and salaries has been reclassified to be fully captured in line with the UN System of National Accounts (SNA) methodology. Also, the MOFNE has taken some steps in using Government Finance Statistics (GFS) definitions to put national data in a format consistent with the 1993 SNA. Monetary data 11. Most monetary and financial data are readily available in SAMA’s Monthly Statistical Bulletin, published with about one-month lag and available since March 2000 on the SAMA website. In particular, commercial bank data are adequate and are provided on a regular basis. Information on deposit interest rates is included (and published on a daily basis in the national press), but not interest rates on government securities. Monetary data for SAMA are provided to the Fund on a monthly basis. Liabilities are provided in aggregates Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-5l- APPENDIX III without detailed breakdown into components (e.g., no indication of foreign liabilities) which does not permit a comprehensive compilation of the monetary survey. More disaggregated data on SAMA’s liabilities are only provided during consultation missions. The timeliness of data, however, has improved dramatically starting with the April 2001 submission. Prior to that time, there had been long lags in reporting SAMA’s data, but after that time the lags were cut dramatically to one month. Information on aggregates related to the stock market and mutual fund transactions are available monthly on SAMA’s website. More detailed data on the stock market, including selected data on listed companies such as share prices, dividend announcement, are instantaneously available on the new electronic platform TADAWUL which has, since October 2001, replaced the former electronic ESIS system for stock trading, clearing, and settlements. 12. The authorities have revised the definition of official international reserves in light of the recommendations of a STA-MED mission (May 16-19, 1998) and reported revised data for January 1996 and onward. The authorities noted that the foreign exchange cover of the currency in circulation with the public was included in the revised definition, as were other investments in foreign marketable instruments in conformity with a strict interpretation of the balance of payments manual. No information had been provided on the composition of foreign assets that were excluded from the revised official international reserves data. Balance of payments 13. Progress has been made in several areas to improve the balance of payments statistics, although the data are not yet compiled or reported according to the Balance of Payments Manual, Fifth Edition (BPMS). Only the major items of the balance of payments are presently reported, and limited breakdown is provided. However, steps are underway to address the remaining issues, such as improvement in the compilation of data on services, income, and transfers, as well as on the financial and capital accounts, reconciliation between oil sector statistics published in SAMA’s annual reports and those in the real sector, improvement on the classification of public sector imports and services. The 1997 STA mission on the balance of payments assisted the authorities in reclassifying the BOP data according to Fund methodology, and recommended new collection methods that would allow SAMA to convert the balance of payments to the new BPM5 presentation within a relatively short period. SAMA has made significant progress in implementing these recommendations, particularly in the design and dispatch of survey forms used for data collection, including from: the MOFNE and several other government agencies and ministries; a large number of private sector companies, including telecommunication and transportation companies; and financial institutions. Specifically, the coverage of establishments has increased to about 100 companies, in addition to financial institutions from which SAMA already receives data on a regular basis. The rate of response to the questionnaires has risen to about 25 percent, To ensure continued progress in this regard, SAMA’s BOP committee of 11 officers (with weekly meetings) have continued their work of reviewing progress in the collection and usage of BOP data; some of the material is also being used for training, with a view to improving data collection, Finally, to improve the compilation of balance of payments data in Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 52 - APPENDIX III accordance with the BPMS, the authorities together with STA organized a seminar in January/February 200 1. Data publication 14. Publication is generally limited to officially finalized and approved data. Data on real sector, national accounts, financial sector, limited budgetary accounts, and balance of payments are published in official documents, such as the CDS and the SAMA annual reports. In addition, as mentioned above, main financial data are available in SAMA’s Monthly Statistical Bulletin with about one-month lag and since March 2000 on the SAMA website. The budget document is not published but limited actual fiscal data are published in SAMA’s annual report. Data provided to the consultation missions are available in the Fund documents and intended for internal circulation only. The authorities issued in May 2001 a directive requiring departments and ministries to publish relevant data, including information on GDP and other vital statistics on a regular basis. As a result of the new directive, a Data Committee was established in 2002, including the CDS, Budget’s Final Accounts specialists, SAMA, and the Petroleum Ministry. The Committee meets in principle on a quarterly basis to discuss data issues and decide about the publication of quarterly data. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 53 - APPENDIX III 4 c c 4 4 4 4 $ E E 4 4 . . ” 3 E E E E 2 E z z! E 4 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 54 - APPENDIX IV Saudi Arabia: Medium-term Fiscal Outlook 1. In order to forecast the fiscal outlook over the medium term (2003-07) and assess the needed fiscal adjustment to achieve a sustainable fiscal position, the staff prepared medium- term projections under two scenarios: a baseline scenario reflecting current fiscal policies and trends (Table 2) and an adjustment scenario reflecting substantial fiscal retrenchment to put the public debt on a durable downward trend and sharply curtail the non-oil fiscal deficit (Table 5). The external environment parameters, particularly projections of world oil prices and demand, are assumed to remain the same under both scenarios. Also, both scenarios assume continued strengthening of the tax and customs administration and collection efforts in line with ongoing modernization of both departments. Baseline Scenario 2. Under the present policy stance (baseline scenario) and the IMP’s World Economic Outlook projections for oil prices, the economic and financial position are likely to remain weak, with the fiscal deficit averaging 4.5 percent of GDP a year, as against the authorities’ objective of restoring a fiscal balance or small surplus by 2005/06. The baseline scenario makes the following key assumptions about the impact of the fiscal measures currently in place or under consideration: (i) imposition of an income tax on expatriates as of 2005 (at 10 percent rate and with a threshold income of SRls 3,00O/month) with a yield of about SRls 1.5 billion in 2005 rising to about SRls 2 billion by 2007; (ii) introduction of a VAT as of 2006 with an annual yield of about SRls 7 billion;’ (iii) the clearance of past dues with the payment of SRls 5 billion in 2003 and assuming that no new overdue payments would emerge; (iv) the maintenance of the present trends with respect to other revenue items; (v) the maintenance of the present trends with respect to expenditure items, which would imply some shift toward health and education; this assumes annual rates of increase for the wage bill at about 3 percent (with the periodic, Hijri calendar-related payment of a 13* month salary in 2003 and 2006) supplies and services at 2 percent, subsidies maintained at their level in 2000, operations and maintenance at 3 percent, and capital outlays at 8 percent; ’ Assumed at a rate of 5 percent applied to dutiable imports (equivalent to about 4 percent of total imports). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 55 - APPENDIX IV (vi) the receipt of privatization proceeds (classified as a financing item) in 2003 of SRls 10 billion essentially coming from the sale of government shares in the telecommunication company; any privatization proceeds from electricity are assumed to be virtually re-invested into capital outlays and the privatization prospects for other entities are assumed too vague to warrant any receipts in the years 2004-07. 3. The baseline scenario outturn indicates that the overall fiscal deficit would average about 4.5 percent of GDP in 2003-07. With the trends assumed in (v) above, the government expenditure will be reduced from over 36 percent of GDP in 2001 to 29 percent of GDP in 2007. The government domestic debt would increase steadily to about SRls 8 16 billion or 95 percent of GDP by end 2007 (from about SRls 643 billion or 92 percent of GDP at end-2001). The deficit excluding oil revenue would continue to be high at an average of about 23 percent of GDP during the forecast period. Under a more conservative assumption of a deeper drop in oil prices over the 2003-07 period the fiscal position would worsen and require higher fiscal effort to achieve the targeted balance. For instance, a reduction in the oil price of US$5 per barrel would entail deterioration in the fiscal and external accounts of 5 percent and 7.5 percentage points of GDP, respectively. The fiscal position would also substantially weaken with an increase in the interest rate on domestic debt, with the fiscal deficit and domestic debt rising by about 3 percentage points of GDP for a rise of 3 percentage points in the implicit interest rate. 4. The baseline scenario poses serious implications for the economy at large. First, the surge in government debt would worsen the structural rigidities of the budget and negatively impact the financial sector’s ability to finance private sector activities. It could, by increasing the debt-servicing burden relative to non-oil revenues, also weaken private sector confidence and discourage investment. With a rising external current account deficit, despite an anticipated pick up in FDI, net foreign assets of SAMA could decline precipitously which could negatively impact exchange rate stability. Also the projected moderate increase in private sector investment (financed, in part, by increase in FDI) would be insufficient to provide employment opportunities for the young and rapidly growing Saudi workforce. Adjustment Scenario 5. The alternative adjustment scenario suggests that the budget policy should be set in a medium-term context in order to achieve sharp reductions in both the overall and non-oil fiscal deficits. This scenario would ensure putting domestic debt on a sustainable downward trend with a declining ratio to GDP and with a real interest rate below that of real non-oil GDP growth. This scenario would also help expedite the privatization and reform strategy, with the anticipated increase in private investment boosting growth of the private sector, as well as enhancing non-oil revenues and employment opportunities. Also, with this scenario the economy would be in a much better position (than under the baseline) to withstand the impact of sharp external shocks of an oil price drop or a hike in international (and therefore domestic) interest rates (such as those described in paragraph 4 above). Compared to the baseline scenario, the adjustment scenario assumes the following: Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 56 - APPENDIX IV (i) accelerated implementation of the income tax in 2004 (along with its extension to Saudi income earners in 2005); (ii) introduction of a single rate, general sales tax at 5 percent (including on non-essential imports) effective as of 2003, and phased out gradually as VAT is implemented; this tax (imposed on the sale of private consumer goods) would yield an average of about SRls 7 billion annually in 2003-06, and would be phased out completely by 2007. (iii) accelerated implementation of VAT beginning in 2005; (iv) upward adjustments in utility rates and fees and charges; and (v) lower growth rates than in the baseline scenario for some current expenditure items (particularly the wage bill and subsidies); this assumes a freeze of the wage bill at the level in 2002 (except for the periodic, Hijri- calendar related payment of a 13* month salary in 2003 and 2006) subsidies reduced gradually to about a third of their 2002 level by 2005 (SRls 1.8 billion) and frozen at that level for 2006-07, and interest payments reduced in line with the declining domestic debt stock. 6. Under this scenario, the overall fiscal deficits relative to GDP would decline to 2.6 percent and 0.5 percent, respectively in 2003 and 2004, shift into a near balance in 2005, and into surpluses of 0.5 percent and 2.2 percent respectively in 2006 and 2007. The government domestic debt would decrease steadily to around SRls 648 billion or 72 percent of GDP by end-2007. The deficit excluding oil revenue would decline to an average of about 23 percent of GDP during the forecast period. 7. The national savings are expected to increase by about 4-5 percentage points of GDP by 2007 relative to the baseline scenario. With an anticipated increase in FDI under the Gas Initiative and higher private capital inflows, total investment is projected to be higher than under the baseline with the growth of real non-oil GDP accelerating to over 5 percent per year. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 57- APPENDIX V Saudi Arabia: Privatization Strategy 1. Overview. In the past few years, Saudi Arabia has embarked on key structural reforms including the privatization of state-owned companies and government services. It is intended to support the diversification strategy which aimed at encouraging foreign investment, enhancing the role of the private sector, and addressing unemployment pressures. The authorities are pursuing the privatization program under a deliberately cautious strategy that includes establishing the legal and institutional frameworks needed for successful implementation. In the short run, the primary focus of privatization will be on the corporatization of enterprises and on establishing the associated regulatory frameworks (mainly in the telecommunications, electricity, water, and transportation sectors) in order to prepare for their eventual privatization without creating private sector monopolies. The revision of a number of laws (e.g., company, agency, competition, mortgage lending, insurance, and capital markets) is underway to promote private sector activity and foster domestic competition. 2. In June 2002, the SEC (headed by Crown Prince Abdullah Al Saud) approved the privatization strategy, which had been proposed by the Council of Ministers in August 1997. The main objective of the privatization strategy is to increase the share of the private sector in the national economy by privatizing large-scale government enterprises and giving the private sector the opportunity to invest, finance, and manage these entities in accordance with the objectives formulated in the Seventh Development Plan. Further, the strategy charges the SEC with the responsibilities of (a) determining which activities are to be privatized; and (b) supervising the privatization program and monitoring its implementation, in coordination with other government agencies. A list of the targeted activities to be privatized will be issued by a decree of the Council of Ministers, and the SEC will develop a specific plan and timetable for this purpose. The strategy pins the success of the privatization program on providing the suitable environment including the promotion of an efficient capital market, skilled human resources, and appropriate regulatory and legislative framework. 3. Definition. The strategy defines privatization as a process of transforming ownership and management of public entities, projects, and services from the public to the private sector based on market forces and competition. The strategy stipulates several methods for the implementation of the privatization process including the transfer of ownership; contracts for management, operation, leasing or financing; sale through public subscription; and sale to a principal investor. 4. Main objectives. The privatization strategy aims at achieving eight specific objectives. These are: l Improving the capacity of the national economy and enhancing its competitive ability to meet the challenges of regional and international competition; Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-58- APPENDIX V l 0 a l 0 l 5. Encouraging private sector investment and effective participation in the national economy, and increasing its share of domestic production to achieve growth in the. national economy; Expanding the ownership of productive assets by Saudi citizens; Encouraging local investments of domestic and foreign capital; Increasing employment opportunities, optimizing the use of the national work force, and ensuring the continued equitable increase of individual income; Providing services to citizens and investors in a timely and cost-efficient manner; Rationalizing public expenditure and reducing the burden of the government budget by giving the private sector opportunities to finance, operate, and maintain certain services that it is able to provide; and Increasing government revenues from returns on participation in activities to be transferred to the private sector and monies obtained, for example, from granting concessions or the sale of government properties. Preconditions. The authorities recognize that in order to aid the process of privatization, a regulatory framework needs to be established. Therefore, the strategy calls for the establishment of a regulatory system and authority for each sector intended to be privatized. These regulatory authorities are responsible for pricing government services, restructuring public sector and government entities intended for privatization, treatment of strategic partners, and provision of a healthier environment for privatization. The strategy indicates that a strategic partner, whether Saudi or foreign, could play an important role by providing the needed capital, sharing the risks, offering advanced techniques and administrative expertise to improve performance and create added value. Therefore, the strategic partner must have sufficient financial capability and experience in managing firms similar in size to the enterprise that is to be privatized, must be able to provide a sufficient number of technical and managerial experts, and should have a good reputation. 6. The authorities realize that the success of a privatization program depends on the effectiveness of the investment climate aimed at developing the private sector. The strategy points out three important elements to encourage more productive and efficient private sector and foreign investment. First, the existence of a developed financial market would ensure the success of the privatization process when certain enterprises are privatized through public subscription in the financial market. This requires a number of specific elements, including: (a) the regulatory and legal framework is needed to protect the rights of investors and define the basis for regulating the market on the basis of clear, announced orders and instructions; (b) a strong infrastructure is required to develop a robust financial market with the appropriate management system and technical apparatus; and (c) a sufficient number of investment tools that allow for the participation of large and small investors, including Saudi Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 59 - APPENDIX V and non-Saudi residents. Second, the existence of well-developed, highly productive human resources is a critical factor for the provision of required skills for the privatized entities. Finally, the regulations and procedures related to investments and private sector activities, the capacity of the agencies responsible for their implementation, and the speed with which disputes can be settled are important to create an appropriate environment in which the private sector can operate effectively to meet the challenges of regional and international competition. 7. The strategy stipulates the appropriate sequencing of stages of the privatization process and criteria for choosing the public entities that are suitable for privatization. These criteria relate to the following aspects of the privatization process: (a) positive return to, or impact on, the national economy; (b) degree of preparedness of entity for privatization; (c) benefit of privatization to society such as increasing job opportunities and optimal employment of national labor force, and an equitable enhancement of per capita income; (d) absence of adequate services by existing public enterprises; and (e) absorptive capacity of the domestic capital market. The privatization process is to be pursued under the following avenues: (a) increasing share in government-owned companies and joint sector companies through new shares subscription; (b) offering a part of government shares in the stock market on a gradual basis; and (c) selling the entire government share of these companies to privately-owned venture capital companies listed on the stock market. 8. Progress to date. The telecommunications and power generation sectors are currently at the forefront of the privatization efforts. The regulatory authority was established for the STC in May 1998. The state monopoly of the telecommunications sector was ended and steps were taken to open it for foreign investment. The government is planning to transfer 20 percent of its shares in the privatized entity to the private sector through initial public offering, which is expected to start before end-2002 followed by another lo- 20 percent in 2003. The eight regional electricity companies were merged into SEC in 1999 and SEC’s corporatization was approved by the authorities in 2001. Steps were taken to privatize the electricity sector, such as establishing a regulatory authority and appointing a regulator (2002) to study the tariff rates and provide market-based assessment of these rates. The regulatory authority has proceeded with the restructuring process of the electricity sector by splitting the company into three parts (generation, transmission and distribution) and the privatization of the sector will be organized in accordance to these companies. The government holds a share of 85 percent in the electricity sector, which will be gradually sold to the private sector over time. 9. Other areas for potential privatization include industrial parks, existing and proposed railroads, water and sewerage, postal services, education, health services, and the Saudi Arabian airline (Saudia). The government is keen on promoting the inflow of FDI through the enhancement of infrastructure in the emerging industrial areas. In this context, a utility company has been established to take care of the infrastructure needs of the industrial cities of Jubail and Yanbu. Moreover, the government is planning to sell its share in about 10 companies in various businesses, including cement manufacturing, the non-oil mining Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 60 - APPENDIX V company (Ma’aden), oil shipping, hotels, banks and utilities (the latter pertaining to the ports, power, water, and sewerage services of the industrial cities of Jubail and Yanbu). 10. In June 2002, the SEC has passed a number of resolutions to expedite the pace of privatization including: (a) approval of the privatization strategy; (b) approval of the executive program of expansion of the railway network through privatization; (c) allowing private sector participation in desalination projects; (d) establishment the Saudi Postal Company (SPC) and transferring of all postal employees to the SPC; (e) establishment of the Petroleum Service Company; and (t) appointing additional representatives from the Ministry of Justice and the Ministry of Municipal and Rural Affairs at the comprehensive investment service center to coordinate and facilitate with SAGIA to speedup foreign direct investment. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public