DOCUMENT OF INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND NOT FOR PUBLIC USE SM/O l/242 CONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION August 2,200l To: Members of the Executive Board From: The Acting Secretary Subject: Malaysia-Staff Report for the 2001 Article IV Consultation Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staff report for the 2001 Article IV consultation with Malaysia, which is scheduled for discussion on Wednesday, August 29,200l. At the time of circulation of this paper to the Board, the Secretary’s Department has not received a communication the authorities of Malaysia indicating whether or not they consent to the Fund’s publication of this paper; such communication may be received after the authorities have had an opportunity to read the paper. Questions may be referred to Ms. 0. Liu (ext. 36134) and Mr. Khatri (ext. 35494). Unless the Documents Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the WTO Secretariat on Friday, August 10,200l; and to the Asian Development Bank and the Islamic Development Bank, following its consideration by the Executive Board. Att: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicCONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND MALAYSIA Staff Report for the 2001 Article IV Consultation Prepared by the Staff Representatives for the 2001 Consultation with Malaysia Approved by Mario I. Blejer and Liam P. Ebrill July 31,200l l The Article IV consultation discussions were held in Kuala Lumpur during May 14-25, 2001. The mission team met with Tan Sri Datuk Dr. Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor, Bank Negara Malaysia; Datuk Samsudin Hitam, Secretary General, Ministry of Finance; Dato’ Mustapa Mohammed and Tan Sri Dato’ Dr. Noordin Sopiee, National Economic Action Council; other senior government officials; and private sector representatives. l The staff team comprised Ms. Meesook (Head), Ms. Liu, Mr. Khatri, Ms. Iakova (all APD), Mr. O’Brien (MAE), and Mr. Kashiwagi (PDR). Mr. Blejer (APD) joined policy discussions during the second week of the mission. Ms. Phang (OED) also participated in the meetings. l In concluding last year’s Article IV consultation with Malaysia on July 25,2000, Executive Directors commended the authorities for the implementation of policies that had placed the economy on a path to recovery. They called for greater flexibility in managing macroeconomic policies so as to achieve high, sustainable growth with low inflation, noting the importance of judicious timing for the transition to a more flexible exchange rate regime. Directors also encouraged the authorities to continue the momentum of financial sector reform and push forward corporate restructuring. l As global prospects deteriorated in 2001, Malaysia’s growth and exports have slowed. Consistent macroeconomic policy and steadfast structural reforms are increasingly critical to sustain market confidence, which would in turn help Malaysia manage risks and forestall an excessive economic slowdown. l Malaysia has accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4, and maintains an exchange system free of restrictions on the making of payments and transfers for current inter- national transactions. Some capital controls were removed recently, but some remain, applied mainly to the internationalization of the ringgit and the transfers of capital abroad by residents. l Malaysia’s statistical base is adequate to conduct effective surveillance. Data issues are discussed in Section II and Annex II. l The staff report was prepared by the staff team and coordinated by Ms. Meesook and Ms. Liu. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2- Contents Page I. Recent Economic Developments ....................................................................................... 4 A. Developments in 2000-01 ....................................................................................... .4 B. Outlook and Risks ................................................................................................... 13 II. Policy Discussions ........................................................................................................... 15 A. Exchange Rate and Monetary Policies ................................................................... 15 B. Fiscal Policy ............................................................................................................ 20 C. Liquidity and Credit Risk Management .................................................................. 21 D. Trade and Capital Account Policies ........................................................................ 22 E. Structural Policies.. ................................................................................................. 23 III. Staff Appraisal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25 Boxes 1. Capital Flows to Malaysia: Short-Term Capital and Foreign Direct Investment.. ........... .6 2. The 2001 Budget and Preemptive Measures to Counter the Impact of a Global Economic Slowdown.. .................................................................................................... 8 3. Recent Financial Sector Reforms.. ................................................................................... 11 4. Corporate Governance and Recent Reforms.. .................................................................. 12 5. Growth Impact of Global Environment and Electronics Slowdown ............................... 14 6. Development Plans and Key Strategy Documents ........................................................... 16 7. Export Performance and Competitiveness.. ..................................................................... 18 Figures 1. Selected Asian Countries: Macroeconomic Indicators, 1994-2001 ............................... .28 2. Selected Asian Countries: Economic Performance, 1998-2001 .................................... .29 3. Selected Asian Countries: Macroeconomic Indicators, 1994-2001 ............................... .30 4. Selected Asian Countries: Macroeconomic Indicators, 1994-2001 ............................... .3 1 5. Selected Asian Countries: Monetary Indicators, 1998-2001........................................... 32 6. Selected Asian Countries: Financial Indicators, 1994-2000 .......................................... .33 Tables 1. Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 1997-2001 ............................................... 34 2. Balance of Payments, 1997-2001. ................................................................................... 35 3. Federal Government Fiscal Operations, 1997-2001 ...................................................... .36 4. Banking Survey, 1997-2001 ........................................................................................... .37 5. Indicators of Financial Institution Soundness, 1997-2001.............................................. 38 6. Indicators of External Vulnerability, 1997-2001 ............................................................ 39 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3- Annexes I. Medium-Term Illustrative Scenario, 1999-2006.. .......................................................... .40 II. Statistical Issues ............................................................................................................... 43 III. Fund Relations ................................................................................................................ .46 IV. Relations with the World Bank Group ........................................................................... .49 V. Relations with the Asian Development Bank.. ............................................................... .50 VI. Social and Demographic Indicators of Selected Asian Countries ................................... 51 VII. Public Information Notice.. .............................................................................................. 52 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4- 1. RECENT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS A. Developments in 2000-01 1. Malaysia’s economic recovery gained momentum during 2000, but is showing clear signs of deceleration (Figure 1 and Table 1). Real GDP grew by 8.3 percent in 2000, sustained by strong expansion in consumption and investment that were in turn supported by stimulative macroeconomic policies and a favorable trend in exports. Since late last year, however, the economy has been adversely affected by the global slowdown. The impact has been significant, as Malaysia’s exports are highly dependent on electronics. Manufacturing sales have declined, and consumer and business confidence indices have fallen sharply. 2. In the first five months of 2001, exports declined slightly from the same period last year (Figure 2), with the fall in electronics exports partly offset by higher exports of electrical and petroleum products. For the year, total export volume is expected to fall slightly Malaysia: Contribution to Growth by Expenditure Categories (Percentage) from last year, corresponding to an even larger decline in the overall export earnings. Real GDP growth in the first quarter decelerated to 3.2 percent (from 6.3 percent in the preceding quarter), as sluggish export receipts combined with deteriorating consumer sentiment weak- ened private consumption. Private investment also slowed sharply, reflecting, in part, an adjustment to overstocking in the previous 25 , , 2: 15 5 -5 -15 -25 1998 1999 2ooo 2001 Pmj Sources: Malaysian authorities; and Fund staff estimates. year. The negative contribution of net exports to growth this year is similar to the pattern in other Asian emerging economies whose exports have also been hit hard by the global slowdown in electronics demand. 3. Inflation has remained low (at about 1% percent, year-on-year), and capacity utilization has fallen in recent months. Unemployment was low during 1997-2000, at about 3 percent, and the proportion of households under the poverty line stayed around 7-8 percent. The substantial reduction in the use of foreign workers during the crisis helped cushion the impact of the crisis on the domestic labor force. Cyclical retrenchment is, however, on the rise, particularly in sectors related to electronics. In order to mitigate the adverse impact on the most vulnerable groups, the government has implemented specific programs aimed at reducing poverty among the hardcore poor, and the elderly and disabled. 4. The current account remained in strong surplus in 2000, but substantial capital outflows led to some losses in gross official reserves (Figure 3 and Table 2). The strong current account, sustained by robust external demand and high oil prices, initially facilitated a buildup of official reserves, which reached $34.7 billion by April 2000 (from $30.9 billion at end-1999). However, short-term capital outflows intensified in the second half of the year. These took the form of outward trade credits, early debt repayments, a buildup of commercial Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-5- bank foreign assets, and portfolio flows (Box 1). Inward foreign direct investment also weakened somewhat. Overall, gross official reserves declined to $29.9 billion by end-2000. 5. Capital outflows continued into 2001, raising concerns about the sustain- Selected Asian Countries: Real Effective Exchange Rates (December 1999dcnl ability of the ringgit peg. Such concerns peaked around late March/early April as the yen and other regional currencies weakened, and the ringgit appreciated markedly in real effective terms. In addition, signs of a prolonged slump in global electronics demand became more pronounced. This in turn led to an intensification of capital outflows, accelerating the losses in international reserves. 1 85 40 I Malaysia: Gross External Reserves I 700 6. More recently, however, as other regional currencies stabilized, the near-term risks associated with the peg subsided. Furthermore, following successive cuts in U.S. interest rates in recent months, the negative interest rate differentials between Malaysia and the United States have narrowed significantly, helping to retain capital within Malaysia and easing the pressure on the peg. The level of reserves was stable at $26.0 bil- lion during May-June. Official reserves were augmented by a $1 billion sovereign bond issue in early July,’ and stood at $27.1 billion in mid-July, adequate to cover 3l/2 months of this year’s imports of goods and nonfactor services,2 more than 5% times (three times) 15 . .' -#-kpemtof short-termdebt 3oo . --- ___-.__.’ (rghtscale) I/ to . 200 1 100 o, . . . . . . . . . . . . lo I m I m I m I m I 1997 1998 1999 zcflo 2001 short-term debt by original (remaining) maturity, or about 2% times the monetary base. There is no evidence of a black market, and the forward discount continues to be small. ‘The bond issue was oversubscribed compared with the planned amount of $750 million, and yielded 228 basis points over ten-year U.S. treasury bonds; they are expected to be rated “BBB” by Standard and Poor’s and “Baa2” by Moody’s. 2The authorities measure reserves coverage in relation to retained imports of goods, i.e., excluding imports that are immediately reexported as well as service payments; based on such definition, the coverage is 4% months. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicBox 1. Capital Flows to Malaysia: Short-Term Capital and Foreign Direct Investment short-term capital flows to Malaysia over the last two years appear to have been driven largely by expectations relating to economic prospects and the future direction of the ringgit, and the interest rate differential, whereas the policy on capital controls has had a limited effect. b Between late 1999 and early 2000, inward flows were attracted by the rally of the Kuala Lumpur stock market in andem with the U.S. market, a strong recovery of the Malaysian economy, and the general perception that the ringgit was .mdervalued and could be revalued. However, these inflows were partly offset by foreign debt repayments by banks and :nterprises, induced by the large negative interest rate differentials associated with the government’s low Net Short-Term Flows lomestic interest rate policy. 4 B Economic prospects and stock market performance lave since deteriorated. In addition, the ringgit has 2 appreciated relative to other regional currencies in real :ffective terms, raising expectations of a devaluation. JO I rhese trends have precipitated large capital outflows in he form of delayed repatriation of export proceeds, ligher outward trade credits, and accelerated debt 4 *epayments, while the interest rate differentials continued .o provide banks and enterprises with an incentive to -6 \ -educe their foreign liabilities. : g 3 ? 5 I , P &? D fgfi%[fi ‘0 8 0 D Portfolio capital reversed from inflows to outflows around March 2000, consistent with the turnaround in the global md domestic economic outlook. The capital controls introduced in September 1998 and their subsequent relaxation seem .o have had relatively little direct impact on these portfolio flows; this may have been due to the fact that a substantial imount of capital had already left the country before the imposition of controls. D The recent stabilization of regional currencies and the narrowing interest rate differential (to about 50 basis points as If end-June) following the recent cuts in U.S. interest rates seem to have moderated the capital outflows. Among other .hings, the direction of short-term flows to Malaysia in the near future would likely be determined by market expectations If movements in regional currencies against the U.S. dollar. Vet foreign direct investment (FDI) in Malaysia has declined significantly since the crisis. Relatively weak economic Jrospects, as well as uncertainty about Malaysia’s policy on capital controls, may have played a role. B Net equity inflows into Malaysia fell in 1997 but have since remained fairly stable, whereas other components have Jeen more volatile. Retained earnings were reduced in 1998, consistent with very weak profits during the recession and eading to a sharp drop in net inward FDI that year, but recovered strongly in 1999-2000. 1 In the last two years, increased outward intercompany loans, possibly taking advantage of the interest differentials, offset the weakening of equity investment abroad (which became subject to stricter approval requirements) and :ontributed to the slow net FDI flows overall. D Malaysia is an attractive FDI destination because of its strong legal system and infrastructure, relatively skilled labor Force, and favorable investment incentives. However, increasing competition from China and other regional economies- .ncluding their low wages-may generate both a rise in outward FDI and a further drop in inward FDI. 1996 Net FDI (US$ billion) 3.5 (in percent of GDP) 3.5 FDI in Malaysia 7.3 Equity 2.9 Loans 0.8 Retained earnings 3.6 FDI abroad -3.8 Equity -3.0 Loans -0.4 Retained earninqs -0.4 Source: Data provided by the Malaysian authorities. 1997 1998 1999 2000 3.6 1.9 2.5 1.6 3.6 2.6 3.1 2.0 6.3 2.7 3.9 3.9 1.3 1.1 1.5 1.5 1.6 0.7 0.5 0.0 3.4 0.9 1.9 2.3 -2.7 -0.9 -1.4 -2.0 -2.2 -0.8 -0.6 -0.8 -0.1 0.0 -0.7 -1.4 -0.4 -0.1 -0.1 0.1 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-7- 7. Fiscal policy was expansionary in 2000 (Figure 4 and Table 3), as the overall federal government deficit of 4% percent of GDP provided ample stimulus to domestic demand. Development projects were carried out with short lags; funds were established to support high-tech projects, venture capital firms, and small and medium-scale companies; and spending on education was increased in line with the long-term strategy to transform Malaysia into a knowledge-based economy. Also, in order to boost private consumption, the structure of civil servants’ wages was raised for the first time in several years. On the revenue side, collections were lower than expected, reflecting the one-off effect of a staggered shift in the basis for tax assessments to an estimated current (rather than the previous) year income. In addition, tax collection was depressed by corporate write-offs of losses incurred in 1998-99 and the tax incentives granted to promote private investment. The strong output growth and high oil prices boosted revenues of the nonfinancial public enterprises (NFPEs), which produced a large surplus. Overall, the estimated public sector deficit in 2000 was about 1% percent of GDP.3 8. To mitigate the impact of the global slowdown on domestic activities, the authorities announced a package of additional fiscal stimulus in a March 2001 supplement to this year’s already expansionary budget (Box 2). The added Malaysia: FiscalPolicy Measures, 19!37-ux)l stimulus comprised higher spending on (In percent of GDP) 8 8 infrastructure, housing, and education, as 6 well as measures to promote private ------- b consumption, notably through a voluntary reduction in employees’ minimum contri- bution to the Employees’ Provident Fund (EPF)! The supplement also included a 1 I -8 1 substantial allocation to acquire 29 percent -8 ,997 199s MS9 2Mo zcm of Malaysia Airlines from its major private Pm,. Source: Malaysian authorities. shareholder and chief executive officer. The - budget now targets an overall deficit of nearly 6 percent of GDP, with the operating (or current) balance remaining in surplus. Consistent with the budget, the consolidated public sector is expected to yield a deficit of 4% percent of GDP, with total public debt increasing to 3The NFPE sector consists largely of corporatized enterprises. In assessing the fiscal stance, it is appropriate to limit the analysis to the federal government, including its contributions to state and local governments and its interaction with the NFPE sector through the latter’s tax and other contributions to the budget. However, NFPE debt is explicitly included in the assessment of fiscal sustainability. 4The reduction will be matched by employees’ lower entitlements; therefore, the long-term financial position of the EPF is not affected by this measure. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-8- Box 2. Malaysia: The 2001 Budget and Preemptive Measures to Counter the Impact of a Global Economic Slowdown The 2001 budget (announced October 2000) The 2001 budget aims at stimulating output growth, enhancing competitiveness, and improving living standards. l A deficit of 4.4 percent of GDP in 2001 was to follow a deficit of 4.2 percent of GDP in 2000. l Key measures include lower rates and higher thresholds for personal income taxes; tax incentives for investment in strategic areas (including information, communications, and technology); significant spending increases for education and training; and a further increase in development expenditure. l The fiscal consolidation that was to begin in 2001 has been postponed in order to support the recovery. l Development expenditure focuses on building productive capacity in line with the long-run goal of transforming Malaysia into a knowledge-based economy. Preemptive supplementary measures (announced March 2001) The package of measures, aimed at stimulating domestic demand in order to maintain the growth momentum. entails: Additional development spending amounting to RM 3 billion (0.8 percent of GDP) which, together with the RM 1.6 billion relating to the purchase of shares in Malaysia Airlines, raises the forecast 2001 budget deficit to 5.9 percent of GDP. The additional spending focuses largely on education-related infrastructure. A (voluntary) reduction in employee contributions to the Employees’ Provident Fund (EPF) by 2 percentage points (down to 9 percent) for one year effective April 1, and incentives for car purchase by government employees and for credit card usage, to promote consumption. The authorities estimate the impact on output growth from these measures to be 1.1 percentage points, of which the reduction in EPF contributions is expected to be around one-third of a percentage point. Staff estimates suggest the total increase in GDP related to these measures to be nearly 1 percent in 2001, of which the reduction in EPF contributions is estimated to be around 0.2 percent (based on RM 1.5 billion reduction in total contributions, scaled down to nine months, and assuming 60 percent of this reduction will be spent in 2001). The related overall increase in imports is estimated to be around VI percentage point of GDP. Multiplier effects suggest that the long-run increase in GDP (and imports) will be larger. Supporting policies include: l Reducing the property overhang through restricting new construction, and tax and financing incentives for residential ownership. l Continuing accommodative monetary policy with loan growth targets for banks. l Promoting the financing of small and medium-sized enterprises, through expanding existing funds and lowering of their lending rates, together with setting up new funds. l Promoting the service sector, particularly tourism, and the new airport as a regional hub. l Maintaining the ringgit peg, to ensure a continued environment of predictability and certainty. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-9- about 67% percent of GDP by end-2001. Fiscal consolidation had been planned to commence in 2001, but has now been deferred to 2002 (see Section II.B below). 9. Monetary policy continued to be accommodating throughout 2000, aided by the low inflation environment. While the growth in outstanding credit to the private sector was moderate (Figure 4 and Table 4), it appeared sufficient to support economic expansion, as Malaysia: Interest Rates a significant portion of corporate funding I I 12 needs was met through retained earnings, equity issues, and nonbank debt financing. Bank Negara Malaysia’s (BNM) monetary operations were aimed mainly at achieving stable liquidity conditions. In the environ- ment of ample liquidity in the banking system, the central bank issued BNM bills in 2000 for the first time since 1997, amounting to RM 6.7 billion (about 2 percent of GDP). In order to ensure that sufficient credit was Sornre:Bbomkm. J channeled to priority sectors, guidelines were issued to banks specifying minimum lending targets to the bumiputra (or ethnic Malay) community and the housing sector; a number of funds were also set up to ensure access to financing by small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) at reasonable interest rates. 10. The overall interest rate structure in Malaysia has remained broadly unchanged since mid-1999, at relatively low levels (Figure 5). The authorities have managed interest rate policy with the goal of balancing support for economic growth, promotion of domestic Malaysia: Interbank and Base-Lending Rates savings, and maintenance of an adequate profit margin for banks. Although the three- :: . 16 . 14 month interbank rate (KLIBOR) declined substantially in the first half of 1999, . 10 reflecting excess liquidity in the market, adjustments in the BNM intervention rate, 2 --- - - - tending rate . 2 which is used in the computation of the Base 0 . ...* ..,,,,.,,,, 0 Lending Rate (BLR), were much less, and the q St 16 L$ K& $ I I 3 F 8& $ $ ? 8 8 9 $gf .&a&5$&JJxqg$$ BNM rate has remained at 5.5 percent since Source: CEIC. August 1999. This has resulted in a signifi- cant widening between the KLIBOR and lending rates,’ thus benefiting banks’ balance sheets and allowing them to absorb the higher costs stemming from the restructuring process. To ‘The BLR has remained broadly unchanged, at 6.79 percent for commercial banks and 7.95 percent for finance companies, respectively. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-lO- ensure positive real rates of return to savers, banks agreed to raise deposit rates by 25 basis points in August 2000 (to 3Y2-4 percent for fixed deposits). 11. Significant progress has been made in the area of financial sector consolidation and restructuring, as well as in the enhancement of banking regulation and supervision (Box 3). The most notable development has been the virtual completion of the merger program for domestic banks, which the authorities launched in 1999 with the aim of consoli- dating more than fifty financial institutions (commercial banks, merchant banks, and finance companies) into ten banking groups. Parallel to this effort has been a continuation of the process of moving to risk-based and consolidated supervision of financial institutions. Plans to consolidate the stock-broking industry have moved away from stipulating the targeted number of brokers, and the timeframe has been extended. Looking ahead, the financial sector and capital markets master plans released in early 2001 aim to achieve full integration of the domestic financial system with the globalized markets over the next ten years. 12. Macroprudential indicators have remained reasonably robust, and profitability of the financial system increased significantly in 2000. Capital-asset ratios have stayed well above the minimum 8 percent requirement over the last year (Table 5). After declining during 2000, the level of nonperforming loans (NPLs) rose slightly in early 2001, on account of a stricter loan classification rather than the onset of the economic slowdown, remaining at a significant level by international standards.6 The higher share of loans to the real estate sector is accounted for by the strong credit expansion for residential property, whereas lending to riskier, nonresidential projects has declined. The earlier focus of NPL resolution had been on large loans; a special program was introduced in mid-2000 to expedite loan workouts for SMEs, and in July 2001, a fund was set up to provide relief to bumiputra SMEs. 13. Corporate financial positions benefited from the strong economic recovery and corporate debt restructuring in 2000.7 In addition, operational restructuring has taken the form of downsizing, changes in management, or an expansion in ownership. Corporate governance issues have been brought to the fore by a few high-profile cases, which raised concerns about the rights of minority shareholders and the prudent use of public funds or management of the EPF (Box 4). These issues have been cited as having a dampening effect on the stock market and delaying corporate recapitalization efforts. 6The gross NPL ratio for the banking system rose above 16 percent at end-March 2001; however, taking into account banks’ provisioning, the NPL ratio was about 10% percent. 7Measured by earning yields, returns on shareholders’ funds, and returns on equity, the financial performance of publicly listed nonfinancial enterprises improved in 1999, but leverage continued to be high. Information for 2000 is based on qualitative assessments. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-ll- Box 3. Malaysia: Recent Financial Sector Reforms The Malaysian authorities have continued to press ahead with reforms aimed at strengthening the resilience of the financial sector and improving its competitiveness and efficiency, so that it can more effectively contribute to economic development over the long term. These reforms have involved financial sector consolidation; state- led bank recapitalization, management of distressed assets, and debt restructuring; and improvements in financial sector regulation and supervision. Consolidation of the domestic financial system l In 1999, the Malaysian authorities instituted a program aimed at consolidating the country’s domestic banks, merchant banks, and finance companies into ten banking groups. Foreign banks were not involved in the consolidation process. A list of ten anchor banks, together with suggested constituents, was identified by Bank Negara Malaysia (BNM), but institutions were permitted to look for other, more complementary partners. Acquisitions and mergers were based on market prices. l To accelerate the process, tax incentives were granted for institutions that concluded negotiations by August 3 1,2000, including: exemptions from stamp duty and real property gains tax; and the ability to amortize any losses resulting from the acquisitions over time for tax purposes (the losses have to be realized immediately for bank supervision purposes). By end-2000, the merger negotiations were concluded for 50 of the 54 domestic banking institutions (accounting for 94 percent of total domestic banking assets). One of these completed the merger process in March 2001. l Consolidation in the stock-broking and insurance sectors is also under way. The authorities have instituted a program aimed at encouraging the many small brokerage houses to merge into “universal brokers” that will be large enough to compete in a liberalized environment; in parallel, commission rates have become fully negotiable and transaction fees were reduced. The authorities also plan a consolidation in the insurance sector, to be achieved primarily by increasing minimum capital requirements, with a goal of reducing the number of insurance companies from 5 1 to about 15. Debt restructuring and bank recapitalization Danaharta, the asset management company set up to acquire and work out large nonperforming loans following the Asian crisis, has continued to make good progress. As of March 31,2001, it had restructured or disposed of loans and assets with a gross value of RM 38.7 billion (out of a total acquired or under management of RM 48 billion) with an average recovery rate of 60 percent of face value. Remaining loans and assets are generally more problematic, so a lower recovery rate is expected. Danamodal, the bank recapitalization agency, has been repaid by seven out of the ten banks which it helped to recapitalize. The agency is expected to complete its operations and be wound up no later than 2003. Corporate Debt Restructuring Committee (CDRC), set up to mediate restructurings (based on London club rules) of large loans following the crisis, had resolved debt restructuring for 46 companies amounting to RM 30 billion by end-April 2001, with around RM 9 billion remaining. CDRC was expected to cease operations in early 200 1, but it has taken on the debt restructuring of the public transportation industry, and has been involved with plans to restructure the steel and telecommunications industries. It recently announced that it will continue operations as long as there is demand for its services. Strengthening of regulation and supervision In support of the consolidation program and to improve the resilience of the banking sector, further measures have been introduced to strengthen and consolidate regulation and supervision, including the issuance by BNM of guidelines on the management of credit risk (to be formalized in mid-2001, although already in use), market and interest rate risks, and best practices for operational risks. Banks were required to implement a new liquidity management framework from January 1,200l. Minimum capitalization levels for domestic banking groups were raised to RM 2 billion and those for foreign-owned banking institutions were increased to RM 300 million, both effective end-2001. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12- Box 4. Malaysia: Corporate Governance and Recent Reforms Malaysia, like its neighbors, is characterized by an “insider” system of corporate governance: a few large corporations own a significant proportion of financial assets and productive capacity; stock owner- ship is concentrated in the hands of relatively few institutional and corporate investors; and cross-holding of share ownership, or pyramiding, magnifies the actual control of a few individuals/entities well beyond their level of ownership in each company. These features have resulted in some innate vulnerabilities such as: close ties between the government, banks, and large corporations; incentives for double gearing that renders corporate wealth extremely sensitive to changes in the equity market; and ownership concentra- tion which can lead to poor governance as the small group of insiders (large shareholders) pursue their own objectives at the cost of the outsiders (small shareholders). A recent empirical study finds evidence that ownership concentration adversely affects firm performance (see forthcoming Selected Issues paper). In early 1998, a High-Level Finance Committee was set up to develop a framework for the enhancement of corporate governance. Its report, published in March 1999, presents the Malaysian Code on Corporate Governance, which sets out the principles of best practices, recommends actions for strengthening the overall regulatory framework for listed companies, and indicates the need for training/education of corporate participants. The Committee established an Implementation Project Team, consisting of the Ministry of Finance, the Securities Commission, the Registry of Companies, the Kuala Lumpur Stock Exchange (KLSE), the Federation of Public Limited Companies, Bank Negara Malaysia, and Malaysian Exchange of Securities Dealing and Automated Quotation. Good progress has been made in implementing the recommendations of the Committee’s Report. This has taken the form of updating laws, regulations, and rules in line with international best practices; amendments to the listing requirements of the Kuala Lumpur Stock Exchange; and development of accreditation programs for existing directors of listed companies (see summary in Malaysia: Selected Issues; S&I/99/145). Around 20 of the recommendations of the Committee were in relation to KLSE, of which 2 have been implemented, 15 have been incorporated under its new listing requirements, 3 are pending further changes to laws, and 1 is pending further review. KLSE’s new listing requirements, launched on January 22,2001, focus on enhancing corporate governance and transparency, improving efficiency in capital activities, strengthening investor protection, and promoting investor confidence. Six practice notes and a recent roadshow have also been employed to promote awareness and compliance with the listing requirements. Key measures to improve the protection of small shareholders have included provisions on related party transactions and the setting up of a watchdog. Following the United Engineers Malaysia’s purchase of shares in Renong (its holding company, which has close ties with United Malays National Organization) at a higher-than-market price, there has been a revamping of provisions (included in the new listing requirements) on related party transactions designed to help preclude such deals in the future. Also, a monitoring body on corporate governance was recently set up-the Minority Shareholders Watchdog Group-to monitor corporations, provide advice on best practices, and eventually to offer other services such as proxy voting. While a concerted effort has been made to improve corporate governance, high-profile cases of poor governance relating to companies with political links have occurred, high- lighting the importance of applying the new code of governance evenly. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13- 14. Stock market performance began to weaken in early 2000, reflecting develop- ments in the United States and other emerging markets, and the outlook for lower corporate earnings in Malaysia (Figure 6). By end-June 2001, the stock market index had Malaysia: Stock Market Index and Market declined by 40 percent from its peak in February 2000, and 13 percent since end-2000; from early July, however, the market has rallied signifi- cantly but remained volatile. The negative market sentiment was heightened by Standard and Poor’s downgrading of Malaysia from positive to stable in April 2001. Notwithstanding its weak performance, the equity market remained an important avenue for raising funds for both the public and private sectors in 2000, I I III 1 III I III I III I 1997 1998 1999 2033 2001 Sources: Bloomberr! and CEIC. I and the private debt securities market became deeper and more liquid. 15. In early May 2001, the authorities abolished the remaining 10 percent exit levy on repatriated profits from portfolio capital and eased the rules governing the purchase of property by foreigners. Malaysia’s weight in the Morgan Stanley Capital International (MSCI) Composite Index is scheduled to be reduced substantially in November, but this adjustment is unlikely to generate substantial portfolio outflows, as many fund managers are already underweight on Malaysia. B. Outlook and Risks 16. In the near term, the outlook for Malaysia has become less favorable in line with the most recent WE0 projections, which foresee a slowdown in world economic growth and a decline in export demand for electronics (Box 5). Output growth in Malaysia for 2001 is now estimated at 2 percent. As the contribution of net exports to growth is expected to be negative, and private demand is likely to slow considerably, strong public sector demand generated by the fiscal stimulus program will play a central role in supporting growth. Provided that the global economy recovers as envisaged in the WE0 scenario, Malaysia’s growth rate is projected to rise to 6% percent by 2003 (Annex I). Still, the attainment of this potential growth, which is lower than the authorities’ target,’ is highly dependent on the ability to improve productivity through the integration of new technology, deregulation measures, and more efficient investment spending. 17. In the absence of an external shock, Malaysia’s vulnerability is expected to be well contained in the near term. Malaysia’s external vulnerability appears to be manageable ‘The average output growth of 7% percent is envisaged for the decade, according to The Third Outline Perspective Plan, 2001-10 and the Eighth Malaysia Plan, 2001-05. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14- Box 5. Malaysia: Growth Impact of Global Environment and Electronics Slowdown The electronics sector played a vital role in Malaysia’s robust growth of industrial production and exports in 2000. Despite falling prices, electronics and electrical exports grew by 18.2 percent in U.S. dollar terms last year, reflecting a strong external demand, the effect of an undervalued exchange rate, and the upgrading of the electronics sector toward a higher value-added chain. As 2001 progressed, however, Malaysia’s output growth began to taper off significantly, reflecting theimpact of the global slowdown, - - particularly in electronics demand, which has ‘m become more acute than previously anticipated. Non-oil exports represented 99 percent of GDP in Iw 2000, and 60 percent of these were electronics and 8o electrical products. More than half of total exports m went to the United States, Singapore, and Japan. w Given its heavy dependence on electronics exports, Malaysia is highly sensitive to the global electronics m cycle; in addition, as the electronics cycle is 0 Dependence on Electronic Exports, 2000 affecting economies worldwide, there is little room for diversification to other destinations. Recent trade data point to a sharp deceleration in the growth of electronics exports, although this was matched by slowing imports, and the current account remained in large surplus. During the first four months of 2001, exports grew by only 0.2 percent in U.S. dollar terms (as compared to 18 percent over the same period of 2000), and exports of electronics and electrical goods fell by 1.8 percent (as compared to a 16.8 percent growth in January-April 2000). Exports dropped further by 7.3 percent year-over-year in May. The sharp drop in electronics demand has been partially offset by a reasonably strong performance in exports of electrical goods and petroleum products. Real GDP growth decelerated to 3.2 percent in Ql 2001 following a 6.3 percent in 44 2000. The global slowdown is expected to weaken, but not derail, the recovery in Malaysia. Staff estimates indicate that a decline in output growth by 1 percentage point in the United States and by l/2 percentage point in the rest of the world will reduce Malaysia’s real GDP by about 2 percent, assuming income elasticity of electronics and nonelectronics imports of Malaysia’s trading partners to be 5 and 1.5, respectively. l Countercyclical measures adopted by the authorities are expected to help cushion the economic slowdown and sustain domestic demand (Box 2). Malaysia’s high savings rate and low inflation can facilitate these policies. Furthermore, strategies adopted during the past decade have deepened and widened the industrial base, and enhanced the development of the services sector as a second engine to growth. l Malaysia is now in a stronger position to absorb external shocks than in 1997. In particular, policymakers now monitor an array of indicators that would help identify weaknesses in the economy, and progress in financial sector restructuring has improved the capacity of banks to absorb better the risks of corporate distress. l Despite reduced flows of capital to the region overall, foreign direct investment (FIX) inflows to Malaysia have shown some resilience, in part aided by the further liberalization of the FDI regime since the crisis. Nevertheless, investor confidence in the region has yet to be fully restored. In addition, there remain potential policy inconsistencies in Malaysia, as well as uncertainties regarding the succession of political leaders. Slow progress in corporate operational restructuring may continue to undermine investor confidence. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 15 - based on standard indicators (Table 6). The external current account continues to be in large surplus, as slowing exports (with high import content) are matched by decelerating imports; short-term external debt is low and reserves have remained adequate; and the capacity of banks to manage the risks of corporate distress has improved. Malaysia’s success in its most recent bond placement points to investor confidence in the fundamentals of the economy. 18. There are, however, considerable risks, both external and domestic, that could affect this outlook. Short-term capital outflows, albeit slowing, continue to be substantial. If other regional currencies weakened further, concerns about Malaysia’s external competitive- ness could rekindle speculative pressure on the ringgit peg. A negative turn in market sentiment toward a particular emerging market could have a contagion effect on other markets, including Malaysia. Furthermore, if domestic economic slowdown became protracted, slow progress in corporate operational restructuring could pose risks to banks in terms of rising NPLs and lowering capital. Uncertainty relating to the succession of the current political regime could also potentially undermine investors’ confidence. II. POLICY DISCUSSIONS 19. The policy discussions focused on the macroeconomic policy mix that would help Malaysia reduce vulnerabilities and better manage external shocks while averting an economic recession. During the period of rapidly expanding world growth and strong external demand from late 1998 to late 2000, the undervalued exchange rate, combined with the stability provided by the pegged exchange rate regime, was conducive to Malaysia’s brisk, export-led recovery. Subdued domestic demand and substantial excess capacity prevented price pressure from emerging even as fiscal and monetary policies were expansionary. Buoyant economic activities facilitated financial and corporate sector reforms, which have in turn enhanced the economy’s capacity to manage risks. 20. The deterioration in the external outlook and more volatile financial markets may call for a cautious rebalancing of macroeconomic policies. Given that the authorities were well aware of this challenge, there was broad agreement between the authorities and the staff team on the economic outlook, the fiscal policy stance, financial sector reforms, and the agenda for structural reforms as outlined in the various strategy documents (Box 6). There was, however, some divergence of views on the specific modalities of the monetary and exchange rate policy. A. Exchange Rate and Monetary Policies 21. The authorities reiterated their strong intention to maintain the peg at the prevailing rate, arguing that the ringgit was not misaligned with respect to Malaysia’s economic fundamentals in spite of some erosion in its relative competitiveness since last year. They saw high costs and risks associated with a move toward more flexibility in the exchange rate, which could lead to greater uncertainty and intensify, rather than reduce, pressures on the rate. They stressed that exchange rate stability in itself provided a strong Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 16- Box 6. Malaysia: Development Plans and Key Strategy Documents In 197 1, the Malaysian government instituted the 20-year New Economic Policy (NEP), a program for development which strived for greater economic well-being for the ethnic Malays or “bumiputras.” The National Development Policy (NDP) followed the NEP after 1990, and most recently, the National Vision Policy (NVP) replaced the NDP in outlining the general thrust of development policy. The third Outline Perspective Plan (OPP3, covering the period 2001-10) embodies the NVP objectives. Strategies are defined in more detail in a series of five-year plans, the latest being the Eighth Malaysia Plan (2001-05), the K(nowledge)-Economy Master Plan (see SM/OO/134), the Capital Markets Masterplan, and the Financial Sector Master-plan. Capital Markets Masterplan A Capital Markets Masterplan was issued in February 2001, motivated by the view that Malaysia needs a long-term planning framework to ensure an orderly and effective deregulation and liberalization of the capital markets. The plan charts the future direction of the Malaysian capital markets for the next ten years, with the intention of developing capital markets that are well regulated, financially sound, internationally competitive, and technologically advanced. The 24 strategic initiatives and 152 recommendations aim to develop Malaysia as the preferred fund-raising center for Malaysian companies; to promote an effective investment management industry and a more conducive environment for investors; to enhance the competitive position and efficiency of market institutions; to develop a strong and competitive environment for intermediation services; to ensure a stronger and more facilitative regulatory regime; and to establish Malaysia as an international Islamic capital market center. l Phase I(2OOI-3): To strengthen domestic capacity and develop strategic and nascent sectors. l Phase II (2004-5): To strengthen key sectors and gradually liberalize market access as necessary. l Phase ZZZ (2006 onwards): To expand and strengthen market processes and infrastructure, and enhance the market’s international positioning in areas of comparative advantage. Financial Sector Masterplan In conjunction with the Capital Markets Masterplan, a ten-year Financial Sector Masterplan was released in March 2001 with a view to improving the resilience and efficiency of the financial sector. The plan aims at achieving a financial system that: (i) comprises a core of domestic institutions; (ii) is large enough to compete in a more liberalized environment; (iii) is flexible enough to adjust and develop in the face of liberalization and globalization; (iv) is capable of supporting economic growth; and (v) is more technology driven. l Phase I (first 3 years): To build the capacity and capabilities of domestic banking institutions, including through the replacement of the current blanket deposit guarantees by a deposit insurance scheme. l Phase II (subsequent 3-4 years): To further increase competition between domestic and existing foreign banks, and enhance the role of market-based signals through deregulation. l Phase 111 (lust 34 years): To integrate the financial system into the international market, including allowing further foreign bank entry into Malaysia. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17- competitive advantage by facilitating business planning and pricing decisions. By contrast, reacting to short-term changes in market perceptions, when there was no significant underlying shift in economic fundamentals, would only undermine policy credibility. This could in turn result in a serious overshooting and a bout of competitive devaluations, with the obvious negative implications for the financial stability of the entire region. They observed that this view was shared by other ASEAN+ authorities at the group’s meeting in May. 22. Monetary pohcy in 2001 would be geared to support economic growth through maintaining low interest rates and ensuring suffkient credit growth. The authorities resisted the idea that domestic interest rates may need to be raised to defend the ringgit peg, noting that such a strategy in 1997 resulted in output contraction and severe financial and corporate stress.’ In fact, a key argument of the authorities against a shift to a more flexible exchange rate at this juncture was that such a shift may necessitate higher interest rates to prevent the exchange rate from depreciating too far, which would run counter to their goal of promoting a positive environment for economic activity. To complement the low interest rate policy, a minimum target (8 percent) for credit growth for each bank has been set for 2001. The authorities affirmed that this target was not a hard limit, and would be implemented flexibly, taking into account the rapid growth in private debt placements and specific circumstances facing each bank. Given this flexibility, they thought such a target would not-as feared by the staff team-lead to inefficient resource allocation or impede the capacity of banks to manage risks. 23. The staff team observed that the current set of policies, involving the combination of an exchange rate peg with low interest rates and an expansionary fiscal policy, could become inconsistent. Although the current level of the exchange rate might not be significantly misaligned from a longer-term perspective (Box 7), market participants were aware of the constraints facing the authorities in pursuing such a policy mix in the short run.” Escalating capital outflows and recent reserve losses underscored the fragile market sentiment and investors’ sensitivity to the peg. If the weakening of other regional currencies recommenced or if instability surfaced in an emerging market elsewhere, pressures on the ringgit could be renewed. Additionally, world export market shares of Korea and China have risen, whereas that of Malaysia has remained unchanged in recent years. ‘Staff estimates show that a 1 percent increase in interest rates would reduce corporate cash flows by about 0.9 percent of GDP, whereas a 10 percent depreciation would reduce cash flows of borrowers (assuming that they are hedged to some degree) by about 0.5 percent of GDP and their net wealth by about 2.1 percent (see the methodology for this estimation in Box VI.2 of SM/00/147, Supplement 1 (7/l l/00)). loIn principle, the May 2001 removal of the exit tax on the repatriation of portfolio capital could reduce further the scope for conducting monetary independence; in practice, however, the impact of the measure is likely to be imperceptible. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 18- Box 7. Malaysia: Export Performance and Competitiveness Since end-1999, Malaysia’s CPI-based real effective exchange rate has appreciated by 10 percent, while the currencies of Malaysia’s main competitors in Asia have depreciated, signaling a potential erosion of the country’s export competitiveness. l Based on a CGER analysis, the ringgit is not significantly misaligned. However, further gains in the U.S. dollar against regional currencies are likely to affect negatively Malaysia’s export performance, capital flows, and its overall external position. l The real effective exchange rate of the ringgit based on relative unit labor costs, which captures the increase in wages relative to the increase in productivity, has also appreciated in the last two years, and indicates a substantial loss of competitiveness by Malaysia relative to Korea. l Relatively high wages and certain rigidities in Malaysia’s labor market could contribute to a deterioration of competitiveness in the long run, especially after China’s entrance into the WTO. Real Effective Exchange Rate (1999HZ = 100) ULC-Based Real Effective Exchange Rate, Malaysia and (1993 = loo) I I Korea -Malaysia - - Philippines -Thailand Malaysia’s share in world exports has remained broadly unchanged since 1996, while some of its competitors in the region, Korea and China, have gained market share. l Malaysia’s export values over the first five months of 2001 declined by 1.4 percent from the same period last year, while imports decreased by 0.8 percent. The trade balance has continued to narrow since the end of 1999. l However, the stagnation of exports has been in line with the slowdown of export demand across the region, despite Malaysia’s relatively heavier dependence on electronics products. Couutry Exports as Percent of World Exports Export Values (s.a., 1999H2=100) 5 q CHINA q KOREA hfALAYSL4 UMTHAILAND -China - -Korea -Malaysia - - - Philippines - - Thailand Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 19- 24. Malaysia’s position had weakened since the time of last year’s consultation exercise, when it could have made a transition to a more flexible exchange regime with little risk. The staff team noted the importance of judicious timing for any transition, as well as active policy management subsequent to the initial move to minimize overshooting and excessive volatility of the rate. Nevertheless, the team expressed serious concern about the prospect of substantial short-term capital outflows this year, which would more than offset the envisaged current account surplus, even in the absence of any external shock. 25. If the authorities were convinced that a move in the exchange rate regime was imprudent under current conditions, it was the team’s view that they should then stand ready to adjust macroeconomic policies as necessary to defend the peg, including interest rates. This policy stance should be made known to market participants so as to underpin confidence in the authorities’ willingness to use market instruments to protect the regime. The alternative of tightening capital controls would not be desirable, as this would have long-lasting detrimental effects on Malaysia’s standing as an emerging market. For the medium term, the team considered that a more flexible exchange rate regime would be better suited to Malaysia’s economic structure. While acknowledging that trade and investment flows may have been facilitated by the certainty of the pegged regime over the past few years, the staff team pointed out that the country’s heavy reliance on exports made it prone to external shocks and cycles to which a fixed rate system might not be able to respond in a timely manner. 26. While in agreement that the recent decline in reserves was a matter of concern, the authorities noted a number of special, nonrecurring factors that contributed to the accelerated capital outflows. These included portfolio adjustment following an exceptional performance of the regional equity markets in early 2000, a repositioning of fund managers ahead of the prospective rebasing of the MSCI indices, strategic foreign investments by Malaysian corporations, foreign debt repayments, and forward purchases by corporations to hedge import payments in response to negative interest rate differentials; also, a significant amount of reserves loss at end-March 2001 reflects revaluation adjustment. The authorities deem the current level of reserves sufficient to support the peg, given the country’s low short- term external debt. For the period ahead, the prospects of an accommodative monetary policy stance in the United States would result in a convergence of monetary policies of Malaysia and industrial countries. Thus, in the absence of a confidence crisis affecting the entire region, the authorities expected capital outflows and the pressure on the exchange rate to subside, and the level of external reserves to stabilize. 27. The authorities stressed nonetheless that they stood ready to take the necessary actions in the event of an acute external shock, and that contingency policies have been formulated. They noted that Malaysia has become better prepared than in 1997 to manage a potential crisis. External developments are closely monitored, and stress tests and sensitivity analysis on the banking system are conducted on a regular basis. The authorities continually Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 20 - review all available policy options-their risks and benefits-in order to prepare for any eventuality. l1 B. Fiscal Policy 28. Fiscal stimulus in 2001 has been designed to avoid a sharp output slowdown and moderate risks relating to corporate and financial sector distress. The broad composition of the budget is consistent with the authorities’ objective to expand education and social services. The authorities maintained that investors need not be concerned about Malaysia’s fiscal sustainability, noting the country’s record of fiscal prudence, and considered such concerns to be far outweighed by the downside risks from a possible recession in the absence of a fiscal stimulus. Measures put in place last year have resulted in shorter lags in project implementation; if continued, the policy could rapidly help support domestic demand and the growth momentum this year. The staff team agreed with the authorities that, in the environ- ment of excess domestic capacity, it is unlikely that the fiscal plan will generate inflationary pressure or crowd out the private sector. Also, as additional development expenditure focuses largely on infrastructure, housing, and education (with low direct import content), the degree of fiscal expansion does not seem to put significant pressure on the external current account. 29. The staff team expressed strong reservations about the use of public funds to acquire infrastructure projects in financial trouble. The purchase of Malaysia Airlines, and similar plans for other privatized infrastructure projects later this year,12 raised concerns about the efficient use of budgetary resources, fiscal sustainability associated with a higher deficit, and the perception regarding the government’s commitment to adhere to market principles and best governance practices. The authorities explained that the acquisition of the national airline was necessary to ensure the government’s control of, and mandate to impose more efficient management on, a strategic industry, and that it was a normal market practice to pay a high premium above the traded share price in order to gain majority ownership. “Besides these contingency policy plans, Malaysia has access to some external financing in case of an emergency. This includes possible disbursements of $2.5 billion from the Miyazawa package and $100 million from the Chiang Mai Initiative; another $900 million under the Chiang Mai Initiative is linked to IMF conditionality. In addition, there is a regional swap arrangement of $300 million. 12Privatized infrastructure projects entail, for example, the construction of highways, mass- transit systems, or other utilities that is undertaken by the private sector through the build- operate-transfer method. A fuller description of these projects is outlined in Annex III. 1 of SM/00/147, Supplement 1 (7/l l/00). The government’s role in the projects is through the Infrastructure Development Fund. For 1999, the combined debt of this fund and other financial public enterprises was estimated by the staff to be equivalent to 4.8 percent of GDP. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2l- 30. As noted earlier, fiscal consolidation is now scheduled to commence next year. Given the fiscal rule to maintain an annual operating surplus, together with relatively short lifespan of projects initiated since 1998, it is expected that the consolidation can be brought about through lower development spending and with little need for structural changes in the budget. Based on the Eighth Development Plan, the fiscal deficit will decline from the exceptionally high level of 2001 to a balanced position by 2004, maintaining fiscal sustainability over the medium term. The staff team was in broad agreement with this schedule, but noted that, although public debt remains manageable, its level relative to GDP has risen significantly since the crisis and is now higher than several other emerging market economies; government debt service in relation to total revenue has also increased; and investors’ concerns about the sustainability of the fiscal stance have added some pressure on the external capital account. For these reasons, it is important to begin the consolidation exercise soon,13 Furthermore, given the possible acquisition of additional privatized projects this year, the government could be taking on implicit contingent liabilities associated with these projects. If these contingent obligations were realized, the fiscal position and debt profile could deteriorate rapidly, with adverse implications for market confidence and growth prospects. 31. The team encouraged the authorities to intensify their effort to monitor public debt and other potential liabilities of the government. More data have been compiled, including the liabilities associated with privatized projects planned to be acquired by the government this year. However, the analysis of the consolidated fiscal stance on- and off- budget and a comprehensive assessment of public debt sustainability could be enhanced with additional and more timely data. Thus, the staff recommended that reported public debt be expanded to include domestic debt of NFPEs not guaranteed by the government, and that debt monitoring be complemented by systematic collection of data on quasi-fiscal operations (such as off-budget and privatized projects) and contingent liabilities even if not explicitly guaranteed. The Ministry of Finance recently carried out a Self-Assessment of the Code of Good Practices on Fiscal Transparency; the report on the assessment is expected to be shared with the staff shortly. C. Liquidity and Credit Risk Management 32. The authorities plan to use market-based instruments for liquidity management more actively, including the BNM bills recently reintroduced. The development of a government securities market, including treasury bills, would further help improve the effectiveness of monetary operations, and provide a benchmark yield curve to support the development of the domestic bond market. i3Staff analysis indicates that Malaysia’s fiscal sustainability is nevertheless fairly robust, and will be attained even if the consolidation is postponed by another year, or the medium-term growth is somewhat weaker, or interest rates higher, than currently assumed. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 22 - 33. Banking institutions have begun to implement guidelines on credit risk management, developed by BNM as part of a series of guidelines on best practices in managing various types of risk. The prudential-based liquidity management framework was adopted by all financial institutions in early 2001, when the liquid asset requirement was removed; the new framework will support the effort to rely more on market-based policy instruments. With banks’ improved capacity for pricing loans in accordance with risks, together with the regulatory framework in place to monitor loan quality, the staff team noted that banks should be able to set appropriate deposit and lending rates without governmental directives. The staff team encouraged the removal of the ceiling on lending rates and abolition of the BLR (both of which are elements of the financial sector master plan) as soon as practicable. D. Trade and Capital Account Policies 34. The openness of Malaysia’s trade regime is comparable to that of other countries in the region,t4 and Malaysia has largely fulfilled its obligations under the WTO and AFTA.” The financial sector master plan outlines steps to further liberalize the financial sector under the General Agreement of Trade and Services of the WTO; these entail a more level playing field for incumbent foreign banks in the second phase and the introduction of additional foreign competition in the third and final phase. 35. Malaysia’s policies are to continue to attract foreign direct investment, and to promote diversification of trade to the services industry. As part of its industrial policy, measures to relax restrictions on foreign equity holdings in manufacturing, which expired at end-2000, were extended to 2003. As for the team’s concern that Malaysia might be overly dependent on electronics exports, the authorities noted that Malaysia had been moving to higher value-added products within the group, rendering its electronics exports reasonably well diversified. Nevertheless, efforts continued to be made to broaden the export base, and priorities in trade negotiations have included the promotion of services trade, especially the engineering, construction, healthcare, and educational services. 36. The capital account has been further liberalized. As noted earlier, restrictions on the repatriation of portfolio investment introduced in September 1998 have been completely 14Malaysia’s trade regime is rated as a “4” (broadly open) under the Fund’s lo-point trade restrictiveness index. This reflects an “open” rating for the tariff barrier component, and a “moderate” rating for the nontariff barrier component of the index. “Malaysia was granted a deferment of tariff reduction for finished automobiles under the AFTA (from 2003 to 2005), and is awaiting the granting of an extension to 2005 of the transition period under the WTO agreement on Trade-Related Investment Measures to phase out domestic content requirements in the automobile industry. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 23 - removed. The international use of the ringgit continues to be prohibited, however, as the authorities believe that this restriction has proven to be effective in preventing market instability by reducing opportunities for speculation on the currency, and that despite the restriction, sufficient instruments are available for resident traders and investors to hedge their foreign currency exposure. E. Structural Policies Financial sector reform 37. The authorities’ agenda on financial sector reform has been articulated in the financial sector and capital markets master plans. As noted earlier, the plans’ strategy is to enhance the resilience and efficiency of the financial and capital market systems, aiming at full integration of Malaysia’s financial system into the globalized market within the next ten years (Box 6). The staff team agreed with the authorities’ approach to lay out clearly at the outset the program of actions to bring about greater foreign competition, observing that the prospect of imminent competition would give domestic institutions strong incentives to upgrade their systems and operations. In this connection, the staff team noted the move by BNM to allow foreign-owned banks to offer inter-net banking as early as January 2002, and encouraged the authorities to look for ways to bring forward other aspects of the plans where possible. 38. The staff team encouraged the authorities to finalize the objectives of the deposit insurance scheme proposed under the financial sector master plan and to speed up its preparation and implementation. The authorities recognized that the current blanket deposit guarantee could create moral hazard among banking institutions, but argued that safeguards existed to minimize such a problem. These include BNM’s regular on-site examinations, which identify the level of risk in the institutions and their imprudent practices, and bi-annual reviews by BNM of the appointments of directors and chief executive officers to these institutions. 39. The reforms already implemented have resulted in a stronger and more resilient financial system, but vulnerabilities remain. The staff team pointed out that a deeper or more prolonged global economic slowdown might result in a resurgence of NPLs, especially relating to those large enterprises that have not completed the required operational restructuring. Such a development could exert pressure to extend the operations of Danaharta (the asset management company). The staff team advised the authorities to take a cautious approach so that future bailouts would be avoided. 40. The authorities responded that the banking system had been recapitalized and NPLs carved out of balance sheets so that the system could withstand even a protracted economic slowdown. The authorities were also of the view that further consolidation of the domestic banking system would be determined by market conditions. The staff team Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 24 - encouraged BNM to continue to upgrade its supervisory practices so as to achieve fully effective, risk-based supervision on a consolidated basis. 41. The staff team encouraged early participation of Malaysia in the Financial Sector Assessment Program. Given a relatively healthy financial system together with Malaysia’s advanced regulation and supervision practices, the exercise may result in a positive assessment compared to peer countries; at the same time, the evaluation could help identify remaining areas where improvements might be required. Corporate sector reform 42. The staff team recommended that enhanced measures be taken to help improve market perceptions relating to corporate reforms and the government’s commitment to promote good corporate governance practices. The authorities noted their plan to provide key data on progress with operational restructuring of the corporate sector, which would help to dispel uncertainties relating to the extent of restructuring. The staff team acknowledged the extensive efforts made toward the adoption of best practices, including upgraded disclosure standards and protection of minority shareholders, through tighter regulations and guide- lines.16 However, further incentives would be needed to ensure consistent application of these practices by the corporate sector, so as to reduce corporate vulnerabilities and preserve investor confidence. Social sector issues 43. Efforts are being made to increase labor mobility through retraining and the implementation of an electronic labor exchange. The authorities also see scope to further enhance flexibility in wage-setting through the process of collective bargaining by encouraging productivity-linked wage increases and less rigidity in its procedure. Their aim is to improve income distribution through the creation of employment opportunities and training programs, rather than increased transfers to those who are potentially able to work. Consistent with that principle, the staff team suggested that, although price controls were not prevalent, their replacement with cash payments to well-targeted groups could provide a more efficient means of subsidy. Statistical issues 44. The coverage and quality of Malaysia’s macroeconomic data have been strengthened since the crisis, and are generally good (Annex II). The frequency and ?I’he World Bank Report on the Observance of Standards and Codes-Corporate Governance Module was presented to the Board in January 2001. Most of the key features of regulatory requirements relating to shareholders’ rights, oversight of management, and disclosure and transparency are reported to conform to those desirable for good governance. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 25 - quality of the national income statistics have been upgraded, and the consumer price index has been rebased to year 2000. An impressive range of economic statistics are disseminated through official websites. While Malaysia has complied with all requirements of the Special Data Dissemination Standards, the authorities noted that excessive disclosure requirements and transparency could be potentially destabilizing since market participants tend to react to short-term developments while overlooking fundamentals. In addition to more complete information on public debt and contingent liabilities, the team noted that there was room for further improving the capital account of the balance of payments and reducing its reporting lag, and encouraged an early move to the statistical framework of the fifth edition of the Balance of Payments Manual. III. STAFF APPRAISAL 45. Recent pressures on Malaysia’s international reserves have raised concerns about its external vulnerability. A few key factors underscore these concerns. The economy is expected to be seriously affected by the global electronics slowdown owing to its high dependence on exports of electronics. Even though the Malaysian financial system has become more robust, slow progress with operational restructuring of the corporate sector has unsettled investor confidence. While the exchange rate does not seem to be misaligned from a medium-term perspective, the real effective appreciation of the ringgit since late 2000 has intensified market concerns about the sustainability of the peg, contributing to substantial capital outflows and escalating losses of official reserves. 46. The staff notes that pressures on reserves have abated with the recent stabilization of the regional currencies; however, the current macroeconomic policy mix has the potential of becoming inconsistent in the event of a reemergence of external financial instability. The combination of the exchange rate peg and expansionary fiscal and monetary policies exposes Malaysia to the risk of a rekindling of speculative pressure on the ringgit if depreciation of other regional currencies were to resume. The authorities fear that a modification in the exchange system at this time could lead to greater uncertainty and pressure on the exchange rate, with negative implications for the financial stability of the entire region. In these circumstances, they have reaffirmed their intention to maintain the ringgit peg at its current level, while giving an assurance to the staff that contingency plans have been formulated. The question is whether this is adequate to cope with the potential reemergence of external pressures. 47. The staff sees a clear case for the authorities to try to reassure the market that, should the need arise, macroeconomic policies will be managed in a more flexible manner so as to maintain policy consistency. Given the authorities’ determination to continue with the current peg, the staff urges that they stand prepared-and be seen to be prepared-to adjust other macroeconomic policies as warranted, including a tightening of interest rates. Such policy reaction would risk output contraction with implications for deteriorating financial and corporate balance sheets that could lead to a negative cycle similar to the one that exacerbated the 1997-98 crisis, but there would be little alternative given the Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 26 - exchange rate regime chosen by the authorities. The alternative of tightening capital controls to defend the peg should be avoided, and in this connection, the staff welcomes the removal of the remaining restriction on portfolio capital flows. 48. The possible policy dilemma in the near term demonstrates that a fixed exchange rate system may not be adequate to cope with future external shocks. The staff continues to view a more flexible exchange rate regime to be suited to Malaysia’s economic structure and supportive of the authorities’ long-term growth and stability objectives. Accordingly, the staff recommends that Malaysia shift to a more flexible-but cautiously managed-exchange rate regime as soon as circumstances permit. The move should be made when Malaysia is in a position of relative strength. Active management of the new regime initially, involving both the use of interest rates and reserve intervention, could help safeguard against excessive instability. However, any regime change will likely be accompanied by some volatility in the exchange rate, and this may be a price worth paying to avoid a forced, and more costly, exit from the peg later. Specific elements of an alternative monetary policy framework, which the authorities began deliberating a few years ago, should be prepared early so that the frame- work can be adopted in the wake of the more flexible exchange rate regime. 49. Barring an external shock, fiscal expansion in the current environment is appropriate to avoid a sharp economic downturn and moderate the risks of corporate and financial sector distress. Continued speedy implementation of development projects could effectively help to bolster domestic demand and sustain economic activity. Given the nature of the projects, the anticipated magnitude of fiscal expansion should not weaken the balance of payments in a significant way. Still, the fiscal stimulus in the current environment of turbulent financial markets comes at a possible cost of worsening market sentiment. Thus, the authorities should constantly review developments in the external account in case there is a need to adjust the fiscal program to safeguard the foreign reserve position. 50. The staff strongly supports the authorities’ plan to commence a fiscal consolidation exercise starting next year, which will help reverse the trend in the public debt and debt service ratios. It is important to dispel investors’ apprehension about Malaysia’s fiscal sustainability over the medium term, which could adversely affect the country’s capital account and long-term growth prospects. Efficient use of public funds in line with good governance practices, especially in connection with privatized projects or public enterprises, is also important in strengthening the efficacy of government spending. Based on the medium-term fiscal plan and the available data, Malaysia’s fiscal position remains sustainable. However, the government’s contingent liabilities associated with off- budget activities and privatized projects have not all been identified; if realized, these liabilities could weaken the public debt profile and constrain fiscal policy in the future. The authorities are encouraged to compile comprehensive information that identifies all potential liabilities of the government. 51. The authorities’ efforts to conduct monetary policy increasingly through market-based instruments are welcome. To this end, the development of a government Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 27 - securities market will deepen the domestic bond market, which will enable BNM to move toward more open market operations. BNM’s initiative to help banks manage different types of risks is commendable, and should be followed by steps to liberalize the interest rate structure so that deposit and lending rates can be set more freely by the banking institutions without fear of jeopardizing the system’s loan quality. The staff supports the authorities’ intention to apply the loan growth target for financial institutions in a flexible manner, so as not to distort proper credit allocation decisions. 52. The financial sector and capital market master plans call for deregulation measures that, if effectively implemented, would go a long way to improve the competitiveness and efficiency of the financial system. That system is expected to become more efficient with the recent consolidation, enhanced by more progressive regulatory frameworks. The staff supports the ultimate objective of full integration of Malaysia’s financial system into the global market, and encourages the authorities to look for ways to expedite actions toward this objective within the framework of the master plans. Given the moral hazard inherent in the current blanket deposit guarantees, it would be prudent also to move quickly toward finalizing the details of the proposed deposit insurance scheme. 53. Efforts to adopt best practices of corporate governance have been impressive, but some negative market perceptions remain, stemming from uncertainties about the pace of operational restructuring and questionable governance practices. To change such perceptions, strengthen investor confidence, and further reduce the potential vulner- ability of the financial system, there is a need for demonstrable progress in a number of areas. The staff encourages the authorities to speed up the effort to publish relevant data relating to the extent of operational restructuring. Additionally, the government needs to act unambig- uously in support of the rights of minority shareholders, and to take into account moral hazard concerns when acquiring entities in financial difficulties. Efforts could also be made to promote the even application of best practices of corporate governance in line with recently tightened rules and regulations. 54. The staff commends the efforts to broaden dissemination and promote transparency of macroeconomic statistics, including the plan to publish data on corporate operational restructuring. The authorities are encouraged to compile more complete information on public debt and contingent liabilities, and to further upgrade the capital account of the balance of payments. 55. It is recommended that the next Article IV consultation with Malaysia be held on the standard 12-month consultation cycle. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-28 - 45 40 35 30 25 20 15 Figure 1. Selected Asian Countries: Macroeconomic Indicators, 1994-2001 Reflecting external conditions, Malaysia’s growth is expected to slow... . . . investment to moderate... Real GDP Growth (In percent) 1 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 Proj. Proj. . . . and savings to decline... National Savings (In percent of GDP) ---_ ‘. . . Indonesia I . \ ,I- \ I’ 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 Proj. 15 10 5 0 -5 -10 -15 I5 12 -4 - 4 _ : I0 10 ‘5 8 3o 6 25 4 20 2 15 0 Gross Domestic Investment (In percent of GDP) Thailand \ Malaysia H------ Indonesia Philippines . . . while inflation is expected to remain low. 50 40 30 20 10 Inflation (Percent change) - 70 - 60 - 50 - 40 - 30 - 20 - 10 ” 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2oao 2001 Proj. Source: IMF, WEO. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 29 - Figure 2. Selected Asian Countries: Economic Performance, 1998-200 1 40 30 20 10 0 -10 -20 -30 180 Imporl 180 ts Value (1998Ql=lOO, in US$ terms) 160 160 140 140 120 120 100 100 80 80 60 60 The decline in industrial production foreshadowed.. Industrial Production (Fourquarter percent change) Korea / \ Philippines I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I 1998 1999 2000 2001 . . . and imports. I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I 1998 1999 2000 2001 Source: AF’D databases. 40 30 20 10 0 -10 -20 -30 . . . declining exports... a”” 150 Exports Value (1998Ql=lOO, in USS terms) h4alavsia 140 130 120 110 100 90 - \ I \ I 80 , ,b, , , , , , * , I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I 1998 1999 2000 2001 14 12 10 8 6 160 150 140 130 120 110 100 90 80 Trade balances, nevertheless, remained in large surpluses. Trade Balance 14 (In billions of U.S. dollars) 8 6 Philippines ,’ -e I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I 1998 1999 2000 2001 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 30 - Figure 3. Selected Asian Countries: Macroeconomic Indicators, 1994-2001 25 20 15 10 5 0 -5 -10 -15 . . . although reserves remain at adeauate levels... 300 800 160 Reserves (In percent of short-term debt by original maturity) 250 700 140 600 120 200 150 100 50 0 500 100 4oo 80 300 60 200 40 100 20 0 01 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 Pmj. The current account is expected to decline substantially... 15 10 5 0 -5 -10 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 Proj. 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 Proj. . ..and reserves have declined steadily... 9 Reserves 9 8 - (ln months of imports of goods and services) 8 0 1 I994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 Proj. . . . and external debt remains manageable. External Debt (In percent of GDP) - I’ I’ ’ ‘1 - / f&m&a I \ \ --- - 7 6 160 80 60 Sources: Ih4F. WE0 and APD databases. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicWhile the budget remains expansionary... 6 Budget Balance (In percent of GDP) 4 6 120 4 100 Thailand Malaysia 2 80 0 60 -2 -4 40 -4 -6 -6 20 -8 -8 0 -3l- Figure 4. Selected Asian Countries: Macroeconomic Indicators, 1994-200 1 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 Proj. Proj. Private sector credit continued to decline in relation to GDP... 200 200 30 Private Sector Credit 180 _ (by percent of GDP) - 180 160 140 120 100 ” 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 Proj. Sources: IMF, WE0 and APD databases. . . . Government debt remains at sustainable levels. Central Government Debt (In percent of GDP) /’ \ . . . and money growth remained low. Money Growth (Percent change) --.. -, Malaysia \ . fu3. lefr sca1e) Thailand 120 100 80 60 70 60 10 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 Pmj. I/ 1995 through 1999 are fiscal year basis (fiscal year ending March). 2000 is three quarters data. Figure for 2001 is calendar year basis. 2/Fiscal year basis (fiscal year ending September). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 32 - Figure 5. Selected Asian Countries: Monetary Indicators, 1998-2001 Nominal interests declined in the region in the post-crisis period... 20 Philippines .* . . -. 10 - ._ _. -. .I -- .-----.1-._..-..-. (left scale) .- -’ -. -s -- -. . 0 L---, __------ --- -10 JAN h4AR MAY JUL SEP NQV JAN MAR MAY NL SEP NOV JAN MAR MAY NL SEP NOV JAN MAR MAY 1998 1999 2lmo 2001 . . . and real rates remained low, andpositive (by late 1999 in the case of Indonesia). 30 25 20 15 10 5 0 -5 40 30 20 10 0 -10 Real Interest Rate Indonesia (right scale) / --w----v-_ -- ---e--H--, (right scale) / c--d-----_ -- ‘--e--H--, / JAN MAR MAY NL SEP NOV JAN h4AR MAY JUL SEP NOV JAN MAR MAY NL SEP NOV JAN h4AR MAY 1998 1999 2000 2001 Private credit growth began to pick up during 2000. Private Sector Credit Growth , (12-month percent change) 100 80 60 40 20 0 40 30 20 10 0 -10 -20 -30 -40 -50 160 140 120 100 80 60 40 20 0 -20 -40 -60 -80 JAN MAR MAY NL SEP NOV JAN MAR MAY NL SEP NOV JAN MAR MAY NL SEP NOV JAN MAR MAY 1998 1999 2000 2001 Sources: IMF, IFS; and APD databases. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-33 - Figure 6. Selected Asian Countries: Financial Indicators, 1994-2000 250 Afler the initial recovery, stock prices again declined. Stock Market Price Index 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 During the recovery, portfolio outflows from I Net Portfolio Investment Malaysia abated, but resumed in 2000. Philippines 10 5 0 -5 -10 -15 . . . as reflected in market capitalization. 400 ‘20 350 100 300 80 250 200 60 150 40 100 20 50 0 0 Market Capitalization (In percent of GDP) Y”““” n”, SY (k?ji scale) , ’ I ,’ a’ A , I Malaysia (right scale) Capital outflows in the post crisis period remain large. 10 20 15 5 10 0 5 0 -5 -5 -10 -10 -15 -15 -20 Total Capital Flows (Net) (In percent of GDP) Malaysia 1 -20 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2ooo 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 Sources: IMF, WE0 and APD databases. 350 300 250 200 150 100 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 34 - Table 1. Malaysia: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 1997-2001 l/ 1997 1998 1999 Prel. 2000 Proj. 2001 Real sector (percent change) Real GDP growth Real domestic demand CPI inflation (period average) 7.3 -7.4 6.1 8.3 2.0 7.7 -25.2 1.9 15.7 5.6 2.7 5.3 2.7 1.5 1.5 Saving and investment (percent of GDP) Gross domestic investment Private, including stocks Public Gross national saving Private Public 43.0 26.7 22.3 26.8 26.8 29.9 10.1 4.9 11.1 9.7 13.1 16.5 17.3 15.7 17.1 37.0 39.9 38.2 36.2 33.3 17.0 24.9 21.3 22.5 20.4 20.0 15.0 16.9 13.7 12.8 Fiscal sector (in percent of GDP) Federal government overall balance 2/ Revenue 21 Expenditure and net lending 2/ Consolidated public sector overall balance Total public sector debt 3/ 2.5 -1.5 -4.1 -4.2 -5.9 23.5 20.1 19.7 18.3 19.6 20.9 21.5 23.8 22.5 25.5 6.9 -1.5 -0.4 -1.5 -4.3 54.6 61.3 64.1 61.4 67.6 Monetary sector (annual percent change) M3 growth Net domestic assets Net claims on private sector 19.5 1.4 7.1 6.3 4.6 29.6 -12.7 -0.3 7.9 10.7 23.2 0.6 0.4 6.6 6.9 Balance of payments (in US$ billion) Trade balance Exports, f.o.b. Imports, f.o.b. Services account Current account balance (In percent of GDP) 3.7 17.6 22.8 21.0 19.0 77.4 71.8 83.9 98.2 95.9 73.7 54.1 61.2 77.2 76.9 -8.1 -5.7 -8.5 -10.7 -10.9 -5.9 9.5 12.6 8.4 6.0 -5.9 13.2 15.9 9.4 6.5 Capital account balance Medium- and long-term Ofwhich: Net foreign direct investment Short-term Errors and omissions ii 3:6 -4.6 -2.3 -2.6 2.7 1.9 -5.3 -2.5 -6.6 ;z -9:9 -1.3 -6.1 -9.9 2.9 3.0 1.8 1.4 -9.0 -13.0 -3.3 0.0 Overall balance -6.0 4.5 4.7 -1.0 -3.9 International trade (annual percent change) Export value Import value 0.7 -7.3 16.9 17.0 -2.4 1.2 -26.6 13.0 26.2 -0.3 Gross official reserves (in US$ billion) (In months of following years’ imports of goods and nonfactor services) (In percent of short-term debt) 41 (In percent of monetary base) Total external debt (in US$ billion) (In percent of GDP) 21.7 26.2 3.8 4.1 146.4 209.3 73.6 283.9 43.9 42.9 43.8 59.4 33.8 29.1 30.9 29.9 26.0 3.9 3.7 3.0 302.9 345.3 295.1 256.7 274.5 . . . 42.5 41.3 42.4 53.8 46.1 45.7 24.0 21.0 20.7 Short-term external debt (percent of total) 4/ Debt-service ratio (In percent of exports of goods and services) 6.5 6.6 6.1 5.2 4.9 Memorandum items: Nominal GDP (RM million) Stock market index (end of period) 5/ 281,796 283,243 300,339 340,706 352,733 594 586 812 680 630 Sources: Data provided by the Malaysian authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections. l/ Period ending December 3 1. 2/ Draft budget 2001. 3/ Staff estimates; excludes nongovernment-guaranteed domestic debt of the nonfinancial public enterprises. 41 By remaining maturity. 5/ Data for 2001 refer July 16. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 35 - Table 2. Malaysia: Balance of Payments, 1997-2001 l/ 1997 1998 1999 Prel. 2000 Proj . 2001 Current account balance -5.9 9.5 12.6 8.4 6.0 Trade balance 3.7 17.6 22.8 21.0 19.0 Exports, f.o.b. 77.4 71.8 83.9 98.2 95.9 Imports, f.o.b. 73.7 54.1 61.2 77.2 76.9 Services and income balance -8.1 -5.7 -8.5 -10.7 -10.9 Net transfers -1.5 -2.4 -1.7 -2.0 -2.1 Capital account balance 2.2 -2.6 Medium- and long-term flows, net 6.8 2.7 Public sector, net 1.7 0.5 Net federal goverment -0.6 0.5 Net other public sector 2.3 0.1 Private sector, net 5.1 2.2 Net foreign direct investment 3.6 1.9 Inward direct investment 6.3 2.7 Outward direct investment -2.7 -0.9 Net borrowing 1.5 0.3 Short-term flows, net -4.6 -5.3 Commercial banks 2.8 -3.1 Portfolio (equity) -7.8 -0.4 Other (including trade credit) 0.5 -1.8 -6.6 -6.1 -9.9 3.3 2.9 3.0 1.8 1.0 1.5 0.8 0.2 1.4 1.0 0.8 0.1 1.6 1.9 1.5 2.5 1.8 1.4 3.9 3.9 2.8 -1.4 -2.0 -1.4 -0.9 0.0 0.1 -9.9 -9.0 -13.0 -3.1 -1.2 . . . 0.1 -1.9 . . . -7.0 -5.9 . . . Net errors and omissions 21 -2.3 -2.5 -1.3 -3.3 0.0 Overall balance -6.0 4.5 4.7 -1.0 -3.9 Gross official reserves (In percent of short-term debt) 31 (In months of following year’s imports of goods and nonfactor services) 21.7 26.2 30.9 29.9 26.0 146.4 209.3 302.9 345.4 295.2 3.8 4.1 3.9 3.7 3.0 (In percent of GDP) Current account balance Trade balance Exports Imports Services and income balance Capital account balance Medium-term capital Net foreign direct investment Net short-term flows Net errors and omissions 2/ Overall balance -5.9 3.6 77.3 73.6 -8.1 2.2 6.8 3.6 -4.6 -2.3 -6.0 13.2 15.9 24.4 28.8 99.4 106.2 75.0 77.4 -7.9 -10.7 -3.5 -8.4 3.8 4.2 2.6 3.1 -7.3 -12.6 -3.4 -1.6 6.2 5.9 (In percent) 9.4 6.5 23.5 20.3 109.5 102.8 86.1 82.5 -11.9 -11.7 -6.8 -10.7 3.2 3.3 2.0 1.5 -10.0 -13.9 -3.7 0.0 -1.1 -4.2 Memorandum items: Export volume growth Import volume growth Changes in terms of trade 5.5 0.4 13.5 16.3 -0.7 5.7 -18.8 10.8 23.6 1.1 0.3 1.6 0.7 3.6 -0.2 (In billions of U.S. dollars) Sources: Data provided by the Malaysian authorities; and Fund staff estimates. l/ Period ending December 3 1. 2/ Includes portfolio investment. 3/ By remaining maturity. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 36 - Table 3. Malaysia: Federal Government Fiscal Operations, 1997-2001 1997 1998 1999 2000 Budget Proj. 2001 2001 Total revenue 66,114 56,874 59,157 62,338 69,439 69,073 Tax revenue 55,664 47,387 47,917 48,709 55,737 55,071 Nonpetroleum tax revenue 47,325 39,790 41,338 41,561 46,996 46,583 Taxes on net income and profits l/ 23,802 24,753 22,595 21,255 23,885 25,422 Sales tax and excises 2/ 18,719 12,571 15,402 16,745 19,291 17,757 Taxes on international trade 4,804 2,466 3,341 3,561 3,820 3,404 Petroleum tax revenue 8,339 7,597 6,579 7,148 8,741 8,488 Oil production companies 3,861 4,046 2,856 6,010 7,568 7,568 Excises and duties 4,478 3,551 3,723 1,138 1,173 920 Nontax revenue 10,450 9,487 11,240 13,629 13,702 14,002 Petroleum 4,09 1 4,202 5,074 5,863 6,830 6,309 Other 31 6,359 5,285 6,166 7,766 6,872 7,693 Total expenditure and net lending 59,002 61,036 71,429 76,811 89,960 90,041 Current expenditure 45,473 44,868 48,878 57,710 61,899 61,940 Wages and salaries 13,195 13,984 14,436 16,357 16,921 16,921 Other expenditure on goods and services 7,273 5,795 8,443 8,642 11,470 11,470 Interest payments 6,425 6,928 7,941 9,055 10,179 10,179 Subsidies and transfers 18,580 18,161 18,058 23,656 23,329 23,370 Development expenditure 13,529 16,168 22,55 1 19,101 28,061 28,101 Direct expenditure 12,761 15,204 19,141 25,022 28,819 28,819 Net lending 41 768 964 3,410 -5,921 -758 -718 Overall balance 7,112 -4,162 -12,272 -14,473 -20,521 -20,968 Current balance 20,588 11,955 10,210 4,628 7,540 7,133 Financing -7,112 4,162 12,272 14,473 20,521 20,968 External -1,681 1,806 2,923 864 3,800 3,800 Domestic -5,431 2,356 9,349 13,609 16,721 17,168 Total revenues Tax revenue Nonpetroleum tax revenue Petroleum tax revenue Nontax revenue 23.5 19.8 16.8 3.0 3.7 20.0 16.7 (In percent of GDP) 19.7 18.3 16.0 14.3 Total expenditures Current expenditure Development expenditure 20.9 16.1 4.8 14.0 13.8 12.2 2.7 2.2 2.1 3.3 3.7 4.0 21.5 23.8 22.5 15.8 16.3 16.9 5.7 7.5 5.6 19.3 19.6 15.5 15.6 13.1 13.1 2.4 2.4 3.8 4.0 25.0 25.5 17.2 17.6 7.8 7.9 Overall balance 2.5 -1.5 -4.1 -4.2 -5.7 -5.9 Current balance 7.3 4.2 3.4 1.4 2.1 2.0 Memorandum items: Fiscal stance (in percent of GDP; base year = 199.5) -1.1 0.9 3.9 5.5 6.7 6.9 Fiscal impulse (in percent of GDP; base year = 1995) -1.3 2.0 3.1 1.6 1.2 1.4 Cyclically neutral balance (in percent of GDP; base year = 1995) 1.4 -0.6 -0.2 1.3 1.0 1.0 (In millions of ringgit) Sources: Data provided by the Malaysian authorities; and Fund staff projections. l/ Includes taxes on property. 2/ Includes “other tax revenue.” 3/ Includes capital revenue and foreign grants. 4/ Includes adjustment for accounts payable. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3I- Table 4. Malaysia: Banking Survey, 1997-2001 l/ 1997 1998 1999 2000 Ql 2000 2001 42 43 Q4 Ql April (In millions of ringgit; end of period) Net foreign assets 2/ 34,735 85,267 114,304 116,756 123,293 122,068 122,741 116,756 114,087 116,561 Net domestic assets 354,567 309,663 308,760 333,005 297,160 304,170 308,182 333,005 33 1,954 330,584 Domestic credit 423,735 413,642 415,711 450,156 415,921 422,399 428,730 450,156 452,937 454,250 Net claims on general government -6,776 -19,318 -18,802 -13,224 -19,399 -22,268 -22,285 -13,224 -11,187 -10,549 Claims on private sector 430,512 432,960 434,513 463,380 435,320 444,667 451,015 463,380 464,124 464,799 Other items net -69,168 -103,979 -106,952 -117,151 -118.761 -118,229 -120,548 -117,151 -120,983 -123,666 420,453 426,238 430,923 449,762 446,041 447,145 60,004 57,969 57,151 68,564 63,458 60,790 69,648 68,887 69,298 79,276 74,317 74,262 -4,125 -4,027 -3,942 -4,116 -4,170 -4,107 -5,520 -6,891 -8,205 -6,596 -6,688 -9,365 349,314 358,479 364,373 372,229 374,183 377,474 254,468 261,502 263,631 270,848 270,247 274,797 91,605 93,784 98,007 98,680 101,989 100,781 3,241 3,193 2,735 2,700 1,947 1,896 11,136 9,790 9,399 8,969 8,400 8,881 389,302 394,930 423,064 449,762 61,970 51,483 65,220 68,564 81,683 57,886 74,936 79,276 -19,711 -4,516 -4,795 -4,116 -2 -1,887 -4,921 -6,596 295,909 314,833 345,760 372,229 198,875 214,436 249,863 270,848 90,335 94,881 92,781 98,680 6,699 5,516 3,115 2,700 0 0 0 0 3 1,423 28,614 12,085 8,969 Total liquidity (M3) Monetary liabilities Narrow money (Ml) 3/ Less: Intersystem demand deposits Less: NFl deposits at BNM 4/ Broad quasi-money Quasi-money and bank repos 3/ NFI time and savings deposits 3/, 4/ NFI repos 4/ Less: Intersystem fixed deposits Other financial liabilities 5/ Memorandum items: Broad money (M2) Narrow money (Ml) 310,347 299,768 335,857 358,154 334,247 339,205 341,363 358,154 352,052 357,041 81,683 57,886 74,936 79,276 69,648 68,887 69,298 79,276 74,317 74,262 (Contribution to growth of initial stock of total liquidity) Net foreign assets 2/ -5.3 13.0 7.4 0.6 8.6 4.8 3.5 0.6 -2.2 -1.6 Net domestic assets 24.9 -11.5 -0.2 5.7 -2.0 1.1 2.0 5.7 8.3 7.9 Domestic credit 25 .O -2.6 0.5 8.1 2.8 5.8 3.7 8.1 8.8 9.1 Net claims on federal government 0.1 -3.2 0.1 1.3 0.0 0.4 -0.5 1.3 2.0 2.1 Claims on private sector 24.9 0.6 0.4 6.8 2.8 5.4 4.1 6.8 6.9 7.0 Other items net -0.1 -8.9 -0.8 -2.4 -4.8 -4.7 -1.7 -2.4 -0.5 -1.2 Total liquidity (M3) 19.5 1.4 7.1 6.3 6.6 5.9 5.5 6.3 6.1 6.3 Monetary liabilities 1.2 -2.7 3.5 0.8 4.0 1.7 0.0 0.8 0.8 0.2 Broad quasi-money 14.3 4.9 7.8 6.3 6.5 6.4 6.2 6.3 5.9 6.6 Other financial liabilities 4.1 -0.7 -4.2 -0.7 -4.0 -2.2 -0.8 -0.7 -0.7 -0.5 Source: Data provided by the Malaysian authorities. I/ Consolidation of the accounts of the monetary authorities, commercial banks, and Bank Islam according to the Fund’s monetary statistics framework. 2/ 1997 figures exclude valuation gains on official foreign currency reserves; financial institutions’ net foreign assets valued at current exchange rates. 31 Includes deposits of nonresidents, state and local governments, statutoty bodies, and the Employees Provident Fund. 4/Consist of nonmonetary financial institutions (finance companies, merchant banks, and discount houses). 5/ Includes bank and NFl negotiable instruments of deposit. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-38 - Table 5. Malaysia: Indicators of Financial Institution Soundness, 1997-2001 1999 2000 2001 1997 1998 1999 2000 Mar. Jun. Sep. Dec. Mar. Jun. Sep. Dec. Mar. Loan-deposit ratio l! Commercial banks Finance companies Merchant banks Share of loans to broad property sector 2/ Commercial banks Finance companies Merchant banks 31.8 33.3 38.2 38.8 34.2 36.4 37.4 38.2 38.3 38.4 39.2 38.8 41.7 24.7 28.4 32.2 29.5 28.3 31.3 31.2 32.2 32.0 31.8 30.1 29.5 32.8 32.7 32.1 38.7 36.8 31.4 38.2 39.5 38.7 39.5 39.4 38.5 36.8 38.0 Risk-weighted capital ratio (RWCR) 31 10.5 11.8 12.5 12.4 12.3 12.9 12.8 12.5 13.0 13.0 13.1 12.4 12.1 Commercial banks 10.3 11.7 12.8 12.2 12.1 12.9 13.2 12.8 13.1 13.0 13.2 12.2 11.7 Finance companies 10.3 11.1 10.8 11.6 12.0 12.0 10.8 10.8 11.3 11.8 11.8 11.6 12.0 Merchant banks 13.3 15.2 14.5 16.6 14.5 14.2 13.8 14.5 15.8 16.4 15.8 16.6 17.8 Nonperforming loans (NPLs) of the banking system 41 Gross NPLs Commercial banks Finance companies Merchant banks 6.0 18.6 16.6 15.3 4.9 15.0 13.8 13.2 9.2 27.0 23.6 21.1 4.8 32.2 29.6 24.7 Net NPLs Commercial banks Finance companies Merchant banks 4.1 13.6 11.0 9.6 3.2 10.3 8.8 8.1 6.5 21.6 16.3 13.4 3.5 25.4 23.4 18.2 General provisions of the banking system 5/ 2.0 2.2 2.2 2.2 Commercial banks 2.2 2.3 2.3 2.2 Finance companies 1.7 1.9 1.6 2.2 Merchant banks 1.9 2.2 2.3 2.2 Total outstanding bad-debt provision of the banking system 6/ Commercial banks Finance companies Merchant banks Memorandum items: Total nonperforming loans (including loans sold to Danaharta) (percent of total loans) 7/ Banking system’s return (percent) On assets On equities 91.9 92.9 83.9 83.7 90.1 88.2 87.4 83.9 83.6 84.8 85.2 83.7 82.1 96.2 88.6 85.2 96.6 86.1 85.8 86.8 85.2 87.9 90.8 91.6 96.6 102.7 87.4 84.3 72.9 70.1 75.7 74.1 77.6 72.9 71.2 71.2 69.7 70.1 60.9 66.2 42.4 50.2 54.4 43.1 47.1 48.0 50.2 51.7 52.3 53.8 54.4 50.8 79.7 49.5 55.6 57.2 50.0 55.3 54.6 55.6 55.4 55.9 57.0 57.2 51.7 46.9 31.8 43.4 51.2 31.2 31.9 37.0 43.4 47.0 47.1 50.2 51.2 51.0 68.0 34.6 34.6 40.3 36.1 39.7 34.8 34.6 39.0 40.8 40.6 40.3 40.2 21.1 23.4 22.3 24.1 23.3 23.3 23.4 23.5 23.2 23.0 22.3 23.2 1.3 -0.9 0.7 1.5 17.5 -12.3 9.8 20.4 (In percent, end of period) (In percent of total loans) 19.7 18.0 17.7 16.6 16.4 16.4 14.9 15.1 13.8 14.1 26.7 25.4 23.9 23.6 22.4 36.5 34.2 32.5 29.6 29.0 14.2 12.3 12.0 11.0 10.7 11.1 9.4 9.6 8.8 8.9 21.3 20.1 17.9 16.3 15.0 28.4 25.5 25.5 23.4 21.8 2.2 2.2 2.1 2.2 2.2 2.4 2.4 2.3 2.3 2.3 1.6 1.6 1.7 1.6 1.9 2.1 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 (In percent of nonperforming loans) 16.2 16.1 15.3 13.7 13.7 13.2 22.5 21.7 21.1 29.7 30.5 24.7 10.4 10.1 9.6 8.6 8.5 8.1 15.1 14.0 13.4 21.7 22.4 18.2 16.2 14.3 21.1 27.2 10.6 9.4 13.5 20.2 2.2 2.2 2.2 2.1 2.2 2.2 2.2 2.1 2.1 2.2 2.2 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.2 2.3 Source: Data provided by the Malaysian authorities. I/ Deposits include repos and negotiable instruments of deposit; loans exclude housing loans sold to Cagamas Berhad. the national mortgage corporation. 2/ Lending for construction, real estate, and housing purchases: excludes loans sold to Cagamas Berhad. 3/The minimum RWCR is currently 8 percent for all institutions. 4/ Loans are classified as nonperforming if payments are overdue for three months or more; prior to January 1, 1998, this period was six months. Total loans include housing loans sold to Cagamas Berhad. Beginning in 1997, net NPL ratios are computed net of interest-in-suspense and specific provisions for both numerators and denominators. 5/In percent of total loans including housing loans sold to Cagamas Berhad, minus interest-in-suspense and specific provisions; minimum requirement is 1.5 percent (1 percent prior to January 1, 1998). 61 Aggregate of provisions for general, specific, and interest-in-suspense. 7/Leans were first sold to Danaharta beginning Q3 1998. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 39 - Table 6. Malaysia: Indicators of External Vulnerability, 1997-2001 1997 1998 1999 Prel. 2000 Proj. 2001 Financial indicators Public sector debt (in percent of GDP) I/ 54.6 61.3 64.1 61.4 67.6 Total liquidity (M3: percent change, 12-month basis) 19.5 1.4 7.1 6.3 4.1 Private sector credit (M3: percent change, 12-month basis) 23.2 0.6 0.4 6.6 6.4 Treasury bill interest rate (percent, 12-month basis, average) 2/ 6.4 6.9 3.5 2.9 3.3 External indicators Exports (percent change, 12-month basis in U.S. dollars) 0.7 -7.3 16.9 17.0 -2.4 Imports (percent change, 12-month basis in U.S. dollars) 1.2 -26.6 13.0 26.2 -0.3 Current account balance (in US$ billion) -5.9 9.5 12.6 8.4 6.0 Current account balance (in percent of GDP) -5.9 13.2 15.9 9.4 6.5 Capital and financial account balance (in US$ billion) 3/ -0.1 -5.0 -7.9 -9.4 -9.9 Of which: Short-term capital 4/ Foreign direct investment Other investment (medium- and long-term loans) Gross official reserves (in US$ billion) (In months of following years’ imports of goods and nonfactor services) Short-term foreign assets of the financial sector (in US$ billion) 4/ Short-term foreign liabilities of the financial sector (in US$ billion) Gross official reserves/total liquidity (M3) (in percent) Gross official reserves/monetary base (in percent) Total short-term external debt by original maturity (in US$ billion) Total short-term external debt by remaining maturity (in US$ billion) Total short-term external debt by original maturity to reserves (in percent) Total short-term external debt by original maturity to total debt (in percent) Total short-term external debt by remaining maturity to reserves (in percent) Total short-term external debt by remaining maturity to total debt (in percent) Total external debt (in US$ billion) -6.9 -7.7 -11.2 -12.3 3.6 1.9 2.5 1.8 3.1 0.9 0.8 1.1 21.7 26.2 30.9 29.9 3.8 4.1 3.9 3.7 8.7 5.6 6.8 8.1 17.7 9.2 7.5 7.2 15.7 26.0 27.7 25.2 73.6 283.9 256.7 274.5 11.1 8.5 6.0 4.6 14.8 12.5 10.2 8.7 51.2 32.3 19.5 15.4 25.3 19.7 14.1 11.2 68.3 47.8 33.0 29.0 33.8 29.1 24.0 21.0 43.9 42.9 42.5 41.3 -13.0 1.4 1.6 26.0 3.0 . . . . . . 21.1 . . . 4.1 8.8 15.8 9.7 33.8 20.7 42.4 Of which: Public and publicly guaranteed debt 16.8 17.9 20.3 20.6 22.1 Total external debt to exports of goods and services (in percent) 45.8 50.5 43.4 36.2 37.3 External amortization payments to exports of goods and services (in percent) 4.4 4.4 4.1 3.7 3.5 Exchange rate (per U.S. dollar, period average) 2.8 3.9 3.8 3.8 3.8 Exchange rate (per U.S. dollar, end of period) 3.9 3.8 3.8 3.8 3.8 REER appreciation (+) (12-month average) 5/ -2.4 -20.5 2.9 2.5 5.0 Financial market indicators Kuala Lumpur Stock Exchange Composite Index 6/ Ten-year sovereign bond spread 61 594.4 586.1 812.3 679.6 630.0 39.4 561.0 153.5 217.5 259.0 Sources: Data provided by the Malaysian authorities; and Fund staff estimates. l/ Excludes unguaranteed domestic debt of the nonfinancial public enterprises. 21 Discount rate on three-month treasury bills; data for 2001 refer to July 5,200l. 3/ Includes errors and omissions. 4/ Includes net external position of banking system, portfolio investment, and errors and omissions. 5/ For 2001, data refer to estimates as of July. 6/ Data for 2001 refer to July 16. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 40 - ANNEX I Malaysia: Medium-Term Illustrative Scenario In line with the most recent baseline WE0 projections, world growth is assumed to decline to 2.6 percent in 2001, with export demand for electronics slowing significantly. Given this unfavorable outlook, as well as uncertainties regarding the movements of the yen and other regional currencies, Malaysia’s policy mix and readiness to respond to external developments will have a significant influence on its outlook. The near-term projections assume that global and regional financial systems continue to be relatively stable, and that there is no significant pressure on the ringgit (see attached table). In this environment, the authorities are able to carry out expansionary macroeconomic policies and avoid an excessive output slowdown. . Real GDP growth is projected to decelerate to 2.0 percent in 2001, with the contribution from net exports expected to be significantly negative. The main impetus for growth is anticipated to come from sustained domestic demand, supported by the fiscal stimulus and accommodating monetary policy. Declining private investment in relation to GDP is expected to be in part compensated by increased public investment so as to narrow the output gap. . Short-term capital oufflows would continue, but they are not expected to intensify (as experienced in late March/early April of this year). For the remainder of the year, net capital outflows are projected to be matched by the current account surplus. Thus, official reserves are projected to remain at $26 billion by end-2001 (adequate to cover three months of the following year’s imports of goods and nonfactor services, and about three times short-term external liabilities). There are downside risks, however, to the near-term outlook: . The magnitude and duration of the global economic slowdown could be more severe. Staff estimate that a further one percentage point decline in GDP growth in the United States and a half percentage point decline in growth in the rest of the world will reduce Malaysia’s real output by about 2 percent and weaken the current account by 1 percentage point of GDP. . Sharply lower world oil prices could also dampen Malaysia’s economic growth and reduce its current account surplus. Staff estimate that, for every $5 decline in world oil prices, Malaysia’s current account will fall by about a half percent of GDP and real GDP will decline by 0.8 percent. . International financial markets could become much more volatile. In particular, if other regional currencies weakened further, concerns about Malaysia’s external competitiveness could rekindle speculative pressure on the ringgit peg, exacerbating capital outflows and leading to further losses of external reserves. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4l- ANNEX I Malaysia’s medium-term prospects will benefit from the more robust financial and corporate systems and improved productivity, as well as the authorities’ plan to move the country to a knowledge-based economy. Assuming a recovery in the global economy and regional outlook beginning next year, Malaysia’s potential growth rate of 6% percent is expected to be attained in 2003. Investment quality is projected to improve, with the investment-to-GDP ratios substantially below the precrisis levels. The current account surplus is projected to narrow as output growth approaches its potential. The inflation rate is expected to remain within 3 percent, consistent with world inflation. Sensitivity analysis of the public debt dynamics indicates that Malaysia’s fiscal sustainability over the medium term is robust: Public debt is projected to be contained at about 68 percent of GDP in 2002, even if the fiscal consolidation is postponed by another year to 2003 and a balanced budget is not achieved until 2006. Under this scenario, the public debt would improve in 2004 and reach about 53 percent of GDP in 2006. This scenario could arise if, for example, projected recovery in external demand does not materialize and the authorities resort to fiscal expansion for another year. The public debt ratio is estimated to rise by about 2-2s percentage points of GDP for every 2 percentage points increase in domestic and external interest rates. The impact of exchange rate movement on public debt is relatively modest given Malaysia’s low level of external debt. It is estimated that a 10 percent devaluation will raise the public debt ratio by about 2 percentage points of GDP. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 42 - ANNEX I Malaysia: Medium-Term Illustrative Scenario, 1999-2006 l/ Prel. Proj. 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 Real sector (in percent change) Real GDP growth Real domestic demand CPI inflation (period average) Saving and investment (in percent of GDP) Gross domestic investment Private, including stocks Public Gross national saving Private Public Fiscal sector (in percent of GDP) Federal government overall balance Consolidated public sector overall balance Total public sector debt 2/ Monetary sector (in annual percent change) M3 growth Net domestic assets Net claims on private sector Balance of payments (in US$ billion) Trade balance Exports, f.o.b. Imports, f.o.b. Services account balance Current account balance (In percent of GDP) Capital account balance Overall balance International trade (in annual percent change) Export value Import value Gross official reserves (in US$ billion) (In months of following year’s imports of goods and nonfactor services) (In percent of short-term debt) 3/ 6.1 8.3 2.0 4.8 6.2 6.2 6.2 6.2 1.9 15.7 5.6 7.4 7.4 7.5 7.5 7.5 2.7 1.5 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.0 3.0 22.3 26.8 26.8 28.0 28.8 29.4 30.2 31.5 4.9 11.1 9.7 11.9 13.6 15.1 16.3 17.6 17.3 15.7 17.1 16.1 15.2 14.3 13.9 13.9 38.2 36.2 33.3 33.5 33.1 32.4 32.1 32.3 21.3 22.5 20.4 20.4 19.4 18.1 17.6 17.7 16.9 13.7 12.8 13.1 13.7 14.4 14.5 14.6 -4.1 -4.2 -5.9 -3.5 -1.5 0.0 0.5 0.6 -0.4 -1.5 -4.3 -3.1 -1.4 0.1 0.6 0.7 64.1 61.4 67.6 66.0 62.0 56.6 51.1 46.0 7.1 6.3 4.6 8.0 9.4 9.4 9.4 9.3 -0.3 7.9 10.7 9.1 9.3 9.3 9.3 9.2 0.4 6.6 6.9 6.2 6.9 7.3 7.5 7.5 22.8 21.0 19.0 18.2 17.9 17.2 16.4 15.6 83.9 98.2 95.9 102.0 109.6 118.0 127.1 137.1 61.2 77.2 76.9 83.8 91.7 100.8 110.7 121.6 -8.5 -10.7 -10.9 -11.4 -11.8 -12.1 -12.4 -12.6 12.6 8.4 6.0 5.5 4.6 3.6 2.4 1.1 15.9 9.4 6.5 5.5 4.3 3.0 1.8 0.8 -6.6 -6.1 -9.9 -4.4 -1.9 -0.6 0.8 2.5 4.7 -1.0 -3.9 1.1 2.8 2.9 3.2 3.5 16.9 17.0 -2.4 6.3 7.5 7.7 7.8 7.9 13.0 26.2 -0.3 8.9 9.5 9.9 9.9 9.8 30.9 29.9 26.0 27.1 29.8 32.8 36.0 39.5 3.9 3.7 3.0 2.8 2.9 2.9 2.9 3.0 302.9 345.3 295.1 306.4 356.1 437.7 473.0 500.8 Sources: Data provided by the Malaysian authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections. I/ Period ending December 3 1. 2/ Staff estimates; excludes nongovernment guaranteed domestic debt of the nonfinancial public enterprises. 3/ By remaining maturity. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 43 - ANNEX II Malaysia: Statistical Issues The quality and availability of Malaysia’s economic statistics are generally good. Malaysia subscribes to the Special Data Dissemination Standard (SDDS). The coverage, periodicity, and timeliness of Malaysia’s economic statistics are consistent with SDDS’ prescription. National accounts: As a result of the Fund’s Statistics Department’s (STA) technical assistance project, the Department of Statistics Malaysia (DOSM) has developed good quarterly National Accounts Statistics that meet the SDDS requirements. Currently, DOSM compiles and publishes annual and quarterly estimates of GDP by activity and by expenditure at current and constant prices, and annual estimates for gross disposable income, saving, and net lending for the economy based on the 1968 SNA. The quarterly data are released within 2-3 months of the reference quarter. In addition, DOSM has developed experimental institutional sector income and outlay accounts in accordance with the 1993 SNA. The 1993 SNA institutional sector accounts project was undertaken with UNDP funding, and with technical support from UNSD. There are significant numerical differences in the estimates for key aggregates, particularly for GDP, Final Consumption Expenditures (Government, Household, NPISH, and Gross Capital Formation) common to both the 1968 SNA-based GDP compilation system and the 1993 SNA-based institutional sector accounts system. For that reason, the institutional sector accounts data have not been officially released, and the report from the project has been given a limited circulation. Prices: The CPI and the PPI are available on a timely and comprehensive basis. As part of the PPI program, an import price index is compiled, but not an export price index. STA has encouraged DOSM to start developing an export price index and has provided some assistance in this respect. Year 2000 has been set as the base for the calculation of the CPI. Labor market statistics: Data on employment and unemployment are disseminated quarterly, whereas wages/earnings are disseminated monthly. Monetary statistics: Over the past two years, Bank Negara Malaysia (BNM) and STA have made a joint effort to bring Malaysia’s monetary statistics reported to the Fund into conformity with the Fund’s new reporting format. Publication according to the new format began with the April 1999 issue of International Financial Statistics.. Coverage of the monetary data has recently extended to Islamic banks, but there remains a need to expand the coverage of the “Other Depository Corporations Survey” to include saving and development institutions as well. Balance of payments (BOP) statistics: Although DOSM and BNM have made some progress toward the implementation of the recommendations of the December 1998 BOP Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 44 - ANNEX II mission, the follow-up BOP mission of December 1999 concluded that many of the issues would be more effectively addressed if responsibility for compilation of the BOP data were to be formally transferred from DOSM to BNM. The December 1999 mission also recommended that, given the decision of the Inter-Agency Planning Group to delay publication of the BOP presentation in the BPiW format until a full year’s data are available in the new format, an attempt should be made in the interim to publish quarterly data in the BPM4 format. This recommendation was implemented in January 2000, although the release of quarterly data still lags about six months after the end of the reference quarter. BOP presentation in the BPMS format is still not being published. l Fiscal accounts: Progress has been made in improving the consolidation of accounts across various levels of government. An effort has been made to broaden the coverage of major nonfinancial public enterprises (NFPEs). Existing major weaknesses pertain to the quantity of data on NFPEs and accounting of quasi-fiscal and off-budget operations. As recommended by the multisector STA mission in 1997, increased efforts are necessary to obtain more detailed data on their domestic and foreign financing by type of debt instrument and debt holder. In addition, a joint effort is necessary from the Economic Planning Unit (EPU), Treasury, and BNM to compile the data on quasi-fiscal and off- budget operations, improve the reliability of the data, and consolidate them into the fiscal accounts of the public sector. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicANNEX 11 Y E Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 46 - ANNEX III I. II. III. IV. V. VI. VII. Malaysia: Fund Relations (As of May 31,200l) Membership Status: Joined March 7, 1958; Article VIII General Resources Account: SDR Million Quota 1,486.60 Fund holdings of currency 878.45 Reserve position in Fund 608.16 SDR Department: SDR Million % Quota 100.0 59.1 40.9 % Allocation Net cumulative allocation 139.05 100.0 Holdings 91.42 65.7 Outstanding Purchases and Loans: None Financial Arrangements: None Projected Obligations to Fund: None Exchange Rate Arrangement: Since September 1998, the ringgit has been pegged to the U.S. dollar at the rate of RM 3.8 per U.S. dollar. This middle rate is quoted by the central bank, with the maximum spread between the buying and selling rate fixed at 2 percent for the U.S. dollar, the deutsche mark, the pound sterling, the Japanese yen, the Hong Kong dollar, and the Singapore dollar. The spread is 3 percent for all other currencies. Malaysia has accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2,3, and 4. Malaysia maintains bilateral payments arrangements with 24 countries. As of 1998, 19 of these arrangements potentially gave rise to exchange restrictions which, since these were set up before July 1994, had been temporarily exempted pursuant to Decision No. 10749-(94/67). Since then the restrictive features of these arrangements have been eliminated. On the capital account, foreign borrowing above RM 5 million is subject to approval, and foreign ownership of Malaysian equity is limited in some sectors (notably banking). Capital control measures imposed in early 1994 have all been lifted, with the exception of reserve requirements on foreign liabilities of banks, which is viewed as leveling the playing field with sources of domestic funding. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 47 - ANNEX III In September 1998, Bank Negara Malaysia imposed the following exchange and capital restrictions: (0 Transfers to and from ringgit-denominated external accounts of nonresidents not physically in Malaysia are restricted. The restrictions were relaxed in steps and were completely removed as of May 2,200l. (ii) Ringgit funds abroad were required to be repatriated by end-September 1998, following which it was prohibited to bring in more than RM 1,000 per person per trip. The import and export of ringgit by travelers, both resident and nonresident, are restricted, also to that amount; effective March 1, 1999, the ceiling allowed for the import and export of ringgit was raised to RM 10,000 for border trade with Thailand. Effective December 20,2000, licensed commercial banks can extend intraday credit of up to RM 200 million, and overnight credit of up to RM 10 million to non-resident stock-broking companies and nonresident global custodian banks. That replaces a complete prohibition of the extension of credit facilities to nonresident institutions. (iii) All export and import settlements must be made in foreign currency. (iv) Trading in Malaysian shares on Singapore’s Central Limit Order Book (CLOB) was de facto prohibited as a result of strict enforcement of the existing law requiring Malaysian shares to be registered in the Kuala Lumpur Stock Exchange prior to trade. The issue of the blocked CLOB securities has now been resolved, and the securities have been gradually released. These restrictions do not contravene Malaysia’s obligations under Article VIII. VIII. Last Article IV Consultation: Malaysia is on the standard 12-month consultation cycle. Discussions for the 2000 Article IV consultation took place during April 20-May 4,200O. The staff report (SM/OO/134) was discussed by the Executive Board on July 25,200O. IX. Technical Assistance: MAE: A mission visited Kuala Lumpur in February 1998 to assist the authorities in developing a strategy for financial sector reform, assess the vulnerability of banking institutions, advise on measures related to regulatory practices, and review liquidity and monetary management arrangements. STA: A monetary statistics mission visited Kuala Lumpur in June 1998 and made recommendations for improving the methodology for the valuation of foreign currency- denominated accounts as well as the consistency of the interbank accounts in the monetary statistics. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-48 - ANNEX III STA: A staff member visited Kuala Lumpur in October/November 1998 to provide assistance in the compilation of quarterly national accounts. The mission was a follow-up to a multisector statistics mission in April 1997 and a quarterly national accounts mission in February 1998. STA: A mission visited Kuala Lumpur in December 1998 to review Malaysia’s balance of payments and international investment position statistics. BCS: A staff member visited Kuala Lumpur in February 1999 to assist Bank Negara Malaysia in developing a centralized database system. STA: A mission visited Kuala Lumpur in May 1999 to provide further technical assistance on the development of quarterly national accounts. The mission was the last one in a series of statistics missions in the area of quarterly national accounts, following the multisector statistics mission in April 1997. MAE: A mission visited Kuala Lumpur in February 2000 to conduct a workshop in bank supervision, focusing on the issues of consolidated supervision, risk-based supervision, and accounting requirements. STA: A staff member visited Kuala Lumpur in May 2001 to discuss issues related to Malaysia’s participation in the 200 1 Coordinated Portfolio Investment Survey. X. Resident Representative/Advisor: None Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 49 - ANNEX IV Malaysia: Relations with the World Bank Group’ (As of March 31,200l) The World Bank Group recommenced relations with Malaysia in 1998 after a three-year hiatus. As a first step in this process, the Bank fielded a mission in February/March 1998 to begin preparation of a Country Economic Memorandum (CEM), which focused on: the social impact of the recent economic turmoil and the adequacy of the social safety net; the role of contingent government liabilities in infrastructure development; competition policy and the financial viability of the corporate sector in light of recent market developments; and past and future trends in saving, investment, and consumption. The CEM was subsequently trans- formed into a Structural Policy Review (SPR) paper, with an emphasis on crisis-related and medium-term constraints to development (see below). In addition, the World Bank provided technical input into the financial sector strategy that was elaborated by an MAE mission in February 1998. The World Bank also provided a fast-disbursing Economic Recovery and Social Sector Loan of $300 million in June 1998; Fund staff participated in the preparation of the loan. In February 1999, the World Bank completed its SPR and shared it with the government. The SPR focused on: social safety nets; financial and corporate sector restructuring; macro- economic policies for growth; and public sector management. A Social and Structural Review Update was reviewed by the government and released in January 2001 under gray cover. The Bank’s Board of Directors discussed a Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) paper on March 30, 1999. The CAS proposed a program of lending and nonlending services designed to mitigate the social consequences of the regional economic crisis and support medium-term social development, and to restore short-term growth and medium-term competitiveness. In conjunction with the CAS, the Bank’s Board approved the following projects on the same date: (i) Social Sector Support Project ($60 million); (ii) Education Sector Support Project ($244 million); and (iii) Year 2000 Technical Assistance Project ($100 million). Given the strength of the recovery, however, it is unlikely that the government will draw against the Social Sector Support Project loan. The World Bank completed a Public Expenditure Review (PER) which was reviewed by the government, and distributed under gray cover. The PER: (i) assesses the government’s performance in allocating and using public funds during the crisis; (ii) addresses selective fiscal challenges in the social sectors and infrastructure facing Malaysia over the medium term; and (iii) assesses public expenditure management. IBRD (In millions of U.S. dollars) Total loans approved 4,150 Total held by IBRD 1,294 Total undisbursed 312 Total commitments in FY 1997 0 Total commitments in FY 1998 300 Total commitments in FY 1999 404 Total commitments in FY 2000 0 Recent mission reports: “Meeting Labor Needs: More Workers and Better Skills,” February 1995. “Structural Policy Review,” January 1999. “Country Assistance Strategy,” March 1999. “Social and Structural Review Update,” January 200 1. ‘Based on information provided by World Bank staff. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 50 - ANNEX V Malaysia: Relations with the Asian Development Bank’ (As of May 31,200l) The Asian Development Bank (AsDB) has provided 76 loans totaling $1,987.5 million to Malaysia since 1968. Approximately 66 percent of the loans have been for projects in the agriculture and social infrastructure sectors. Of the 76 loans received, 5 were active at the end of May 2001. Cumulative disbursements to date totaled $1.4 billion. No new loans or technical assistance projects were approved in 1998, 1999, and 2000. Malaysia: Cumulative AsDB Lending (As of December 3 1,200O) Sector Number Amount of Loans of Loans (in millions of U.S. dollars) Percent Social infrastructure Agriculture and natural resources Energy Transport and communications Industry and nonfuel minerals Others Finance Total 21 750.6 26 566.0 11 321.5 15 255.1 1 53.0 1 26.3 1 15.0 76 1,987.5 37.8 28.5 16.2 12.8 2.7 1.3 0.7 100.0 AsDB’s operational strategy for Malaysia was approved before the Asian financial crisis in 1997. The possible scope for AsDB’s future assistance, including support to regional cooperation initiatives involving Malaysia is yet to be discussed with the government. ‘Based on information provided by AsDB staff. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-51- ANNEX VI Social and Demographic Indicators of Selected Asian Countries Malaysia Indonesia Korea Philippines Thailand POPULATION Total population, midyear (millions) Growth rate (percent annual average) Urban population (percent of population) Total fertility rate (births per woman) POVERTY (percent of population) National headcount index Urban headcount index Rural headcount index INCOME GNP per capita (U.S. dollar) Consumer price index (1995=100) Food price index (1995=100) INCOME/CONSUMPTION DISTRIBUTION Gini index Lowest quintile (percent of income or consumption) Highest quintile (percent of income or consumption) SOCIAL INDICATORS Public expenditure Health (percent of GDP) Education (percent of GNP) Social security and welfare (percent of GDP) Net primary school enrollment rate (percent of age group) Total Male Female Access to safe water (percent of population) Total Urban Rural Immunization rate (percent under 12 months) Measles DPT Child malnutrition (percent under 5 years) Life expectancy at birth (ye@ Total Male Female Mortality Infant (per thousand live births) Under 5 (per thousand live births) Adult (15-59) Male (per 1,000 population) Female (per 1,000 population) Maternal (per 100,000 live births) 22.2 203.7 46.4 75.2 61.2 2.1 1.4 0.9 1.9 0.9 55.9 38.8 80.4 56.8 21.0 3.1 2.7 1.6 3.6 1.9 7.5 11 20.3 . . 40.6 . . 17.8 . . 22.5 . . 22.0 . . 51.2 . . . . . . 3,670 640 8,600 1,050 2,160 112 182 118 127 121 120 119 117 121 128 48.5 36.5 31.6 46.2 41.4 4.5 8.0 7.5 5.4 6.4 53.8 44.9 39.3 52.3 48.4 1.3 4.9 1.4 0.6 2.5 1.7 1.7 1.4 3.7 3.4 4.8 0.9 1.9 . . 0.8 100 99 100 100 88 100 100 100 100 87 100 99 100 100 89 89 62 83 83 100 78 93 91 86 54 77 81 ii: 88 83 91 20 ;: 34 85 83 80 83 . . 30 E . . ;i 75 8 12 186 113 39 65 2; Liz 76 2; 71 72 ;i 43 9 32 29 52 11 40 33 237 204 197 206 186 94 149 116 450 20 170 44 Source: 2000 World Development Indicators CD-ROM, World Bank. l/ Data provided by the Malaysian authorities, 1999. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 52 - ANNEX VII Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 01/xX FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE International Monetary Fund 700 lgth Street, NW Washington, D. C. 20431 USA IMP Concludes Article IV Consultation with Malaysia On [August, 29,2001], the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded the Article IV consultation with Malaysia. ’ Background Malaysia’s economic recovery gained momentum during 2000 with real GDP growing by 8.3 percent, sustained by strong expansion in consumption and investment, and supported by stimulative macroeconomic policies and a favorable trend in exports. Since late last year, however, the economy has been adversely affected by the global slowdown. The impact has been significant, as Malaysia’s exports are highly dependent on electronics. Real GDP growth in the first quarter of 200 1 decelerated to 3.2 percent as sluggish export earnings combined with deteriorating consumer sentiment weakened private consumption, while private investment also slowed sharply, reflecting, in part, an adjustment to overstocking in the previous year. Inflation has remained low and capacity utilization has fallen in recent months. While the current account remained in large surplus during 2000, capital outflows intensified in the second half of last year, leading to losses in gross official reserves. The capital outflows continued into 200 1, particularly during late March/early April as the yen and other regional currencies weakened and the ringgit appreciated markedly in real effective terms, raising concerns about the sustainability of the ringgit peg. Impact of a prolonged slump in global electronics demand on the region has also become more pronounced. However, the negative interest rate differentials between Malaysia and the United States have narrowed significantly following successive cuts in the ’ Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial information, and discusses with officials the country’s economic developments and policies. On return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the country’s authorities. This PIN summarizes the views of the Executive Board as expressed during the [August, 29,2001] Executive Board discussion based on the staff report. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicANNEX VII - 53 - U.S. interest rate in recent months, helping to mitigate capital outflows and easing the pressure on the peg. The pace of reserve losses has slowed, and boosted by a $1 billion Euro-bond issue, the official reserves as of mid-July 2001 stood at $27 billion, covering 3% months of this year’s imports of goods and nonfactor services, or three times short-term external liabilities. Recent developments point to fragile market sentiment toward the region. The Kuala Lumpur stock market index has declined substantially since its peak in February 2000, and, while the market has recently rallied, the decline in 2001 to date has been around u percent. Macroeconomic policies were expansionary in 2000, supportive of economic recovery in a low inflationary environment. To mitigate the impact of the recent global slowdown on domestic activities, the authorities announced a package of additional fiscal stimulus in a March 2001 supplement to the year’s already expansionary budget. Interest rates are also kept low to balance the need to support economic growth, sustain domestic savings, and maintain adequate profit margin for banks. During 2000, progress made in financial sector reforms included the near completion of the bank merger program and ongoing enhancement of regulation and supervision. Capital-asset ratios have stayed well above the minimum 8 percent; and the level of nonperforming loans has been contained. Strengthening of banking regulation and supervision has continued to focus on risk-based and consolidated supervision. The financial sector and capital markets master plans released in early 2001 propose to achieve full integration of the domestic financial system into the globalized market over a ten-year period. Corporate financial positions benefited from the strong recovery and corporate debt restructuring in 2000. Nevertheless, corporate governance issues have been brought to the fore by a few high-profile cases, which have been cited as having a dampening effect on the stock market and delaying corporate recapitalization efforts. In early May 200 1, the authorities abolished the 10 percent exit levy on repatriated profits from portfolio investment of less than a year and eased the rules governing the purchase of property by foreigners. Executive Board Assessment <Begin Typing Here> Public Information Notices (PINS) are issued, (i) at the request of a member country, following the conclusion of the Article IV consultation for countries seeking to make known the views of the IMF to the public. This action is intended to strengthen IMF surveillance over the economic policies of member countries by increasing the transparency of the IMF’s assessment of these policies; and (ii) following policy discussions in the Executive Board at the decision of the Board. I Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public