DOCUMENT OF INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND NOT FOR PUBLIC USE FOR AGENDA sM/oo/2 18 CONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION September 28, 2000 To: Members of the Executive Board From: The Acting Secretary Subject: Namibia-Staff Report for the 2000 Article IV Consultation Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staff report for the 2000 Article IV consultation with Namibia, which will be brought to the agenda for discussion on a date to be announced. Mr. Caramazza (ext. 34675) and Mr. Yuguda (ext. 36591) are available to answer technical or factual questions relating to this paper prior to the Board discussion. Unless the Documents Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the WTO Secretariat on Friday, October 6, 2000; and to the African Development Bank and the European Commission, following its consideration by the Executive Board. Att: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicCONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND NAMIBIA Staff Report for the 2000 Article IV Consultation Prepared by the StaffRepresentatives for the 2000 Consultation with Namibia Approved by Jose Fajgenbaum and Jesus Seade September 28,200O Contents Page Executive Summary .............................................................................................................. 1 I. Introduction ...................................................................................................................... .3 II. Recent Economic Developments ....................................................................................... 4 III. Report on the Discussions ............................................................................................. 10 A. Public Finances .................................................................................. ..lO B. Monetary and External Sector Issues ........................................................ 15 C. Labor Market ................................................................................... 18 D. Statistical Issues .................................................................................. .19 IV. Staff Appraisal .............................................................................................................. 19 Boxes 1. Revenues from the Southern African Customs Union,. ..................................................... ,7 2. Banking Sector Performance ............................................................................................ .9 3. Hw/AIDs ....................................................................................................................... 12 4. Banking Supervision ....................................................................................................... 17 5. Labor Legislation and Labor Relations ........................................................................... .20 Figures 1. Selected Economic Indicators, 1990-99 ......................................................................... .24 2. Financial Operations of the Central Government, 1990/9 l- 199912000 ........................... .25 3. Interest Rates: January 1992-February 2000 .................................................................. .26 4. Effective Exchange Rates: 1990-2000 ............................................................................ .26 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public. Tables 1. Selected Financial and Economic Indicators, 1995-99. ................................................... .27 2. Financial Operations of the Central Government, 1997/98-2004/05 ............................... .28 3. Monetary Survey, 1994-99 ............................................................................................ .29 4. Balance of Payments, 1995-99.. ..................................................................................... .30 5. Medium-Term Scenario, 2000-05 ................................................................................... 3 1 Appendices I. Relations with the Fund ................................................................................................... 32 II. Relations with the World Bank Croup ........................................................................... .34 III. Statistical Issues ........................................................................................................... .35 IV. Social and Demographic Indicators .............................................................................. .37 V. Public Information Notice ............................................................................................. .38 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicEXECUTIVE SUMMARY l Since the conclusion of the last Article IV consultation in January 1999, economic activity in Namibia has expanded at a modest pace. Real GDP grew by 3 percent in 1999, the same rate as in 1998, reflecting modest recoveries in mining and construction, as well as an expansion in government consumption. Consumer price inflation stabilized at an average annual rate of 8.6 percent in 1999 and the first half- of 2000, broadly in line with core inflation in South Africa. The fiscal position has deteriorated, however. The overall fiscal deficit (including grants) widened to 4.8 percent of GDP in 1999/2000, from 4.4 percent the previous year, as revenues and grants failed to keep pace with the rise in expenditure. l In line with the decline in interest rates in South Africa in 1999, as investor confidence was reestablished and pressures in foreign exchange and financial markets abated, monetary conditions in Namibia eased significantly. Market interest rates have declined somewhat further in 2000. The Namibia dollar-which is pegged to the South African rand at par- depreciated against the U.S. dollar by 5 percent during 1999 and, reflecting the renewed pressures on the rand, by a further 13 percent in the first half of 2000. An improved export performance, subdued import demand, and a robust expansion in current transfers contributed to a marked increase in the external current account surplus to 5.1 percent of GDP in 1999. Gross international reserves at end-1999 were equivalent to two months of imports of goods and services. 0 The discussions centered on the need and the measures necessary to place the public finances on a sustainable path over the medium term. Fiscal pressures have been growing in recent years, fuelled by primarily by a high and rising public sector wage bill, increasing transfers to parastatals, and an inefficient expenditure control system. The result has been an annual budget deficit of 4% percent of GDP on average during the past five years and a corresponding steep rise in domestic public debt. 0 The fiscal situation is rendered particularly precarious by the fact that over a third of revenues (corresponding to around 12 percent of GDP) consist of receipts from the Southern African Customs Union (SACU) common revenue pool, which are expected to decrease considerably in the medium term, as the revenue-sharing formula is revised and as external tariffs are lowered with the implementation of the South Africa-EU free trade agreement and the SADC free trade area. Furthermore, the fiscal and economic costs of the country’s high prevalence of HIV/AIDS infection will grow over time. 0 The staff stressed the urgency both to constrain the rate of growth of public expenditure and to broaden the tax base, and the need to restructure an expenditure profile that has seen expenditure on personnel and interest costs squeeze expenditure on goods and services. It noted that a sustainable fiscal strategy must address squarely the issue of personnel expenditure, and urged the authorities to adopt a medium-term plan with clear annual targets aimed at reducing the share of personnel expenditure Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2- through reductions in the size of the civil service, continued wage moderation, and strengthened efforts to control hiring by line ministries. The staff advised that an improvement in the efficiency of the public sector through a streamlined civil service, greater operational efficiency, and strengthened expenditure control would create room for a redirection of budgetary outlays to health and education, particularly in view of the HIV/AIDS crisis and the need to enhance the skills base of the labor force. l The staff emphasized that stronger efforts should be made to divest parastatals in the context of a comprehensive medium-term privatization program with a clear timetable. This would help to foster investment, encourage competition, and lead to the improvements in effkiency necessary for sustained higher growth. l The mission advised the authorities not proceed with the establishment of an offshore financial center (OFC) without an adequate assessment of the purpose and expected benefits of such a center, and without having in place the appropriate institutional structures. The staff also advised the authorities against the proposed diffusion of supervisory authority in the financial sector among three agencies, if the planned OFC were to proceed, as this would hamper the effective supervision of financial institutions. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3- 1. INTRODUCTION 1. The 2000 Article IV consultation discussions with Namibia were held in Windhoek during May 16 to June 1,200O.’ Meetings were held with the Minister of Finance, the Governor of the Bank of Namibia, other senior officials, and representatives of the business and financial communities and the labor unions.2 2. In concluding the 1998 Article IV consultation on January 8, 1999,3 Executive Directors noted that since independence in 1990 Namibia’s overall macroeconomic performance had been broadly satisfactory, but stressed the need to raise economic growth so as to provide job opportunities for the rapidly growing labor force and thus reduce poverty. To these ends, Directors underscored the need to build on recent efforts to improve the environment for investment and private sector development through privatization of state- owned enterprises, and increased labor market efficiency and wage flexibility. They also underscored the need to adopt a strategy to lower the tax burden, reduce expenditures, especially on the civil service, and strengthen the fiscal position. 3. Legislative and presidential elections were held on November 30 and December 1, 1999. President Nujoma was re-elected to a third five-year term-after parliament amended the Namibian constitution to allow him to stand for re-election-and the ruling South West African People’s Organization (SWAPO) won over 75 percent of the vote, retaining its two-third majority in both the National Assembly and the National Council. A cabinet reshuffle was announced in March 2000, but Finance Minister Mbumba retained his post. 4. Namibia enjoys political stability. It operates a multiparty democracy with a constitution which guarantees fundamental human rights, including freedom of association and expression, an uncensored press, and the proscription of arbitrary arrest and detention without trial. The right of individual property ownership and payment ofjust compensation for any expropriation by the state are equally enshrined. A new code of conduct, approved by the National Assembly in 1999 and expected to come into effect in 2000, will require ’ The staff team comprised Mr. Caramazza (head), Mr. Yuguda, Ms. Kawakami (all AFR), Ms. Chakraborty (TRE), and Ms. Kabia (assistant, AIR). 2 Namibia has accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4 of the Fund’s Articles of Agreement and has not made use of Fund resources. Summaries of Namibia’s relations with the Fund and the World Bank Group are contained in Appendices I and II, respectively. Appendix III reports on statistical issues and Appendix IV provides selected social and demographic indicators. 3 See SUR/99/2. There was no mission to Namibia during 1999, as the authorities requested that Article IV consultation discussions be held after the legislative and presidential elections in December 1999 and the formation of a new government in March 2000. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4- members of parliament to disclose personal and financial interests; these disclosures will be open to public inspection. The judiciary in Namibia is quite independent while an equally independent office of the Auditor-General with wide powers of oversight over spending of government ministries has been institutionalized. The latter presents annual reports to the parliament .4 II. RECENTECONOMICDEVELOPMENTS 5. Per capita income in Namibia, at about US$1,900, is among the highest in sub- Saharan Africa, but income distribution is highly skewed and poverty is widespread. In 1993, the latest year for which survey data are available, 55.8 percent of the population lived on less than US$2 a day. The depth and prevalence of poverty, as measured by the poverty gap, was also high at 30.4 percent.’ As a result of the poor growth performance in the second half of the 199Os, real GDP per capita has stagnated. This suggests that there has been little if any reduction in consumption poverty since independence in 1990. 6. Poverty has other dimensions besides income, however. These include health, education, and access to clean water and other services. In these dimensions there has been progress: literacy and school enrollment rates have risen considerably; child immunizations have risen and infant mortality rates have declined markedly; and access to water and rural electrification have increased. Since independence the government has embarked on a major program of expanding education in order to widen access and correct the inequalities of the apartheid era. In addition, health expenditures have grown substantially over the same period as primary health care services were extended to all Namibians. Life expectancy has fallen, however, owing to the increased prevalence of HIV/AIDS. Indeed, the very high prevalence of HIV/AIDS is reversing the economic and social development gains of the past decade. 7. Economic activity in Namibia has expanded modestly in recent years (Figure 1 and Table 1). Real GDP grew by 3 percent in 1999, the same rate as in 1998, supported by modest recoveries in mining, agriculture, and construction activity, as well as by an expansion in government consumption expenditure. The recovery in the mining sector was confined to diamond mining, especially offshore mining, as value added in other mining 4 Notwithstanding the large size of the government sector, and the continued dominance of one political party since independence in 1990, governance has not been a major issue in Namibia. According to a recent survey of business people, risk analysts, and the public by Transparency International, Namibia ranked among the least corrupt (the top one third) of the 90 industrial and developing countries in the survey. Of the 19 sub-Saharan countries in the survey, it ranked second. ’ The poverty gap is calculated as the mean shortfall below the poverty line, expressed as a percentage of the poverty line. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-5- contracted. Value added in the fish processing industry, which accounts for about one-quarter of value added in manufacturing, also contracted, owing to high operating costs and increased competition from South Africa. Unemployment has remained high, at around 35 percent of the labor force.6 8. From a peak of almost 18 percent in 1992, the annual inflation rate (measured by the consumer price index for Windhoek) declined to a low of 6.2 percent in 1998 (see Figure 1) This reflected both the impact of the successful tightening of monetary policy in South Africa on Namibia’s import prices and the more moderate pace of economic activity in the second half ofthe 1990s than previously. The 12-month inflation rate bottomed at 4.3 percent in May 1998 but edged up to 8.7 percent by end-1998, as the depreciation of the currency (see below) exerted upward pressure on prices. Inflation stabilized at an average rate of 8.6 percent in 1999 and the first half of 2000, broadly in line with core inflation in South Africa. 9. The government sector in Namibia is large by international standards, with total government expenditure corresponding to 44 percent of GDP, nearly half of which is accounted for by the wage bill (Figure 2 and Table 2). Personnel expenditure, which had increased sharply after independence, reflecting the authorities’ policy of bringing under- represented groups into the civil service, rose further in recent years. In 1999/2000, personnel expenditure rose to 20.2 percent of GDP from 18.7 percent in 1998/99 as the government responded to the high unemployment by employing some 9,000 ex-combatants.’ This rise, together with rising interest payments on the government’s increasing stock of domestic debt, and sharply increased defense spending, as a result of Namibia’s military involvement in the Democratic Republic of Congo, have considerably weakened the government’s financial position.* 10. Total revenues and grants, despite an increase of 2% percentage points to 39 percent of GDP in 1999/2000, did not keep pace with the rise in expenditure. The overall fiscal deficit (including grants) thus widened to 4.8 percent of GDP (5.6 percent excluding grants) 6 This is based on the “broad” definition of unemployment, which classifies as unemployed all those who did not work and had no job, but who were available for work. On the “strict” definition, which requires an active search for a job on the part of the unemployed, the rate of unemployment was 20 percent. ’ In 1997, the latest year for which labor force data are available, the central government employed around 14 percent of the labor force, or over 20 percent of those employed. These proportions have likely increased recently, owing to the employment of the 9,000 ex- combatants. ’ Defense spending in constant Namibia dollar terms rose by 56 percent, from N$210 million (2.5 percent of GDP) in 1998/99 to N$328 million (3.8 percent of GDP) in 1999/2000. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-6- from 4.4 percent in the preceding fiscal year. The fiscal situation is rendered particularly precarious by the fact that over a third of revenues (corresponding to around 12 percent of GDP) are made up of official transfers- receipts from the Southern African Customs Union (SAW)’ common revenue pool-which are expected to decrease considerably in the medium term, as the revenue-sharing formula is revised and as external tariffs are lowered with the implementation of the South Africa-EU free trade agreement and the SADC free trade area. (Box 1)” 11. The budget for 2000/01 targets a reduction in the overall fiscal deficit to 3.7 percent of GDP, mainly through a decline in expenditure growth, which in the staffs view is unlikely to be realized. I1 On the revenue side, taxes on domestic goods and services will undergo two major changes, First, a value added tax (VAT) will be introduced in November, 2000. The VAT will replace the sales tax and the additional sales levy, and is intended to be revenue neutral.” Second, fuel levies were partially converted into road user charges on April l,2000, and will become the revenue of the newly established Road Fund Administration. Domestic taxes on goods and services are expected to decline by about 18 percent because of this change. SACU revenue will rise temporarily by 2 percentage points to 13.9 percent of GDP in 2000/01, in part because of upward revisions to previous years’ share. 12. In view of the Namibia dollar’s peg to the South African rand and Namibia’s membership in the Common Monetary Area (CMA), there is limited scope for an independent monetary policy, and short-term interest rates closely follow those in the South ’ Members include Botswana, Lesotho, Namibia, South Africa, and Swaziland. SACU provides for the free movement of goods and the right to transit among, members, as well a common external tariff. I0 This is discussed further in the section on external trade policy below. I1 The cut in expenditure is to be underpinned by a reduction in personnel expenditure of 1% percentage points of GDP, largely based on an assumed early withdrawal of Namibian forces from the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) and the outsourcing of some non- core government functions, in particular road construction and maintenance. (The withdrawal of Namibian troops from the DRC would reduce personnel expenditures because of the ehmination of the wage supplement paid to troops stationed abroad.) l2 The VAT will be levied at a rate of 15 percent on basic consumption goods and a 30 percent on luxury items. Certain essential commodities will be zero-rated. The Namibia authorities have benefited from Fund technical assistance in the design of the VAT and the drafting of the legislation. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-7- Box 1. Namibia: Revenues from the Southern African Customs Union Namibia is highly dependent on intemational trade taxes-receipts from the Southern African Customs Union (SACU) revenue pool account for about 30 percent of the central government’s total revenues and grants, or 12 percent of GDP. Over the next several years, SACU revenues will be affected by three developments: the renegotiation of the revenue-sharing formula; the free trade agreement (ITA) between South Africa and the European Union (EU); and the Southern African Development Community (SADC) free trade protocol. Under the SACU Agreement member countries are required to apply the customs and excise duties set by South Africa to goods imported into the common customs area from non-SACU countries. Duties collected under this arrangement are pooled in a common fund-administered by South Africa-and subsequently distributed to members, other than South Africa, on the basis of a revenue-sharing formula.’ South Africa receives the residual. The formula contains a compensation factor of 42 percent of the shares of the member countries to compensate them for the fiscal lags in the distribution of revenue, the loss of fiscal discretion, and the trade diversion and “industrial polarization” effects related to the Agreement. The formula is applied so as to stabilize the revenue shares of the member countries, other than South Africa, at 20 percent, and allow them to fluctuate between 17 percent and 23 percent. In recent years, 17 percent has been the operative figure. Revenue allocations in any given year are based on data of two years previously. Data revisions are reflected in adjustments to allocations in subsequent years.’ The SACU Agreement is currently under renegotiation. Under discussion are revisions to the revenue- sharing formula; the establishment of a SACU administrative secretariat; and the implementation of sectoral tariff policies, which have allegedly favored South African industries. Although it has been agreed in principle that the new Agreement should not result in a sudden decline in revenues for any member country, revisions to the revenue-sharing formula are expected to result in significant declines in Namibia’s revenues from the SACU in the medium term. With the implementation of the South Africa-EU free trade agreement, the revenue pool will shrink, as tariffs on imports from Europe, the largest trading partner for SACU, are eliminated. Under the agreement, which came into force on January 1,2000, South Africa will elimiuate tariffs affecting 86 percent of the value of imports from the EU over the next twelve years, with about threequarters of this taking place within the first three years, The implementation of the SADC protocol will result in a forther decline in the revenue pool, as tariffs on imports from (non-SACU) SADC countries are eliminated. Under the SADC free trade area, which comes into force on September 1,2000, participating countries are expected to eliminate a rninirnurn of 85 percent of tariffs within eight years and the remaining tariffs by 20 12. SACU members have undertaken to liberahze faster than the other countries. l/ The formula used to calculate the share of the member countries, other than South Africa, is: R = 1.42{H[(A+B+C)l (D+,T+F+G)]} where R = the percentage share of a member country, A = c.i.f. duty-inclusive value of all imports (including intm-SACU trade) into a member country, B = value of excisable goods produced and consumed in the member country, C = excise duty paid on& D = c.i.f. value of imports into the SACU area (excluding intra-SACU trade), E = customs duties paid on D, F = value of excisable goods produced and consumed in the SACU, and G = excise duties paid upon F, H = total pool of customs and excise duties. The formula is applied subject to: 0.17 5 [R/(A+B+C)] 5 0.23. 2/ Thus Namibia’s SACU revenues in 2000/01 are exceptionally high because of an unusually large adjustment to 1997198 data. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-8- African market.13 Thus, in line with the decline in interest rates in South Africa during 1999, as investor confidence was reestablished and pressures in foreign exchange and financial markets abated, monetary conditions in Namibia eased significantly (Figure 3). The Bank of Namibia gradually lowered the bank rate from 18% percent at the end of 1998 to 11% percent at the end of 1999; the average commercial bank prime lending rate fell by a similar magnitude to l@% percent. In the first four months of 2000, bank rate remained constant, but market rates declined further, by over 1 percentage point. Private sector credit growth was sluggish during 1999, but increased modestly in the first quarter of 2000 as it began to respond to the relatively low real interest rates. Growth in broad money (excluding rand in circulation) increased from a year-on-year rate of 10% percent at the end of 1998 to 19% percent, at the end of 1999, but remained essentially constant in the first four months of 2000 (Table 3). 13. Asset quality in Namibia’s banking sector deteriorated significantly between 1996 and 1998, reflecting the downturn in economic activity in 1996 and 1997 and the rise in interest rates, especially in 1998. Nonperforming loans increased from 4.6 percent of outstanding loans in 1996 to 10.7 percent in 1998. In response, the Bank of Namibia issued a determination requiring banking institutions to raise provisions against bad and doubt&l debts. This, together with the decline in interest rates during 1999 and an improved business climate, contributed to an improvement in loan quality, with nonperforming loans declining to 6.5 percent of outstanding loans at the end of the first quarter of 2000 (Box 2). The banking sector is adequately capitalized. At the end of 1999, the average risk-weighted capital adequacy ratio for all banks was 14.4 percent, compared to 13.1 percent at the end of 1998. All banking institutions maintained a risk-weighted capital adequacy ratio above the minimum of 8 percent. 14. An improved export performance, subdued import demand, and a robust expansion in current transfers contributed to a marked widening of the external current account surplus to 5.1 percent of GDP in 1999 from 2.7 percent in 1998. (Figure 1 and Table 4). Diamond exports recovered, following the lifting of the sales quota that had been imposed by De Beers’ Central Selling Organization (CSO) in the aftermath of the Asian crisis, while the net increase in fish catch ceilings allowed a modest increase in fish exports. The deficit in the services account remained essentially unchanged, as a slight decline in receipts from tourism was offset by a fiuther drop in transportation payments. As in past years, the large deficit on goods and services was more than offset by current transfers, which in 1999 were boosted by a significant increase in Namibia’s SACU revenues. As is characteristic of Namibia, the I3 The CMA arrangement requires that a major proportion of the Bank of Namibia’s monetary liabilities be backed by the reserve currency (the rand) or other foreign assets. The Bank of Namibia does not issue its own securities nor does it hold government securities; it does not lend directly to the government, but it does provide an overdraft facility. The Bank of Namibia’s foreign assets cover currency in circulation more than four times over and reserve money more than twice over. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-9- Box 2. Namibia: Banking Sector Performance Namibia inherited a relatively sophisticated financial system at independence in 1990. Namibia’s banking and hancial industry is closely integrated with South Africa’s with most banks and nonbank financial intermediaries having institutional links to South Africa. The banking system has grown strongly since 1993. Total assets increased by an average annual rate of 28 percent between 1994 and 1996, in pait reflecting the high prevailing inflation, before decelerating to 15 percent in 1997 and 7 percent in 1998. In 1999 asset growth edged up to 14 percent. Loans and advances to the public represent the main assets of banks, and accounted for 84 percent of all bank assets in 1999, up from 74 percent in 1997. Deposits remain the major source of funding, accounting for over 80 percent of total liabilities. Virtually all deposits are denominated in Namibiau dollars or South African rand which is also legal tender.* Namibia’s commercial banks are on the whole adequately capitalized. Total capital funds of the banking system more than doubled from N$3 12 million in 1994 to NS697 million in 1997, with about 80 percent of this being unimpaired reserves. In 1998, the Bank of Namibia introduced new capital requirements based on the Base1 Accord on risk-weighted capital adequacy. Banks are required to maintain minimum ratios of capital to risk-weighted assets of 8 percent with core capital representing at least 50 percent of a bank’s total qualifying capital. In 1999, total qualifying capital of Namibian banks amounted to N$959 million, indicating a capital adequacy ratio of 14.4 percent, of which 12.7 percent was core capital and 1.7 percent was supplementary capital. The quality of assets on the balance sheets of Namibian banks has deteriorated in recent years. During the period 1993 to 1996 nonperforming loans averaged 3.3 percent of outstanding loans. However, they subsequently rose significantly from 4.6 percent in 1996 to 10.7 percent in 1998. This deterioration in the quality of assets was associated with the rapid increase in real interest rates during 1997-98, which especially affected personal borrowers, as the increase in bad debts is more pronounced in the category of consumer loans and overdrafts. To stem this tide, the Bank of Namibia in 1998 issued a determination on loan classification which requires banking institutions to make adequate provisions for bad and doubtful debts before declariug any profits. In addition to making specific provisions for loans which need to be classified, each bank is also required to make a general provision of 1 percent of its entire loan portfolio. The determinations provide guidelines for the classification of loans, the treatment of interest on nonperforming loans, and the write-off of bad debts. Banks are required to suspend the accrual of interest on all loans classified as nonperforming. Loan quality improved somewhat during 1999 and more significantly in the first quarter of 2000. The amount of non-performing loans decreased from N$894 million in December 1998 to N$819 million in December 1999 and to N$616 million in March 2000. Over the same period the ratio of non-performing loans to outstanding loans declined to 9 percent in December 1999 and 6.5 percent in March 2000.’ The Namibia banking sector is highly profitable, owing largely to high interest margins, fees and other charges. In 1999 despite a decrease in the interest spread, banks posted strong results, with net income before taxation growing by 19 percent. Net interest income rose by 7.6 percent, as the 2.5 percent decline in interest income was more than off-set by an 8 percent decline in interest expense. 11 Although Narnibian resident private individuals are allowed to operate foreign currency accounts with local banks, foreign currency deposits represent less than 4 percent of total deposits of Narnibian banks. 2/ This decline may also reflect some sign&ant write-offs of bad debts by certain banks during 1999. Because these loans were secured, when they were written-off the securities were real&d and the resultant impact of the write-off on the income statement was not as high as the reduction in the total amount of non-nerforminr! loans. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- lo- current account surplus was largely offset by net capital outflows, mainly portfolio investment by institutional investors. Gross international reserves rose by US$45 million to US$305 million at end-1999, equivalent to two months of imports of goods and services. 15. Movements in the Namibia dollar during the past 18 months reflected the return to more stable foreign exchange and financial market conditions in South Africa during 1999 and the renewed pressures on the rand in the first half of 2000 (see Figure 3). Vis-a-vis the U.S. dollar, the Namibia dollar depreciated by 5 percent during 1999 and by a further 13 percent in the first seven months of 2000. On an effective basis, it remained unchanged in nominal terms, but appreciated by 6.3 percent in real terms. During the first half of 2000 both the real and the nominal effective exchange rate depreciated, by 1 and 2 percent, respectively. 16. The outlook is for stronger growth in the next few years, mainly on account of robust growth in mining and construction associated with the expansion of offshore diamond mining activity, the operation of a new zinc mine, and the reactivation of the former Tsumeb Corporation’s mining and smelting operations, which had shut down in April 1998. The expansion will be underpinned by the rebound in global metal commodity prices, a favorable external environment, and the substantial easing of domestic monetary conditions during the past year. III. REPORT ON THE DIXXJSSIONS 17. Against this background, the discussions focused on the need and the measures necessary to place the public finances on a sustainable path over the medium term, efforts to foster private sector development, and issues related to financial sector regulation and supervision, A. Public Finances 18. The improved outlook should help to address some pressing issues to safeguard the government’s financial and economic objectives over the medium term. Foremost amongst these issues is the deterioration in the public finances. Fiscal pressures have stemmed mainly from a high and rising public sector wage bill, increasing transfers to public enterprises and statutory bodies, and an inefficient expenditure control system. These have resulted in persistent budget deficits, leading to a steep rise in domestic public debt--from 12 percent of GDP in 1992 to 28 percent in 1999~and a corresponding rise in debt servicing costs.‘4 Furthermore, the underlying fiscal situation has been weaker than the actual budget deficits indicate. That is because the increases in expenditure have been “structural” in character, whereas the increases in revenue have been largely of a temporary nature--such as l4 When the contingent liability of government guaranteed loans to public enterprises is taken into account, the situation is even more marked. In 1999, government guaranteed loans to public enterprises amounted to 12.5 percent of GDP. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- ll- the exceptionally high diamond tax receipts in 1997/98 and SACU revenues in 1999/2000 and 200 l/O 1. In the medium term, Namibia’s revenues from SACU, which currently account for more than one third of total revenues and grants, are expected to decline significantly, as indicated in Box 1. Thus, the mission stressed the urgency of restructuring the expenditure profile and exploring alternative revenue sources. 19. The staff pointed out that in a medium-term baseline scenario (Table 5) that assumes average annual real GDP growth of around 4 percent and current expenditure trends (i.e., assuming no immediate measures to curb government expenditure), the overall fiscal deficit would rise from 4.8 percent of GDP in 1999/2000 to 10 percent in 2005/06, as SACU receipts decline from the exceptionally high levels in 1999/2000 and 2000/01, Over the same period, public debt as a proportion of GDP would rise by 13 percentage points to 42 percent. The staff further noted that even a steady, gradual reduction in current expenditures of about 1 percent of GDP per year over the next five years would leave a budget deficit close to 5 percent of GDP, pointing to the need to broaden the tax base to strengthen the fiscal position to more sustainable levels, 20. The mission stressed that there are some downside risks to these projections in the near term, including increased defense-related expenditures as a result of the continuing conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and a possibly less favorable external economic environment. Furthermore, in view of the rapid spread of the HIV/AIDS epidemic in recent years, the negative effect of the epidemic on public finances and output growth will grow significantly over time, with most of the effect being felt in the years beyond the scenario (Box 3). The fiscal balance would deteriorate further by about 1 percent of GDP, owing to increased health outlays; increased government wage expenditures related to sick leave payments, absenteeism, and increased labor turnover; and increased expenditure on social security. Annual real GDP growth could decline by about 1% percent over the next ten years owing to HIV/AIDS, and real GDP would be about 20 percent lower than it would be otherwise. This underscores the importance of early action to strengthen fiscal management as well as the adoption of measures to reduce the incidence of HIV/AIDS, which would place the authorities in a better position to meet the challenge of poverty reduction. 21. The authorities considered the medium-term baseline scenario plausible, but argued that for the immediate future trade liberalization is not likely to affect Namibia adversely: SACU revenues are known two years in advance and are not expected to decline significantly until 2003/04. On the possibility of an unfavorable SACU revenue sharing formula, they indicated that Namibia would work with other members to achieve an agreement that minimizes the fiscal loss. In any event, the authorities maintained, they would introduce corrective measures in time to prevent a significant deterioration in the fiscal position. 22. The mission stressed that the current practice of formulating and executing the budget over a one year horizon is too short to fully adjust spending priorities and to ensure that medium term objectives are met. Indeed, the absence of a medium term expenditure framework (MTEF) has contributed to the failure to achieve the authorities’ goal of a 3 percent of GDP budget deficit over the medium term. The absence of a link between the Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12- Box 3. Namibia: HIV/AIDS Namibia has one of the highest rates of HIV/AIDS infection in Africa. The most comprehensive cross-country study estimates that at the end of 1999,19.5 percent of the population aged 15-49 was infected.’ This compares with an adult population average prevalence rate of 8.6 percent for sub-Saharan Mica. Reflecting the rapid spread of the disease, the HIV prevalence rate among pregnant women in Namibia is estimated to have increased from 4.2 percent in 1992 to about 18 percent in 1999. AIDS has become the principal cause of death: in 1999, it claimed over 1 percent of the population. The high mortality rate has been associated with a growing number of orphans to an estimated cumulative 67,000 iu 1999 (corresponding to about 4 percent of the total population). Furthermore, life expectancy at birth has been reduced by more than 20 years as a result of AIDS. Based on current estimates of HIV incidence, Namibia’s labor force is projected to decline by 22 percent over the next 20 years, compared to what it would have been otherwise, ana given the high incidence of the infection in the adult population, the median age of the labor force will gradually decline by as much as two years. These demographic changes will have far-reaching social consequences; they will also affect considerably public finances and economic growth. The effect on public finances will be felt through various channels, especially through increased expenditures on health and social transfer payments, and reduced productivity in the public sector. HIV/AIDS-related direct health expenditures have risen from 1.8 percent of GDP in 1996/97 to 2.5 percent in 2000101. Hospital&ion on account of the disease increased twenty fold between 1993 and 1999, and direct expenditures on HIV/AIDS now absorb about 20 percent of the health budget. The health budget is projected to be affected further through increased expenditure on AIDS-related opportunistic infections, in particular tuberculosis. In addition, sick leave payments, absenteeism, and increased labor turnover are likely to increase personnel expenditures throughout the economy. The epidemic is also having a large effect on the Government Institutions Pension Fund through increased disability payments and pensions for surviving dependents. To date, an estimated 30 percent of total claims have been AIDS related. Economic growth is likely to be adversely affected by HIV/AIDS through diminished productivity and human capital accumulation, skills shortage, and reduced saving and investment. Staff estimates indicate that annual real GDP growth may drop by 1% percentage points and real GDP in 2010 would be about 20 percent lower than it would have been without the impact of HIV/AIDS. In 2020, real GDP would be around 50 percent lower. The impact on GDP per capita would not be as large because of the decline in population growth: in 2010 real GDP per capita would be about 3 percent lower. A recent World Bank study based on cross-country data finds, however, that the impact on growth could be even larger. This study estimates that the annual rate of growth of real GDP could be as much as 2% percentage points lower. At the end of a twenty-year period real GDP would be 67 percent less than it would be otherwise.’ Poverty and income inequality are also likely to increase because of HIV/AIDS, through reduced economic growth, increased scarcity of skilled labor, and the relatively greater impact on poor households of the loss of income. Gains in human development have already begun to be reversed. According to the UNDP’s Human Development Report 2000, the human development index for Namibia declined between 1990 and 1998 because of the drop in life expectancy due to HIV/AIDS. Further declines may be expected in the fixture as GDP per capita, one of the major components of the index, 1 grows at a substantially slower pace. As the experience of Uganda shows, however, the reversal can be turned around by the adoption of measures that successfully reduce the incidence of HIV.4 l/ UNAIDS, Report on the Global HIVTAIDSEpidemic: 2000 21 U.S. Bureau of Census, World Population Profile: 1998. 31 Made up in about equal proportions in reductions in per capita growth and in population growth. 4/ Uganda’s human development index value declined in 1985-90 because of HIV/AIDS, but then improved - bv 1998 to suroass the value in 1985. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13 - current budget and that in the following year(s), together with the practice of a regular supplementary budget that does not begin with firm expenditure ceilings, creates a tendency for expenditure to drift upward. A MTEF, together with a strengthened system of expenditure control would serve to anchor the expenditure profile and counter the inherent upward bias in expenditure. The authorities agreed on the need for a MTEF and underlined their intention, announced in the Budget Statement 2000/01, to adopt such a framework. The mission welcomed the authorities’ announcement and urged its early adoption. 23. The mission also welcomed the targeted reduction in government expenditure in the 2000/01 budget, in particular, the reduction in personnel expenditure to 18.8 percent of GDP from 20.2 percent in the revised 1999/2000 budget. But it noted that this reduction is to be achieved in large part by the outsourcing of road construction and maintenance (under the Transport vote) to the newly-established Road Authority and related parastatals, and the assumed withdrawal of Namibian troops from the Democratic Republic of Congo during 2000. The creation of the road parastatals is expected eventually to increase efficiency in the provision of road construction and maintenance as these entities will be subject to competition from private sector companies after a three-year adjustment period. However, no progress has been made toward implementing some of the major recommendations of the Wages and Salaries Commission (WASCOM) and the subsequent High Level Committee, especially with respect to the recommendations to reduce expenditure on personnel by 2 percent a year and to eliminate all unfbnded vacancies.” Since 1998/99, when these recommendations were slated to begin, personnel expenditures have risen by 3 1 percent in nominal terms and are projected to increase by almost 3 percent in 2000/01 (3.8 percent if the Transport vote is excluded). As for unfbnded vacancies, they increased f%om 4,344 in 1997/98 to 7,743 in 1999/2000. The mission urged the authorities to ensure that the reduction in unfimded posts--to 5,825-envisaged in the 2000/01 budget is realized. l6 24. Upward pressures on government expenditure stem in part from weak expenditure control. The tinding of wage and travel-related payments and allowances-which together constitute 60 percent of total outlays-is managed by the Prime Minister’s office, and largely escapes the Ministry of Finance’s expenditure control. Even for the remaining payments under the control of the Ministry of Finance, oversight over line ministries is inadequate. Weak budget discipline has created an inherent tendency for budget provisions to be exhausted ahead of schedule and for unauthorized expenditures to be made-a problem that l5 Unfimded vacancies are those vacancies for which no fbnds have been allocated in the budget; they represent that part of the staffing requirements of ministries which cannot be financed with available resources. These could become tinded vacancies later when the necessary tinding becomes available through a supplementary budget or in a subsequent year’s budget. The existence of unfunded vacancies creates pressure to increase personnel expenditure. I6 However, the number of filled posts is expected to increase &rther by 3,855. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14- has been compounded by the regular presentation of a supplementary budget during the second half of each fiscal year. As a result, in 1997/98, the latest year for which the Auditor- General’s report is available, unauthorized expenditures amounted to about N$ 140 million, nearly 1 percent of GDP. 25. The authorities responded that in recent years a number of steps have been taken to try to strengthen fiscal management, including the introduction of a computerized Funds Controi System to control expenditure by line ministries, and the shift from a quarterly to a monthly system for projecting cash flows. These measures have not resolved the problem, however, in part because of technical difficulties in integrating different computer programs for the payroll system and for other expenditure components. In a further effort to control expenditures, this year the Ministry of Finance will place a ceiling on remuneration and travel allowances and on other expenditures. In the mission’s view, however, the effectiveness of the ceilings is likely to be limited, because they will be indicative only for remuneration and because observance by the line ministries of other expenditure ceilings is expected to be achieved through peer pressure. The Ministry of Finance’s proposed amendment to the State Finance legislation to introduce an explicit system of sanctions-for instance, by adjusting subsequent budget allocations-would more effectively discourage overspending. Fiscal management could be further strengthened by assigning to only one ministry-the Ministry of Finance-the responsibility for allocations of budgetary resources, including the responsibility for formulating and carrying out the government’s wage policies. 26. The sales tax and the additional sales levy will be replaced toward year end by a value-added tax (VAT), which is intended to be revenue neutral and which should improve tax compliance. There remains a need, however, to simplify the tax system and to broaden the tax base. Namibia’s tax system is characterized by: (i) a high corporate tax rate, which discourages the formalization of informal businesses and business growth, and encourages tax evasion and avoidance; (ii) high international trade taxes, which adversely affect the competitiveness of exporters and boosts the price of many consumption goods; and (iii) a complex system of tax incentives and concessions of dubious benefit. The authorities shared the mission’s view that the tax base needs to be broadened, and noted that a study would soon be commissioned to assess the tax system as a whole with the aim of introducing an overall reform program. 27. The mission also stressed the need to review nontax revenues. In view of the importance of parastatals in the Namibian economy, dividend payments of parastatals (as well as tax payments and tax exemptions) should be reviewed. Especially for parastatals engaged in commercial activities, such as transport, energy, and tourism, the state should receive an adequate return on its investment, one that at least matches its cost of funds. The staff noted that while government expenditure on parastatals, including net lending and current transfers, have risen steeply since the early 199Os, both in nominal terms and as a share of total government expenditure, revenue collected (i.e., taxes and dividends received) has remained flat. With the exception of some financially strong parastatals-essentially those which operate as monopolies- many parastatals often incur losses and pay no taxes or dividends. Government oversight of public enterprises has been weak and ill-defined, and the Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 15- government has had to bear the burden of the inefftciency of the parastatals by providing subsidies, loan guarantees, and direct equity participation. In the mission’s view, there is a need to ensure accountability of parastatals with respect to financial performance and return on capital. There is also a need to improve the efficiency of parastatals in part through strengthening the supervisory power of government, but also through hard budget constraints and the introduction of competition. 28. The authorities noted that the institutional and supervisory framework governing parastatals is under review, and amendments to the State Finance Act that would broaden the scope of the Treasury to oversee the financial affairs and operations of parastatals are under consideration. They further affirmed that Namibia’s economic development strategy aims at redirecting public expenditure toward more productive investment, by increasing the share of capital expenditure, and encouraging the growth of the private sector as the main engine of development. 29. The mission inquired about the government’s policy on the privatization of parastatals. The authorities stated that for now commercialization, rather than privatization, was the government’s preferred policy in dealing with the problems of parastatals. They explained that the aim of this policy is to achieve full cost recovery in the shortest possible time, to eliminate subsidies, and to improve the operational efficiency of the enterprises. Parastatals would be required to sign performance agreements with the government, but would otherwise be fully mandated to operate on commercial terms with no government interference. While welcoming the authorities’ efforts aimed at improving the efficiency of parastatals and their oversight, the staff urged the authorities to make stronger efforts to divest parastatals in the context of a comprehensive medium-term privatization program. B. Monetary and External Sector Issues 30. The return of investor confidence in South Africa in 1999 allowed interest rates in Namibia to decline in tandem with those in South Africa, but there would appear to be little scope for further interest rate reductions in the near term. Although core inflation has remained fairly stable in South Africa, there is concern that the impact of higher oil prices on headline inflation could revive inflationary expectations. Moreover, the recent downward pressure on the rand also militates against further interest rate declines. The outlook is for a firming of interest rates as the cyclical recovery gathers force-a view shared by the authorities. While higher interest rates will tend to dampen economic activity, the recent depreciation of the Namibia dollar will benefit merchandise exports and tourism. 31. The mission and the authorities shared the view that the inflation-targeting framework in South Africa should prove beneficial to Namibia, in so far as it delivers lower and more stable inflation which enhances confidence in Namibia’s economic prospects both at home and abroad. The peg of the Namibia dollar to the South African rand has served Namibia well and the mission supports the authorities’ commitment to maintain the peg and remain a member of the Common Monetary Area. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 16- 32. The Namibian interbank market is small and banks to a large extent cover their liquidity needs by borrowing from, or placing their surplus funds with, their parent or affiliate banks in South mica. The authorities have sought to improve liquidity management, by introducing a call deposit facility for commercial banks and building societies, so that excess tinds can be placed locally instead of flowing to South Africa. The Bank of Namibia has also sought to enhance the liquidity of government securities by introducing secondary auctions for these instruments beginning in April 2000. While these auctions have met with only limited success thus far, it is hoped that the effort over time will lead to the emergence of an efficient secondary market in government securities. 33. The promulgation of the Banking Institutions Act 1998 has created an effective legal framework conducive to the development of sound banking practices. The act incorporates prudential requirements based on the international supervisory standards advocated by the Bank for International Settlements. Most significantly, it has conferred on the Bank of Namibia new powers that are essential for effective financial regulation and supervision (Box 4). 34. Nonbank financial institutions currently are supervised by the Ministry of Finance. It is planned, however, that a new parastatal, the Namibia Financial Institutions Supervisory Authority, will take over this tinction. It is also planned that the banking functions of the proposed offshore banking and financial center would be supervised by the Bank of Namibia, while the nonbanking tinctions of the offshore financial center would be supervised by a separate regulatory body to be set up under the Ministry of Finance. There would thus be three separate regulatory agencies. The mission argued that the diffusion of supervisory authority is not efficient. While a strong case can be made for moving the supervision of nonbank financial institutions out of the Ministry of Finance, since supervisory agencies generally have greater independence of action if they are not part of a government ministry, no case can be made for two separate agencies to supervise onshore and offshore nonbanking financial activities. Indeed, such a set up would hamper the effective supervision of nonbank financial institutions. 35. The proposal for an offshore banking and financial ceder-which, the authorities maintained, would be compatible with Namibia’s membership in the CMA-goes back to the establishment of the EPZ program. What the benefits of such a center would be have not been clearly established though. The EPZ itself has met with limited success: as of the end of March 2000, there were only 18 firms in operation, employing 453 people, and one firm accounted for most of the activity and employment. The mission cautioned against proceeding with the establishment of an offshore financial center without first clearly setting out what would be the purpose and objectives of such a center and evaluating how and whether these objectives would be met. In addition, in view of the potential risks to financial stability of a poorly supervised offshore financial center, it would be crucial to have in place the appropriate institutional structures. This would include an adequately staffed and skilled supervisory agency, with the necessary legal powers and independence to ensure effective supervision, as well as effective anti-money laundering laws and practices of enforcement. In this respect, an independent appraisal-drawing on international experience-of the Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-17- Box 4. Namibia: Banking Supervision The legal basis for the regulation and supervision of the banking system in Namibia is the Banking Institutions Act of 1998.’ This legislation confers on the Bank of Namibia the power to issue and revoke banking licenses, and also charges the central bank with the responsibility to supervise banking institutions. In the early 1990s the Bank of Namibia was constrained by a lack of the necessary skills and technical capacity to limit its surveillance function to off-site supervision only. However, in recent years it has made concerted efforts to build technical capacity in banking supervision and has accordingly increasingly employed on-site examinations. The promulgation of the Banking Institutions Act 1998 has created an effective legal framework conducive to the development of sound banking practices. It has conferred on Bank of Namibia new powers which are very essential for effective financial regulation and supervision, prominent among which is the power to issue prudential regulations based on the international supervisory standards advocated by the Bank for International Settlements (BIS).2 These include regulations on capital adequacy, liquidity, single borrower limits, loan classification, and financial reporting. Recognizing the risk posed to the stability of the banking system of excessive concentration of credit risk, Bank of Namibia issued determinations limiting a bank’s exposures to a single borrower to 30 percent of its capital funds, while the exposure to all large loans3 is limited to 800 percent of capital funds. The central bank has also issued determinations on money laundering and “know your customer policy”. These determinations are based on the Base1 Statement of Principles4 on the subject, which Bank of Namibia has adopted in its entirety. I/ Financial institutions other than banks and building societies are regulated and supervised by the Minisuy of Finance. 2/ The 25 Core Principles for Effective Banking supervision issued by the Basle Committee and adopted in September 1997 by supervisory authorities worldwide have to a large extent been incorporated into the Banking Institutions Act 1998. 31 Large loans are defined by Bank of Namibia as those representing 10 percent or more of capital funds. 41 The Base1 Committee on Banking Regulations and Supervisory Practices adopted a Statement of Principles in December 1988 aimed at preventing the use of the financial system for criminal and money laundering purposes. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 18- adequacy of the existing and contemplated supervisory, regulatory, and legal frameworks would be most useful 36. Being a member of the SACU, Namibia’s external trade policy is largely determined by South Africa. The Namibian authorities have in the past expressed concerns that the SACU common external tariff structure, which is very complex and often fluctuates, and the decision-making process, was unfavorable to Namibia’s industrial development.” Negotiations on the SACU agreement have been going on since 1994, during which Namibia has made proposals aimed at allowing greater participation of individual member states in tariff policy, as well as the adoption of a new revenue sharing formula. The mission inquired about the status of these negotiations. The authorities revealed that during the most recent round of negotiations agreement had substantially been reached on a revenue sharing formula. However, the administration of both the revenue pool and tariff policy had not been resolved and could have a bearing on any eventual revenue sharing agreement. 37. South Africa’s free trade agreement (FTA) with the European Union (EU) and the recently approved free trade area within the Southern Africa Development Community (SADC) entails significant tariff reductions over the next few years, which-notwithstanding the beneficial effects of trade liberalization on economic development-could have negative consequences for Namibia’s fiscal situation and balance of payments, owing to its dependence on trade taxes (see Box 1). C. Labor Market 38. Namibia’s labor market is characterized by an excess supply of unskilled labor, an excess demand for skilled labor, and a large scale dependence on the service sector as the main source of employment. The available data suggest that the unemployment rate rose from 33 percent in 1994 to 35 percent in 1997 and is estimated to have remained at about the same rate since. There is a widespread perception among business and policy researchers that unemployment in Namibia has been exacerbated by a wage structure that is incompatible with the low level of productivity of unskilled workers. Indeed, unit labor costs in manufacturing have been found to be higher in Namibia than in many other countries in the region, with the notable exception of South Africa, its main trading partner. Wage inflexibility in the formal sector, difftcult labor relations, and regulations on hiring and firing, and other aspects of labor management weigh negatively on competitiveness, and detract ” SACU tariff regime is very complex. In 1998, the tariff book contained over 7,000 lines, the maximum tariff was 72 percent, and the average unweighted tariff was 14 percent, with substantial dispersion. The structure of the SACU common external tariff is determined by South Africa, and while Namibia has the right to levy additional duties on all imports to protect infant industries, it has not exercised this right. Anti-dumping duties and import controls for safeguard purposes applied by South Africa are also applicable in other SACU members. Namibia has no separate domestic legislation in these fields. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 19- from Namibia’s advantages with respect to transportation infrastructure, port facilities, and utility costs. The paucity of labor market data, though, prevents a clear assessment of the role of labor costs in employment performance. 39. The mission welcomed the draft labor bill to amend the Labor Act of 1992 as a positive step toward improving labor relations (Box 5). By providing for mediation and conciliation before allowing industrial actions, and by making arbitration compulsory for certain disputes of interest when conciliation fails, the proposed legislation should help to reduce the number of industrial actions. In line with the existing Act, however, the revised bill allows sector-specific wage agreements, which can be extended to employers and employees not party to the bargaining process at the discretion of the Minister of Labor. The mission noted that sectoral collective bargaining introduces rigidity in the wage formation process, with consequent negative effects on job creation. 40. Data on employment and wages are scarce. Only two national labor force surveys have been conducted since independence: the first in 1991 and the second in 1997. The lack of data makes policy analysis difficult. The mission urged the authorities to increase the frequency of labor force surveys to an annual frequency as a necessary step toward improved policy formulation. The authorities noted that funding constraints and limited capacity for data analysis have curbed the frequency of the surveys. They are engaged in building up the capacity to carry out an annual labor force survey, but in the meantime, they are planning to conduct a labor force survey every two years and surveys on specific labor market issues in the intervening years. D. Statistical Issues 41. Namibia’s core data for surveillance are generally adequate, but weaknesses remain. Fiscal and balance of payments data are available only annually and with a considerable lag, and the CPI covers only the capital city. Efforts are underway, however, to improve the coverage, periodicity, and quality of statistics produced. These efforts include the production of quarterly balance of payments statistics, the introduction of a nationwide CPI, and implementation of the new IMF manual on monetary and financial statistics. Namibia has taken an initial step toward participating in the General Data Dissemination System (GDDS) through the appointment of a country coordinator. TV. STAFF kiPPRAISAL 42. After several years of lackluster economic performance, real GDP growth is expected to strengthen significantly in the next few years, owing largely to the expansion of the mining sector. The authorities are urged to take advantage of the more favorable economic prospects to place the public finances on a sustainable path over the medium term. Pressures on the public finances have been growing in recent years and the budget deficit has been edging up notwithstanding a high tax burden. Budgetary pressures have been fuelled primarily by high expenditures on personnel, increasing transfers to parastatals, and weak expenditure control. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 20 - Box 5. Namibia: Labor Legislation and Labor Relations Labor relations in Namibia have been difficult at times. During the period 1994-99, there were 53 industrial actions, with an estimated loss of 2,162,299 manhours (or 0.06 percent of total hours worked). The manufacturing sector witnessed the largest number of strikes, followed by the mining sector. In an effort to improve labor relations, the Labor Act of 1992 has been amended in several respects.’ Strengthened conciliation procedures: The revised bill-unlike the 1992 Labor Act-makes it mandatory for the Labor Commissioner to attempt to resolve a dispute through conciliation upon receipt of a notice from any of the disputing parties within 30 days of the date of referral of the dispute. The importance of the conciliatory measures is emphasized by the bill’s stipulation that a disputing party has the right to strike or lockout if and only if the dispute has been referred to the Labor Commissioner for conciliation, and 30 days have expired from the date of the referral, and the dispute still remains unresolved. Strengthened arbitration procedures: Arbitration procedures under the current Labor Act are voluntary. In contrast, the draft bill makes arbitration compulsory for certain disputes of interest, for example, disputes concerning the breach of a contract of employment or collective agreement, or employment equity. A party in such a dispute can not resort to a strike or lockout if the dispute remains unresolved through conciliatory measures, it must refer the case to arbitration. The arbitrator will commence the arbitration and issue an award within 30 days of the conclusion of the arbitration proceedings. Powers of the labor institutions: The draft Labor bill, in a departure from the Labor Act, vests more power and allocates more functions to the Labor Advisory Council, a tripartite body representing the interests of the State, registered trade unions, and registered employers’ orgamzations. In addition to its role as an advisory body, the Council will actively participate in the selection of officials responsible for enforcement and implementation of labor laws, and prevention and resolution of disputes. Also, the Labor Court, which has exclusive jurisdiction to interpret and implement the Labor Act, has been strengthened by establishing its authority at par with that of the High Court of Namibia, with the added provision that its decisions, judgements, and orders are final. 11 The legislation has been drafted and awaits Parliamentary approval. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2l- The result has been an annual budget deficit of 4% percent of GDP on average during the past five years and a corresponding steep rise in domestic public debt. 43. Unless appropriate policy measures are soon put in place, budget performance is expected to deteriorate further in the years ahead. Under current policies, even with the projected considerably more favorable output growth performance than in the past several years, the overall fiscal deficit would almost double over the next five years as SACU receipts decline from their currently exceptionally high levels. This would lead to an unsustainable fiscal position, with public debt as a proportion of GDP rising considerably further. To avoid such prospects the authorities need both to constrain the rate of growth of public expenditure and to broaden the tax base. 44. Fiscal consolidation will need to aim at rebalancing an expenditure profile that has seen expenditure on personnel and interest costs squeeze expenditure on goods and services, An important first step in this regard would be the early adoption and implementation of a medium term expenditure framework to help offset the bias toward escalating expenditure in the current budget process. The authorities’ intention, announced in the Spring Budget, to adopt such a framework is therefore welcome. 45. A sustainable fiscal strategy must address squarely the issue of personnel expenditure. The 2000/01 budget shows a reduction in personnel expenditure, which is to be achieved in part by the outsourcing of road construction and maintenance to newly created parastatals. In the staffs view, the planned reduction is unlikely to be fully realized. Indeed, a clear strategy for reducing overall personnel expenditures still remains to be implemented. While it would not be desirable to reduce appreciably the size of the civil service from one year to the next, a gradual but consistent reduction in personnel is essential for fiscal consolidation and to create a more efftcient, motivated, and professional civil service. Thus, the authorities are urged to adopt a medium-term plan with clear annual targets aimed at reducing the share of personnel expenditure through reductions in the size of the civil service, continued wage moderation, and strengthened efforts to control hiring by line ministries. 46. Some helpful measures have been introduced to improve expenditure control; nevertheless, they have not resolved the problem of unauthorized expenditures, owing in part to technical difficulties, but more fundamentally because Treasury lacks the ability and power to intervene in cases of overspending and because too much leeway is provided for shifting funds between and within votes. The new State Finance (Management) Bill should help to improve fiscal management; but legislation alone will not suffice: ownership of the budget by the Cabinet and managerial accountability are crucial to success. Fiscal management should be streamlined by assigning to the Ministry of Finance the responsibility for budgetary allocations, including spending on personnel. 47. An improvement in the efficiency of the public sector through a streamlined civil service, greater operational efficiency, and strengthened expenditure control would create room for a redirection of budgetary outlays to health and education, particularly in view of Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 22 - the HIV/AIDS crisis and the need to enhance the skills base of the labor force and alleviate poverty. 48. For Namibia’s public finances to be placed on a sustainable path over the medium term, reduced personnel expenditure and strengthened expenditure control must be supplemented by a broadening of the tax base, while lowering the high tax burden. Commendably, the authorities have eschewed piecemeal reforms, which often result in inconsistencies, and have undertaken instead to review’ the efficiency of the tax system as a whole. The review should extend to all incentives and concessions accommodated by the tax system, including the EPZ program, given the many ways in which EPZs can undermine the tax base, and the very limited benefits they have brought. It should also bring about greater consistency in the tax and dividend policies regarding parastatals. 49. The number and size of parastatals has continued to expand. The aim has been to commercialize non-core government functions, with a view to improving efficiency. Fiscal transfers to these entities has grown considerably, however, and some of them have experienced serious financial difficulties. The process of outsourcing non-core government functions should not stop with the commercialization of parastatals; stronger efforts should be made to divest parastatals in the context of a comprehensive medium-term privatization program with a clear timetable. This would help to foster investment and a more competitive environment, and lead to the improvements in efficiency necessary for sustained higher growth. 50. The draft new labor legislation should help to improve labor relations, which have been difficult at times and detracted from Namibia’s international competitiveness. But, as with the Act it amends, it allows the extension of sectoral collective bargaining agreements to firms not party to the bargaining process. The result may be a relative wage structure that fails to reflect productivity differences across firms, and therefore may hamper the development of small and medium-sizes enterprises. To introduce more flexibility in the wage formation process, the authorities may want to consider encouraging firm-level modifications that allow productivity frameworks to be incorporated into sectoral wage agreements. 51. The peg of the Namibia dollar to the South African rand and participation in the CMA have served the country well in securing broad financial stability, and the staff supports the authorities’ intention to retain the present regime. To this end, the authorities will need to continue to pursue sound macroeconomic policies and appropriate labor market reforms, which are necessary to maintain stability and competitiveness and to ensure the sustainability of the exchange rate regime. The staff considers the current level of the Namibia dollar effective exchange rate adequate to maintain competitiveness. 52. Namibia possesses the legal framework for effective financial sector regulation supervision. However, if the planned offshore financial center were to proceed, the proposed diffision of supervisory authority among three agencies would be inefficient, especially as regards the supervision of the OFC. Moreover, the establishment of the offshore financial Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 23 - center itself should not proceed without an assessment of the purpose and expected benefits of such a center, and how they would be achieved. In the staffs view, Namibia could benefit from IMF technical assistance in this area. 53. Namibia’s statistics are generally adequate for surveillance purposes, but some weaknesses remain. The authorities are urged to continue to improve the periodicity and coverage of fiscal and balance of payments data, and especially of labor market data, where. the paucity of data constrain effective economic analysis and policy formulation, and to shorten the considerable lag with which data are made available. They are also urged to move forward decisively to commit to participation in the GDDS and thereby adopt it as the framework for statistical development. 54. It is recommended that the next Article IV consultation with Namibia be held on the standard 12-month cycle. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 24 - Figure 1. Namibia: Selected Economic Indicators, 1990-99 6 -4 21 18 6 3 Xeal GDP :Annual percentage changes) Consumer Prices (Annual percentage changes) ‘. average (South Africa) 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 12 110 9 90 6 3 70 10 10 8 3 6 0 4 2 -5 0 -10 -2 -4 -15 170 21 150 18 15 130 l! 390 1992 1994 1996 1998 External current account (Excluding transfers) E External Indices ( 1990 = 100) External Imbalances (In percent of GDP) (Ir+uding Jransfer$ , . . . I I , # I , , ------a Terms of Trade 10 5 0 -5 -10 -15 170 150 130 110 90 70 Sources: Namibian authorities; and Fund staff estimates. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 25 - 40 3s 30 2s 20 I5 10 5 Figure 2. Namibia: Financial Operations of the Central Government, 1990/91-1999/2000 (ln percent of GDP) 11 I Xevenues pgfrJ+Q I excluding grants Taxes on Taxes on incon: i mational trade IT and p5ofit \ Taxes on domestic I 1990191 19921’93 1994195 1996l97 1998199 Budget Deficit / Balance including grants 199Of91 1992193 1994195 1996197 1998l99 1990191 1992193 1994J95 1996197 1998199 40 3s 30 2s 20 15 10 5 50 40 30 20 10 0 I Zxpenditure 3s ( jovemment Debt 30 2s 10 5 , . I - a Total expenditure cm I Cu?e&exp<nditure I ..-- ..-. . . Capital expenditure . . -.5e.-.....--ss. 1990191 1992f93 1994BS 1996197 1998l99 SO 40 30 20 10 0 - : 10 !S 20 15 10 5 0 Sources: Namibian authorities; and Fund staff estimates. 11 Fiscal year begins April 1. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 26 - Figure 3. Namibia: Interest Rates: January 1992-February 2000 30 25 20 15 10 5 Interest Rates South Africa Prime rate m +-i/i Namibia u-j Prime rate -‘, ‘> - .._, ‘\ 8’ “a b. . .._.....” ....‘. . . .._.__--_ ._.. cc .~ 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 Figure 4. Namibia: Effective Exchange Rates: 1990-2000 (1995=100) 120 80 Real Effective Exchange rate ‘. c lJd 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 30 25 20 15 10 5 120 110 100 80 Sources: Namibian authorities; and IMF, International Monetary Fund; Information Notice System. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 27 - Table 1. Namibia: Selected Financial and Economic Indicators, 199549 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 Est. National income and prices (Amtual percentage changes, unless otherwise indicated) 11,759 13,482 15,037 16,598 17,808 3.2 2.1 2.6 3.0 2.9 7.0 12.3 8.7 7.1 4.2 10.0 8.0 8.8 6.2 8.6 1.9 8.4 6.9 8.7 719 9.7 3.3 -2.7 -12.4 2.6 12.1 1.3 2.3 -9.6 -3.3 11.1 4.7 1.3 4.9 1.0 13.8 7.7 -7.0 0.2 -3.8 0.5 2.7 -10.6 6.0 1.1 11.6 14.4 21.1 8.6 15.8 18.3 22.0 9.6 13.1 16.0 32.8 17.6 16.8 8.3 4.0 26.0 27.4 7.4 10.8 19.7 21.1 22.7 22.1 23.8 7.8 8.1 14.3 15.6 9.7 12.0 27.3 28.1 2.0 0.7 25.3 27.4 (In percent of GDP) 17.7 18.2 8.6 9.6 4.3 20.3 5.0 15.3 20.0 18.9 18.1 19.3 9.2 9.8 8.9 9.5 5.2 7.3 22.7 24.2 4.9 8.4 17.8 15.7 17.1 19.1 (In percent of GDP) 18.3 18.7 20.2 -4.3 -6.8 -3.2 -4.7 -5.6 -3.9 -6.4 -2.8 4.4 4.8 6.2 5.3 2.6 2.7 5.3 GDP at current market prices (NS million) GDP at constant 1990 market prices GDP deflator Consumer price index (period average) Consumer price index (end of period) External sector l! Exports of goods and services (in U.S. dollars) Imports of goods and services (in U.S. dollars) Export volume Import volume Terms of trade Central government finance 21 Revemre and grants Expenditure and net lending Money and credit Credit to the private sector Broad money lnvestment and savings Gross investment Gross fixed investment Public fixed investment Private fixed investment Gross domestic savings Gross national savings Public national savings Private national savings Central government f-s 2/ Wages Overall government deficit Excluding grants lnc1udii grants External sector Current account balance Including official transfers Current account balance (Lo millions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise indicated) Excluding official transfers -180.2 -232.1 -341.0 -336.5 -288.3 Including official transfers 199.7 167.3 85.4 80.7 153.9 Gross official reserves (end of period) 221.6 193.7 250.4 260.6 305.3 In months of imports of goods and services 1.3 1.2 1.5 I.7 1.9 Sources: Narnibian authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections. 11 Goods and services.. 21 Figures are those for fiscal years beginning April 1. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 28 - Table 2. Namibia: Financial Operations of the Central Government, 1997/98-2004/05 11 19971’98 1998199 1999l2000 2000/o 1 2001/02 2002fO3 2003/04 2004105 Rev. budget Budget Proj. Proj. (In millions of Namibia dollars) Total revmue and grants ReWlluC Tax revenue home and profits Of which: individual income tax Companytaxmdiamondmines Conlpenytexonotbermilles Tax on nonknkg companies lhmeatic gods and services Ofwhich: Geueralsalestax Additional sales duty Fuel levies SACU transfers 21 other Nontax revenue Royalties on diamond exports Compensation for use of rend Administmtive fees and charges olher 5,646 6,132 7.103 7,662 7,567 8,382 9,016 9,338 9,852 5,592 6,095 6,964 7,582 7,487 8,306 8,944 9,269 9,787 5,106 5,501 6,391 6,935 6,935 7,561 8,112 8,383 8,841 1,979 2.03 1 2,059 2,374 2,279 2,686 3,062 3,411 3,801 966 1,241 1,280 1,405 1,405 1,576 1,750 1,930 2,127 505 161 200 185 185 353 412 437 466 29 19 60 65 65 78 90 96 101 406 540 440 625 530 588 711 844 995 1.491 1.582 2,010 1,586 1,586 1,883 2.063 2,239 2,433 756 905 328 368 316 211 1,560 1,805 76 83 486 593 199 199 55 71 172 205 60 118 54 37 965 1,025 1,025 1,659 395 380 380 . . . 528 95 95 106 2,241 2,877 2,877 2,889 81 98 98 103 573 646 646 745 205 240 240 293 75 76 76 76 233 237 237 284 60 94 94 92 139 80 80 76 1,823 1,968 2,110 . . . . 115 131 2,877 2,615 110 117 832 887 342 362 76 76 313 337 101 111 72 69 . . . 158 2,484 124 946 386 76 362 121 65 Total expendhe and net lending 6,085 6,881 7,984 8,429 8,562 9,462 10,398 11,362 12,384 Current expenditure 5,262 6,103 6,814 7,189 7,322 8,062 8,870 9,711 10,607 Personnelexpewhre 2,831 3,162 3,678 3,719 3,820 4,229 4,650 5,036 5,397 Goodsandservices 1,241 1,350 1,465 1,539 1,539 1,613 1,722 1,826 1,934 Intemt payments 350 489 515 536 568 671 796 974 1,201 Subsidies and current transfers 841 1,102 1,156 1,395 1.395 1,549 1,702 1,875 2,075 Capital expenditure 779 737 1,071 1,106 1,106 1,265 1,390 1,511 1,635 Net lendii 44 42 100 134 134 136 138 140 142 Overall fiscal balance -439 -749 -881 -767 -995 995 *.. . . . -1,080 -1,382 -2,024 -2,53 1 Fiiin8 DOlWStiC Foreign 439 749 482 649 98 100 881 . . . 767 . . . . . . 1,080 . . . 1.. 1.382 . . . . 2,024 2,531 . . . .** . . . . . . Balance including grants Balance excluding gmnts Revenue Revenue and grants Expenditure Current expenditure Personnel expenditwe Interest paymmts Capital expendii and net lending -2.8 -4.4 -4.8 -3.2 -4.7 -5.6 36.2 36.1 38.2 36.6 36.3 39.0 39.4 40.7 43.8 34.1 36.1 37.4 18.3 18.7 20.2 2.3 2.9 2.8 5.3 4.6 6.4 (In percent of GDP) -3.8 -5.0 -4.2 -5.4 37.8 37.3 38.2 37.7 42.0 42.7 35.8 36.5 18.5 19.0 2.7 2.8 6.2 6.2 -4.9 -5.7 -7.7 -9.0 -5.2 -6.0 -8.0 -9.2 37.3 36.7 35.3 34.8 37.7 37.0 35.6 35.0 42.5 42.7 43.3 44.1 36.2 36.4 37.0 37.7 19.0 19.1 19.2 19.2 3.0 3.3 3.7 4.3 6.3 6.3 6.3 6.3 Memorandumitems GDP at market prices (fiscal year) Overall fiscal balance excl. SACU trausfers (In millions of Namibia dollars, unless indicated otherwise) 15,427 16,901 18,232 20,059 20,059 22,259 24,344 26,230 28,110 -2,000 -2,554 -3,122 -3,644 -3,872 -3,969 4,259 4,639 -5,016 (In peramt of GDP) -13.0 -15.1 -17.1 -18.2 -19.3 -17.8 -17.5 -17.7 -17.8 Public debt 3,988.0 4.627.0 5.212.0 5,710.4 6.356.9 7,059.04 7,957.16 9,272.66 10,918.10 (In peccant of GDP) 25.9 27.4 28.6 28.5 31.7 31.7 32.7 35.4 38.8 Sources: Namibia authorities and Fund stalTestimates and projections. I/ Fiscal year beginning April 1. 21 Transfers hm the Southem Africa Customs Union mmmon revenue pool. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-29- Table 3. Namibia: Monetary Survey, 1994-99 1994 199s 1996 1997 1998 1999 Net foreign assets 515.4 441.0 965.1 910.1 1,378.7 2297.7 Bank of Namibia 705.2 791.1 899.1 1,194.o 1,488.8 1,828.g Deposit money banks -197.1 -359.9 54.8 -301.7 -132.5 459.4 other 11 7.3 9.8 11.2 17.8 22.4 9.4 Domestic credit Net claims on central government Excluding counterpart to long-term external liabilities Claims on local and regional governments Claims on nonfinancial public enterprises Claims on private sector Claims on other banking iustitutions Claims on nonbank financial institutions 4,282.1 4.811.2 5,992.3 6,811.g 7,418.2 8.057.5 584.5 -98.1 220.5 67.8 112.3 459.0 -135.5 -98.1 220.5 67.8 112.3 459.0 17.2 19.2 18.6 17.5 18.8 16.3 42.1 72.1 72.2 148.8 142.7 136.6 3J42.6 4,742.8 5,663.2 6,553.5 7,129.3 7,434.2 95.6 75.3 7.7 24.3 15.1 1.3 0.0 0.0 10.1 0.0 0.0 10.1 Broad money 2l Money 21 Ofwhich : Namibia dollars in circulation Quasi-money 3,768.g 1,682.8 217.4 2,086.l Long-term external liabilities 698.5 Other items, net 3/ 330.1 4,747.7 6,050.8 6,501 .O 7205.7 1,822.2 2,800.O 2,898.0 3,680.g 240.2 282.9 335.6 364.9 2,851.6 3250.8 3,603.O 3,524.8 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 504.6 906.7 1,221.0 1,591.2 8,625.6 5,291.6 422.7 4,036.7 0.0 1,729.6 Net foreign assets Domestic credit Net claims on central govemment Excluding counterpart to long-term external liabilities Claims on the economy Broad money 2/ Money 21 Quasi-money Other items, net 31 Memorandum item Velocity (GDP/S-quarter average broad money) (In millions of Namibia dollars) (Annual changes in percent of beginning-of-year broad money) 0.8 -2.0 11.0 -0.9 7.2 12.8 31.6 14.0 24.9 13.5 9.3 8.9 0.7 -18.1 6.7 -2.5 0.7 4.8 -2.7 1.0 6.7 -2.5 0.7 4.8 30.9 32.2 18.2 16.1 8.6 4.1 25.9 26.0 27.4 7.4 10.8 19.7 7.2 3.7 20.6 1.6 12.0 22.4 18.7 20.3 8.4 5.8 -1.2 7.1 6.5 4.6 8.5 5.2 5.7 1.9 3.1 2.8 2.6 2.4 2.5 2.2 Source: Bank of Namibia. 11 Deposit money bank and other banking institution holdings of South African rand. 2/ Excludes South African mud circulating in Namibia. 3/ Includes money market intruxuenk, bonds, and long term external facilities. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 30 - Table 4. Namibia: Balance of Payments, 1995-99 (In millions of U. S. dollars, unless otherwise indicated) 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 Est. 199.7 167.2 85.4 80.8 153.9 Exporta, f.o.b. Ofwhrch : Diamonds Other minerals Fish lqmts, f.o.b. -129.7 -90.7 -278.9 -285.7 -178.5 1.418.4 1,452.7 1,363.l 1,203.9 1,244.4 472.7 524.1 537.1 387.4 411.5 243.5 254.5 257.9 202.1 197.8 382.2 337.3 350.0 382.8 399.1 -1,548.l -1,543.4 - 1.642.0 -1,489.7 -1,423.0 Services -239.4 -247.2 -156.6 -157.8 -159.8 Transportation -196.5 -200.2 -180.2 -140.9 -141.4 Ofwhich : charter of fishing boats -69.0 -71.4 -50.9 -25.0 -26.7 Travel 188.3 204.2 233.0 197.9 196.6 Other services -231.2 -251.3 -209.5 -214.9 -215.0 Income 160.3 75.3 69.3 89.2 36.4 Compendon of employees 0.1 -0.9 -6.9 -2.4 -1.4 Investment income 160.1 76.2 76.2 91.5 37.7 Current transfers Of which : SACU receipts 11 Capital and facial account 408.6 430.0 451.7 435.2 455.9 301.2 302.5 338.6 326.5 366.8 -177.5 -179.1 -99.8 -87.5 -155.3 Capital account 40.1 42.1 33.5 45.5 44.4 Financial account Direct investment Portfolio investment other investment ofwhich : Life insurance Pension funds Reserve assets (increase -) -217.6 -221.2 -133.3 -133.0 -199.7 156.5 150.4 83.1 78.6 116.2 77.1 31.2 18.6 -10.1 -5.6 427.1 -379.8 -167.2 -145.5 -253.3 -193.6 -231.0 -110.0 -101.7 -70.4 -256.7 -174.2 -128.3 -130.6 -139.1 -24.1 -22.9 -67.8 -56.0 -s7.1 Net errors and omissions -22.2 11.9 14.4 6.7 1.4 Memorandum items Current account, excluding offkial transfers Current account/GDP (in percent) Excluding current offkial transfers Including current ofkial transfers -180.2 -231.9 -340.9 -336.6 -288.3 -5.6 -7.4 -10.5 -11.1 -9.6 6.2 5.4 2.6 2.7 5.3 International reserves (end of year) 2/ In months of imports of goods and services Reserves/short-term external debt Reserves/ M 1 31 Reserves/M2 3/ 221.6 193.5 250.4 260.6 1.3 1.2 1.5 1.7 . . . . . 0.44 0.32 0.42 0.41 0.17 0.15 0.19 0.21 304.9 1.9 . . . 0.35 0.20 Exchange rates USVN % (period average) 41 0.2757 0.2326 0.2170 0.1809 0.1637 USWN S (end of period) 41 Source: Bank of Namibia. 0.2742 0.2136 0.2054 0.1706 0.1625 l/ southern African Customs Union. 2/ Gross foreign assets of the Bank of Nsmibii. 31 Excludes South African rand circulating in Namibia. 4/ Exchange rates for 2000 are as at end-July. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3l- Table 5. Namibia: Medium-Term Scenario. 2000-05 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 Est. Projections National income end prim (Annual puccntsgc changes, unless 0Uwrwise indicated) GDP at current market prices (N$ million) 17,808 19,505 21,722 23,870 25,764 27,626 29,560 GDP at constant 1990 market prices 2.9 3.3 5.3 5.0 3.8 3.2 3.0 GDP per capita (in U.S. dollars) 1,829 1,834 1,875 1,911 1,927 1,931 1,931 Consumer price index (period average) 8.6 8.2 7.3 6.0 5.5 5.0 5.4 Consumer price index (end of period) 7.9 8.3 6.2 5.9 5.4 4.9 5.5 Investment and savings Gross investment Public fixed investment Private fixed investment Gross domestic savings Gross national savings Public national savings Private national savings Central government flnences 21 Total revenue and grants Ofwhich: SACU transfers Total expenditure and net lendiig Current expenditure Ofwhich: Wages Overall government deficit (inchrding grants) Public debt 18.9 24.0 9.8 9.5 9.5 14.0 7.3 8.3 24.2 27.7 8.4 6.9 15.7 20.8 39.0 37.7 12.3 14.3 43.8 42.7 37.4 36.5 20.2 19.0 -4.8 -5.0 28.6 31.7 (In percent of GDP) 23.7 19.3 19.8 9.7 9.8 9.8 13.5 9.0 9.5 8.5 6.0 7.5 26.5 23.0 22.8 5.5 4.4 3.5 21.0 18.5 19.3 (In percent of GDP) 37.7 37.0 35.6 13.0 11.8 10.0 42.5 42.7 43.3 36.2 36.4 37.0 19.0 19.1 19.2 -4.9 -5.7 -7.7 31.7 32.7 35.4 19.3 19.0 9.3 8.7 9.5 9.2 6.6 6.9 21.3 21.7 3.3 3.6 18.0 18.1 35.0 34.5 8.8 8.0 44.1 44.4 37.7 38.2 19.2 19.2 -9.0 -9.9 38.8 42.1 Extemal sector (In millions of U.S. dollars. unless otherwise indicated) Current account balance 154 108 90 124 104 72 (in percent of GDP) 5.3 3.6 2.8 3.7 3.0 2.0 Exports, f.o.b. 1,244 1.371 1,561 1,735 1,832 1,888 Ofwhich: diamonds 413 553 649 729 757 784 fish 398 357 378 389 401 410 Imports, f.o.b. -1,423 -1.530 -1,772 -1,888 -1,970 -2,013 Services (net) -160 -308 -270 -291 -298 -343 Transfers 456 517 500 478 426 393 Ofwhich: SACU receipts 367 436 421 403 359 331 Capital and tinancial account balance -155 -108 -90 -124 -104 -72 Gross official resaves (end of period) 305 351 404 485 581 652 In months of imports of goods and services 1.9 2.1 2.0 2.3 2.6 2.9 Main assumptions Real output growth is expected to strengthen in the near term on account of expansion of offshore diamond recoveries and rebound in other mining activities but over time will be depressed by the negative effects of HIV/AIDS. Cyclical recovery in South Africa in 2000-200 1 boosts export demand. SACU transfers decline considerably, reflecting the impact of ii-ee trade agreements and a new revenue sharing formula. The public sector wage bill increases in part owing to HIV/AIDS-related labor costu,outlays for subsidies and current transfers increase due to HIV/AIDS. Borrowing costs increase as the domestic public debt increases significantly. 102 2.7 1,941 809 417 -2,057 -345 378 318 -102 739 3.2 Sources: Namibian authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections. 11 Goods and services. 2/ Figures are those for fiscal years beginning April 1. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicMembership Status Joined 9/25/90; Article VIII General Resources Account Quota Fund holdings of currency Reserve position in Fund SDR Department Holdings -32- APPENDIX I Namibia: Relations with the Fund (As of July 3 1,200O) Outstanding purchases and loans Financial arrangements Projected obligations to Fund SDR (million) 136.50 136.47 0.04 % of Quota 100.0 100.0 0.0 SDR (million)% of Allocation 0.02 0.0 None. None. None. Exchange rate arrangement The Namibia dollar is pegged at par to the South African rand, and both currencies are legal tender in Namibia. Namibia formally accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4 of the Fund’s Articles of Agreement, as from September 20, 1996. Article IV consultations Namibia is on the standard 12-month Article IV consultation cycle; the last Article IV consultation was concluded by the Executive Board on January 8, 1999. Technical assistance Monetary and Exchange Affairs Department MAE played a key role in the establishment of Namibia’s central bank-the Bank of Namibia-which became operational in August 1990. Subsequent MAE technical assistance missions have assisted in drafting Namibia’s Central Banking Act and the draft of the Deposit- Taking and Financial Institutions Act. A short-term expert visit provided advice in interbank market development in May 1994. To date, MAE has seconded the following experts to the central bank: the first Governor, whose term expired in August 1991; the General Manager; and the Director of Research, all financed by the Fund (their assignments ended in 1992). MAE also appointed the following experts, financed by the United Nations Development Program (UNDP): Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-33 - APPENDIX1 Director of Banking Supervision (until 1992), and two advisors in the areas of banking supervision and bank accounting. The latter advisor was assigned to work as a general advisor and assisted with the introduction of the new currency and the management of foreign exchange reserves. He left in December 1995. The advisor on banking supervision (partly financed by the Swedish International Development Authority) left in January 1994, and a successor (financed by MAE) assisted the Bank of Namibia during May 1994-December 1996. An advisor on market operations was assigned to the Bank of Namibia for a one-year period beginning September 1997. Most recently, in November 1998, an MAE expert in monetary operations was assigned to the Bank of Namibia for one year. Fiscal Affairs Department Technical Assistance provided by FAD aims at building institutional capacity by strengthening fiscal and budgetary management, improving tax and customs administration, and undertaking various forms of human resource development, including in-service training, study tours, and fellowships. Previous FAD missions and resident advisors (largely financed under phases I and II of the UNDP/IMF Financial Systems’ Development Project) have provided technical assistance in customs administration, tax policy and administration, fiscal and budgetary management, and budget accounting. Also, FAD assigned a long-term general fiscal advisor to the Ministry of Finance during the period September 1994-March 1996. A short-term tax collection advisor was assigned in September 1996 for a duration of two months, In addition, a computer expert on the modernization of tax administration was assigned for six weeks beginning June 1997. Most recently, a resident tax advisor on the value-added tax took up a six-month assignment in June 1998 to assist in preparations for implementation of the VAT. Statistics Department A country page for Namibia was introduced in the January 1994 issue of International Financial Statistics. The long-term experts provided by STA in monetary statistics and balance of payments statistics completed their assignments in May 1992 and September 1993, respectively, thereby ending phase I of the UNDP-financed project. The January 1994 government finance statistics mission assisted the authorities in compiling budgetary data for 1992/93 (April-March) and 1993/94; these data covered only central government because of the absence of information on extrabudgetary accounts, as well as of regional and local government operations, The mission also made recommendations to improve the functional classification of expenditures and expand the coverage of government finance statistics. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 34 - APPENDIX II Namibia: Relations with the World Bank Group 1. Current World Bank involvement in Namibia focuses on providing technical assistance to support the government’s efforts to reduce poverty, build local capacity, and enhance management of water resources. There are no IBRD loans to Namibia. The Bank Group’s involvement is provided mainly through economic and sector work, capacity- building activities funded through a series of small Institutional Development Fund (IDF) grants, and technical assistance. The main economic and sector studies completed include the following: a Poverty Strategy (1998) 0 Recent Economic Developments and Prospects (1999) 0 Emerging Pension System: Evaluation, Challenges and Options (draft, 2000) 2. In FY 2000, the World Bank Group will provide support for macroeconomic modeling, review of the pension system, review of a proposed inheritance tax, and an analysis of the development impact of HIV/AIDS. Support for the preparation of an extensive water sector review is under way. The Bank will also continue supervision of IDF- funded activities for (i) a national capacity assessment; (ii) support for management of marine environment resources; and (iii) public service training. 3. The Foreign Investment Advisory Service (FIAS) of the IFC is involved in improving Namibia’s investment infrastructure. IFC has a loan investment in a fishery project (Pescanova); an equity investment in Namibia’s first indigenous life insurance company (Namibia Life); and has approved, in 1999, a loan of US$1.4 million to help finance a US$6.5 million 120-room Best Western hotel in Northern Namibia. Early in 1999, IFC also worked with the Namibian Agronomic Board in raising trust funds which helped fund a feasibility study of a cotton ginning industry. Namibia joined MIGA in 1990, but there has been no guarantees to date. MIGA has however launched the AFRI-IPA support program, headquartered in Namibia, to provide technical assistance for African countries. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-35 - APPENDIX III Namibia: Statistical Issues 1. The core data for surveillance-exchange rate, international reserves, reserve money, and interest rates-are available on a monthly basis with reasonable promptness. Although the reliability, quality, and coverage of these data are generally satisfactory, some w&esses remain that need to be addressed. The core real sector data and the balance of payments and international investment position date are reported on an annual frequency only. Real sector 2. The authorities do not report any real sector data to STA; data published in the international Financial Statistics (IFS) are taken from publications of Namibia’s Central Statistical Bureau. The present consumer price index covers only the capital city of Windhoek. The compilation of a nationwide index has started in October 1998. 3. Data on the labor market-including labor force, employment, and wages-are not systematically collected, which impedes the analysis of labor market developments. Actions are being taken to rectify this situation with the creation of the required capacity in the Central Statistics Bureau to collect and analyze labor market statistics. In addition, a Labor Market Information System is to be established within the Ministry of Labor and Employment to monitor labor market trends. Government finance 4. The authorities do not report fiscal data to STA. Data (through 1993) in the GFS Yearbook were compiled during a technical assistance mission in January 1994, and the same data are published in IFS. 5. Actual expenditure data of line ministries are not available soon after the end of the fiscal year, and are also subject to frequent revisions. The system for expenditure information needs to be strengthened: provisional information on the cash expenditures of ministries should be available more speedily; and exercises to reconcile the above-the-line estimates with financing data should be conducted more frequently. Monetary accounts 6. Following the introduction of an IFS page in 1994, reporting of monetary data has been timely and comprehensive. Balance of payments 7. Namibia reports balance of payments and international investment position data on an annual frequency. The latest available data are for 1997. The methodology underlying the Namibian balance of payments is consistent with the fifth edition of the IMF’s Balance ofPayments Manual and is well documented. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicNamibia: Core Statistical Indicators (as of end-July 2000) central Bank RCSerVe/ Exports/ Imports Current OveralI Account Government Balance BahL% EXtel-llaI Debt/Debt Service Interest Rates Consumer PIiCe Index May 2000 May 2000 Jul2000 Jut 2000 Exchange International BalaLKX Base Rates Reserves Sheet Money Broad Money tiay 2000 1~12000 M M GDP/GNP 1999 May 2000 Mar 1999 May 200C Q IWO (irregularl: ia Q&e+ Bulletin) ArN MN C 0 (irreguhrl! in Quarterly Bulletin) May 2000 I I May 2000 May 2OM May 2000 May 2000 May 2OM Jul2000 JuI 2000 Jul2000 M M M M M M M M M A----l- A A A 1999 I 1999100 Date of latest observation Date received Frwpeacy of data 11 Frequency of reporting 1_! Source of data _U Mode of reporting 31 Confidentiality 41 Frequency of publication L/ ua 2000 1999 Mar 200C A A A A A C C C C C C M M M 1 1 Jl I I Mar 2000 I Mar 2000 Jul2000 I I M A A I- A A M M M A M M A A I A A A A A C C M A C A C clwv CIMN E C C CIMIV ClkW C A C C C M A A -I- A M L/ M = monthly, Q = quarterly, A = a~ualy, and 0 = other. 2/ A = direct report by the authorities; and N = official publication. 2/ C = cable or facsimile; M = mail; and V z staff visits. 4/ C T unrestricted use. . Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-37- APPENDIX IV Namibia: Social and Demographic Indicators Namibia Sub-Saharan A&a Namibia Sub-Saharan Africa Area (thousand sq. km) 823 23,628 Population characteristics Population density (per sq. km, 1997) Urban population (penent of total, 1999) Population age structure (percent of total, 1997) O-14 years 15-64 years 65 years and above Income distribution (1994) l/ Percent of national income Highest 25 percent Lowest 25 percent Access to safe water Percent of population (1993) Total Urban Rural 2 30 42 44 54 52 4 3 73 4 57 47 97 32 37 74 26 34 aa. n.a. Population (1999) Total (million) Annual rate of growth (percent) 1990-99 1.7 642.3 2.6 2.6 i-kalth Life expectancy at birth (years, 1998) Infant mortality (per 1,000 live births, 1998) Population per physician (1994) Population per nursing person (1993) 55 51 67 92 4,348 na. 339 n.8. GDP per capita (1999) In US. dollars L&or force (1997) Total (in millions) Female (percent of total) 1,830 592 0.6 268 50 42 Education (1997) Percent of relevant age group Primarysch001enrollment Secondary school enrolhnent Enrollment in tertiary education Adult literacy rate (percent) 91 **. 81 . . . 9 . . . 80 60 Sources: World Bank, World Development Report, 2000; and Fund staff estimates. 11 Central Bureau of Statistics. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-38- APPENDIX v Public Information Notice (PIN) No. FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE International Monetary Fund 700 lgth Street, NW Washington, D. C. 20431 USA IMF Concludes Article IV Consultation with Namibia Economic activity in Namibia has expanded modestly in recent years. Real GDP grew by 3 percent in both 1998 and 1999, supported by modest recoveries in mining, agriculture, and construction activity, as well as by an expansion in government consumption expenditure. The recovery in the mining sector was confined to diamond mining, especially offshore mining, as value added in other mining contracted. Value added in the fish processing industry, which accounts for about one-quarter of value added in manufacturing, also contracted, owing to high operating costs and increased competition from South Africa. However, unemployment has remained high, at around 35 percent of the labor force, and given an annual population growth rate of about 3 percent, recent economic growth has been insufficient to achieve gains in per capita income and reduce poverty. From a peak of almost 18 percent in 1992, the annual inflation rate (measured by the consumer price index for Windhoek) declined to a low of 6.2 percent in 1998, reflecting both the impact of the successful tightening of monetary policy in South Africa on Namibia’s import prices and the more moderate pace of economic activity in the second half of the 1990s than previously. Inflation stabilized at an average of 8.6 percent in 1999 and the first half of 2000. The overall fiscal deficit (including grants) in 1999/2000 widened to 4.8 percent of GDP from 4.4 percent the previous year, as total revenues and grants failed to keep pace with the rise in expenditure. The fiscal situation is rendered particularly precarious by the fact that over a third of revenues (corresponding to around 12 percent of GDP) are made up of official transfers- receipts from the Southern African Customs Union (SACU) common revenue pool-which are expected to decrease considerably in the medium term, as the revenue-sharing formula is revised and as external tariffs are lowered with the implementation of the South Africa-EU free trade agreement and the SADC free trade area. In line with the decline in interest rates in South Africa during 1999, as investor confidence was reestablished and pressures in foreign exchange and financial markets abated, monetary conditions in Namibia eased significantly. The Bank of Namibia gradually lowered the bank rate from 18% percent at the end of 1998 to 11 W percent at the end of 1999; the average commercial bank prime lending rate fell by a similar magnitude to 16% percent. In the first four months of 2000, bank rate remained constant, but market rates declined further, by over Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-39- APPENDIX V 1 percentage point. Private sector credit growth was sluggish during 1999, but increased modestly in the first quarter of 2000 as it began to respond to the relatively low real interest rates. An improved export performance, subdued import demand, and a robust expansion in current transfers contributed to a marked widening of the external current account surplus to 5.1 percent of GDP in 1999 from 2.7 percent in 1998. The large deficit on goods and services was more than offset by current transfers, which in 1999 were boosted by a significant increase in Namibia’s SACU revenues. The deficit in the services account remained essentially unchanged, as a slight decline in receipts from tourism was offset by a further drop in transportation payments.The current account surplus was largely offset by net capital outflows, mainly portfolio investment by institutional investors. Gross international reserves rose by US$45 million to US$305 million at end-l 999, equivalent to two months of imports of goods and services. The Namibia dollar remained unchanged in nominal terms during 1999, but appreciated by 6.3 percent in real terms. During the first half of 2000 both the real and nominal effective exchange rates depreciated, by 1 percent and 2 percent respectively. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 40 - APPENDIX V . Namibia: Selected Financial and Economic Indicators, 1997-2000 Domestic economy (Annual percentage change) GDP deflator 8.7 7.1 4.2 6.1 Consumer price index (period average) 8.8 6.2 8.6 8.2 Consumer price index (end of period) 6.9 8.7 7.9 8.3 External economy (In millions of U.S. dollars) l/ Exports, f.o.b. Imports, f.o.b. Current account balance 2/ (in percent of GDP) Capital and financial account balance Gross official reserves (end of period) In months of imports of goods and services Change in real effective exchange rate (in percent) 3/ 1363.1 ,1642.0 - 85.4 2.6 -99.8 250.4 1.5 3.3 1203.9 1244.4 s1489.7 -1423.0 - 80.8 153.9 2.7 5.3 -87.5 -155.3 260.6 304.9 $:Z i:; 1371.1 ,1529.7 107.9 3.6 -108 351 2.1 . . . Real effective exchange rate (end of period, depreciation -) Total revenue and grants 4/ 36.6 36.3 39.0 37.7 Deposit rate Lending rate Interest rate (in percent) 5/ 20.0 23.6 16.7 .a. Sources: Namibian authorities; and Ih4F staff estimates and projections l/ Unless otherwise indicated 2/ Including transfers 3/ Trade-weighted period average 4/ Figures are those for fiscal years beginning April 1. 51 Bank of Namibia bank rate, end period Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public