DOCUMENT OF INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND NOT FOR PUBLIC USE ARCHIVES ROOM HQ C-532 0450 W/00/86 CONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION May 11,200O To: Members of the Executive Board From: Subject: The Secretary Singapore-Staff Report for the 2000 Article IV Consultation Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staff report for the 2000 Article IV consultation with Singapore, which is tentatively scheduled for discussion on Monday, June $2000. Ms. Kochhar (ext. 38770), Mr. J. Lee (ext. 37331), and Ms. Gobat (ext. 34413) are available to answer technical or factual questions relating to this paper prior to the Board discussion. Unless the Documents Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the WTO Secretariat on Friday, May 19,200O. Att: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicCONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND SINGAPORE Staff Report for the 2000 Article IV Consultation Prepared by the Staff Representatives for the 2000 Consultation with Singapore Approved by Charles Collyns and Ishan Kapur May 10,200O The 2000 Article IV Consultation discussions were held in Singapore during March 2-13,200O. The mission team consisted of Ms. Kochhar (head), Ms. Gobat and Messrs. Lee and Cardarelli (all APD). Mr. Peh (Executive Director’s office) attended the meetings and Mr. Collyns (APD) joined the mission for the last three days of discussions. The mission met with Deputy Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong, Finance Minister Richard Hu, Managing Director of the Monetary Authority of Singapore Mr. Koh Yong Guan; other senior government officials; and representatives of the private sector and academia. Singapore has accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3 and 4 and maintains an exchange system that is free of restrictions on the making of payments and transfers for current international transactions. This report is the joint product of the mission team, led by Ms. Kochhar. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2- Contents Page I. Executive Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..I.....I........~........... 3 II. Background and Short-Term Outlook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 III. Policy Discussions ......................................................................................................... 9 A. Near-Term Demand Managament and the Policy Mix.. ................................... -9 B. Medium-Term Policy Issues.. .......................................................................... 10 C. Transparency Issues ......................................................................................... 18 IV. Staff Appraisal . . ,.... ..,........ ,....... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .18 Boxes 1. The Asian Crisis: Experience of Hong Kong SAR and Singapore.. ............................. ,5 2. Central Provident Fund.. ............................................................................................. .13 3. Financial Sector Reforms.. .......................................................................................... .15 4. Productivity Growth and Competitiveness in the Medium-Term .............................. .17 Figures 1. Current and Leading Indicators of Economic Activity ................................................ 21 2. Regional Comparisons: Key Domestic Indicators ....................................................... 22 3. Regional Comparisons: Key External Indicators ......................................................... 23 4. External Developments.. ............................................................................................. .24 5. Labor and Asset Market Developments ....................................................................... 25 6. Monetary and Fiscal Indicators .................................................................................... 26 Tables 1. Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 1996-200 1 .......................................... .27 2. Balance of Payments, 1996-200 1 ................................................................................ 28 3. Monetary Survey, 1995-99 .......................................................................................... 29 4. Summary of Government Operations, 1996/97-2000/O 1 ........................................... .30 Annexes 1. Illustrative Medium-Term Scenario.. .......................................................................... .3 1 2. Exchange Rate Assessment.. ....................................................................................... .33 3. Illustrative Long-Term Fiscal Projection ..................................................................... 35 4. Statistical Issues ........................................................................................................... 38 5. Fund Relations ............................................................................................................ .40 6. Official Development Assistance ................................................................................ 42 7. Draft Public Information Notice ................................................................................. .43 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3- 1. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 0 Singapore’s economy has staged a strong comeback from the slowdown in 1998, growing by 5% percent in 1999. Inflation remains low; the employment situation is improving; the impact of the crisis on the financial sector has been absorbed; and the external position continues to be strong. The short-term economic outlook is healthy, reflecting strong global electronics demand and good prospects for sustained growth in Singapore’s major trading partners. GDP growth in 2000 and 2001 is projected to be around 6 percent, implying that the output gap would likely close over the next year. 0 While the present macroeconomic policy mix is appropriate, the authorities recognize that, looking ahead, they need to be prepared to act preemptively to tighten monetary policy to head off overheating risks. With activity strengthening, fiscal stimulus was withdrawn in 1999 and the likely outturn for the budget in 2000 will deliver a broadly neutral fiscal stance. The mission endorsed the planned combination of spending increases-especially the lifting of the freeze on government wages and partial restoration of bonus awards-and the phasing out of revenue and other measures implemented to reduce business costs during the crisis. The current easy stance of monetary policy remains appropriate, given the lack of inflation pressures and the withdrawal of fiscal support. However, with expectations of continued strength in external and domestic demand, and as the economy moves closer toward full employment, the exchange rate would need to be allowed to appreciate to avoid overheating. l The discussion of structural policies focused on several areas relevant to sustaining Singapore’s growth potential over the medium-term. These include a marked reduction in the role of the government in business in preparation for the challenges of globalization and the “new” economy; a reconsideration of the approach to medium-term fiscal policy formulation taking into account the large accumulated net government asset position, the need for tax and spending policies to be supportive of enhancing productivity growth and to cope with an aging population; a comprehensive review of the Central Provident Fund (CPF) scheme to refocus it as a retirement saving scheme with lower contribution rates and higher returns and to further develop the health insurance and annuity markets; and continued progress with measures to develop the financial sector. l The mission pressed the authorities to move toward greater transparency on a number of fronts relevant to economic policies. The authorities agreed to consider requesting an FSAP/FSSA and a ROSC on fiscal transparency. The mission also urged the authorities to improve statistical practices relating to fiscal and external sector issues to facilitate analysis of economic policies. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4- II. BACKCROUNDANDSHORT-TERMOUTLOOK 1. Singapore’s economy has rebounded strongly from the sharp slowdown in 1998. The economy slid into a recession in early 1998 as a result of the Asian crisis and the weakening in the global electronics market. The recession was, however, shallower and shorter-lived than in other similarly placed countries in the region, in large part because of Singapore’s robust macroeconomic and structural fundamentals-including a well- supervised and adequately capitalized banking system and the absence of an overheated property market-and the authorities’ pragmatic and flexible policy responses (Box 1). After being virtually flat in 1998, the economy grew by 5% percent in 1999 (Table 1). 2. Both external and domestic demand contributed to the strong growth performance. Initially, the recovery was led by robust external demand underpinned by a surge in the exports of electronics and chemicals, reflecting the Bul GllPCmwh recovery in regional trade and the 11 upturn in the global electronics cycle.’ Since the second quarter of 12 1999, domestic demand has also been 0 making a strong contribution to growth. The increase in domestic ’ demand was led by private consumption, reflecting improved ’ sentiment and wealth effects from -I* ~~~ , , , , , , , , rising asset prices (Figure 1). Since -lb I I, 111 I” I li 111 I” 1 I, 111 iv I ,916 ,597 19% ,599 the third quarter of 1999 there have i Conmbvllon yl CDP @owh also been signs of a rebound in machinery and equipment investment, but construction investment-which accounts for about half of fixed investment-has continued to be weak. 3. The traditionally strong external position has strengthened further. The current account surplus surged by more than 7 percentage points to 25 percent of GDP in 1998 and remained broadly unchanged in 1999 (Table 2). During 1999, export growth rose markedly reflecting the strong pick up in global demand for semiconductor and telecommunication products, more than offsetting the marked recovery ’ In Singapore, electronics account for roughly half of manufacturing and two-thirds of non- oil exports. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-5- Box 1. The Asian Crisis: Experience of Hong Kong SAR and Singapore The Asian crisis appears to have impacted Hong Kong SAR and Singapore with different intensity, lespite their similarities as small open economic-with strong fundamentals and large external reserves-that erve as regional hubs in the provision of financial and trade-related business services. The recession during the isian crisis was less severe and the subsequent recovery started off stronger in Singapore than in Hong Kong. Singapore’s GDP declined by about 2 percent over three quarters in 1998 and rose by 5% percent in 1999. In contrast, Hong Kong’s GDP declined by more than 5 percent over five quarters starting in 1998 and rose by 1% percent in 1999, although the fourth quarter growth reached 8% percent (year-on-year)-higher than 7 percent of Singapore in the same quarter. Although both economies suffered sharp declines in asset prices, the collapse in asset markets in Hong Kong culminated in a major speculative attack on the currency in mid-1998. 1 The stock market in Singapore regained the loss during the Asian crisis by late 1999, a few months earlier than in Hong Kong. In recent months, however, the Singapore stock market has lost steam in contrast to the Hong Kong stock market which has continued to strengthen (Figure 2). 1 The property market in Singapore recovered substantially since early 1999 whereas the property market in Hong Kong has yet to turn around. The difference in the two economies’ experiences during the Asian crisis can be broadly attributed to the bllowing three factors. 1 Singapore’s asset markets had already begun to cool when the Asian crisis swept through the region. At the inception of the Asian crisis in the mid-1997, Singapore’s property price was already declining as the result of the anti-speculative measures implemented by the authorities in 1996. In contrast, Hong Kong’s property market had been in a sustained boom, containing a sizeable speculative bubble (SM/OO/l7). Stock prices had also been declining in Singapore since 1996, while they had reached historical highs in Hong Kong in mid- 1997. 1 Faced with the collapse in demand, Singapore adopted more flexible policy responses. Hong Kong, whose policy options were constrained by the exchange rate link to the U.S. dollar, had to rely on the flexibility of its markets. Singapore was able to adopt an expansionary monetary policy stance by letting the exchange rate depreciate and interest rates fall. The supportive policy stance was reinforced by the business cost-cutting package implemented in early 1999 to enhance competitiveness. In Hong Kong, defending the exchange rate link resulted in spates of high interest rates in 1997 and 1998, but the initial decline in competitiveness has now been virtually erased by the rapid deflation (Figure 3). I A larger share of manufacturing in the economy enabled Singapore to reap larger benefits from the regional and global recovery at the early stage of recovery. The recovery in Singapore was initially led by the manufacturing sector, which has benefited from the upturn in the global electronic cycle, the recovery in regional economic activity and improved competitiveness. Hong Kong could not benefit as much from the pickup in the global electronic cycle since manufacturing accounts for less than 10 percent of GDP, compared to a quarter of GDP in Singapore. Over the course of 1999, however, the recovery in both economies has become increasingly broad-based and dependent on domestic demand. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-6- in import growth.* Rising regional demand for entrepot services and a sharp recovery in visitor arrivals led to the improvement in the service balance.3 At the same time, capital outflows-largely reflecting the withdrawal of foreign interbank funds from Singapore- moderated from the high level recorded in 1998 and early 1999 (Figure 4). Official foreign reserves stood at almost US$75 billion at end-March 2000 (equivalent to 8% months of imports). 4. Inflation has remained low and equity prices have rebounded. Following a period of deflation in 1998 largely due to falling commodity prices and labor I costs, consumer prices rose very slightly during 1999Lby ‘/z percent on average, reflecting continued slack in the economy. Equity prices, ’ however, staged a strong comeback. The Straits Times Index rose roughly ’ 60 percent in 1999, and current levels _, _ - CPI u/l ilenlr are well in excess of those before the - - - CP,; COW II crisis (Figure 5). In contrast, the .* -2 I II Ill 1” I II 111 I” I I, 111 1v I II Ill I” 4 recovery in property prices has been 1% ,597 ,998 1599 I/ E?cl”ding hovr.g rromdmon nd pnv*r ma IM~O” more subdued-property prices have 1 risen by 28 percent, but remain about one third below their previous peak in mid-1996. 5. Labor market conditions have improved. From a peak of 4% percent in the second half of 1998, the unemployment rate has dropped to below 3 percent by end-1999, notwithstanding large retrenchments in the disk drive industry arising from relocation of production facilities to lower cost countries. Significant business cost reductions helped not only to moderate the need for layoffs during the slowdown, but also to underpin the recovery in employment. Mirroring supply developments, employment growth was broad-based across all sectors, with the exception of the construction sector. Notwithstanding the marked acceleration in earnings growth through 1999, robust labor productivity growth has contributed to a significant reduction in unit labor costs. 6. The easier monetary policy stance adopted in mid-1997 has largely been maintained. The easing of the exchange-rate centered monetary policy in mid- 1997 was accomplished through a shift in the slope and the width of the (undisclosed) target band around the (undisclosed) trade-weighted exchange rate. Specifically, the appreciating (positively sloped) band was replaced with a flat band at the same time that the band width was widened, thereby allowing the exchange rate to depreciate in real effective terms by 9 percent between mid- 1997 and mid-l 999. As the regional currencies regained stability and the domestic recovery took hold, the authorities reinstated, in mid- 1999, the narrower band * Global semiconductor sales rebounded by a robust 17 percent in 1999, after having contracted by 8% a year earlier. 3 Intra-regional trade accounts for around half of Singapore’s total trade. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-7- width but not the positive slope. As a result, the real effective exchange rate has remained broadly stable in 1999 and thus far in 2000, but remains roughly 10 percent more depreciated than in mid- 1997. Interest rates- interbank and prime lending rates- have fallen sharply since their peak in early 1998, and are now amongst the lowest in the region. 7. Bank lending to the private sector contracted in 1999 and in early 2000, but tentative signs of recovery are evident (Table 3). Notwithstanding the easing in monetary conditions and the pickup in economic activity, private sector credit contracted reflecting both the normal lagged response in lending to a recovery and the continued weakness in the credit-sensitive construction sector (Figure 6).4 However, there are signs that a recovery may be around the comer with the slight pickup in the loan-deposit ratio in the fourth quarter of 1999 and in early 2000. 8. Fiscal policy in FY1999 was initially aimed at providing continued support to activity, but in light of the stronger-than-expected recovery, the emphasis shifted to a smooth withdrawal of fiscal stimulus.’ The budget for FY 1999- Ihc Rscal hritian ,, 14 formulated in the context of a sharp ,2 .‘“-‘O’Oop’ . I2 weakening in growth in the second ,0 . half of 1998 and the expectation of B . .B negative growth for the following 6 year-envisaged a swing in the primary operating balance into a deficit of some 3% percent of GDP I: 2&&q :I 0 0 from a surplus of L/ percent of GDP - O”erollholmLv ‘.\#.--- - Pnmory”pw”ling bdancr - -2 in FY 1998 (Table 4). This outcome 1 ~-OS--- F’s?rrnpu’ra . was exnected to be the result of the N 1953 Ml9% FY I%7 FYI998 NW9 FYXO 4 full-yeir effect of the combination of I 4 The manufacturing sector-which has been the primary source of recent growth-is dominated by the presence of multinational corporations (MNCs), which finance their operations mainly through internal earnings, their parent companies, or the offshore Asian dollar market, and thus tends to be less sensitive to domestic interest rates or credit conditions. ’ FY 1999 refers to the period April 1999 to March 2000. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-8- measures that had been implemented in 1998 to stimulate demand and reduce business costs.6 A freeze on civil service wages partly offset these expansionary measures. However, both as a result of the functioning of automatic stabilizers on the revenue side and discretionary action to scale back lower priority development projects, as the year unfolded, the fiscal position in fact strengthened. The final outturn for the primary operating balance in FY 1999 is conservatively estimated to have been a surplus of around 2 percent of GDP, implying a negative fiscal impulse of 1% percent of GDP in FY 1999. 9. With the recovery now firmly established, the likely fiscal policy outturn in FY2000 will maintain a broadly neutral stance. The budget for FY2000 aims at a primary operating surplus of 1 ‘VI percent of GDP, but given the authorities’ usual conservatism with respect to revenues, the staff projects that the actual outturn in FY2000 is likely to be a surplus of 1% percent of GDP, implying a broadly neutral fiscal policy. Wages and related expenses are to increase by close to 11 percent reflecting the restoration of the civil service salary cut imposed in 1999, partial restoration of the cut in the employers’ contribution rate to the CPF from IO percent to 12 percent, and normal salary increases. A key expenditure priority in the 2000 budget is the education sector, for which both operating and development spending allocations have been increased. On the revenue side, the primary focus is on a phased rollback of the tax rebates and other cost-cutting measures taken during the crisis. The temporary 10 percent rebate on corporate taxes has been discontinued and the 10 percent rebate on personal income taxes was halved. However, the 55 percent property tax rebate for commercial and industrial properties has been extended and the corporate tax rate has been permanently lowered by % percentage point to 25% percent. The budget also included tax incentives to promote innovation and entrepreneurship in high-tech sectors, and to encourage the development of the bond market. 10. The adverse impact of the regional crisis on Singapore’s financial sector has largely been absorbed. The ratio of nonperforming loans to nonbank clients as a share of total nonbank loans of Singapore incorporated banks rose from around 3 percent in early 1998 to a peak of 12% percent in June 1999-largely reflecting banks’ regional exposure- but has since stabilized at around that level.’ Banks’ capital adequacy ratios-ranging from 17-24 percent in mid-l 999-are well in excess of the regulatory minimum of 12 percent of risk-weighted assets. 11. The short-term outlook for Singapore’s economy is bright. Singapore is well positioned to continue to benefit from buoyant global electronics demand and the favorable 6 The measures included increases in development spending, rebates on property taxes and rental rates, reductions in utility tariffs, suspension of land sales, a temporary 10 percent cut in corporate income tax, and a 10 percent cut in the employer’s contribution rate to the CPF. ’ Banks are required to make general provisions of 3 percent and specific provisions of 10 percent for the unsecured portion of substandard loans (three months overdue), and 50 percent and 100 percent of the total loans for doubtful and loss loans (both classified using forward looking criteria). At present, provisioning covers about */a of the total value of classified loans and more than covers the unsecured portion of these loans. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-9- outlook for the region, the European Union and the United States. Recent monthly data and leading indicators provide further support to the expectation of strong growth. Against this background, Singapore’s economy is forecast to grow by around 6 percent in both 2000 and 200 1, broadly in line with market consensus, implying that the output gap will likely be eliminated within a year. Inflation is projected to remain low, with CPI inflation expected to hover between 1?&2 percent in 2000 and 2001 (Annex I). The current account surplus is expected to remain high (albeit declining as a share of GDP) on the back of strong exports, even as import growth picks up. 12. There are risks to the outlook both on the upside and downside. A continued strong expansion could lead to overheating pressures mainly through a pick up in wage growth, which could.arise even though unemployment remains above normal levels because of labor market mismatches and skill shortages.’ On the downside, growth prospects could be undercut by a “hard landing” in the United States or because of slower than expected recovery in Japan. Also, lingering risks of political instability in neighboring countries could adversely affect Singapore. III. POLICYDISCUSSIONS 13. Discussions focused on the mix of macroeconomic policies to support growth while limiting risks of overheating, and on structural policies to enhance Singapore’s growth potential. During the last Article IV consultation, Directors endorsed the significant easing of fiscal and monetary policy implemented in response to the crisis-induced economic slowdown, and welcomed the structural reforms aimed at securing Singapore’s position as a regional financial center. With the recovery from the Asian crisis well underway and short- term prospects favorable, the focus of the mission’s discussions shifted to medium-term structural issues relevant to enhancing Singapore’s growth potential and upgrading its economic policy framework. A. Near-Term Demand Management and the Policy Mix 14. The mission endorsed the recent management of fiscal policy-both the withdrawal of stimulus in FY1999 and the reorientation toward medium-term objectives implicit in the FY2000 budget. The mission noted that the authorities acted prudently to rein in the budget deficit during FY 1999 as it became apparent that the effects of the crisis were being overcome more rapidly than expected. The authorities explained that development expenditure was much lower than targeted under the budget because of lower contract prices for government projects reflecting the slump in the construction sector as well as the decision to postpone lower priority projects in the wake of the stronger recovery. The broadly neutral stance of fiscal policy for FY2000, the easing of the temporary expenditure restraint measures, and the planned reduction in the revenue-side relief provided to reduce business costs during the crisis are also appropriate. The mission welcomed the initiatives in the budget aimed at enhancing medium-term prospects, including the priority accorded to ’ The authorities have estimated NAIRU at 2-2X percent in Singapore. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- lo- education expenditure, the moderate reduction in corporate taxes, the planned introduction of tax incentives to encourage individuals to save for retirement, over and above CPF contributions, and to promote greater use of annuity products with CPF savings. 15. While the authorities continue to view the current stance of monetary policy as appropriate, they recognize the need to be prepared to act preemptively to tighten monetary policy to head off risks of overheating. The mission agreed that the stance of monetary policy is consistent with the current cyclical position of the economy, given the remaining slack in the economy, the absence of inflationary pressures, and the withdrawal of fiscal stimulus. However, the mission warned of the need for vigilance to the emergence of evidence of overheating for two main reasons. First, with the Singapore dollar remaining undervalued from a medium-term perspective, continued strength of external demand could lead to rapid growth and intensified wage pressures9 Second, with the current easy liquidity conditions, a turnaround in sentiment in currently depressed sectors such as construction, which rely heavily on bank credit, could quickly lead to a build-up of price pressures in both property and Iabor markets, which could have spillover effects elsewhere in the economy. The authorities reiterated their view that the present level of the exchange rate was broadly appropriate given the cyclical position of the economy, but they recognized that some appreciation might be needed to ward off overheating pressures as the economy moved to full employment. They emphasized that they were aware of the need for caution, and stressed that monetary policy is set in line with a forward-looking assessment of the economy, which assured a tightening of the policy stance as incipient inflationary pressures emerge. B. Medium-Term Policy Issues 16. The discussion focused on issues relevant to enhancing competitiveness-broadly defined to include factors that will sustain medium term growth-which the authorities see as “the prime economic challenge for Singapore in the new millennium.“‘0 The mission shared the authorities’ view that maximizing Singapore’s growth potential will require the adoption of a strategy aimed at creating a knowledge-based, entrepreneurial economy, and pressed for accelerated action in several areas, including reducing the role of government in business, establishing a more market-oriented and flexible system of regulation (especially in services), reducing potential distortions to saving and investment decisions (particularly related to the CPF), and updating the overall economic policy framework to place greater emphasis on transparency. 9 While acknowledging the considerable degree of uncertainty in such calculations, the mission’s assessment-broadly in line with the market’s view-is that the Singapore dollar could be some 10-15 percent below its medium-term equilibrium level, in real effective terms, suggesting that as the economy moves towards full employment, the Singapore dollar would need to appreciate (see Annex II for details of this analysis). lo FY2000 Budget Speech by Finance Minister Richard Hu. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- ll- Medium-Term Fiscal Policy 17. The mission discussed the appropriateness of the authorities’ medium-term fiscal goals both in terms of the desired level of fiscal balances and of the government’s net asset position. Under the present policy framework, medium-term fiscal policy formulation is broadly guided by the goal of maintaining a modest operating surplus and a law that current governments cannot run down the assets accumulated by previous governments without the express consent of the President. The authorities believe that Singapore’s commitment to fiscal prudence has served the country well in managing macroeconomic policy and responding to shocks. They noted that there are good economic reasons-primarily the need to prepare for the aging of the population and the desire to build up a sizable “rainy day” reserve given that Singapore lacks natural resources-underlying their cautious approach to fiscal policy. 18. Illustrative projections prepared by the mission suggest that the government’s long-term financial position would be very strong, even taking account of demographic pressures. Staff estimates (based on partial information that is publicly available) suggest that the net government asset position (excluding official foreign Illustrative Long-term Fiscal Projections ,. _ 120 exchange reserves) was roughly (Bwl!r.csulur~a.,” pcrcmofGDP, 1 equivalent to about 100 percent of GDP at end-1999. Based on the present policy framework, the mission’s illustrative long-term projections (Annex III), which take into account the impact of the slowdown in potential growth, and of aging and new health care technologies on revenues and expenditures, suggest that the 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030 ” operating balance would go into a small deficit by 2020, which would widen to a deficit of 4-5 percent of GDP by 2030. However, even with operating deficits, the budget would continue to record overall surpluses, once off-budget investment income is included, with the result that the government’s net asset position would be sustained well above its present level relative to GDP. 19. The mission discussed the scope provided by the current strong fiscal position to absorb the impact of population aging on revenues and expenditures, while also facilitating the transition to increased global integration and the “new” economy, The illustrative projections outlined above suggest that the authorities have considerable latitude to continue with reductions in taxes in line with the pressures of globalization, further enhance Singapore’s human capital through spending on education and training, and rationalize social protection programs to cushion the impact of an aging population (discussed further below), while maintaining a clearly sustainable fiscal position, including a Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12- sizable policy reserve,” In this context, the mission argued for a relaxation of the restriction that the current government cannot run down the assets built up by previous governments. The authorities agreed that greater attention needs to be devoted to estimating optimal ratios of net government assets to GDP as a guide to fiscal policy, and appreciated the usefulness of the illustrative projections prepared by the mission for their own deliberations on these issues, Nevertheless, they stressed the sensitivity of the projections to different assumptions about future growth rates, the rates of return on the government’s overseas assets, and the impact of aging on revenues and expenditures. Reforms of the CPF 20. The CPF has proven to be a useful tool for saving mobilization, but, over time, several problems have emerged as the scheme has been used to meet wider public policy objectives (Box 2). A central problem is that, despite high contribution rates, at retirement most CPF members are “asset rich but cash poor” due to large pre-retirement withdrawals for housing and low returns on CPF balances. Periodic variations in CPF contribution rates for short-term macroeconomic management have exacerbated this problem. As the demographic hump approaches and many retirees seek to reduce or liquidate their housing investment to supplement their retirement cash balances, this problem may get considerably worse. Moreover, the heavy emphasis on housing and low-risk saving instruments has inhibited the development of deeper and more dynamic financial markets. Finally, retirees are inadequately covered against longevity risks due to the lack of well-developed and active annuity and health insurance markets. 21. While acknowledging that the recent changes to the CPF scheme are steps in the right direction, the mission advocated a more comprehensive approach to reforming the CPF and associated programs. The key recent reform measures include widening of investment options for CPF members, placing additional restrictions on pre-retirement withdrawals, and providing tax incentives to expand the use of annuities at retirement. Rather than the hitherto piecemeal approach to reforms, the mission took the view that a comprehensive review of the CPF was needed and should address the following objectives: l Refocusing the CPF on retirement needs by making it a core pension scheme with much more restrictive limitations on withdrawals than at present financed with lower contribution rates-the latter also serving to lower business costs. The investment of these balances should aim to provide members with market-related returns, while diversifying risks. -Thus, while a portion of the funds could be invested in risk-free assets, the bulk of the assets would be pooled and invested either through the CPF or private fund managers in higher return assets with a view to providing a satisfactory replacement rate at retirement. ” A generational accounting exercise suggests that the large accumulated net asset position provides scope for a once-and-for-all 35 percent across-the-board reduction in taxes or a once-and-for-all 45-50 percent increase in expenditures, while maintaining the net asset position unchanged at the present level. Details of this exercise can be found in the forthcoming Selected Issues paper. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13 - Box 2. Central Provident Fund The Central Provident Fund was established in 1955 as a mandatory, fully funded, defined contribution, individual account system designed to provide a degree of financial security for workers in their old age and has clearly been instrumental in generating Singapore’s remarkably high saving rates. Over time, the CPF has evolved into a scheme that has come to be used for various public policy objectives, including macroeconomic management through variations in employer contribution rates as a means of reducing business costs.’ Accounts I Each CPF member has four accounts: (1) Ordinary Account-savings in this account are available for pre-retirement withdrawals for home purchases, education, approved financial investments, and for topping-up parent’s retirement accounts; (2) Medisave Account-savings in this account can be used for meeting hospitalization and to pay premiums for approved medical insurance schemes such as MediShield (designed to help meet the cost of catastrophic illnesses); (3) Special Account-savings in this account are reserved for old age and contingency purposes and can only be withdrawn at age 55; and (4) Retirement Account-at age 55, a member can withdraw the remaining balance in the Ordinary Account and the balances in the Special Account as a tax exempt lump sum after setting aside a minimum sum in this account. This minimum sum in the retirement account is currently S$60,000 (out of which S$40,000 can be in pledged property and S$20,000 in cash). From the retirement age, currently 62 years, each member may receive a monthly income from this sum (plus interest). Alternatively, it can be used to buy an approved annuity product or be deposited into an approved bank. Contribution Rates I Both the employer and the employee contribute to the CPF. Contribution rates rose from 10 percent at the inception of the scheme in 1955 to a peak of 50 percent in 1984/85. During the past 15 years, contribution rates have been lowered and raised 7 times. At present, the contribution rates are 20 percent of the wages for employees aged 55 and below and 12 percent for employers subject to a wage limit of S$6000 per month (beyond which no contribution is payable). Progressively lower rates apply to those aged between 55 and 60, those aged between 60 and 65, and those aged above 65. About */3 of the labor force is covered by the scheme. Investments of CPF Balances and Returns to CPF members I CPF balances must by law be invested in government bonds. The proceeds from the sale of government securities to the CPF are invested on behalf of the government by the Government Investment Corporation (GIC). The portfolio investments of the GIC are not revealed to the public but most of its funds are invested abroad. The interest rate paid to CPF members is set on the basis of the 12-month fixed deposit rate and month-end savings rates of the four major local banks. The guaranteed statutory minimum interest rate is 2% percent on ordinary account balances and 4 percent on special account balances. The average interest earned on CPF accounts since 1980 has been in the range of 4-5 percent. Employees contributions and the interest earned on their CPF balance are all tax-exempt. The authorities estimate the average replacement rate to be between 20 percent and 40 percent of last drawn income. ’ A detailed analysis of these issues and the resulting problems can be found in the forthcoming Selected Issues paper. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14- 0 Rationalizing the various endowment funds in the budget that are aimed at social protection into a means-tested scheme for publicly funded support for aging and health care needs. 0 Building on recent initiatives to encourage the development of a third tier of voluntary supplementary saving schemes (e.g., through tax incentives) as well as to develop the health insurance and annuity markets to provide greater protection for longevity. 22. The authorities agreed with the general recommendation for a comprehensive review of the CPF and acknowledged that the current reform agenda does not go far enough to address the problems of the scheme. The authorities noted that to assure sufficient income at retirement for CPF members, they would probably need to go beyond the main recommendation made by the recent Interministerial Committee on Aging to increase the share of CPF contributions credited to the special account from 4 percent to 8 percent of wages. In particular, it may be necessary to consider additional measures such as raising the minimum sum in the retirement account and reducing the percentage that can be pledged in housing. However, they disagreed with the mission’s proposal to move to means- tested publicly funded social protection programs, noting that means-tested programs in other countries have had mixed success. More importantly, the authorities have a strong preference, on socio-political grounds, to make available (through the endowment funds) the means to provide publicly funded social safety net programs but to stop short of setting up entitlement programs. Financial Sector Reforms 23. The mission endorsed the financial sector reforms implemented since late 1997 that are aimed at securing Singapore’s position as a major international financial center. In particular, the mission supported the reforms to open up the domestic banking system to greater competition, and the measures to develop bond and equity markets, and the asset management industry (Box 3). The mission agreed with the authorities’ assessment that Singapore’s position as a financial center faces three key challenges. The first is to cope with the shift in financing away from banks-where Singapore has had an advantage in the region through the Asian Currency Units (the off-shore banking units)-towards capital markets; the second is to deal with increasing competition both from already established as well as emerging financial centers in the region; and the third is to overcome the constraints imposed by the small size of the domestic market and the lack of an obvious “hinterland” whose financing needs can be met through Singapore. 24. The authorities’ strategy for financial sector development is focused both on leveraging traditional strong suits and removing constraints to the development of new areas of strength. A priority is to address the remaining constraints to the development of a more liquid and efficient domestic bond market by taking steps to further develop markets for government securities, repos and derivatives. The mission discussed several measures that would help achieve this objective including replacement of the liquid asset ratio with a maturity ladder approach to liquidity management which would help develop secondary trading in government securities; greater use by statutory boards of the bond market for their financing needs; greater use of government securities for monetary management to develop Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 15- Box 3. Financial Sector Reforms In early 1998, the authorities unveiled a comprehensive package of financial sector reform with a fivefold aim: (i) bring regulatory and supervisory practices in line with current best practice, shifting from a one-size-fits-all to a risk-based approach; (ii) remove remaining entry restrictions in domestic banking and insurance to fully open the financial industry to foreign competition; (iii) develop deep and liquid bond and equity markets; (iv) promote the asset management industry; and (v) gradually liberalize the use of the Singapore dollar by nonresidents.’ The focus of this box is on recent measures to develop Singapore’s capital markets. 1. Bond market Several steps have been taken to enhance liquidity in the government securities market (SGS) and to develop the corporate bond market. l Steps were taken to develop a benchmark government bond yield curve. In September 1998, the first 5-year bond issue was launched, followed by a 7-year bond in October 1998, and a lo-year bond in 1999. As a result, the amount outstanding of SGS increased from S$23 billion at end- 1997 to S$36 billion at end- 1999. Average daily trading turnover increased to S$602 million in 1999 from S$534 million in 1997. Bid-ask spreads narrowed and the benchmark yield curve was extended to 1 OY. l To expand liquidity, the issuer base and trading activity in the corporate bond market, the authorities permitted nonresident foreign corporations to raise money in Singapore dollars through bond and equity issues. However, to limit the international use of the Singapore dollar, proceeds of these capital market issues, if they are not earmarked to finance activities in Singapore must be swapped out into foreign exchange. Further, local corporations, including statutory boards, have been encouraged to tap the capital markets. Finally, tax incentives were introduced to promote issuance, underwriting, origination from Singapore. As a consequence, corporate bond issuance by high grade foreign companies and statutory boards increased markedly. Since the third quarter of 1998, Singapore dollar bond issuance by nonresident corporates has totaled S$3.9 billion. Local corporates issued S$9.2 billion in 1999, compared to S$6.7 billion in 1997 and S$4.2 billion in 1998. Most notably, while most issues before 1998 were private placements, public issues are now on the rise, enhancing price discovery and liquidity. 2. Equity market A key measure in this segment of the financial sector is the demutualization and merger of the Stock Exchange of Singapore (SES) and SIMEX, which puts Singapore in the same league as Australia, Germany, Sweden and the Netherlands. The merger is expected to align cash and derivatives business strategies more closely so as to spur the development of complementary products. Other measures include the easing of regulations to allow foreign companies to list on the stock exchange and the decision to make stockbroking commissions fully negotiable from 2001. 3. Asset Management Industry The other key area of reform targets institutional investors and private fund managers with a view to enhancing Singapore’s standing as a major regional hub for the fund management industry. Institutional investors are expected to play an active role in channeling both foreign and domestic savings through Singapore and in widening the selection of capital market products. Several measures have been implemented to catalyze the fund management industry, including strengthening and streamlining the regulatory structures for fund managers and unit trusts, provision of tax incentives and more flexible licensing requirements to attract new players to the industry, the decision to farm out a part of the government’s assets currently being managed by the Government Investment Corporation (GIC) to other fund managers, measures to further liberalize the CPF Unit Trust scheme and to encourage CPF members to investment in professionally managed funds, and measures to enhance distribution channels for unit trusts. ’ The reforms of the regulatory and supervisory framework and of banking practices are covered in SMl99153. Further details on the current agenda of financial sector reforms and remaining constraints can be found in the forthcoming Selected Issues paper accompanying this report. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 16- the repo market; and continued liberalization of the restrictions on the intemationalization of the Singapore dollar. The authorities responded that these measures are all under consideration, but stressed that the pace at which reforms are implemented will be determined pragmatically to avoid undermining Singapore’s prudential strength, in the first place, and to respond to competitive pressures, as necessary. On the asset management industry, the authorities agreed that the reforms of the CPF (discussed above) will generate greater demand for unit trusts and mutual funds as well as lead to a more active insurance and annuity product industry Finally, the mission welcomed the efforts underway to develop the equities market through demutualization and merging the derivatives and cash markets which could spur the development of complementary products and derivatives; and establishing alliances with global exchanges to expand liquidity and trading volumes. Deregulation and Promotion of a Knowledge-Based Economy 25. The authorities’ commitment to reduce the role of the government in the economy is evident in the recent initiatives to open up key sectors of the economy. The authorities are keenly aware that Singapore consistently lags many OECD countries on indicators which assess a country’s ability to create the microeconomic circumstances conducive to growth (Box 4). Partly in response to these findings, they have recently taken steps to open up the banking, telecommunications and power sectors; strengthen education and training to equip the current and future labor force with the skills necessary to function in the knowledge and high-technology based economy; and set up government funds as a catalyser for venture capital to fund high-tech start-ups. The mission welcomed these measures but stressed that care should be taken to ensure that the essential characteristics of venture capitalism- an interest in making investments succeed and in setting up systems to spread risks-are not weakened by the perception of government direction or implicit guarantee. 26. More generally, the mission emphasized that there is scope for moving faster and further with both deregulation and privatization of government-linked companies (GLCs). The mission pointed out that the benefits of opening up the telecommunication sector would be enhanced by deregulation of key sectors with strong synergies with the high- tech sector such as information technology infrastructure and media services. The authorities were in general agreement on the need for more ambitious plans for deregulating industries with close links to the high-tech sectors, and indeed, since the mission, they have made several announcements in this regard-including plans to implement measures to increase competition in the provision of internet access, broadband access, and media services. The authorities also agreed that privatization of GLCs would be a key step toward improving incentives and enhancing competition. They noted that although GLCs have operated on a fully commercial basis, there has been a lack of dynamism on the part of some GLCs, as well as the perception of an implicit guarantee by the government. In this regard, the authorities have recently announced that they are considering ways to further divest their holdings in GLCs, including by placing their shares in unit trusts which can then be sold to the public, although no time frame has been specified for such a move. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17- Box 4. Productivity Growth and Competitiveness in the Medium-Term Inhere is considerable controversy about whether Singapore’s exceptional growth performance in the last two decades has been largely driven by factor accumulation rather than productivity growth. Regardless of the .esolution of the dispute on past TFP growth, future growth is likely to be limited by the following factors: Ii) the expected marked slowing in labor force growth; (ii) a capital output ratio equivalent to that of the United States; and (iii) the significantly reduced scope for growth driven by “technological catch-up.” Thus, the nedium- to long-term growth potential of Singapore depends critically on the generation of productivity gains. Some indicators of competitiveness raise further concerns about Singapore’s growth prospects. First, Singapore las been losing market shares for its key exports in its main industrial country markets, although this largely .eflects the transition lower-skill, labor-intensive electronics products to higher value-added products (semi- :onductors) and financial and business services. Second, cross-country studies constantly rank Singapore at the top on the basis of macroeconomic indicators.] 3ut, according to a recent study of competitiveness (the Global Competitiveness Report published by the World Economic Forum), judged on the basis of a “microeconomic” index which attempts to measure the strength of nicroeconomic foundations for growth, Singapore ranked 12’h behind the United States, Canada and smaller European countries such as Switzerland and the Netherlands, and has lost some ground since 1998. Many domestic and international observers have noted that there has been insufficient diversity in business and :conomic decision making in Singapore, with government-linked companies (GLCs) and public monopolies dominating the business landscape. These observers note that Singapore’s growth prospects will depend on its Ibility to develop dynamic private manufacturing and service sector companies-with a greater willingness to :ake risks and less hierarchical and bureaucratic decision making-and to move to a more market-oriented and flexible system of regulation. The Singapore authorities have already begun to respond to some of the policy implications of these findings. Progress is being made in shifting the emphasis of the regulatory framework for the financial sector from :xtensive regulations and directives to supervision of banks’ risk management and control processes. Furthermore, the government has initiated a number of measures to elicit more private sector-initiated activities and upgrade the skill level of the workforce: The telecomcommunications sector was fully liberalized: 58 business licenses were issued for new entrants into the market and new businesses of incumbents. New entrants include major global companies (MCI Worldcom and AT&T) as well as smaller local operators. The electricity and gas sector will be restructured: in April 2001, electricity generation will be privatized with no limit on foreign ownership, and electricity sales for businesses will be fully liberalized; in April 2002, electricity sales for households will be liberalized; and similar restructurings are under consideration for gas industry. Initiatives under manpower 2 1 are in place to strengthen pre and in-employment education, to raise labor force participation by females and the aged, and to attract foreign talent into Signapore. In addition to increasing support to local schools, several foreign business schools were enticed to open their Singapore campuses. To provide support for the retraining of unskilled workers, the employers’ contribution to Skills Development Fund was increased. Small and Medium Enterprises 2 1 is a ten-year strategic plan to facilitate the transition by SMEs to a knowledge-based economy, by enhancing their productivity and potential for innovation. Construction 2 1 is aimed at improving producitivity in the construction sector including by raising the skill level of construction workers and by using prefabricated building components. ’ Singapore has one of the most open trade regimes in the world, getting the highest score on the Fund’s lo-point scale of trade restrictiveness. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 18- C. Transparency Issues 27. Singapore was an early subscriber to the SDDS and produces generally high quality economic data, but there remain some issues regarding the transparency of economic policies. On monetary policy, the mission suggested that as financial markets became deeper and more complex, increased transparency about the authorities’ objectives and actions could, by enhancing the signaling value of information, increase the leverage and efficacy of monetary policy actions. The authorities responded that their careI management of monetary policy has worked well and that, despite the lack of transparency, the framework was well understood and has considerable credibility with market participants. Moreover, they believe that revealing information on specific policy objectives would weaken the operational efficacy of monetary policy and exchange rate management, which is carried out through foreign exchange market intervention and money market operations. However, they agreed with the mission that as their financial markets became even more open, the potential for an increased volume and volatility of capital flows could complicate the conduct of monetary policy and that the issue of greater transparency would need to be kept under review. 28. On the government’s accounts, the mission reiterated the view that policy analysis is hampered by incomplete information and the lack of a proper consolidation. In particular, part of the government’s investment income is credited to various off-budget accounts and there are no accounts on consolidated public sector operations, and no comprehensive information on the current value of the government’s assets. The authorities stressed that most statutory boards have been corporatized and operate on a commercial basis and the remaining ones do not represent a large share of economic activity. Furthermore, consolidation is complicated by the fact that statutory boards’ accounts are on an accrual basis while those of the government are on a cash basis. The authorities are also concerned about populist pressures that could be put on the government to spend the surpluses if the full extent of the government’s net asset position and investment income from these assets is revealed. The mission responded that greater transparency on the management of these reserves would provide a safeguard against possible governance problems and a clearer explanation of the government’s rationale for the need for reserves could insulate policy setting from political and populist pressures. 29. The authorities expressed interest in participating in some of the initiatives being taken by the Fund aimed at assessing member countries’ adherence to best practice standards and codes. They have agreed to consider the mission’s proposal to request an FSSA and to complete a ROSC on fiscal transparency. IV. STAFF APPRAISAL 30. Singapore has weathered the financial storm that swept through Asia relatively unscathed, owing in large part to its strong macroeconomic and structural fundamentals and the authorities’ pragmatic and flexible policy responses. In particular, the significant improvement in competitiveness- resulting from the cost-cutting measures and exchange rate depreciation-cushioned the economy from the negative consequences of Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 19- the regional downturn and positioned Singapore to take full advantage of the upswing in the global electronics cycle and the regional economic recovery. 31. Against the backdrop of likely continued global recovery, Singapore’s short- term economic outlook is healthy, but there are risks to this outlook. Although inflationary pressures are likely to remain subdued in the immediate future, a continued strong economy would face the risk of overheating through a pickup in wage pressures, which could arise even while overall unemployment remains above normal levels, because of labor market mismatches. On the other hand, growth prospects could be undercut by an abrupt slowing of activity in the United States or by slower-than-expected recovery in Japan. 32. Thus, the chief short-term macroeconomic policy challenge will be to steer the economy pragmatically to support sustained growth, while avoiding risks of overheating. The current mix of fiscal and monetary policies is about right, but looking beyond the immediate future, vigilance will be required against inflationary pressures. With fiscal policy having appropriately been shifted to a neutral stance and with minimal inflationary pressures at present, the monetary policy stance has been kept relatively easy. However, as the output gap closes over the next year, continued strong external and domestic demand could lead to a build-up of price pressures in labor and property markets. The authorities will therefore need to be prepared to act preemptively to tighten monetary conditions-in particular, by allowing the exchange rate to appreciate-to head off these risks. 33. The long record of prudent fiscal policies provides room to absorb the impact of aging on government revenues and expenditures, while implementing tax and expenditure policies that are supportive of productivity growth and competitiveness. Now that the crisis is past, fiscal policy formulation can once again be driven by longer-term considerations. The staffs illustrative projections suggest that, even with the emergence of operating deficits as the population ages, the government is likely to record small overall fiscal surpluses once off-budget investment income is taken into account, thus allowing the government’s net asset position to be maintained at its present high level. This gives the authorities latitude to continue with reductions in taxes to maintain Singapore as an attractive business environment in the face of the pressures of globalization, while raising spending on upgrading human capital and providing social protection programs to cushion the impact of an aging population. 34. Although the recent initiatives to widen the range of assets in which CPF balances can be invested are steps in the right direction, there is a need for a more comprehensive approach to reforming the scheme and associated programs. Specifically, the staff suggests that the CPF scheme should be refocused as a core retirement scheme, financed through lower contribution rates and with tighter limits on preretirement withdrawals. Lower contribution rates will serve to lower business costs. At the same time, reforms of the investment and manageinent of CPF funds aimed at generating higher returns while diversifying risks would serve not only to ensure a satisfactory replacement rate at retirement but also to promote the asset management industry and the markets for insurance and annuity products. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 20 - 35. The staff strongly welcomes the financial sector reforms that have been implemented to date as well as the authorities’ resolve to move quickly with further reforms. To cope with the shift in financing away from banks toward capital markets and to overcome the constraints imposed by Singapore’s small size, the development strategy for the financial sector needs to be focused on leveraging traditional strengths to widen the base of the domestic financial sector as well as to expand beyond geographical borders. A priority is to address the remaining constraints to the development of a more liquid domestic bond market by taking steps to further develop markets for government securities, repos and derivatives. The staff also encourages the authorities to continue to liberalize the international use of the Singapore dollar. 36. The authorities recognize that sustaining Singapore’s growth potential requires a marked reduction in the government’s role in business. Although Singapore’s government-led development strategy based on high rates of capital accumulation was very successful in the past, continued success in the process of shifting to a knowledge-based economy will depend on encouraging the development of a more dynamic and entrepreneurial private sector, through deregulation, privatization and upgrading human capital. The staff welcomes the recent measures to open up the banking, telecommunications and power sectors, but sees scope for building on these initiatives to move faster and further in some areas such as information technology and media services. Privatization of GLCs would also be a key step towards improving incentives and enhancing competition. 37. The authorities are encouraged to move toward greater transparency on a number of fronts relevant to economic policies. Not only would greater transparency enhance the efficacy of policies and provide a safeguard against governance problems, but also the experience of other advanced economies suggests that it can help insulate policy making from political pressures. With respect to monetary policy, the reforms aimed at developing Singapore as a global financial center are likely, over time, to increase both the volume and the volatility of capital flows. In these circumstances, greater transparency about the broad inflation objective and the modalities of exchange rate policy could help the market better identify and interpret policy signals and thus facilitate monetary management and reduce interest rate, exchange rate and asset market volatility. Likewise a proper consolidation of the various off-budget accounts as well as those of the statutory boards and increased information on the operations of the GIC would provide a more accurate basis for fiscal policy analysis. 38. Singapore provides data to the Fund on a generally timely basis and has subscribed to the SDDS but a number of limitations in published statistics continue to hamper the analysis of economic policies (Annex IV). The staff would therefore urge the authorities to continue to make progress in improving statistical practice as a matter of priority, including with respect to the absence of foreign exchange forward and other off- balance sheet items in reserves data, the exclusion of Indonesian trade data into trade statistics; and the lack of data on government assets held abroad. The staff welcomes the authorities’ intention to consider requesting an FSSA, and completing the ROSC on fiscal transparency. 39. It is recommended that the next Article IV consultation be held on the standard 12-month consultation cycle. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-21- Figure 1. Singapore: Current and Leading Indicators of Economic Activity @mrter-on-quarter percenr change: snuonofly adjured I2 Real Gross Domestic Product IO - I99O=IW I70 Leading Economic Indicators - 20 - IO 140 - -0 - -10 - -20 #lC "O , . 1994 1995 19% 1997 1998 1999 -30 Bilbnr of S~ngqmre dollorr 3 ’ Investment Commitments in Manufacturing 30 25 - 20- - IO 1 .#m.l(11. 05 ".'.""'."'.""'r" 1994 1995 I!?96 I997 1998 1999 OS Sources: Data provided by the Singapore authorities. Year-on ymrprrcnr change 42 36 30 24 I8 I2 6 0 -6 -12 @EW Total domestic demand -Private wluunprlo” - - - -IS Cross fired capiraljommrion 42 36 30 24 I8 12 6 0 -6 -12 -I8 *lb -24 , 1.. . I . . . 1 . . . 1994 1995 19% 1997 1998 1999 -24 Ye-on-ywprcar change; US. dollars a Global Semiconductor Market Developments 31 60 - 47 -30 Billions o/Singapore dollars * Construction Contracts Awarded 8 7- -7 Toml 6- -6 5 5 :!;; 0 ...'...'.,.'.'.'...'... 1994 1995 1996 1997 1598 1999 O l/ Percentage change of fins expecting an improvement in business wndltions in the manufacturing tractor. 21 The composite leading index has nine components which include money stock, stock of finished goods, company formation,wholesale price changes in manufactured goods, inverted real unk labor costs for manufaoturlng, Inverted default rates for manufacturing, the business forecast for wholesale trade, new orders, and the stock price Index. 31 Based on data by the Semiconductor industry Assodation. Reflects value of shipments in a single month. Sales data are on an annual basis. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 22 - Figure 2. Singapore: Regional Comparisons: Key Domestic Indicators ” Real GDP Growth / 16 12 -8 Percent of GDP Zentral Government Fiscal Balance ,.’ ‘_ 16 ,Proj’ 2 I I I I I 1994 1995 1996 1997 I998 1999 2000 -8 Zonsumer Price Inflation --- Ko:oreo -- - Malaysia - Hong Kong Ipr0- I 1 I 1 I 1994 199s 19% 1997 1998 I999 January 1996= f 00 160 ,tock Market Indices 80 60 40 20 - Singapore ‘i, ,+ --- Korea 1’ I --- Malaysia ‘, : ‘r - Hong Kong 1997 1998 I999 160 60 40 Sources: IMF. World Economic Outlook; Information Notice System; and data provided by the Singapore authoritiis l/ Overall balance on a calendar year basis. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 23 - Figure 3. Singapore: Regional Comparisons: Key External Indicators -5 t -10 - . . . ,/ %F-Qb -I5 1 I t 1 I :: / ” k 1994 1995 19% 1997 1998 1999 2000 -15 January 1994=100 f 995=f 00; L!S. dollar basis 140 r 130 120 SC 7C 6( lea1 Effective Exchange Rates Ii :: - Singapore --- Korea --- Malaysia - Hong Kong MO 130 120 80 70 60 Percenr of GDP 30 Current Account Balance Prq -10 t E Singapore [z9 Korea 0 Mduysio E Hong Kong ‘n’ I 1 .:I : J1 ‘:* I’.. : uF--mb ., I 1 I I I -15 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 8C 6C Unit Labor Costs in Manufacturing 1996 m Karen 63 Taiwan. P 0 C i=i Hong Kong - Singapore /; 98 30 25 20 I5 10 5 0 -5 -10 -I5 I20 II0 loo 60 Sources, IMF. World Economic Outlook; Information Notice System; and data provided by the Singapore authorities. i/Exports of goods and services. BOP basis. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTwelve-monrhpercenr change 40 -10 -2a -3c - 24 - Figure 4. Singapore: External Developments rrade Volume imports m I . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..I.. c 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 ‘& Balance of Payments I -9 - -12 - -15 - -18 - rrpols -21 ‘I* ‘. . . I”. ’ *. * I’. . ‘* ‘. 1994 1995 19% I997 1998 1999 10 IO !O IO 1 IO 20 .30 6 -6 -12 -15 -18 -21 Perccnc of GDP I- Invisibles Balance 24 2c ‘t IC 11 I 4 mo4b ,. . ‘. . .I *. . 1. *. 1. 2. t.. 3 1994 1995 1996 1991 1998 1999 -4 July 1997= 100 II5 110 105 100 95 90 85 80 7s - U.S. dollar/Singapore doilnr -Japanese yen /Singapore dollar --- NEER --- REER 70 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2c 115 110 105 100 95 IO 15 30 75 f0 Sources: IMF, lntemabonal Finandal Statistiis; information Notice System; ard data provided by the Singapore authorities. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-25 - Figure 5. Singapore: Labor and Asset Market Developments Four-quaver percenr change 60 Real Estate Property Prices 60 -40 ” ” ” ” ” ” ” ’ “‘I I I I I 1 I I II 111 IV I I1 Ill IV I II 111 IV [ 11 III IV I II III IV I II IIIIV 1 11 -40 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 January 1994=100 130 IStock Exchange: Straits Times Index 3o I II 111 IV I II IIIIV I 11 III IV I 11 IIIlV 1 II IIIIV I II III IV I 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 200 I I L 11 130 120 110 80 60 0 Sources, CEIC Database; and data provided by the Singapore authoritiis. In percenr; seasonally odjusred 5.0 Unemployment Rate 4.5 - 4.0 - 3.5 - 3.0 - 2.5 2.0 :w 1.5 - w-=b - 4.. - 41 - 3. - 3. -2 - 2. - 1. ~0”““““““““““““. I II IIIIV I II IIIIV I II IlIIV 1 II IIIIV I II 111 IV I II III IV I II 10 I994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 - 5.1 Four-quanerpercenl change 15 I .abor Costs IO . S a I- -5 ,- -11 I- -I! s- -21 7 1: - 11 -5 -0 ._ Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 26 - Figure 6. Singapore: Monetary and Fiscal Indicators Twelve-month percent change 27 Money and Credit I/ 27 24 - 24 In percent IO Interest Rates Primerate YI Three-month SIBOR (U.S. dollarl Thhrea-month Interbank rate 18 9 6 3 0 -3 -6 Y- IO IO > t 7 5 5 0 3 2 1 0 Percent ofCDP ‘C r entral Government Revenue 40 iroj. 3s 28 - 24-Jl 20 - 16 12 8 1994195 Percent @GDP 32 Central Government Expenditure >?32 m Current .” :’ p&$ :. , , = Development : 28 Sourcas CEIC Database; and data povidad by tha Singapore authorities. I/ Adjusted for the purchase of POSBank by DSS Bank in November 1908 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 27 - Table 1. Singapore: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 1996-2001 Nominal GDP (1999): US684.9 billion GDP per capita (1999): USS2 1,237 Population (I 999): 4.00 million Quota: SDR 862.5 million 1996 1997 1998 1999 Proj. 2000 2001 Growth (percent change) Real GDP Real domestic demand Consumption Private consumption Gross capital formation Saving and investment (percent of GDP) Gross national savings Gross capital formation Inflation and unemployment (period average, percent) CPI inflation Unemployment rate Central government budget (percent of GDP) li Revenue and grants Expenditure, net lending, and fund transfers Overall balance Primary operating balance 2/ Money and credit (end of period, percent change) Broad money (M3) 3/ Credit to private sector Interest rate (three-month interbank, in percent) Merchandise trade (percent change) Export volume Import volume Terms of trade 6/ Balance of payments (billion of U.S. dollars) Current account balance (In percent of GDP) Balance on goods Exports, f.o.b. Imports, f.o.b. Overall balance International reserves and external debt Gross official reserves (billion of U.S. dollars) 7/ (In months of imports) Gross external debt (billion of U.S. dollars) 8/ (In percent of GDP) Exchange rate (end of period) Singapore dollar/US. dollar Nominal effective exchange rate 91 Real effective exchange rate 9/ 7.5 8.4 0.4 5.4 5.9 6.0 11.1 9.4 -7.4 8.7 7.2 7.4 8.8 6.4 -0.2 5.6 5.2 7.1 6.5 6.2 -2.1 6.2 5.6 7.6 16.8 15.1 -15.9 7.7 9.9 7.9 52.0 57.2 58.2 58.0 57.5 56.6 36.8 39.3 32.8 32.8 34.0 34.6 1.4 2.0 -0.3 0.4 1.3 1.7 2.0 I.8 3.2 3.5 2.9 2.5 36.7 36.6 30.1 28.9 29.5 30.3 28.2 27.1 28.5 25.0 26.9 26.8 8.5 9.5 1.6 3.9 2.6 3.5 2.0 3.9 0.5 1.9 1.7 1.1 8.5 10.3 7.9 7.2 4.9 41 . 15.8 12.7 7.9 -3.1 -1.1 41 . . 3.4 6.6 1.6 2.8 3.0 51 . . . 7.3 6.8 -0.7 5.3 7.1 7.2 7.1 8.1 -12.5 9.1 9.5 9.2 0.0 0.4 0.9 0.0 -0.1 -0.7 13.9 16.9 21.0 21.5 22.5 23.0 (15.2) (17.9) (25.4) (25.3) 23.5 22.0 2.2 1.1 14.8 11.3 11.8 9.4 126.0 125.7 110.6 115.6 136.1 148.5 -123.8 -124.6 -95.8 -104.3 -124.2 -139.1 7.4 8.0 3.0 2.3 6.8 6.3 77.0 71.4 (7.5) (6.9) 9.1 IO.7 (9.9) (12.8) 75.0 (9.4) (I?; 77.1 88.2 (8.9) (8.5) 14.4 ,.. (16.7) . . . 96.9 (8.4) . 1.400 1.676 1.661 1.673 125.9 125.2 120.8 118.9 118.1 117.2 108.4 106.6 1.729 5/ 118.6 IO/ 107.4 101 . . . Sources: Data provided by the Singapore authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections II Fiscal year beginning April I ; in percent of fiscal year GDP. 2/Overall balance excluding capital revenue, investment income, net lending, debt service, and fund transfers. 31 Adjusted for the acquisition of POSBank by the Development Bank of Singapore in November 1998. 4/ As of March 3 l? 2000. ~/AS of May 10,200O. 6/Based on changes in export and import unit values. 71 Valued at market prices since 1999; Until 1998, U.S. dollar data converted from Singapore dollar data valued at book cost, using end-period exchange rates. g/Based on BIS data; corporate bonds outstanding and the external bank claims by the BIS reporting countries, 91 IMF InformationNotice System monthly index (1990 = 100). 1 O/ APD estimate for April 2000. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 28 - Table 2. Singapore: Balance of Payments, 1996-2001 l/ (In billions of U.S. dollars) 1996 1997 1998 1999 Projection 2000 2001 Current account balance 13.9 16.9 Trade balance 2.2 1.1 Exports, f.o.b. 126.0 125.7 Imports, f.o.b. 123.8 - 124.6 Services balance 9.9 11.1 Income balance 2.8 5.9 Transfer payments (net) -1.1 -1.2 Net capital flows 2/ -6.5 -8.9 Capital and financial account balance -5.3 -13.4 Capital account (net) -0.1 -0.2 Financial account (net) -5.2 -13.2 Direct investment (net) 2.0 -0.8 Portfolio investment (net) -11.0 -12.9 Other investment (net) 3.8 0.4 Net errors and omissions -1.2 4.5 Overall balance 7.4 8.0 Memorandum item : Current account as percent of GDP 15.2 17.9 25.4 25.3 23.5 22.0 21.0 21.5 14.8 11.3 110.6 115.6 -95.8 -104.3 1.4 4.8 6.0 6.3 -1.2 -0.9 -18.0 -19.2 -21.5 -19.6 -0.2 -0.2 -21.3 -17.4 7.0 3.0 -7.8 -7.1 -20.5 -13.3 3.5 0.4 3.0 2.3 22.5 11.8 136.1 -124.2 5.7 6.5 -1.5 23.0 9.4 148.5 139.1 7.5 7.7 -1.7 -15.7 -16.6 -15.7 -16.6 -0.2 -0.1 -15.5 -16.5 1.9 2.6 -11.1 -12.7 -6.2 -6.4 0.0 0.0 6.8 6.3 Sources: Monetary Authority of Singapore, Economic Survey of Singapore; and staff estimates and projections. l/ Data for the current account balance, the capital and financial account balance, and net errors and omissions are converted to U.S. dollars from the official presentation in Singapore dollars using period-average exchange rate. 21 Including net errors and omissions. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public. - 29 - Table 3. Singapore: Monetary Survey, 1995-99 1/ 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 Net foreign assets 86.2 90.3 92.8 115.5 130.9 Monetary authorities 97.0 107.4 119.3 124.3 127.1 Deposit money banks I/ -10.8 -17.1 -26.5 -8.8 3.8 Domestic credit 73.6 86.4 103.3 122.1 120.5 Claims on private sector 109.9 127.3 143.4 154.9 150.2 Claims on government (net) -36.3 -40.9 -40.2 -32.8 -29.7 Other items (net) -57.8 -64.7 -72.6 -76.8 -77.0 M2 102.0 112.0 123.4 160.8 174.5 Ml 25.3 27.0 27.5 27.2 31.1 Quasi-money 76.6 84.9 95.9 133.5 143.4 Domestic credit 17.4 17.3 19.5 18.3 -1.3 Claims on private sector 20.3 15.8 12.7 7.9 -3.1 M2 8.5 9.8 10.3 30.3 8.5 M3 21 10.1 8.5 10.3 7.9 7.2 (In billions of Singapore dollars at end-period) (Annual percentage change of selected indicators) Source: Data provided by the Singapore authorities. l/ Commercial banks and discount houses. 2/ Adjusted for the acquisition of POSBank by the Development Bank of Singapore in November 1998. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 30 - Table 4. Singapore: Summary of Government Operations, 1996/97-2000/01 l/ (In percent of GDP) Budget Est. Budget Proj. 1996197 1997198 1998199 1999/2000 2000/0 1 Total revenue 36.7 36.6 30.1 23.5 28.9 29.2 29.5 Current revenue 27.7 23.1 23.8 19.9 24.4 24.4 24.8 Tax revenue 17.8 16.1 15.7 12.4 14.7 14.9 15.4 Investment income 5.4 2.6 3.5 3.4 4.6 4.2 4.2 Other nontax revenue 4.4 4.3 4.6 4.1 5.1 5.2 5.2 Capital revenue 2/ 9.0 13.5 6.3 3.6 4.5 4.7 4.7 Total expenditure and net lending 28.2 27.1 28.5 30.9 25.0 27.0 26.9 Current expenditure 14.1 11.0 11.6 11.3 11.1 11.0 11.0 Operating expenditure 10.9 9.9 10.7 10.4 10.3 10.3 10.3 Debt servicing 0.9 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.6 0.4 0.4 Agency fees on land sales 0.1 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Investment expenses 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 Transfer payments 2.1 0.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Development expenditure and net lending 13.6 15.8 16.8 19.6 13.7 16.0 15.9 Development expenditure 7.0 6.3 8.9 9.5 7.3 8.3 8.2 Net lending 6.6 9.5 7.9 10.1 6.4 7.7 7.7 Fund transfers 31 0.5 Overall balance 8.5 Primary operating balance 4/ 2.0 Memorandum items : Government saving Structural primary operating balance 51 Fiscal impulse 61 13.1 3.8 2.3 0.4 9.5 3.9 11.7 3.7 0.1 0.0 1.6 0.5 12.2 0.9 2.8 0.0 -7.4 -3.7 8.6 -3.4 4.3 0.2 3.9 1.9 13.0 2.2 -1.3 0.0 0.0 2.2 2.6 1.3 1.7 13.4 13.8 1.4 1.8 0.8 0.4 Sources: Data provided by the Singapore authorities; and staff estimates and projections. 11 Fiscal year runs from April 1 through March 3 1. 21 Sale of government property. 31 Includes transfers to the Edusave Endowment Fund, the Medical Endowment Fund, the CPF share ownership top-up scheme, CPF top-up scheme, and senior pensioners grant scheme. 41 Overall balance excluding capital revenue, investment income, net lending, debt service, and fund transfers. 51 Calculated with the elasticity of revenue with respect to output equal to 1.1, and a zero elasticity of expenditure with respect to output. 6/ Calculated as increase in the structural primary operating deficit. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3l- ANNEX I SINGAPORE-ILLUSTRATIVE MEDIUM-TERM SCENARIO 1. This scenario provides a framework to assess the dynamics of output growth, current account balances, and other economic variables over the medium term. While external demand will remain the major driving force of economic growth given Singapore’s strong dependence on trade, the strengthening of domestic demand will provide a significant boost in the near term. 2. Output growth is projected to remain strong at the rate of about 6 percent in 2000 and 2001 supported by both external and domestic demand. Exports of goods and services are projected to remain robust reflecting the strong electronics demand and regional recovery, while imports will rise in line with the pickup in domestic expenditure. Consumption will remain strong on the force of rising wealth and earnings, and investment will pick up sharply after declining for two consecutive years, initially reflecting growth in equipment investment but subsequently also construction investment from late 2000. An additional boost to domestic demand is expected from the liberalization of key industries planned for the next couple of years. Over the medium term, the output growth rate is projected to converge to the potential growth rate of 5 percent per annum. Total factor productivity is assumed to grow at 2 percent and labor force is projected to grow at 1!&2 percent assuming only a small inflow of unskilled foreign workers. Inflation will remain benign at about 1% percent in 2000, before edging up gradually to 2 percent by 2002. The unemployment rate will decline gradually before stabilizing at 2% percent, slightly higher than the historical average of 2 percent owing to skill mismatches. 3. The government budget balance will remain in moderate surplus in years ahead, with a broadly neutral impact on aggregate demand. In fiscal year 2000, the primary operating budget surplus will be 1% percent, as the actual revenue is anticipated to be somewhat higher than budgeted reflecting robust economic growth and adjusting for the authorities’ customary conservatism in revenue projections. In the medium term, the primary operating budget surplus is projected to remain near 1 percent of GDP, but the overall surplus-including investment income and capital receipts--will stay somewhat above 3 percent of GDP. 4. The current account surplus is projected to remain high in the near term before gradually declining towards 18 percent of GDP. The large surplus in the goods balance of recent years will decline gradually as import demand picks up in line with recovery in domestic demand. The moderation in the goods balance will be partly offset by the rise in the services surplus as the demand for services exports strengthens with the regional recovery. The overall balance is projected to remain in sizable surplus and the level of gross official reserves will remain above 8 months of imports. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 32 - ANNEX I Table 1. Singapore: Illustrative Medium-Term Scenario, 1998-2005 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 Real growth (percent change) GDP Domestic demand Private consumption Public consumption Fixed investment Exports of goods and services Imports of goods and services Saving and investment (percent of GDP) Gross national savings Central government Private and other Gross capital formation Fixed investment Increase in stocks Inflation and unemployment (period average, percent) CPI inflation Unemployment rate Central government (percent of GDP) Revenue and grants Expenditure, net lending, and fund transfers Overall balance Primary operating balance 1 / Merchandise trade (percent change) Export volume Import volume Terms of trade 2/ Balance of payments and official reserves (in billions of U.S. dollars) Current account balance (percent of GDP) Balance on goods Exports, f.o.b. Imports, f.o.b. Balance on services Balance on income and transfers Overall balance Gross official reserves (in months of imports) 0.4 5.4 5.9 6.0 5.4 5.0 5.0 5.0 -7.4 8.7 7.2 7.4 6.1 5.5 5.0 4.8 -2.1 6.2 5.6 7.6 6.9 5.4 4.3 3.8 7.7 3.3 3.8 5.0 5.1 5.2 4.6 4.9 -6.7 -3.1 9.9 7.9 5.6 5.7 5.8 5.8 -6.2 4.8 9.7 7.5 8.4 8.2 8.3 8.6 -9.8 6.0 10.6 8.2 8.9 8.6 9.1 8.7 58.2 58.0 57.5 56.6 55.4 54.5 53.9 53.6 12.2 13.0 13.7 13.5 13.2 13.0 13.0 13.0 46.0 45.1 43.8 43.1 42.2 41.5 40.9 40.5 32.8 32.8 34.0 34.6 34.7 34.9 35.2 35.5 37.1 32.4 33.7 34.3 34.4 34.6 34.8 35.1 -4.3 0.3 0.3 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 -0.3 0.4 1.5 1.9 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 3.2 3.5 2.9 2.5 2.2 2.2 2.2 2.2 31.7 29.2 29.4 30.0 30.0 29.8 29.8 29.8 28.1 25.9 26.9 26.9 26.5 26.3 26.3 26.3 3.6 3.3 2.6 3.2 3.5 3.5 3.5 3.5 1.3 1.6 1.6 1.2 1.1 1.1 1.1 1.1 -0.7 5.3 7.1 7.2 7.6 7.4 8.3 8.6 -12.5 9.1 9.5 9.2 7.9 8.0 9.1 8.7 0.9 0.0 -0.1 -0.7 -0.6 -0.4 -0.1 -0.1 21.0 21.5 22.5 23.0 23.4 24.1 24.9 26.1 (25.4) (25.3) (23.5) (22.0) (20.7) (19.6) (18.7) (18.1) 14.8 11.3 11.8 9.4 8.9 8.1 7.4 7.9 110.6 115.6 136.1 148.5 163.0 179.2 198.0 218.1 -95.8 -104.3 -124.2 -139.1 -154.2 -171.0 -190.6 -210.1 1.4 4.8 5.7 7.5 8.0 9.2 11.2 12.2 4.8 5.4 5.0 6.0 6.5 6.7 6.2 6.0 3.0 2.3 6.8 6.3 6.9 7.3 7.6 8.8 75.0 77.1 88.2 96.9 106.5 116.8 127.8 138.7 (9.4) (8.9) (8.5) (8.4) (8.3) (8.2) (8.0) (7.9) Sources: Data provided by the Singapore authorities; and staff estimates and projections. l/ Overall balance excluding capital revenue, investment income, net lending, debt service, and fund transfers. 21 Based on changes in export and import unit values. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-33 - ANNEX II SINGAPORE-EXCHANGE RATE ASSESSMENT 1. In assessing the broad appropriateness of the level of countries’ exchange rates, the IMF staff relies on a variety of indicators, including the calculation of purchasing power parity measures and other univariate international competitiveness indicators. The analysis in this annex is based on a macroeconomic balance approach where the focus is on the extent to which prevailing exchange rates and policies are consistent with simultaneous internal and external equilibrium over the medium term. Specifically the approach involves comparing the underlying current account-defined as the current account balance that would emerge if all countries were operating at full potential and exchange rate changes are fully passed through-with an equilibrium saving-investment balance estimated using their fundamental determinants. 2. Much work has been done on the determinants of saving-investment balances in industrial countries.’ More recently, work has begun on estimating similar relationships in developing countries. As in the case of industrial countries, cross-section and panel regressions were used to characterize the properties of current account variation across countries. Apart from the usual demographic variables (youth and old-age dependency ratios), the estimated equations indicate that positive government budget balances, greater financial deepening, higher terms of trade volatility and the stage of development-measured by relative income-are all associated with larger current account surpluses, while the degree of openness to international trade tends to be associated with larger current account deficits. 3. Applying the estimated parameters from this panel regression, the medium-term saving-investment norm for Singapore is estimated to be around 16-18 percent of GDP. This result is quite robust to changes in assumptions about the medium-term values of the independent variables. 4. The second step of the analysis is the estimation of the underlying current account balance.2 The underlying current account balance is obtained using an equation where trade flows are assumed to depend on domestic and foreign activity and changes in the real exchange rate, and then imposing the assumption that output is at potential at home and abroad and that trade volumes and prices have responded fully to the prevailing exchange rate. In effect, this amounts to adjusting the actual observed current account balance for a closing of the domestic and foreign output gaps and a full pass-through of exchange rate changes to trade volumes. ’ Faruqee, Hamid and Guy Debelle: “Saving-Investment Balances in Industrial Countries: An Empirical Investigation,” in Isard, Peter and Hamid Faruqee, ed: ‘Exchange Rate Assessments: Extensions of the Macroeconomic Balance Approach,” IMF Occasional Paper No. 167, 1998 * See Bayoumi, Tamim and Hamid Faruqee: “A Calibrated Model of the Underlying Current Account,” in Isard, Peter and Hamid Faruqee, ed: “Exchange Rate Assessments: Extensions of the Macroeconomic Balance Approach,” IMF Occasional Paper No. 167, 1998 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 34 - ANNEX II 5. In Singapore, the underlying current account so defined stood at around 33% percent of GDP at end-1999 compared to the actual current account surplus of 25% percent of GDP. The relatively high value arises from the positive impact on export volumes produced both by the depreciation of the Singapore dollar and the closing of the foreign output gap. The combination of these factors more than offsets the larger import volumes arising from the closing of the domestic output gap. 6. The gap between the underlying current account and the equilibrium S-I balances is assumed to be closed through an exchange rate adjustment. Using standard trade elasticities, the Singapore dollar, in real effective terms, is estimated to be about 12-15 percent below its medium-term full employment equilibrium-a level about 3-5 percent more appreciated than the pre-crisis level3 7. It must be emphasized that the staff do not see the difference between the current exchange rate and its medium-term full-employment equilibrium value as evidence of a misalignment of the exchange rate. Rather the staff see the current exchange rate as being consistent with the current cyclical conditions in the economy, but with a tendency towards appreciation as the economy moves along the cycle towards full employment. This conclusion is supported by the recent widening of the interest rate differential between Singapore and the United States suggesting market expectations of an appreciation of the Singapore dollar. 3 The price elasticities of imports and exports are assumed to be 0.92 and 0.7 1, respectively, and income elasticities for both imports and exports are assumed to be 1.5. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 35 - ANNEX III SINGAPORE-ILLUSTRATIVE LONG-TERM FISCAL PROJECTION 1. This annex provides a framework to assess the long-term fiscal positioein terms of both fiscal balances and the stock of government assets-in light of the budgetary pressure expected to stem from the demographic change, globalization, and Singapore’s transition to a developed economy with a lower growth rate than in the past.’ Singapore’s old-age dependency ratio, defined as the ratio of population over 65 to the working-age population, is anticipated to rise substantially from 2010/15 and reach about 40 percent by 2030. 2. The following assumptions are made to generate the baseline projections: 0 Operating expenditure on health will rise by 3 percentage points to 3.7 percent of GDP by 2030, reflecting the rise in old-age dependency ratio and the demand for health care in line with rising income. This implies an annual increase of 7.7 percent in per capita health expenditures. l Operating expenditure on education is projected to rise by 1% percentage points to 4.0 percent of GDP by 2030, owing to the expected rise in secondary and tertiary enrollment rates and in the quality of education service. This implies an annual increase of 5.2 percent in per capita education expenditures. l Operating expenditure on pension is assumed not to rise appreciably despite the aging population, since a large part of the pension coverage is by the Central Provident Fund (CPF) and not using public funds. 0 Operating revenue will decline by 2 percentage points to 18.6 percent of GDP by 2030, as a result of globalization, the rise in e-commerce and demographic change. 0 The real GDP growth rate is assumed to equal 5 percent until 2005 and thereafter to decline progressively towards 2% percent by 2030. The inflation rate is assumed to equal 2 percent. l The total nominal rate of return on government assets is assumed to equal 6 percent, considerably lower than the estimated average rate of return on the portfolio of the GIC-which is evenly divided into equity, bond, and cash-during the last 15 years of 10 percent. 3. The accumulation of government assets is projected as follows: l The stock of gross government assets was initialized to equal the stock of government investments (excluding cash) in fiscal year 1999. l The change in the stock of gross government assets occurs through two channels: ’ The last study by the authorities on this issue was completed in 1996. Many of the assumptions used for illustrative projections are in line with those used by the authorities. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-36- ANNEX III . the consolidated overall balance, which includes total investment income (including the part that is recorded off-budget); and . the projected change in the CPF balance which is deposited with the government. 0 The CPF balance is projected to decline broadly in bne with demographic change. l The net government asset is calculated by subtracting the stock of outstanding Singapore government securities (SGS) from the stock of gross government assets. l The stock of government securities was initialized to equal the sum of the Government Securities Fund and Pension Fund in 1999. l The change in the stock of government securities is due to the projected change in the CPF balance. 4. The operating balance, defined as the operating revenue minus operating and development expenditure, will turn into deficit near 2020 and go into a deficit above 4 percent of GDP by 2030. Both the overall balance and the consolidated overall balance-including the off-budget investment income-remain in surplus through 2030. Net government assets in percent of GDP remain higher in 2030 than in 2000. 5. To check the robustness of the results, an alternative scenario was projected under the assumption that the nominal rate of return on government assets equals 5 percent. The measured overall balance turns into a deficit of about 1 percent of GDP by 2030, while the consolidated overall balance-including the off-budget investment income--still remain in surplus through 2030. Net government assets in percent of GDP fall to about % of the current level by 2030.’ Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 37 - ANNEX III Table 1. Illustrative Long-Term Fiscal Projections (In percent of GDP) 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030 Total Revenue 29.5 29.9 30.2 29.3 28.2 27.4 26.8 Operating revenue 20.6 20.3 20.6 20.2 19.7 19.1 18.6 Investment income 1/ 4.2 5.5 5.4 5.1 4.9 4.8 4.8 Capital receipts 4.7 4.1 4.2 3.9 3.7 3.5 3.3 Total Expenditure 26.9 26.4 26.6 26.5 25.7 25.4 25.8 Current expenditure 11.0 11.3 11.7 12.1 12.6 13.8 15.4 Operating expenditure 10.3 10.6 11.4 11.8 12.3 13.5 15.1 Health 0.7 0.9 1.1 1.5 1.9 2.7 3.7 Education 2.6 2.8 2.9 3.0 3.1 3.5 4.0 Development expenditure a.2 7.9 7.8 7.5 7.1 7.3 7.4 Health 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 Education 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.2 1.1 1.1 1.1 Net Lending 7.7 7.2 7.1 6.9 5.9 4.3 3.0 Operating balance 1.7 1.1 1.1 0.7 -0.1 -1.9 -4.2 Overall balance 2.6 3.5 3.6 2.8 2.5 2.1 1.0 Off-budget investment income 6.7 5.6 5.3 5.0 4.7 4.9 4.8 Consolidated overall balance 2/ 9.3 9.0 8.9 7.9 7.2 6.9 5.8 Gross government asset 191.2 192.6 185.8 176.0 165.9 167.7 165.8 Net government asset 98.3 108.6 112.3 111.8 109.7 115.2 117.4 Sensitivity Analysis: Lower rate of return 3/ Overall balance Consolidated overall balance 2/ Gross government asset Net government asset 2.6 2.5 2.5 1.5 1.1 0.5 -0.9 7.5 7.0 6.5 5.2 4.3 3.6 2.0 190.3 187.5 172.2 154.9 137.9 131.0 119.7 97.4 103.5 98.7 90.7 81.7 78.5 71.3 11 Calculated as a half of investment income on the stock of gross government assets from 2001. The rate of return is assumed to equal 6 percent. 2/ Includes off-budget investment income. 31 The rate of return is assumed to equal 5 percent. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 38 - SINGAPORE-STATISTICALISSUES ANNEX IV Data Reporting 1. Singapore provides data to the Fund on a generally timely basis and has subscribed to the SDDS.’ However, there are a number of deficiencies in statistical practice that hamper economic analysis, particularly in the external and fiscal areas, The main issues are: l Trade statistics do not include trade with Indonesia, although trade transactions with Indonesia are captured elsewhere in the current account; other goods and services receipts and payments, which are substantial, are not disaggregated. However, the authorities have completed a new survey of the services receipts and payments which should permit the provision of disaggregated data. l While financial account data have been improved, notably by including Government Investment Corporation outflows under official flows, they are subject to frequent revision, often with a significant time lag.2 Surveys on nonofficial external liabilities were initiated recently, but the coverage of the survey needs to be enlarged. At present, the survey covers FDI companies with the assets exceeding US$5 million. l Information on government assets held abroad is not published nor provided to the Fund on a confidential basis. Interest on these assets and debt service payments on domestic debt made from the off-budget Government Securities Fund, is published on an annual basis but is not fully reflected in the fiscal position. More generally, data on the financial position of the consolidated public sector are not published. 2. During the course of the year, staff receive a steady flow of economic data from published sources, via the Reuters monitor, various official websites, and through the TREND database. Most data are received on a timely basis, 3. Annual balance of payments data are reported each year to STA. Quarterly financial account data as provided by the authorities are not sufficiently detailed for publication in the International Financial Statistics. i Related metadata have been posted on the Dissemination Standards Bulletin Board. 2 This results in a corresponding change in errors and omissions. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicSingapore: Core Statistical Indicators (As of May 10, 2000) lnterntitional Reserves Reserve/ I Central T Exchange Rates Interest Rates Current Account Broad Me&y Federal Government Balance 04199 300 3100 4100 cl M Q M A E A E Public Public a M GDP External Debt/Debt Service II Base Money Bank Baiance Sheet 5/l o/o0 3100 3100 I 3100 3100 5/l o/o0 3100 1 3100 Date of latest observation Date received Frequency of data 21 Frequency of Reporting 21 Source of data 31 a4199 3100 . . I 4100 4100 -I- M M 4100 4100 4100 M M 5/l 0100 D 5/l 0100 D 4100 M I cl I D M D Q M M M A A A A= E E A E A E A E A E E Mode of reporting 41 Confidentiality Public Public Public Public Public Public Public D Public Q . . . . M 1/ Official external debt is zero; data from official sources on private external debt are not available, although a survey to improve reporting in this area has recently been launched. 2/ D-daily; M-monthly; or Q-quarterly 3/ A-direct reporting by central bank, ministry of finance, or other official agency. 4/ E-electronic data transfer. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 40 - ANNEX V SINGAPORE-FUNDRELATIONS (As of March 3 1,200O) I. Membership Status: Joined August 3, 1966; Article VIII II, General Resources Account: SDR Million % Quota Quota 862.50 100.0 Fund holdings of Singapore dollars 559.03 64.8 Reserve position in Fund 303.48 35.2 Operational budget transfers (net) -10.00 III. SDR Department: SDR Million % Allocation Net cumulative allocation 16.48 100.0 Holdings 92.72 562.8 IV. Outstanding Purchases and Loans: None V. Financial Arrangements: None VI. Projected Obligations to Fund: None VII. Exchange Rate Arrangement: Singapore has accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2,3, and 4 and maintains an exchange system that is free of restriction on the making of payments and transfers for current international transactions. Singapore follows a policy under which the Singapore dollar is permitted to float. The Monetary Authority of Singapore (MAS) monitors its value against an undisclosed basket of currencies and intervenes in the market to maintain this value within an undisclosed target band. The U.S. dollar is the intervention currency. As of March 3 1, 2000, US$l = S$1.72. VIII. Article IV Consultation: The 1998 Article IV consultation discussions were held in Singapore in December 1998. The consultation was concluded by the Executive Board on March 15, 1999. At that time, Directors endorsed the significant easing of fiscal and monetary policy implemented in response to the crisis-induced economic slowdown. They noted that the flexibility of exchange rate policy had facilitated adjustment to volatility in financial markets. While endorsing the steps taken to improve financial sector transparency, ease restrictions on Central Provident Fund investments and relax restrictions on the availability of Singapore dollar credit facilities to nonresidents, Directors emphasized that policy analysis could be enhanced by making the fiscal and monetary policy frameworks more transparent. IX. Technical Assistance: None Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4l- ANNEX V X. Resident Representative/Advisor: None XI. Exchange System: Singapore has accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4 and maintains no restrictions on the making of payments or transfers for current international transactions.’ Singapore maintains several restrictions on Singapore-dollar credit facilities, bonds and derivatives. Financial institutions (banks, merchant banks, and finance and insurance companies) may, without prior consultation with the MAS, extend Singapore-dollar credit facilities to: Singapore residents for any purpose; and to nonbank nonresidents if the Singapore-dollar proceeds from these credit facilities are used for pre-approved economic activities in Singapore or for hedging the Singapore-dollar exchange rate and interest rate risks arising from these economic activities, to finance investments such as commercial properties in Singapore if the credit facilities do not exceed S$5 million in aggregate, and via fully collaterized repurchase agreements of Singapore government securities where the amount does not exceed S$20 million and the funds are managed in Singapore. Financial institutions are not allowed to extend Singapore-dollar credit facilities to nonresidents for speculating in the Singapore-dollar currency and interest rate markets; financing third- country trade between countries not involving Singapore; financing the acquisition of shares of companies not listed on the Stock Exchange; and financing any activities outside Singapore, except when approved by the MAS. The MAS may, upon consultation, approve the extension of Singapore-dollar credit facilities to non-residents for overseas projects and the Singapore-dollar proceeds from these facilities must be converted or swapped into foreign currency for use outside Singapore. Financial institutions may, without prior consultation with the MAS, invest in Singapore-dollar bonds issued by nonresidents if the Singapore-dollar proceeds from the issuance are used for pre-approved economic purposes in Singapore. Financial institutions must consult the MAS before investing in Singapore-dollar bonds issued by non-residents where the Singapore-dollar proceeds are to be used outside Singapore or for non-pre- approved economic purposes in Singapore. The Singapore-dollar proceeds from all such bond issues by nonresidents must be converted or swapped into foreign currency for use outside Singapore. Financial institutions may, without prior consultation with the MAS, lend in the Singapore dollar through currency swaps with nonbank nonresidents for hedging the Singapore-dollar exchange rate and interest rate risks arising from pre-approved economic activities in Singapore; lend in the Singapore-dollar through currency swaps or transact in Singapore-dollar interest rate swaps with Special Purpose Vehicles incorporated in Singapore for the express purpose of securitising Singapore-dollar mortgages of financial institutions in Singapore; and transact Singapore-dollar interest rate futures in Singapore with nonresidents. r Singapore continues to maintain restrictions on payments and transfers against Iraq and Libya in compliance with U.N. Security Council resolutions, which have been notified to the Fund under Decision No. 144 (52/5 1). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-42 - ANNEX VI SINGAPORE-OFFICIALDEVELOPMENTASSISTANCE 1. Singapore provided subsidy contributions accruing from net income on a loan of SDR 40 million to the original ESAF (now renamed PRGF) in 1987 and from an additional loan of SDR 40 million to the enhanced ESAF in 1994 at an interest rate of 2 percent per annum. In November 1998, Singapore agreed to roll over the loan of SDR 40 million from the original ESAF to the ESAF-HIPC Trust. In December 1999, Singapore agreed to transfer its balance from the SCA-2 to the PRGF Subsidy Account in the form of noninterest bearing deposits. Singapore’s contributions to the PRGF-HIPC Trust are estimated at about SDR 16.5 million on an “as needed” basis. 2. Singapore has also committed to lend up to SDR 340 million in the New Arrangements to Borrow (NAB), representing 1 percent of total NAB resources. In December 1998, Singapore also lent SDR 99.35 million, under the NAB, to finance the standby credit for Brazil. 3. Singapore has provided technical assistance to other developing countries since the 196Os, primarily through technical training programs directed at government officials. The range and scope of such assistance have increased significantly since the establishment in 1992 of the Singapore Cooperation Program (SCP). The SCP offers both bilateral and joint training programs in collaboration with individual countries and international organizations. At present Singapore sponsors training and study visits for about 2,000 officials annually from more than 100 developing countries. 4. The Fund and the Singapore authorities have jointly set up the IMF-Singapore Regional Training Institute (STI) in May 1998. The ST1 is administered by the IMF, in collaboration with the Monetary Authority of Singapore, with the assistance of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. The STI’s training activities are targeted at officials from the Asia-Pacific region. Courses on macroeconomic adjustment, reform policies, financial programming, transition economies, monetary and exchange operations, public finance, banking supervision, and statistics. As of end March 2000, ST1 has conducted 33 courses and seminars and trained 850 officials from 29 countries. 5. In response to the crisis, Singapore also increased its technical assistance programmes to the region. At the APEC Economic Leaders’ meeting in Kuala Lumpur in Novemver 1998, Singapore announced capacity-building initiatives involving training in finance and healthcare. At the ASEAN Summit in Hanoi in December 1998, Singapore also announced that it would offer S$l2 million under the Singapore Cooperation Programme to provide about 30 undergraduate scholarships per year for ASEAN students over the next three to four years to study in Singapore. These two projects have been implemented. 6. Recognising the hardships that the economic crisis has caused Indonesia, Singapore announced in July 1998 that it would extend S$12 million worth of humanitarian assistance in rice and medicines to the Indonesian people to help alleviate their diffkulties. This assistance programme has been completed. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-43 - Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 001 FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE June 5,ZOOO ANNEX VII International Monetary Fund 700 19’ Street, NW Washington, D. C. 20431 USA IMF Concludes Article IV Consultation with Singapore On June 5, 2000, the Executive Board concluded the Article IV consultation with Singapore.’ Background Singapore’s economy has rebounded strongly from the sharp slowdown in 1998, growing by an estimated 5% percent in 1999. The economy slid into a recession in early 1998 as a result of the Asian crisis and the weakening in the global electronics market. The recession was, however, shallower and shorter-lived than in other countries in the region, in large part because of Singapore’s robust fundamentals and the authorities’ pragmatic and flexible policy responses. Both external and domestic demand contributed to the strong growth performance. Initially, the recovery was led by robust external demand, but since the second quarter of 1999, domestic demand has also contributed. The rise in domestic demand was led by private consumption, but since the second half of 1999, there have also been signs of a rebound in fixed investment. The traditionally strong external position has strengthened further. The current account surplus surged by more than 7 percent of GDP to 25 percent of GDP in 1998 and remained broadly unchanged in 1999. During 1999, exports rose markedly reflecting the sharp pick up in global demand for semiconductor and telecommunication products, more than offsetting the robust import growth. Rising regional demand for entrepot services and a sharp recovery in visitor arrivals led to the improvement in the service balance. Capital outflows moderated from the high level recorded in 1998, mainly as a result of lower withdrawal of foreign interbank funds from Singapore. Official foreign reserves stood at almost US$75 billion at end-March, 2000. l Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial information, and discusses with officials the country’s economic developments and policies. On return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the country’s authorities. In this PIN, the main features of the Board’s discussion are described. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-44- ANNEX VII Inflation has remained low, reflecting continued slack in the economy. In contrast, equity prices staged a strong comeback, and current levels are well in excess of those before the crisis. In line with the recovery, labor market conditions have improved. Significant business cost reductions helped not only to moderate the need for layoffs during the slowdown, but also to underpin the recovery in employment. From a peak of 4% percent in late 1998, the unemployment rate dropped to 3 percent at end 1999. The easier monetary policy stance adopted in mid-l 997 has largely been maintained. Between mid-1997 and mid-1999, the exchange rate depreciated by some 9 percent in real effective terms. Since mid-l 999, however, the real effective exchange rate has remained broadly stable at that level. In light of the stronger-than-expected recovery, fiscal stimulus was withdrawn in FY 1999. Although the budget for FY 1999 called for a widening in the operating deficit, the recorded budgetary outturn is estimated at a surplus of 2 percent. With the recovery now firmly established, fiscal policy in FY2000 is aimed at maintaining a broadly neutral stance, with the primary operating surplus estimated to be 1% percent of GDP, higher than the budget target of 1 XI percent of GDP. During 1998 and 1999, the authorities undertook important structural reform measures with a view to promoting a dynamic private-sector led, knowledge-based economy. These include measures to raise foreign participation and competition in the domestic banking system, to . expose the insurance industry to greater competition, to further develop the bond and equity market and the asset management industry, and to open up the telecommunication and power sectors. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public