DOCUMENT OF INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY FOR L-----l AGENDA SM/04/14 January 20,2004 To: Members of the Executive Board From: The Secretary Subject: Malaysia-Staff Report for the 2003 Article IV Consultation Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staff report for the 2003 Article IV consultation with Malaysia, which is tentatively scheduled for discussion on Monday, February 9,2004. At the of circulation of this paper to the Board, the Secretary’s Department has not received a communication from the authorities of Malaysia indicating whether or not they consent to the Fund’s publication of this paper; such communication may be received after the authorities have had an opportunity to read the paper. Questions may be referred to Mr. Valdivieso (ext. 34705), Ms. Poirson (ext. 37072), and Mr. N’Diaye (ext 3975 1) in APD. Unless the Documents Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the WTO Secretariat on Wednesday, January 28, 2004; and to the the Asian Development Bank and the Islamic Development Bank, following its consideration by the Executive Board. This document will shortly be posted on the extranet, a secure website for Executive Directors and member country authorities. Att: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicINTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND MALAYSIA Staff Report for the 2003 Article IV Consultation Prepared by the Staff Representatives for the 2003 Consultation Approved by Daniel Citrin and Juha Ktihkijnen January 20,2004 l The 2003 Article IV consultation took place during October 27-November 7, 2003. The mission team consisted of Mr. Valdivieso (Head), Ms. Poirson, and Mr. N’Diaye (all APD), and Messrs. Gilmour (PDR), Podpiera (MFD), and Sy (ICM). Mr. Alowi (OED) also attended the meetings. Mr. Citrin (APD) and Ms. Indrawati (OED) participated in the final policy discussions, l The staff met with Dr. Jamaludin Mohd Jarjis, Second Finance Minister; Dr. Samsudin Hitam, Secretary General to the Treasury; Messrs. Mohd Salleh bin Haji Harun and Ooi Sang Kuang, deputy governors of the Bank Negara Malaysia; other senior government officials; and representatives of the private sector. l Mr. Abdullah Ahmad Badawi became the new Prime Minister and Minister of both Finance and Home Affairs on October 3 1, 2003. On January 7, 2004, Mr. Seri Najib became Deputy Prime Minister, retaining his post as Defense Minister. At the same time, Mr. Nor Mohamed Yakcop, Economic Advisor to the Prime Minister since 1998, was appointed Second Finance Minister. No changes in economic policy are envisaged in the near term. l In concluding the last Article IV consultation on October 16, 2002, Directors supported the authorities’ pursuit of a judicious macroeconomic policy strategy-including the timely fiscal impulse and prudent management of net domestic assets-and commended progress in structural reforms. A number of Directors supported maintaining the present exchange rate policy, but many others recommended a carefully prepared move to a more flexible exchange rate regime. Directors also noted that achieving the medium-term growth objectives would require a steady pursuit of fiscal consolidation, continued efforts to strengthen the financial and corporate sectors, improvements in corporate governance, greater flexibility in labor and capital markets, and a liberal trade and investment regime. l Malaysia’s statistical base is broadly adequate to conduct effective surveillance. The coverage, periodicity, and timeliness of key data made available to the staff have improved considerably (Annex II). l Malaysia has accepted the obligations under Article VIII, sections 2, 3, and 4, and maintains an exchange system free of restrictions on payments and transfers for current international transactions. l The authorities have consented to the publication of the PIN and statistical appendix for the last three Article IV consultations, but chose not to publish the staff report and selected issues papers. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2- Contents Page Executive Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 I. Recent Developments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 II. Economic Outlook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8 III. Policy Discussions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8 IV. Other Issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14 V. Staff Appraisal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15 Boxes 1. Recent Fiscal Developments and Outlook.. ................................................................ .19 2. Key Fiscal and Structural Measures in the 2004 Budget.. .......................................... .20 3. Financial and Corporate Sector Reforms.. .................................................................. .21 4. Recent Measures to Develop Capital Markets and Promote Investment .................... .22 5. Off-Budget Operations Channeled Through the DFIs.. .............................................. .23 6. FDI and Market Perceptions of Investment Climate .................................................. .24 Figures 1. Real Sector Developments and Outlook.. ................................................................... .25 2. External Developments and Outlook.. ........................................................................ .26 3. Financial Market Developments and Confidence.. ..................................................... .27 4. Fiscal and Monetary Developments.. .......................................................................... .28 5. Interest Rate Developments ........................................................................................ .29 6. Leading Real and External Sector Indicators.. ............................................................ .30 Tables 1. Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 1999-2004 .......................................... .31 2. Balance of Payments, 1999-2004.. ............................................................................. .32 3. Federal Government Fiscal Operations, 1999-2004 .................................................. .33 4. Banking Survey, 1999-2003.. ..................................................................................... .34 5. Indicators of Financial Institution Soundness, 2000-03.. ........................................... .35 6. Key Financial Ratios for Listed Nonfinancial and Financial Companies, 1998-2002.. ..................................................................................................... .36 7. Indicators of External Vulnerability, 1999-2004 ....................................................... .37 Annexes I. Medium-Term Outlook.. ............................................................................................. .38 II. Assessing Malaysia’s Debt Sustainability and Resilience to Shocks ......................... .43 III. Statistical Issues.. ........................................................................................................ .49 IV. Fund Relations ............................................................................................................ .52 V. Relations with the World Bank Group.. ...................................................................... .55 VI. Public Information Notice.. ........................................................................................ ..5 6 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3- EXECUTIVE SUMMARY Overview. Economic activity slowed in the first half of 2003 but rebounded in the third quarter. Concurrent and leading indicators clearly signal an emerging recovery. A timely fiscal impulse has supported economic activity in 2003, and a substantial fiscal consolidation is planned for 2004. This policy stance seems appropriate in light of the expected recovery in private sector and external demand. Monetary management has continued to be prudent and consistent with maintaining the fixed exchange rate regime, while providing adequate liquidity. There has been progress in structural reform. Banks soundness has been enhanced and corporate debt problems have been addressed effectively. The first phase of the Financial Sector Master-plan is nearly completed, and measures to improve corporate governance and develop local capital markets, as envisaged in the Capital Markets Master-plan are being implemented as scheduled. Malaysia is well positioned to benefit from the projected global upturn in the near term. Staff projects growth at 4% percent in 2003 and 5% percent in 2004, slightly lower than official estimates. The trade and current account surpluses are expected to remain sizable, and inflation subdued. The medium-term prospects are favorable. Risks to the outlook are balanced. The near term upside potential stems from faster growth in private domestic demand. Downside risks include a slower-than-projected global recovery and a possible recurrence of SARS. The medium-term outlook hinges critically on raising private investment and productivity growth. Policy issues. The staff and authorities broadly agreed on the main policy issues. l Adhering to the announced fiscal targets for 2003 and 2004 is appropriate in view of the strengthening recovery and also to maintain credibility in fiscal policy. The success of fiscal adjustment over the medium term requires specific measures to underpin the projected rise in revenues and decisive steps to rein in the growth and eventually reduce operational and noncore development expenditures. Public sector debt management, including that of contingent liabilities associated with rapidly growing off-budget lending operations, should also be improved. l The Bank Negara Malaysia (BNM) has scope for some monetary easing if the recovery falters, given the current levels of inflation, output gap, reserves, and the interest rate differential. The adoption of a more flexible exchange rate regime at an appropriate time, from a position of strength, and accompanied by the adoption of a monetary framework suitable for a flexible exchange and interest rate regime, would broaden Malaysia’s policy options to address shocks. 0 The authorities’ plans for financial and corporate sector reform, development of capital markets, and shift to a knowledge-based economy should continue to be implemented in a timely manner. This, together with further steps to address remaining restrictions in the trade and investment regime, high cost of regulation, and skills shortages will be key to attaining a high and sustainable growth path over the medium term. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4- 1. RECENTDEVELOPMENTS 1. Following a slowdown in early 2003, economic activity is recovering strongly. l In the first half of 2003, real GDP growth slowed to 4% percent, y-o-y, and unemployment edged up to 4 percent, Malaysia: Quarterly Real GDP Growth and Industrial Production reflecting the adverse impact on private (Year-on-year change: in percent) 30 domestic demand of the global slowdown, 25 25 the Iraq war, and the SARS outbreak. 20 Private consumption and overall 15 investment growth decelerated visibly; 10 and the services sector weakened. Most 5 macroeconomic indicators turned 0 favorable starting in the third quarter of -5 -5 2003. Real GDP growth accelerated to -1c -15 around 5 percent, y-o-y, reflecting a strengthening domestic demand. Growth in services rebounded, while that of -2c 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 agriculture and industry remained strong. More recently, industrial production growth has accelerated further. l CPI inflation, which averaged about 1 percent in 2003, has remained subdued. l The trade and current accounts strengthened in the first half of 2003. Export growth remained robust despite the global slowdown, while imports declined moderately. Tourism receipts fell sharply, mainly due to SARS. The capital account also weakened, reflecting increased public debt repayments and lower net FDI flows. Gross international reserves rose by about $2% billion to $37 billion. External debt declined to 50% percent of GDP, and the debt-service ratio remained low. The trade and current account balances strengthened further in the third quarter, as imports continued to decline, albeit at a less rapid pace, while export growth slowed somewhat. Services receipts rose in line with the rebound in tourism receipts. The capital account also strengthened, reflecting higher FDI and portfolio inflows, offsetting continued public debt repayments. More recently, both exports and imports as well as tourism receipts have rebounded strongly. Gross international reserves reached $45 billion at end-2003, equivalent to 5lV2 months of prospective imports. a Market sentiment has improved markedly. Equity prices have risen since May, reaching a three-year high in early January 2004. Sovereign spreads have narrowed to less than 100 bps in early January, and Standard & Poor has maintained Malaysia’s sovereign ratings at A- since its early October 2003 upgrade. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-5- 2. An expansionary fiscal policy has continued to support economic activity. 0 The federal government deficit for 2003 is expected to have reached 5% percent of GDP, almost unchanged from the two preceding years, following the adoption of the Economic Stimulus Package (ESP) in May 2003 (Box 1). l The consolidated public sector deficit’ is projected to double to 1% percent of GDP in 2003, mainly reflecting higher expenditures of the nonfinancial public enterprises (NFPEs). The implied fiscal impulse at the consolidated public sector level is 3/4 percent of GDP in 2003 (1/2 percent in 2002).2 a The ESP also included off-budget lending programs equivalent to 1% percent of GDP on an annualized basis, of which 60 percent was to be channeled through the development finance institutions (DFIs), and the rest through the BNM. a The gross debt of the federal government and the nonfinancial public sector (projected to reach 47% and 67 percent of GDP in 2003, respectively) is high, but manageable. Federal government debt service is low (11% percent of revenue). The rest of the debt resides mostly with NFPEs whose capacity to repay is sound. Contingent liabilities (6% percent of 2002 GDP) are mostly related to bank restructuring.3 3. The 2004 budget signals a return to a path of fiscal consolidation in line with the expected recovery. l The federal government deficit is targeted to decline to 3% percent of GDP in 2004, with the consolidated public sector balance envisaged to shift to a small surplus. The reduction in the 2004 federal government deficit rests on a sharp reduction in development expenditures (especially in education), following large increases in the preceding years as the government accelerated the implementation of the investment program under the Eighth Development Plan. Current expenditures will continue to rise moderately. The budget contains several tax changes and incentives, but their net fiscal effect is basically neutral (Box 2). ’ Comprising the federal government, the state and local governments, the statutory bodies, and the NFPEs. 2 The methodology used in the calculation of the fiscal impulse is described in Malaysia: From Crisis to Recovery, Chapter IV, Appendix II, IMF Occasional Paper 207. 3 A small proportion of the ESP loan programs has been funded with government-guaranteed loans (l/4 percent of GDP). Existing budgetary provisions cover only the projected cost of interest subsidies. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-6- The 2004 budget also provides for off-budget lending programs amounting to L percent of GDP, down by one-third from 2003.4 0 The turnaround in the 2004 consolidated public sector balance also reflects a significant cut in NFPEs’ development expenditures. The estimated fiscal impulse is negative (-1% percent of GDP). Malaysia: Consolidated Public Sector Balance (In percent of GDP) l The authorities have also announced a plan for the deficit to decline to 1% percent of GDP in 2005, before reaching balance in 2006. The specific 1991 1993 1995 measures underpinning the proposed medium-term consolidation remain to be worked out. 1997 1999 2001 2003 Rev. Budget 4. Monetary management has been prudent, and consistent with maintaining the fixed exchange rate regime while providing adequate liquidity. 0 Base money growth has risen since end-2002 despite continued BNM intervention to sterilize the monetary impact of rising foreign reserves. Broad money growth has also accelerated, reflecting rising private sector credit. a In May 2003, BNM reduced its intervention rate by 50 basis points to 4% percent as part of the ESP, and average lending rates have since declined by about 40 basis points. The spread between the KLIBOR and the LIBOR remains at about 200 basis points. Malaysia: Contribution to Base Money Growth (In percent) 150 -NIP Malaysia: Selected Interest Rates (Percent per annum: end of period) 4 Half of the lending program will add to the DFI lending, and the rest to promote venture capital companies. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-7- 5. The ringgit exchange rate does not appear substantially misaligned. l Staff calculations indicate that, despite a recent sizable depreciation5 the i?!“g.qi”“s$ Malaysia: Spot Rate and REER 2.0 r ringgit REER is only about 5 percent below its long-term trend.6 Malaysia’s market share has remained broadly stable in Japan, Europe, and the U.S., and risen in Asia. The peg continues to be supported by relatively strong fundamentals. 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0 4.5 r 199 6. There has been significant further progress in structural reform. -Spot rate (left scale, reversed) - - REER based on CPI (right scale) -FlEER based on ULC (right scale) REER based on PPI (right scale) 6 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 100 90 80 60 Bank soundness has continued to improve and the Financial Sector Master Plan TFSMP), which lays out the government’s lo-year plan to reform the financial sector, is being implemented as envisaged (Box 3).7 Net NPLs have declined to 9 percent of total assets at end-November, and the aggregate capital adequacy ratio (13 percent) is robust. In 2002, a legislative framework for the regulation and supervision of DFIs was introduced. 0 All corporate debt cases registered for the post-crisis voluntary out-of-court restructuring process (about 18% percent of 1998 GDP) have been resolved, and most of the agreements have been implemented. The net fiscal cost is estimated at about 5 percent of 1998 GDP. Financial indicators have improved somewhat, but the benefits of restructuring have not yet fully materialized. Also, there have been important advances in enhancing governance.* l The authorities are implementing swiftly the Capital Markets Masterplan (CMMP), which focuses on the development of domestic capital markets. In addition to developing the market infrastructure and the regulatory and legal framework, the authorities have liberalized foreign equity participation and foreign exchange regulations (Box 4).9 5 In the 18 months ending September 2003, the CPI-based REER depreciated by 11 percent. 6 The trend REER is defined as the value of the real exchange rate which would eliminate pressures on output to deviate from its potential. 7 For details on the FSMP, see Box 6 of the 2001 Article IV Staff Report (SM/01/242). ’ See accompanying Selected Issues paper. 9 For details on the CMMP, see Box 6 of the 2001 Article IV Staff Report (SM/O1/242). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-8- 0 The labor market remains flexible.” However, skill mismatches-evidenced partly by the recent rise of unemployment of university graduates-and shortages pose concerns.” II. ECONOMIC OUTLOOK 7. Malaysia is well placed to benefit from the projected global upturn, and medium-term prospects remain favorable (Annex I). a Staff projects real GDP growth to accelerate from 4% percent in 2003 to 5% percent in 2004, reflecting a steady recovery in private domestic demand and net exports. This is somewhat more conservative than the official forecast (5%6 percent in 2004), owing to a less optimistic outlook for net exports. Growth is envisaged to pick up to the 6l% percent range by 2008. Inflation is expected to remain low throughout. As the economy recovers, the current account surplus is projected to narrow from 10% percent of GDP in 2003 to 43/4 percent of GDP by 2008. 8. Risks to the outlook are balanced. l Recent indicators signal upside potential related to private domestic demand. However, continued-albeit reduced-dependence on electronics exports and tourism receipts still leave Malaysia vulnerable to a delay in the global recovery and a possible recurrence of SARS. 0 The medium-term outlook rests on the ability of the authorities to raise private investment and productivity growth markedly, which in turn will require sustained implementation of sound macroeconomic policies and a deepening of structural reforms. III. POLICY DISCUSSIONS 9. The consultation discussions focused on the policies needed to support the emerging recovery and to enhance medium-term prospects. In addition, the staff and the authorities exchanged views on the room for monetary policy flexibility, debt sustainability, and the banking and corporate sectors’ resilience to shocks. 10. The policy strategy pursued by the authorities in recent years has addressed the key issues identified in previous Article IV consultations. With Malaysia having confronted two episodes of adverse external developments in the last four years, the consultation discussions have focused on the policies needed to counter the adverse effects of the shocks and to start and sustain a recovery, while setting the conditions for returning to a lo The World Bank’s Doing Business 2003 ranks Malaysia third in the world on labor market flexibility (after Singapore and the U.S.). I1 The World Bank’s 2003 Productivity and Investment Climate Survey identifies skill shortages as the most binding constraint on Malaysian firms. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-9- path of high and sustained growth. The authorities’ policies have been broadly consistent with the Executive Board’s recommendations and the staff’s advice, as confirmed during discussions with the Managing Director during his visit to Kuala Lumpur in September 2003. After three consecutive years of a counter cyclical fiscal policy, the authorities envisage a sustained reduction in the fiscal deficit starting in 2004, in line with Board and staff observations on the importance of returning to a path of fiscal consolidation as economic conditions improve. On exchange rate policy, the authorities have agreed with a number of Directors who have supported the maintenance of the peg. Market pressures on the peg have emerged only sporadically, as in early 2001, but were promptly addressed by a prudent management of BNM credit. The staff and many other Directors have recommended a move to a more flexible arrangement from a situation of strength. The authorities have reiterated their intention to consider a move to a more flexible arrangement, if and when needed, and in the context of a broader macroeconomic policy. In the structural areas, the authorities have continued to make progress in reforming the financial and corporate sectors, developing capital markets, and enhancing the business climate, much in line with the Fund’s call for deepening reforms. Fiscal policy 11. The staff and authorities agreed that adhering to the fiscal targets for 2003 and 2004 was appropriate in view of the strengthening recovery and important to maintain credibility in fiscal policy. 0 For 2003, the authorities have monitored revenue performance closely and identified expenditure cuts to offset anticipated expenditure overruns (especially in the wage bill and interest payments). The decision in December by Prime Minister Abdullah to postpone indefinitely Malaysia’s biggest infrastructure project12 should also help cap the government’s deficit in 2003 and beyond. The authorities were confident the tax revenue target could be met, although its composition may not be as envisaged, reflecting a less buoyant performance of the corporate, sales, and services tax, and a better performance of nontax revenue, which includes proceeds from the sale of selected government equity holdings of listed companies. l For 2004, the authorities counted on the economic recovery to facilitate the achievement of the tax revenue target. While the new tax measures and incentives are likely to be revenue neutral, they are expected to have a positive impact on activity and revenue over the medium term. The staff expressed concerns about the growth implications of the envisaged reliance on development spending cuts. The authorities noted that the projected spending levels were in line with long-term development plans. In particular, the projected investment decline in education reflected the completion of one-time programs in 2003. l2 A railroad construction project estimated at RM 14.5 billion (US$3.8 billion). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- lo- 12. Over the medium term, the authorities remained committed to fiscal consolidation. l Staff supported the authorities’ fiscal plans, but stressed the need to specify the steps that would underpin the projected rise in tax revenue and contribute to rein in current and non-core development expenditures. The authorities explained that, while the current tax system has served them well, they would consider reviewing it-including reassessing the desirability of adopting a VAT-in due course, possibly after next year’s elections. Meanwhile, they would focus their efforts on improving tax administration. The authorities saw little scope for reducing current expenditures, as the relocation of government headquarters to the new administrative city of Putrajaya has increased certain operational costs, such as rentals.13 They were receptive to staff’s suggestion to review the policy on subsidies and transfers. 0 The staff also expressed concerns regarding contingent liabilities from off-budget lending operations channeled through DFIs, in light of the high NPL ratio of the key institutions in charge of these operations (Box 5). The authorities acknowledged these concerns, in principle, but stressed that these operations have only limited systemic significance. Moreover, they were strengthening the DFI’s supervision and management practices and monitoring their loan performance. The staff recommended that if these activities were to continue, best practices be adopted to limit their potential adverse fiscal implications. Exchange rate regime and monetary policy 13. The authorities remained committed to the peg. l They noted that the exchange rate was not significantly misaligned at present and was supported by strong fundamentals. They were monitoring competitiveness closely, and also observed that the cost to BNM of sterilizing the monetary impact of the rising reserves remained small. They reaffirmed their commitment to supporting the peg through further structural reform, while noting the steps taken during the year to liberalize further restrictions on capital outflows, and the trade and investment regimes. a Staff welcomed the authorities’ prudent monetary management in support of the peg, as well as additional steps taken to liberalize the exchange, trade and investment regimes. While acknowledging the small cost of sterilization, the staff encouraged BNM to expand the range of instruments of monetary control with an appropriate portfolio of securities to conduct open market operations.14 I3 All buildings owned by Putrajaya Development Corporation have been leased for 30 years, at the end of which the government assumes ownership. l4 BNM’s intervention relies primarily on direct borrowing and BNM notes. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- ll- l Staff also supported the authorities’ efforts to enhance competitiveness through structural reforms, but continued to encourage Malaysia to broaden its policy options by moving to a more flexible exchange rate arrangement. This would help manage risks associated with capital flows, complement fiscal policy in addressing unanticipated shocks, and facilitate the adjustment to structural changes. The authorities reiterated their willingness to reconsider the peg if and when needed. The staff acknowledged that, at present, the peg was not unduly complicating macroeconomic management. Nevertheless, it maintained that moving to a more flexible arrangement from a position of strength would be beneficial, with most conditions now appearing to be favorable for such a move. More generally, greater exchange rate flexibility would be consistent with the process of an orderly adjustment of global current account imbalances. 14. The staff and the authorities agreed that monetary conditions were broadly appropriate, and that there was some scope for lowering interest rates that could be used cautiously, in case the recovery falters. l The staff noted that the current reserve coverage, output gap, inflation, and sizable interest rate differential, together with the remaining administrative controls on capital flows, provided BNM some room to maneuver, albeit limited.15 The authorities acknowledged that this may be the case, but noted that the room to maneuver is also constrained by several additional factors, such as their commitment to ensuring positive real interest rates to small depositors and the volatility of short-term capital flows. In the event, it was agreed that, with recent data showing the recovery gaining steam, the scope to lower interest rates further should be preserved for an unanticipated slowing of growth in the period ahead. Structural issues 15. The authorities continue to assign high priority to deepen structural reform. l On financial system reform, staff and the authorities agreed that further voluntary consolidation-intra-group mergers of commercial banks and finance companies and formation of investment banks-would help enhance the sector’s efficiency and resilience. Staff also agreed that ongoing implementation of the consolidated risk-based banking supervision, improvements in bank corporate governance, updates of the capital adequacy framework to include market risks, and the development of a regulatory framework for the DFIs, were key in further enhancing the financial system soundness. The staff emphasized the importance of extending the regulatory framework to cover all DFIs, and expediting the liberalization of restrictions on operations of foreign banks, given the relatively robust position of domestic banks. l5 Empirical analysis prepared by the staff indicates that the interest rate could be reduced by about 50-100 basis points while remaining consistent with the main policy objectives of maintaining price and exchange rate stability (see accompanying Selected Issues paper). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12- @ Staff welcomed the authorities’ intention to bring forward the liberalization of interest rates. The current base-lending rate mechanism (BLR), which sets the reference rate and corresponding maximum spread for the banks’ prime lending rate, had served its purpose of preserving stability and preventing banks from engaging in distressed lending. However, increasing competition among banks had rendered the BLR progressively less relevant, as many banks have been lending on the basis of cost-plus, which is below the reference rate.16 This situation, together with the strengthened position of domestic banks, provides a window to abolish the BLR system, sooner rather than later. The authorities and staff concurred that such a move should not be disruptive. To this end, the authorities intended to strengthen their efforts to raise consumer awareness, enhance bank disclosure requirements, and develop alternative savings instruments for small depositors, such as unit trusts. Staff and the authorities also discussed the outcome of recent consultations with the banking industry on the main features of the planned deposit insurance scheme, which, in line with best practices, would feature compulsory membership and risk-adjusted contributions. l On corporate sector reform, the authorities and staff agreed that traditional indicators of leverage, liquidity, profitability and efficiency were yet to fully reflect the benefits of the post-crisis restructuring efforts.17 However, they noted that loans restructured by Danaharta had so far performed satisfactorily, with only 4 percent overdue for more than 60 days. l The staff welcomed the significant progress achieved in developing the domestic capital markets, particularly on improving the infrastructure and updating the regulatory and supervisory framework, in line with the recommendations of the CMMP. The authorities shared the staff’s concerns about the dominant position of the Employee Provident Fund (EPF) in relation to the investor base, but noted the steps being taken to develop unit trusts and broaden investment alternatives. The staff encouraged the authorities to undertake a comprehensive examination of the future role of EPF, including exploring ways to phase in competitor pension schemes. The staff also stressed the need for closer coordination between BNM and the Securities Commission in cases-such as the mergers of merchant banks with brokerage firms-which give rise to joint regulatory and supervisory responsibilities.‘* l Regarding labor markets, the authorities indicated that they were addressing skills mismatches and shortages through an expansion of retraining programs and tertiary education, and had requested the World Bank’s technical assistance to audit skills and technology institutes. l6 For a further description of the BLR system, see Box 4 of the 2002 Article IV Staff Report (SM/02/300). l7 See accompanying Selected Issues paper. I* An overview of developments, issues, and prospects of Malaysia’s capital market is presented in the accompanying Selected Issues papers. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13- l On competitiveness issues, staff welcomed the recent liberalization of investment guidelines in the manufacturing sector, but noted that restrictions on foreign equity participation remain in the services sector while stressing the benefits of further liberalization (Box 4). The staff also underscored the need for further enhancements to the business climate and governance. To maintain and boost competitiveness within the context of a pegged exchange rate regime, the authorities had established a high level National Cabinet committee to monitor this issue. Increasing emphasis is being placed on the quality, predictability, and timeliness of delivery of Malaysian exports, as these factors, rather than price, are where Malaysia’s competitive advantage is seen to lie. l Malaysia maintains a relatively liberal trade regime, and is rated as “broadly open” under the Fund’s trade restrictions index. Further reductions in import tariffs were planned under multilateral regional and bilateral trade arrangements and the authorities updated staff on some recent trade policy initiatives. The ASEAN Free Trade Area had been fully operationalized in 2003, with 97 percent of products under the Common Effective Preferential Tariff (CEPT) scheme.” l Discussions for a Trade and Investment Framework Agreement with the U.S. and bilateral trade agreements with Japan, India, and Korea were underway. Malaysia is also committed to undertake progressive trade liberalization as part of its WTO commitments, but takes the position that “nontrade issues” such as investment rules, competition policy, and government procurement, as well as labor, social, and environmental standards which are not under the jurisdiction of the WTO, should be excluded. 16. The proposal to introduce a gold dinar to settle payments under existing bilateral payment agreements (BPAs) was still under consideration. The authorities confirmed the scheme would neither require the creation of a new currency, nor require traders and commercial banks to possess gold to settle transactions.20 Instead, the net trade position would be settled in gold by the two central banks every two months, effectively converting the foreign exchange risk into sovereign risk.21 While in principle the arrangement would not I9 The average CEPT rate had been reduced to under 2 percent (from 2% percent in 2002), while the average MFN rate applied in 2003 has remained unchanged at 9% percent. More recently, import duties on imported cars from ASEAN countries were reduced to 25-190 percent from 42-300 percent, while those from non-ASEAN countries were reduced to 35-200 percent. 2o The scheme is likely to be adopted first by Islamic trade partners (representing about 2 percent of Malaysia’s total trade). Discussions are ongoing with the likely participants in the scheme. 21 Arbitration, if it were needed, would be conducted under the auspices of the London Centre for International Arbitration. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14- appear to give rise to any restriction under IMF’s jurisdiction, a definitive assessment can be done only once a specific gold-based BPA is established and the details are made available to the staff. 17. As part of its policy of strengthening greater regional cooperation, Malaysia is also a participant in the Chiang Mai Initiative, a regional financing arrangement under the umbrella of ASEAN+ designed to help countries in addressing the risk of a liquidity crisis, and supplement the use of Fund resources through a network of bilateral swap agreements. Since its inception in 2000, Malaysia has concluded three bilateral swap arrangements totaling $3% billion with Japan, China, and Korea. IV. OTHER ISSUES 18. The authorities and staff agreed that Malaysia had become increasingly more resilient to shocks, and had a productive exchange of views on the key areas of risk exposure identified by the staff (Annex II). In particular: l Both public and external debt appeared to be sustainable under all shocks considered. Public debt in relation to GDP was expected to decline steadily over the medium term, as fiscal consolidation proceeded. However, public debt remained relatively more vulnerable to real GDP growth shocks and, to a lesser extent, exchange rate depreciation and the realization of possible contingent liabilities, and was relatively robust to individual or joint shocks in all other key macro variables. The external debt in relation to GDP was also expected to decline over time reflecting the recovery of output, continued current account surpluses, and relatively low interest rates. However, it remained relatively more vulnerable to a large exchange rate depreciation and combined growth-current account-deflator shocks, and was relatively robust to interest rate shocks. The authorities noted that the favorable debt dynamics implied by the staff’s exercise were in line with their expectations. Staff concurred with the authorities that the debt sustainability exercise would be enhanced if net debt were used instead of gross debt, and encouraged the authorities to start compiling and disseminating data on the net worth of the public sector. l The financial sector was found to be in a position to withstand significant shocks, given its strong capitalization. However, the sector-in general, and finance companies-in particular, were relatively more exposed to interest rate and credit risk than to direct exchange rate and equity price risks. The authorities noted that the relatively higher exposure of finance companies should not have systemic implications because the risks were mitigated by the fact that they belonged to broader banking groups. l The aggregate corporate sector’s financial health has improved somewhat in the last few years, but it continued to be relatively highly exposed to lower growth, higher real 22 ASEAN plus China, Japan, and Korea. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 15 - interest rates, asset price deflation, and real exchange rate depreciation. The authorities and staff agreed that these risks were likely to diminish over time with the realization of the restructuring benefits. 19. Malaysia has taken important steps to combat money laundering and the financing of terrorism (AMLKFT). The AML/CFT framework introduced in 2002 now covers both bank and non-bank intermediaries. Amendments to the AML Act and penal code to cover terrorism are pending approval by Parliament, and should allow Malaysia to accede to and implement the UN Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism. 20. Significant progress was made in reconciling public debt stocks and the debt implied by cumulating deposit-financing flows. l The discrepancy for 1995-2002 has been estimated at about 46 percent of GDP. About half is explained by differences in the recording of debt and financing, exchange revaluation gains, and debt assumptions. The remainder is explained by the NFPEs which, despite having an overall surplus, still incurred debt to acquire assets.23 l The staff recommended a fiscal ROSC to supplement ongoing efforts at enhancing the fiscal accounts, and the authorities are considering it. 21. The authorities also made progress in implementing the SDDS. Data on the international investment position for 2002 was published at the end of 2003, and quarterly external debt data in accordance with SDDS requirements were disseminated starting in September 2003. V. STAFF APPRAISAL 22. Malaysia’s pragmatic approach to macroeconomic policy has been instrumental in weathering the adverse effects of the global slowdown, the Iraq war, and the SARS outbreak, and creating the conditions for a sustained recovery. The stimulus package adopted in May 2003 was key in supporting economic activity. This, together with continued progress in structural reform, helped foster a revival of confidence and positioned Malaysia well to benefit from the ongoing global recovery. Since then, the government’s renewed commitment to fiscal consolidation starting in 2004, should contribute to enhance Malaysia’s medium-term prospects. The smooth political transition up to Mr. Abdullah’s appointment as Prime Minister in late October has also supported the economic climate. 23. Malaysia’s outlook is positive and the risks are balanced. In the near term, upside potential stems from a higher private sector domestic demand. The main downside risks include a delay in the global recovery and a possible recurrence of SARS. Over the medium 23 Assets accumulated over 1995-2002 by the major NFPEs amount to 33 percent of GDP (recorded at face value). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 16- term, the main challenge remains to increase private investment and raise productivity growth. With regard to Malaysia’s resilience to shocks, the staff’s assessment indicates that even under severe circumstances, the current levels of public and external debt appear to be sustainable, and the banking and corporate sector’s balance sheets are quite robust. 24. The fiscal policy plans for 2003-04 strike an appropriate balance between supporting domestic demand and returning to a path of fiscal consolidation. The projected decline in the federal government deficit in 2004 should be attainable, but some areas will require close monitoring, especially tax revenue performance and the scope for reining in the growth of nonwage operational expenditures and reducing noncore investments. The staff notes that the projected sharp decline in core investment, including the end of one-off programs in education and the decision to postpone large infrastructure projects pending a review, signal the beginning of a return to a more normal level of public investment. 25. The staff strongly supports the authorities’ commitment to fiscal consolidation over the medium term. The plans to balance the federal government budget by 2006 are appropriate; the staff encourages the authorities to further elaborate a comprehensive set of policies to achieve and sustain this objective in the period ahead. The staff welcomes the authorities’ intention to review, in due course, the potential for enhancing the efficiency and efficacy of the tax system, and also to examine the scope for reducing subsidies and transfers. 26. Further efforts to enhance fiscal transparency would help ensure a successful medium-term fiscal consolidation. The authorities should consider gathering and disseminating more detailed information on the fiscal costs of exemptions, the implicit subsidies on gasoline, diesel, LPG and electricity, the quasi-fiscal expenditures (or “social obligations”) of the NFPEs-such as in tertiary education, and the contingent liabilities associated with off-budget lending operations channeled through the DFIs. In this last regard, the staff acknowledges the efforts to strengthen the supervision and management practices of the public institutions in charge of these lending programs. Adopting best practices should ensure an adequate fiscal treatment of these operations. 27. Malaysia’s fixed exchange rate system continues to be supported by strong fundamentals. The staff concurs with the authorities that, at present, the ringgit exchange rate peg does not appear to be significantly undervalued, continues to provide an anchor of stability, and does not unduly complicate macroeconomic management. The approach taken to address pressures stemming from rising official reserves, including by allowing a faster expansion of domestic credit and by gradually liberalizing restrictions on capital outflows and the trade and investment regimes, is well conceived. These efforts, together with the authorities’ commitment to undertake the necessary structural adjustments, and publicly- stated readiness to reconsider the peg if, and when needed, add credibility to the peg regime. 28. Looking ahead, the staff continues to endorse the view that greater exchange rate flexibility would be beneficial for Malaysia. A more flexible exchange rate regime would broaden Malaysia’s policy options, help manage risks associated with capital flows, alleviate the burden of adjustment on fiscal policy to deal with shocks, and facilitate Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17- Malaysia’s adjustment to structural changes in the economy. The timing of any change in the regime should be carefully chosen, preferably in a situation of strength, and supported by the adoption of a suitable monetary framework. A more flexible arrangement would also contribute to the adjustment of prevailing global current account imbalances. 29. The staff supports BNM’s prudent approach to managing domestic credit which is consistent with the peg, while providing adequate liquidity. The May reduction of interest rates was a step in the right direction and did not create pressures on the peg. The staff agrees with the authorities that the remaining room to maneuver is limited and should be used cautiously in case the recovery falters. More fundamentally, the staff supports the authorities’ plan to bring forward the liberalization of interest rates, and stands ready to provide technical support to ensure that such a move will not be disruptive. 30. The authorities should be commended for the progress in strengthening the banking system and continued commitment to financial sector reforms. Further voluntary bank consolidation should help raise the sector’s efficiency and resilience. Equally important will be to adopt a deposit insurance scheme based on best practices, and enhance further the supervisory and regulatory framework, including by broadening the institutional coverage of the DFI Act. Financial sector competition should also be enhanced by eliminating remaining restrictions on operations of foreign banks. 31. Domestic capital markets are playing an increasingly important role in promoting and allocating financial savings. The authorities’ efforts to enhance efficiency by widening both the retail and institutional investor base for domestic securities are appropriate. In this regard, the proposed examination of the future role of EPF will be very important. There is also a need to enhance regulatory coordination between BNM and the securities commission, as the capital markets develop further. 32. Having concluded the voluntary debt restructuring, the authorities should continue efforts to enhance corporate governance, in line with the recommendations of the CMMP. The staff welcomes the authorities’ emphasis on surveillance and enforcement associated with measures to increase market discipline, including the establishment of a shareholders’ watchdog group. 33. Maintaining and boosting competitiveness will be key to sustain high growth. The staff welcomes the authorities ongoing efforts to raise productivity and the level of tertiary education, reduce existing skills mismatches, and lower the cost of doing business. In addition, consideration should be given to lift remaining restrictions in the service sector, mainly regarding foreign equity participation. 34. Malaysia has continued to develop its framework for anti-money laundering and combating the financing of terrorism (AML and CFT). The staff looks forward to Malaysia’s accession to the UN convention for the Suppression of Financing of Terrorism. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 18- 35. The recent publication of 2002 IIP data on the SDDS and detailed external debt service data are welcome. Progress achieved in reconciling public debt data and ongoing efforts at improving the fiscal accounts should be supported by undertaking a fiscal ROSC. 36. It is recommended that the next Article IV consultation with Malaysia take place on a 12-month cycle. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 19- Box 1. Malaysia: Recent Fiscal Developments and Outlook Key fiscal trends up to 2002 The original 2001-02 budgets targeted a reduction in the federal government deficit. In both years, however the authorities, faced with a more adverse external environment, introduced fiscal stimulus packages to support domestic demand. The federal government deficit hovered around 51/2-5X percent of GDP, and the consolidated public sector surplus shifted to a small deficit. Developments in 2003 The original 2003 budget once again signaled the government’s commitment to begin fiscal consolidation as the economy recovered. The federal government deficit was to decline to 4 percent of GDP and the consolidated public sector balance to shift to a surplus of % percent of GDP. As it became clear in early 2003 that the global recovery would be delayed by the adverse impact of the Iraq conflict and the outbreak of SARS, the government announced on May 21,2003 an Economic Stimulus Package (ESP) of 2% percent of GDP on an annualized basis. The federal budget component of the ESP was 3/4 percent of GDP, and the rest consisted of lending programs by the development financial institutions (DFIs) mainly to small and medium-sized enterprises and the agricultural sector. One-third of the lending package was to be funded directly by Bank Negara Malaysia (BNM) and the remainder by four DFIs (of which 40 percent with government’s guarantee). The federal budget component of the ESP called for: (i) an increase in federal government current spending of around r/2 percent of GDP (two-thirds of which in 2003); (ii) temporary tax relief of about % percent of GDP (half of which in 2003, mainly for sectors worst hit by SARS and weakening external demand, such as tourism, transport, and construction); and (iii) several measures intended to have a medium-term effect, including incentives directed at SMEs and foreign direct investment. The ESP also called for a 2 percentage point reduction in the rate of pension contributions to the Employees’ Provident Fund (about % percent of GDP on an annualized basis). The revised 2003 budget announced in September targeted a federal government deficit of 5% percent of GDP, mainly reflecting the ESP measures and the revenue impact of a downward revision in the official growth forecast underlying the original budget. The deficit reached 5 percent of GDP for the first 9 months, with revenues and expenditures at 65 percent and 70 percent of their yearly targets, respectively. The corporate, sales, and service tax, and non-tax revenues have been somewhat weaker than budgeted, although this has been partially offset by stronger performance in individual taxes. Budget for 2004 The 2004 budget announced in September calls for a reduced federal government deficit of 3% percent of GDP and a consolidated public sector surplus of l/4 percent of GDP. The deficit reduction is underpinned by a 2% percent of GDP reduction in development expenditures (mostly in education), and stable revenues in relation to GDP following a number of new tax measures and incentives, Current expenditures are targeted to increase by ‘/2 percent of GDP. The budget also provides for a further expansion of off-budget credit programs by about l/2 percent of GDP. The government has not yet announced financing plans. It has, however, announced its intention to balance the budget by 2006. The projected turnaround in the consolidated public sector balance reflects a significant cut in NFPE development expenditures. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 20 - Box 2. Malaysia: Key Fiscal and Structural Measures in the 2004 Budget The 2004 budget includes several tax measures and incentives for selected sectors, with a basically neutral revenue impact (0.1 percent of GDP). To stimulate private sector growth and the services sector, the budget: l Increases income tax relief for children. Estimated revenue impact: -RM 32 million. l Increases the minimum taxable income for small and medium-scale companies. Estimated revenue impact: -RM 322 million. l Exempts small motorcycles from road tax and halves the road tax on buses for workers. Estimated revenue impact: -RM 65 million. l Provides incentives to promote new economic activities and investment, including: (i) extensions of income tax exemptions and investment tax allowances to service companies for agricultural produce and tourism-related companies; (ii) extension of pioneer status income tax exemption (70 percent) to additional income from reinvestment for qualifying capital expenditure; (iii) extension of the investment tax allowance (60 percent) to additional investments; and (iv) increases in investment tax allowances and income tax exemptions to 100 percent for promoted areas. Revenue-neutral. In the area of consumption and trade, the budget: l Raises import and excise duties on liquor and tobacco by 10 and 20 percentage points. Estimated revenue impact: +RM 229 million. l Lowers import duties on machines and spare parts, building materials, resin and plastic materials, and food supplements. Estimated revenue impact: -RM 109 million. l Lowers export taxes on building materials, food products, and other selected items. Estimated revenue impact: -RM 6 million. l Introduces excise duties on imported cars effective January 1, 2004 to offset a reduction in import duties under AFTA. Revenue-neutral. To help develop capital markets, the budget contains the following measures (assumed to be revenue- neutral): l Tax deductions for expenses incurred in issuing asset-backed and Islamic securities. l Tax exemption on real property gains to property trusts and REITs, and grants stamp-duty exemption to property companies or individuals that transfer assets to such trusts. l Tax deductions to venture capital companies and venture capitalists. l Income tax exemption to overseas income repatriated by individuals. The budget also includes new credit schemes amounting to RM 2.1 billion (1/2 percent of GDP on an annualized basis). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2l- Box 3. Malaysia: Financial and Corporate Sector Reforms The post-1998 crisis bank rescue and corporate debt restructuring have been virtually completed. Danamodal (the banking recapitalization agency) and Danaharta (the asset management company) have largely completed their missions. Danamodal’s loans for recapitalization which totaled RM 7 billion in ten banking institutions have since declined to RM 2 billion in three institutions. Danamodal has redeemed its bonds and was scheduled to cease operations by end-2003. Danaharta has resolved all its NPLs and is on track with cash collections to repay its bonds before it unwinds in 2005. The Corporate Debt Restructuring Committee (CDRC) has resolved all cases (with total outstanding debt of RM 53 billion) and was closed in August 2002. Malaysia’s reform progress compares favorably with other countries in the region. Malaysia has resolved its NPL problem faster than other countries and with a relatively high recovery rate. The scale of the NPL problem, however, was smaller in Malaysia. Corporate debt workouts have also proceeded faster than in other countries, and corporate leverage remains the lowest in the region. Country Malaysia Indonesia Thailand Korea Assets Acquired (percent of total bank assets) 2001 7.1 21.1 31.4 22.7 NPLs Disposed of by AMCs (in percent of NPLs acquired) 2001 99.9 7.9 . . . 57.8 2002 100.0 39.6 67.2 57.2 Recovery Rate (percent) 2002 57.0 29.4 45.0 46.8 Government-Supervised Voluntary Workouts (percent of cases resolved) 2001 71.2 56.6 68.1 . . 2002 100.0 68.3 68.3 . Debt/Equity Ratios in Corporate Sector (percent) 1997 88.5 334.0 380.0 396.3 2001 83.3 277.0 350.0 198.3 Sources: ARIC database, and Fund staff estimates. Implementation of the first phase of the Financial Sector Master Plan (FSMP), which focuses on building domestic capacity, is proceeding swiftly. Domestic banking institutions were merged into ten groups by end-200 I. However, efficiency gains are still to be realized, and intra-group consolidation will be crucial to achieve this. Although the quality of banking regulation and supervision has increased considerably in recent years, a strict enforcement of consolidated risk-based supervision will be critical for maintaining the soundness of the banking system during further reforms. Some of the main FSMP recommendations implemented in 2001-02 were the introduction of guidelines for credit risk management, the establishment of a legislative framework for the regulation and supervision of DFIs, and a further strengthening in bank corporate governance. The authorities are now preparing to move into phase two of the FSMP, which focuses on increasing domestic competition. The key measures in this phase include the liberalization of interest rates and fees, the introduction of a deposit insurance scheme, and a gradual leveling of the playing field for foreign financial institutions operating in Malaysia. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 22 - Box 4. Malaysia: Recent Measures to Develop Capital Markets and Promote Investment The government is proceeding with the implementation of phase one of the 2001 Capital Markets Master Plan (CMP), which focuses on strengthening domestic capacity and developing strategic and nascent sectors. Key measures have been aimed at: enhancing efficiency and competitiveness of market institutions; developing the bond market, the investment management industry, and the Islamic capital market; and strengthening investor protection and corporate governance. Concerning the latter, the listing requirements for the KLSE and the securities law have been revised; a minority shareholder watchdog group has been established; and relevant industry best practices are being identified. The Foreign Investment Committee (FIC) guidelines are being liberalized to attract more portfolio equity flows. According to the ESP, FIC approval will only be needed for acquisitions in excess of RM 10 million (previously RM 5 million); acquisitions exceeding RM 100 million are now possible, subject to approval by the finance minister; and the only equity condition remaining is to maintain at least 30 percent bumiputera equity (previously, foreign interests could hold a maximum of 30 percent equity). On June 17, 2003, the government allowed 100 percent foreign ownership in the manufacturing sector without any export obligations, removing the requirement that 30 percent of equity be reserved for bumiputeras unless 80 percent of production is exported. Foreign exchange rules were also liberalized in late 2002 and early 2003 to help improve the business climate and foster efficiency gains. Foreign multinational companies are no longer required to obtain at least 50 percent of their loans from Malaysian-owned domestic banks and can borrow five times more in ringgit than before. In addition, the maximum overnight limit on foreign currency accounts for export proceeds was raised and reporting requirements simplified. New regulations allow residents to sell forward foreign exchange contracts of up to twelve months for any purpose, provided the sale is backed by foreign currency receivables. International payments can now be settled in any currency. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 23 - Box 5. Malaysia: Off-Budget Operations Channeled Through the DFIs The increase in DFIs’ operations envisaged in the ESP contrasts with the postcrisis decline in government participation in the financial system. The ESP provides for an increase by RM 3.6 billion (0.9 percent of GDP on an annualized basis) in lending programs channeled through the DFIs. The full execution of these programs would nearly double the flow of credit channeled through the DFIs. While the DFIs’ financial market share remains small (about 5 percent), a sustained expansion at this pace may pose a risk, especially if the quality of lending does not improve markedly. Relying on lending programs is generally not recommended because of its nontransparent nature and potentially large fiscal costs. The fiscal deficit could increase in case of default, as the intermediaries would eventually need to be recapitalized. It is worrisome in this regard that: (i) the risk of default on DFIs’ loans in Malaysia is higher than in Korea, the Philippines, Thailand, and Vietnam; (ii) DFI provisioning against losses is lower than in Korea and Thailand; and (iii) directed loans in the ESP are mainly allocated to the two DFIs that have had the weakest performance in terms of NPLs. Best practices in the fiscal treatment of directed lending operations call for: (i) a centralized- ideally parliamentary-approval for government-guaranteed borrowing for directed lending, as is the case in most OECD countries; (ii) a budgetary allocation to cover the likely call on guarantees-as in Canada or the Netherlands-to ensure that proposals are scrutinized alongside expenditure budgets; (iii) the imposition of a guarantee fee on the beneficiaries-as in Turkey, Hungary, and South Africa-to recoup some of the costs associated with guarantees, and impose discipline on the requests for guarantees; and (iv) the provision of explicit transfers in the budget-as in the U.S. and Brazil-for operations which are clearly of a quasi-fiscal nature. The authorities are aware of the risks involved, and have taken steps to strengthen the regulatory and supervisory framework. The DFIs’ Act (February 2002) appointed Bank Negara Malaysia (BNM) as the central regulatory and supervisory body for six of the main DFIs. BNM is currently working on a regulatory framework for the DFIs, including for their capital adequacy and liquidity. In addition, while one of the DFIs with the highest NPL ratios, which will be playing a key role in the ESP lending programs, is not yet under the purview of BNM, it has been voluntarily adopting the best reporting practices mandatory for BNM-supervised DFIs. While these measures will improve DFIs’ management, their credit risk assessment capacity also needs to be improved substantially in the short run. More generally, it would be advisable to: (i) limit these operations, develop proper internal procedures, and ensure all institutions comply with prudential regulatory requirements; and (ii) put in place a framework for disclosing, managing, and budgeting the potential contingent liabilities. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 24 - Box 6. FDI and Market Perceptions of Malaysia’s Investment Climate Foreign direct investment (FDI) inflows have declined steeply since the Asian crisis, to $550 million in 2001 from a high of $71/4 billion in 1996. Inflows recovered strongly in 2002 reaching $3 billion (3% percent of GDP). Malaysia rose to eighth rank in UNCTAD’s 2002 list of top 10 developing economies recipients of FDI. The authorities also adopted several measures in late 2002-early 2003 to improve the business environment and encourage investment (Box 4). Malaysia: Gross Fixed Investment/GDP and FDI inflows 1991-2002 20 Selected Countries: FDIlGDP 1991-2002 16 8 6 ,991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 Zoo0 2001 2002 lYY1 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 ,998 ,999 Zoo0 200, 20~32 Sustaining and strengthening this performance will depend on a variety of factors. Available indicators of investment climate, competitiveness and governance rankings, and sovereign spreads suggest that market perceptions of Malaysia are generally favorable and have been improving. However, Malaysia is still perceived as laggard in terms of economic freedom, competitiveness, and governance compared to Singapore, Hong Kong, Taiwan, and Korea. Malaysia, in contrast, outscores China on most rankings, but the latter’s low wage costs and recent accession to the WTO mean that it is an increasingly attractive destination for FDI, putting a premium on the need for Malaysia to enhance productivity. Market Perceptions of Investment Climate: Global Rankings Growth and Competitiveness Country Risk Governance Economic Freedom WEF 11 IMD: Pop < 20m 2/ ICRG 31 CPI 41 Rule of lawS/ Heritage 61 Fraser 71 Year 2002 2001 2002 2001 Aug. 03 Sep. 02 2002 2001 2002 f 2003 2001 Malaysia 27 30 4 6 47 31 33 36 68.6 72 60 Hong Kong 17 Singapore 4 Taiwan 3 China 33 Korea 21 Thailand 31 Chile 20 Mexico 45 Poland 51 13 4 39 23 33 27 42 41 22 13 14 14 86.3 5 4 5 4 93.3 6 7 19 18 29 27 80.9 12 12 39 47 59 57 51.5 15 10 25 28 40 42 77.8 10 13 49 40 64 61 62.4 41 37 17 18 87.1 24 19 61 64 57 51 52.1 27 22 49 43 45 44 70.6 2 2 27 26 127 100 52 26 40 44 16 20 56 69 66 77 Hungary 29 28 39 36 33 31 78.9 44 35 * Percentile rank (O-100) indicates the percentage of countries that rank below the selected country 11 World Economic Forum. 21 IMD World Competitiveness Yearbook 2003. 31 Inrernationnl Country Risk Guide, August 2003. 4/Convption Perceptions Index, Transparency International. 51 D. Kaufman, A. Kraay & M. Masttuzi, 2003 Govemancr Indicators 6/Heritage Foundation. Index of Economic Freedom. 71 Fraser Institute, Economic Freedom of the World Index. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 25 - 20 15 10 5 0 -5 -10 -15 45 40 35 30 25 20 15 Figure 1. Real Sector Developments and Outlook Real GDP growth is expected to rise . . . and investment to remain stable. moderately, supported by the ESP . . . Real GDP Growth (In percent) -Malaysia -- - Indonesia KOIC?l _ _ _ _ - Philippines Thailand 20 50 15 Gross Domestic Investment (In percent of GDP) -Malayala - - - Indonesm ~ ~ Korea _ _ _ _ _ Philippines ” Thailand \ -1 \ /’ \ \ / ‘,’ ‘\4/ 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 1996 1997 1998 1999 zoo0 2001 2002 2003 Proj. Proj. Savings is expected to remain high . . . . . . and inflation remained subdued in 2003. National Savings (rn percent of GDP) -Malaysia - - - Indonesia I ,.‘\ ,’ _ _ - - - \ / \/ 45 12 4o 10 35 8 30 6 25 4 20 2 15 0 Inflation -Malaysia (Percent change) (Percent change) ;o ;o ’ *. ’ *. ’ . ’ . ’ . ’ . \ \ , * ( , * ( ~ ~- Korea ~ ~- Korea _____, ___-_, Philippines Philippines n I’ ‘^Thailand n -. ‘^Thailand 1996 I997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 Proi. Source: IMF, WEO. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 26 - 25 20 15 10 5 0 -5 -10 500 400 300 200 100 0 Figure 2. External Developments and Outlook The current account surplus is expected to remain in large surplus in 2003. Foreign reserves increased in 2003... Current Account (In percent of GDP) -Malaysia - - - Indonesia ~~~ Korea _____. Phdippines Thailand 25 10 9 20 8 ’ -10 0 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 Proj Reserves (In months of imports of goods and services) r\ /-- / 2‘ _ ‘ / ,(, \ / i/ / j\, ’ - - - g*ia -__-_. Philippines ‘~Thadand 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 Proj . . . and reserve cover remained adequate. External debt is expected to stabilize. leserves :In percent of short-term debt on remaining maturity #asis) Korea _____, Philippines 11” ./. ‘.-Thai,a”d -Malaysia - - - Indonesia 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2CO3 Proj Proj. 500 200 180 400 160 140 300 120 100 200 80 60 External Debt (In percent of GDP) -Malaysia Indonesia ‘\ Korea _____, ’ \ Philippines . ., ) *Thailand 1 \ 1 \ I \ I \ I \ \ 10 9 8 I 6 200 180 160 140 120 100 80 60 40 20 0 Sources: IMF, WE0 and APD databases. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 27 - Figure 3. Financial Market Developments and Confidence The stock prices’ decline reverted in 2003... . . . and market capitalization increased. 350 300 250 Stock Market Price Index (1997=100) -Malaysia P _ _ _ . - Phdippmes / 1 Thailand 10 5 0 -5 -10 -15 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 Net portfolio outflows eased . . . Net Portfolio Investment (In percent of GDP) -Malaysia - _ _ _ - ‘Philippines AX_ Thailand 96 97 98 99 00 01 02 03 03 03 QI 42 43 350 300 250 200 150 100 50 0 10 5 0 -5 -10 -15 _~ - Philippines (left scale) -Malaysia (right scale) 96 97 98 99 00 01 02 03 03 03 Ql 02 Q3 . . . and other capitalflows improved. 20 15 10 5 0 -5 -10 -15 Other Capital (In percent of GDP) -Malaysia -- - Indonesia ~~ -Korea --_-- ‘Phihppmes _,. .’ ‘Thailand 150 100 350 250 200 150 100 96 97 98 YY 00 01 02 03 03 03 Q1 Q2 Q3 / 10 15 10 5 0 -5 -10 -15 Sources: IMF, WE0 and APD databases. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 28 - Figure 4. Fiscal and Monetary Developments 10 sector is expected to widen in 2003 . . . , 8 6 Consolidated Public Sector Balance (In percent of GDP) -Malaysia -- - Indonesia I/ 2/ ~~ Korea _-.... Phdippines Thailand 3/ 4 2 -4 -6 -8 -10 t 1 1996 1997 1998 1999 2OOC 2001 2002 2003 Proj. The overall deficit of the consolidated public 10 180 8 160 6 140 4 120 2 100 0 80 -2 60 -4 40 -6 20 -8 0 -10 -20 . . . but public sector debt is expected to stabilize. Public Sector Debt -Malaysia (In percent of GDP) - - - ;i”‘j;a=ia 11 _____, Philippines ‘Thadand 3/ 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 Proj. Broad money is expected to grow at a faster . . . andprivate sector credit to remain stable pace in 2003 . . . in relation to GDP. -J a 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 Proj. Sources: IMF, WEO, and APD databases. 200 Private Sector Credit 180 (It, PerCent Of GDP) 41 -Malaysia - - - Indonesia 180 ___--, Phihppines 160 160 140 .;_ -‘.---Thailand a ,f”,. 140 120 120 100 .,; ,- )“. “.. ). 100 80 80 60 60 40 20 0 /\ / / \ *.--.- \ e- --\.-- \ ---__ --.. \ - - _ _ t \ ---____--- 1 20 40 ” 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 200 I 2002 2003 Proj. 180 160 80 60 40 20 0 I/ End of fiscal year (March) for 1996 to 1999; end-December for 2000 to 2003. 2/ Federal government only. 3/ End of fiscal year (end-September). 4/ End-September 2003 for Korea, Philippines, and Thailand. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 29 - Figure 5. Interest Rate Developments The nominal interest rate was stable . . . Nominal Interest Rates -Malayai (left scale) I 30 - (Percent perannum,end of period) hlrcarmg remporory copimi ronrmil m,roduced m Su,mnher ~~~ ~ Korea (left scale) ___--. ,998 I” Maioym Philippines (left scale) x1 ,. .( Thailand (left scale) --- Indonesia (right scale) . . . and the real rate has remained low. 25 (Percent per annum, end of period) _ _ _ _ - ‘Phihppines (left scale) *,1 _._x 20 ‘Thailand (left scale) --- Indonesia (right scale) 15 / -.--I_ ------_-__ Lc---------__ -5 IAN APR ,“L OCT JAN APR J”L “CT JAN APR J”L OCT JAN APR JUI. OCT JAN APR JUL OCT JAN APR JUL OCI 199s 1999 mxl 2cQt *co* zoo3 The interest rate differential with the U.S. has been positive since September 2001. 100 80 60 40 20 0 50 40 30 20 10 0 -10 -20 -30 -40 -50 _Y Interest Rate Differential l/ /-\ 20 -' / \ . ", / \ ‘.yJ. LY \ 10 -, ,‘k’ ‘or”;,“. --.*_ \ \ 1:. -Malaysia, (left scale) ~ Hong Kong (left scale) _____. Philippines (left scale) - - - Singapore (left scale) .," Thailand (left scale) --- Indonesia (right scale) , * \ --\ - - - -* -._-._e* ’ * -_ . :*_ - - _ _ _ _ _-.__.-- JAN APR J”L OCT JAN APK J”L OCT JAN APR JUL “CT JAN APR JUL OCT JAN APR JUL OCT JAN APR J”L OCT 19% ,999 2wo ZOOI 2002 2003 “” 50 40 30 ; 20 10 -0 Sources: IMF, IFS; and APD databases li 3-month interbank offer rate minus 3-month LIBOR. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 30 - Figure 6. Leading Real and External Sector Indicators 35 30 25 20 15 IO 5 0 -5 -10 -15 200 180 160 140 120 80 60 Industrial production has somewhat strengthened . . . Industrial Production (4-quarter percent change) -Malaysia - - - Indonesia . \” Thailand . ’ * ’ - -10 - .’ -15 I II III IV 1 II III IV 1 II III IV I II 111 IV I II 111 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 Imports have also rebounded reflecting the emerging recovery. Imports Value (1998Ql=lOO,in US$terms) I II 111 IV I II III IV I II III IV I 11 III IV 1 II III I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 200 180 160 140 120 60 . . . and exports have rebounded following a dip due in part to the Iraq war. 170 160 170 Exports Value (1998Ql=lOO, in US$ terms) 1 160 -Malaysia - - - Indonesia 150 ___--. Philippines 140 130 120 110 100 90 80 12 10 8 6 150 110 100 90 80 I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III I999 2000 2001 2002 2003 Inflation remains subdued. Inflation (Four-quarter percent change) Malaysia (left scale) ~~~ Korea (left scale) _____. Philippines (left scale) _ ‘Thailand (left scale) --- Indonesia (right scale) 70 60 Source: APD databases. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-31. Table 1. Malaysia: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 1999-2004 l/ PKl. Proj Proj 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 Real sector (percent change) Real GDP growth Real domestic demand CPI inflation (period average) GDP deflator 6.1 8.6 0.3 4.1 4.5 5.3 2.3 16.3 0.0 7.0 3.3 5.1 2.7 1.5 1.4 1.8 I.1 2.2 0.0 4.9 -2.7 3.6 2.3 1.0 Saving and investment (percent of GDP) Gross domestic investment Private, includingstocks Public Gross national saving Private Public 22.4 21.2 24.0 24.5 23.0 22.7 7.1 12.8 6.5 6.0 3.6 5.4 14.6 14.3 17.5 18.5 19.4 17.3 38.3 36.6 32.2 32.0 33.6 32.6 21.4 21.6 15.0 14.5 15.8 15.2 16.9 IS.0 17.2 17.6 11.7 17.4 Fiscal sector (percent of GDP) Federal government overall balance 21 RWe”W Expenditwe and net lending Consolidated public sector overall balance Total public sector debt 31 Of which: Federal govemrnent debt -3.2 -5.8 -5.5 -5.6 -5.4 -3.4 19.5 18.1 23.8 23.2 23.1 23.2 22.7 23.8 29.3 28.8 28.5 26.6 2.3 0.7 -0.3 -0.9 -1.7 0.2 63.1 60.1 69.2 69.6 67.0 62.9 31.3 36.7 43.6 45.7 41.7 48.2 Monetary sector (annual percent change) M3 growth Net domestic assets Net claims on private sector Three-month interbank rate (period average, in percent) 7.1 6.3 1.7 5.6 -0.3 7.9 0.7 5.1 -0.3 7.1 3.6 5.5 4.1 3.2 3.3 3.2 8.9 6.3 5.0 5.2 6.3 5.1 3.1 Balance of payments (in billions of U.S. dollars) Trade balance Exports, f.o.b. Imports, f.o.b. Services account Current account balance (In percent of GDP) Capital account balance Medium- and long-term Ofwhich : Net foreign direct investment Short-term Errors and omissions Overall balance 22.6 20.8 18.4 18.1 23.2 24.1 84.1 98.4 88.0 93.4 98.4 105.9 61.5 77.6 69.6 75.2 75.2 81.8 -8.3 -10.4 -8.9 -8.2 -9.9 -10.1 12.6 8.5 7.3 7.2 10.7 10.7 15.9 9.4 8.3 7.6 10.6 9.9 -6.6 -6. I -3.9 -3.1 -0.4 -3.5 3.3 2.9 2.5 1.8 0.5 1.6 2.5 1.8 0.3 1.3 1.0 0.9 -9.9 -9.0 -6.4 -4.9 -0.9 -5.2 -1.3 -3.2 -2.4 -0.3 0.0 0.0 4.1 -0.8 1.0 3.7 IO.3 7.2 International trade (annual percent change) Export value Import value Terms of trade Gross official reserves (in billions of U.S. dollas) (In months of following year’s imports of GNFS) (In percent of short-term debt) 41 (In percent of broad money) 51 Total external debt (in billions of U.S. dollars) (In percent of GDP) Short-term external debt (percent of total) 41 Debt-service ratio 17.2 17.0 -10.6 6.1 13.5 26.3 -10.3 8.1 -0.3 1.3 -1.5 1.9 30.9 29.9 30.8 34.6 3.9 4.2 4.0 4.5 298.4 311.9 216.2 221.6 34.9 31.7 31.9 33.9 42.7 42.4 45.7 48.8 53.9 47.0 52.0 51.4 24.2 22.6 24.4 32.0 5.4 7.6 0.0 8.7 1.5 -0.2 44.9 52.1 5.5 5.9 301.0 304.3 38.9 50.2 53.0 49.3 49.1 29.7 32.3 (In percent of exports of goods and services) (In percent of exports of goods and nonfactor services) Memorandum item: 6.3 5.5 6.6 6.2 8.3 5.5 6.5 5.6 6.7 6.3 8.5 5.6 Nominal GDP (in billions of ring&) 300.8 342.6 334.3 360.7 385.6 409.8 Sources: Data provided by the Malaysia” athorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections. I/ Period ending December 31. 2/Revised budget 2003; budget 2004 after tax tneasures. 3/ Staff projections; excludes financial public enterprises and nongovernment-guaranteed domestic debt of the NFPEs. The debt-tc-GDP ratios starting in 2003 are calculated by adding the yearly deficit financing flows to the previous year stock of debt divided by the corresponding yearly GDP. The projections asswne no off-budget operations. 4/By ranaining maturity. 5/ For 2003, as of end-November. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 32 - Table 2. Malaysia: Balance of Payments, 1999-2004 lYY9 2000 200 1 2002 Proj Proj 2003 2004 Current account halance 12.6 x.5 7.3 7.2 10.7 10.7 Trade halance 22.6 20.x 18.4 18.1 23.2 24.1 Exports, f.o.h. 84.1 9x.4 88.0 Y3.4 9x.4 105.Y Jmports, f.o.h. 61.5 77.6 69.6 75.2 75.2 X1.X Services and income balance -8.3 -10.4 -8.9 -8.2 -Y.9 -10.1 Receipts 13.9 15.9 16.3 17.0 15.7 16.5 Of’ whirh : Income 2.0 2.0 1.X 2.1 2.8 2.8 Payments 22.2 26.3 25.2 25.2 25.6 26.6 f3f‘which : Income 1.5 Y.6 X.6 x.7 9.2 9.9 Net transfers -1.7 -1.9 -2.2 -2.8 -2.5 -3.3 Capital account halance -6.6 -6.1 -3.9 -3.1 -0.4 -3.5 Mcdiun- and long-term flows, net 3.3 2.Y 2.5 1.8 0.5 1.6 Public sector, net 1.8 1.2 1.9 1.2 -1.2 1.1 Net fcdcral goverment 0.8 0.2 1.7 2.1 -1.2 1.1 Drawings 1.3 1.3 1.9 2.8 1.0 1.5 Repayments 0.5 1.0 0.2 0.6 2.1 0.4 Net other public sector 1.0 1.0 0.2 -0.9 0.0 0.0 Drawings 1.6 2.0 2.9 0.9 2.9 2.5 Repayments 0.6 1 .o 2.6 1.x 2.9 2.5 Private sector, net 1.6 1.7 0.7 0.5 1.6 0.5 Net foreign direct investment 2.5 1.X 0.3 1.3 1.0 0.Y Inward direct investment 3.9 3.8 0.6 3.2 3.0 3.0 Outward direct investment -1.4 -2.0 -0.3 -1.9 -2.0 -2.2 Net horrowing -0.9 -0.1 0.4 -0.8 0.6 -0.3 Drawings 2.3 2.4 2.5 1.6 2.x 1.3 Repayments -3.2 -2.4 -2.1 -2.4 -2.2 -1.7 Short-term flows, net -Y.9 -9.0 -6.4 -4.9 -0.9 -5.2 Commercial banks -3.1 -1.4 -0.4 2.1 2.8 0.0 Portfolio -1.2 -2.5 -0.6 -1.7 0.1 -1.0 Other -5.7 -5.2 -s.4 -5.2 -3.7 -4.1 Net errors and omissions Overall balance Gross official reserves In months of following year’s imports of goods and nonfactor services As a percentage of short-term debt 1/ Mcrnorandum items: Exports of goods and nonfactor services Imports of goods and nonfactor services -1.3 -3.2 -2.4 -0.3 4.7 -0.8 1.0 3.7 30.9 29.Y 30.8 34.6 3.‘) 4.2 4.0 4.5 2YX.4 311.9 276.2 221.6 0.0 10.3 44.9 5.5 301.0 0.0 7.2 52.1 5.Y 304.3 96.0 112.4 102.4 108.3 111.3 llY.6 76.2 94.4 X6.3 91.7 91.6 Y8.5 (In percent of GDP) Current account balance 15.9 9.4 x.3 7.6 10.6 9.9 Trade halance 2X.6 23.1 20.9 19.1 22.9 22.4 Exports 106.3 109.2 100.0 98.4 97.0 Y8.2 Imports 77.6 X6.1 7Y.l 79.3 74.1 75.8 Services and income balance -10.5 -11.6 -10.2 -8.6 -9.8 -9.4 Capital account halancc -8.3 -6.7 -4.4 -3.3 -0.4 -3.3 Medium-turn capital 4.2 3.3 2.9 1.x 0.5 1.5 Net foreign direct investment 3.1 2.0 0.3 1.4 1.0 0.8 Net short-term flows -12.6 -10.0 -7.3 -5.2 -0.9 -4.x Net errors and omissions -1.6 -3.5 -2.8 -0.3 0.0 0.0 Overall halance 5.9 -0.8 1.1 3.Y 10.2 6.6 Export value growth Export volume growth import value growth Import volume growth Terms of trade 17.2 14.1 13.5 10.5 -0.3 (Annual percentage change) 17.0 -10.6 6.1 5.4 15.1 -9.1 3.9 3.3 26.3 -10.3 X.1 0.0 25.9 -9.9 7.7 -0.5 1.3 -1.5 l.Y 1.5 7.6 5.7 x.7 6.6 -0.2 (In billions of U.S. dollars) Sources: Data provided by the Malaysian authorities; and Fund staff estimates. l/ By remaining maturity. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 33 - Table 3. Malaysia: Federal Government Fiscal Operations, 1999-2004 1999 2000 2001 Prel. 2002 Revised Budget 2003 Budget 2004 11 Total revenue Tax revenue Nonpetroleum tax revenue Taxes on net income and profits 21 Sales tax and excises 31 Taxes on international trade Petroleum tax revenue Nontax revenue 58,675 61,864 79,567 83,515 89,168 95,154 45,346 47,173 61,491 66,860 69,171 74,736 38,767 40,165 50,801 58,457 59,217 65,594 24,390 23,146 32,239 36,715 37,486 40,5 17 11,049 13,386 15,333 18,038 17,781 20,775 3,328 3,633 3,229 3,704 3,950 4,302 6,579 7,008 10,690 8,403 9,954 9,142 13,329 14,69 1 18,076 16,655 19,997 20,418 Total expenditure and net lending 68,162 81,579 97,990 103,767 110,017 108,990 Current expenditure 49,069 57,829 64,991 71,115 74,600 81,351 Wages and salaries 14,436 16,357 17,443 20,242 19,727 20,934 Other expenditure on goods and services 8,866 9,214 13,275 14,654 18,107 19,305 Interest payments 7,941 9,055 9,634 9,669 8,868 9,929 Subsidies and transfers 17,826 23,203 24,639 26,550 27,898 31,183 Development expenditure 19,093 23,750 32,999 32,652 35,417 27,639 Overall balance -9,487 -19,715 -18,423 -20,252 -20,849 -13,836 Current balance 9,606 4,035 14,576 12,400 14,568 13,803 Primary balance 41 -1,546 -10,660 -8,789 -10,583 -11,981 -3,907 Financing External Domestic (including use of assets) 9,487 19,715 18,423 20,252 20,849 13,836 2,923 864 6,295 8,020 -4,391 4,151 6,564 18,851 12,128 12,232 25,240 9,685 Total revenues Tax revenue Nonpetroleum tax revenue Taxes on net income and profits 21 Sales tax and excises 31 Taxes on international trade Petroleum tax revenue Nontax revenue 19.5 18.1 15.1 13.8 12.9 11.7 8.1 6.8 3.7 3.9 1.1 1.1 2.2 2.0 4.4 4.3 23.1 23.2 17.9 18.2 15.4 16.0 9.7 9.9 4.6 5.1 1.0 1.0 2.6 2.2 5.2 5.0 Total expenditures 22.7 23.8 Current expenditure 16.3 16.9 Wages and salaries 4.8 4.8 Other expenditure on goods and services 2.9 2.7 Interest payments 2.6 2.6 Subsidies and transfers 5.9 6.8 Development expenditure 6.3 6.9 28.5 26.6 19.3 19.8 5.1 5.1 4.7 4.7 2.3 2.4 7.2 7.6 9.2 6.7 Overall balance -3.2 Current balance 3.2 Primary balance 41 -0.5 Financing 3.2 External 1.0 Domestic 1.8 -5.8 1.2 -3.1 5.8 0.3 3.7 (In percent of GDP) 23.8 23.2 18.4 18.5 15.2 16.2 9.6 10.2 4.6 5.0 1.0 1.0 3.2 2.3 5.4 4.6 29.3 28.8 19.4 19.7 5.2 5.6 4.0 4.1 2.9 2.7 7.4 7.4 9.9 9.1 -5.5 -5.6 4.4 3.4 -2.6 -2.9 5.5 5.6 1.9 2.2 4.0 1.7 -5.4 -3.4 3.8 3.4 -3.1 -1.0 5.4 3.4 -1.1 1.0 6.0 2.4 Memorandum items: Structural balance (percent of potential GDP) 51 -3.9 -6.3 -4.6 -5.6 -4.8 -3.5 Nominal GDP (in millions of ringgit) 300,764 342,612 334,309 360,658 385,635 409,838 (In millions of ringgit) Source: Data provided by the Malaysian authorities. l/ After tax measures. 2/ Includes taxes on property. 3/ Includes “other tax revenue.” 4/Overall balance plus interest payments. 5/The methodology used in the calculation of the structural balance is described in Mulaysia:from Crisis to Recovery, Chapter IV, Appendix II, Occasional Paper 207. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 34 - Table 4. Malaysia: Banking Survey, 1999-2003 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2003 Q1 Q2 Q3 Nov. Net foreign assets 114,304 116,601 121,585 128,068 126,960 129,776 141,620 153,917 Net domestic assets 308,760 333,197 335,685 354,889 364,479 371,087 369,264 368,035 Domestic credit 437,212 475,150 486,786 526,714 538,929 552,204 558,591 566,500 Net claims on general government -13,411 -7,638 -13,460 -1,294 2,714 9,318 3,863 7,858 Claims on private sector 450,623 482,788 500,246 528,008 536,215 542,886 554,728 558,642 Other items, net -128,452 -141,953 -151,101 -171,825 -174,450 -181,117 -189,327 -198,465 Total liquidity (M3) Monetary liabilities Narrow money (Ml) 11 Less: Intersystem demand deposits Less: NFI deposits at BNM 2/ Broad quasi-money Quasi-money and bank repos I/ NFI time and savings deposits II, 2/ NFI repos 2/ Other financial liabilities 31 423,064 449,798 457,270 482,957 491,439 500,863 510,884 521,952 65,220 68,590 67,138 70,674 65,200 67,360 67,259 71,896 74,936 79,302 82,944 91,169 90,496 93,185 95,964 101,992 -4,795 -4,116 -4,136 -4,335 -4,446 -4,361 -4,497 -4,487 -4,921 -6,596 -11,669 -16,160 -20,850 -21,464 -24,208 -25,609 345,760 372,229 382,452 403,794 417,999 424,540 433,499 439,162 249,863 270,853 278,100 288,649 297,109 305,445 310,034 316,891 92,781 98,677 101,228 112,116 117,272 115,847 118,800 117,236 3,115 2,700 3,123 3,029 3,618 3,247 4,664 5,036 12,085 8,979 7,681 8,489 8,240 8,963 10,126 10,894 Memorandum items: Broad money (M2) Narrow money (Ml) 335,857 358,193 14,936 79,302 367,873 388,136 395,674 407,429 82,944 91,169 90,496 93,185 (Contribution to 12.month growth in M3) 415,966 429,618 95,964 101,992 Net foreign assets 7.4 0.5 Net domestic assets -0.2 5.8 Domestic credit -0.2 9.0 Net claims on general government 0.2 1.4 Claims on private sector -0.4 7.6 Other items, net -0.1 -3.2 Total liquidity (M3) 7.1 6.3 Monetary liabilities 3.5 0.8 Broad quasi-money 7.8 6.3 Other financial liabilities -4.2 -0.7 Memorandum items: (12.month percentage change) M3 M2 Ml Velocity (M3) Money multiplier (M3) 7.1 6.3 1.7 5.6 5.7 7.6 7.8 8.9 12.0 6.7 2.7 5.5 5.5 8.5 10.4 11.1 29.5 5.8 4.6 9.9 7.6 10.1 11.9 13.4 0.71 0.76 0.73 0.7 0.78 0.76 0.75 0.73 9.26 10.87 11.43 11.3 11.39 11.52 11.48 10.95 (In millions of ringgit; end of period) 1.1 1.4 0.1 -0.1 0.6 4.2 5.6 7.6 2.6 8.7 9.6 10.4 -1.3 2.7 3.2 3.7 3.9 6.1 6.3 6.8 -2.0 -4.5 -3.9 -2.8 1.7 5.6 5.7 7.6 -0.3 0.8 -0.1 0.5 2.3 4.7 5.6 6.8 -0.3 0.2 0.1 0.3 3.0 5.3 4.8 3.5 8.7 7.6 1.2 0.9 7.5 6.6 -4.0 -4.0 7.8 8.9 0.1 0.7 7.2 7.4 0.4 0.7 Source: Data provided by the Malaysian authorities l/Includes deposits of nonresidents, state and local governments, statutory bodies, and the Employees’ Provident Fund. 2/ NFI consists of nonmonetary financial institutions (finance companies, merchant banks, and discount houses). 3/includes bank and NFI negotiable instruments of deposit. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 35 - Table 5. Malaysia: indicators of Financial Institution Soundness, 2000-03 2000 2001 2002 Mar. 2003 Jun. Sep. Loan-deposit ratio l! Commercial banks Finance companies Merchant banks 83.7 88.1 87.1 85.5 85.3 85.2 96.6 109.2 112.1 112.0 115.9 115.0 70.1 57.6 51.3 40.9 41.4 40.9 Share of loans to broad property sector 21 Commercial banks Finance companies Merchant banks 38.8 43.5 45.2 46.0 45.9 46.2 29.5 30.4 27.9 27.3 27.0 26.4 36.8 40.6 40.1 42.7 41.2 38.6 Risk-weighted capital ratio (RWCR) 31 Commercial banks Finance companies Merchant banks Nonperforming loans (gross) to total loans 4/ Commercial banks Finance companies Merchant banks 12.5 13.0 12.8 12.8 12.8 12.8 12.3 12.8 12.8 12.8 12.8 12.8 11.5 12.1 11.4 11.4 11.4 11.4 17.1 19.6 18.4 18.4 18.4 18.4 15.4 17.8 15.9 15.6 14.9 14.2 13.4 16.3 14.7 14.6 13.9 13.3 21.0 20.3 17.3 17.0 16.2 15.5 25.3 34.4 33.1 31.6 32.0 28.7 Nonperforming loans (net) to total loans 41 9.7 11.5 10.2 9.9 9.5 9.0 Commercial banks 8.3 10.5 9.3 9.1 8.8 8.3 Finance companies 13.2 12.8 11.2 11.1 10.6 10.1 Merchant banks 18.7 26.2 24.6 23.0 24.3 21.5 General provisions of the banking system 5/ 6.8 7.2 6.4 6.4 6.1 5.9 Commercial banks 6.2 6.8 6.3 6.3 6.0 5.9 Finance companies 8.7 8.1 6.4 6.2 6.0 5.7 Merchant banks 7.3 10.9 10.4 10.1 9.2 8.2 Total outstanding bad-debt provision of the banking system 61 Commercial banks Finance companies Merchant banks 54.5 50.8 52.0 52.6 52.6 53.5 57.2 51.6 53.9 54.5 54.4 55.7 51.8 51.9 49.9 49.5 50.1 50.2 39.5 38.9 40.2 41.8 38.6 39.3 Memorandum item: Total NPLs (including loans sold to Danahaita) (Percent of total loans) 7/ 22.5 24.4 22.4 22.1 21.3 20.6 (In percent) Source: Data provided by the Malaysian authorities. l/ Deposits include repos and negotiable instruments of deposit; loans exclude housing loans sold to Cagamas Bhd., the National Mortgage Corporation. 2/ Lending for construction, real estate, and housing purchases; excludes loans sold to Cagamas Berhad. 3/ The minimum RWCR is currently 8 percent for all institutions. 4/ Loans are classified as nonperforming if payments are overdue for three months or more; prior to January 1, 1998, this period was six months. Total loans include housing loans sold to Cagamas Berhad. (Net) NPL exclude interest-in-suspense and specific provisions. 5/In percent of total loans including housing loans sold to Cagamas Berhad, minus interest-in-suspense and specific provisions; minimum requirement is 1.5 percent (1 percent prior to January 1, 1998). Includes specific provisions. 6/ Aggregate of provisions for general, specific, and interest-in-suspense. 7/Leans were fust sold to Danaharta beginning Q3 1998. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 36 - Table 6. Malaysia: Key Financial Ratios for Listed Nonfinancial and Financial Companies, 1998-2002 (In percent, unless otherwise indicated) 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 l/ Listed nonfinancial companies Profit (after tax)/turnover (net profit margin) Return on assets Return on shareholders’ funds Dividend yield Earnings yield (one divided by price-earnings ratio) Total debt-to-equity ratio Number of companies included in calculating these ratios Listed financial companies Profit (after tax)/turnover (net profit margin) Return on assets Return on shareholders’ funds Dividend yield Earnings yield (one divided by price-earnings ratio) Total debt-to-equity ratio Number of companies included in calculating these ratios -4.0 2.6 3.1 2.6 4.1 -2.0 0.6 1.1 0.9 1.7 -5.3 1.8 2.8 2.1 4.4 2.1 1.7 1.9 2.6 2.7 -4.7 1.1 1.9 1.7 2.8 0.99 0.98 0.97 0.83 0.99 667 684 708 736 445 -15.4 -1.0 13.2 7.2 12.9 -1.7 -0.1 0.9 0.4 0.7 -21.0 -1.0 10.5 4.9 8.4 1.8 0.9 1.2 1.7 1.4 -20.0 -0.5 5.3 3.5 5.5 1.66 1.58 1.24 1.17 1.12 63 62 60 59 34 Sources: Kuala Lumpur Stock Exchange data, and BNM Annual Report (various issues). l/ Based on partial information. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicPrel. Proj. Proj. 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 Financial indicators Public sector debt (in percent of GDP) l/ Total liquidity (M3: percent change, 12-month basis) Private sector credit (percent change, 12.month basis) Treasury bill interest rate (percent, 12.month basis, average) 21 63 60 69 70 67 63 7.1 6.3 1.7 5.6 8.9 6.3 -0.3 7.1 3.6 5.5 6.3 5.1 3.5 2.9 2.8 2.7 2.8 External indicators Exports (percent change, 12.month basis in U.S. dollars) Imports (percent change, 12.month basis in U.S. dollars) Current account balance (in billions of U.S. dollars) Current account balance (in percent of GDP) Capital and financial account balance (in billions of U.S. dollars) 31 Of which: Short-term capital 41 Foreign direct investment Other investment (medium- and long-term loans) 17.2 17.0 -10.6 6.1 5.4 7.6 13.5 26.3 -10.3 8.1 0.0 8.7 12.6 8.5 7.3 7.2 10.7 10.7 15.9 9.4 8.3 7.6 10.6 9.9 -7.9 -9.2 -6.3 -3.5 -0.4 -3.5 -5.2 -0.9 -5.2 1.3 1.0 0.9 0.5 -0.5 0.8 Gross official reserves (in billions of U.S. dollars) (In months of imports of goods and services of the following year) Short-term foreign assets of the financial sector (in billions of U.S. dollars) 4, 5/ Short-term foreign liabilities of the financial sector (in billions of U.S. dollars) 51 34.6 44.9 52.1 4.5 5.5 5.9 7.9 6.7 8.7 10.3 Gross official reserves/total liquidity (M3) (in percent) Gross official reserves/monetary base (in percent) -11.2 -12.2 -8.9 2.5 1.8 0.3 0.9 1.2 2.3 30.9 29.9 30.8 3.9 4.2 4.0 6.8 7.9 7.4 7.5 7.0 6.2 27.7 25.2 25.6 256.7 274.5 292.9 27.2 32.4 308.6 35.4 Total short-term external debt by original maturity (in billions of U.S. dollars) 5.9 4.6 6.4 8.3 10.3 12.3 Total short-term external debt by remaining maturity (in billions of U.S. dollars) 10.3 9.6 11.2 15.6 14.9 17.1 Total short-term external debt by original maturity to reserves (in percent) 19.1 15.4 20.6 24.0 23.0 23.6 Total short-term external debt by original maturity to total debt (in percent) 13.8 10.9 13.9 17.0 20.5 23.2 Total short-term external debt by remaining maturity to reserves (in percent) 33.5 32.1 36.2 45.1 33.2 32.9 Total short-term external debt by remaining maturity to total debt (in percent) 24.2 22.6 24.4 32.0 29.7 32.3 Total external debt (in billions of U.S. dollars) 42.7 42.4 45.7 48.8 50.2 53.0 Public and publicly guaranteed debt Total external debt to exports of goods and services (in percent) External amortization payments to exports of goods and services (in percent) 26.5 25.3 26.4 44.2 44.0 43.3 4.3 6.4 3.8 Exchange rate (per U.S. dollar, period average) Exchange rate (per U.S. dollar, end of period) REER appreciation (+) (12-month basis) NFA of commercial banks (in billions of U.S. dollars) 19.8 20.6 24.1 43.5 37.0 43.9 4.3 3.9 4.8 3.8 3.8 3.8 3.8 3.8 3.8 2.9 2.5 5.5 -0.8 0.7 1.1 3.8 3.8 3.8 3.8 0.2 -8.3 -0.9 3.8 3.8 Financial market indicators Kuala Lumpur Stock Exchange Composite Index Ten-year sovereign bond spread (bps) 5/ 812 680 696 646 794 154 218 176 138 81 Sources: Data provided by the Malaysian authorities; and Fund staff estimates. l/ Excludes unguaranteed domestic debt of the NEPEs. 2/Discount rate on three-month treasury bills, October 2003 figure. 3/ Includes errors and omissions. 4/ Includes net external position of banking system, portfolio investment, and errors and omissions 5/Far 1998, maturity date of 9/27/2000 is used and from 1999, maturity date of 6/l/2009 is used. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 38 - ANNEX I MALAYSIA: MEDIUM-TERM OUTLOOK I. THE MID-TERM REVIEW OF THE EIGHTH MALAYSIA PLAN, 2001-05 The authorities completed the mid-term review (MTR) of the Eighth Plan in October 2003. a Annual real GDP growth is projected at 4% percent over 2001-05, substantially lower than the initial target of 7% percent, given the effects of adverse external shocks in 2001-03, which led to a marked decline in private investment and consumption growth. Growth is expected to accelerate to 6 percent during 2004-05, led by a recovery in private sector demand and net exports of goods and non-factor services. a The projected current account surplus is higher than the original plan, reflecting a lower anticipated growth in imports. Exports are expected to grow at a fast pace. Acknowledging the increased competition from China, Malaysia is focusing on higher value added exports, while also shifting some of its manufacturing operations to China and encouraging services exports. In addition, Malaysia is likely to benefit from increasing trade within ASEAN and with China itself (see Box 6, SM/02/300). Eighth Malaysia Plan (2001-05) Original Target 200 l-05 Actual 2001-03 Revised TarPets 2004-05 2001-05 Real sector (percent change, average) Real GDP growth Private consumption Public consumption Private investment Public investment Exports of GNFS Imports of GNFS GDP deflator Gross domestic investment (percent of GNP) Gross national saving (percent of GNP) Fiscal sector (percent of GDP, average) Federal government overall balance Consolidated public sector overall balance Balance of payments (in US$ billion, average) Trade balance Exports, f.o.b. Imports, f.o.b. Services and income balance Net transfers Current account balance 7.5 3.0 6.0 4.2 7.4 4.0 7.0 5.2 7.7 12.1 5.5 9.4 19.0 -10.8 11.8 -2.3 1.1 9.6 -4.2 3.8 6.8 -1.1 6.8 2.0 7.8 -0.9 6.3 1.9 0.4 1.0 1.0 1.0 31.4 25.7 23.6 24.8 35.3 34.8 34.1 34.5 -1.4 -5.5 -2.5 -4.2 1.4 -0.8 0.3 -0.3 17.9 19.3 23.9 21.1 123.3 92.8 107.6 98.7 105.5 73.5 83.7 77.6 -11.7 -8.8 -10.2 -9.4 -2.2 -2.5 -2.8 -2.6 4.0 8.6 10.1 9.2 Source: Mid-Term Review of the Eighth Malaysia Plan 2001-05. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 39 - ANNEX I 0 Growth will continue to be input-driven over 2004-05, although the contribution of total factor productivity (TFP) growth is expected to return to levels more consistent with historical experience.’ The projected rise in TFP growth will be underpinned by continued efforts at shifting production toward higher value-added goods and services, fostering innovation, and addressing the skills shortage.* Eighth Malaysia Plan (2001-05) Original Actual 2001~5 2001-03 2004-05 Revised 2001-05 Contribution Share of Total Contribution Share of Total Contribution Share of Total Contribution Share of Total (Percent) (Percent) (Percent) (Percent) (Percent) (Percent) (Percent) (Percent) GDP 7.5 100.0 3.0 100.0 6.0 100.0 4.2 100.0 Labor 1.6 21.5 1.2 28.6 1.7 28.6 1.4 32.6 Capital 3.1 41.3 I.0 43.0 2.6 43.0 1.7 40.0 TFP 2.8 37.2 0.8 28.4 1.7 28.4 1.1 27.4 Source: Mid-Term Review of the Eighth Malaysia Plan 2001-05. l To ensure fiscal sustainability over the medium term and foster private-sector led growth, the federal government deficit is targeted to decline to 1% percent of GDP by 2005. Monetary policy is expected to remain accommodative in light of subdued inflationary pressures. II. STAFF PROJECTIONS 1. Under the baseline scenario, Malaysia’s growth accelerates gradually to above 6 percent by 2OO6-O8,3 led by dynamic export growth4 and rapidly rising domestic demand (Annex I, Figure 1, and Annex I, Table 1). Imports continue rising in line with exports due to the high import content, but also in response to rising investment associated with both the projected recovery in economic activity and the transition to a knowledge- ’ Malaysia’s annual TFP growth (Solow residual) averaged 1% percent over 1971-2002. * The skills shortage was identified as the most binding constraint on Malaysian firms in the World Bank’s 2003 Productivity and Investment Climate Survey (PICS). The PICS also highlights the low level of innovation in Malaysian firms. 3 The output gap is projected to close by 2008. 4 Malaysia’s trading partners’ growth is projected to rise from 2% percent in 2003 to an average of 33/4 percent in 2004-08. The terms of trade are expected to turn slightly negative in 2004-08, reflecting mainly a projected decline in the prices of oil and other commodities (palm oil and rubber) and slowing growth in export unit value for manufacturing. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 40 - ANNEX I based economy. The current account surplus declines steadily to 4% percent of GDP by 2008. Savings remain high, albeit slightly lower than in the recent period. Private investment- to-GDP increases steadily, whereas public investment-to-GDP declines. 2. The baseline projections are underpinned by: a credible and sustained move toward fiscal consolidation starting in 2004; continued pursuit of a monetary policy stance consistent with maintaining a low inflationary environment; and a steadfast implementation of the financial sector and capital markets master plans. It also assumes further enhancements in the flexibility of labor markets5; further liberalization of the trade and investment regimes to promote competition6; and full implementation of the knowledge-based Economy Master Plan (launched in September 2002), which includes steps to develop high value-added sectors, such as information, communications, and technology, to further develop the Multimedia Supercorridor, and to raise TFP and human capital, including through a substantial increase in tertiary enrollment rates.7 5 The baseline scenario assumes that the authorities take steps to reduce skill mismatches and shortages. 6 The 2003 World Bank PICS and World Competitiveness Yearbook rank Malaysia quite high on government effectiveness, competence of government officials, and government’s ability to adapt policy to changes in the economy. Both surveys however rank Malaysia low on regulatory restrictions-competitive environment, trade and foreign exchange system, tax effectiveness-and time managers must spend with government officials. 7 Expansion of tertiary education will also help address the skills shortage. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4l- ANNEX I Malaysia: Medium-Term Projection Macroeconomic Indicators, 1997-2008 20 15 10 5 0 -5 -10 -15 -20 -2s -30 Inflation, Real GDP Growth, and Domestic Demand (Change in percent) Proiecfion -Inflation ~ -RealGDP __... Real domestic demand 1 -30 97 98 99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 Central Government Balance (In percent of GDP) m Revenue ICurrent expenditure -Development expenditure / 50 40 30 20 10 Savings and Investment (In percent of GDP) -Investment 97 98 YY 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 Consolidated Public Sector Balance (In percent of GDP) 50 40 30 20 10 Y” “” - Revenue 50 IExpenditure I Proiection 50 25 -Balance 25 40 40 20 20 30 30 15 15 10 10 20 20 5 5 10 10 0 0 0 0 -5 -5 -10 1 I 1 -10 97 98 99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 Public Sector Balance and Debt Current Account, Debt, and Reserves (In percent of GDP) (In percent of GDP) 80 ! 80 70 - p.-----.___ Prow&m - 70 60 - __.---__I* --.__ *_-- I... - 60 50 - *-_ -. - 50 40 - - - - - - Public sector dedt . - . - 40 30 - -Public sector balance - 30 20 - - 20 10 - - 10 O\‘-- 0 -10 - - -10 -20 _ -20 97 98 99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 80 , I , 80 70 60 SO 40 30 dCum”t account L External debt 20 - ----I. Reserves (m months of imports) - 20 10 - - IO .._-_- . ..-..-____________ -.---- 0 0 -10 - , -10 -20 1 I 1 -20 97 9x 99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 -10 1 1 -10 97 98 99 2000 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 70 60 50 40 30 Source: Fund staff estimates and prqections Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicANNEX I Malaysia: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 2003-08 I/ 2003 2004 Proj. 2005 2006 2007 2008 Real sector (percent change) Real GDP growth Real domestic demand CPI inflation (period average) GDP deflator 4.5 5.3 5.5 6.3 6.3 6.5 3.3 5.1 5.4 7.8 7.9 8.3 1.1 2.2 2.5 2.5 2.5 2.5 2.3 1.0 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.4 Saving and investment (percent of GDP) Gross domestic investment Private, including stocks Public Gross national saving Private Public 23.0 22.7 22.4 23.3 24.5 25.7 3.6 5.4 7.1 8.1 9.2 10.4 19.4 17.3 15.3 15.3 15.3 15.3 33.6 32.6 31.9 31.4 31.0 30.4 15.8 15.2 16.4 16.2 15.9 15.7 17.7 17.4 15.5 15.3 15.0 14.8 Fiscal sector (percent of GDP) Federal government overall balance 21 Revenue Expenditure and net lending Consolidated public sector overall balance Total public sector debt 31 -5.4 23.1 28.5 -1.7 67.0 Ofwhich: Federal government debt Monetary sector (annual percent change) M3 growth 47.7 -3.4 -1.x 0.0 0.2 0.5 23.2 22.7 22.7 22.7 22.7 26.6 24.6 22.7 22.5 22.2 0.2 0.2 1.5 1.5 1.9 62.9 58.8 53.1 47.8 42.4 48.2 47.0 43.7 40.3 36.8 Net domestic assets Net claims on private sector Balance of payments (in billions of U.S. dollars) Trade balance Services account Current account balance (In percent of GDP) Capital account balance Medium- and long-term Ofwhich : Net foreign direct investment Short-term 8.9 6.3 6.7 7.7 7.7 8.0 5.0 5.2 6.4 8.3 9.2 10.2 6.3 5.1 6.0 6.2 6.6 7.2 Errors and omissions 23.2 24.1 24.8 24.5 23.7 22.5 -9.9 -10.1 -10.3 -10.6 -10.8 -11.1 10.7 10.7 10.9 10.0 8.7 6.9 10.6 9.9 9.5 8.1 6.5 4.8 -0.4 -3.5 -4.4 -4.1 -4.4 -4.5 0.5 1.6 1.5 1.7 1.4 1.4 1.0 0.9 0.9 0.9 0.8 0.9 -0.9 -5.2 -5.9 -5.8 -5.8 -5.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Overall balance 10.3 7.2 6.5 5.9 4.3 2.4 International trade (annual percent change) Export value Import value Terms of trade 5.4 0.0 1.5 Gross official reserves (in billions of U.S. dollars) (In months of following year’s imports of GNFS) (In percent of short-term debt) 41 Total external debt (in billions of U.S. dollars) (In percent of GDP) Short-term external debt (percent of total) 4/ Debt-service ratio 44.9 5.5 301.0 50.2 49.5 29.7 7.6 7.7 8.0 8.2 8.3 8.7 9.2 10.6 11.0 11.1 -0.2 -0.3 0.0 -0.1 -0.2 52.1 58.6 64.5 68.8 71.2 5.9 6.0 6.1 5.9 5.9 304.3 306.6 327.9 306.4 311.8 53.0 55.6 58.4 61.1 63.6 49.1 48.3 47.1 45.7 44.1 32.3 34.4 33.7 36.8 35.9 (In percent of exports of goods and non-factor services) Memorandum item: 8.5 5.6 Nominal GDP (In billions of ringgit) 386 410 5.3 437 3.8 471 4.0 507 2.7 548 Sources: Data provided by the Malaysian authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections. l/ Period ending December 3 1. 2/Revised budget 2003; budget 2004 after tax measures. 3/Staff projections; excludes non-government guaranteed domestic debt of the NFPEs. The debt to GDP ratios starting in 2003 are deficit financing flows to the previous year stock of debt divided by the corresponding yearly GDP. The projections assume no off- 4/ By remaining maturity. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-43 - ANNEX II MALAYSIA: ASSESSING MALAYSIA’S DEBT SUSTAINABILITY AND RESILIENCE TO SHOCKS I. PUBLIC SECTOR DEBT SUSTAINABILITY 1. Medium-term public sector debt dynamics will be driven by the aim to balance the federal government budget by 2006. Under the baseline scenario, public sector debt is projected to decline from 69% percent of GDP in 2002 to 42% percent in 2008, while that of the federal government is projected to rise to 48% percent of GDP in 2004 before falling to 36% percent of GDP in 2008. The debt dynamics reflects rising GDP growth, continued primary surpluses at the consolidated public sector level, and a shift of the federal government primary deficit to a surplus in 2005-08. l Stress test results indicate that total public sector debt appears sustainable under all shocks considered.’ The impact of a two-year, two standard deviation shock to real GDP growth would pose the biggest risk, with public debt rising by 10% percent of GDP before declining over the medium term (Annex II Table 1). One-time shocks to the exchange rate or to other debt-creating flows would also pose a significant risk, with debt to GDP rising by about 6 percent of GDP. The impact of two-year, two- standard deviation shocks (relative to the four-year average) to the interest rate and combined one standard deviation shocks to interest rates, growth, and primary balance, would be moderate, with the debt ratio rising by 4 percent of GDP or less before declining. The alternative scenarios, including the country-specific shock which assumes a one-time, one-standard deviation shock to growth and a corresponding shock to the primary balance as revenues decline, would result in only a moderate increase in the debt ratio relative to the baseline.2 0 The above results should however be interpreted with caution. The historical trend continues to indicate that public sector debt has been growing faster than implied by the net financing requirements of the consolidated public sector, reflecting in part operations not captured by the consolidated public sector accounts, including the acquisition of assets by the NFPEs. Taking into account the public sector net asset acquisition would therefore be an important step in enhancing the analysis of fiscal ’ Due to the structural breaks introduced by the Asian crisis, using the recommended ten-year averages and associated standard deviations would bias the calibration of the shocks. Instead, the staff has calibrated them based on data for the four postcrisis years only. Despite the short length of the postcrisis period, there was enough variability of the key variables over that period to infer the possible magnitude of likely shocks. 2 The no-policy change scenario assumes that the elasticity of tax revenues remains at the historical value (0.9) over 2006-08 and that non-interest current expenditures are not reduced. The market forecast scenario uses the consensus forecast for 2004 real GDP growth and assumes a slower pace of fiscal consolidation (S&P forecast). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 44 - ANNEX II sustainability. The staff has encouraged the authorities to develop a system for compiling the public sector’s net worth. II. EXTERNAL DEBT SUSTAINABILITY 2. Under the baseline scenario, the external debt-to-GDP ratio is expected to decline to 44 percent in 2008, from 5 1% percent in 2002. Positive debt dynamics hinges on strong economic growth, continued current account surpluses, and relatively low interest rates. 0 Stress tests suggest the debt dynamics remains sustainable under all shocks considered (Annex II Table 2). External debt-to-GDP increases initially but eventually resumes a declining trend. A one-time and permanent 30 percent exchange rate depreciation has the greatest impact, resulting in an increase in the external debt- to-GDP ratio by 203/4 percent of GDP.3 A combined shock to growth, interest rates, current account, and GDP deflator and shocks to real GDP growth, GDP deflator, or current account also result in relatively high increases in external debt (by 8%-15% percent of GDP). In contrast, Malaysia’s external debt is relatively robust to an interest rate shock. III. FINANCIAL AND CORPORATE SECTOR VULNERABILITIES 3. The banking system is well capitalized and would be able to withstand significant shocks. Banking system’s aggregate capital adequacy is over 13 percent.4 0 Stress tests illustrate that credit and interest rate risks remain substantial, but the system as a whole would be able to sustain large shocks. a The aggregate capital adequacy ratio remains well above 8 percent under all credit shocks. Deepening progress in corporate restructuring will be key to further reduce the level of credit risk. Credit risk related to the household sector appears relatively limited: although banks’ exposure to households has risen recently, loans to households have been mostly for residential property and households’ NPLs have remained much lower than corporates’ NPLs.’ The authorities have nevertheless asked the staff to develop recommendations for improving surveillance of the 3 The current and trade accounts and net non-debt creating inflows are assumed to remain constant in U.S. dollar terms. 4 While the authorities did not share bank-by-bank information with the staff, they reported that even the least capitalized banking group had capital adequacy in excess of 10 percent. 5 Household sector NPLs averaged 7% percent of banking system loans to that sector at end- 2002 (compared to 16% percent for corporate loans). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 45 - ANNEX II household sector.6 As a first step, they are considering the feasibility of collecting and disseminating aggregate household sector balance sheet data. 0 Interest rate risk is the only substantial risk in the market risk category. Direct exchange rate and equity price risks are small. The indirect impact of a depreciation would likely be small due to regulations limiting foreign currency borrowing to companies with a natural hedge. l Finance companies are the most vulnerable to both credit and interest rate risks. The systemic risk is lowered, however, by the fact that all finance companies belong to larger banking groups. Banking System: Sensitivity Analysis Results (In percent of capital) Market risk (June 2003 data) Exchange rate Interest rates Equity prices Shock 11 43.7 (depreciation) +2.1 -36.6 Impact (% of capital) Commercial banks Finance companies Merchant banks Banking system Credit risk (end 2002 data) Shock 11 Impact (% of capital) Commercial banks Finance companies Merchant banks Banking system 2.0 -11.2 -0.7 0.0 -34.1 -1.5 -1.0 -21.0 -2.9 1.7 -15.9 -1.0 Asset price impact on NPLs collateral Lending rates 21 -13.0 property, equity +3.2 as above +2.6 -25.7 -21.9 -26.4 -40.5 -31.2 -20.9 -25.1 -14.3 -25.9 -28.2 -23.0 -25.4 Memorandum Items Commercial banks Finance companies Merchant banks June-2003 risk-weighted capital ratio (%) 13.3 12.3 20.3 Source: Bank Negara Malaysia, MERP, and Fund staff calculations and estimates. l/ Percentage points. The shocks were set at two standard deviations derived from the 1999-2002 period (1995-2002 for the exchange rate as the currency has been pegged to US$ since 1998). 2/ Based on the bottom-up analysis of the interest coverage ratios for listed nonfinancial companies. 6 A methodological guidance note prepared by the staff, that summarizes data needs and international best practices in household sector surveillance, was left with the authorities during the mission. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 46 - ANNEX II 4. The financial health of the corporate sector has improved after the crisis, but the improvement has been only gradual. Average debt-to-equity ratios remain above their pre-crisis level and interest coverage ratios have improved only tentatively. These developments reflect in part the growth slowdown in 2001, and a time lag before the results of corporate debt restructuring become fully reflected in the data. The corporate sector remains vulnerable to slower growth, higher interest rates, asset price deflation, and real depreciation (see accompanying Selected Issues paper). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 47 - ANNEX II Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-48 - ANNEX II Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 49 - ANNEX III MALAYSIA: STATISTICAL ISSUES The quality and availability of Malaysia’s economic statistics are generally good. Malaysia subscribes to the Special Data Dissemination Standard (SDDS). The coverage, periodicity, and timeliness of Malaysia’s economic statistics are consistent with SDDS prescription. l National accounts: As a result of the Fund’s Statistics Department’s (STA) technical assistance project, the Department of Statistics Malaysia (DOSM) has developed good quarterly national accounts statistics that meet the SDDS requirements. Currently, DOSM compiles and publishes annual and quarterly estimates of GDP by activity and by expenditure at current and constant prices, and annual estimates for gross disposable income, saving, and net lending for the economy based on the 1968 SNA. The quarterly data are released within two to three months of the reference quarter. l In addition, DOSM has developed experimental institutional sector income and outlay accounts in accordance with the 1993 SNA. The 1993 SNA institutional sector accounts project was undertaken with UNDP funding, and with technical support from UNSD. There are significant numerical differences in the estimates for key aggregates, particularly for GDP, final consumption expenditures (government, household, NPISH, and gross capital formation) common to both the 1968 SNA-based GDP compilation system and the 1993 SNA-based institutional sector accounts system. For that reason, the institutional sector accounts data have not been officially released, and the report from the project has been given a limited circulation. l International Investment Position data for 2002 were submitted to STA on December 3 1, 2003 for review and consideration for publication in the 2003 BOPSY. l Prices: The CPI and the PPI are available on a timely and comprehensive basis. As part of the PPI program, an import price index is compiled, but not an export price index. STA has encouraged DOSM to start developing an export price index and has provided some assistance in this respect. l Labor market statistics: Data on employment and unemployment are disseminated quarterly, whereas wages/earnings are disseminated monthly. l Monetary statistics: Bank Negara Malaysia reports monetary data on a timely and regular basis to STA and broadly in conformity with the Fund’s data needs. Coverage of the monetary statistics has recently been extended to Islamic banks, but there remains a need to expand the coverage of the Depository Corporations Survey to also include saving and development institutions. In addition, data on loans were revised largely due to changes in the accounting rules for commercial banks. A follow-up monetary and financial statistics mission is planned in January 2004. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 50 - ANNEX III l Balance of payments (BOP) statistics: There has been marked progress in the BOP statistics, including the publication of the quarterly BOP estimates since end 1999, and in 2001, a move to the fifth edition of the Balance of Puyments Manual. In September 2003, DOSM’s submission of 2002 balance of payments statistics to STA included greatly expanded component detail, making the data more useable for surveillance. Fiscal accounts: Progress has been made in improving the consolidation of accounts across various levels of government. An effort has been made to broaden the coverage of major nonfinancial public enterprises (NFPEs). Existing major weaknesses pertain to the quantity of data on NFPEs and accounting of quasi-fiscal and off-budget operations. As recommended by the multisector STA mission in 1997, increased efforts are necessary to obtain more detailed data on their domestic and foreign financing by type of debt instrument and debt holder. In addition, a joint effort is necessary from the Economic Planning Unit (EPU), treasury, and BNM to compile the data on quasi-fiscal and off-budget operations, improve the reliability of the data, and consolidate them into the fiscal accounts of the public sector. Malaysia has not provided data for the GFS Yearbook since 1997. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-51- ANNEX III W W u 4 ;3 0 W CJ ti 4 2 d 6 W W & 0 u 25” 4 ;3 0 W u 4 & 0 0 ti ti 4 m 8 h a 0 m k u 4 ;3 0 z z - 2 0 2 0 d 2 0 v 4 a 0 2 0 2 0 u 4 2 0 2 0 n Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 52 - ANNEX IV I. II. III. IV. V. VI. VII. MALAYSIA: FUND RELATIONS (As of November 30,2003) Membership Status: Joined March 7, 1958; Article VIII General Resources Account: SDR Million % Quota Quota 1,486.60 100.00 Fund holdings of currency 887.26 59.68 Reserve position in Fund 599.34 40.32 SDR Department: SDR Million % Allocation Net cumulative allocation 139.05 100.0 Holdings 119.95 86.27 Outstanding Purchases and Loans: None Financial Arrangements: None Projected Obligations to Fund: None Exchange Arrangement: Since September 1998, the ringgit has been pegged to the U.S. dollar at the rate of RM 3.8 per U.S. dollar. This middle rate is quoted by the central bank, with the maximum spread between the buying and selling rate fixed at 2 percent for the U.S. dollar, the euro, the pound sterling, the Japanese yen, the Hong Kong dollar, and the Singapore dollar. The spread is 3 percent for all other currencies. Malaysia has accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4. Malaysia maintains bilateral payments arrangements with 23 countries, 15 of which are inoperative. The authorities have indicated that these arrangements do not have restrictive features. Capital control measures imposed in early 1994 and in 1998 in the wake of the Asian crisis have mostly been lifted. In particular, since May 2001, nonresident portfolio investors are freely allowed to repatriate their principal sums and profits out of the country at any time. Malaysia further liberalized exchange control regulations in 2002 and early 2003. The main features of such liberalization were an easing of regulations on domestic credit facilities extended to nonresident controlled companies, raising the maximum overnight limit on foreign currency accounts for export proceeds, and allowing residents to enter into foreign exchange forward contracts to sell foreign currency receivables for ringgit for any purpose (prior to April 2003, only export proceeds and services receivables-excluding interest receivables-were allowed to be sold on a forward contract basis). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 53 - ANNEX IV The principal remaining exchange controls are as follows: Foreign borrowing is subject to quantitative limits and approval, which reportedly is granted for projects that generate or save foreign currency. Foreign liabilities of banks are subject to net open foreign exchange position limits. Domestic lending and borrowing in foreign currency is subject to limits and approval. Transfers of funds between external accounts of different account holders require approval and are prohibited for purposes other than for purchase/sale of ringgit assets. Residents are prohibited from obtaining (granting) credit facilities in ringgit from (to) nonresidents, except for: (i) intraday and overnight credit to nonresident stock- broking companies and nonresident global custodian banks to finance unforeseen or inadvertent technical and administration errors or time zone delays in relation to settlement; (ii) financing of projects in Malaysia; and (iii) purchases of immovable property and vehicles in Malaysia; all subject to limits. Investment by residents abroad beyond a certain limit is subject to approval. Lending to nonresident controlled companies is also subject to limits and approval beyond these limits. Licensed offshore banks are prohibited from trading in ringgit assets on clients’ accounts; they can trade in ringgit assets and instruments for their own accounts, provided these investments are not financed by ringgit borrowing. Forward and swap exchange contracts to buy foreign currency against the ringgit for imports cannot exceed 12 months after the intended date of import. Forward contracts to sell foreign currency for ringgit arising from export proceeds cannot exceed six months after the intended date of export. Forward and swap contracts to purchase foreign currency are allowed, provided the transaction is supported by foreign currency receivables. Foreign ownership is limited in some sectors (notably banking and insurance). All export and import settlements must be made in gold. The import and export of ringgit by travelers, both residents and nonresidents, is restricted to RM 1,000, except for selected border trading with Thailand. Licensed commercial banks can extend intraday credit of up to a maximum of RM 200 million and overnight credit of up to RM 10 million to nonresident stock- broking companies and nonresident global custodian banks to finance unforeseen or inadvertent technical and administration errors or time zone delays in relation to settlement. As of 1998, trading in Malaysian shares on Singapore’s Central Limit Order Book (CLOB) has been de facto prohibited as a result of strict enforcement of the existing law requiring Malaysian shares to be registered in the Kuala Lumpur Stock Exchange Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 54 - ANNEX IV prior to trade. The issue of the blocked CLOB securities has now been resolved, and the securities have been released.’ These controls (including the recent modifications) do not contravene Malaysia’s obligations under Article VIII. Malaysia also imposes certain restrictions on payments and transfers for current international transactions with respect to Israel, Serbia, and Montenegro. Financial institutions have been instructed to freeze the accounts of the Taliban and of individuals and economic entities associated with terrorism. These measures were taken in accordance with two relevant UN Security Council resolutions and the IMF Executive Board decision No. 144-(52/51). VIII. Article IV Consultation: Malaysia is on the standard 12-month consultation cycle. Discussions for the 2002 Article IV consultation took place during June 17-28, 2002. The staff report (SM/02/300) was discussed by the Executive Board on October 16, 2002. IX. Technical Assistance: MFD: A mission visited Kuala Lumpur in February 2000 to conduct a workshop in bank supervision, focusing on the issues of consolidated supervision, risk-based supervision, and accounting requirements. STA: A mission visited Kuala Lumpur in August 2003 to facilitate the submission of Malaysia’s IIP data to STA for publication. MFD: A mission visited Kuala Lumpur in October 2003 to discuss Islamic banking issues. MFD: A mission will visit Kuala Lumpur in December 2003 to conduct a workshop on AML/CFT for supervisors. X. Resident Representative/Advisor: None ’ The total release under Scheme A was completed as of July 21, 2001. As of September 2003, most of the CLOB securities (99% percent) has been released. The remaining securities (‘/2 percent) will be dealt with in accordance with the law and procedures stipulated by MCD, after expiry of the CDP’s Authorized Nominee status on October 1, 2003. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 55 - ANNEX V MALAYSIA:RELATIONSWITHTHEWORLDBANKGROUP' (As of November 30,2003) The World Bank’s Board of Directors discussed a Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) paper on March 30, 1999. The CAS proposed a program of lending and nonlending services designed to mitigate the social consequences of the regional economic crisis and support medium-term social development, and to restore short-term growth and medium-term competitiveness. In conjunction with the CAS, the World Bank’s Board approved the following projects: (i) Social Sector Support Project ($60 million); (ii) Education Sector Support Project ($244 million); and (iii) Year 2000 Technical Assistance Project ($100 million). In May 2000, the World Bank completed a Public Expenditure Review (PER) which was reviewed by the government and distributed under gray cover. The PER: (i) assessed the government’s performance in allocating and using public funds during the crisis; (ii) addressed selective fiscal challenges in the social sectors and infrastructure facing Malaysia over the medium term; and (iii) assessed public expenditure management. A social and structural review update was reviewed by the government and released in January 2001 under gray cover. In October 2002, at the request of the government of Malaysia, the World Bank launched a Productivity and Investment Climate Survey (PICS). The survey was completed at end-April 2003 and covered 902 plants and 8,590 workers in manufacturing and 250 plants and 2,232 workers in business support services. In June 2003, a World Bank team conducted the technical diagnosis of the firm-level investment climate data jointly with the counterparts, responding to the government’s request to build microeconometric and analytic capacity locally. Medium-term constraints to growth and firm competitiveness were identified. Subsequently, a report on “Firm Competitiveness, Investment Climate and Growth” was completed in September 2003 and the green cover draft will be discussed with the government in January 2004. The report’s main finding is that while Malaysia’s investment climate compares very favorably with other Southeast Asian countries, medium-term growth is likely to be tempered by: (a) high cost of regulation; (b) skills shortage and mismatch; and (c) weak technological capabilities. The government has initiated reforms in these areas, but more needs to be done. The government of Malaysia has requested a Country Economic Memorandum (CEM) on “Services as a Source of Growth” as part of phase two of the analytical and advisory activities of the World Bank. The CEM will build on findings of a wide-ranging survey of around 1,000 establishments in the services sector to be completed in 2004. In addition, the World Bank is providing technical assistance in measuring the contribution of the services sector to GDP, and in the audit of skills and technology institutes. Also, the government has requested FIAS assistance in designing and conducting a “Prospective Investors Survey.” IBRD (In millions of U.S. dollars) Total loans approved 4,150 Cancellations 867 Disbursed 3,234 Undisbursed 49 Total commitments in FY 2001 0 Total commitments in FY 2002 0 Total commitments in FY 2003 0 Recent mission reports: “Social and Structural Review Update,” January 200 1. “Firm Competitiveness, Investment Climate and Growth,” October 2003. ’ Based on information provided by the World Bank staff. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 56 - ANNEX VI EXTERNAL RELATIONS Public Information Notice DEPARTMENT Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 04/-- FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE International Monetary Fund 700 lgth Street, NW Washington, D. C. 20431 USA IMF Concludes 2003 Article IV Consultation with Malaysia On February 9, 2004, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded the Article IV consultation with Malaysia.’ Background Following a slow-down in early 2003, economic activity is recovering strongly. In the first half of 2003, real GDP growth slowed to 4% percent (year-on-year), and unemployment edged up to 4 percent, reflecting the adverse impact of the global slowdown, the Iraq war, and the SARS outbreak, on private domestic demand. Private consumption and investment growth decelerated visibly; and the service sector weakened. Most macro-economic indicators turned favorable starting in the third quarter of 2003. Real GDP accelerated to around 5 percent (year- on-year), reflecting a strengthening domestic demand. Growth in services rebounded, while that of agriculture and industry remained strong. Monthly CPI inflation, which averaged about 1 percent in 2003, has remained subdued. More recently, industrial production growth has accelerated further (11% percent, year-on-year, in November). The trade and current accounts strengthened in the first half of 2003. Export growth remained robust at 7 percent (year-on-year) despite the global slow down, while imports declined moderately by about 1% percent (year-on-year). Tourism receipts fell sharply, mainly due to SARS. The capital account also weakened, recording a deficit of about $2% billion ’ Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial information, and discusses with officials the country’s economic developments and policies. On return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the country’s authorities. This PIN summarizes the views of the Executive Board as expressed during the February 9, 2004 Executive Board discussion based on the staff report. Washington, D.C. 20431 l Telephone 202-623-7100 l Fax 202-623-6772 l www.imf.org Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 57 - ANNEX VI compared with a surplus of around $2X billion in the second half of 2002 Increased public debt repayments and lower net foreign direct investment flows have more than offset reduced portfolio and other short-term outflows. Gross international reserves rose by about $2X billion to $37 billion. The trade and current account balances continued to strengthen in the third quarter of 2003. Imports further declined by about 5% percent (year-on-year), while export growth slowed to about 1% percent (year-on-year), and service receipts rose in line with the rebound in tourism receipts. The capital account also strengthened, reflecting higher foreign direct investment (FDI) and portfolio flows, offsetting continued public debt repayments. Both exports and imports rebounded strongly in November (7% percent and 6 percent, year-on-year, respectively). External debt declined (to 50% percent of GDP in the third quarter of 2003), and the debt- service ratio remained low (at only about 6 percent of exports of goods and nonfactor services). Gross international reserves reached $44.9 billion at end-2003, equivalent to 5% months of prospective imports of goods and nonfactor services. Market sentiment has improved markedly. Equity prices have risen since May 2003, reaching a three-year high in November. Sovereign spreads have narrowed to less than 100 basis points in early December, and Standard & Poor has maintained Malaysia’s sovereign ratings at A- since its early October 2003 upgrade. An expansionary fiscal policy has continued to support economic activity. The federal government deficit for 2003 is expected to have reached 5% percent of GDP, almost unchanged from the two preceding years, following the adoption in May 2003 of an economic stimulus package (ESP). The consolidated public sector deficit is projected to double to 1% percent of GDP in 2003, providing a positive fiscal impulse to the economy. The ESP also included off- budget lend?ng programs equivalent to 1 YZ percent of GDP on an annualized basis (60 percent of which channeled through development financial institutions (DFls). The gross debt of the federal government and the nonfinancial public sector (projected to reach 48 and 67 percent of GDP in 2003, respectively) is high but manageable. Federal government debt carries a low debt service (11% percent of fiscal revenue in 2002). Debt of the nonfinancial public enterprises (NFPEs) is owed mostly by the three largest NFPEs (Petronas, Tenaga, and Malaysia Telecom), whose capacity to repay is sound. Contingent liabilities at 6% percent of GDP in 2002 are mostly related to bank restructuring. The 2004 budget signals a return to a path of fiscal consolidation in line with the expected recovery. The federal government deficit is targeted to decline to 3% percent of GDP in 2004, with the consolidated public sector balance envisaged to shift to a small surplus (% percent of GDP). The 2004 budget also provides for off-budget lending programs amounting to ‘/2 percent of GDP, down by one-third from 2003. About half of the lending programs are to be channeled through DFls. The improvement in both the federal government and the consolidated public sector balances in 2004 is projected to result from reductions in development expenditures, while current expenditures in relation to GDP continue to rise moderately. The budget contains several tax changes and incentives, but their net fiscal effect is basically neutral and the federal government revenue is expected to remain broadly unchanged as a share in GDP. The government has also announced a plan for the deficit to decline to 1% percent of GDP in 2005, before reaching balance in 2006. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 58 - ANNEX VI The projected economic recovery and strict implementation of fiscal plans for 2003 and 2004 should help substantially reduce the burden of public sector debt. More specifically, based on the targeted turnaround in the consolidated public sector deficit to a surplus in 2004 and the projected acceleration in GDP growth, public sector debt is expected to decline to about 63 percent of GDP in 2004 and to lower levels over the medium term. However, the historical trend continues to indicate that public sector debt has been growing at a faster pace than implied by the net financing requirements of the consolidated public sector reflecting-in part- operations not captured by the consolidated accounts, including the acquisition of public assets and the assumption of debts by the federal government. Monetary management has been prudent, and consistent with maintaining the fixed exchange rate regime while providing adequate liquidity. BNM reduced its intervention rate by % percentage point to 4% percent in May 2003 as part of the ESP, leading to a l/4 percentag p e oint decline in lending rates. The spread between KLIBOR and LIBOR has remained at about 2 percentage points since September 2001. Together with improved economic fundamentals, this has helped reduce capital outflows and contributed to the rise in international reserves since mid-2001. Despite continued BNM intervention to sterilize the impact of rising foreign reserves, the growth in base money has risen since end-2002. Broad money growth has also accelerated, reflecting rising private sector credit. The ringgit exchange rate does not appear to be substantially misaligned. Despite a sizable depreciation in the last year and a half, the ringgit REER remains close to its long-term trend, and supported by relatively strong fundamentals. In addition to a large current account surplus, a comfortable level of reserves, and low inflation, Malaysia has a relatively sound financial system, manageable external debt, and is gradually diversifying its economy. Malaysian export market shares in Europe, Japan, and the U.S. have been broadly stable, while rising in the rest of Asia. Significant progress has been made in reforming the financial and corporate sectors, developing capital markets, and enhancing the business climate. Bank soundness has continued to improve, and implementation of the Financial Sector Master Plan is proceeding. Net nonperforming loans (NPLs) (based on a three-month classification) have declined steadily to about 9 percent of total loans at end-November 2003 (from 10% percent at end-2002). The aggregate risk-weighted capital adequacy ratio, at 13 percent is robust. In 2002, a legislative framework for the regulation and supervision of DFls was introduced. All corporate debt cases registered for the voluntary out-of-court restructuring process (about RM 53 billion or 18% percent of 1998 GDP) have been resolved and most of the agreed debt workouts have been implemented. The overall financial health of the corporate sector shows some improvements, but the full benefits of restructuring have not yet fully materialized. It is encouraging, however, that loans restructured by Danaharta (the asset management company) have so far performed satisfactorily, with only 4 percent falling more than 60 days overdue. Important advances were also made in enhancing corporate governance and implementing the Capital Markets Master Plan, particularly on improving infrastructure and enhancing the regulatory and legal framework. Steps have also been taken to liberalize foreign equity participation and foreign exchange regulations. The labor market remains highly flexible overall. However, skills mismatches-evidenced in part by the recent rise in unemployment of university graduates-and shortages pose concerns. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 59 - ANNEX VI Executive Board Assessment Public information Notices (PINS) are issued, (i) at the request of a member country, following the conclusion of the Article IV consultation for countries seeking to make known the views of the IMF to the public. This action is intended to strengthen IMF surveillance over the economic policies of member countries by increasing the transparency of the IMF’s assessment of these policies; and (ii) following policy discussions in the Executive Board at the decision of the Board. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 60 - ANNEX VI Malaysia: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 1999-2004 l/ 1999 2000 2001 Prel. Proj. Proj. 2002 2003 2004 Real sector (percent change) Real GDP growth Real domestic demand CPI inflation (period average) Saving and investment (percent of GDP) Gross domestic investment Gross national saving Fiscal sector (percent of GDP) Federal government overall balance 2/ Revenue Expenditure and net lending Consolidated public sector overall balance Total public sector debt 31 Monetary sector (annual percent change) M3 growth Net domestic assets Net claims on private sector Three-month interbank rate (period average, in percent) 4/ Balance of payments (in billions of U.S. dollars) Trade balance Exports, f.o.b. Imports, f.o.b. 6.1 8.6 0.3 4.1 4.5 5.3 2.3 16.3 0.0 7.0 3.3 5.1 2.7 1.5 1.4 1.8 1.1 2.2 22.4 27.2 24.0 24.5 23.0 22.7 38.3 36.6 32.2 32.0 33.6 32.6 -3.2 -5.8 -5.5 -5.6 -5.4 -3.4 19.5 18.1 23.8 23.2 23.1 23.2 22.7 23.8 29.3 28.8 28.5 26.6 2.3 0.7 -0.3 -0.9 -1.7 0.2 63.1 60.1 69.2 69.6 67.0 62.9 7.1 6.3 1.7 5.6 8.9 -0.3 7.9 0.7 5.7 5.0 -0.3 7.1 3.6 5.5 6.3 4.1 3.2 3.3 3.2 3.1 Services account Current account balance (In percent of GDP) Capital account balance Medium- and long-term Of which: Net foreign direct investment Short-term Errors and omissions Overall balance 22.6 20.8 18.4 18.1 23.2 24.1 84.1 98.4 88.0 93.4 98.4 105.9 61.5 77.6 69.6 75.2 75.2 81.8 -8.3 -10.4 -8.9 -8.2 -9.9 -10.1 12.6 8.5 7.3 7.2 10.7 10.7 15.9 9.4 8.3 7.6 10.6 9.9 -6.6 -6.1 -3.9 -3.1 -0.4 -3.5 3.3 2.9 2.5 1.8 0.5 1.6 2.5 1.8 0.3 1.3 1.0 0.9 -9.9 -9.0 -6.4 -4.9 -0.9 -5.2 -1.3 -3.2 -2.4 -0.3 0.0 0.0 4.7 -0.8 1.0 3.7 10.3 7.2 International trade (annual percent change) Export value Import value Gross official reserves (in billions of U.S. dollars) (In months of following year’s imports of GNFS) (In percent of short-term debt) 5/ Total external debt (in billions of U.S. dollars) (In percent of GDP) Short-term external debt (percent of total) 5/ Debt-service ratio (in percent of exports of GNFS) Memorandum item: 17.2 17.0 -10.6 6.1 5.4 7.6 13.5 26.3 -10.3 8.1 0.0 8.7 30.9 29.9 30.8 34.6 44.9 52.1 3.9 4.2 4.0 4.5 5.5 5.9 298.4 311.9 276.2 221.6 301 .o 304.3 42.7 42.4 45.7 48.8 50.2 53.0 53.9 47.0 52.0 51.4 49.5 49.1 24.2 22.6 24.4 32.0 29.7 32.3 6.5 5.6 6.7 6.3 8.5 5.6 Nominal GDP (in billions of ringgit) 301 343 334 Sources: Data provided by the Malaysian authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections. l/ Period ending December 31. 6.3 5.2 5.1 361 386 410 2/ Revised budget 2003; budget 2004 after tax measures. 3/Staff projections; excludes financial public enterprises and nongovernment-guaranteed domestic debt of the NFPEs. The debt- to-GDP ratios starting in 2003 are calculated by adding the yearly deficit financing flows to the previous year stock of debt divided by the corresponding yearly GDP. The projections assume no off-budget operations. 4/ For 2003, as of end-December. 5/ By remaining maturity. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public