DOCUMENT OF INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND NOT FOR PUBLIC USE OFF-SITE ROOM IS1 l-400 0450 FOR AGENDA SM/O1/58 CONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION February 20,200l To: Members of the Executive Board From: The Secretary Subject: Antigua and Barbuda--Staff Report for the 2000 Article IV Consultation Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staff report for the 2000 Article IV consultation with Antigua and Barbuda, which is tentatively scheduled for discussion on Wednesday, March 7,200l. At the time of circulation of this paper to the Board, the Secretary’s Department has not received a communication from the authorities of Antigua and Barbuda indicating whether or not they consent to the Fund’s publication of this paper; such communication may be received after the authorities have had an opportunity to read the paper. Questions may be referred to Mr. Pellechio (ext. 38687) and Mr. 0. Williams (ext. 38632). Unless the Documents Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the WTO Secretariat on Wednesday, February 28,200l; and to the Caribbean Development Bank and the European Commission, following its consideration by the Executive Board. Att: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public. CONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION . INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA Staff Report for the 2000 Article IV Consultation Prepared by the StaffRepresentatives for the 2000 Consultation with Antigua and Barbuda Approved by Claudio M. Loser and Liam P. Ebrill February 15,200l Contents Page Executive Summary.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . 3 I. Introduction.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ., . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . 4 II. Recent Economic Developments. _ . . . .,,...........................,..................,........................... . 4 III. Policy Discussions ......................................................................................................... 9 A. Fiscal Policy ....................................................................................................... 10 B. Public Sector Reform ......................................................................................... 12 C. External Policies ................................................................................................. 13 IV. Medium-Term Outlook .......... ...................................................................................... 15 V. StafT Appraisal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17 Tables 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. Selected Economic and Financial Indicators. ................................................................ 20 Real Sector Indicators .................................................................................................. 21 Central Government Operations ................................................................................... 22 Public Sector Operations .............................................................................................. 23 Monetary Survey ......................................................................................................... 24 Balance of Payments. ................................................................................................... 25 Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt.. ............................................................ 26 Indicators of External Vulnerability.. ............................................................................ 27 Medium-Term Outlook-Baseline Scenario . . . . ... .......................................................... 28 Medium-Term Outlook-Adjustment Scenario ............................................................ 29 Social and Demographic Indicators.. ............................................................................ 30 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2- Box 1. Offshore Financial Sector.. . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8 Figures 1. 2. 3. 4. Real Sector Indicators .................................................................................................. 3 1 Selected Tourism Indicators ......................................................................................... 32 Fiscal Indicators.. ......................................................................................................... 33 Exchange Rate Developments.. .................................................................................... 34 Appendices I. Fund Relations ............................................................................................................. 3 5 II. Statistical Issues ........................................................................................................... 36 III. Public Information Notice (PIN) .................................................................................. 39 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3- Executive Summary 0 Real GDP grew by an estimated 3% percent in 2000, down from 5% percent in 1999, owing to weak performance in the tourism sector. Inflation declined, with near price stability estimated for 2000. The external value of the Eastern Caribbean dollar, as measured for Antigua and Barbuda, appreciated in real effective terms by 8 percent during the first eleven months of 2000, reflecting mostly the appreciation of the U.S. dollar, a Central government finances continued to weaken, with the overall deficit reaching an estimated 12 percent in 2000, owing to increased public employment and higher capital spending. The deficit was financed by transfers from the rest of the public sector and accumulation of arrears in social security contributions. These developments prompted the implementation of revenue measures in the latter part of 2000 equivalent to about 2 percent of GDP in 2001. However, additional measures, amounting to 3 percent of GDP, are needed to support the medium-term growth target of 5 percent a year. a The external current account deficit improved by an estimated 2% percentage points of GDP to 13 percent in 2000, reflecting a decline in imports of automobiles following the surge in 1999 related to the special exemption from import duties granted in the first half of that year. Bank asset quality deteriorated in 1999, with the share of assets classified as unsatisfactory increasing from 8% to 10 percent, but improved in 2000. a Following the issuances in 1999 of unfavorable financial advisories by the United Kingdom and the United States, laws and regulations governing the offshore financial sector were revised with a view to meeting international standards. Nevertheless, in May 2000 the Financial Stability Forum listed Antigua and Barbuda among the 25 offshore financial centers whose quality of supervision and cooperation was generally perceived to be low (Group III). In June the OECD listed the country as one of 35 tax havens, but the Financial Action Task Force on money laundering did not list it as a noncooperating jurisdiction. The United Kingdom issued a modified advisory in late 2000 recognizing the strengthening of offshore financial regulation and supervision, particularly with regard to antimoney laundering systems. Involving the Eastern Caribbean Central Bank in the supervision of the offshore financial sector would benefit not only Antigua and Barbuda, but also the other OECS countries. 0 The further restructuring of official bilateral external debts in the last two years and of a large commercial debt in 2000 reduced external arrears to an estimated 16% percent of GDP at the end of 2000 from 84% percent at the end of 1996. Import monopolies were removed for sugar and rice, although not for vegetable and petroleum products. The final phase of CAFUCOM’s Coommon External Tariff should be implemented as soon as possible. Delay will bring into question Antigua and Barbuda’s commitment to regional trade liberalization and thwart efforts to diversify the economy based on comparative advantage. 0 Achievement of the authorities’ fiscal and growth objectives will require a sustained commitment to more efficient government, privatization of public enterprises in activities outside the core areas of government, a fresh look at linkages between the tourism sector and domestic economic activities, and adherence to policies for promoting a diversified competitive open economy. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4- I. INTRODUCTION 1. The 2000 Article IV consultation discussions with Antigua and Barbuda were conducted in St. Johns during November 620,200o. The representatives of Antigua and Barbuda included the Prime Minister, the Minister of Finance, the Financial Secretary of the Ministry of Finance, senior government officials, and representatives of labor and business.’ 2. In concluding the 1999 Article IV consultation on November 10, 1999, Executive Directors noted the authorities’ success in restructuring bilateral external debts but expressed concern that underlying fiscal imbalances had not been corrected. In this regard, they urged the authorities to strengthen the tax system, including by eliminating discretionary tax exemptions. They highlighted the need to improve budgetary procedures and expenditure control, and address the issue of large public sector employment. Directors stressed the importance of an adequate framework for regulation and supervision of the offshore financial sector. Relations with the Fund are summarized in Appendix I. 3. Antigua and Barbuda is one of eight eastern Caribbean islands with a common central bank, the Eastern Caribbean Central Bank (ECCB), and a common currency, the Eastern Caribbean (EC) dollar, which has been pegged to the U.S. dollar since 1976.2 It is a small country with a population of 72,000 and a tourism-based economy. Data reporting by the government of Antigua and Barbuda is not fully adequate for assessing the macroeconomic situation, including the magnitude of domestic and external debt, and the fiscal and external positions. The government is taking steps to improve the timeliness and consistency of its data reporting (Appendix II). II. RECENTECONOMICDEVELOPMENTS 4. Real GDP grew by 5% percent in 1999 with strong performance in the construction and financial sectors, and growth in government services (Tables 1 and 2). Construction activity was focused on private and public projects to repair damage from Hurricane Georges in 1998 and two hurricanes in 1999, which curtailed tourism. Real GDP growth slowed to an estimated 3% percent in 2000, owing to continued weakness in the tourism sector. ’ The mission team comprised Messrs. Pellechio (Head-WHD), Brunner (INS), Pearson, Shah, Williams, and Go (Assistant) (all WHD). The team was assisted by Ms. Williams of the Eastern Caribbean Central Bank and Mr. Murphy of the Caribbean Development Bank (CDB). Mr. van Beek (WHD), Mr. Bemes, Executive Director for Antigua and Barbuda, and his advisor, Mr. Nelmes, participated in the final meetings. ’ Antigua and Barbuda has accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2,3, and 4, and maintains an exchange system free of restrictions on payments and transfers for current international transactions. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-5- While cruise-ship arrivals were up, the number of stayover arrivals declined and average daily expenditure was down because of hotel discounts to bring back tourists. Government services continued to grow, reflecting expansion in government employment. 5. Inflation in the ECCB member countries tends to be in line with that in the United States and other major countries, reflecting the openness of the economy and the monetary discipline associated with the regional currency union. Measured by the 12-month change in the CPI, inflation in Antigua and Barbuda fell from 43/4 percent at end-1998 to 1 percent at end- 1999, and further to % percent through September 2000, reflecting both low inflation in partner countries and appreciation of the U.S. dollar. Controlled petroleum prices for consumers were not changed, despite the rise in international oil prices, which led to a reduction in fuel tax collections. The real effective exchange value of the EC dollar as measured for Antigua and Barbuda appreciated by 4% percent during 1999 and a further 8 percent during the first eleven months of 2000, reflecting mostly the appreciation of the U.S. dollar. 6. The low inflation environment helped moderate wage demands, with recent negotiated wage increases averaging about four percent, compared with 6 percent two years ago. The incidence of strikes has been sharply reduced, reflecting the increased involvement of the Ministry of Labor in the resolution of labor disputes. Government employment has remained high, while private sector employment appears to have declined.3 7. The central government’s overall deficit rose to 9% percent of GDP in 1999 from 5 percent of GDP in 1998, owing to a decline in revenues caused mainly by exemption of import duties on automobiles, and increases in current spending, including interest payments, and capital expenditures (Table 3). The central government’s finances deteriorated further in 2000, with its current account deficit increasing by an estimated 2 percentage points of GDP to 7% percent, and the overall deficit by 2% percentage points to 12 percent of GDP. Revenue growth was held back by delayed implementation of revenue measures proposed in the 2000 budget, while expenditures were boosted by increased public employment and higher capital spending, which necessitated supplementary allocations equivalent to 3 percent of GDP. 8. The government relied increasingly on domestic commercial bank financing that required deposit of certain government revenue collections in commercial bank accounts that are debited for debt service. Revenue earmarking for debt service and also for transfers to some statutory bodies accounted for almost half of current revenue, while wage payments 3 The Employers’ Federation reports employment of 3,800 persons in about 120 establish- ments, excluding the construction sector, much below the 5,000 persons in the mid-l 990s. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-6- amounted to more than 60 percent. The deficit was financed in part by transfers from the rest of the public sector and the accumulation of arrears in government contributions to the social security scheme. 9. Notwithstanding the deterioration in the central government’s finances, the fiscal performance of the consolidated public sector strengthened (Table 4). Its overall deficit increased by less than the central government’s in 1999, as a result of the reduction in interest obligations from debt restructuring. Reflecting efforts to raise operating balances of public enterprises: the consolidated current account improved by almost 1 percentage point of GDP in 2000 and the overall deficit declined slightly to 7% percent of GDP. 10. Broad money grew by 10% percent during 1999, considerably faster than nominal GDP but not as fast as domestic credit (Table 5). To meet credit demands, banks have relied increasingly on borrowing from ECCB area banks and their head offices. Broad money growth is estimated to have slowed to 4% percent in 2000. Credit to the private sector, mostly for retail trade, grew by an estimated 10% percent, up from 8% percent during 1999. The growth of credit to the public sector slowed substantially, to an estimated 4% percent, as banks curtailed credit to the government in light of its very weak fiscal position. 11. While banks built up their liquid assets abroad, their net foreign liability position continued to grow, as domestic demand for credit outpaced domestic supply of deposits.’ Asset quality deteriorated in 1999, with 10 percent of assets classified as unsatisfactory at year-end, compared with 8% percent at end-1998. Asset quality improved in 2000 on balance, as most government loans being serviced with earmarked revenue have become current, although property foreclosures and automobile repossessions in the private sector have risen sharply. 12. The external current account deficit declined in 1999 to 15 ‘/z percent of GDP, from 16% percent of GDP in 1998 (Table 6), reflecting large insurance payments for hurricane damage. Merchandise imports jumped with a surge in purchases of automobiles, owing to the special exemption from import duties in the first half of 1999. The net inflow of external capital fell in 1999 as private inflows decreased by more than the increase in net official borrowings, and the overall deficit increased to 2% percent of GDP from % percent of GDP in 1998. The deficit was financed by an accumulation of arrears that also permitted a further increase in the imputed reserves at the ECCB. 4 These efforts included increases in tariffs and rents charged by statutory bodies, improvement in procedures for billing and collection, and reduction in employment at the Antigua Public Utilities Authority. 5 The net foreign position of the banks reflects short-term deposits abroad and short-term borrowing from foreign banks, to a large extent from head offices. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-7- 13. The external current account deficit is estimated to have decreased further to 13 percent of GDP in 2000, reflecting a decline in imports of automobiles following the surge in 1999. Tourist receipts were nearly unchanged. The net inflow of capital increased in 2000 by 1% percent of GDP, reflecting borrowing for the construction of a major hospital and refurbishing of the airport and roads. The overall deficit, financed through an accumulation of arrears and a fall in imputed reserves, is estimated to have increased to the equivalent of 3 percent of GDP. 14. Following the large reschedulings in 1997 and 1998, the restructuring of official bilateral external debts with France in 1999 and the United Kingdom in 2000, and of a large commercial debt in 2000, further reduced Antigua and Barbuda’s external arrears to an estimated 16% percent of GDP by end-2000 (Table 7), down from 84% percent in 1996. All the 1999-2000 reschedulings resulted in lower interest rates; the U.K. rescheduling also included a write-off of interest arrears. 15. In the area of external policies, import monopolies were removed for sugar and rice, although not for vegetable and petroleum products. Notwithstanding these monopolies and a license requirement for certain goods, the trade regime allows free importation of goods subject to tariff rates ranging from 0 to 35 percent and averaging 10 percents6 A customs service tax of 5 percent is charged on all dutiable imports. Goods from OECS member countries are duty free, as are imports of capital goods and raw materials for construction. Antigua and Barbuda does not have any controls on capital transactions, but has a foreign exchange tax of one percent on purchases of foreign currency, whose elimination is proposed by the ECCB in its fiscal reform program for member countries. 16. Following amendments made in 1999 to the laws and regulations governing the offshore financial sector in Antigua and Barbuda (Box l), the United Kingdom and the United States issued unfavorable financial advisories to their banks.’ In response, further amendments and revisions were made with a view to meeting international standards. Nevertheless, in May 2000 the Financial Stability Forum (FSF) listed Antigua and Barbuda 6 Tariff rates are multiples of 5 percent, with two higher rates of 45 percent rate for some alcoholic beverages and 70 percent for firearms. The Fund’s index of aggregate trade restrictiveness for Antigua and Barbuda is 5 on a scale up to 10, the rating for greatest restrictiveness. ’ See SIW99/25 1, Appendix III. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicBox 1. Offshore Financial Sector The International Business Company (IBC) Act of 1982 marked the beginning of offshore financial operations. Responsibility for regulation and supervision was assigned to the financial secretary in the ministry of finance. However, regulation and enforcement were regarded as ineffective, largely the result of insufficient resources. More effective regulation began in 1997 when a separate !,BC department was established with a full-time director. In 1998 regulatory and enforcement functions were separated with the establishment of the International Financial Sector Authority-later renamed the International Financial Sector Regulatory Authority (IFS&I jand the Office of National Drug and Money Laundering Control Policy (ONDMLCP), with the former responsible for regulation and the latter for enforcement. A memorandum of understanding between the two agencies was signed that outlined their respective responsibilities and the conditions for joint efforts. In addition to regulating the offshore sector, the IFSRA registers new offshore corporations and issues licenses to offshore banks, insurance companies. and trust companies. The Free Trade and Processing Zone (FTPZ) is responsible for issuing licenses to gaming and intemet gambling companies. Amendments to the Money Laundering Prevention Act (MLPA) and the IBC Act made in 1998 were perceived by the United States as weakening the legal, regulatory, and supervisory framework for the offshore sector. In April 1999 the United States and the United Kingdom issued unfavorable financial advisories for conducting business in Antigua and Barbuda. Since mid-l 999, Antiguan authorities have worked with U.S. and U.K. authorities in making adjustments to both acts in an effort to have a legal and regulatory framework that meets international standards. Provisions of the MLPA and the IBC Act now stipulate: (i) owners of licensed institutions must be known, and bearer shares are not allowed; (ii) licensed institutions must submit audited annual financial statements; (iii) mandatory annual examination of licensed institutions by the regulatory authority; (iv) OFCs cannot accept cash deposits; (v) licensed institutions must appoint an internal compliance officer, who is required to report any suspicious activity; (vi) suspicious activity found during a routine examination by the regulatory authority must be reported to the enforcement authority; (vii) institutions must follow “know your customer” procedures; and (viii) internal transaction records on all customer accounts must be kept for 5 years by the licensed institution, even after the account has been closed and in the event that the institution discontinues business. The IFSRA has issued a moratorium on new entities in Antigua while it makes a thorough examination of the industry. The number of offshore banks has dropped from 57 in 1997 to 25 in 2000 (see following tabulation). Some banks are still under intensive investigation, and the number of banks may drop to 18 in 200 1. Currently, there are 8,000 to 9,000 IBCs, six bust companies, and no active insurance companies. The FTZP is also attempting to attract other offshore activities, with feasibility studies having been done for various industries (pharmaceutical, information technology, footwear). The next phase of development for the FTPZ includes an office complex to house the gaming industry and other offshore industries, and an information 1 technology center to provide services (intemet connectivity, data warehousing, etc.) to firms operating in the FTPZ. i The offshore sector appears to have relatively little direct impact on onshore economic activity. Direct employment in the offshore industry is estimated by Antiguan authorities to be about 2,500, mostly attributable to gaming companies. Only one onshore bank appears to have significant exposure to offshore activities-its crossholdings amount to about 10 percent of its portfoli+while other banks have only limited OFC deposits for paying salaries, utilities, and other business expenses, Efforts to further strengthen the regulatory and enforcement framework continue. The IFS&I is in the process of recruiting new staff. ONDMLCP is constructmg a new facility that will house its staff and customs enforcement staff Antiguan authorities recognize that new legislation is needed to allow for new products, such as mutual funds and limited life companies. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-9- Antigua and Barbuda: Indicators of Offshore Sector Activity 1997 1998 Number of institutions International business companies Offshore banks Insurance companies Internet gaming companies OtherS 10,900 11,000 57 52 7 7 . . . . . . 52 51 Government revenue from OFCs In millions of Eastern Caribbean dollars As a percentage of current revenue As a percentage of nontax revenue 6.7 5.2 2.0 1.5 14.4 10.5 Foreign exchange earnings In millions of Eastern Caribbean dollars As a percentage of exports of good and services 15.6 23.4 1.3 2.1 Sources: International Financial Sector Regulatory Authority; and Eastern Caribbean Central Bank. among the 25 offshore financial centers whose quality of supervision and cooperation was generally perceived to be low (Group III). In June the OECD listed the country as one of 35 tax havens, but the Financial Action Task Force on money laundering did not list it as a noncooperating jurisdiction. Delegations from the United States and the United Kingdom visited Antigua in October 2000 to examine the legal and regulatory systems for the offshore financial sector. In November the United Kingdom issued a modified advisory that recognized the efforts made by the government to strengthen the system of supervision and control, particularly with regard to enhancing antimoney laundering controls.* III. POLICY DISCUSSIONS 17. The consultation discussions focused on the need to strengthen public finances. The authorities referred to the 2000 budget presentation to parliament, which had stressed the need for higher domestic savings in light of the diminishing flow of external assistance and the importance of reducing the fiscal deficit by strengthening broad-based taxes and controlling expenditures. They regretted that implementation of the revenue measures proposed in the budget had been delayed by public resistance to tax increases, especially * The modified advisory instructed U.K. banks that it was not necessary to issue a suspicious transaction report for transactions involving Antigua. Further, financial institutions were not asked to avoid business with Antiguan citizens. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-IO- among the business community. This outcome had contributed to a further widening of the budget deficit in 2000, but it had strengthened their determination to implement measures by the end of 2000 that would provide the foundation for better fiscal performance in 2001 and over the medium term. A. Fiscal Policy Fiscal adjustment 18. The staff welcomed the revenue measures implemented in late 2000: a revision of the property tax, which is expected to yield the equivalent of 1 percent of GDP in 2001; reinstatement of the gasoline tax of EC$0.30 per gallon; application of a surcharge of EC$0.3 per kilowatt hour to the electricity tariff, with a further increase of ECJ0.03 in 2001 if petroleum prices increase further; consolidation of the three taxes applied to hotels into a single simplified tax that would increase the hotel tax yield by 50 percent, equivalent to l/2 percent of GDP in 2001; application of a 2 percent tax on turnover of unincorporated businesses which is projected to yield ‘/z percent of GDP in 2001; and improvement in the administration of travel, embarkation, and restaurant taxes. 19. The combined yield for the central government budget of these measures is estimated at 2 percentage points of GDP in 200 1. However, according to the staffs projections, without additional measures the central government’s current account deficit would remain in the range of 7% to 8 percent of GDP throughout the medium termg. The overall deficit would still be at 9 percent of GDP in 2005 notwithstanding a decline in capital expenditures to 2 percent of GDP from 5 percent of GDP in 2000. The staff stressed that these continued large deficits would create pressure for further accumulation of domestic and external arrears over the medium term. 20. In order to generate the public savings needed to eliminate arrears and support the investment required for higher growth, the staff strongly recommended additional fiscal adjustment equivalent to about 3 percent of GDP in 2001. This adjustment would focus on continuing to increase tariffs for public services toward cost recovery and on controlling expenditure and reforming public enterprises. It would include freezing public employment and improving training programs to encourage public workers to move to employment in the ’ Although the ECCU has not adopted rules for member countries’ fiscal performance, these projected deficits fall substantially short of the surpluses that the ECCB is considering as necessary for supporting public investment in light of the diminishing flow of external concessional financing. See the discussion of the ECCB’s proposed fiscal reform program in the accompanying staff document, Eastern Carihbeall Currency Union: Recent Developments and Muir1 Regional Policy Issues, February 200 1. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- ll- under the fiscal incentives, hotels, and customs acts, as well as intensification of current efforts to improve tax administration. 21. The authorities agreed with these recommendations, but expressed uncertainty about how quickly tariffs could be raised for water and telephone service and about the feasibility of enacting some of the other measures in early 2001. They were strongly disposed to reducing waivers, although the exact mechanism remained open. They pointed out that these waivers are considered by the Cabinet without estimates of foregone revenue, and that consideration in full light of such estimates could curtail the magnitude of waivers. The staff recommended that legal requirements be established for receiving waivers so that businesses and individuals would be eligible for them only upon meeting clearly defined, statutory criteria. 22. The staff encouraged the authorities to continue shifting tariffs for services of public enterprises toward cost recovery and improve the efficiency of their operations to strengthen their overall financial performance. Water tariffs, which have not been raised since 1988, need to be examined with a view to improving efficiency in the use of resources. 23. Employment in the government and some public enterprises has risen in recent years, leaving them overstaffed. The authorities noted that, in a small economy like Antigua and Barbuda’s, public employment served as a policy instrument for alleviating poverty. The staff suggested a disentanglement of policies on employment, training, and welfare, and recommended that the government cease hiring and let separations and retirement reduce public employment over time. The employment of nonestablished workers, who comprise about two thirds of central government employment, should be reduced in favor of regular employment based on qualifications and performance. Other fiscal issues 24. The authorities acknowledged the problem of arrears to the social security scheme, whose stock has grown steadily to the equivalent to 11 percent of GDP in 2000. They are considering reforms of the system based on the latest actuarial study of its long-term finances. There are also arrears in government payments of both employer and employee contributions to the medical benefits scheme and employee contributions to the education levy. The authorities said that these programs had been established as a partial substitute for a personal income tax and that the government’s contribution had been adopted to gain political support for their introduction. They added that the two programs were already receiving more in contributions than they could spend under current law and that if the government were to pay its share, then an equivalent amount of its expenditures on health and education outside these programs would have to be shifted to them. The staff suggested that, with the programs in place and in the context of consolidating the medical benefits and education levies into a single “social services levy” as recommended in the 1999 Article IV consultation, the government should look for ways to avoid the appearance of arrears. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12- 25. The staff expressed concern about the practice of earmarking revenues to meet domestic and external debt payments and to finance operations of several statutory bodies. Revenue earmarking contributes to fragmentation of the government budget, with some of the revenue earmarked to finance public enterprises not entering the consolidated fund. 26. For reasons of efficiency and stability of revenue, tbe staff recommended that the present system of taxing fuel be replaced by an excise per gallon of gasoline and that fuel prices be allowed to vary directly with changes in the import price. The authorities indicated their intention to introduce a VAT over the medium term, which could substantially enhance the efficiency of the indirect tax system. 27. Vocational training and apprenticeship programs, originally designed as temporary, have become permanent and costly, amounting to 95 percent of GDP annually. It was agreed that the targeting and effectiveness of these programs need to be carefully examined, with a view to eliminating their operating as a wage subsidy for selected employers. Instead, consideration could be given to devoting resources to vocational education that enables government employees to shift to private sector employment. The training institute attached to the free trade zone has trained civil servants in information technology skills, many of whom have quickly found private sector jobs. A lot of these jobs are in the gaming industry in the free trade zone, which has had the spillover benefit of encouraging the growth of other businesses based on information technology. B. Public Sector Reform 28. For the proposed revenue measures to be effective, the tax administration must improve collection and enforcement procedures so as to enhance taxpayer compliance. The staff noted that in 2000 the Tax Compliance Unit (TCU) had collected EC$l8 million of past-due tax liabilities, equivalent to nearly one percent of GDP, using in part information in audited accounts, sometimes obtained overseas. The staff proposed closer collaboration between the TCU and the Inland Revenue Department (IRD) and Customs and Excise Department (CED), with strong effort in reforming the tax departments’ procedures and systems. The authorities highlighted the current technical assistance project with the Government of India as an effort to examine and improve collection procedures and taxpayer compliance within the IRD and CED. In particular, the project had already identified many serious deficiencies that needed to be addressed promptly. At the authorities’ request, a technical assistance mission from the Fund will visit Antigua and Barbuda to conduct a complete review of it’s tax system and tax administration. 29. Even if tax administration is carried out effectively, the staff noted that effective expenditure control is essential to ensure budget accountability and sound fiscal performance. The establishment of govemment agencies with off-budget operations funded by earmarked revenue tends to reduce accountability for expenditure decisions. The Ministry of Finance needs to monitor operations of the entire public sector to be able to assess their fiscal impact. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13- 30. Referring to the government’s intention to prepare a multiyear national development plan, the staff emphasized that the budget should represent a one-year slice of this plan. The Ministry of Planning should prepare a list of all projects, including projections of capital and recurrent costs, financing, and debt service. Further, the budget approved by parliament should be monitored by the budget office with quarterly expenditure limits stipulated for the spending agencies. All revenue, including earmarked funds, and expenditure must to be included in budgetary accounts. The extensive use of advance or special warrants to effect expenditures not authorized by parliament should be curtailed and procedures implemented to ensure that parliamentary approval precedes expenditure commitments to a much greater extent. The staff noted that the failure to audit the government accounts for over ten years reflected poorly on fiscal discipline and transparency, and needed to be rectified soon. 31. The authorities highlighted the undertaking of a review of the civil service system funded by the CDB, with completion expected by the middle of 200 1. An expedited review of the customs administration, where the authorities suspect some of the more serious performance problems in the civil service, is expected soon. 32. The authorities’ reiterated their intention, as conveyed in the 2000 budget presentation, to consider selling some statutory enterprises, including hotels. However, while some commercial enterprises would be sold, they saw opportunities for expanding public sector activities in selected commercial areas, especially telecommunications and computer training. Also, public ownership of utilities would be retained. More generally, the authorities lacked confidence in the private sector’s willingness to take ownership of assets for long-term investment in the country. The staff noted that privatization could enhance the investment environment by disengaging government from commercial activities undertaken more appropriately and efficiently by private business. The staff urged that privatization proceeds be used to reduce public debt and cautioned that privatization be done transparently. C. External Policies 33. The government plans to implement the foal phase of the CARICOM’s Common External Tariff (CET) in early 2001, reducing the maximum tariff from 35 percent to 20 percent in a revenue neutral manner by raising consumption taxes. The staff urged the authorities to remove import monopolies for vegetable products and petroleum products. The government should try to achieve any remaining debt restructuring needed to clear arrears and stay current on external payment obligations. 34. The staff noted the absence of reporting of data on imports for over ten years as a serious deficiency, and delays in implementation of the computerized system for customs administration as unfortunate. The authorities assured the staff that preparations had been made for the system’s implementation in 2001, Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14- 35. The authorities were satisfied that the monetary and exchange arrangements of the currency union have served the country well.” The mission discussed the possibility of a problem with Antigua and Barbuda’s external competitiveness in the tourism industry, noting that not only have U.S. tourist arrivals declined in much of the subregion but Antigua and Barbuda’s share as well. The authorities referred to recent moderate wage increases and sharply reduced incidence of strikes as strong indication of their commitment to preserving the country’s external competitiveness. Further, they discussed the potential for developing linkages between the domestic economy and tourism. The Ministry of Agriculture is making an effort to raise the domestic vaiue added in tourism receipts by, for example, developing the agriculture sector’s capacity to supply hotels. 36. As noted earlier, following the issuances in 1999 of unfavorable financial advisories by the United States and the United Kingdom, laws and regulations governing the offshore financial sector were revised with a view to improving supervision and management. Noting that they had stepped up enforcement also, with the number of offshore banks reduced to 25 from 57 in 1997, the authorities said they were surprised that the FSF had still not found Antigua and Barbuda’s quality of supervision and cooperation acceptable. The staff underscored the need for a framework for joint supervision with the ECCB. The staff also advised that the amendment to the IBC Act permitting offshore bank lending to the government be reconsidered in light of the appearance of a conflict of interest with the government’s role in regulating the offshore sector. 37. The authorities voiced their strong displeasure with the processes employed by the FSF and the OECD in their dealings with offshore financial centers, in particular with the lists issued by both institutions and with what they perceived as “moving of the goal posts” whenever Antigua and Barbuda changed its laws or regulations in response to a complaint. They feared that not only the offshore sector, but also foreign investment in the hotel sector, would be affected by “reputation fall out” from the listings. They also felt that dealing with these pressures had put extraordinary demands on the scarce public resources of a very small state, including the time of the attorney general and other senior officials. They were especially distressed by the OECD’s harmfi.d tax competition initiative, which they believe could destroy the offshore industry if implemented as conceived by the OECD. The staff noted that the underlying principles of transparency, nondiscrimination and exchange of information, when properly defined, deserve the support of all countries, lo For a description of these arrangements and of key aspects of ECCB credit policy, see the accompanying staff document, Eastem Caribbean Currency Union: Recent Developments and h4ain Regional Policy Isslles, February 200 1. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 15- 38. The authorities indicated that Antigua and Barbuda was not prepared to involve the ECCB in the regulation and supervision of offshore financial institutions. The staff noted that Antigua and Barbuda would be the only one of the six independent ECCB member states that has not agreed to some form of arrangement with the common central bank in this area. Given the experience it has gained in dealing with pressures from outside, Antigua and Barbuda’s participation in the common exercise-without prejudice to the “ownership” of the regulatory and supervisory function- could be of benefit to the ECCB and the other member states. At the staffs encouragement, the authorities agreed in principle to participate in the assessment by the IMF of the quality of offshore regulation and supervision in the subregion, including through an initial self-assessment (Module I), and participation in the financial sector assessment program (FSAP) exercise for the ECCB membership area, covering the offshore as well as domestic financial systems, expected to take place in 200 1. IV. MEDIUM-TERMOUTLOOK 39. As stated earlier, the measures implemented by the end of 2000 are intended to improve fiscal performance in 2001 but still leave large imbalances. The implications of these measures were projected in a medium-term baseline scenario, which shows the consolidated public sector’s current account balance deteriorating to a deficit of 2 percent of GDP in 2005 and the overall deficit fluctuating around 6 percent of GDP over the medium term (Table 9). The uncertain state of government finances, tight liquidity, and low consumer demand create an unfavorable environment for private investment. Because hotel capacity has not increased in recent years, a strong recovery in tourism is unlikely. In this scenario, the mission projected growth to decelerate to 2% percent in 2001 and stay at that rate over the medium term. 40. Against this background, the mission urged adoption of additional fiscal measures as discussed above. With these measures, public sector financing requirements would be substantially reduced over the medium term and would be met from official external sources and the domestic banking system, while avoiding new arrears. The operation of statutory bodies and environment for private sector investment would improve, thereby enhancing fiscal performance and overall investment and growth, and the international competitiveness of the economy. 41. The impact of the mission’s recommended additional measures on economic performance was projected in a medium-term adjustment scenario through 2005 (Table 10). The current account balance of the public sector, rather than deteriorating under the baseline scenario, would improve to a surplus of 3% percent of GDP in 2005. The generation of public savings is critical to supporting the public and private investment needed Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 16- to bring real GDP growth to the government’s target of five percent a year.” The improvements in public saving would be achieved through higher revenue collections, mainly by curtailing discretionary tax waivers, and reducing current expenditures relative to the baseline scenario by not hiring in the public sector. 42. The mission’s recommended additional measures are projected to halt the accumulation of public sector domestic debt. Under the baseline scenario, domestic debt of the public sector increases steadily from 28% percent of GDP in 2000 to 34 percent of GDP in 2005, with the central government’s portion growing from 28% percent to 3 1% percent, respectively.12 In the adjustment scenario, the ratio of public sector domestic debt to GDP levels off at 29 percent in 2005; the central government’s portion peaks at 28% percent of GDP in 2002-04 and falls to 28 percent in 2005. 43. The external current account deficit is expected to improve by 2 percentage points of GDP over the baseline to 10 percent in 2001 and then decline steadily to 5 percent of GDP in 2005. Tourist receipts grow more rapidly than in the baseline, owing to higher investment in tourism and infrastructure in an environment of improved public finances and private sector confidence. The current account deficit is covered by higher official borrowing and foreign direct investment.‘3 The overall external account improves to near balance in 2002 and shows a surplus of 3% percent of GDP in 2005. I’ Higher income generates a higher private savings ratio to GDP following the substantial improvement in public savings projected in 200 1. l2 Domestic debt is projected by adding to the stock at the end of a year the domestic financing requirement for the subsequent year taking into account debt service payments during the year. These payments are based on the interest rates that apply to existing stocks and the interest rate for additional borrowing applied to the domestic financing requirement. Under the adjustment scenario, this requirement is smaller for central government and absent for the consolidated public sector. r3 The adjustment scenario permits borrowing for the full public sector investment program, while the baseline scenario does not, resulting in a lower total amount of domestic and external public debt. In the adjustment scenario, foreign direct investment is steady at 4% percent of GDP, the average level attracted by Antigua and Barbuda during 1995-2000, while, in the baseline scenario, it declines to 33/4 percent. These inflows are mainly associated with investment in the hotel and communications sector. Under both scenarios, Antigua and Barbuda meets its contractual obligations for external debt, with external arrears left for resolution through bilateral negotiations. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17- 44. Fiscal adjustment and wage discipline underpin external competitiveness and support the investment in tourism necessary for the favorable performance of the tourism and offshore business sectors in the medium-term adjustment scenario. The main risk to performance would be failure by the government to make the necessary fiscal adjustments and reforms, which would likely force it to borrow from the rest of the public sector and accumulate domestic and external arrears. This would lower domestic saving and investment, reduce growth, and further weaken Antigua and Barbuda’s external position, creating a potentially unstable situation. Another risk is that concern about Antigua and Barbuda’s tax structure and regulation and supervision of the offshore financial sector could dampen growth. A potential problem is the possible slowdown in U.S. economic growth. V. STAFFAPPRAISAL 45. Antigua and Barbuda’s economic growth is slowing. In recent years, large central government deficits have kept public sector savings at or below zero. As the public sector accumulated external debt service arrears, its access to external financing dwindled. However, debt restructurings with major creditors in recent years have reduced the stock of arrears. The economy remains vulnerable to external shocks, as it still relies heavily on tourism and offshore services. The challenge facing the authorities is to stabilize and strengthen Antigua and Barbuda’s fiscal position to provide the public savings needed to support desired economic growth and diversification. 46. The 2000 budget presentation signaled the authorities’ readiness to address the government’s very weak fiscal position, but opposition to some measures caused delay in their implementation. Despite the resulting shortfall in revenue, the government did not curtail expenditure or discretionary tax waivers. As the deficit widened further in 2000, the government found itself strapped for financing and had to resort to forced borrowing from the rest of the public sector. This situation heightened the authorities’ concern enough to implement measures by the end of 2000 that provide a foundation for improved fiscal performance in 2001. The staff strongly urges implementation of its recommended additional measures to achieve the levels of public saving needed to support the government’s medium- term growth objectives, 47. Discretionary tax waivers have come to represent a large and growing revenue loss, and are not transparent. The rationale for this practice needs to be reexamined and the scope for access should be sharply curtailed and subject to clearly defined, strict statutory criteria 48. In addition to fiscal probity, achievement of fiscal and growth objectives requires commitment to more efficient government, privatization of public enterprises in activities outside the core areas of government, a fresh look at linkages between the tourism sector and domestic economic activities, and adherence to policies for promoting a diversified competitive open economy. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 18- 49. The authorities’ willingness to address overstaffing in government is a welcome tirst step toward strengthening the effectiveness of the civil service. The staff urges that this be the catalyst for securing a smaller, more efficient civil service over the medium term. High priority should be given to civil service reform based on a study of the civil service, including an expedited evaluation of the customs administration, with assistance from the CDB. The staff shares the authorities’ sentiments against termination of employment that adversely affects individual well-being and social cohesion, but urges a disentanglement of employment and social policies. The government should stick to its plan to cease hiring of nonestablished workers. The staff encourages better use of resources for vocational training and apprenticeship programs to provide government workers the skills needed to shift to employment in the private sector. 50. The staff strongly urges social security reform, starting with the government’s becoming current on its obligations to the system and not incurring arrears in the future. The staff reiterates its recommendation that the medical benefits and education levies be consolidated into a single social services levy. The structure of contributions should be designed in a way that is consistent with the authority for spending so as to improve fiscal transparency and thereby bolster public support for these programs. 51. To enhance government efficiency and fiscal transparency, the budget should rely less on supplementary expenditure authorization. There should be no further recourse to revenue earmarking to obtain debt financing. Ideally, the budget would show clearly all transactions between the government and statutory bodies, as well as among statutory bodies. In this regard, the budget should reflect a one-year slice of a multiyear national development plan, fully accounting for public investment projects and their associated financing and recurrent costs. 52. Public enterprises, especially the APUA, should continue to shit? tariffs for their services toward cost recovery. The staff endorses the authorities’ intention conveyed in the 2000 budget presentation to consider privatizing some public enterprises, including hotels. Privatization can improve the investment environment by disengaging government from commercial activities more appropriately and efficiently under-taken by private business. The environment for private investment can also be improved by developing linkages between domestic economic activities and the tourism industry. 53. The authorities are to be commended for taking a constructive approach to resolving the issues raised by the unfavorable financial advisories with respect to the offshore financial sector, and revising the laws and regulations with a view to meeting international standards. Without prejudice to Antigua and Barbuda’s ownership of the regulatory and supervisory function, the staff recommends collaboration with the ECCB in this area. Antigua and Barbuda’s willingness to participate in the Fund’s assessment of offshore regulation and supervision in the subregion is welcome. This should enhance Antigua and Barbuda’s profile as a transparent open economy relying on comparative advantage for development. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 19- 54. The authorities are urged to implement the final phase of CARICOM’s CET early this year as planned. Delay will bring into question their commitment to regional trade liberalization and thwart efforts to diversify the economy based on comparative advantage. 55. The lack of comprehensive and timely data on financial operations of the central government and statutory bodies impedes the monitoring of public sector accounts, which severely limits the authorities’ understanding of the fiscal position and ability to conduct fiscal policy. A consolidated public sector budget is needed to enhance surveillance of fiscal developments and policies. Deficiencies in fiscal data and shortcomings in economic statistics make data provision to the Fund not fXy adequate for surveillance purposes. Despite weaknesses in statistical reporting, the quality of external debt data has improved, due largely to the strengthening of the budget office in the ministry of finance and its effective use of the debt reporting and management system provided by the ECCB. The government should develop a work program, including the need for technical assistance, for improving statistical reporting. In addition to public finance statistics, emphasis needs to be placed on improving coverage and reporting of accounts of offshore businesses. 56. It is recommended that Antigua and Barbuda remain on the standard 1Zmonth Article IV consultation cycle. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 20 - Table 1. Antigua and Barbuda: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators Fst. 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 I/ (Annual percentage changes, unless otherwise specified) National income and prices GDP at constant factor cost 6.1 Nominal GDP at market prices 9.5 Consumer prices (end of period) 31 3.2 Consumer prices (average) 3.0 External sector Exports, f.o.b. -29.0 Imports, f.o.b. 3.0 Travel receipts (gross) -1.4 Terms of trade (deterioration - ) 21 -10.8 Nominal effective exchange rate (end of period; depreciation -) 31 0.2 Real effective exchange rate (end of period; depreciation -) 3f 0.4 Public sector Revenue and grants 15.2 Expenditure and net lending 3.3 Money and credit Net domestic assets 4/ 10.6 Credit to the public sector -1.2 Credit to the private sector 12.9 Other -1.5 Monetary liabilities to the private sector -1.9 Velocity (GDP relative to M2) 1.43 Three-month deposit interest rate (percent) 5.5 (In percent of GDP) Public sector Current balance (excluding grants) -0.2 Capital expenditure and net lending 4.5 Overall balance (after grants) -4.0 Identified financing 3.6 External 4.6 Domestic -1.0 Statistical discrepancy 5/ 0.4 Financing gap 0.0 Gross domestic investment 35.5 Public 4.5 Private 31.0 Gross domestic saving 164 Private 16.6 Public -0.2 External sector Current account balance -19.1 Overall balance -8.1 External public debt (end of yearj 6/ 87.0 Ofwhich : arrears 84.5 (In percent) Scheduled debt service/exports of goods and services 9.8 OJwliich : interest 7.3 Scheduled debt service/public sector revenue and grants 26.2 5.6 3.9 5.2 3.6 2.5 7.2 7.0 5.3 5.4 4.8 -1.1 4.7 1.1 0.4 1.1 0.4 3.3 1.1 0.0 1.1 0.4 4.0 9.5 11.2 4.4 5.3 2.8 14.7 -1.6 9.5 9.6 17.9 0.9 11.6 9.7 6.1 17.5 13.3 11.0 3.1 4.3 7.0 17.2 6.7 7.2 -1.9 2.8 -2.9 8.3 15.2 10.6 1.41 1.31 1.25 5.5 5.5 5.5 -1.3 7.4 -8.4 8.4 5.2 3.2 0.0 0.0 32.8 7.4 25.4 19.0 20.3 -1.3 -13.8 -16.3 -15.6 -13.0 -11.9 -5.1 -0.4 -2.6 -3.1 -6.3 80.6 68.1 60.2 55.9 52.6 68.2 27.7 24.6 16.2 15.4 9.6 5.6 7.0 6.2 5.4 7.5 4.6 4.8 3.4 2.3 27.5 14.6 19.9 14.7 12.0 Net imputed international reserves External public debt 61 OJwhich : arrears Memorandum item: Nominal GDP (in millions of EC$) (In millions of US. dollars, end of period) 47.0 50.8 471.0 467.4 457.0 395.9 1461 1,567 -1.3 4.0 10.9 5.7 13.0 -3.6 0.4 7.5 0.0 -3.4 12.2 1.6 3.7 8.1 -0.5 4.5 8.1 5.3 3.1 3.1 . . . . . . . 9.6 4.9 0.9 0.7 9.1 4.5 -1.4 -0.3 4.3 4.9 1.26 1.26 . . . 0.6 6.8 11.4 6.2 2.6 3.6 -1.8 0.0 32.4 6.8 25.6 16.1 15.5 0.6 -1.7 6.6 -7.7 7.0 ;:; 0.7 0.0 32.8 6.6 26.2 17.2 18.9 -1.7 -0.8 -0.2 7.4 6.4 -7.5 -5.6 4.5 0.3 3.4 -0.3 1.1 0.6 0.0 0.0 3.0 5.3 29.9 26.7 7.3 6.4 22.6 20.3 16.9 14.8 17.7 15.0 -0.8 -0.2 60.4 69.8 63.4 68.3 422.7 393.5 384.9 379.4 172.2 160.5 111.9 111.2 1,676 1,765 1,859 1,949 Sources: Ministry ofFinance; Labor Department; and Fund staff estimates and projections. I/ Staff baseline estimate. 2/ Trade weights include country origin of tourist arrivals. 3/ The figure shown for 2000 is for the first eleven months of the year. 4/ In relation to liabilities to the private sector at the beginning of the period. 5/ Difference between deficit from above the line and identified financing. 6/ Includes arrears on both principal and interest. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-21- Table 2. Antigua and Barbuda: Real Sector Indicators b P . 1996 1997 1998 1999 202 2oofo:j National accounts and prices (percent change) Nominal GDP at market prices 9.5 7.2 7.0 5.3 Nominal GDP at factor cost 8.9 7.9 7.5 6.3 Real GDP at factor cost (1990 prices) 6.1 5.6 3.9 5.2 Consumer prices (period average) 3.0 0.4 3.3 1.1 Consumer prices (end of period) 3.2 -1.1 4.7 1.1 National accounts (millions of Eastern Caribbean dollars) Nominal GDP at factor cost 1,220 1,3 16 1,414 1,504 Nominal GDP at market prices 1,461 1,567 1,676 1,765 Agriculture 3.9 4.1 4.0 3.9 3.9 3.8 Manufacturing 2.2 2.2 2.2 2.2 2.2 2.2 Construction 10.9 11.1 11.8 12.2 12.6 13.0 Transport and communication 19.8 20.8 21.0 20.5 20.6 20.4 Hotel and restaurants 13.6 13.3 12.1 11.9 11.3 11.1 Trade 10.7 10.6 10.8 10.8 11.1 11.3 Government services 17.8 16.9 18.0 18.3 17.9 17.9 Other 21.1 20.9 20.1 20.2 20.4 20.3 Private sector 3.1 3.6 3.3 3.3 3.3 2.0 Hotels 1.0 1.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 Other 5.0 5.0 4.0 4.0 4.0 2.0 Central government 21 7.7 5.1 10.7 4.6 10.6 2.6 Total midyear population 68.6 68.9 69.9 70.9 71.9 72.3 Total active labor force 29.6 29.8 30.0 30.5 31.0 31.3 Ofwhich: foreign workers 7.5 7.5 7.9 8.0 8.0 8.0 Memorandum item: Origin of GDP (in percent, at factor cost) Wages (percent change) Population and employment (thousands) Electricity (sales in millions of kwh) 108.5 115.3 119.4 137.8 151.0 160.0 5.4 4.8 5.3 4.3 3.6 2.5 0.0 1.1 0.4 1.1 1,583 1,651 1,859 1,949 Sources: Antiguan authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections. 11 Staff baseline projection. 21 Weighted average of percentage changes in the average wages of established workers and nonestablished workers. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 22 - Table 3. Antigua and Barbuda; Central Government Operations 1996 1997 1998 (In millions of Eastern Caribbean dollars) Prel. 1999 Est. Proj. 2000 2001 1/ Current revenue Of which: Tax revenue 342.6 345.0 427.5 Current noninterest expenditure Interest obligations Capital revenue and grants Capital expenditure and net lending Overall balance 318.8 327.7 269.9 281.4 272.7 291.0 50.4 71.5 10.5 3.7 35.8 47.1 -29.5 -78.2 (In percent of GDP) 292.9 300.3 335.0 365.8 74.2 82.1 24.4 10.8 42.3 71.9 -84.6 -164.0 371.5 319.8 451.6 63.9 13.0 93.0 -224.0 379.4 466.1 74.0 18.3 71.2 -165.4 Current revenue ofwhich: Tax revenue 21.8 20.9 20.4 19.5 20.0 21.9 18.5 18.0 17.5 17.0 17.2 19.5 Current noninterest expenditure Of which: Wages and salaries 18.7 18.6 20.0 20.7 24.3 23.9 11.1 10.6 11.6 12.1 12.9 12.9 Current primary balance 3.2 2.3 0.4 -1.2 -4.3 -2.0 Interest obligations 3.4 4.6 4.4 4.6 3.4 3.8 Current balance -0.3 -2.2 -4.0 -5.8 -7.7 -5.8 Capital revenue and grants 0.7 0.2 1.5 0.6 0.7 0.9 Capital expenditure and net lending Of which: Fixed capital formation 2.5 3.0 2.5 4.1 5.0 3.7 2.3 2.9 2.1 3.9 5.0 3.7 Overall balance -2.0 -5.0 -5.0 -9.3 -12.0 -8.5 Financing 2.0 5.0 5.0 9.3 12.0 Identified financing 3.9 7.9 6.7 7.4 6.6 External 2.1 2.9 2.5 3.7 1.7 Net disbursements 0.4 -0.2 -0.1 0.2 1.3 Change in arrears 1.7 3.1 2.7 3.5 0.4 Domestic 1.9 4.9 4.2 3.7 4.9 Bank -0.1 2.4 1.9 1.7 1.9 Non bank 0.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Change in arrears 1.3 2.6 2.3 2.0 3.1 Statistical discrepancy 21 -1.9 -2.9 -1.7 1.9 0.0 8.5 -g -0:3 0.0 2.1 0.0 0.1 2.0 0.0 Financing gap 31 0 0 0 0.0 5.4 6.7 Memorandum items: Import tax waivers (percent of GDP) Central government employment GDP market prices (millions of EC$) 8.9 5.9 8.2 13.9 9.2 10.2 8,154 8,319 8,799 9,248 9,433 9,622 1,461 1,567 1,676 1,765 1,859 1,949 Sources: Ant&an authorities, and Fund staff estimates and projections. l! Staff baseline projection. 21 The difference between overall balance and identified financing. 3/ Assumed to be reflected in the accumulation of arrears. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-23 - Table 4. Antigua and Barbuda: Public Sector Operations 11 1996 1997 1998 Prel. 1999 Est. Proj. 2000 200121 (In millions of Eastern Caribbean dollars) Current revenue Of which: Tax revenue 31 Current noninterest expenditure Interest obligations Capital revenue and grants Capital expenditure and net lending Overall balance Current revenue Of which: Tax revenue 31 27.8 27.2 27.6 27.4 29.5 31.5 Current noninterest expenditure Of which: Wages and salaries Current primary balance Interest obligations Current balance Capital revenue and grants Capital expenditure and net lending Of which: Fixed capital formation Overall balance 19.2 18.7 18.3 18.3 19.0 21.2 20.8 20.9 22.1 23.9 26.1 27.3 14.0 13.1 14.1 14.6 15.4 15.4 7.0 6.2 5.6 3.5 3.4 4.2 7.2 7.5 4.9 5.3 4.2 4.4 -0.2 -1.3 0.6 -1.7 -0.8 -0.2 0.8 0.3 1.7 0.6 0.7 0.9 4.5 7.4 6.8 6.6 7.4 6.4 Financing Identified facing External Net disbursements AlTCiCl Domestic 4.0 -4.0 4.0 3.6 4.6 -0.5 5.1 -1.0 Statistical discrepancy 41 0.4 Financing gap 51 0.0 Memorandum items: Domestic debt (percent of GDP) Of which: central government GDP at market prices (millions of ECS) 20.8 21.5 24.1 28.6 28.6 29.6 19.5 20.8 22.7 25.4 28.3 28.7 1461 1567 1676 1765 1859 1949 406.3 425.3 463.2 484.4 542.1 608.2 280.7 292.9 304.0 327.6 105.4 117.8 11.3 4.1 66.4 115.5 -58.3 -131.5 (In percent of GDP) 6.6 5.8 6.0 7.4 6.4 -8.4 -4.4 -7.7 -7.5 -5.6 a.4 4.4 7.7 7.5 5.6 8.4 6.2 7.0 4.5 0.3 5.2 2.6 3.9 3.4 -0.3 -0.5 0.0 0.2 2.5 -0.3 5.7 1.9 3.7 0.9 0.0 3.2 3.6 3.1 1.1 0.6 0.0 -1.8 0.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 3.0 5.3 307.2 323.8 348.7 409.1 370.1 421.7 479.9 526.6 82.3 92.8 77.0 85.3 29.1 10.8 13.0 18.3 113.7 117.1 135.9 123.4 -73.8 -136.5 -137.7 -108.8 Sources: Antiguan authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections. l/ Data refer to the consolidated public sector, comprising central government, public enterprises, the social security and medical benefits schemes, and other statutory bodies. 2/ Staff baseline projection. 3/ Includes tax collections by the Central Government, the Board of Education beginning in 1995 and, beginning in 1999 the International Financial Sector Authority, the Transport Board, the Tourism Marketing Fund, and the Solid Waste Management Authority. 41 Difference between deficit measured above the line, and identified financing. 5/ Assumed to be reflected in an accumulation of arrears, Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 24 - Table 5. Antigua and Barbuda: Monetary Survey Mt. YXIJ. 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 11 (In millions of Eastern Caribbean dollars, at end of period) Net foreign assets 112.5 18.0 39.4 34.3 -40.6 -41.2 Net international reserves (imputed) 126.9 137.3 163.0 188.5 171.2 184.5 Commercial banks’ net foreign assets -14.4 -119.3 -123.6 -154.2 -211.8 -225.7 Net domestic assets Net credit to the public sector Central government Statutory bodies Credit to other financial institutions Credit to private sector Other items (net) Monetary liabilities (M2) Money (Ml) Ofwhich: Currency in circulation Quasi-money Ofwhich: Foreign currency deposits Monetary liabilities (M2) -1.9 8.3 15.2 10.6 4.3 4.8 Money (Ml) -9.3 4.1 25.4 0.1 -0.1 4.8 Quasi-money 0.7 9.7 12.2 14.1 5.6 4.8 Credit to the public sector -9.1 24.6 29.5 42.5 4.4 3.2 Credit to private sector 18.4 20.3 7.2 8.2 10.7 4.9 Ml M2 Net domestic credit Credit to public sector Credit to private sector Prime lending rate Other lending rates Add-on loans, effective rate Deposit rate (three-month) 912.4 1,092.l 130.1 162.2 170.2 208.1 -40.1 -45.9 17.6 18.1 866.3 1,042.4 -101.7 -130.7 1,024.g 1,110.l 245.8 255.8 68.1 66.5 779.2 854.4 50.3 68.6 (Percentage change) 1,239.7 1,380.3 1,515.9 1,587.g 210.0 299.2 312.5 322.5 240.5 287.0 305.8 305.8 -30.5 12.2 6.6 16.6 34.7 25.7 30.5 34.7 1,117.3 1,209.o 1,338.3 1,404.l -122.3 -153.6 -165.3 -173.3 1,279s 320.6 79.8 958.5 71.3 1,414.5 1,475.3 1,546.l 321.0 320.7 336.3 85.0 85.9 90.1 1,093.5 1,154.6 1,210.5 97.0 74.6 103.1 (As a percentage of annual GDP) 16.8 16.3 19.1 70.2 70.8 76.3 69.4 78.0 81.3 8.9 10.4 12.5 59.3 66.5 66.7 (Percent per annum at end of period) 10.0-12.0 10.0-12.0 10.0-12.0 7.0 -19.5 7.0 -19.5 7.0 -19.5 7.0-12.5 7.0-12.5 6.5-12.5 2.5-5.5 2.5-5.5 2.5-5.5 18.2 17.3 17.3 80.1 79.4 79.4 86.9 90.4 90.4 17.0 16.8 16.5 68.5 72.0 72.0 10.0-12.0 7.0 -19.5 6.5-12.5 .., 2.5-5.5 Sources: Eastern Caribbean Central Bank; and Fund staff estimates and projections. l! StafTbaseline projection. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-25 - Table 6. Antigua and Barbuda: Balance of Payments Est. ProJ. 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 11 Current account Trade balance Exports (f.o.b.) Ofwhich: domestic exports Imports (f.o.b.) Services balance Gross tourist receipts Interest obligations Other (net) Private transfers Capital and fmancial sccount Capital transfers (net) Official disbursements Official amortization Commercial banks Direct investment Other capital Errors and omissions Overall balance FhPncing Change in imputed reserves (increase -) Net change in arrears (decrease -) 2/ Exceptional financing Financing gap Current account ofwhich: Merchandise imports Gross tourist receipts Capital and financial account Ofwhich: Official disbursements (net) Direct investment Overall balance Memorandum items: Accumulation of arrears (net) 31 Foreign debt (end of year) Arrears (end of year) t Balance of Payments (In millions of U.S. dollars) -103.3 -80.1 -301.5 -287.9 37.7 37.9 16.8 13.0 339.2 325.8 167.4 197.3 262.6 287.5 33.8 38.3 -61.4 -51.9 30.8 10.5 65.1 69.2 4.4 10.9 7.8 6.8 LO.5 9.8 35.7 38.8 18.7 23.5 8.9 -1.1 -5.8 -18.5 -44.0 -29.3 44.0 29.3 12.7 -3.9 31.7 -25.8 2 59.0 0.0 (In percent of GDP) -19.1 -13.8 62.7 56.1 48.5 49.5 12.0 11.9 -0.5 -0.5 3.5 4.1 -8.1 -5.1 -0.7 -9.5 87.4 80.6 84.5 68.2 II. Tourism Indicators -101.4 -101.7 -89.4 -86.2 -307.0 -353.3 -3352 -344.9 37.4 35.9 39.8 41.9 14.8 21.1 15.9 16.5 344.3 3892 375.0 386.8 207.8 233.5 239.6 260.0 288.6 310.2 310.3 319.9 27.4 32.0 22.4 16.1 -53.5 -44.6 -48.2 43.9 -2.2 18.2 6.2 -1.2 77.8 15.0 6.1 4.4 1.6 27.4 32.1 21.0 -2.6 2.6 -9.5 -136.0 148.1 0.0 SO.6 10.9 15.8 11.7 11.4 26.5 -2.3 33.9 -17.2 17.2 -9.4 4.5 22.1 0.0 68.0 2z.i 13:6 21.3 32.2 -3.6 0.0 -21.4 21.4 -1;:: 34.0 -2.0 41.0 10.2 13.8 16.0 3i.i -5:o 0.0 -45.2 45.2 -4.9 10.2 0.0 39.9 -16.3 55.5 46.5 12.5 0.3 4.4 -0.4 -15.6 -13.0 -11.9 59.5 54.5 53.6 47.4 45.1 44.3 7.7 9.9 5.7 0.6 1.3 -0.3 4.1 4.7 4.5 -2.6 -3.1 -6.3 -22.7 -1.8 -1.4 0.0 68.1 60.2 55.9 52.6 27.7 24.6 16.2 15.4 (Number of arrivals; in thousands) Tourist arrivals 528 543 596 Of which: Air arrivals 202 211 204 Cruise-ship arrivals 270 285 336 386 208 328 (Annual percentage change, unless otherwise indicated) Tourist arrivals 12.5 2.8 9.8 -1.6 Ofwhich: Air arrivals 5.8 4.5 -3.5 1.9 Cruise-ship arrivals 18.9 5.6 17.9 -2.7 Hotel room capacity (Index ZOOO=lOO) 84.2 86.8 88.5 92.8 653 iii 653 200 404 11.3 0.0 -3.8 0.0 23.3 0.0 100.0 100.0 Sources: Antiguan authorities; Eastern Caribbean Central Bank; and Fund staff estimates and projections. ll Staff baseline projection. 21 Reflects accumulations less payments and rescheduling of arrears. 31 Reflects accumulations plus valuation adjustments less payments and rescheduling of arrears. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 26 - Table 7. Antigua and Barbuda: Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt Est. Proj. 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 l/ (In millions of U.S. dollars) Outstanding debt (beginning of year) 21 Central government Government guaranteed Disbursements Central government Regular disbursements Due to rescheduling operations Government guaranteed Cash amortization Central government Government guaranteed Stock adjustments 31 Central government Government guaranteed Outstanding debt (end of year) Central government Government guaranteed Scheduled debt-set-&e obligations Interest 41 Principal Cash payments on debt obligations Interest Principal Stock of arrears (end of year) 215-J Interest Principal 458.8 121.9 336.9 7.8 7.8 7.8 0.0 0.0 4.4 2.5 2.0 8.8 4.0 4.8 471.0 131.2 339.8 471.0 467.4 131.2 199.7 339.8 267.7 65.7 154.3 65.7 150.3 6.8 2.2 59.0 148.1 0.0 3.9 5.1 2.5 2.6 -64.2 5.2 -69.4 467.4 199.7 267.7 43.7 33.9 9.8 5.8 2.6 3.3 -193.1 13.2 -206.4 40.6 30.1 10.5 422.7 360.7 62.0 26.6 22.1 4.4 8.9 4.4 4.4 10.5 5.4 5.1 14.5 8.6 5.8 457.0 395.9 172.2 218.3 197.1 92.5 238.6 198.8 79.7 (In percent of total outstanding debt) Debt by creditor Multilateral creditors 2.6 2.2 2.3 Bilateral 12.9 26.2 55.8 Commercial creditors 84.5 71.5 41.9 (In percent) Debt indicators Scheduled debt sewice/exports of goods and services 9.8 9.6 5.6 Scheduled debt service/public sector revenue and grants 26.2 27.5 14.6 Cash payments/scheduled obligations 21.8 23.9 54.4 Debt outstanding/GDP 87.0 80.6 68.1 Stock of arrears/GDP 84.5 68.2 27.7 Average interest rate 6.6 7.2 4.7 422.7 393.5 384.9 360.7 334.0 337.8 62.0 59.5 47.1 37.8 60.0 13.8 33.3 58.0 11.8 11.2 20.3 11.8 22.1 37.6 0.0 4.5 2.0 2.0 8.1 10.9 16.0 6.3 8.8 13.9 1.8 2.0 2.0 -59.0 -57.8 -3.3 -53.7 -45.4 -3.2 -5.2 -12.4 -0.1 393.5 384.9 379.4 334.0 337.8 332.5 59.5 47.1 46.9 36.4 30.2 27.8 24.8 16.7 11.9 11.7 13.6 16.0 12.0 19.8 27.8 4.0 8.9 11.9 8.1 10.9 16.0 160.5 111.9 111.2 85.6 72.2 71.7 74.9 39.7 39.5 2.4 3.7 4.1 59.2 63.7 65.7 38.4 32.6 30.2 7.0 6.2 5.4 19.9 14.7 12.0 33.0 65.5 100.0 60.2 55.9 52.6 24.6 16.2 15.4 5.9 4.2 4.2 Sources: Ministry of Finance; Eastern Caribbean Central Bank; and Fund stti estimates and projections. l/ Staffbaseline projection. 21 Including interest arrears. Debt at beginning of year equals debt outstanding at end of preceding year. 31 Including exchange rate valuation adjustments and other adjustments mainly due to reschedulings. 4/ Including interest on interest arrears through 2000. 5/ Including valuation adjustments. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 27 - Table 8. Antigua and Barbuda: Indicators of External Vulnerability Est. Proj. 19% 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 1/ Financial indicators Broad money (12-month percent change) Private sector credit (1Zmonth percent change) External indicators Foreign exchange earnings from tourism (12-month percent change in USS) Merchandise imports (12-month percent change in US%) Terms of trade (percent change, deterioration -) 2/ Current account balance (percent of GDP) Capital and financial accotmt balance (percent of GDP) Of which: Inward foreign direct investment Imputed net international reserves 31 In USE millions In percent of broad money In percent of base money Commercial banks’ foreign assets (US$ million, end of period) Commercial banks’ foreign liabilities (US$ million, end of period) External public debt (end-period, US$ millions) External public debt service (in percent of exports of goods and services) 4/ External interest (in percent of exports of goods and services) 41 External amortization (in percent of exports of goods and services) 41 Exchange rate (E.C. dollars per U.S. dollar), end-period Real effective exchange rate appreciation (+) (end-period, percentage change) -1.9 8.3 15.2 10.6 4.3 4.8 18.4 20.3 7.2 8.2 10.7 4.9 -1.4 9.5 0.4 7.5 0.0 3.1 3.0 -4.0 5.7 -10.8 11.2 -3.4 -19.1 -13.8 -16.3 12.0 11.9 12.5 13.0 -3.6 12.2 . . . -15.6 -13.0 7.7 9.9 3.1 . . . -11.9 5.7 3.5 4.1 4.4 4.1 4.7 4.5 47.0 50.8 60.4 69.8 63.4 68.3 12.4 12.4 12.7 13.3 11.6 11.9 81.4 83.4 86.1 87.3 98.2 100.8 71.3 57.5 66.8 152.4 176.1 184.9 76.7 101.7 112.6 209.5 254.6 268.5 471.0 467.4 422.7 393.5 384.9 379.4 9.8 9.6 5.6 7.0 6.2 5.4 7.3 7.5 4.6 4.8 3.4 2.3 2.5 2.2 0.9 2.2 2.8 2.7 2.7 2.7 2.7 2.7 0.4 5.3 -0.5 4.5 8.1 3.1 . . . . . . Sources: Eastern Caribbean Central Bank; Ministry of Finance; and Fund staff estimates. l/ StafT baseline projection. 2/ Based on average daily expenditures by visitors arriving by air and import-weighted export unit values from partner countries. 3/ Refers to the imputed share of Antigua and Barbuda in the net international reserves of the ECCB; calculated as the net foreign asset counterpart of net liabilities to Antigua and Barbuda (currency in circulation plus net liabilities to commercial banks less net credit to government). 41 Scheduled. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 28 - Table 9. Antigua and Barbuda: Medium-Term Outlook-Baseline Scenario Est. Baseline Projections 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 GDP at constant factor cost Consumer prices (average) Tourist anivals by air Gross domestic investment Public sector Private sector Gross domestic savings Public sector Private sector Current revenue Ofwhich: Tax revenue Current noninterest expenditure Current primary balance 27.4 29.2 31.2 31.3 31.2 30.6 30.8 18.3 18.8 21.0 20.9 20.9 20.8 20.7 23.9 26.1 27.3 27.3 28.3 28.5 28.4 3.6 3.3 4.2 4.3 3.1 2.4 2.7 Interest obligations 5.3 4.1 4.4 4.3 4.5 4.5 4.7 Public savings -1.7 -0.8 -0.2 -0.2 -1.4 -2.1 -2.0 Capital revenue and grants 0.6 0.7 0.9 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 Capital expenditure and net lending 6.6 7.4 6.4 6.7 5.8 5.3 4.4 overall balance -7.7 -7.4 -5.6 6.0 -6.3 -6.6 -5.6 Financing 7.7 -7.4 5.6 6.1 6.3 6.7 5.7 External 3.9 3.4 -0.3 -0.6 -0.9 -1.1 -0.7 Domestic 21 3.1 3.1 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.5 0.5 Financing gap 0.0 0.0 5.3 6.1 6.6 7.2 5.8 Domestic debt (end of period) 26.1 28.6 29.6 30.8 32.1 33.0 34.1 Ofwhich: central government 25.4 28.3 28.7 29.4 30.4 30.8 31.5 Current account balance -15.6 -13.0 -11.9 -11.4 -10.6 -9.8 -9.1 Trade balance -54.0 -48.7 47.8 47.8 47.8 -47.8 -47.8 Tourist receipts 47.4 45.1 44.3 44.9 45.5 46.1 46.7 Capital and financial account balance 7.7 9.9 5.7 4.4 4.0 3.5 3.2 Overall balance -2.6 -3.1 -6.3 -6.9 -6.6 -6.3 -5.8 External public debt (end of year) 60.2 55.9 52.6 50.2 47.6 44.9 42.2 O/which: arrears 24.6 16.2 15.4 14.8 14.3 13.8 13.3 Scheduled external debt service (In percent of exports of goods and services) 7.0 6.2 5.4 5.4 5.2 5.2 4.9 I. Real Sector Indicators (Annual percentage changes) 5.2 3.6 2.5 1.1 0.0 1.1 1.9 -3.8 0.0 (In percent of GDP at market prices) III. External Sector Indicators 32.8 29.9 6.6 7.3 26.2 22.6 17.2 16.9 -1.7 -0.8 18.9 17.7 II. Fiscal Indicators l/ 26.7 6.4 20.3 14.8 -0.2 15.0 2.5 2.5 2.5 2.5 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.3 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 26.2 24.0 6.6 5.7 19.6 18.3 14.8 13.4 -0.2 -1.4 15.0 14.8 22.4 5.3 17.1 12.6 -2.1 14.7 20.4 4.4 16.0 11.3 -2.0 13.3 Sources: h4inistq of Finance; and Fund staff estimates and projections. I/ Consolidated public sector. 21 Including statistical discrepancy in 1999 and 2000. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 29 - Table 10. Antigua and Barbuda: Medium-Term Outlook-Adjustment Scenario 1999 Est. 2000 2001 Adjustment Pro~echons 2002 2003 2004 2005 GDP at constant factor cost Consumer prices (average) Tourist arrivals by air Gross domestic investment Public sector Private sector Gross national savings Public sector Private sector Current revenue 27.4 29.2 32.1 32.2 32.2 31.9 31.6 Ofwhich: tax revenue 18.3 18.8 21.8 22.0 22.2 22.4 22.8 Current noninterest expenditure 23.9 25.8 24.9 24.3 23.8 23.6 23.0 Current primary balance 3.6 3.3 7.2 7.9 8.3 8.2 8.6 Interest obligations Public savings 5.3 4.1 4.6 4.9 5.0 -1.7 -0.8 2.6 3.1 3.4 3’:; 5.0 3.6 Capital revenue and grants 0.6 0.7 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 7.3 6.1 6.7 7.4 7.4 7.8 -7.4 -3.1 -3.2 -3.6 -3.8 -3.8 I. Real Sector Indicators (AnmA percentage changes) 5.2 3.6 3.0 4.2 1.1 0.0 1.5 1.6 1.9 -3.8 2.0 5.0 (In percent of GDP at market prices) 32.8 29.9 28.5 28.9 29.3 29.0 28.9 6.6 7.3 6.1 6.7 7.4 7.4 7.7 26.2 22.6 22.4 22.2 21.9 21.6 21.2 17.2 16.9 18.6 19.8 21.7 22.5 23.8 -1.7 -0.8 2.6 3.1 3.4 3.2 3.6 18.9 17.7 16.0 16.7 18.3 19.3 20.2 II. Fiscal Indicators l! Capital expenditure and net lending 6.6 Overall balance -7.7 Financing 7.7 External 7.7 Domestic 2/ 3.1 Financing gap 0.0 Domestic debt (end of period) 26.1 Of which : central government 25.4 7.4 3.1 3.2 3.6 3.8 3.8 7.7 2.2 2.2 2.3 2.3 2.4 1.1 0.9 1.0 1.3 1.5 1.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 28.6 28.6 28.8 29.0 29.1 29.1 28.3 28.1 28.2 28.2 28.2 28.0 III. External Sector Indicators Current account balance -15.6 -13.0 -9.9 -9.1 -7.6 -6.5 -5.1 Trade balance -54.0 -48.7 -47.2 -47.2 -47.2 -47.2 -47.2 Tourist receipts 47.4 45.1 45.7 45.7 46.5 47.7 49.1 Capital and financial account balance 7.7 9.9 9.1 8.6 8.8 8.8 8.9 Overall balance -2.6 -3.1 -0.8 -0.6 1.1 2.3 3.7 External public debt (end of year) 60.2 55.9 54.1 53.4 52.6 51.8 Ofwhich: arrears 24.6 16.2 15.2 14.4 13.5 12.7 (In percent of export of goods and services) Scheduled external debt service 7.0 6.2 5.3 5.4 4.6 4.9 4.9 1.5 1.4 1.4 5.0 6.0 6.0 5.3 5.4 51.0 11.9 5.3 Sources: Ministry of Finance; and Fund staff estimates and projections. 11 Consolidated public sector. 21 Including statistical discrepancy in 1999 and 2000. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 30 - Table 11. Antigua and Barbuda: Social and Demographic Indicators Area Total (sq. km) Arable land (percent of land area) Population (1999) Total (thousand) Rate of growth 1997-99 (percent a year) Density (per sq. km) GDP per capita (1999; in U.S. dollars) Population characteristics (1998) Life expectancy at birth (years) Infant mortality rate (per thousand live births) Nutrition (most recent year) Protein intake (grams per capita a day) Health (most recent year) Population per physician Population (per hospital bed) Education (in percent) (1995) Enrollment rate, Primary education Adult literacy rate 442 27.3 71.0 1.1 160.6 9,200 7.5 18.1 90 274 164 87 90 Source: Statistics Division, Ministry of Planning. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3l- Figure 1. Antigua and Barbuda: Real Sector Indicators ( Output growth and inflation a ’ 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 45 Gross domestic savings 35 (In percent of GDP) Private savings 5 _------ ‘C- --i -- -_--- ----- *-,,,-A--- ._ 5 Public savings -15 L 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 35 i Gross domestic investment 30 (In percent of GDP) Private investment 25 20 15 10 Public investment (--------- --____.c..-.. ---- 5 .--’ -_--- -.--------.d- “.._I- 0 I r I I I 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 Sources: Antiguan authorities; and Fund staff estimates. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 32 - Figure 2. Antigua and Barbuda: Selected Tourism Indicators 90 85 Foreign exchange earnings from tourism (In percent of GDP) 65 60 55 50 45 40 I , 1 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 450 400 350 300 250 200 150 100 50 0 110 100 90 80 70 60 r , I rourist arrivals w-9 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 E3 By Cruiseship R ByAir Origin of tourist arrivals by air (In tbouands of arrivals) America 105 100 95 90 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 Sources: Antiguan authorities; and Fund s-estimates Hotel room capacity (1994=100) 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 33 - Figure 3. Antigua and Barbuda: Fiscal Indicators 40 Public sector revenue and expenditure (In percent of GDP) Total expenditure and lending 35 30 25 Total revenue and grants ..---.__ _.- - .- -- _.w-- ..-- .----__ --11__--- --.. _.-- ._..-- l____----- 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 10 8 6 4 2 0 -2 -4 Public savings, investment and overall balance (In percent of GDP) Public investment -6 -8 -10 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 120 , I 100 Fiscal sector external debt, at end-year (In percent of GDP) Ei Outstanding debt El Stock of arrears 80 60 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 Sources: Antiguan authorities; and Fund staff estimates. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public12s 120 115 110 105 100 12s 120 115 110 105 100 95 90 - 34 - Figure 4. Antigua and Barbuda: Exchange Rate Developments (1990 = 100) Effective exchange rate l/ Real effective exchange rate for tourism l/ 2/ Tourism (origin-weighted) 4/ --- 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 Sources: Caribbean Tourism Organization; and IMF Information Notice System. l/ Increase indicates an appreciation. 2/ Index of relative consumer prices adjusted for exchange rate changes. 3/ Weights based on merchandise trade and tourism. 41 Weights based on country of origin for air arrivals to Antigua during 1996-99. 5/ Weights based on air arrivals to Caribbean by country of destination during 1996-99. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-35 - APPENDIX I ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA: FUND RELATIONS (As of November 30,200O) I. Membership Status: Joined: 02/25/82 Status: Article VIII II. General Resources Account: SDR Million Quota 13.50 Fund holdings of currency 13.50 Reserve position in Fund 0.00 III. SDR Department: Holdings SDR Percent of Million Allocation 0.01 n/a Percent of Quota 100.0 100.0 0.0 IV. Outstanding Purchases and Loans: None V. Financial Arrangements: None VI. Projected Obligations to Fund: None VII. Exchange Rate Arrangement: Antigua and Barbuda and the other seven member countries of the Eastern Caribbean Central Bank (ECCB) share a common currency, the Eastern Caribbean dollar, which since July 1976 has been pegged to the U.S. dollar at the rate of ECX2.70 per U.S. dollar. Antigua and Barbuda maintains an exchange system free from restrictions on the making of payments and transfers for current international transactions. VIII. Last Article IV Consultation and Recent Contacts: The Executive Board concluded the last Article IV consultation on November 10, 1999 (EBM/99/124). IX. Technicai Assistance: Dept. FAD STA STA Purpose Tax reform Construct revised CPI index Reconcile financing data in the government records and in the monetary statistics Time of Delivery December 1993 April and October- November 1993 April 1993 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 36- APPENDIX II Antigua and Barbuda-Statistical Issues Antigua and Barbuda’s statistical database is inadequate for meeting the authorities’ needs and for surveillance. There are weaknesses in coverage, quality, frequency, and timeliness preventing an accurate assessment of the flows of funds within and among sectors in the economy. The weakest areas are the fiscal accounts and the balance of payments. The authorities are aware of the deficiencies in the statistical base and have chosen to participate in the General Data Dissemination System (GDDS). Metadata and plans for improving the country’s statistical system are posted on the Internet on the IMF’s Data Standards Bulletin Board (http://dsbb.imf.org). 1. Real sector National accounts compilation has been plagued by the continued absence of trade data since 1991. This has had a serious impact on the estimation of value added in some sectors, especially construction and wholesale and retail trade. For construction, alternative data sources include building applications approved annually and the Government’s public sector investment projects. Wholesale and retail trade estimates are inflated based on movements in the CPI and patterns of consumer spending where there is not enough data derived from Annual Surveys. The consumer price index currently in use is based on the recommendations of a 1993 STA technical assistance mission, and covers only Antigua. A Household Income and Expenditure Survey was conducted for Antigua for 1998 to provide a broader picture of household consumption. The Statistics Division plans to introduce a new CPI based on the results of the HIES. A producer price index is not available. Annual data on employment and on wages/earnings are produced and disseminated with a lag of about one year. 2. Government finance Annual data on central government operations are produced and disseminated with a lag of about 2 months, and quarterly transactions data are also available. Data on general government operations are not available. Fragmentation of the public enterprises compounds the unsystematic reporting of data by these entities. 3. Monetary statistics Monetary statistics are compiled by the ECCB on a monthly basis with a lag of six weeks. The data are reported to the Fund regularly. The monetary survey, however, does not include the accounts of credit unions that accept demand and other deposits. The ECCB is aware of the need to improve coverage of the monetary statistics and is taking steps to collect reliable data on credit unions. Data on the activities of offshore banks are not reported to the Fund. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 37 - APPENDIX II 4. Balance of payments Balance of payments statistics are reported on an annual basis only and are not reported in the format recommended in the fifth (1993) edition of the IMP’s Balance ofR.xynrenrs Manual. The absence of updated trade data renders the publication of merchandise trade statistics for 1991-99 impossible. Estimates have been made using secondary data, including cargo landed and loaded, and imports on major investment projects, based on the last year for which actual data were available (1990). A 12 percent adjustment is made to convert estimates from c.i.f to fo.b.. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDate of Latest Observation Date Received Frequency of Data 21 Frequency of Reporting 2/ Source of Update Mode of Reporting Confidentiality Frequency of Publication Antigua rnd Barbuda: Core Statistical Indicators (as of December 2 1,200O) Central Overal 1 Interna- Bank Reserve/ Current Govem- External Exchange tional Balance Base Broad Inkiest Consumer Exports/ Account mcnt GDP/ Debt/ Debt Rates Resen 1 M Sheet Money Money Rates Price Index Importsl/ Balance Balance GNP Service I 1 o/o0 1 o/o0 Y/O0 9100 9100 1999 1999 1999 1999 1999 12/00 12100 1 l/00 1 l/00 1 l/O0 woo 9100 9100 9100 8100 M M M M M A A A A A M M M M M A A A A A Ministry Ministry ECCB ECCB ECCB ECCB ECCB ECCB ECCB ofFinance ECCB of Financ e-mail e-mail e-mail e-mail C-mail e-mail e-mail fax fax fax Wnres- tricted Unres- tricted Unres- tricted Unres- tricted Unres- tricted umes- tlicted UnrCS- For use by For use by For use b tricted staff staff Staff M M M M M A A A A A I/ Information refers to merchandise exports; latest observed import data rcfcr to 1989. 2/ D=daily, M=monthly, W=weekly, Q=quarterly, A=annual. I W 00 I Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-39- Public Information Notice (PIN) No. FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE APPENDIXIII International Monetary Fund 700 lgth Street, NW Washington, D. C. 20431 USA IMF Concludes Article IV Consultation with Antigua and Barbuda On March 7, 2001, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded the Article IV consultation with Antigua and Barbuda.’ Background After a period of slow growth in the first half of the 1990s (2 percent in 1990-95) due in part to a decline in large public sector investment and tourism-related projects, economic growth averaged 5 percent during 1998-99. The recovery was led by post-hurricane reconstruction activity and increased stayover visitor arrivals. However, the tourism performance was held back by Hurricanes Georges in 1998 and Lenny in 1999. Real GDP growth is estimated to have slowed to 3% percent in 2000 owing to weakness in the tourism sector. ’ Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial information, and discusses with officials the country’s economic developments and policies. Cn return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the country’s authorities. This PIN summarizes the views of the Executive Board as expressed during the March 7, 2001 Executive Board discussion based on the staff report. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 40 - APPENDIX III The central government’s overall fiscal deficit rose to 9% percent of GDP in 1999, from 5 percent in 1998, owing to a sharp decline in revenues caused mainly by a one-time exemption of import duties on automobiles and increases in both current and capital expenditures. The overall deficit of the consolidated public sector increased less than that of the central government reflecting the reduction in interest obligations as a result of debt restructuring. In 2000, the central government’s overall deficit is estimated to have risen to 12 percent of GDP, because of delays in implementing revenue measures and a boost in expenditures related to increased public employment and higher capital spending. However, the overall deficit of the consolidated public sector declined to 7% percent of GDP, reflecting efforts to improve the operating performance of public enterprises, The external current account deficit narrowed to 15% percent of GDP in 1999, from 16X percent of GDP in 1998, as large insurance payments were made for hurricane damage. With imports of automobiles declining sharply after the expiration of the temporary duty exemptions in 1999, a further narrowing in the deficit to 13 percent of GDP is estimated for 2000. Following large reschedulings in 1997 and 1998, the restructuring of official bilateral external debts with France in 1999 and the United Kingdom in 2000, and of a large commercial debt in 2000, further reduced Antigua and Barbuda’s external arrears to an estimated 16% percent of GDP. In the area of external policies, import monopolies were removed for sugar and rice, although not for vegetables and petroleum products. Broad money grew by 10% percent during 1999, considerably faster than nominal GDP but not as fast as domestic credit. In 2000, broad money is estimated to have grown by 4% percent in line with GDP while credit to the private sector rose by an estimated 10% percent. To meet credit demands Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4l- APPENDIX m from the public and private sectors, commercial banks borrowed from ECCB area banks and head offices. The quality of bank loan portfolios deteriorated in 1999 but improved somewhat in 2000 as most government loans being serviced with earmarked revenue have become current. Following the issuance in 1999 of unfavorable financial advisories by the United States and the United Kingdom, laws and regulations governing the offshore financial sector were revised with a view to improving supervision and management. Increased enforcement has resulted in the reduction in the number of offshore banks to 25, from 52 in 1998. The authorities intend to participate in an IMF assessment of the quality of offshore regulation and supervision in the subregion. Executive Board Assessment <Begin Typing Here> Public hformafion Notices (PINS) are issued, (i) at the request of a member country, following the conclusion of the Article IV consultation for countries seeking to make known the views of the IMF to the public. This action is intended to strengthen IMF surveillance over the economic policies of member countries by increasing the transparency of the IMF’s assessment of these policies; and (ii) following policy discussions in the Executive Board at the decision of the Board. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 42 - APPENDIX III Antigua and Barbuda: Selected Economic Indicators Output and prices 1996 ; 1997 Est. Pro]. 1996 1999 2000 Real GDP Consumer prices (average) Investment and saving 6.1 5.6 3.9 3.0 0.4 3.3 In percent of GDP Gross domestic investment Gross domestic savings Public sector operations 35.5 32.8 32.4 16.4 19.0 16.1 Public sector revenue 27.8 27.2 27.6 Public sector expenditure 28.1 28.5 27.0 Public sector savings -0.2 -1.3 0.6 Public sector balance -4.0 -8.4 -4.4 In millions of U.S. dollars unless otherwise specified External sector Merchandise exports 37.7 37.9 37.4 Merchandise imports 339.2 325.8 344.3 Gross tourism receipts 262.6 287.5 288.6 Current account balance -103.6 -80.1 -101.4 Current account (in percent of GDP) -19.1 -13.8 -16.3 Overall balance -44.0 -29.3 -2.6 External public debt 1/ 471.0 467.4 422.7 Public sector external arrears 457.0 395.9 172.2 Real effective exchange rate (1990=100) 104.9 110.4 109.8 5.0 3.6 1.1 0.0 32.8 29.9 17.3 16.9 27.4 29.5 29.2 30.3 -1.7 -0.8 -7.7 -7.5 35.9 39.8 389.2 375.0 310.2 310.3 -101.7 -89.4 -15.6 -13.0 -17.2 -21.4 393.5 384.9 160.5 111.9 114.7 123.4 Changes in percent of broad money at the beginning of period Monetary sector Net domestic assets Credit to the private sector Broad (M2) money 10.6 17.5 13.3 11.0 9.6 12.9 17.2 6.7 7.2 9.1 -1.9 8.3 15.2 10.6 4.3 Sources: Antiguan authorities: Eastern Caribbean Central Bank; and IMF staff estimates and projections. l/ Includes arrears on principal and interest. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public