DOCUMENT OF INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND NOT FOR PUBLIC USE FOR l-----l AGENDA SM/02/4 CONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION January 4,2002 To: Members of the Executive Board From: The Secretary Subject: Republic of the Marshall Islands- Staff Report for the 2001 Article IV Consultation Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staff report for the 2001 Article IV consultation with the Republic of the Islands, which is tentatively scheduled for discussion on Friday, January 18, 2002. At the time of circulation of this paper to the Board, the Secretary’s Department has not received a communication from the authorities of the Republic of the Marshall Islands indicating whether or not they consent to the Fund’s publication of this paper; such communication may be received after the authorities have had an opportunity to the paper. Questions may be referred to Mr. Mtihleisen (ext. 38686) and Mr. Baig (ext. 38790). Att: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicCONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND REPUBLIC OF THE MARSHALL ISLANDS Staff Report for the 2001 Article IV Consultation Prepared by the Staff Representatives for the 200 1 Consultation with the Republic of the Marshall Islands Approved by Anoop Singh and Michael Hadjimichael January 3,2002 a Discussions were held in Majuro during October 10-19. The staff team comprised Messrs. Miihleisen (head), Baig (both APD), and Fukushima (OAP). Mr. di Maio (OED) also took part in the discussions. The visit overlapped with an AsDB mission. Supporting analysis is provided in the accompanying Selected Issues paper. a The team met with Finance Minister Konelios; senior officials at the President’s Office; Ministries of Education, Finance, Foreign Affairs, Health and Environment, and Resources and Development; the Marshall Islands Marine Resources Authority (MIMRA); the Marshall Islands Social Security Administration (MISSA); the Marshall Islands Visitors Authority (MIVA); the Public Services Commission (PSC); and with business and financial sector representatives. 0 The Republic of the Marshall Islands (RMI) is on a 24-month consultation cycle. The last Article IV consultation discussions for the RMI were held in September 2000, in conjunction with those for the Federated States of Micronesia (FSM). To ensure a more even staff work flow, the consultations are proposed henceforth to take place in alternate years. In adjusting to the new cycle, the Article IV consultation with the RMI, originally planned for 2002, was advanced. 0 The RMI has accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4 and maintains an exchange system that is free of restrictions on payments and transfers for current international transactions. a The RMI is included in the FATF’s anti-money laundering list and has been classified by the FSF as a Group III Offshore Financial Center. 0 The authorities have started the preparation of documents necessary to consent to the Eleventh Quota increase, and they also intend to accept the Fourth Amendment to the Articles of Agreement. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2- Contents Page I. Summary and Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 II. Recent Economic Developments and Outlook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5 III. Policy Discussions ...................................................................................................... .7 A. Fiscal Policy.. ....................................................................................................... .7 B. Economic Development and Governance ........................................................... 10 C. Financial Sector Issues ....................................................................................... .14 D. Other Issues.. ...................................................................................................... .16 Iv. Staff Appraisal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .16 Boxes 1. The Compact of Free Association with the U.S.. ........................................................ .4 2. Fiscal Challenges Posed by Global Climate Change ................................................. 11 3. Export Prospects and External Competitiveness ...................................................... .15 4. Money Laundering and Tax Haven Issues.. .............................................................. .17 Tables 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. Basic Data, 1996-2002 ............................................................................................. .2 1 Central Government Finances, 1997-2002.. ............................................................. .22 Balance of Payments, 1997-2002 ............................................................................. .23 External Vulnerability Indicators, 1996-2002.. ........................................................ .24 Social Indicators.. ...................................................................................................... .25 Figure 1. External Grants and Growth in Selected Pacific Island Countries, 1987-1999 . . . . . . . . 12 Annexes I. Illustrative Long-Term Fiscal Adjustment Scenario.. ............................................... .26 II. Fund Relations .......................................................................................................... .29 III. Relations with the World Bank .................................................................................. 31 Iv. Relations with the AsDB .......................................................................................... .32 V. Relations with PFTAC .............................................................................................. .34 VI. Statistical Issues.. ...................................................................................................... .35 VII. Draft Public Information Notice ............................................................................... .37 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3- 1. SUMMARYANDBACKGROUND 1. The economy of the Republic of the Marshall Islands (RMI) is highly dependent on financial support from the United States. A former U.N. Trust Territory under U.S. administration, the RM-a group of atolls and islands in the central Pacific with a population of about 52,000-receives substantial external assistance under a Compact agreement that is currently being renegotiated (Box 1). Although having fallen sharply in recent years, per-capita GDP of around $2,000 remains one of the highest among the Pacific island economies. However, the income distribution is relatively uneven-with a high incidence of poverty on some outer atolls-and social indicators lag behind other countries in the same income group. At the conclusion of the 2000 Article IV consultation in January 2001, Directors emphasized the need to invigorate economic growth in the private sector, reduce the role of the public sector, and strengthen the fiscal position, especially in view of prospective reductions in external assistance over the medium term. 2. Economic development has been hampered by a deeply ingrained reliance on , 12” the public sector as a provider of income and services. Except for small contributions from agriculture, fishery, and tourism, the private sector has evolved mainly to meet the needs of the government which, through the budget, distributes the bulk of Compact funds in the economy. Although growth prospects have suffered from factors that are common to most small island economies-including geographic dispersion, diflicult access to world markets, limited diversification (exports consist mostly of copra and coconut oil), and exposure to natural disasters-impediments also include restrictions on foreign direct investment, a relatively unskilled labor force and an underdeveloped financial system. The strength of the U.S. dollar, which is used as domestic currency, may also have inhibited export growth for the past several years. 3. Since 1995, the economy has faced drastic cutbacks in public expenditure and employment. In the early 199Os, the RMI had borrowed substantial funds on commercial terms against future Compact receipts in order to finance domestic infrastructure projects. However, the economy subsequently failed to pick up as expected, and the government curtailed current expenditure by about 15 percent in nominal terms between 1995 and Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4- Box 1. The Compact of Free Association with the U.S. The Republic of the Marshall Islands (RMI) gained independence under a Compact of Free Association with the U.S. in 1986. The RMI was part of the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands (TTPI), created by the United Nations in 1947, with the U.S. as the trustee. In 1978, the FWI voted to separate from the TTPI and become self-governing under a constitution that came into effect in 1979. As part of tht post-Trustee relationship, the Compact was signed between the RMI and the U.S. in 1982, and eventually came into force in November 1986. The three goals of the Compact are to: (i) secure self-government for the RMI; (ii) assure certain national security rights for the RMI and the U.S.; and (iii) assist the RMI in its efforts to promote economic self-sufficiency. The economic provisions of the Compact were effective for a 15-year period, with the option of re-negotiation for another 15 years. Since 1987, the RMI has received roughly $950 million in Compact funds, split into Marshall Islands: Compact Flows I/ 2/ live categories-(i) compensation for nuclear 80% loss and injury (about $300 million); (ii) lease payments for the missile testing base at Kwajalein Atoll ($100 million); (iii) block grants to the FWII government ($250 million); (iv) U.S. federal program expenditures (FAA, Postal Services, etc.) requested by the authorities ($150 million); and (v) inflation adjustments worth $150 million. Nearly a third of the annual flows are earmarked for development spending on Kwajalein and for rent payments to the eighty-four land-owners and their dependents in the atoll. Payments for nuclear damages to inhabitants of several atolls are made separately from the income of a U.S. financed $150 million trust fund. However, the returns from the trust fund have been significantly below expectations over the past decade, and with mounting claims, the fund has experienced a decline in its original principal. Following the expiration of the original agreement at end-September 2001, the Compact provides for a two-year negotiation period to agree on the scope of further U.S. assistance.’ Discussions for a new arrangement began in July, against the backdrop of a series of reports from the U.S. General Accounting Office which concluded that, despite the substantial financial support received in the past, economic development in the RMI had been unsatisfactory. In this context, the U.S. is negotiating to add new provisions to the Compact agreement that would replace lump-sum assistance (excluding Kwajalein rent payments, terms of which are being negotiated separately with the land-owners) with sector-specific grants in a number of priority areas, including public sector reform, capacity building, private sector development, health care, education, and infrastructure. The grants would become part of an overall plan with performance indicators, to be reviewed on an annual cycle, and disbursements would be linked to progress made toward specific objectives. A portion of the funds would also be directed toward building up the Marshall Islands Intergenerational Trust Fund (MIITF), the income from which is expected to eventually replace the assistance received under the Compact. The authorities are negotiating for an extension of the Compact economic provisions beyond the 15- year timeframe, as well as for additional nuclear compensation. Concrete monetary terms are to be discussed during the second round of negotiations, which began in December 200 1. However, the RMI ha accepted the U.S. stipulation that the provisional financing provided in the next two years will not be used as collateral for further loans. The negotiations will need to be completed by mid-2002 in order for the U.S. Congress to ratify the agreement before the end of the transition period in September 2003. ’ During the renegotiation period, the Compact provides for funding to continue in FY2002 and FY2003 a the average level of the past 15 years (in real terms), leading to a substantial increase over FY2001 levels. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-5- 1999 in order to maintain debt service payments.’ With private activity contracting along with the public sector, real GDP has dropped to pre-independence levels, making the RMI the weakest growth performer in the region (Table 1). 4. With the retirement of all commercial debt by end-FY2001, the focus for fiscal policy has now shifted from short-term liquidity management to achieving budget sustainability.* In addition to resources being freed up by a sharp decline in debt service, public finances will benefit from a temporary increase in Compact grants during the transition to a new agreement for FY2004. The long-term fiscal outlook remains difficult, however, as the bulk of U.S. Compact assistance is likely to be phased out over time, requiring the accumulation of a fiscal buffer to manage the transition to the post-Compact era. Moreover, the suggested shift from general budgetary grants to project aid-coupled with the possible introduction of performance conditionality (see Box 1)-could imply that future Compact flows could be more volatile, requiring flexible policy responses. 5. The discussions focused primarily on maintaining macroeconomic stability over the next two years. Urging the authorities to withstand expenditure pressures caused by the temporary fiscal windfall, the mission focused on steps to contain public expenditure, develop permanent sources of government revenue, and improve the domestic tax structure. The mission highlighted the need to build sizeable fiscal reserves to guard against future economic shocks, and also recommended further measures to ensure longer-term fiscal sustainability. Moreover, the mission called for a determined effort to improve fiscal governance and boost the government’s administrative capacity-a key ingredient for the success of various development initiatives-while urging the speedy removal of key obstacles for private sector growth. 6. The mission also discussed steps to deepen financial intermediation and strengthen domestic bank supervision. As continued presence on the FATF anti-money laundering list could have detrimental consequences for the RMI’s financial system, the mission encouraged the authorities to further cooperate with U.S. authorities and the FATF. II. RECENTECONOMICDEVELOPMENTSANDOUTLOOK 7. The fiscal situation developed to the verge of crisis in FY2001, limiting the growth contribution of the public sector. Reflecting the ongoing deterioration in domestic revenue generation, the government had to continue to reign in spending in order to generate sufficient resources for a final $25 million commercial debt payment (Table 2). Although an exceptionally strong inflow of grants from Taiwan Province of China brought the fiscal surplus to almost $18 million (17 percent of GDP), useable government financial assets remained precariously low throughout the year, and a fiscal crisis was only avoided with the ’ Spending cuts concentrated on public employment, which fell by a third over this period. * The fiscal year ends on September 30 (e.g., FY2001 ran from 10/l/00 to 9/30/01). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-6- disbursement of the first tranche of a $12 million AsDB loan in June. The financial situation of the social security system was of particular concern as fund shortages forced a temporary cutback in health services. 8. Although statistical deficiencies make an assessment difficult, private sector activity appears to have remained subdued. A rise in copra production and the first full year of operations of a new tuna loin processing plant are estimated to have contributed to a small rebound in private sector activity-bringing overall GDP growth to an estimated 2 percent in FY2001-but other sectors largely stagnated in the face of low government demand. Inflation, as measured by the Majuro-based CPI, remained unchanged below Commodity Prices: Copra andlbna us dui,.n orr,h”r,l”n 1 percent. 9. Although weak domestic demand continued to reduce imports in FY2001, the trade balance was adversely affected by the terms of trade. Compared to the mid-1990s, imports have now been reduced on a sustained basis across all product categories, and exports have not recovered from the collapse of a major fish exporting company in 1997 (Table 3). The rise in copra shipments has not translated into significantly higher export earnings, owing to a continuing slump in J world markets, and low tuna prices have also had a dampening effect on fishing license fees. Visitor numbers dropped sharply in the weeks after the September 11 attacks, mainly because of temporary flight suspensions, but have since recovered. Although the current account surplus moved into surplus in FY2000 and FY2001, boosted by a pick-up in official transfers, the surpluses were needed to complete the repayment of external commercial debt (Table 4). 10. Efforts to attract large-scale foreign investment and develop new export products have proved mostly futile. While larger investors continue to show little interest in the RMI, a recent pickup in small business activities by mostly Asian immigrants is being perceived as a threat to established Marshallese operators, and is now being fought with a restricted list for small-scale FDI. Initiatives to exploit abundant natural resources to generate stronger export revenues (e.g., in aquaculture or outer island tourism) have not grown much beyond pilot status, partly because of their risky and capital-intensive nature, and partly because they remain heavily dependent on complementary public infrastructure funding 11. The FY2002 budget aims to provide a boost to growth through a rise in expenditure by 5 percent of GDP compared to the FY2001 outcome (see Table 2). The increase is to some extent related to external project funds-which tend to carry a high import content-but growth could reach 4 percent in FY2002, particularly since private Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-7- activity is also anticipated to rise with government spending.3 Useable fiscal reserves would remain virtually nonexistent, however. 12. The medium term outlook remains bleak as private sector growth is likely to remain insufficient to compensate for possible cutbacks in Compact financing. Uncertainties remain over the level of future Compact flows pending the completion of negotiations between the RMI and the U.S., but further shrinkage in the government sector will likely be unavoidable. Without major private investment in sight, per-capita income growth over the medium-term risks being minimal, or falling. In view of the RMI’s strong demographic pressures, migration flows to the U.S. are likely to intensify as a result. III. POLICY DISCUSSIONS 13. The discussions centered on three topics: (i) fiscal policy in the transition to a new Compact agreement; (ii) governance issues and the structural reform agenda; and (iii) financial sector supervision and anti-money laundering efforts. A. Fiscal Policy 14. The mission strongly cautioned that the FY2002 budget’s overall expenditure increase appeared unsustainable and left the RMI highly exposed to external shocks. The budget boosts capital spending on health and education infrastructure, which the mission agreed was necessary to address the deterioration in health standards and boost human capital. However, the need to preserve macro stability requires stronger efforts to reduce spending in other areas and curb the potential for budgetary overruns-particularly on copra and health subsidies, as well as relating to spending needs by Air Marshall Islands. Taking into account the need to transfer resources into the Marshall Islands Intergenerational Trust Fund (MIITF), the staff recommended that-while awaiting the revenue effects of additional tariff measures (see below)-overall government expenditure should be held as close as possible to FY2001 levels in both FY2002 and FY2003 to avoid a sharp decline in FY2004 when funds under the U.S. Compact are expected to decline (see tabulation).4 Consistent with this assessment, the mission urged the authorities to use the bulk of the temporary increase in Compact funds to rebuild financial assets. This would reduce the need for either costly 3 The ongoing global slowdown is unlikely to add much downside risk since the export environment has already been extremely weak, owing to rock-bottom copra prices. 4 This analysis is complicated by the fact that the authorities could not provide a breakdown for the amount of spending tied to the receipt of external project grants, which accounts for a substantial amount of overall expenditure. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-8- commercial borrowing or tapping into deposits reserved for the MIITF in the case of an economic shock, both of which would be highly detrimental to the RMI’s fiscal standing.5 Marshall Islands: Sustainable Fiscal Profile, 2001-2004 (In millions of U.S. dollars) FY2001 FY2002 FY2003 FY2004 Est. Budget Proj. Proj. Proj. Total revenue and grants 83.8 83.6 83.6 84.9 Total expenditure 66.3 74.0 67.4 67.2 Overall balance 17.6 9.6 16.2 17.7 Net government debt repayment 19.7 -4.7 -4.7 -2.0 Change in government financial assets -2.1 14.3 21.0 19.7 Of which: MIITF 0.0 15.0 15.0 15.0 Memorandum items: Trust Fund assets 11 0.0 17.0 17.0 34.9 Useable government financial assets 2/ 0.7 0.0 6.0 10.7 li Includes a $2 million annual off-budget contribution from Taiwan Province of China. 21 Cash and cash equivalents that are not reserved for specific uses. 77.9 67.1 10.8 0.5 10.3 10.0 48.6 10.9 J 15. The authorities acknowledged that there was a need for fiscal reserves, but explained that pent-up demands limited the room for reducing public expenditure. Officials noted that public employment and subsidies had already been sharply reduced, and several years of curtailed spending had led to underinvestment in crucial areas. They confirmed, however, that the budget maintained a general public sector wage freeze during FY2002, notwithstanding some selected payroll increases. The mission argued that there was further room to cut nonessential public sector employment, and the remaining subsidies could be quickly scaled back, notably through an overdue adjustment of copra producer prices. The mission also urged the authorities to shift expenditure into FY2003 while using the next budget for further fiscal adjustment. 16. Stronger efforts at revenue generation could mitigate pressures on the expenditure side. The authorities were hopeful that potential budgetary overruns could be offset by tariff measures passed in October 200 1, including the rise in the general tariff level from 5 to 8 percent, the elimination of most of the remaining exemptions for private sector enterprises, and the introduction of unit tariffs for selected imports (e.g., cars) to counter tariff evasion.6 They explained that their focus was now shifting to collecting sizeable tax 5 Legislation governing the operation of the MIITF has been passed, but the trust fund will come formally into existence only after the Compact negotiations have been concluded. In the meantime, funds destined for the MIITF are parked in ordinary government deposits. 6 Revenue from these measures (which were not included in the FY2002 budget projection) could amount to about $1 million or more in FY2002, but their effect may be limited by weaknesses in the RMI’s tax administration. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-9- arrears that in most cases dated back several years. While welcoming these efforts, the mission also urged the adoption of measures with a more substantial revenue impact, e.g., by bringing the public sector under the tariff and gross revenue tax net and making income taxation more progressive (including by making Compact-related rent incomes subject to income tax), which could have the potential to yield some $1-2 million in annual revenue.7 Although the authorities were reluctant to raise fishing license fees-fearing negative effects on fishing volumes and transshipment revenues-the mission suggested extracting greater revenues from the RMI’s rich marine resources, both through stricter enforcement of existing fee requirements and, to the extent practical, the increased use of price instruments. 17. Although the administration of the Marshall Islands Social Security Administration (MISSA) has been strengthened, measures are still required to address financial imbalances. Following a change in management, MISSA’s reporting and accounting practices have significantly improved, the completion of audits for several past years has led to criminal prosecution in a number of cases, and efforts are underway to collect substantial arrears in payroll contributions owed by employers. While the number of medical referrals remained broadly unchanged in FY200 1, the completion of a hospital in Ebeye is expected to reduce demand for referrals in the coming months. However, government subsidies worth $2X million budgeted for FY2002 are still unlikely to cover the costs of the program, notwithstanding the recent increase in medical payroll contribution rates from 2% to 3% percent.8 Supporting the authorities’ intent to reduce subsidies further, the mission called for an increase in co-payments on a means-tested basis and other cost-saving measures, including cutbacks in patient per diems and payments for medical escorts. 18. Looking ahead, the government was confident of a successful renegotiation of the Compact agreement. Senior officials accepted the need to demonstrate a commitment to sound fiscal management and accountability for Compact support to respond to U.S. concerns over its effective use. They were concerned, however, that ambitious development targets coupled with strict conditionality under the “sectoral grants” approach favored by the U.S. could lead to disruptions in the flow of Compact assistance and contribute to significant macroeconomic volatility. They therefore emphasized the importance of finding a mechanism to tailor development targets closely to the RMI’s limited project implementation capacity. 7 The increase in tariff rates corrects a pre-election decision to reduce tariffs from 12 to 5 percent in 1999. The measure is not expected to have distortionary effects since there is no manufacturing sector of note and imports are mainly for domestic consumption (see below). ’ Contributions at this rate are paid by both employer and employee. Pension contribution rates have been similarly increased to 7 percent in early 200 1. However, the finances of the RMI’s retirement fund remain under pressure, with an actuarial report characterizing them as being “on the edge of soundness”. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-lO- 19. It is doubtful whether future U.S. support will be sufficient to enable the RMI to eventually become fiscally self-sustaining. The mission strongly welcomed the government’s decision to set aside a substantial part of the resources freed by the decline in external debt service to establish the MIITF. Maintaining this contribution would likely prove a considerable challenge if fiscal revenues were to return to last year’s levels in FY2004, particularly since-in the absence of a medium-term budget framework-the authorities have not yet identified potential savings that would enable them to reach that target. Long-term projections by the staff indicate that sizeable fiscal surpluses (around 8-10 percent of GDP) would be required to build up the MIITF to a size sufficient to eventually replace Compact revenues (Annex I). The related policy measures-including further reductions in public employment in noncore areas and adjustments in real public wages toward lower private sector levels-will be difficult to implement, given spending pressures caused by a strongly growing population.’ The government will also have to deal with the increasing costs from global climate change (Box 2). B. Economic Development and Governance 20. The RMI’s development strategy rightly focuses on long overdue improvements in fiscal governance. Partly because of shortcomings in fiscal management, the RMI has so far failed to translate substantial budgetary assistance into higher living standards (Figure l).” The government’s strategy framework therefore puts a welcome emphasis on improving budgetary processes, increasing transparency and fiscal control, and boosting the government’s administrative capacities. l1 Indeed, in the context of the recent AsDB loan, the government has already committed to improving the presentation and execution of the annual budget as well as establishing a medium-term budget framework. However, progress in fiscal management has so far been minimal, partly owing to personnel shortages and lack of specific fiscal expertise. 21. The mission emphasized that swift progress in budget preparation and execution was crucial to the success of the reform program. Given the authorities’ limited technical capacities, the mission cautioned against the introduction of unnecessary complex budget techniques while urging adherence to basic accounting principles. In supporting PFTAC recommendations, the mission called for documentation and reporting procedures that 9 Relative to GDP, the RMI’s government sector is considerably larger than in other Pacific island countries. Output indicators on public health and education are generally worse, however. These inefficiencies were flagged in last year’s Staff Report (SM/00/266). lo See Chapter II by Taimur Baig in the accompanying Selected Issues paper. l1 The strategy framework is contained in Vision 2018, a document listing structural reform priorities that was discussed during a recent national economic summit. It will be developed further through a number of “master plans” in areas such as infrastructure, tourism, IT, and private sector development, which are to be implemented from mid-2002 onward. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- ll- Box 2. Fiscal Challenges Posed by Global Climate Change A recent report by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) identified small island states among the countries most seriously impacted by climate change.’ The report projected that globally averaged surface temperatures could increase by 1% to 6 “C over the next century, while average sea levels would rise by 0.09 to 0.88 meters over the same period. Along with these trends, the report predicted changes in the variability of climate, as well as in the frequency and intensity of some extreme climate phenomena. Owing to their location in the open ocean and low topography (the highest elevation in the RMI reaches an altitude of 6 meters), atoll islands such as the Marshall Islands would be especially exposed to such developments. A more unstable natural environment would significantly affect output volatility in the RMI. The RMI has already experienced a number of climate-related events in recent years, including a sharp swing in fisheries revenues as tuna swarms have been driven into and out of the RMI’s territorial waters by El Niiio currents, substantial damage caused by a major typhoon in 1997, and lower agricultural output related to a lengthy drought. The intensification and increased occurrence of such events could have a major impact on subsistence agriculture and fishing, as well as on export incomes which are also derived mainly from natural resources. Flexible macroeconomic adjustment mechanisms would be needed to mitigate the associated effects on income. To offset fluctuations in private sector income, the government would need to build a sufficiently large fiscal buffer, which could also be drawn upon to provide disaster aid and income support to the most vulnerable segments of the population, In addition, the government could consider offering, or arranging for, weather-related insurance products to protect export incomes. Over the medium to long-term, even a relatively minor increase in global temperatures-under an optimistic IPCC scenario-could prove difficult for the RMI. Although scientific uncertainties remain, the IPCC expects that even a small further rise in sea levels could lead to enhanced coastal erosion, increased risk from storm surges, reduced resilience of reef-based ecosystems, and saltwater intrusion into already fragile freshwater resources. As a result, some islands could become uninhabitable over the next decades, causing dislocation and putting greater strains on the RMI’s remaining resources. Substantial budgetary resources could be required to cope with global climate change. The main challenge would be to protect the main islands, which could entail massive investments in flood protection and measures to secure water supplies. The government would probably also need to deal with the cost of significant migration flows, both internally and to foreign destinations (which could raise a question regarding the allocation of the intergenerational trust fund between residents and migrants). Given the time required to build up sufficient financial assets, this raises the importance of achieving substantial fiscal surpluses over the foreseeable future. The RMI has been active in raising international awareness and garnering financial support. In recognition of the potential threat, the government has joined the Alliance of Small Island States (AOSIS) to influence the outcome of global climate discussions, and recently joined 13 other Pacific island states in endorsing the development of a long-term programmatic approach to build capacity for coping with climate change, including through support from the South Pacific Regional Environment Programme (SPREP), the United Nations, and other international organizations. ’ Climate Change 2001: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability, Report of Working Group II of the U.N. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Geneva, 2001. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12- Figure 1. External Grants and Growth in Selected Pacific Island Countries, 1987-99 In thousands of U.S. dollars 15 12 9 6 700 600 500 400 300 200 100 0 -100 -200 -300 Cumulative Grants per Capita I 1 I Marshall Islands Micronesia Samoa Tonga Vanuatu Fiji In 1995 U.S. dollars Change in Real GDP per Capita Fiji Marshall Islands Micronesia Samoa Tonga Vanuatu 15 12 9 6 3 0 700 600 500 400 300 200 100 0 -100 -200 -300 Sources: 2001 World Bank Development Indicators; and IMF staff estimates. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13 - facilitated economic analysis, in particular by clearly separating discretionary from non- discretionary spending and unifying the various government accounts into a consolidated budget format. Moreover, improvements in cash flow management would help reduce uncertainties over the timing and continuity of government funding. The mission also recommend an increase in the staffing of the Budget Office, including with a qualified accountant, to make headway in time for the FY2003 budget. 22. Similarly, while taking note of the authorities’ development planning efforts, the mission emphasized the need to quickly boost the government’s administrative capabilities. Government officials explained that they intended to concentrate policy planning functions in a yet-to-be created agency, while raising the efficiency of the public service by creating a more competitive job environment and introducing mandatory job training, which would however require some time to put in place. The mission pointed out that administrative improvements did not have to await the completion of the planning process, as MISSA’s example had shown. In particular, TA resources could be focused on providing on-the-job training for senior officials, and a limited number of experienced professionals could be employed to generate improvements in core government services and build up administrative experience. In response to concerns that hiring expatriate personnel would come at a considerable cost, the mission suggested tapping the growing pool of Marshallese graduates living abroad, reducing spending on purely administrative functions, and allowing greater wage differentiation within the public sector. 23. The authorities agreed with the mission that private sector growth was key to economic development. However, officials were largely opposed to further government withdrawal from the provision of infrastructure services, arguing that only public operators had an interest in providing adequate service levels, notwithstanding claims by private sector representatives that they could run services more efficiently. 0 Transportation and infrastructure. Government officials pointed out that the sharp pickup in copra production over the past year had again highlighted the importance of the government in arranging for reliable means of inter-island ship transportation. The mission suggested that transportation and infrastructure services could mainly be provided through private operators, with contracts awarded on a competitive basis, although both sides agreed that the government would need to strengthen its capacity to supervise and enforce agreed service standards. 0 Public enterprise reform. Direct subsidy payments have been considerably reduced in recent years, but the government has yet to follow through with its intentions to withdraw from unprofitable business activities, especially in the agriculture, fishing and tourism sectors. In the meantime, the mission recommended that the government should adopt a hands-off approach to the management of public enterprises, e.g., by appointing independent board members. 24. The mission was also concerned that, as limited administrative resources are to be used for finalizing the RMI’s development strategy over the coming months, the Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14- structural reform process appears to have come effectively to a halt. Prospects for the expansion of traditional copra exports remain clouded by low world market prices and high transportation cost, while government subsidies are required to maintain current production levels. As a result, the mission noted that export-led growth depended on attracting increased foreign investment (Box 3), key obstacles for which were already well identified. It therefore urged the authorities to put priority on achieving noticeable progress in the following areas: 0 Human resources. The lack of sufficiently skilled workers-which cannot be overcome in the short term-is generally regarded as the RMI’s main investment obstacle, given the relatively high wage level and the absence of exchange rate policy tools. The mission therefore reemphasized the need to address existing distortions in the F&II’s wage structure, including through a review of the existing minimum wage legislation as well as downward adjustments in public sector wages at lower skill levels. The government responded that both private and public sector real wages had already fallen sharply in recent years, and that further reductions would lead to an unacceptable decline in living standards, prompting increased migration to the U.S. l Land issues. Following the passage of legislation establishing a national land registry, the registry should be made operative as soon as possible, with the aim of providing investors immunity against title claims that emerge after registered land has been made available through long-term leases. l Investment climate. While acknowledging progress in streamlining approval processes for foreign investment, the mission noted that restrictions on (mostly small- scale) business activities by foreigners had prevented some investment in a number of cases and should be scaled back. More broadly, private sector representatives emphasized the need for a stable business climate characterized by equitable enforcement of existing laws and regulations and a steady tariff and tax environment. C. Financial Sector Issues 25. Financial intermediation continues to be hampered by the lack of readily available loan collateral, owing to uncertainties regarding land ownership and difficulties in foreclosing on default. l2 As a result, banks hold substantial unlent reserves- largely in deposits overseas-and lending is concentrated in short-term consumer loans. To provide greater credit access for small businesses, including start-ups, the authorities are in the process of devising a small-scale credit scheme, with a particular focus on fishing and marine-related enterprises. However, even less formal micro-credit schemes may be needed to bolster the economies of outer islands hit hard by the decline in copra incomes. The l2 As is common among Pacific Island economies, the land tenure system does not recognize individual property rights. Land usually cannot be leased or pledged as security without the agreement of senior clan leaders. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 15- Box 3. Export Prospects and External Competitiveness’ Current situation The RMI lacks essential ingredients for the development of a Table 1. Exports of Pacific Island Countries strong manufacturing sector, including land, proximity to a Land Area FY2000 Number of major export market, and raw materials. It is thus limited to (square export main export exporting products derived from local natural resources, mainly &es) rev.-($m) products copra, coconut oil, fish, and other marine products. However, RMI 70 8.8 2 owing to global overcapacities in most of these markets, export FSM 270 22.0 2 revenues have generally declined, prompting inter alia the Fiji 7,055 481.3 6 collapse of the RMI’s only fish exporter in 1997. Kiribati 266 5.8 2 Samoa 1,158 17.0 6 The RMI has been more successful in generating revenues Tonga 386 11.1 6 from the export of services, mainly in transshipping and Vanuatu 4,707 31.7 7 tourism, and from fish licensing fees. The re-export of diesel fuel Source: Staff documents. to foreign fishing vessels resupplying at Majuro has been the RMI’s largest export item, accounting for $6.6 million in revenues in FY2000, an increase of more than 30 percent from FY1999. Majuro has benefited from its proximity to major tuna fishing grounds, the depth of its port, and a large dock that enables long-line large vessels to harbor in the atoll. Tourism has been constrainec by a lack of attractions (with the exception of the Bikini diving grounds) and limited transportation capacities. Exchange rate and tariff issues Reflecting the RMI’s strong dependency on the U.S., the domestic use of the U.S. dollar has been a natural choice that has imparted much-needed monetary stability. Although the RMI’s real effective exchange rate has strongly appreciated in recent years, the impact on the domestic economy has been fairly limited as prices for the RMI’s main export products are determined on world markets. Although a strong dollar could potentially have affected the tourism sector, the number of visitors-mostly from Japan-has increased in recent years. An optimal tax policy for the RMI would consist of meakures to broaden the tax base, strengthen tax administration, and replace the existing gross revenue tax and import tariff with a VAT. However, strong political opposition and limits to administrative capacity are likely to hinder progress in these areas for several years to come. In view of significant revenue losses following a general tariff reduction from 12 to 5 percent in 1998, the government has recently raised the tariff rate halfway back to 8 percent. However, with imports mainly destined for domestic consumption, this modest increase should not impact negatively on competitiveness or introduce serious distortions in the RMI’s production structure. Indeed, the tariff increase is not expected to have a noticeable impact on consumer prices, similarly to the earlier tariff reduction which was also not passed on to consumers. Strengthening the export environment The key to strengthening the RMI’s export prospects lies in attracting foreign direct investment, as both the required capital and expertise are not readily available on the islands. Most of the RMI’s commercial export ventures have indeed been owned or operated by expatriate companies. However, these have generally received considerable tax and regulatory exemptions (including from the domestic minimum wage law), owing to the high costs of operating from the Marshall Islands and the generally low productivity of the domestic workforce. Given the lack of domestic monetary tools, improvements in human capital and adjustments in the domestic wage structure remain essential to increasing the attractiveness of the RMI for foreign investors. Efforts to harness more of the RMI’s natural resources for export purposes have been underway for some time, but are hampered by high development costs, lack of infrastructure, and environmental concerns. Efforts have so far focused on aquaculture products (seaweed, black pearls, fish farming) and outer island tourism, but there are no signs that this will lead to significant export earnings in the near future. ’ See Chapter III by Shunichi Fukushima and Martin Miihleisen in the accompanying Selected Issues paper. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 16- mission pressed for urgently needed improvements in the governance of the Marshall Islands Development Bank (MIDB), including by bringing the bank under the authority of the banking supervisor and transferring it to majority private ownership. 26. Further efforts are required to strengthen banking supervision. The new Banking Commissioner has made progress in off-site monitoring and is about to launch-with PFTAC assistance-a first round of on-site inspections. Both the Commissioner and private sector representatives were not overly concerned over the rapidly growing loan portfolio of the locally owned commercial bank.i3 They felt that the bank was well run and had skillfully exploited a niche left by the other two banks which had been excessively cautious. Total bank loans in the economy had only increased by 1% percent in calendar 2000, which could not be regarded as excessive. The mission emphasized the need to consider a special loan quality audit if warranted by the initial on-site inspection. 27. The authorities are cooperating with U.S. authorities in the supervision of money flows, but uncertainties over when the RMI will be removed from the FATF list remain (Box 4). The authorities expressed their strong commitment to international cooperation on money laundering issues. In particular, relevant anti-money laundering legislation had been passed, and the newly established the Financial Intelligence Unit (FIU) had recently joined the Egmont group (the international body of FIUs) and was cooperating closely with the U.S. Treasury’s Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN). An FATF team is expected to arrive in January 2002 for further discussions. In order to identify room for further improvements, the mission urged the authorities to submit an application for an OFC Module II assessment by the Fund, which officials said would be forthcoming. D. Other Issues 28. Serious statistical deficiencies continue to impede effective economic surveillance. The mission noted that, despite considerable technical assistance from the Fund and PFTAC, core macroeconomic data were still not being compiled or reported to the Fund on a timely basis. In particular, data on useable government assets and external debt is not provided regularly and falls short of SDDS benchmarks. The authorities responded that they had been preoccupied with work on a UNDP social indicators project, but would shortly refocus their attention on macroeconomic statistics. Lack of response to statistical surveys had emerged as a key problem for the compilation of the production-based national accounts, and the authorities were considering returning to compiling GDP on an income basis. IV. STAFF APPRAISAL 29. With negotiations for the next phase of economic support under the Compact agreement underway, the RMI is at a fiscally critical juncture. Given the RMI’s I3 The other two banks are U.S. owned and subject to FDIC as well as Marshallese supervision. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17- Box 4. Money Laundering and Tax Haven Issues Why is the BMI included in the list of “Non-Cooperative Countries or Territories” by the FATF? . The BMI’s small financial system is closed to offshore banking. The financial system essentially consists of three banks, two of which are branches of U.S. banks, and none of them is engaged in offshore activities. Some 100 offshore banks registered in the RMI in the early 1980s were closed down more than a decade ago, and there are no offshore banks or insurance companies registered in or licensed by the RMI. . However, the RMI has a thriving offshore center involving an international shipping registry and associated maritime agency. There are about 4,000 non-resident companies (NRCs) registered in the RMI. These companies are both represented and administered by the Trust Company of the Marshall Islands (TCMI), an affiliate of a globally operating U.S. company, that operates as registrar under a contract with the RMI government. While about half of all NRCs are directly or indirectly involved in international shipping, there is no specific information on the nature of business for the remainder of the companies. According to the authorities, however, these currently do not include offshore companies, trusts, or partnerships involved in financial asset management. . The FATF’s major concerns relate to the lack of a basic set of anti-money laundering regulations and lack of access to relevant information on international business companies. At the time of the FATF’s June 2000 report, money laundering had not been a criminal offense in the RMI, and there were no satisfactory customer identification or suspicious transaction reporting systems in place. Moreover, there are concerns over the confidentiality and asset protection afforded to NRCs, including through the issue of bearer shares which remain permitted in the RMI. What measures has the government taken to be removed from the list? . The Banking Act was amended in October 2000 to make money laundering a crime and to provide for the introduction of anti-money laundering procedures. The Cabinet also approved the establishment of a domestic Financial Intelligence Unit (FIU) under the responsibility of the Banking Commissioner, which has recently joined the Egmont group (the international umbrella organization for FIUs). In view of the limited domestic expertise, technical assistance has been sought from the U.S. Government, which is likely to respond positively to the request. What remains to be done? . Further progress is needed in implementing the new legislation, including through strengthened supervisory practices and training for both government and banking sector officials. According to the FATF, the RMI has enacted most of the legislation needed to remedy the deficiencies that were originally noted. However, to be removed from the list, the RMI will need to submit concrete implementation plans for evaluation by the FATF ( a visit by FATF experts is slated for January). . One remaining issue could be the definition of financial institutions in the Banking Act, which does not extend to the TCMI. In the authorities’ view, the TCMI-which contributes 2-3 percent of domestic government revenues-should not be covered since is not involved in financial operations (a subsidiary of the company, which is actively soliciting trust business but currently has no funds under management, is already under the authority of the domestic banking supervisor). There are also still questions regarding the identification and supervision of NRCs, although the authorities insist that TCMI’s practices are consistent with those in other countries, including the U.S.. Why is the BMI included on the OECD’s list of “tax havens”, and what needs to be done? . The criteria for identifying tax havens established by the OECD in 1998 include the lack of taxation on financial or services income, and whether a country offers itself as a place where non-residents can escape tax in their country of residence. Other criteria focus on transparency, exchange of information, and local business activities of foreign enterprises. To avoid inclusion in a list of “uncooperative” tax havens, the government will need to commit itself publicly by February 28, 2002, to adopt a schedule of progressive changes to eliminate harmful tax practices by end-2005. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 18- continued strong dependence on external transfers, changes in the composition and volume of future U.S. assistance could have a significant economic impact. Depending on the outcome of the negotiations, the Compact could provide a less generous basis for government operations in the future once a temporary increase in grants expires at the end of FY2003. Compact inflows could also become potentially less stable as the U.S. aims to shift future assistance from block grants toward sectoral grants subject to performance reviews. This could translate into higher output volatility and economic uncertainty. 30. In this situation, the immediate challenge for the authorities is to maintain short- term macroeconomic stability, the key being to resist the use of transitory revenue for fiscal expansion. The government’s first priority should be to preserve a sizeable fiscal surplus over the next two years. The FY2002 budget has rightly concentrated on raising expenditures on health and education, and projects to use at least 60 percent of the resources freed by the decline in external debt service to establish the Marshall Islands Intergenerational Trust Fund (MIITF). However, spending in other areas should be further curtailed to keep expenditure at a level that can be sustained over the medium term. 31. In order to avoid more painful fiscal adjustment later on, the government should take immediate steps to keep actual spending as close as possible to FY2001 levels. As a first step, the general freeze on public sector wages should remain in place, and no new additional government positions be created on a net basis. Public subsidies could also be quickly scaled back, notably through an overdue adjustment in copra producer prices, a sharp increase in (means-tested) co-payments for overseas medical referrals-the number and cost of which need to be substantially reduced-and collection of unpaid social security taxes. At the latest, the FY2003 budget should be used to return spending to a level that is sustainable under the new Compact environment. 32. Room for revenue increases should also be fully exploited. In view of still widespread tax evasion, substantial income could be generated through stepped-up tax collection efforts while further rate increases could be considered as a second best solution. Bringing both government and public sector enterprises under the tariff and gross revenue tax net would boost revenue while reducing distortions in the real economy. To ensure a more equitable distribution of the tax burden, income taxation could be made more progressive by introducing higher-taxed income brackets while raising minimum thresholds, and rent incomes deriving from the Compact should be brought under the income tax net. 33. The long-term sustainability of the RMI’s fiscal position hinges on its ability to eventually substitute Compact income with returns from the MIITF. Building up the MIITF to an adequate size will require maintaining sizeable fiscal surpluses for the next decade and beyond, with appropriate safeguards in place to avoid premature disbursements from the fund. This re-emphasizes the need for sustained cutbacks in government expenditure, in particular through further reduction in public employment in non-core areas and adjustments in real public wages toward lower private sector levels. Efficiency improvements in public services could help mitigate the economic impact of these measures. In view of a potentially more volatile climate environment, additional fiscal reserves are likely to be Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 19- required to react to more frequent natural disasters and other weather-related events potentially caused by global climate change. 34. It will be important to tailor the RMI’s long-term strategy for economic development to the government’s institutional capacities, which are in need of substantial improvement. Progress in budget preparation and execution will be particularly crucial to the success of the reform program. The introduction of a medium-term budget planning framework, supported by documentation and reporting procedures in line with international best practices, would provide the basis for setting budget priorities and fostering greater accountability. Strengthening governance will also require the concentration of technical assistance on projects that would build essential skills of key government officials as well as a reallocation of manpower resources within the government to accommodate the hiring of a limited number of outside specialists. 35. The main focus for the authorities’ structural reform agenda should be the removal of obstacles for private sector development in key areas. While the RMI’s exchange rate regime imparts much-needed monetary stability, stronger efforts are needed to boost export prospects by attracting foreign direct investment, including a reduction in domestic minimum wages, speedy implementation of the provisions of the land registration act, and pruning of the reserved list for small-scale investment. At the same time, the government should withdraw from most of its remaining commercial ventures, although there may be room for providing limited government incentives for investment in some capital- intensive areas on a temporary basis, such as for aquaculture or outer island tourism. 36. More decisive steps are needed to strengthen the RMI’s financial infrastructure and harness domestic savings for financing growth. While the domestic on-lending requirement for commercial banks could be reduced to avoid undue lending pressures, developing micro finance schemes and enhancing access to financial services in remote areas could play an important role in building small-scale productive capacity. Governance of the Marshall Islands Development Bank will need to be substantially enhanced, including by bringing the bank under the authority of the domestic banking supervisor, transferring the bank into majority private ownership, and shifting its activities back from consumer loans towards development lending. 37. Despite welcome progress in off-site banking supervision, domestic supervisory capacities require further improvement. In particular, the Banking Commissioner should be supported by additional staff, and a full round of on-site inspections should be completed over the next six months. In view of the locally owned commercial bank’s importance for the financial system, a special audit could be considered to assess the quality of the bank’s rapidly growing loan portfolio, pending the outcome of the forthcoming inspection round. 38. The authorities are encouraged to continue to work toward the RMI’s removal from the FATF money laundering and OECD tax haven lists. While the RMI has already taken legislative and other steps to strengthen money laundering defenses and cooperates closely with U.S. authorities, it will be important to identify and address, in conjunction with Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 20 - the FATF, any outstanding issues that may still exist. In the meantime, adherence to recently issued reporting requirements will need to be closely supervised. The authorities are encouraged to submit a request for a Module II assessment under the Fund’s Outreach Initiatives for Offshore Financial Centers as soon as possible. 39. Serious statistical deficiencies continue to impede effective economic surveillance. While plans to enlarge the authorities’ statistical capacity with potential help from foreign donors are welcome, priority should be given to achieving progress in implementing recommendations by the PFTAC advisor for a statistics program aimed at improvements in the structure of statistical processes and the establishment and dissemination of a core set of economic statistics, including balance of payments statistics. The authorities are also encouraged to report data on useable government assets and external debt in accordance with SDDS benchmarks. 40. The next Article IV consultation with the Republic of the Marshall Islands is proposed to take place on the 24-month cycle. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2l- Nominal GDP (2OOOiOl): Population (2000): GDP per capita (1999100): Quota: Table 1. Marshall Islands: Basic Data, 1996-2002 l/ $ 10 1.7 million 51,526 $1,974 SDR 2.5 million FY1996 FY1997 FY1998 FY1999 FY2000 FY2001 FY2002 Est. Proj. Real sector Real GDP (percent change) -16.6 -10.1 0.8 -0.2 0.7 2.1 4.0 Consumer prices (percent change) 10.5 5.8 2.9 1.9 0.9 0.8 0.8 Central government finance (in percent of GDP) Revenue and grants Total domestic revenue Grants Expenditure Current Capital Overall balance Stock of arrears 80.5 74.6 74.7 67.3 74.7 82.4 37.1 30.1 25.X 27.4 27.5 22.6 43.4 44.5 4x.9 39.9 47.2 59.8 62.0 65.5 59.2 56.X 65.8 65.2 55.4 57.4 54.2 49.7 56.9 53.9 6.5 8.1 5.0 7.1 8.9 11.3 18.5 9.1 15.5 10.5 8.9 17.3 1.4 0.9 1.3 1.0 1.7 0.0 Usable government financial assets (US$ mn.; end of period) 2/ (In percent of government expenditure) 9.9 9.3 12.4 4.8 2.x 0.7 79.0 23.4 55.6 69.9 55.5 14.5 9.1 0.0 0.0 16.5 15.4 21.9 x.7 4.3 1.1 0.0 Commercial banks (US$ mn.; end-December) 3/ Foreign assets Private sector claims Total deposits One-year time deposit rate (in percent) Average consumer loan rate (in percent) 21.2 18.0 22.2 25.0 30.6 23.4 30.5 32.3 30.4 34.9 36.5 37.7 48.6 45.0 46.4 54.3 58.5 50.3 5.5 5.4 5.1 5.0 6.2 4.6 19.8 18.0 18.7 20.5 19.2 19.2 Balance of payments (US$ mn.) Trade balance Net services Net income Private and official transfers Current account including official transfers (In percent of GDP) Current account excluding official transfers (In percent of GDP) Overall balance (In percent of GDP) External debt (US$ mn.; end of period) 41 (In percent of GDP) External debt service (US$ mn.) (In percent of exports of goods and services) Exchange rate -41.8 -41.3 -49.7 -52.4 -41.9 -38.7 -43.3 -11.6 -11.4 -14.4 -9.7 -3.3 -3.8 -4.3 11.5 12.8 14.3 15.1 19.1 19.9 20.1 42.5 41.5 47.3 39.4 47.3 61.5 59.4 0.6 1.6 -2.5 -7.7 21.2 38.X 31.9 0.6 I.7 -2.6 -7.9 21.5 3X.2 30.5 -41.4 -39.4 -49.2 -46.4 -25.5 -22.1 -26.9 -42.7 -42.7 -51.4 -47.7 -25.8 -21.7 -25.X -8.3 -0.6 3.1 -7.6 -2.0 -2.1 14.3 -8.5 -0.7 3.2 -7.8 -2.0 -2.1 13.5 133.7 126.8 123.0 98.5 X6.7 67.0 70.9 137.8 137.5 128.5 101.2 87.7 65.9 67.0 25.1 25.0 25.7 36.2 20.6 27.3 7.9 108.8 145.2 252.1 360.5 138.5 168.7 4X.8 Exchange rate regime U.S. dollar is the domestic currency Sources: Data provided by the RMI authorities; and Fund staff estimates. li Fiscal year ending September 30. 21 Cash and cash equivalents that are not reserved for specific uses. 31 Data refer to December within the fiscal year; for example, FY2001 refers to December 2000. 41 Government and government-guaranteed debt only. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 22 - Table 2. Marshall Islands: Central Government Finances, 1997-2002 l/ FY 1997 FY 1998 FY 1999 FY 2000 FY 2001 FY 2002 Est. Budget Total revenue and grants 68.8 71.5 65.5 73.9 83.8 83.6 Total domestic revenue 27.8 24.7 26.7 27.2 23.0 24.8 Taxes 18.6 18.7 16.9 17.0 17.7 18.6 Income 8.1 7.6 7.6 8.7 9.6 8.8 Gross rcvcnue 2.7 2.7 2.5 3.2 3.4 4.3 Imports 7.0 7.5 6.2 4.2 3.9 5.0 Other 0.8 0.8 0.5 0.9 0.7 0.6 Nontax 9.2 6.0 9.8 10.2 5.3 6.2 Fishing rights 1.9 1.3 2.3 3.7 2.9 3.5 Fees and charges 1.9 0.6 0.6 0.9 0.5 0.7 Investment income 0.8 1.6 0.6 0.5 0.3 0.2 Other 4.6 2.4 6.3 5.1 1.7 1.8 Grants 41.0 46.8 38.8 46.7 60.9 58.8 Ofwhich : current grants 18.0 22.9 15.8 16.3 17.0 20.5 Compact 21 30.4 30.9 30.9 30.9 30.9 36.9 Other 10.6 15.9 7.9 15.8 30.0 21.9 Total expenditure 60.4 56.6 55.3 65.1 66.3 74.0 Current expenditure 52.9 51.8 48.4 56.2 54.8 58.7 Wages and salaries 18.8 18.0 17.0 17.4 18.7 19.5 Goods and services 17.8 21.6 18.8 25.5 28.7 29.8 Interest payments 6.8 5.4 4.3 2.0 0.9 0.2 Subsidies to public enterprises 2.1 2.6 1.4 1.5 1.5 2.0 Other subsidies and transfers 5.4 3.6 6.1 9.5 4.9 7.0 RIF payment 3/ 2.1 0.6 0.8 0.3 0.1 0.1 Capital expenditure 7.5 4.8 6.9 8.8 11.5 15.3 Current balance -7.1 -4.2 -5.9 -12.7 -14.8 -13.4 Overall balance 8.4 14.9 10.2 8.8 17.6 9.6 Use of Surplus Net government debt repayment Principal repayment Gross borrowing Asset sales 41 Change in government financial assets Ofwhich : Trust Fund 8.4 14.9 10.2 8.8 17.6 7.3 11.0 27.0 5.6 19.7 17.9 19.0 42.3 16.7 25.0 10.7 7.9 15.3 11.1 5.3 0.0 0.0 0.0 -1.3 0.0 1.1 3.8 -16.8 4.4 -2.1 9.6 -4.7 1.2 5.9 0.0 14.3 15.0 (In percent of GDP) Revenue and grants Revenue Grants Expenditure Current Capital Current balance Overall balance 74.6 74.7 67.3 74.7 82.4 79.0 30.1 25.8 27.4 27.5 22.6 23.4 44.5 48.9 39.9 47.2 59.8 55.6 65.5 59.2 56.8 65.8 65.2 69.9 57.4 54.2 49.7 56.8 53.9 55.5 8.1 5.0 7.1 8.9 11.3 14.5 -7.8 -4.4 -6.1 -12.8 -14.5 -12.7 9.1 15.5 10.5 8.9 17.3 9.1 (In millions of U.S. dollars) Memorandum items: Total expenditure excl. non-compact grants Total government financial assets Of which : Trust Fund Usable government financial assets 51 Outstanding government debt Stock of arrears 49.8 40.8 42.5 47.0 9.3 108.1 0.9 12.4 97.0 1.2 47.4 49.3 36.3 29.6 34.0 40.6 4.8 2.8 0.7 70.1 58.5 45.5 1.0 1.7 0.0 52.1 54.9 15.0 0.0 5 I .4 0.0 (In millions of U.S. dollars) Sources: Data provided by the RMI authorities; and Fund staff estimates. l/ The fiscal year ends on September 30. 2/ Not all Compact funds go through the government budget. 3/ Payments under early retirement and separation program (Reduction In Force) financed by an AsDB loan. 41 Negative sign indicates a sale. 51 Cash and cash equivalents that are not reserved for specific uses. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 23 - Table 3. Marshall Islands: Balance of Payments, 1997-2002 11 (In millions of U.S. dollars) FYI997 FY1998 FY1999 FY2000 FY2001 FY2002 Est. Proj. Trade balance -41.3 -49.7 -52.4 -41.9 -38.7 -43.3 Exports, f.o.b. 14.2 7.5 7.2 8.8 10.2 9.5 Imports, f.o.b. -55.6 -57.2 -59.6 -50.7 -48.9 -52.9 Net services -11.4 -14.4 -9.7 -3.3 -3.8 -4.3 Receipts 3.0 2.7 2.9 6.0 6.0 6.2 Travel 2.8 2.6 2.7 2.8 2.9 3.0 Transshipments 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.2 0.1 0.2 Other 0.0 0.0 0.0 3.0 3.0 3.0 Payments -14.4 -17.1 -12.6 -9.3 -9.8 -10.5 Freight and insurance -8.3 -8.6 -8.9 -7.6 -7.8 -7.9 Transportation -4.2 -5.3 -2.3 -1.4 -1.7 -1.8 Communications 0.0 -0.3 -0.1 0.0 0.0 -0.3 Other -1.8 -3.0 -1.2 -0.3 -0.3 -0.4 Net income 12.8 14.3 15.1 19.1 19.9 20.1 Receipts 20.2 21.0 20.7 22.4 22.3 22.1 Fishing rights fees 1.9 1.3 2.3 3.7 2.9 3.5 Registration fees 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.1 1.1 Interest and dividend earnings 2.4 3.2 2.1 2.2 2.6 1.6 Labor income 6.6 6.8 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5 Other 8.3 8.8 8.4 8.4 8.4 8.4 Payments -7.4 -6.7 -5.6 -3.3 -2.4 -2.0 Interest payments -7.4 -6.7 -5.6 -3.3 -2.4 -2.0 Unrequited transfers 41.5 47.3 39.4 47.3 61.5 59.4 Private 0.5 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 Inflows 0.5 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 outflows 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Official 41.0 46.8 38.8 46.7 60.9 58.8 Compact grants 21 30.4 30.9 30.9 30.9 30.9 36.9 Other 10.6 15.9 7.9 15.8 30.0 21.9 Current account including official transfers 1.6 -2.5 -7.7 21.2 38.8 31.9 (In percent of GDP) 1.7 -2.6 -7.9 21.5 38.2 30.5 Current account excluding official transfers -39.4 -49.2 -46.4 -25.5 -22.1 -26.9 (In percent of GDP) -42.7 -51.4 -47.7 -25.8 -21.7 -25.8 Capital and financial account -6.4 -8.5 -19.4 -8.2 -21.8 4.3 Direct investment, net 0.1 0.1 3.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 Short-term liabilities, net 3/ 0.8 2.6 4.6 -2.7 -2.2 0.3 Medium-term liabilities, net -7.2 -11.1 -27.0 -5.6 -19.7 3.9 Inflows 10.7 7.9 15.3 11.1 5.3 5.9 outflows -17.9 -19.0 -42.3 -16.7 -25.0 -2.0 Errors and omissions 4.1 14.1 19.4 -15.0 -19.1 -21.8 Overall balance 41 -0.6 3.1 -7.6 -2.0 -2.1 14.3 Government financial assets 9.3 12.4 4.8 2.8 0.7 15.0 Ofwhich : usable financial assets 9.3 12.4 4.8 2.8 0.7 0.0 (In months of imports of goods and services) 1.6 2.0 0.8 0.6 0.1 0.0 Sources: Data provided by the RMI authorities; and Fund staff estimates. I! Fiscal year ending September 30. 21 Compact funding pertaining to the Kwajalein Atoll Trust Fund and Kwajalein resident and landowner compensation payments are classified as income rather than official transfers. 31 Includes changes in social security fund investments, banking system assets held overseas, and government assets held in the capital and special fund accounts. 41 Approximated by changes in usable government financial assets and assets in the MIITF. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 24 - Table 4. Republic of the Marshall Islands: External Vulnerability Indicators, 1996-2002 FY1996 FYI997 FY1998 FYI999 FY2000 FY2001 FY2002 Financial indicators l/ Commercial bank deposits (12-month percent change) Private sector credit (12-month percent change) Foreign assets/total assets (percent) Nonperforming loans (in percent of total loans) 2/ External indiators Exports (percent change) Imports (percent change) Current account balance (percent of GDP) Including official transfers Excluding official transfers Capital and financial account balance (percent of GDP) Of which: FDI Gross official reserves (in millions of doilars) 3/ Gross official reserves (in months of imports of goods and services) Gross official reserves (in percent of broad money) Short-term external debt Total external debt (percent of GDP) Total external debt (in percent of exports of goods and services) External debt service (in percent of exports of goods and services) 6.6 0.3 38.9 2.7 -12.4 8.6 0.6 -42.7 -32.1 0.0 9.9 1.6 137.8 579.8 108.8 -7.4 5.9 33.0 -28.7 -10.0 1.7 -42.7 -6.9 0.1 9.3 1.6 137.5 737.0 145.2 3.2 -5.9 40.2 0.5 -47.3 2.9 -2.6 -51.4 -8.9 0.1 12.4 2.0 128.5 1204.0 252.1 17.0 14.7 39.9 2.2 -4.1 4.2 -7.9 -47.7 -19.9 3.1 4.8 0.8 101.2 980.0 360.5 14.6 12.6 44.5 2.4 22.4 -14.9 21.5 -25.8 -8.3 0.1 2.8 0.6 87.7 587.5 138.5 -14.1 3.3 36.5 2.4 15.9 -3.6 38.2 -21.7 -21.5 0.1 0.7 0.1 65.9 414.8 168.7 -6.9 8.2 30.5 -25.8 4.1 0.1 0.0 0.0 67.0 414.8 48.8 I/ Financial indicators are on calendar year basis. 2/ Preliminary figures. Defmed as loans with arrears in excess of 90 days. 3/ Measured by the end-of-period stock of usable government fmancial assets Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-25 - Table 5: Marshall Islands: Social Indicators Marshall Islands Same Region/Income Group East Asia Lower-middle and Pacific Income Population Total population, mid-year (millions) Natural growth rate (percent annual average) Urban population (percent of population) Total fertility rate (births per woman) GNP per capita (US$) Human poverty index Current public expenditure Health (percent of GDP) Education (percent of GDP) School enrollment (percent of school age population) Primary school Female 0.05 1,817.l 886.5 3.7 1.0 0.9 65.2 33.9 57.7 5.7 2.1 2.5 2,212 19.5 5.9 1.7 3.0 10.1 2.9 4.9 Secondary school Female Access to safe water (percent of population) Immunization rate (percent under 12 months) Measles 80 99 . . . 99 43 58 *.. . . . 76.5 83.9 Diphtheria/Pertussis/Tetanus (DPT) Life expectancy at birth (years) Total Male Female 52.0 93.2 89.0 78.0 93.1 89.5 67.5 68.9 68.4 65.7 67.2 65.4 69.4 70.7 71.5 Mortality Infant (per thousand live births) 37.0 Under 5 (per thousand live births) . . . 990 . . . 35.3 35.2 42.5 44.2 1,740 . . . 94 93 64 . . . . . . Sources: 2001 World Bank Development Indicators, and RMI Office of Planning and Statistics, 1999 Census of Population and Housing. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 26 - ANNEX I Republic of the Marshall Islands-Illustrative Long-Term Fiscal Adjustment Scenario Main assumptions a Prior to the transition to a new Compact agreement, budgetary financing of $36.9 million is received from the U.S. in both FY2002 and FY2003. The Compact is renewed in FY2004 for fifteen years, with overall financing assumed to remain about the same as in FY200 1 (around $3 1 million). However, other than an inflation adjustment for Kwajalein related payments, the rest of the funding is not adjusted for inflation, so that the real value of Compact flows falls gradually. The last Compact payments are received in FY2018. 0 Improved tax administration and a more progressive income tax structure produce more elastic tax revenues, and capital expenditure is boosted to improve the productive capacity of the economy. a Real GDP growth picks up gradually as a result of structural reforms, reaching 2% percent per annum by FY2018 (in line with the average of other Pacific islands). Inflation is broadly in line with the U.S. at 2% percent. 0 The real rate of return on assets in the trust fund is 3% percent per annum; the return on government liquid asset holdings is 3 percent per annum. Target Scenario In this scenario, the authorities target (i) a buildup of the trust fund to about 250 percent of GDP by FY2018, income from which is used as a perpetual source of budgetary support; and (ii) a stock of usable government assets at around 15 percent of total expenditure (or about 1% months of imports). The authorities contribute $40 million to the trust fund during FY2002-04 ($15 million, $15 million, and $10 million, respectively), and subsequently make an annual contribution of $15 million in FY2005 dollars. In view of the RMI’s large infrastructure needs, capital expenditure exceeds 9 percent of GDP for the entire projection. Current expenditure is reduced aggressively to meet the target for trust fund contributions. The budget surplus falls from FY2004 onward with reduced Compact inflows, but concerted revenue generation and expenditure control measures allow for the required contributions toward the trust fund and usable resources to secure long-term fiscal sustainability. The assets in the intergenerational fund reach their target by the end of FY2018, and the investment income is sufficient to replace the non-Kwajalein related part of the Compact payments. From the following year, that part of the Compact financing ends, and the government begins to use the income from the trust fund for budgetary purposes. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 27 - ANNEX I Alternative Scenario Under this scenario, the external support remains the same, but the authorities succeed in make only modest headway in increasing revenue and reducing expenditures. This reflects spending pressures from a strongly growing population, difficulties in reducing public expenditure in a society that is characterized by traditional relationships building on the exchange of patronage and support, and a lack of earnings opportunities in the private sector. It is therefore assumed that the adjustment in current expenditure is only about two thirds of what would have to be achieved under the target scenario. As a result, the fiscal surplus shrinks in successive years as the pace of decline in external grant inflows overwhelm the fiscal adjustment efforts. The authorities channel most of the surplus and reserves toward the trust fund as the Compact financing nears expiration. The fund’s value reaches about 150 percent of GDP in FY2018 (compared with 250 percent of GDP under the target scenario), when Compact revenues get replaced by matching trust fund income. However, the financing need of the budget overwhelms the trust fund’s dynamics, and the fund is gradually drawn down over time. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-28 - ANNEX I Marshall Islands: Long-Term Fiscal Adjustment Scenario, FY 2001-25 I : r Govemmmt Domestic Revenue (% of GDP) 45.0 - 40.0 - -- - -_ __ _ -Target 35.0 30.0 1 &gm;;;~~~, , ( , 2001 2005 2009 2013 2017 2021 2025 60.0 , 55.0 Government Current Expenditure (% of GDP) .- -- ._ - __ __ .- -. _ 40.0 35.0 30.01 / I I, I I I I I 2001 2005 2009 2013 2017 2021 2025 30.0 - Usable Financial Assets (% of expenditure) 25.0 20.0 0.0 I I, I, I , / I I, I 2001 2005 2009 2013 2017 2021 2025 I : Extenml Grants (“Yo of GDP) 70.0 - 60.0 20.0 - 10.0 o.o- I / I, 1, I,, , I I I I, I, / 2001 2005 2009 2013 2017 2021 2025 20.0 - Fiscal Balance (% of GDP) 18.0 16.0 - s 14.0- ‘., 12.0 - s, 10.0 ‘0 ;I:-:-::::, 8.0 2001 2005 2009 2013 2017 2021 2025 300.0 - Trust Fund (% of GDP) 250.0 200.0 150.0 . 100.0 o.o- I,,, ,,/,I, I,, $ ,,,,,,,,/,I, 2000 2004 2008 2012 2016 2020 2024 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicI. II. III. IV. V. VI. VII. - 29 - The Republic of the Marshall Islands-Fund Relations (As of November 30,200l) Membership Status: Joined May 2 1, 1992; Article VIII ANNEX II General Resources Account: SDR Million Quota 2.50 Fund holdings of currency 2.50 Reserve position in Fund 0.00 SDR Department: SDR Million Holdings None Outstanding Purchases and Loans: None Financial Arrangements: None Projected Obligations to Fund: None Exchange Rate Arrangements: Percent Quota 100.0 100.0 0.0 Percent Allocation n.a. The U.S. dollar is legal tender and the official currency. The Marshall Islands maintains an exchange system that is free of restrictions on international payments and transfers for current and capital transactions. VIII. Article IV Consultation: The Marshall Islands is on a 24-month consultation cycle. The 2000 Article IV consultation discussions were held during September 14-22, 2000. The Executive Board discussed the staff report (SM/00/266) and concluded the consultation on January 5,200l. IX. Technical Assistance: As indicated below. X. Resident Representative: None Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 30 - ANNEX II Republic of the Marshall Islands: Technical Assistance, 1992-2000 Source FAD MAE MAE MAE STA STA PFTAC’ PFTAC’ PFTAC’ PFTAC’ Purpose Assess technical assistance needs in fiscal management Assess technical assistance needs in banking supervision Preliminary assessment of off-shore financial center Banking Commissioner Assess technical assistance needs for the development of economic statistics Establish reporting system for banking statistics Banking supervision issues Tax administration issues Improve budgetary accounting system Statistics Time of Delivery August 1992 August 1992 March 2000 October 1994 July 1996 August 1992 April 1993 November 1993 March 1994 March 1996 August 1996 September 1996 December 1996 March 1997 June 1997 August 1997 November 1997 March 1998 November 1998 January 1999 July 1999 November 1999 July 2000 September 2000 March 200 1 June 200 1 April 1994 October 1995 May 1996 September 1997 September 1994 July 2000 November 2000 May 200 1 August 200 1 July 1998 July 200 1 ‘Pacific Financial Technical Assistance Centre. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3l- ANNEX III Republic of the Marshall Islands: Relations with the World Bank Group’ Total commitments: IFC investments: Recent reports: None None Enhancing the Role of Government in the Pacific Island Economies, October 1998. Pacific Island Economies: Building a Resilient Economic Base for the Twenty-First Century (No. 13803-EAP), June 1995. Health Priorities and Options in the World Bank’s Pacific Member Countries (No. 11620-EAP), October 1994. Pacific Island Economies: Toward Efficient and Sustainable Growth (No. 11351-EAP), Volume 4, March 1993. Pacific Regional Energy Assessment (Pacific Island Series No. l), August 1992. World Bank in cooperation with UNDP/ESCAP, AsDB, and the South Pacific Forum Secretariat. The Marshall Islands joined the World Bank Group in May 1992. In 1992, a country report was prepared as part of the Bank’s Regional Energy Assessment in the Pacific island countries. In 1993, the Bank completed a country economic report on the Marshall Islands, as part of the second Pacific Islands Regional Economic Report. This focused on public sector reform, the role of the private sector in achieving sustainable growth, human resource development, and environmental issues. In May 1993, a grant of $150,000 from the Institutional Development Fund was approved to assist the Presidential Committee on the rationalization of the public service, and a report detailing an action plan for public sector reform was prepared. This report was accepted by the government, and the UNDP assisted in the implementation of the recommendations of the report. In 1994, a regional health study was completed, which provides a comprehensive assessmen of issues in the health sector. In 1995, the Bank completed the third Regional Economic Report (No. 13803-EAP), which is a thematic report focusing on trade, tourism, fisheries, forestry, and regional cooperation. In 1998, the Bank completed the fourth Regional Economic Report which discussed how the development agenda of governments could be enhanced by focusing on core functions, improving spending patterns, and having in place efficient budgetary processes. ’ Prepared on the basis of input from World Bank staff. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 32 - ANNEX IV Republic of the Marshall Islands: Relations with the Asian Development Bank’ The Asian Development Bank(ADB) has approved eight loans totaling about $52 million to the Republic of the Marshall Islands since it joined the Bank in April 1990. In January 1997, the ADB approved a Public Sector Reform Program (PSRP) loan for $12 million to carry out a comprehensive reform program, including the reduction in the size of the civil service, the restructuring of government departments and offices, and the corporation and privatization of public enterprises. The program was supported by a TA package, and the loan was closed with the release of the third tranche in June 2000. In August 1999, the ADB approved the Ebeye Health and Infrastructure project, including a loan for $9.3 million, to alleviate problems with water, sanitation, power, and health services in Ebeye. In June 200 1, the ADB approved a Fiscal and Financial Management Program and TA package for $12 million to consolidate gains from the PSRP. The program supports efforts to ensure a sustainable income flow for future generations, strengthen public sector financial and economic management, stabilize the fiscal position, enhance the policy environment for the private sector, and improve the effectiveness of the public service. As of end July 2001, TA grants totaling $13.1 million for 34 TA projects have been approved. These comprise both project preparatory and advisory TA. Project preparatory TA has focused on fisheries, education, health, water, and sanitation and outer island infrastructure, whereas advisory TA has focused on institutional development, policy reforms, and capacity building. The overall framework for the ADB country strategy for the RMI is set out in A PaciJic Strategyfor the New Millenium. In the Paczjk Strategy, the RMI is grouped with other atoll countries that are severely disadvantaged by their small size, isolation and weak resource base. The RMI economy is heavily reliant on external assistance and has limited potential for self-sustained economic growth. The core strategy identified in the Pacz$c Strategy is to establish and expand trusts funds to finance public expenditures, particularly for projects and services in the disadvantaged outer islands. As part of the Paczjk Strategy the ADB will also explore opportunities for sustainable marine resource development, niche-tourism support and skills development for labor export. The new Pacific Island Economic Report for the RMI titled Meto has been completed and published. In addition, the ADB will host the fourth Consultative Group Meeting in January 2002, which will review economic performance, discuss economic development strategies and policies, share information on donor programs, and reach agreement with the government on significant policy issues, such as good governance. ’ Prepared on the basis of input from AsDB staff. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-33 - ANNEX IV Table 1: Asian Development Bank Loans to the Republic of Marshall Islands by Sector (In millions of U.S. dollars; as of end August 2001) Sector Number Amount Agriculture Energy Industry and Nonfucl Minerals Transportation Communications Finance Social Infrastructure Multisector Total Memorandum Item: Technical Assistance 1 7.0 0 0.0 0 0.0 0 0.0 0 0.0 3 24.0 5 30.4 2 9.8 11 71.2 38 15.5 Source: Data provided by the Asian Development Bank. Table 2: Asian Development Bank Loan Approvals and Disbursements to the Republic of Marshall Islands) (In millions of U.S. dollars; as of 31 August 2001) , I 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 Loan Approvals Loan Disbursements Undisburscd balance at the end of the year 0.0 7.0 0.0 9.2 5.7 9.2 0.0 12.0 0.0 9.3 6.8 12.0 0.0 0.0 0.3 0.9 1.2 3.0 3.0 10.0 7.9 3.9 0.3 4.3 0.0 7.0 6.7 15.0 19.5 25.7 22.7 24.7 16.8 22.2 28.7 36.4 Memorundurn Item. Technical assistance approvals 0.3 0.6 2.1 1.2 1.5 3.7 0.7 2.7 0.1 0.6 0.9 1.0 Source: Data provided by the Asian Development Bank. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 34 - ANNEX V Republic of the Marshall Islands: Relations with the Pacific Financial Technical Assistance Center’ The Center’s assistance to the RMI since 1996 has included 23 advisory missions, with the main focus on assistance in the area of financial sector regulation and supervision. During 1996-2001, the RMI has also sent six officials to the Center’s regional training courses and benefited from two attachments of officials to sister institutions in the region. Public Financial Management Recent advice from the Center has concentrated on the design of a policy matrix for the strengthening of budget processes, as well as the development and discussion of critical templates for the monitoring and analysis of budget data. In addition, key principles of the Code of Good Practices on Fiscal Transparency were discussed with the authorities as a key element of future reform of public financial management. Tax Administration and Policy A 1997 AsDB tax reform program, the implementation of which was expected to involve the Center’s assistance, was not advanced, and no requests for assistance have been received. Assistance with improvements in the technical capacity of staff in tax and customs collection showed limited results under changing administrations. Financial Sector Regulation and Supervision Following assistance in the mid-1990s with the establishment of a Banking Act and supervisory authority, assistance from the Center concentrated on training of the Banking Commissioner in the critical functions of supervision such as off-site and on- site inspection, licensing procedures, and evaluation of prudential ratios. In addition, amendments to the Banking Act in line with the Base1 Core Principles were drafted for promulgation. Advice was also given on the need for tight regulation of offshore banking activities and the threat of money laundering. More recently, the Center’s Advisor joined an IMF/MAE expert in the “Outreach” assessment of the country’s offshore financial sector and began a 12-month training program for the new Banking Commissioner on the fundamentals of banking regulation and supervision. Economic and Financial Statistics Despite significant donor-supported technical assistance in the past, mainly in national accounts, little progress has been made with the regular compilation and dissemination of statistics. The Advisor has therefore recently developed a reform proposal for improvements in the structure of statistical processes and the establishment, dissemination and publication of a core set of statistics (including balance of payments statistics) as well as the identification of training needs. r The Pacific Financial Technical Assistance Center (PFTAC) in Suva, Fiji is a multi-donor technical assistance institution, financed by IMF, UNDP, ADB, AusAID and NZODA, with the IMF as Executing Agency. The Center’s aim is to build skills and institutional capacity for effective economic and financial management that can be sustained at the national level. Member countries are: Cook Islands, Federated States of Micronesia, Fiji, Kiribati, Marshall Islands, Nauru, Niue, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tokelau, Tonga, Tuvalu, and Vanuatu. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 35 - ANNEX VI Marshall Islands: Statistical Issues The authorities publish an annual statistical abstract (last received in 2001), detailed central government budget accounts, and audited financial statements of major public enterprises. However, quarterly and monthly statistical data are not published or transmitted to the Fund. Extensive Fund technical assistance has been provided from headquarters and the Pacific Financial Technical Assistance Centre, but many recommendations have not been implemented. Real Sector National income accounts have been prepared on a production basis for the years from 1991 onward, although the recommendations of the STA’s August 1992 multisector mission have not been fully incorporated. The Majuro consumer price index, the only available aggregate price index, could be improved through an updating of weights, reclassification of baskets, and larger samples. Government Finance Government finance statistics are regularly compiled for budget control but they are not consolidated into a format usable for analysis. The authorities received technical assistance on budgetary accounting in 1994 and 200 1. Monetary Accounts A reporting system has been established for domestic banking institutions on the basis of monthly reporting forms and guidelines developed during the 1993 STA mission. Banks report data to the Banking Commissioner. However, monetary data have never been reported to the Fund. Balance of Payments Apart from trade statistics, balance of payments data are not compiled, although technical assistance has been provided in this area. Despite the recent computerization of trade data, their compilation has not improved in terms of timeliness and accuracy, mainly because of inappropriate classification and coding. Only limited data are available on services, factor income, and private transfers and there are no data on private capital flows. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 36 - ANNEX VI > c u u u Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicANNEX VII Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 021XxX FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE [ -1 20021 International Monetary Fund 700 lgth Street, NW Washington, D. C. 20431 USA IMF Concludes 2001 Article IV Consultation with the Republic of the Marshall Islands On January 18, 2002, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded the Article IV consultation with the Republic of the Marshall Islands.’ Background The Republic of the Marshall Islands (RMI) consists of a group of atolls and islands in the central Pacific with a population of about 52,000. Per-capita GDP of around $2,000 remains one of the highest among the Pacific island economies. However, the income distribution is relatively uneven-with a high incidence of poverty on some outer atolls-and social indicators lag behind other countries in the same income group. The RMl’s economy remains strongly dependent on external grants, most of which have been provided by the United States under a Compact agreement that is currently being renegotiated. Except for small contributions from agriculture, fishery, and tourism, the private sector has evolved mainly to meet the needs of the government which, through the budget, distributes the bulk of Compact funds in the economy. Growth prospects have also suffered from factors that are common to most small island economies-including geographic dispersion, difficult access to world markets, limited export diversification, and exposure to natural disasters. ’ Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial information, and discusses with officials the country’s economic developments and policies. On return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the country’s authorities. This PIN summarizes the views of the Executive Board as expressed during the January 18, 2002 Executive Board discussion based on the staff report. Washington, D.C. 20431 l Telephone 202-623-7 100 l Fax 202-623-6772 l www.imf.org Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 38 - Since 1995, the economy has faced drastic cutbacks in public expenditure and employment. In the early 1990s the RMI had borrowed substantial funds on commercial terms against future Compact receipts in order to finance domestic infrastructure projects. However, the economy subsequently failed to pick up as expected, and the government was forced to curtail current expenditure by about 15 percent in nominal terms since 1995 in order to maintain debt service payments. In 2001, the government repaid all commercial debt but, despite exceptionally strong grant inflows, useable fiscal reserves remained precariously low throughout the year. The financial situation of the social security system was of particular concern as fund shortages forced a temporary cutback in health services. Although statistical deficiencies make an assessment difficult, the relative economic standstill in the private sector appears to have continued in 2001. A rise in copra production and the first full year of operations of a new tuna loin processing plant are estimated to have contributed to a small rebound in private sector activity-bringing overall GDP growth to an estimated 2 percent in FY2001-but other sectors largely stagnated in the face of weak government demand. Inflation, as measured by the Majuro-based CPI, remained unchanged below 1 percent. Although weak domestic demand continued to impact imports in FY2001, improvements in the trade balance were limited by adverse developments in the RMl’s terms of trade. Compared to the mid-1990s, imports have been reduced on a sustained basis across all product categories, but exports have not recovered from the collapse of a major fish exporting company in 1997. The rise in copra shipments has not translated into significantly higher export earnings, owing to a continuing slump in world markets, and low tuna prices have also had a dampening effect on fishing license fees. The current account surplus moved into surplus in FY2000 and FY2001, boosted by a pick-up in official transfers, and external debt has fallen to 67 percent of GDP. Efforts to attract large-scale foreign investment and develop new export products have proved mostly futile. Larger investors continue to show little interest in the RMI, partly owing to an undereducated labor force, and a restricted list also narrows the scope for small-scale FDI. Initiatives to exploit abundant natural resources to generate stronger export revenues (e.g., in aquaculture or outer island tourism) have not grown much beyond pilot status, partly because of their risky and capital-intensive nature, and partly because they remain heavily dependent on complementary public infrastructure funding. Executive Board Assessment Public hformation Notices (PINS) are issued, (i) at the request of a member country, following the conclusion of the Article IV consultation for countries seeking to make known the views of the IMF to the public. This action is intended to strengthen IMF surveillance over the economic policies of member countries by increasing the transparency of the IMF’s assessment of these policies; and (ii) following policy discussions in the Executive Board at the decision of the Board. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public