DOCUMENT OF INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND NOT FOR PUBLIC USE OFF-SITE ROOM IS1 l-400 0450 FOR AGENDA SM/O1/65 CONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION February 23,200l To: Members of the Executive Board From: The Secretary Subject: South Africa-Staff Report for the 2000 Article IV Consultation Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staff report for the 2000 Article IV consultation with South Africa, which is proposed to be brought to the agenda for discussion on Friday, March 16,200l. At the time of circulation of this paper to the Board, the Secretary’s Department has not received a communication from the authorities of South Africa indicating whether or not they consent to the Fund’s publication of this paper; such communication may be received after the authorities have had an opportunity to read the paper. Questions may be referred to Mr. Nowak (ext. 38969) and Mr. Tsibouris (ext. 35632). Unless the Documents Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the WTO Secretariat on Monday, March 5,200l; and to the African Development Bank and the European Investment Bank, following its consideration by the Executive Board. Att: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public. * INFORMATION CONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND SOUTH AFRICA Staff Report for the 2000 Article IV Consultation Prepared by the Staff Representatives for the 2000 Consultation with South Africa Approved by Jose Fajgenbaum and Leslie Lipschitz February 22,200 1 Contents Page Executive Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 I. Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6 II. Recent Developments . . . . . . . . ..I......................................................................................... 6 III. Report on the Discussions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9 A. Economic and Social Policy Framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9 B. Macroeconomic Stabilization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12 C. Structural Reforms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18 D. HIV/AIDS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23 IV. ‘Staff Appraisal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26 Tables 1. Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 1995-200 1 .................................................. 29 2. Monetary Survey, 1995-2000 ............................................................................................ 30 3. National Government Finances, 1997/98-2000/O 1 ............................................................ 31 4. Balance of Payments, 19952000 ...................................................................................... 32 5. Indicators of External Vulnerability, 1996-2000.. ........................................................... ..3 3 6. Social and Demographic Indicators ................................................................................... 34 Figures 1. 2. 3. 4. Financial Market Indicators, January 1998-January 2001 .............................................. 35 Interest Rates and Net Open Forward Position, January 1995-December 2000.. ........ ..3 6 Inflation and Monetary Developments, January 1995-December 2000.. ...................... .37 Selected Economic Indicators ......................................................................................... 38 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2- c Contents Page Boxes 1. 2. 3 4. 5. 6. 7. The Default Risk Premium and Long-Term Interest Rates ............................................ 10 Reducing Unemployment: Investment Alone May Not Be Enough .............................. 11 Trends in Social Development Indicators ....................................................................... 13 Land Reform ................................................................................................................... 14 Main Findings of the Follow-Up Financial System Stability Report ............................. 19 Proposed Amendments to Labor Legislation .................................................................. 21 Restructuring of State-Owned Enterprises ..................................................................... 24 Appendices I. Relations with the Fund .................................................................................................. 39 II. Relations with the World Bank Group ........................................................................... 41 III. Statistical Issues .............................................................................................................. 42 Iv. Medium-Term Scenario .................................................................................................. 45 V. Public Information Notice .............................................................................................. 47 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3- Executive Summary a South Africa has experienced a modest upturn in economic activity since late 1998. Despite some adverse shocks during the first half of 2000, real GDP is estimated to have grown by about 3 percent in 2000. The recovery appears to have been accompanied by some reduction in unemployment, although it still remains at very high rates. Economic growth is expected to pick up further to between 3% percent and 4 percent in 2001. l The economic recovery has been underpinned by sound financial policies. In particular, continued strength in the public finances has helped sustain a competitive exchange rate and ease pressure on long-term interest rates, while monetary policy has contained inflationary pressures. At the same time, vulnerability to external shocks has been diminished by large cuts in South Africa’s short-term foreign currency exposure, the pursuit of a flexible exchange rate regime, and the presence of a strong and robust financial sector. l Despite impressive progress made in reducing macroeconomic imbalances, achieving accelerated growth and a significant reduction in unemployment have remained elusive. A pickup in investment rates is needed to sustain growth, but this is unlikely to be sufficient to make a major dent in unemployment. Reforms are required to remove impediments to labor market flexibility and to enhance job skills. Further trade liberalization and privatization will also help boost productivity and labor demand over the medium term. 0 In developing and refining its strategy for labor market reform, the government is endeavoring to strike a balance between the desire to protect workers’ rights and the need to create jobs. This approach has been reflected in a series of proposed amendments to existing labor laws that are being discussed with representatives of civil society. On balance, these amendments constitute an important initiative that should help expand employment opportunities. To help ensure that the momentum of reform is sustained, the staff recommends that there be regular reviews of the legislative framework to examine whether further scope exists for reducing the “statutory” costs of doing business, while ensuring that fundamental workers’ rights are protected. Steps could also be taken to decentralize the collective bargaining system. l South Africa is implementing a public enterprise-restructuring program that should yield significant benefits in terms of improved industrial efilciency, stronger investor confidence, and reduced government debt. In the absence of any significant deterioration in market conditions, asset sales should proceed as quickly as possible. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4- 0 Adoption of an inflation-targeting framework is helping achieve low and predictable inflation. The SARB is now well on course to meeting the inflation target of 3-6 percent for 2002. Low growth in unit labor costs, sluggish retail sales, and a slowdown in monetary growth indicate the likelihood of some further easing in underlying inflationary pressures. Nevertheless, the staff advises that any reduction in interest rates await a clear sign that nonfuel inflation is on a definite and pronounced downward trajectory. l Significant progress has been made in reducing the short-term currency exposure of the central bank. This exposure, however, remains an important source of vulnerability. Consequently, the authorities intend, quite appropriately, to achieve further cuts through the use of privatization proceeds and, to a lesser extent, access to capital markets. l A follow-up assessment to the FSSA report of January 2000 confvmed that South Africa’s financial system remained strong and generally well regulated. Steps had been taken to address weaknesses previously identified, while key indicators of financial system health had improved from already relatively strong levels. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-5- South Africa: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators,, 19962001 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 Estimate Staff projection (Annual percentage change, unless otherwise specified) Real GDP Nominal GDP per capita (U.S. dollars) CPI (annual average) CPIX (annual average) Broad money (end of period) National government budget balance (in percent of GDP) l/ External current account balance (in percent of GDP) Net international reserves 21 (in months of total imports) Net open forward position of SARB 31 (US$ billion) U.S. dollar exchange rate (rand per US$, end of period) 4.2 2.5 0.7 3,547 3,581 3,154 7.4 8.6 6.9 -- -- 7.1 13.6 17.2 14.6 -4.4 -3.8 -2.3 -1.3 -1.5 -1.6 -0.4 -0.1 1.0 1.6 1.1 1.9 2.5 22.2 16.3 22.5 13.0 4.68 4.87 5.89 6.09 1.9 3.0 3.8 3,023 2,87 1 2,793 5.2 5.3 6.1 6.9 7.7 6.5 10.1 7.6 8.0 -2.0 -2.6 -2.5 9.5 7.59 0.2 . . . . . . **. Sources: South African Reserve Bank; National Treasury; IMF, International Financial Statistics; and staff estimates and projections. l/ Fiscal year beginning April 1. 2/ Excludes forward foreign exchange commitments, 31. Open forward position minus net international reserves. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-6- I. INTRODUCTION 1. The Article IV consultation discussions with South Africa were held in Pretoria and Cape Town during November 21-December 7,200O. The staff team met with the Ministers of Finance, Trade and Industry, Public Service, and Education, the Minister in the Office of the President, the Governor of the South Africa Reserve Bank (SARB), other senior officials, and representatives of the private sector, the trade union movement, community organizations, and the academic community.’ 2. At the conclusion of the last Article IV consultation on February 14,2000, Directors commended the authorities for the sustained pursuit of sound macroeconomic policies. These policies, and the presence of a healthy and well-supervised financial system, had helped the economy weather the emerging markets crises. Directors emphasized that the urgent challenge facing the government was to raise South Africa’s growth potential so as to promote job creation and improve living standards. The key to meeting these objectives would be to achieve further progress in lowering inflation, reducing foreign exchange exposure, and accelerating structural reforms in the areas of the labor market, trade, and privatization. 3. South Africa accepted the obligations of Article VIII in 1973 and maintains an exchange system free of restrictions on payments and transfers for current international transactions.2 II. RECENTDEVELOPMENTS 4. South Africa has enjoyed a modest upturn in economic activity since late 1998. Spurred by a rebound in private consumption and exports, the economy experienced five quarters of progressively stronger growth that culminated in an increase in real GDP of over 4 percent (at an annualized rate) in the final quarter of 1999. The recovery was temporarily interrupted during the early part of 2000 as a result of adverse weather conditions, the increase in international oil prices, and contagion from the political and economic crisis in Zimbabwe. Since then, however, the pace of activity has regained momentum and, led by a healthy expansion in private investment, the economy is estimated to have grown by about 3 percent in 2000 (Table 1). In the formal non-agricultural sector, the recovery has been ’ The team comprised Mr. Nowak (head-AFR), Mr. Tsibouris (AFR), Mr. Dorsey (PDR), Mr. Jonsson (AFR), Mr. Krelove (FAD), and Ms. Pinto (Administrative Assistant-AFR). Mr. Ibrahim, the Fund’s Resident Representative in Pretoria, also participated in the discussions. Prior to the discussions, members of the mission met with market analysts in London. The mission overlapped with an MAE team that conducted a follow-up to the Financial Sector Stability Assessment report of January 2000. ’ South Africa’s relations with the Fund and the World Bank are described in Appendices I and II, respectively. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-7- accompanied by a decline in real unit labor costs, reflecting both a moderation in wage settlements and a marked pickup in labor productivity.3 Labor demand appears to have strengthened particularly in the informal sector, and the unemployment rate declined to just over 36 percent in October 1999, from 37% percent a year earlier.4 5. The economic recovery has been underpinned by sound financial policies. In particular, continued strength in the public finances has helped sustain a highly competitive exchange rate and ease pressure on long-term interest rates, while monetary policy has contained inflationary pressures. At the same time, vulnerability to external shocks has been diminished by significant cuts in South Africa’s short-term foreign currency exposure, the pursuit of a flexible exchange rate regime, and the presence of a strong and robust financial sector. Macroeconomic policies have been reinforced by structural reforms, most notably trade liberalization, which has opened up the economy to foreign competition and helped * raise factor productivity. Since March 2000, the rand has come under renewed selling pressure in response to fallout from the Zimbabwe crisis and weaknesses in other emerging markets. This pressure has continued in recent months. 6. The improvement in the public finances, evident since the mid-1990s, continued in 1999/2000.’ The national government registered a budget deficit of 2.0 percent of GDP- well under the original target of 2.8 percent-as a result of strengthened tax administration, the effectiveness of spending controls, and underspending on certain projects. The public sector borrowing requirement (PSBR) fell to just over 1 percent of GDP in 1999/2000 from well above 3 percent the previous year, reflecting a turnaround in the budgets of the provincial governments, a winding down of large public enterprise investment programs, and a shift from a large loss to a significant profit on the foreign exchange operations of the central bank. 7. The national government budget for 2000/01 targets a deficit of 2.6 percent of GDP. It cut personal income taxes, brought the top marginal rate more into line with corporate rates, and introduced preferential rates for very small businesses.6 Certain tax 3 However, aggregate employment and output figures suggest much lower productivity growth and little, if any, decline in unit labor costs. 4 These data, which are based on a household survey conducted every October, include “discouraged workers”; excluding such workers, unemployment fell to 23 percent in October 1999 from 25 percent in October 1998. Data from the survey conducted in October 2000 will not be available for some time. 5 The fiscal year runs from April to March. 6 The top rate of personal income tax was lowered from 45 percent to 42 percent and the bottom rate from 19 percent to 18 percent. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-8- loopholes were closed. In addition, a Skills Development Levy was introduced beginning April 1,2000, with the revenue earmarked for the funding of education and job training.’ The budget also included further steps in a gradualist approach to the removal of capital controls, including an increase in limits on investments overseas by resident institutional investors and unit trusts.’ Implementation of the budget so far this year has been well on track, with revenue continuing to perform strongly.g 8. The authorities adopted a formal inflation-targeting strategy in February 2000, setting a target for CPIX inflation at 3-6 percent for 2002.” In implementing inflation- targeting, the SARB kept its basic operating target, the repo rate, unchanged at 11.75 percent from January 2000 until October, when it raised the rate by a modest one-quarter of a percentage point. This policy stance has been associated with a slowdown in monetary expansion.” Inflationary pressures have been further dampened by the fall in unit labor costs, which has helped offset the impact of oil price increases and a weak rand. As a consequence, the CPIX inflation edged down to 7.7 percent in the 12 months to January 2000, from a peak of 8.2 percent in August 2000. 9. The SARB has made considerable progress in lowering its short-term foreign exchange exposure, which has been a major source of external vulnerability in recent years. The SARB’s net open forward position (NOFP), which measures this exposure, reached a high of US!§23 billion (18 percent of GDP) in September 1998, after a period of heavy intervention by the Reserve Bank in the forward market. Subsequently, the NOFP was lowered to US$9.5 billion (7 percent of GDP) by end-January 2001. The bulk of this reduction was achieved during 1999, when South Africa enjoyed large reflows of direct and portfolio investment. The pace of NOFP reduction slowed appreciably in 2000 as a result of the intensification of foreign exchange pressures. ’ The skills levy is collected in the form of a payroll tax of 0.5 percent and will be increased to 1 percent in April 2001. B There are virtually no controls on nonresidents. 9 The central bank, however, made losses on its forward foreign exchange operations estimated at about 1 percent of GDP during the first nine months of 2000/01. lo CPIX is the consumer price index excluding mortgage costs. I’ M3 grew by 7.6 percent in the 12 months through December 2000, compared with 10 percent during 1999. However, money growth spiked toward the end of 1999 in response to a Y2K-induced rise in liquidity demand. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-9- 10. Fiscal discipline, inflation targeting, and cuts in the NOFP have contributed to a significant decline in long-term interest rates.” In February 2001, long-term bond yields were at their lowest levels since the early 198Os, while the yield curve has flattened considerably. The decline in interest rates helped stimulate a recovery in private investment in 2000, following a sharp contraction the previous year. The stance of macroeconomic policies has also helped sustain gains in external competitiveness. At end-2000, the rand was 18 percent more depreciated in real effective terms than at the end of 1997, thereby providing a good boost to export performance. As a result, despite the impact of higher fuel payments and weak gold prices, the external current account deficit is estimated to have narrowed slightly from 0.4 percent of GDP in 1999 to 0.1 percent in 2000. There was also an improvement in the income balance driven by a substantial reduction in interest rates in South Africa. 11. South Africa’s near-term growth outlook appears moderately encouraging. Corporate profitability will benefit from the decline in unit labor costs and from the recent easing in international oil prices. With some further abatement of inflation and fiscal consolidation, a continuing recovery in private investment and an improvement in the external current account should help push economic growth up to around 3X-4 percent in 2001. However, recent business and consumer surveys indicate a softening in confidence, and this could pose some downside risk to growth prospects. Any significant downturn in global economic activity would, of course, also hurt growth performance. III. REPORT ON THE DISCUSSIONS A. Economic and Social Policy Framework 12. The South African government has made major strides in stabilixing the economy and in reducing macroeconomic imbalances over the past five years or so. Continued fiscal restraint, the implementation of an inflation-targeting framework, and a strong financial system provide a solid foundation for a sound and stable environment in which households can save and businesses can invest with confidence. But achieving accelerated growth and making substantive inroads in reducing unemployment and poverty have remained elusive. Raising living standards in a broad-based, durable manner represents the central policy challenge facing the South African authorities, and this constituted the focus of the consultation discussions. 13. Given the current structural framework, the growth potential of the South African economy is presently around 3-4 percent, but there is a need to achieve rates considerably higher than this. Increased investment alone, however, may not be sufficient to significantly raise growth and reduce unemployment (Box 2). The l2 Box 1 describes the quantitative impact of cuts in the NOFP and the budget deficit on default spreads and long-term interest rates. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- lo- Box 1. The Default Risk Premium and Long-Term Interest Rates The spread between South African and U.S. long-term interest rates averaged about 850 basis points in 1996-2000, slightly higher than in 1990-95. This spread reflects both currency risk and default (or sovereign) risk, and a cursory examination of the data indicates that both types of risk are important. Indeed, the spread on South Afiican long-term bonds denominated in U.S. dollars-which is often used to measure default risk- accounts for about half of the total interest rate spread (see figure). Long-term Interest Rates in South Africa and the U.S. (In percent) 51 u.s An empirical study by the staff indicates that the default risk premium in South Africa is driven by both South African-specific and contagion-related factors (see accompanying background paper): . The most important South African-specific variable affecting the risk premium is the net open forward position (NOFP) of the South African Reserve Bank. The study suggests a strong and positive correlation, with evidence that the direction of causality runs from the NOFP to the risk premium. The results indicate that a reduction in the NOFP of US$l billion would lead to a drop in the risk premium of about 15 basis points. Hence, if the NOFP were reduced from the current level to zero, long-term real interest rates could fall by about 150 basis points. . A reduction in the foreign currency-denominated public debt and a lengthening of the average maturity of the external public debt stock are also associated with a lower risk premium and therefore with lower real long-term interest rates. The policy implication of this result is that, in the event that the government increases its external borrowing to reduce the NOFP, it is important that such borrowing be of suffWntly long maturity. l An improvement in the fiscal balance is also significantly related to a lower risk premium. The estimated coefficient suggests that the reduction in the fiscal deficit from an average of 6.4 percent of GDP during 1992-95 to an average of 3.3 percent of GDP during 1996-2000 lowered the risk premium by about 140 basis points. l Finally, the contagion effect is evidenced in a positive and sign&ant impact on the risk premium of fluctuations in the emerging market bond index (EMBI). However, the magnitude of this effect appears to be quite modest: an increase in the EMBI of, say, 100 basis points is associated with an increase in the risk premium in South Africa of less than 20 basis points. This result is in line with the widespread perception that South Africa has a relatively robust and well-supervised banking sector and has pursued sound macroeconomic policies compared with many other emerging market economies. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- ll- Box 2. Reducing Unemployment: Investment Alone May Not Be Enough Much emphasis has been placed on the need to increase investment to raise growth and lower unemployment. This focus is appropriate. But increased investment by itself is not likely to be sufficient. During 197 l-96, the growth of the capital stock in the formal nonagricultural sector outstripped employment growth on average by over 3 percent a year. It is very difficult to reduce unemployment under such conditions, even with high rates of investment. The implications for unemployment of a rising capital-labor ratio (K/L) are set out in a simple simulation exercise below. On the basis of conservative assumptions regarding the rate of capital depreciation and population growth, the table shows that, if K/L rises by 1 percent per year, relatively strong growth in investment-from 15 percent of GDP in 2000 to 25 percent by 2010-would not be enough to reduce unemployment. If, however, IUL were to fall by 1 percent a year, these investment rates would be consistent with a decline in unemployment from 36 percent to 18 percent over the same period. Moreover, per capita income growth would be over 5 percent per year during 2006-10, compared with 3 percent under the increasing K/L scenario. This exercise underscores the importance for employment creation of policies directed at reducing labor costs relative to capital costs to encourage investment that absorbs rather than displaces labor. Investment and Unemployment (In percent) Investment/GDP Unemployment 1 percent increase in WL 1 percent decline in K/L 2000 15 36 36 2002 17 41 38 2004 19 41 36 2006 21 41 33 2008 23 40 27 2010 25 36 18 Source: Staff calculations. “The calculations are based on: annual capital depreciation of 7 percent; annual total factor productivity (TFP) growth of 1 percent; annual labor force growth of 2 percent; a share of labor income in GDP of 67 percent; and a constant-returns-to-scale technology. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12- South African economy is already highly capital intensive, and the contribution of capital formation to output growth could face diminishing retums.13 Moreover, if new investment continues to be labor saving, as it has in the past, then the favorable impact on employment will be correspondingly diminished. The mission emphasized that investment should, therefore, be accompanied by measures to raise productivity, including labor market reforms and further trade liberalization and privatization. 14.. There remain other serious impediments to growth. Of particular concern is the perceived incidence of crime and the deterrent effect it may have for investment, particularly from overseas. This problem is to some extent circular, since low investment is itself contributing to unemployment and, in turn, crime. Successful labor market reform will help break this vicious cycle. South Africa is also facing a major HIV/AIDS pandemic that is imposing a large and growing burden on the country’s social services, exacerbating shortages of skilled labor, and threatening-its social and cultural fabric (see Section D). 15. South Africa has made good progress in providing basic education and health, as reflected in improvements in social indicators (Box 3). Further efforts to improve living standards and reduce poverty will be assisted by higher economic growth and a targeting of budgetary resources to social welfare and infrastructure. South Africa is also implementing, within its existing constitutional and legal framework, a land reform program that will help redress a number of social and economic problems inherited from the apartheid era (Box 4). B. Macroeconomic Stabilization Fiscal policy 16. The South African government has established a most impressive record of budgetary restraint. While further fiscal adjustment on its own cannot realistically provide the resources needed to compensate for the low private savings ratio, there remains scope for further, albeit modest, deficit reduction through the medium term. The mission therefore endorsed the adjustment profile set out in the government’s medium-term expenditure framework (MTEF), which envisages a budget deficit of 2.1 percent of GDP by 2003/04. 17. Nevertheless, in light of the considerable credibility already built up in fiscal management, the mission suggested that some shifts in expenditure composition and flexibility on the medium-term fiscal stance might be warranted should additional resources be needed to tackle pressing social issues, notably HIV/AIDS. For example, while any additional privatization proceeds in excess of the relatively conservative projections built into the MTEF should be used for debt reduction, consideration might be I3 The relatively low productivity of capital is apparent from official data, which indicate that the annual rate of return on foreign direct investment was only 3-4 percent in nominal U.S. dollar terms during 1994-98. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13 - Box 3 Trends in Social Development Indicators Budget deficit reduction in recent years has been accompanied by a reorientation of expenditures aimed at reducing poverty. This has been achieved by shifting spending toward health, education, and welfare while reducing outlays on defense, general administration and economic services. As the table below shows, over the period 1993194 to 1999/2000, expenditure on education, health, and welfare all grew as a share of GDP; there was a modest reduction in spending on housing and other social services. At the same time, expenditure on crime prevention (police, prisons, and courts) also increased, reflecting the government’s efforts to reduce the level of crime in the country. Functional Classification of Consolidated National and Provincial Noninterest Expenditures 1993194 I’ 1999/2000 Change in Percentage (In percent of GDP) Points of GDP Education 5.5 5.9 0.4 Health 2.9 3.7 0.8 Social security and welfare 2.3 2.4 0.1 Housing and other social services 1.0 0.6 -0.4 Economic services/general administration 6.3 5.4 -0.9 Defense 2.4 1.3 -1.1 Crime prevention 2.3 2.7 0.4 Source: National Treasury l! Excludes the unemployment insurance fund and some work compensation funds. The reorientation of spending led to an improvement in a range of social development indicators between 1994 and 1998. Both the adult literacy rate and the primary-to-tertiary enrolhnent ratio improved, approaching or surpassing equivalent indicators for middle-income countries. Similar improvements were achieved in access to improved water sources and sanitation coverage, raising South Africa’s indicators above global averages. However, over the period 1994-98 a significant rise in the HIV prevalence rate, from about 8 percent to 20 percent, led to a marked decline in life expectancy (from 64 to 53 years) to a level well below that of low income countries. This resulted in a modest deterioration in the human development index. Human Development Indicators South Africa Low income Middle income countries countries 1994 1998 1998 1998 Adult literacy rate (in percent) 82 85 69 88 Combined primary, secondary, and 81 95 56 73 tertiary enrollment ratio (in percent) Access to improved water source (in 70 86 82 ” percent of population) Sanitation coverage (in percent of population) 46 86 60 ” Life expectancy at birth (years) 63.7 53.2 63.4 68.8 HIV prevalence rate (in percent) 7.6 19.8 <2 2/ Human development index 0.72 0.70 0.60 0.75 1/ Global estimate. 21 Estimate. Sources: UNDP, Human Development Report, 1997and 2000; UNAIDS database, 2000; World Health Organization, Global Water Supply and Sanitation Assessment, 2000. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14- Box 4. Land Reform Land ownership and land development patterns in South Africa strongly reflect the political and economic conditions prevailing during the apartheid era when land policies contributed to landlessness and poverty amongst black people. South Africa’s land reform program aims at redressing this legacy while contributing to national reconciliation, economic growth and poverty alleviation. It has three main pillars. 1. Land redistribution aims at providing the poor with access to land of residential and productive purposes. It is based on a willing buyer/willing seller principle, and purchase costs are supplemented with government grants. Additional government funding is provided to help develop the necessary infrastructure. In order to provide financial assistance in establishing commercially viable agricultural enterprises, a credit facility fUnded jointly by government and donors has been established. A target was established in 2000/01 to transfer 30 percent of the country’s agricultural land over a 15-year period. Progress has been good. 2. The land restitution program seeks to compensate and restore land to people who were disposessed under racially discriminatory legislation. Initially, implementation suffered from the protracted nature of the adjudicative procedures, but changes were introduced to shift from a court-driven to an administrative process, and the pace of delivery has accelerated significantly as a consequence. During 1998, less than 50 cases were resolved, but by end- November 2000, some 20,SOOO households (or around one-third of total claims) had been awarded restitution costs. In order to address certain implementation problems, safeguards have been established to ensure that adequate development and settlement plans are in place before a restitution claim is settled. 3. Land tenure aims to make changes in the terms and conditions under which land is held, used, and transacted by people with informal land rights and by communities that have historically occupied land. The absence of clear land rights has impeded investment in agriculture, forestry, and tourism. To deal with the problem, a variety of approaches have been developed. For example, since 1995 separate legislation has been passed: to establish a system of land rights in the former homeland areas; to protect labor tenants and their families from eviction by enabling them to buy land; and to provide for the transfer of State land to residents in the former colored reserves. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 15- given to allocating the resulting interest savings to spending in priority areas. Cost savings from improved financial management could also be used for this purpose. 18. In addition to overall deficit reduction, the government has adopted a tax and expenditure strategy that seeks to boost economic growth, while addressing the country’s social problems in an affordable and sustainable manner. The mission expressed support for this strategy, which essentially consists of three prongs. 19. The first prong of the strategy relates to tax policy. Income tax rates and import duties have been cut in order to strengthen investment and job-creation incentives and to encourage competition. At the same, steps have been taken to broaden the tax base and to enhance the efficiency, equity, and international competitiveness of the tax system. These steps include the introduction in 2001/02 of a residence-based tax system and a capital gains tax.14 In addition, revisions to mining tax legislation are being contemplated, as are investment incentives. The mission advised that accelerated depreciation allowances, rather than tax credits or holidays, represented a more effective and less costly form of investment incentives. Experience elsewhere also indicated that tax incentives for investment did little to promote small enterprise development. 20. The second prong in the budget restructuring strategy involves the allocation of savings on wages and interest payments to economic and social infrastructure and to crime prevention and national security. Anticipated savings in the wage bill reflect continued moderation in pay settlements and the adoption of personnel measures, such as elimination of automatic promotions.” Interest payments are expected to decline in relation to GDP in response to primary budget surpluses, falling interest rates, and higher receipt of privatization proceeds. 21. The third prong in the fiscal strategy concerns the effort to strengthen capacity in the areas of revenue mobilization and expenditure management. Following the creation of the South Africa Revenue Service in 1997 as an autonomous agency, revenue administration has been reorganized, information systems modemized, and audit and collection capacity improved. National revenue targets have been consistently exceeded, which indicates the success of the reforms to date. The Public Finance Management Act (PFMA), which came into effect in April 2000, provides for increased accountability of managers, more timely provision of reliable financial information, improved internal I4 The mission agreed with the authorities that any negative impact of the capital gains tax on saving would likely be minimal, particularly at the relatively low tax rates envisaged. The Fund provided technical assistance in drawing up the capital gains tax legislation. Is While little room remains for further cuts in the size of the civil service, a policy guideline is to be introduced to facilitate retrenchment, where appropriate. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 16- controls, and introduction of independent audit and supervision.16 The PFMA covers most national and provincial departments, government agencies, and public enterprises; parallel legislation for municipalities is being prepared. Inflation targeting and interest rate policy 22. The mission welcomed the adoption of an inflation-targeting framework as a means of achieving low and predictable inflation. The SARB was well on course to meeting the inflation target for 2002. Low growth in unit labor costs in the formal non- agricultural sector, sluggish retail sales, and a slowdown in monetary growth indicated the likelihood of some further easing in underlying inflationary pressures. The impact of oil price increases is showing signs of unwinding, while the recent currency depreciation largely represented the impact of adverse real external shocks and the pass-through to domestic prices would likely be limited. Although the output gap was expected to shrink as the recovery proceeded, recent surveys did not indicate the existence of major physical capacity constraints. These surveys did suggest, however, some hardening in inflationary expectations within the labor and business communities, although a flattening of the yield curve on financial assets might indicate the contrary.” Nevertheless, the mission advised that any reduction in short-term interest rates await a clear sign that nonfuel inflation is on a defmite and pronounced downward trajectory. Exercising caution in lowering interest rates would also help ease pressure on the rand and allow room for further cuts in the NOFP. 23. The SARB plans to issue, later this year, a nontechnical report to the public that describes the progress made toward meeting the inflation target. The mission welcomed this initiative. It also suggested that the credibility and transparency of the inflation-targeting strategy might be enhanced in the meantime if a technical report, aimed at market analysts and investors, were produced that set out the SARB’s thinking on the inflationary process. These reports would help foster more forward-looking price expectations. Foreign exchange exposure and external vulnerability 24. The SAEIB’s strategy for reducing the NOFP consists of stepping up purchases of foreign exchange during periods of positive market sentiment. The SARB has also publicly stated that it will not intervene to defend the currency, which effectively locks in all cuts made in the NOFP. This strategy has worked well so far, and the NOFP has been *6 The Auditor-General recently recommended that an audit be undertaken of a large package of defense equipment contracts. ” The hardening of inflation expectations probably reflects a number of factors, such as the impact of the currency depreciation. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17- lowered, or at least kept unchanged, in each of the past 28 months and now stands at its lowest level since early 1996. Indicators of external vulnerability remain weak relative to other emerging market economies, although debt indicators are generally strong. Among emerging market economies that publish data in the Special Data Dissemination Standard reserves template, South Africa is the only emerging market economy in which “drains” on reserves (in the case of South Africa, this is primarily net forward sales of foreign exchange by the SARB) exceed gross reserves.‘* 25. The authorities recognize the importance of achieving further cuts in the NOFP as a means of bolstering confidence and lowering long-term borrowing costs. However, weak investor sentiment in recent months and the prospect of only modest net private capital inflows during the remainder of 2000 have precluded significant cuts in the NOFP through purchases of foreign exchange in the market. The authorities, nevertheless, said that they intended to use receipts from privatization and, to a lesser extent, medium- and long-term foreign borrowing as a means of lowering the NOFP. Such borrowing would improve the maturity structure of South Africa’s foreign exchange liabilities, although the mission advised that it should continue to be undertaken with caution since it, too, was a potential source of external vulnerability. 26. In light of the need to reduce the NOFP as quickly as possible without intensifying currency pressures, the mission considered the present pace of exchange control liberalization to be appropriate. However, it argued that, while retaining overall limits on capital outflows for institutional investors and unit trusts, asset swap requirements could be suspended without fueling foreign exchange demand. I9 In time, these overall limits on capital outflows could be removed and replaced, where appropriate, by prudential limits. ‘* Analogies are sometimes made between the situation of South Africa and both Australia and New Zealand with respect to the low level of net reserves and reserve liabilities. Notwithstanding the similarities, there are considerable differences. Although both Australia and New Zealand have substantial claims against reserves either through loan repayment obligations (New Zealand) or forward and swap liabilities (Australia), gross reserves in both countries exceed short-term reserve liabilities by a comfortable margin. Comparisons of South Africa’s debt and reserve indicators with those of other counties are presented in the accompanying selected issues paper. I9 Tbis view is based on the argument that the inflows the asset swap mechanism is designed . to attract would have happened anyway and that the mechamsm leads only to a reallocation of nonresident investment in South Africa. The asset swap scheme allows South African residents to purchase foreign assets to the extent that they are matched by nonresident purchasers of South African assets on a transaction-to-transaction basis. While the authorities’ intent was to allow South African residents to purchase foreign assets without allowing any net capital outflow, this may not have been the case in practice. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 18- Financial Sector Stability Assessment (FSSA) 27. A recent mission to follow-up on the FSSA report of January 2000 found that the financial system remained robust and relatively well regulated (Box 5). Indeed, key indicators relating to capital adequacy and nonperforming loans had improved slightly. Moreover, the Reserve Bank and Bank Amendment Acts had been passed, money-laundering legislation had been approved by the cabinet, and a deposit insurance scheme would be introduced later this year. Supervision of the financial sector was proceeding well, although the suggestion that the SARB be delegated authority to appoint a curator in dealing with troubled banks had not yet been adopted. C. Structural Reforms Labor market 28. A range of factors have contributed to South Africa’s persistently high unemployment rate, including the legacy of apartheid labor practices, chronic skill deficiencies, low investment, the repercussions of certain labor laws, and the centralized nature of collective bargaining procedures. A successful strategy for tackling unemployment should be broad based in scope and address each of these factors. Initiatives to develop job skills and remove rigidities in the labor market are particularly important since they are necessary not only to attract investment, but also to ensure that new capital spending absorbs, rather than displaces, labor. These considerations are embodied in the government’s strategy for labor market reform. 29. As part of the effort to strengthen incentives to hire and train workers, preparations are under way to introduce job-training schemes. The mission considered this initiative valuable, although it would have wished to have seen more of the available resources directed at training the unemployed, rather than those already with jobs. The authorities also intend to introduce a system of learnership wages.” These initiatives are to be financed by proceeds from the skills development levy, which is a payroll tax, and contributions are also being sought from donors. As the scheme expands, however, additional funding may need to be raised beyond 2002. The mission suggested that recourse to any funding that directly raised labor costs, such as a payroll tax, be avoided because of the potentially adverse employment repercussions and that the resources be found elsewhere from the budget. 30. South Africa revamped its labor laws between 1995 and 1998 with the aim of providing better protection for workers’ rights and improving the conditions and benefits of employment. In the process, however, the costs of retaining and dismissing workers may 2o Learnership programs are geared towards young individuals and provide both structured learning and work experience, while paying trainee wages. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 19- Box 5. Main Findings of the Follow-Up Financial System Stability Report The overall assessment of the follow-up Financial System Stability Assessment (FSSA) mission is that the South African financial system remains robust and generally well regulated. The authorities have acted or are in the process of acting to address most of the weaknesses identified in the report of January 2000: The financial sector’s legal framework remains sound. Recent amendments to the Banks Act and the SouthAf?ican Reserve Bank Act served to bring the laws up to date. Amended regulations relating to banks were issued by the Minister of Finance as a way to foster greater compliance with the Base1 Core Principles. A new Anti-Money Laundering Act was introduced in Parliament, and is expected to become law in early 200 1. Both the Banking Supervision Department (BSD) of the SARB and the Financial Services Board (FSB) remain effective regulators and supervisors. The BSD has undertaken regulatory initiatives that have further increased the degree of overall compliance with the Base1 Core Principles. Noteworthy progress has been achieved in the areas of capital requirements, loan policies and classification, country risks, consolidated supervision, and global supervision. In response to the 1999 Financial Sector Assessment Program mission’s recommendation to expand on-site inspections, the FSB recently implemented a series of on-site visits focused on key risk areas at insurance companies and has intensified reporting requirements. However, delays in the passage of legislation aimed at closing regulatory loopholes and staffing constraints remain somewhat of an impediment to the operations of the FSB. Work continues on the introduction of a deposit insurance scheme, with completion tentatively scheduled for 200 1. An issue that remains outstanding is the responsibility of appointing a curator for a troubled bank, this has not yet been delegated from the Minister of Finance to the SARB. The macroprudential indicators for the banking system have strengthened across the board. The South African banks are well capitalized. The mean Base1 capital ratio for the entire banking system rose from 11 percent at end-1999 to 12.3 percent at end-September 2000, due in part to an increase in equity and reserves and partly to a reduction in risk-weighted assets. The rate of nonperforming loans (NpLs) declined from 4.9 percent at end-1999 to 4.5 percent at end-September 2000, with a concomitant improvement in the ratio of provisions to NPLs. At the same time, there has been a decline in profitability of the banking system when adjusted for risk, including, importantly, credit risk. Insurance companies and retirement funds continue to have financially sound balance sheets, though provisioning against AIDS-related outlays wig remain an important issue. While the life insurance companies are very strongly capitalized, the short-term insurance industry has been experiencing some minor difficulties lately. The liquidity management framework and the payment system continue to be sound and appear well protected from systemic risks. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 20 - have increased signiflcantly.zl Moreover, the ability of small- and medium-sized enterprises to offset these costs is limited by collective bargaining procedures, which require that centrally agreed wage agreements be extended by law to nonparticipating parties.” This requirement may also discourage the emergence of new enterprises. 31. Concerns about possible harmful effects on employment of existing labor laws prompted a review by the Minister of Labour of the overall legal framework. The outcome was a series of proposed amendments that aimed at improving the efficiency of the labor market and creating new jobs. These proposals, which are summarized in Box 6, are being discussed by NEDLAC2j The mission believed that the proposals represent an important initiative in the effort to reduce unemployment, but recommended that they should be considered only as a first step in a more ambitious process of labor market reform. 32. The amendments include a number of provisions to expand employment opportunities. Steps are to be taken to speed up the process of conciliation and arbitration, and reduce related costs to employers. In addition, employment conditions, including overtime pay on Sundays and the length of the workweek, are to be modified. On the other hand, the mission suggested that some of the proposed amendments, while providing additional protection to workers’ rights, were not likely to promote job creation. These included provisions relating to conditions of employment following the transfer or sale of businesses and to the extension of labor laws to cover independent contractors. The proposed amendments also do little, at this stage, to provide small enterprises with more latitude in wage setting. The mission, therefore, reiterated its support for the proposal set out in the government’s economic policy blueprint of 1996 (GEAR) to grant the Minister of Labour 21 These costs have encouraged the evasion of labor laws through the use of independent labor contractors. 22 The impact on employment of centralized collective bargaining is difficult to assess, although bargaining council agreements at present probably cover only about 50-60 percent of the labor market. Moreover, while relatively costly, nonparticipating parties can seek, and are often granted, exemptions from collective agreements. Problems with the quality and timeliness of wage and other labor market data make analysis of the impact of collective bargaining difficult. 23 NEDLAC (National Economic Development and Labour Advisory Council) is the vehicle by which government, labor, business and community organizations cooperate, through problem solving and negotiation, on economic, labor and development issues. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2l- Box 6. Proposed Amendments to Labor Legislation In July 2000, the Minister of Labour announced a number of proposed amendments to existing labor legislation hat seek “to improve the efficiency of the labor market and promote employment creation.‘* The amendments :manate from an exercise to “review provisions that have unintended consequences on employment creation or ire wrongly perceived to be detrimental to employment creation or the expansion of enterprises.” They have leen tabled at NEDLAC for negotiation with stakeholders and include the following provisions: Collective bargaining and bargaining councils . Bargaining councils must consult with nonparties of bargaining agreements before the agreements are extended to nonparties. l Steps are to be taken to speed up bargaining process in the public service. Dispute resolution l Action is to be taken to enable the Court for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration (CCMA) to improve its services to employers and vulnerable workers. These include the introduction of a speedier one-step process of conciliation and arbitration and steps to significantly reduce abuse and misuse of CCMA facilities. . A probationary period of six months will be introduced during which less strict dismissal procedures will apply in cases of unfair dismissals. Workers’ rights in event of retrenchment, transfer of businesses, and insolvency 0 Trade unions will be able to get better access to relevant information in the event of consultations on retrenchments. . The Labor Court will be allowed to seek assistance from experts or assessors when they are required to deal with a retrenchment matter. l Facilitators will be appointed in the event of large-scale retrenchments. l The situation will be clarified in respect of contracts of employment when a business is transferred. 0 Workers will be informed on a timely basis about possible liquidations. . Workers’ contracts will be suspended, instead of terminated, when a provisional liquidation occurs. . A limited process of consultation will be established to search for alternatives in the event of insolvency. Conditions of employment l Normalize work on Sunday so that it will no longer be a legal requirement to pay a premium for work on that day. l Reduce the notice period to a week for those who are employed for less than six months; l Enable bargaining councils to increase the number of ordinary hours that are worked in a week beyond 45 hours; l Increase the scope for collective bargaining agreements to vary the hours of work. Independent labor contractors l The coverage of labor laws will be extended to workers who may presently be legally regarded as independent contractors, but who are de facto workers. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 22 - discretion in exempting nonparticipating parties from bargaining council agreements. It also made other proposals relating to the extension of agreements.24 Trade 33. South Africa has made considerable gains in liberalizing its external trade in recent years. A study by the staff indicates that, during the 199Os, trade liberalization led to a major improvement in industrial efficiency, and that this accounted for the bulk of the economic growth that South Africa has enjoyed.*’ The authorities are pursuing several avenues toward greater regional integration, most notably within the Southern African Development Community (SADC), and are also seeking greater cooperation with other major trade partners and groups of trade partners. Within the SADC, an agreement toward a free trade area was reached in principle in September 2OOO.*‘j The agreement is not yet operational because member countries have yet to finalize details on matters such as rules of origin. The South African authorities continue to regard SADC as the main vehicle for regional integration in trade and investment, although it participated as an observer in a recent Common Market for the Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA)/Regional Integration Facilitation Forum (RIFF) meeting. Following the adoption of a free trade agreement with the EU in January 200 1, South Africa is also engaged in exploratory talks with other trade partners on greater trade and economic integration.*’ The mission advised that, before trade agreements were entered into with any of these groups, it would be important to ensure that the agreements did not give rise to undue trade diversion.* 34. The authorities also reported that they were prepared to support a new general round of multilateral trade negotiations within the World Trade Organization (WTO), by working 24 The mission proposed that consideration be given to (a) raising the employee representa- tion threshold for the extension of bargaining council agreements and (b) codifying permanent exemptions for small businesses with the Labour Relations Act, to be accompanied by an increase in the size of what constitutes a small business. 25 See “Trade Liberalization and Productivity in South Africa” in “South Africa: Selected Issues” (IMF Staff Country Report No. 00/42). 26 The agreement provides for SACU members to eliminate intraregional tariffs on most imports within five years, and for other members to do so within eight years. The phase- out period for “sensitive” goods will be somewhat longer. *’ These include the Common Market for the South (MERCOSUR) of Latin America, the North American Free Trade Agreement NAFTA, and the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and bilateral agreements with several other countries. *’ Trade diversion from preferential arrangements may arise because of the relatively high level of some of South Africa’s trade barriers to nonpreferential partners. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-23 - with other developing countries to reduce peak tariff rates in industrial countries and to limit the scope for antidumping and countervailing duties. The mission agreed that further multilateral trade liberalization would be desirable, but also noted that it would be important in the meantime for South Africa to push ahead unilaterally with trade liberalization. These actions could include further cuts in high rates of protection for the “sensitive sectors” (primarily textiles, clothing, and footwear) and a simplification of the trade regime by reducing the number of tariff bands. 35. In September 2000, a revised formula was concluded for distributing SACU customs and excise revenues. South Africa’s share of revenues is expected to rise from present levels of less than 50 percent to about 55 percent in 2001/02.29 The mission agreed that the new formula would allow SACU members to plan ahead more effectively and adjust to the fiscal impact of ongoing trade liberalization. Privatization 36. The government is moving forward with the restructuring of state-owned enterprises and has announced a policy framework for accelerating the process (Box 7). The focus appropriately centers on the four major public enterprises, namely Transnet, Telkom, Eskom, and Denel. The authorities recognize the benefits of moving ahead expeditiously with privatization as a means of enhancing productive efficiency, catalyzing foreign investment, and transferring technology. Nonetheless, the authorities are also aware of the importance of ensuring that an adequate regulatory framework is in place as privatization moves forward. There is, moreover, a concern about job losses, particularly in the short term. D. HIV/AIDSM 37. South Africa has one of the highest HIV prevalence rates in the world. According to a recent Joint UN Program on HIV/AIDS (LJNAIDS) report, an estimated 20 percent of the population aged 15-49 is infected with HIV-j’ This compares with an adult population prevalence rate of 8.6 percent for sub-Saharan Africa and of just over 1 percent globally. The disease has spread rapidly, with the HIV prevalence rate for pregnant women in South Africa rising from under 1 percent in 1990 to just over 22 percent in 1999. It is estimated that South Africa now accounts for about 12 percent of the world’s HIV-positive individuals. ‘9 The formula also includes the allocation of 15 percent of excise revenues to a development fund that will be distributed to members on the basis of their per capita incomes. 3o A chapter in the accompanying selected issues paper provides a more detailed discussion of the impact of HIV/AIDS on the South African economy. 3’ UNAIDS, “Report on the Global HIV/AIDS Epidemic,” June 2000. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-24- Box 7. Restructuring of State-Owned Enterprises The authorities have laid out their strategy for the restructuring of state-owned enterprises (SOE) in a policy framework released in August 2000. The framework aims at increasing SOE efficiency through improved governance and competition, while seeking an injection of private sector capital, technology, and expertise through full or partial privatization. This framework is consistent with, and expands on, the earlier policy blueprints. It is expected that most restructuring activities will be completed by 2004. In terms of contributions to the budget, it is expected that the privatization of SOEs will generate at least R 40 billion (about 5 percent of GDP) over the next three years. The four largest SOEs-Transnet (transport), Telkom (telecommunications), Eskom (electricity), and Denel (defense)-which account for about 9 1 percent of assets of the top 30 SOEs, are featured prominently in the restructuring process. Transnet. Spoomet will be corporatized, with its different business units becoming corporate entities. Spoomet’s General Freight Business will be corporatized and restructured, prior to seeking a strategic equity partner and an eventual initial public offering (IPO). CoalLink, LinkRail, LuxRail, MLPS, and Orex will be concessioned. A new ports policy and regulatory framework is being developed. Portnet will also be corporatized into a separate port authority and port operations entity, and the port operations will be privatized. Petronet (a network of petroleum and gas pipelines) will also be corporatized, although its restructuring options are not yet well developed. Following shareholder approval, an IPO for a portion of the remaining government shares in South African Airways would take place. Telkom. Work on an IPO (expected in the second half of 2001) for shares of TeIkom is in progress. Procedures are being put in place for licensing a second national land-line operator and third- generation cellular licenses. Eskom. This ranks among the world’s top five electricity utilities in terms of capacity, and it will be corporatized, with generation, transmission, distribution, and non-core activities each forming a separate entity. Different generation companies will be formed out of the existing 20 power stations. Once competition among them has been established, private sector participation will be introduced. Regional electricity distribution (RED) companies are to be created, that will take over responsibility from the local authorities for distributing electricity at the local level and collecting payments. 1 Denel. Denel Aerospace and Denel Ordinance are being corporatized as stand-alone companies, and a strategic equity partner is being sought. Other. Once the airports regulatory framework has been revised, a public share offer will be made for the Airports Company. The sale of certain Safcol forestry assets has been concluded. Strategic management partnerships have been undertaken for Alexkor, Aventura, and the Post Offtce. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public38. The HIV/AIDS pandemic will have a profound impact on the country’s demographic outlook. Since the onset of the pandemic, some 500,000 South Africans have died of AIDS-related causes3* Given that the median survival with HIV/AIDS (reflecting the current state of medical knowledge) is estimated at about 8-10 years, demographic changes are likely to intensify in the period ahead. By 2015, the cumulative number of AIDS-related deaths is projected to rise to more than 10 million.33 AIDS-related deaths will soon outnumber all other causes of death in economically active adults. Life expectancy in South Africa has already fallen by about 10 years compared with a pre-pandemic level of 65 years and is forecast to fall further to about 40 years by 2008.34 AIDS orphans (ages O-15) would account for 4.4 percent of the total population by 2010. Based on the current demographic projections, South Africa’s labor force would decline by about 18 percent over the next 20 years, compared with a no-HIV/AIDS scenario. 39. These demographic changes will have far-reaching economic and social consequences. The government will face increased demands for public health services and social transfers; at the same time, there could be a drop in productivity in the provision of public services due to increased mortality, illness, and absenteeism of public sector employees. The private sector is likely to face similar problems of increased medical plan costs, sick leave, disability/survivor pensions, and absenteeism. Individuals with HIV and their caregivers are likely to become increasingly financially vulnerable, reducing their savings and their investment in human capital, which, in turn, would exacerbate poverty and adversely affect income distribution. 40. Economic growth is likely to be markedly lower than it would be under a no- HIV/AIDS scenario. Recent empirical studies project that, by 2010, real GDP would be anywhere between 8 percent and 17 percent below the level attained in the no-HIV/AIDS scenario.35 The resulting decline in real per capita GDP growth estimated at up to 7 percent would, however, reflect a partial offset coming from reduced rates of population growth. 41. The government has intensified its efforts aimed at addressing the HIV/AIDS pandemic. Declaring the fight against HIV/AIDS a top priority, it has recently called for a 32 South Africa’s population is estimated at 43.1 million at mid-1999. 33 ING Barings, “The Demographic Impact of AIDS on the South African Economy,” December 1999. 34 U.S. Bureau of the Census, “World Population Profile: 1998”, 1999. 35 Bureau of Economic Research, “HIV/AIDS and the South African Economy,” Economic Research Note 8,200O; ING Barings, “The Economic Impact of AIDS on the South African Economy”, April 2000; and Amdt, C, and J. Lewis, “The Macro Implications of HIV/AIDS in South Africa: A Preliminary Assessment,” World Bank Africa Region Working Paper No. 9,200O. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 26 - multisectoral approach for combating the pandemic in its “HIV/AIDS Strategic Plan for South Africa, 2000-2005.” The primary goals are to reduce the number of new HIV infections (particularly among youth) and reduce the impact of HIV/AIDS on individuals, families and communities. The implementation of this strategic plan will require substantial resources, and all sectors (including government agencies, NGOs, the private sector, religious organizations, donors, and people with HIV) have been urged to devote increased resources to the fight against HIV/AIDS. From the government’s side, a range of programs are under way, including those aimed at promoting awareness of HIV/AIDS and of safe sexual behavior, reducing mother-to-child transmission, maintaining a safe blood transfusion service, improving access to voluntary testing, improving treatment protocols by health service providers, and facilitating community/home-based care. It is difficult for the government to estimate the overall level of outlays that it has and will need to devote to combating the disease. IV. STAFFAPPRAISAL 42. South Africa is enjoying a modest upturn in economic activity despite a series of setbacks during the first half of last year, and the immediate outlook appears encouraging. Real GDP should rise to close to 4 percent in 2001, up from around 3 percent in 2000. The recovery has been supported by continued fiscal restraint and implementation of an inflation-targeting strategy. South Africa’s ability to sustain higher growth and withstand adverse external shocks has been strengthened by the success of the stabilization effort, the maintenance of a more flexible exchange rate regime, and the presence of a healthy and robust financial system. 43. Serious policy challenges remain, however. Unemployment persists at unacceptably high levels, and poverty is deep and widespread. Economic growth needs to rise to a higher plateau, and investment rates must increase significantly if this is to happen. But higher investment alone is unlikely to address the acute unemployment problem. It needs to be accompanied by reforms that make labor more competitive so that investment absorbs, rather than displaces, labor. Structural policies, such as trade liberalization and privatization, will also help to raise factor productivity growth and Iabor demand, although this may take time. 44. In developing and refining its strategy for labor market reform, the government is endeavoring to strike a balance between the desire to protect workers’ rights and the need to create jobs. This approach has been reflected in a series of proposed amendments to existing labor laws that are being discussed with representatives of civil society. On balance, these amendments constitute an important initiative that should help expand employment opportunities. But the momentum of reform needs to be sustained. The government is, therefore, urged to undertake regular reviews of the legislative framework in order to examine whether further scope exists for reducing the “statutory” costs of doing business, while ensuring that fundamental workers’ rights are protected. Steps should also be considered to decentralize the collective bargaining system. These might take the form of providing small and medium-sized enterprises, which represent the most important potential Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 27 - source of employment growth, greater independence in setting wages and conditions of employment by not extending to them bargaining council agreements. Finally, in the event of any further expansion in the job skills program, the staff would encourage the authorities to consider funding sources other than payroll taxes. 45. Considerable benefits are likely to accrue to the South African economy with implementation of the public enterprise-restructuring program, although there is, understandably, a concern over short-term job losses. When the restructuring program is reviewed, the staff would also encourage that greater emphasis be placed on transferring majority control of corporatized enterprises to private hands. Moreover, since undue delays in implementation could hurt confidence, the government is urged to proceed with the offer for sale of Telkom this year, unless market conditions happen to deteriorate significantly in the meantime. 46. Significant gains have been made in recent years in reducing macroeconomic imbalances. The task facing policymakers now is to ensure that gains in external competitiveness are preserved, that the inflation target for 2002 is met, and that long-term borrowing costs decline further. Fiscal, monetary, and foreign exchange policies have important roles to play in achieving these goals. 47. The process of budget deficit reduction is largely complete. The government is, therefore, now focusing on strengthening tax incentives and making the tax system fairer and internationally competitive. In weighing options for investment incentives, the staff would urge that attention focus on depreciation allowances, and that recourse to tax holidays or credits be avoided. The government is also allocating savings from the wage and interest bills to security and economic infrastructure, while ensuring that its services provide value for money. Because much credibility has been established in the area of fiscal management, some flexibility on the medium-term fiscal stance may be warranted in the event of a need to devote additional resources to addressing South Africa’s pressing social issues, including HIV/AIDS, 48. The SARB is well on track to meeting its inflation target, and inflationary pressures now appear to be abating. There seems, however, to have been some hardening in inflationary expectations recently, probably because these expectations are still largely backward looking and sensitive to the weakness of the rand. Before contemplating any reduction in interest rates, therefore, the SARB would be advised to await a clear sign that nonfuel inflation is on a pronounced downward path. 49. A cautious approach on interest rates would also facilitate further cuts in the SARB’s short-term foreign currency exposure. Significant progress has been made in reducing the NOFP over the past two or so years; this exposure, however, remains an important source of vulnerability. The authorities leave no doubt that they recognize the need for further reductions. The SARB will continue to purchase foreign exchange in the market during periods of positive market sentiment, as well as using privatization proceeds and, to a lesser extent, accessing capital markets, in order to lower the NOFP. Otherwise, it does not Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 28 - intend to intervene in the foreign exchange market, The staff supports this strategy, since it would avoid exacerbating pressures on the rand at times of significant capital outflows. In view of the benefits of reducing the NOFP.as quickly as possible, the staff considers that the gradualist approach that has been taken to liberalizing capital controls is appropriate. 50. The real currency depreciation that has taken place in recent years is generally consistent with macroeconomic developments, and the value of the rand does not appear to be significantly misaligned. These include trade liberalization, a deterioration in the terms of &de, relatively low productivity growth, and a series of negative shocks during 2000, such as contagion from the Zimbabwe crisis and other emerging market economies. External competitiveness has also been strengthened by the improvement in the public finances, as evidenced by the strengthening of the current account position, and little of the nominal depreciation that occurred in 2000 has been passed through to wages and prices. 51. A follow-up on the FSSA report of January 2000 confirmed that South Africa’s financial system remained strong and generally well regulated. Indeed, it found that key indicators of financial system health, such as capital adequacy ratios, nonperforming loans, and loss provisions, had improved from already relatively strong levels. The authorities are, moreover, to be commended for the steps they have taken to implement most of the recommendations made in the report. 52. The country’s demographic landscape is likely to be changed significantly by the HIV/AIDS pandemic. These demographic changes will have far-reaching economic and social consequences, with lower economic growth and a possible exacerbation of poverty than under a no-HIV/AIDS scenario. The authorities are encouraged to press ahead with their multisectoral approach for combating the pandemic. 53. Most economic data for South Africa are of high quality. They are provided to the Fund and, generally the public, with detail, frequency, and timeliness that are fully adequate for surveillance. South Africa is also a subscriber to S’DDS and is publishing all data included on the reserves template. Major weaknesses remain, however, in the quality, frequency, and timeliness of employment and other labor market data (including comprehensive measures of labor costs and productivity) that significantly complicate surveillance in this area. The authorities have been encouraged to proceed with the development of the data module for the Report of Observance of Standards and Codes (ROSC). 54. It is expected that the next Article IV consultation will be held on the standard 12-month cycle. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 29 - Tabk 1. South Africa: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 1996-2001 19% 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 Est. Prnj. National Income and prkes Real GDP (Annual pcrcmtage change, unless othcrwisc specified) Real GDP per capita Nominal GDP (billions of rand) Nominal GDP percapita (U.S. dollars) CPI (aonual average) CPI (end of period) CFW (period avemge) h.2 2.0 618.4 3,568 7.4 9.4 2.5 0.3 683.7 3,600 8.6 6.0 . . . . . . 0.7 -1.5 735.1 3.154 6.9 9.1 7.1 I.9 -0.3 795.6 3,023 5.2 2.2 6.9 -3.0 0.9 875.9 2,871 5.3 7.0 7.7 3.8 1.7 961.3 2,793 6.1 5.0 6.5 Labor market Unemployment rate (expanded definition; in percent) 34.4 37.4 37.5 36.2 35.2 35.1 Average rcmuocratioo (formal nonagricultural private scetor) 11.0 10.4 16.7 9.2 7.3 6.7 Labor productivity (ikmal aooagricultuml) 4.0 4.3 4.9 4.0 4.5 4.4 Nommal unit labor costs (formal nonagricultural) 7.1 6.5 8.9 2.8 4.8 5.1 External sector Merchandise exports, f.o.b. I! Merchandise imports, to.b. I/ Exports (goods and services) volume Imports (goods and services) volume Terms of trade Nominal effective exchange mt 2/ Real effective exchaop rate Z 0.7 3.1 -6.6 -1.8 0.7 4.6 -5.6 -10.2 9.3 5.5 2.2 1.3 8.7 5.4 1.2 -7.4 1.4 -1.2 -0.9 0.0 -12.0 0.5 -13.8 -9.5 -7.8 7.0 -9.4 -5.4 6.4 3.7 8.2 6.7 1.9 8.2 7.7 10.2 -2.3 -1.7 -5.1 . . -2.0 . Money and credit Net domestic assets 31 credit to the government 31 Credit to the rest of the economy 3/ Broad money (incl. forcx deposits) Velocity (GDPlavcrage broad money) 17.9 15.2 17.0 2.1 1.5 3.1 3.0 -0.5 16.4 12.1 14.0 2.6 13.6 17.2 14.6 10.1 2.1 2.0 1.8 1.8 6.3 . . . 0.2 . 6.1 . . . 7.6 8.0 1.8 1.8 Investment and saving Investment (incl. inventories) Public fmed invcstmmt Private tixad investment Gross nationd saving Public Private 17.1 16.0 16.0 15.1 IS.2 15.9 2.4 2.4 2.4 2.2 2.3 2.3 13.7 13.8 14.3 13.0 12.6 13.0 15.8 14.5 14.3 14.6 15.1 16.1 -3.0 -2.8 -1.6 -0.7 -0.1 0.3 18.8 17.3 15.9 IS.3 IS.2 15.8 National government budget 4/ Revenue, including grants Expenditure and net knding Overall balance Primary balance National government debt General government balance 5/ PSBR of the nonfinancial public sector 6/ 23.1 23.4 24.6 24.5 23.8 23.7 27.5 27.2 26.9 26.4 26.2 26.2 -4.4 -3.8 -2.3 -2.0 -2.4 -2.5 I.1 1.8 3.4 3.5 2.7 2.4 44.1 44.5 44.9 46.5 43.5 41.6 -5.0 4.9 -2.4 -1.7 -2.2 -2.0 4.4 4.2 3.4 1.2 3.8 2.8 External sector Current external balance (in billions of USS) Current external balance Owrall balance of paymmts Foreign currency-dcnomioated debt (in bilions of USS) o/which: short-tam (in billions of USS) Total external debt I exports of goods and services (in percent) 7/ Total external debt service (in billions of USS) 7/ 8/ Total external debt service / exports (in percmt) 7/ 8/ Net oflicial reserves (in billions of USS) (in month5 of total imports) -1.9 -2.3 -2.3 -0.6 -0.1 -1.3 -1.5 -1.8 -0.4 -0.1 -0.8 1.6 -0.5 3.3 1.2 26.1 25.2 25.0 23.9 25.9 14.8 14.3 14.2 13.6 14.7 97.8 107.3 108.9 115.3 118.5 6.3 7.5 7.2 7.5 7.5 17.8 20.5 20.8 22.1 21.0 2.2 3.8 2.3 4.3 4.9 0.8 1.3 0.8 1.7 1.8 22.2 16.3 22.5 13.0 9.5 0.3 0.2 I.2 28.1 16.0 122.7 8.1 21.7 Net open forward position of SARB (in billions of LJSS) 9/ . . . ,.. U.S. dollar exchange rate (end of period) 4.68 4.87 5.86 6.15 7.57 Sources: South African Reserve Bank; IMF, lnfernofionol Financial Stofisrics; and staff projections. II In U.S. dollars, annual percent change. 2l Annual average; INS definition. 31 Conhibution (in percentage points) to the growth of broad money. 41 Fiscal year beginning April 1, 51 Excluding salea of state assets and protiulosses fmm forward market operations of the Reserve Bank. 61 Excluding sales of state assets but including the pmfitnosscs fmm fatward market operations of the Reserve Bank. 7/ Excluding raoddemoninated debt held by nonresidents, end of period. 81 Excluding amorlization of short-term capital. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 30 - Table 2. South Africa: Monetary Survey, 1996-2000 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 Dec. Dec. Dec. Dec. Dec. Est. Net foreign assets Gross reserves Reserve Bank Other monetary institutions Liabilities Reserve Bank Other monetary institutions -26.1 18.8 10.3 8.5 44.9 0.0 44.8 Net domestic assets 345.5 Credit to government, net 10.2 Claims on government 39.1 Government deposit 29.5 Credit to private sector 367.2 Other items, net -31.9 Broad money (M3) Ojwhich: M1 319.4 147.6 Net foreign assets Net domestic assets Credit to govemmenf net Credit to private sector Other items, net Broad money (M3) -86.7 17.1 74.6 15.9 -16.3 13.6 Net foreign assets Net domestic assets Credit to government, net Credit to private sector Other items, net Memorandum item: Income velocity of M3 (GDP/M3) Official risk indicators: I/ Share of nonperforming loans in total lending Risk-based capital adequacy ratio (Contribution to growth in M3, unless otherwise specified)) -4.3 1.9 -2.4 8.1 1.3 17.9 15.2 17.0 2.1 6.3 1.5 3.1 3.0 -0.5 1.1 18.0 16.6 18.7 9.9 12.5 -1.6 -4.4 -4.8 -7.4 -7.3 2.01 1.90 1.75 1.73 1.80 (In percent unless otherwise specified) Financial sector risk factors: 61 Share of foreign currency loans in total lending 2/ Share of foreign currency deposits in total deposits Share of foreign liabilities in total liabilities 2/3/ Share of short-term deposits in total deposits 41 Share of mortgage advances in private credit Annual increase in value per real estate transaction Market assessment: Share prices of financial institutions 5/ 6/ 3.2 3.3 4.1 4.9 4.5 9.7 9.9 10.6 11.8 12.3 4.1 3.8 4.1 5.9 8.4 1.5 2.3 3.5 3.5 4.0 9.0 7.3 7.1 6.0 6.7 41.2 41.6 45.6 49.9 48.7 43.4 42.3 39.9 38.2 38.1 2.9 4.9 0.3 10.1 9.3 140 197 175 217 198 (ln billions of rand) -19.9 -28.9 5.8 37.8 50.7 79.9 28.5 31.6 45.4 9.3 19.1 34.5 57.6 79.6 74.1 9.8 18.1 18.8 47.8 61.5 55.3 394.1 457.6 466.4 20.0 31.3 29.2 48.2 59.1 61.3 28.2 27.8 32.2 420.1 490.1 532.7 -46.0 -63.8 -95.5 374.2 428.7 472.2 173.1 213.9 258.3 (Annual percentage change) 23.9 -45.4 120.0 14.1 16.1 1.9 96.2 56.4 -6.6 14.4 16.7 8.7 -44.2 -38.7 -49.6 17.2 14.6 10.1 11.7 97.8 57.0 40.8 86.1 19.6 66.5 496.2 34.3 64.2 29.9 591.7 -129.8 507.9 266.9 103.5 6.4 17.7 11.1 -36.0 1.6 Sources: South African Reserve Bank; and Fund staff estimates. I/ Banks are audited using acceptable international standards; capital adequacy requirements are also imposed on securities trading. The figure for 2000 refers to September. 21 Including foreign financing in bank’s own name on-lent to clients. 3/ Including foreign currency deposits and other foreign loans and advances. 4/ Short-term deposits include check and demand deposits. 51 Index, 1995 = 100. 61 The figures for 2000 refer to September. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-31 - Table 3. South Africa: National Government Finances, 1997/98 - 2000/01 I/ 1997#8 1998199 1999L?ooa 2000/01 Budget Estimate Budget Projecrion (In billions of rand) Total revenue and grants Total revenue Tax revenue Direct taxes (taxes on income, profits) Domestic taxes on goods and services Of which : Value-added tax Tradetaxes R Other 31 Nontax revenue (including grants) 4/ 163.5 184.3 190.9 198.6 210.4 213.4 163.3 183.9 190.9 198.6 210.4 213.4 160.0 179.9 186.7 193.9 205.3 208.4 95.0 108.4 111.7 116.5 121.3 122.9 60.5 66.1 71.1 72.2 79.4 78.9 40.1 43.7 47.2 48.3 52.9 53.0 0.4 1.1 -0.6 -0.4 -1.9 -0.2 4.1 4.3 4.5 5.6 6.5 6.8 3.3 2.9 4.2 4.7 5.1 5.0 Total expenditure 189.7 201.5 213.9 214.6 233.5 235.1 Current expenditure 182.8 193.2 203.1 206.6 226.0 228.1 Wages and salaries 83.8 87.8 86.5 86.5 91.7 92.4 Goods and services 20.7 19.0 25.2 26.0 23.8 29.8 Interest payments 38.8 42.7 48.5 44.3 46.5 46.2 Other current expenditure 39.5 43.8 42.9 49.9 64.0 59.7 Capital expenditure 6.9 8.3 10.8 8.0 7.5 7.0 Overall balance -26.2 -17.2 -23.0 -16.0 -23.1 -21.7 Primary balance 12.6 25.5 25.5 28.3 23.4 24.5 Financing 26.2 17.2 23.0 16.0 23.1 21.7 Domestic 20.1 16.1 17.8 10.7 15.6 15.6 Domestic Loans (net) 19.6 19.6 17.8 8.0 13.6 13.6 Change in cash balances 0.5 -3.5 0.0 2.7 2.0 2.0 Privatisation proceeds and other 2.9 I.8 4.0 1.7 2.8 1.4 Foreign (net) 3.2 -0.7 1.2 3.6 4.6 4.6 Total revenue and Grants Total revenue Tax revenue Direct taxes (taxes on income, profits) Domestic taxes on goods and services Ofwhich : Value-added tax Trade taxes L? other Nontax revenue (including grants) 23.4 24.6 23.5 24.5 23.4 23.8 23.4 24.5 23.5 24.5 23.4 23.8 22.9 24.0 23.0 23.9 22.9 23.2 13.6 14.5 13.8 14.3 13.5 13.7 8.7 8.8 8.8 8.9 8.8 8.8 5.7 5.8 5.8 6.0 5.9 5.9 0. I 0.1 -0.1 -0.1 -0.2 0.0 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.7 0.7 0.8 0.5 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.6 0.6 Total expcndlture 27.2 26.9 26.3 26.4 26.0 26.2 Current expenditure 26.2 25.8 25.0 25.4 25.2 25.4 Wages and salaries 12.0 11.7 10.7 10.6 10.2 10.3 Guods and services 3.0 2.5 3.1 3.2 2.7 3.3 Interest payments 5.6 5.7 6.0 5.5 5.2 5.1 Other current expendjture 5.7 5.8 5.3 6.1 7.1 6.7 Capital expenditure 1.0 1.1 1.3 I.0 0.8 0.8 Overall balance -3.8 -2.3 -2.8 -2.0 -2.6 -2.4 Primary balance 1.8 3.4 3.1 3.5 2.6 2.7 Memorandum items: Total government debt (percent of GDP) Gmeral government balance (percent of GDP) 4/ 5/ PSBR of the nonfinancial public sector (percent of GDP) 6/ 47.4 47.4 . . . 46.5 -5.0 -2.1 *.. -1.6 4.2 3.4 . . . 1.3 . . . 45.0 . . . -2.3 . . . 3.9 (In percent of GDP) GDP (billions of rand) 698.1 749.0 811.9 811.9 897.9 897.9 Sources: Department of Finance; SARB; and Fund staff estimates and projections. I! Fiscal year begins April 1. 21 Net of SACU payments. 31 Includes Skills Development Levy. 41 Excludes extraordinary receipts, including privatixation receipts and sales of strategic oil stocks, and the profit/loss from the forward market operations of the Reserve Bank. 51 Includes the national government, extrabudgetary institutions (e.g.. universities), social security fund, provinces, and local authorities. 6/ General government plus the nonfinancial public enterprises. Excludes extraordinary receipts, including privatization receipts and sales of strategic oil stocks, but includes the profit/loss from the forward market operations of the Reserve Bank. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 32 - Table 4. South Africa: Balance of Payments, 1995-2000 Fmj. 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 (In billions of U.S.~dollars) Balance on current account Balance on goods and services Exports of goods and services Exports of goods Nongold Gold Exports of services hpom of goods and services Imports of goods Imports of services Balance on income income receipts income payments Balance on transfers .2.2 -1.9 -2.3 -2.3 -0.6 -0.1 0.3 1.3 2.0 1.7 1.5 3.6 3.7 2.4 34.7 35.3 36.5 34.4 33.7 35.6 37.2 30.1 30.3 31.2 29.1 28.6 30.5 31.6 23.9 24.2 25.6 24.5 24.7 26.4 27.2 6.2 6.1 5.6 4.7 4.0 4.0 4.4 4.6 5.0 5.3 5.3 5.1 5.1 5.6 -33.4 -33.3 -34.9 -32.9 -30.1 -31.9 -34.8 -27.4 -27.6 -28.9 -27.3 -24.5 -26.5 -28.2 -6.0 -5.7 -6.0 -5.6 -5.6 -5.4 -6.5 -2.9 -3.1 -3.2 -3.1 -3.2 -2.8 -1.3 1.1 1.1 1.3 1.3 1.5 2.3 4.0 -4.0 -4.2 -4.5 -4.4 -4.7 -5.1 -5.3 -0.6 -0.7 -0.7 -0.7 -0.9 -0.9 -0.9 Capital flows (including unrecorded transactions) Balance on capital and facial account Balance on capital account Balance on financial account Direct investment Liabilities Assets Portfolio investment Liabilities ASSetS Other investment Liabilities Unrecorded transactions 4.6 0.7 4.6 1.6 4.8 1 .o 1.7 5.4 3.1 5.7 3.1 3.6 I.0 1.7 0.0 0.0 -0.2 -0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 5.5 3.1 5.9 3.1 3.7 1.0 1.7 -1.3 -0.2 1.5 -1.2 -0.4 -1.4 -1.2 1.2 0.8 3.8 0.6 1.5 1.0 1.2 -2.5 -1.0 -2.4 -1.8 -2.0 -2.5 -2.3 2.5 2.2 6.6 3.7 8.6 3.6 3.9 2.9 4.2 11.2 9.1 13.7 7.7 7.8 -0.4 -2.0 -4.6 -5.4 -5.2 -4.1 -3.9 4.2 1.1 -2.2 0.7 -4.5 -1.2 -1.0 4.7 1.7 -0.3 1.2 -2.0 0.4 0.5 -0.5 -0.6 -1.9 -0.5 -1.7 -1.6 -1.5 -0.8 -2.4 -1.1 -1.5 1.2 0.0 0.0 Overall balance of payments 2.4 -1.2 2.4 -0.7 4.2 Gross reserves (central governmen t and Reserve Bank) 4.3 2.2 5.8 5.4 7.4 Gross reserves (including the banking sector) 5.0 3.5 7.3 7.2 11.2 Net open position of Reserve Bank -14.0 -22.2 -16.3 -22.5 -13.0 Net foreign assets -28.7 -25.4 -20.7 -12.4 -24.4 0.9 2.0 8.3 . . . 12.1 . . -9.5 . -24.5 (In percent of GDP) Balance on current account -1.5 -1.3 -1.5 -1.8 -0.4 -0.1 0.2 Balance on goods and services 0.9 1.4 1.1 1.2 2.7 2.9 I.9 Exports of goods and services 23.0 24.5 24.6 25.9 25.9 28.2 29.6 Imports of gocds and services -22.1 -23.2 -23.5 -24.7 -23.1 -25.3 -27.1 Balance on income -1.9 -2.2 -2.2 -2.4 -2.5 -2.2 -1.0 Balance on transfers -0.4 -0.5 -0.5 -0.6 -0.7 -0.7 -0.7 Capital flows (including unrecorded transactions) Balance on capital and fmancial account Balance on capital awotutt Balance on financial account Direct investment Portfolio investment 0th investmenl Unrecorded transactions 3.0 0.5 3.1 1.2 3.7 0.8 1.4 3.6 2.1 3.8 2.3 2.8 0.8 1.4 0.0 0.0 -0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 3.6 2.2 4.0 2.4 2.8 0.8 1.4 -0.8 -0.2 1.0 -0.9 -0.3 -1.1 -0.9 1.6 I.5 4.5 2.8 6.6 2.9 3.1 2.8 0.8 -1.5 0.5 -3.4 -1.0 -0.8 -0.6 -1.6 -0.7 -1.1 0.9 0.0 0.0 Overall balance of payments Gross reserves (central government and Reserve Bank) Gross reserves (including the banking sector) Net open position of Reserve Bank Net foreign assets 1.6 -0.8 1.6 -0.5 3.3 2.9 1.7 4.2 4.3 5.7 3.3 2.6 5.2 5.7 a.7 -9.2 -15.4 -11.0 -16.9 -10.0 -19.0 -17.7 -13.9 -9.3 -18.7 0.7 1.6 6.5 . . . 9.6 . . -7.5 -19.4 -19.3 Sources: South African Reserve Bank; and Fund staff estimates and projections. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 33 - Table 5. South Africa: Indicators of External Vulnerability, 1996-2000 (In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated) 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 Est. Financial indicators Public sector debt I/ Broad money (percent change; 12-month basis) Private sector credit (percent change; 12 month basis) Bank rate (in percent) 21 Bank rate (in percent; real) 31 External indicators Exports (percent change; USS value) Imports (percent change; USS value) Terms of trade (percent change) Current account balance Capital and financial account balance Ofwhich : net inward portfolio investment net other investment (loans, trade credits, etc.) net foreign direct investment Gross official reserves (in USS bn.) 41 Short-term official foreign liabilities (in billions of USS) 41 Net open forward position of SARB (in billions of USS) 4151 Net offtcial reserves (in billions of US%) 41 In months of imports of goods and services 41 As a percent of short-term foreign currency debt 4161 Foreign currency-denominated external debt (in US$ bn.) As a percent of total exports External interest payments (as a percent of total exports) Exchange rate (per US dollar; period average) REER appreciation (period average; in percent) 71 Financial market indicators Stock market index ( 1994=100) 4/ Percent change in US dollar terms 41 Foreign currency debt rating--Standard & Poor’s 8/ Foreign currency debt rating--Moody’s 44.1 44.5 44.9 46.5 43.8 13.6 17.2 14.6 10.1 7.6 15.9 14.4 16.7 9.1 10.1 17.0 16.0 19.3 12.0 12.0 7.0 8.1 10.7 3.8 3.1 1.7 3.5 -5.9 -2.0 5.5 -0.1 4.6 -5.8 -8.3 5.9 1.4 -1.2 -0.9 0.0 -2.3 -1.3 -1.5 -1.8 -0.4 -0.1 2.1 3.8 2.3 2.8 1.3 1.5 4.5 2.8 6.6 3.1 0.8 -1.5 0.5 -3.4 -0.8 -0.2 1.0 -0.9 -0.3 -1.0 2.2 5.8 5.4 7.4 8.9 0.0 2.0 3.1 3.1 2.5 22.2 16.3 22.5 13.0 9.5 2.2 3.8 2.3 4.3 6.4 0.8 1.3 0.8 1.7 2.3 14.9 26.7 16.2 31.6 42.9 26.1 25.2 25.0 23.9 25.9 73.8 69.0 72.6 70.9 72.9 7.3 8.3 8.7 8.8 8.9 4.30 4.61 5.53 6.11 6.94 -7.8 7.0 -9.4 -5.4 -2.0 111.9 -17.9 BB+ (+) .a. 104.2 -10.4 BB+ (+) BBB- 91.3 -27.3 BB+ BBB- 143.6 49.8 BB+ Baa3 138.8 -9.8 BBB- Baa3 Spread of benchmark bonds (basis points, end of period) 91 Sources: South African Reserve Bank; and Fund staff estimates. . . . 270.0 572.0 308.0 432.0 l! National government debt. 2/ End of period; repurchase rate as of 1998. 31 Deflated by the percent change in end-period core consumer price index. 4/ End of period. 5/ Defined as net forward liabilities less net spot reserves. 6/ Remaining maturity of less than one year. 7/ Based on IMF’s Information Notice System. 8/ In February 2000, Standard & Poor’s upgraded South African sovereign foreign currency debt to BBB- (investment grade). 91 Spread on 15-20 year dollar-denominated bond relative to comparable U.S. treasury bond. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 34 - Table 6. South Africa: Social and Demographic Indicators Area 1.22 million square kilometers Population characteristics Population density (1998) 29 per sq. km Urban population (1998) (percentage of total) 52.9 Proportion in capital city (1995) (as a percentage of urban population) 12.7 Population age structure (percent) (1995) Labor force (1998) O-14 years 37.5 15-64 58.3 65 and above 4.2 GDP per capita at current prices Percentage of employment (1994) In U.S. dollars (1999) 3,023 Agriculture Mining Industry Government Education (1997) 11 8 25 18 Nutrition (1999) Per capita calorie intake per day Mean Median 2,424 2,358 Population (1999) Annual rate of growth Health 4 1.5 million 2.0 percent Life expectancy at birth (1998) Total 54 Infant mortality (per thousand live births) 51.5 Female (percentage of labor force) 37.6 Adult literacy (15+, percentage) Male Female Total 85 83 84 Sources: World Bank, World Development Indicators; United Nations Population Fund, South African Labor Statistics, 1994; South African Central Statistical Service; South African Department of Health; and staff estimates. R:\DOC\SHEAF\MOO-2\Staff ReportUlemographic Indic-Tbl.Doc February 9,200l (9:32 AM) Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 35 - 1600 1400 1200 1000 80.0 60.0 400 Figure 1. South Africa: Financial Market Indicators, January 1998 - January 2001 All-share index (05&30-98 - 100) TheRqmlmac~te~thcYicldonthcRlSOBond (in pelccnc) 2600 l- 24 00 2200 2000 1800 I600 14.w jj 12.00 - Yield on RI50 Bond 650 Rand pa U.S. Dollar sprcrd Bctwem Lmg-term Dollar-c’ ’ ‘cd South Ahxn and U.S. bonds (in basis points) 9oo.m, 1 8oa.00 700.00 @IO.00 s00.00 4oo.w Sources: South African Reserve Bank; and Bloomberg. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 36 - Figure 2. South Africa: Interest Rates and Net Open Forward Position, January 1995 - December 2000 Interest Rates 18 - 10 . 8 Jan-95 Jul-95 Jan-98 Jul-98 Jan-97 Jul-97 Jan-98 Jul-98 Jan-99 Jul-99 Jan-00 J&O0 30 25 I!? 20 m ‘6 -0 ui 5 15 B El g g 10 5 0 Net Open Forward Position (NOFP) and Interest Spreads f 14 -NOFP (left scale) -- 8 -Long-term yield differential with U.S. bonds (right scale) -- 5 -4 Jan-95 Jul-95 Jan-98 Jul-98 Jan-97 Jul-97 Jan-98 Jul-98 Jan-99 J&99 Jan-00 Jul-00 Sources: South African Reserve Bank, Quarterly Bulletin ; and IMF, International Financial Statistics. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 37 - Figure 3. South Africa: Inflation and Monetary Developments, January 1995 - December 2000 2 Inflation and Interest Rates -Core inftation (left scale) -@-Change in prime rate (right scale) Jan-05 Jul%5 Jan-06 JUI-BE Jan.07 Jul.07 Jan-06 Jul.06 Jan-gB Jul.09 Jan-00 Jul.00 25 Money and Credit Growth a 10 - -Private se&r credit extension -Private se&r credit extension 5 - 5 - -Broad money -Broad money 0. 0. Jan-05 Jan-05 Jul.05 Jul.05 Jan-06 Jan-06 Jul-06 Jul-06 Jan-07 Jan-07 Jul.07 Jul.07 Jan-08 Jan-08 Ju1-M Ju1-M Jan-00 Jan-00 Jul.00 Jul.00 Jan-00 Jan-00 Jul.00 Jul.00 Exchange Rate Developments Exchange Rate Developments -.- -.- .- I “- , -. loo loo ? ‘h, ? ‘h, --QC 008 8 ;; ;; --so I 60 I ,” 5.0 ,” 5.0 01 i i - - 01 5 5 CI: CI: 4.5 - 4.5 G.70 70 P P - 4.0 - 4.0 - 3,5 _- 1 ::..“:..;:ill. 3,5 _- 1 ::..“:..;:ill. -Nominal effective exchange rate (right scale) -Nominal effective exchange rate (right scale) -. 60 60 -Real effective exchange rate (right scale) -Real effective exchange rate (right scale) 3.0 3.0 -60 60 Jan-05 Jan-05 Ju1-05 Ju1-05 Jan-06 Jan-06 Jul.06 Jul.06 Jan-07 Jan-07 Jul.07 Jul.07 Jan-06 Jan-06 Jul.06 Jul.06 Jan-00 Jan-00 Jul.00 Jul.00 Jan-00 Jan-00 Jul.60 Jul.60 Sources: South Atican Reserve Bank, Quarterly Bulletin ; and MF, Information Notice System. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 38 - Figure 4. South Africa: Selected Economic Indicators GDP and Employment, 1992:Ql - 2OOO:QS (Annuahzed quarterly growth rates) -10 I -12 . 1992Ql 1993Q1 ,994Q, 1995Ql l996Ql 195’7QI 199CQl 199991 2OOOQl t Gross hwestment and Saving, 1992 - 2000 (As a percent of GDP) External Indicators, 1992:Ql - 2OOO:QS 30 pi VdImle oual pelTen I- National Government Finances, 1991/92 - 2000/01 11 (Deficits as a percent of GDP) 9,/92 92m 9W94 9u95 55% *97 97/98 9u¶9 99m oom Sources: South African Reserve Bank; and Ministry of Finance. l! Fiscal year beginning April 1. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 39- South Africa: Relations with the Fund (As of December 3 1,200O ) I. MembershiD Status: Joined: 12/27/1945; Article VIII II. General Resources Account: Quota Fund holdings of currency Reserve position in Fund SDR Million 1,868.50 1,868.34 0.20 III. SDR DeDartment: Net cumulative allocation Holdings SDR Million Percent Allocation 220.36 100.0 222.40 100.9 IV. Outstanding Purchases and Loans: None V. Financial Arrangements: TvPe Stand-By Arrangement CCFF Approval Date 1 l/03/82 12122193 Expiration Date 1213 l/83 -- Amount Approved (SDR Million) 364.00 614.43 APPENDIX I Percent Ouota 100.0 100.0 0.0 Amount Drawn (SDR Million) 159.00 614.43 VI. Proiected Obligations to Fund: None. VII. Exchange Rate Arrangement: The South African rand floats against other currencies, although the South African Reserve Bank intervenes in the market periodically. South Africa formally accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Section 2, 3, and 4 of the Fund’s Articles of Agreement as from September 15, 1973. On December 3 1,200O the exchange rate of the rand was US$O. 132=R 1. South Africa has followed a strategy of progressively easing exchange controls on capital transactions since 1994, reflecting the government’s commitment to the eventual abolition of these controls, and has made considerable progress in this regard in recent years. With the abolition of the financial rand in 1995, all exchange controls on nonresidents were eliminated. They are free to purchase shares, bonds, and other assets without restriction and to repatriate dividends, interest receipts and current and capital profits, as well as the original investment capital. Nonresidents are also free to hold rand accounts in the banking system, but they are constrained as to the amount they may borrow domestically. This constraint has also been relaxed, and only organizations with more than 75 percent nonresident ownership are subject to limits on their domestic borrowing. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 40- APPENDIX I Since 1995, exchange controls on capital transaction by residents have also been relaxed considerably. Rather than allowing complete liberalization of a particular type of current or capital transaction, the authorities have pursued a strategy of allowing an increasing array of transactions, with each subject to a quantitative cap that has been progressively raised over time. The limit on foreign exchange holdings by authorized dealers has been eliminated, although they continue to be subject to prudential regulations. There are no controls on the transfer of funds arising from the import or export of goods and services, although the foreign currency proceeds from exports must be repatriated to South Africa within 180 days. South African corporations are allowed to invest up to R 50 million abroad, except for investments in South African Development Community (SADC) countries where the cap is R 250 million. Institutional investors in South Africa (insurance companies, and pension funds) are permitted to invest up to 15 percent of their assets in foreign securities via asset swap arrangements with nonresidents; unit trusts can invest up to 20 percent. Private individuals are allowed to invest up to R 750,000 offshore. In the 2000 budget, the following changes to capital control regulations were announced: l Corporates will be allowed to use local cash holdings to finance up to 10 percent of new foreign investments in excess of the ceilings mentioned in the previous paragraph. l Corporates may, upon application, be permitted to establish primary listings offshore under certain conditions. l Unit trusts are now allowed to invest up to 20 percent of assets in foreign securities via asset swap arrangements with nonresidents. l The travel allowance for tourism and business was raised to R 130,000 per calendar year. VIII. Article IV Consultations The 1999 Article IV consultation was concluded by the Executive Board on February 14, 2000 (SM/OO/O3). South Africa is on the standard 12-month Article IV consultation cycle. Ix. Technical Assistance FAD and LEG provided technical assistance in establishing a capital gains tax in 2000. STA provided technical assistance on balance of payments, price, and government finance statistics in 1999 and 2000. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-41- APPENDIX II South Africa: Relations with the World Bank Group Between 1951 and 1966, the Bank made 11 loans to South Africa, totaling US$241.8 million, largely for expanding the country’s rail and harbor systems, and for generating and transmitting electricity. The Bank ceased lending operations to South Africa in 1966, and the loans from that earlier period have been fully repaid. Since reengaging with South Africa in the early 199Os, the Bank has played an active role, and South Africa has provided ample opportunities to pilot the Bank’s evolving role as a knowledge bank. Between 1990 and 1994, the Bank resumed activities in South Africa through a comprehensive program of economic policy advice and capacity building marked by open participation between the Bank and relevant sectors of the South African society, such as government, the Reserve Bank, (then) opposition parties, universities, labor unions, industrialists, and nongovernmental organizations. Several discussion papers and reports were produced on all the key sectors: the macroeconomy, education, health, agriculture, fiscal decentralization, labor markets, trade policy, and microfinance. Since 1994, the emphasis has shifted slightly toward the provision of policy advice to government, particularly in the areas of municipal services and welfare financing, macroeconomic strategy, poverty, and a medium-term expenditure framework. In addition, a US$46 million loan (since reduced to US$24 million) was approved for an Industrial Competitiveness and Job Creation Project in May 1997. The World Bank is currently preparing two loans (on Municipal Restructuring and District Hospital Rehabilitation) for possible presentation to the Board. The International Finance Corporation (IFC) has been operating in South Africa for only the last four years. A total of US$84 million has been committed (US$32 million disbursed), and a further US$l 1 million approved but not yet signed. The IFC’s strategy focuses on efforts to benefit previously disadvantaged groups directly with small and medium-sized enterprises (SME) project funding and indirectly through job creation, financing of infrastructure, and diversification of business ownership. The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA) has issued three guarantees for US!!13 million in the banking and manufacturing sectors. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-42 - APPENDIX III South Africa: Statistical Issues Real sector In June 1999, Statistics South Africa released a major revision of the national accounts based on the United Nations System of National Accounts (1993). The revision raised nominal GDP by some 13 percent for the 1993-98 period and raised the average annual rate of growth of real GDP from 2.2 percent to 2.7 percent for the period 1994-98. Labor market statistics are published with long lags (usually six months), and unemploy- ment data are only available at an annual frequency. Given the seriousness of the unemployment problem, labor market analysis and policy design need to be based on better, more frequent, and timely labor market data. Government finance South Africa currently reports data for the consolidated central government and for regional and local governments for publication in the Government Finance Statistics Yearbook. It also reports monthly data covering the operations of the budgetary central government for publication in IFS. To assist in tbe authorities’ recent initiative to conduct an extensive budget reform program, the STA mission of November 2000 provided technical assistance in the revised GFS methodology and full accrual accounting at national and provincial government levels for publication in the GFS Yearbook. A working group comprising the National Treasury, South African Reserve Bank, and Statistics South Africa has been established to work out a detailed implementation plan and migration path to the new GFS. The authorities have shown an interest in receiving further technical assistance to develop a chart of accounts in line with the revised GFS methodology. Balance of payments South Africa is a regular reporter of balance of payments data. It has recently revised its balance of payments data to be fully consistent with the fifth edition of the Balance of Payments Manual. Revisions were made to historical data on gold exports for 1992-96 during 1996 in light of new information on forward gold sales. Technical assistance missions in statistics (1994-present) Subject Date Data standards Balance of payments Price statistics course Government finance November 1995 April 5-15, 1999 Feb. 21-March 3,200O November l-14,2000 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicSouth Africa: Core Statistical Indicators (As of February 6,200l) Exports/Imports Current Overall GDP/GNP Debt Debt Account Government Service Balance Balance Iate of latest observation 42100 Q2/00 44199 44199 1 l/00 Q3/00 late received 9/l 9/00 9/l g/o0 6/l 5/00 6/ 15/00 l/18/01 l/18/01 Trequency of data l/ M Q Q Q S S Trequency of reporting l/ M Q Q Q Q Q source of data 2/ p, c p, c p, c p, c p, c p, c diode of reporting 3/ E R R R R R Confidentiality 41 C C C C C C +equency of publication M Q Q Q Q Q I/ D - Daily; M - Monthly; Q - Quarterly; S - Semiannual. 2/ P - Commercial publication; C - Commercial electronic data provider; A - Direct reporting by authorities. 3/ E - Electronic data transfer; C - Cable or facsimile; R - Reserve Bank Quarterly Bulletin. 4/ C - Unrestricted use. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicSouth Africa: Core Statistical Indicators (concluded) (As of February 6,200l) Exchange International Reserve/Base Central Broad Interest Consumer Rates Reserves Money Bank Money RateS Price Index Balance Sheet Date of latest observation 12/3 l/O0 11/30/00 10/31/00 10/31/00 10/3 l/O0 1 o/3 l/O0 ll/OO Date received 1/22/o 1 12/2 1 /oo 12/21/00 12/2 l/O0 12/2 l/O0 12/21/00 l/18/01 Frequency of data 11 D M M M M D M Frequency of reporting I/ D M M M M D M Source of data 21 p, c p, c p, c p, c p, c p, c P, c Mode of reporting 31 E, C E, C E, C E, C E C E, C E, C Confidentiality 41 C C C C C C C Frequency of Publication l/ D M M M M D M l/ D - Daily; M - Monthly; Q - Quarterly; S - Semiannual. 2/ P - Commercial publication; C - Commercial electronic data provider. 3/ E - Electronic data transfer; C - Cable or facsimile; R -Reserve Bank QuarterZy Bulletin. 41 C - Unrestricted use. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-45 - * APPENDIX. South Africa: Medium-Term Scenario The medium-term scenario presented here assumes the continued implementation of current policies, that is, the continuation of a sound and stable macroeconomic environment, and modest progress in the implementation of structural reforms. Specifically, the scenario assumes: (i) the implementation of the authorities’ medium-term budget policy as laid out in their medium-term budget framework (MTBF), in which the national budget deficit falls to 2.1 percent of GDP; (ii) the achievement, in the context of the inflation-targeting framework, of the authorities’ inflation target of 3-6 percent for the CPIX (Inflation, excluding mortgage interest costs) by 2002; (iii) the elimination of the net open forward position of the Reserve Bank; (iv) continued trade liberalization under the commitments made to the World Trade Organization (WTO) and in the free trade agreements with the European Union and the Southern Africa Development Community; (v) the restructuring of public enterprises along the lines of the recently issued policy framework; and (v) slow progress in removing rigidities in the labor market. Under this scenario, real output growth would be expected to increase to a potential rate of 4 percent, supported by stronger rates of growth in private fixed investment and exports compared with those of recent years. The higher rate of economic growth, together with some moderation of wage settlements (the result of the high structural unemployment rate and the credibility imparted by the inflation-targeting regime) would begin to reverse the trend decline of employment witnessed during the 1990s; from a peak of over 37 percent, the unemployment rate would start declining in the outer years. The government’s medium-term fiscal program is consistent with a steadily declining ratio of debt to GDP. In addition to the increasing primary surplus, the sale of state assets is expected to contribute to the decline in the stock of national debt. The general government deficit and the public sector borrowing requirement of the nonfinancial public sector would also decline in terms of GDP over the medium term, facilitating lower real interest rates. The recent gains in competitiveness are expected to be largely maintained in the medium term, bolstered mainly by the sound macroeconomic environment, As such, the share of South Africa’s exports in trading partner markets would stabilize, ending the declining path of recent years. The current account deficit stays roughly in balance over the medium term, while capital inflows should be sufficient to cover this deficit and to increase the import cover of net reserves from 2.4 months in 2000 to 3.6 months in 2006. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 46 - APPENDIX IV Table. South Africa: Selected Emnornic and Financial Indicators, 1996-2005 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2604 National income and prices Real GDP Real GDP per capita Nominal GDP (billions of rand) Nominal GDP per capita (U.S. dollars) CPI (annual average) CPI (end of period) CPu( (excluding mortgage interest costs; annual average) Labor market L&or force Employment Unemployment tale (expanded definition; in percent) Average remuneration (formal nonagricultural private sector) External sector Merchandise exports, f.o.b. I/ Merchandise imports, f.o.b. I/ Termsoftrade Nominal effective exchange rate 2/ Real effective exchange rate 21 Money and credit Net domestic assets 31 Chdit to the government 3/ CTedit to the rest of the economy 31 Broad money (incl. foreign exchange deposits) Velocity (GDP/average broad money) Investment and saving lavcatment (incl. inventories) Public tixed investment Private ftxwl investment Grc8s national saving Public PtiVltc Government budget 4/ Revenue, including grants Expenditure and net lending Overall balance Primary balance National debt Gcncml government balance 5/ PSBR of the nontinancial public sector 61 External sector Current external balance (in billions of USS) currat cxtcroal bdancc Capital and financial flows (including unrecorded flows, in USS billions) Overail ba\ancc of payments (in billions of USS) ovemll balance of payments Foreign currencydenominated debt Total cxtemal debt I exports of goods and scwices (in percent) 7/ Total external debt service (in billions of USS) 7/ 8/ Total cxtcrnal debt scrvicc I exports (in percent) 7/ 8/ Net offkial reaervcs (in billions of USS) 4.2 2.5 2.0 0.3 618.4 683.7 3,568 3,600 7.4 8.6 9.4 6.0 . . . . 0.7 1.9 3.0 3.8 3.8 4.0 4.0 -1.5 -0.3 0.9 1.7 1.8 2.0 2.1 735.1 795.6 875.9 961.3 1044.5 1129.0 1219.7 3,154 3,023 2,871 2,793 2,925 3.087 3,269 6.9 5.2 5.3 6.1 4.5 4.0 4.0 9.1 2.2 7.0 5.0 4.0 4.0 4.0 7.1 6.9 7.7 6.5 5.4 4.4 4.0 3.3 4.7 2.0 0.6 1.7 2.9 2.9 2.8 2.8 0.0 -0.2 1.5 1.6 2.7 3.2 3.1 3.2 3.0 34.4 37.4 37.5 36.2 35.2 35.1 34.9 34.6 34.5 11.0 10.4 16.7 9.2 7.3 6.7 5.5 5.0 5.0 0.7 3.1 -6.6 0.7 4.6 -5.6 1.4 -1.2 -0.9 -12.0 0.5 -13.8 -7.8 7.0 -9.4 -1.8 6.4 3.7 -10.2 8.2 6.7 0.0 -2.3 -1.7 -9.5 -5. I . . . -5.4 -2.0 . . . 5.8 7.8 0.9 . . . . . . 10.2 8.7 0.3 . . . . 9.1 8.5 a.3 . . . . . . 17.9 IS.2 17.0 2.1 6.3 1.5 3.1 3.0 -0.5 0.2 16.4 12.1 14.0 2.6 6.1 13.6 17.2 14.6 10.1 7.6 2.1 2.0 1.8 I.8 1.8 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8.0 8.6 1.8 1.8 . . . . . . *.. . . . *.. 8.1 1.8 . . . 8.0 1.8 (In percent of GDP, unless otherwise speciikd) 17.1 16.0 16.0 15.1 15.2 15.9 16.2 16.6 17.0 2.4 2.4 2.4 2.2 2.3 2.3 2.3 2.3 2.3 13.7 13.8 14.3 13.0 12.6 13.0 13.4 14.0 14.5 15.8 14.5 14.3 14.6 15.1 16.1 15.9 16.7 17.3 -3.0 -2.8 -1.6 -0.7 -0.1 0.3 0.7 0.8 0.9 18.8 17.3 15.9 15.3 15.2 15.8 15.3 15.9 16.4 23.1 23.4 24.6 24.5 23.8 23.7 23.7 23.6 23.5 27.5 27.2 26.9 26.4 26.2 26.2 25.9 25.8 25.4 -4.4 -3.8 -2.3 -2.0 -2.4 -2.5 -2.3 -2. I -2.0 1.1 1.8 3.4 3.5 2.7 2.4 2.4 2.3 2.3 44.1 44.5 44.9 46.5 43.5 41.6 40.2 38.5 36.8 -5.0 -4.9 -2.4 -1.7 -2.2 -2.0 -1.6 -1.5 -1.4 4.4 4.2 3.4 1.2 3.8 2.8 2.9 2.2 2.2 -1.9 -2.3 -2.3 -0.6 -0.1 0.3 -0.4 0.2 0.5 -1.3 -1.5 -1.8 -0.4 -0.1 0.2 -0.3 0.1 0.3 0.7 4.6 1.6 4.8 1.6 1.2 1.9 1.3 1.0 -1.2 2.4 -0.7 4.2 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5 -0.8 1.6 -0.5 3.3 1.2 I.2 1.1 1.0 1.0 18.1 17.0 18.8 18.4 20.5 22.3 22.8 23.0 23.2 97.8 107.3 108.9 115.3 118.5 122.7 126.4 124.7 124.3 6.3 7.5 7.2 7.5 7.5 8.1 8.8 9.5 10.4 17.8 20.5 20.8 22.1 21.0 21.7 22.3 22.0 21.9 2.2 3.8 2.3 4.3 4.9 7.9 9.4 10.9 12.4 (in months of total imports) 0.8 1.3 0.8 SOU~XS: South African Reserve Bank; IMF, Internutiond Fiaanciol Srofisfics ; and staff estimates and projections. 1.7 1.8 2.7 3.0 3.2 3.4 (Annual percentage change, unless otherwise specified) 11 In U.S. dollars; annual percent change. 21 Annual average. INS definition. 31 Contribution (in percentage points) to the growth of broad money. 41 Fiscal year beginning April 1. 5/ Excluding sales of state assets and profit/tosses from forward market operations of the Reserve Bank. 61 Excluding sales of state assets but including the proti~Iosscs from forward market operations of the Reserve Bank 71 Excluding randdenominated debt held by nonresidents, end of period. 8/ Excluding amortisation of short-term capital. 91 Defined as net forward liabilities less spot resewes. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-47- APPENDIX V Public Information Notice (PIN) FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE [Month Day, 20011 No. International Monetary Fund 700 19* Street, NW Washington, D. C. 20431 USA IMF Cbncludes Article IV Consultation with South Africa On [March 16,2001], the Executive Board concluded the Article IV consultation with South Africa.’ Background South Africa has enjoyed a modest upturn in economic activity since late 1998. Spurred by a rebound in private consumption and exports, the economy experienced five quarters of progressively stronger growth that culminated in an increase in real GDP of over 4 percent (at an annualized rate) in the final quarter of 1999. Despite some adverse shocks during the first half of 2000, the pace of activity has regained momentum and, led by a healthy expansion in private investment, real GDP is estimated to have,grown by about 3 percent in 2000. The recovery appears to have been accompanied by some reduction in unemployment, although it remains at high rates. The economic recovery has been underpinned by sound financial policies. In particular, continued strength in the public finances has helped sustain a highly competitive exchange rate and ease pressure on long-term interest rates, while monetary policy has contained inflationary pressures. In 1999/2000, the national government registered a budget deficit of 2.0 percent of GDP (well under the original target of 2.8 percent of GDP) as a result of strengthened tax administration, effective spending controls, and underspending on certain projects. The public sector borrowing requirement fell to just over 1 percent of GDP in 1999/2000, from well above 3 percent the previous year. For 2000/01, the deficit of the national government is now projected to be 2.6 percent of GDP, in line with the original budget estimate. I Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial information, and discusses with officials the country’s economic developments and policies. On return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the country’s authorities. In this PIN, the main features of the Board’s discussion are described. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 48 - APPENDIX V The authorities announced the adoption of a formal inflation-targeting strategy in February 2000, with a target for CPIX inflation (consumer price inflation, excluding mortgage costs) of 3-6 percent for 2002. In implementing inflation targeting, the Reserve Bank kept the repurchase rate unchanged at 11.75 percent from January 2000 until October, when it raised the rate by one-quarter of a percentage point. This policy stance has been associated with a slowdown in monetary expansion, with M3 growing at 7.6 percent in the 12 months through December 2000, compared with 10 percent at end-l 999. Inflationary pressures have been further dampened by the fall in unit labor costs, which has helped offset the impact of oil price increases and a weak rand. As a result, the CPIX inflation edged down to 7.6 percent in December 2000. . The Reserve Bank has made considerable progress in lowering its short-term foreign exposure. The net open forward position (NOFP) of the Reserve Bank declined from its high of US$23.2 billion in October 1998 to less than US$lO billion at end-2000. The bulk of this reduction was achieved during 1999, when South Africa enjoyed large reflows of direct and portfolio investment. Since March 2000, however, the rand has come under renewed selling pressure in response to fallout from the Zimbabwe crisis and weaknesses in other emerging markets, and the pace of NOFP reduction slowed appreciably as a result. The stance of financial policies has also helped sustain gains in external competitiveness. At end-2000, the rand was 18 percent more depreciated in real effective terms than at end-l 997, and this has provided a boost to export performance. As a result and despite the impact of higher fuel payments and weak gold prices, the current account deficit fell from 0.4 percent of GDP in 1999 to an estimate of 0.1 percent in 2000. Progress has continued to be made on structural reforms. Several legislative amendments aimed at improving the efficiency of the labor market and creating new jobs were proposed by the Minister of Labour in June 2000. A free trade agreement with the EU has been in effect and, within the South African Development Community, a free trade agreement was agreed in principle in September 2000. The government is moving forward with the restructuring of state- owned enterprises and announced a policy framework for accelerating the process in August 2000. Executive Board Assessment Public Information Nofices (PINS) are issued, (i) at the request of a member country, following the conclusion of the Article IV consultation for countries seeking to make known the views of the IMF to the public. This action is intended to strengthen IMF surveillance over the economic policies of member countries by increasing the transparency of the IMF’s assessment of these policies; and (ii) following policy discussions in the Executive Board at the decision of the Board. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 49 - APPENDIX V South Africa: Selected Economic Indicators l/ 1997 1998 1998 2000 (In percent) Domestic Economy Change in real GDP 2.5 0.7 1.9 3.0 Unemployment rate 37.4 37.5 36.2 ..a Change in consumer prices (end of period) 2/ 6.0 9.1 2.2 7.0 (In billions of US. dollars) 3/ External Economy Exports, f.o.b. Imports, f.o.b. Current account balance (deficit -) Direct investment Portfolio investment Financial account balance (deficit -) Gross official reserves 21 Current account balance (in percent of GDP, deficit-) Change in real effective exchange rate (in percent) 41 Net open forward position of the Reserve Bank 2/5/ External debt (in percent of GDP) 6/ Exchange rate, rand per U.S. dollar (end-period) 21 Financial Variables National government balance (deficit -) 71 Change in broad money (in percent) 21 Interest rate (in percent) 2/ 81 36.5 34.9 -2.3 1.5 6.6 5.9 5.8 -1.5 7.0 16.3 26.4 4.87 -3.8 -2.3 -2.0 -2.6 17.2 14.6 10.1 7.6 16.0 19.3 12.0 11.8 34.4 33.7 32.9 30.1 -2.3 -0.6 -1.2 -0.4 3.7 8.6 3.1 3.7 5.4 7.4 -1.8 -0.4 -9.4 -5.4 22.5 13.0 28.2 29.8 5.86 6.15 (In percent of GDP) 35.6 31.9 -0.1 -1.4 3.6 1.0 8.3 -0.1 -0.7 9.5 . . . 7.57 Sources: South African Reserve Bank and Fund staff estimates. 11 The figures in the column for 2000 are staff estimates unless otherwise noted. 21 Actual data for 2000. 31 Unless otherwise noted. 41 (+)=appreciation (period average). 51 Defined as net forward foreign exchange liabilities less net spot reserves. 61 Includes rand denominated external debt. 71 Fiscal year starting on April 1, 81 Bank/rep0 rate (end of period). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public