DOCUMENT OF INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND NOT FOR PUBLIC USE IMMEDIATE ATTENTION SM/O1/165 CONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION June 12,200l To: Members of the Executive Board From: The Secretary Subject: Singapore-Staff Report for the 2001 Article IV Consultation Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staff report for the 2001 Article IV consultation with Singapore. In light of the reasonably favorable economic conditions and outlook, and broadly unchanged medium-term policy requirements in Singapore, it is proposed that the 2001 Article IV consultation be completed on a lapse of time basis. l.n the absence of a request by an Executive Director by noon on Friday, June 22,200l that this matter be brought to the agenda of the Executive Board on the tentatively scheduled date of Friday, June 29,2001, the consultation will be considered completed and the following decision will be deemed approved by the Executive Board and it will be so recorded in the minutes of the next meeting thereafter: The Executive Board endorses the staff appraisal in the report for the 2001 Article IV consultation with Singapore (SM/01/165,6/12/01). It is expected that the next Article lV consultation with Singapore will take place on the standard 12-month cycle. At the time of circulation of this paper to the Board, the Secretary’s Department has not received a communication from the authorities of Singapore indicating whether or not they consent to the Fund’s publication of this paper. If there is no request for a Board discussion, the “Executive Board Assessment” section of the PIN will be based on the staff appraisal. Questions may be referred to Ms. Kochhar (ext. 38770) and Mr. Senhadji (ext. 38380). - over - Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2- Unless the Documents Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the WTO Secretariat on Tuesday, June 19, 2001. Att: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicCONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND SINGAPORE Staff Report for the 2001 Article IV Consultation Prepared by the Staff Representatives for the 2001 Article IV Consultation with Singapore Approved by Charles Collyns and Shigeo Kashiwagi June 8,200l l The 2001 Article IV Consultation discussions were held in Singapore during March 16-25, 2001. The mission team consisted of Ms. Kochhar (head), and Messrs. Senhadji, Lee and Nishigaki (all APD). Mr. Low (Executive Director’s office) also attended the meetings. l The mission met with Deputy Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong, Finance Minister Richard Hu, Managing Director of the Monetary Authority of Singapore Tharman Shanmugaratnam; other senior government officials; and representatives of the private sector. l Notwithstanding the cyclical downturn in 200 1, economic conditions and the outlook remain generally favorable and good progress is being made on the key medium-term policy issues. In agreement with the authorities, this staff report is being presented to the Board for consideration on a lapse-of-time basis. l The authorities have indicated their intention to participate in the FSAP. It is expected that discussions will begin towards the end of 2001, with the FSSA to be presented to the Board together with the report for the 2002 consultation. l Singapore provides data to the Fund on a generally timely basis and has subscribed to the SDDS. l Singapore has accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2,3 and 4 and maintains an exchange system that is free of restrictions on the making of payments and transfers for current international transactions. l This report was drafted by Ms. Kochhar and Mr. Senhadji, with contributions from Messrs. Lee and Nishigaki. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2- 1. II. III. IV. Contents Page Background ........................................................................................................................ 3 Near and Medium-term Outlook.. ...................................................................................... 8 Policy Discussions.. .......................................................................................................... 10 A. Near-term Demand Management Policies ................................................................. 10 B . Medium-term Policy Issues ........................................................................................ 12 Staff Appraisal .................................................................................................................. 16 Boxes 1. The Electronics Sector in Singapore .................................................................................. 4 2. Budget for FY 2001 ............................................................................................................ 9 3. Recent Financial Sector Reforms ..................................................................................... 14 4. Corporate Governance Reforms ....................................................................................... 15 Tables 1. Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 1997-2002 ............................................... 19 2. Balance of Payments, 1997-2002 .................................................................................... 20 3. Indicators of Vulnerability, 1997-200 1 ........................................................................... 21 4. Monetary Survey, 1997-2001 .......................................................................................... 22 5. Summary of Government Operations, 1997/98-200 l/O2 ................................................ 23 Figures 1, Regional Comparisons: Key Domestic Indicators ........................................................... 24 2. Regional Comparisons: Key External Indicators ............................................................. 25 3. Current and Leading Indicators of Economic Activity .................................................... 26 4. Labor and Asset Market Developments ........................................................................... 27 5. External Developments .................................................................................................... 28 6. Monetary and Fiscal Indicators ........................................................................................ 29 Annexes I. Illustrative Medium-term Scenario .................................................................................. 30 II. Fund Relations .................................................................................................................. 32 III. Statistical Issues ............................................................................................................... 34 IV. Official Development Assistance ..................................................................................... 36 V. Background Section of the PIN ........................................................................................ 38 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3- 1. BACKGROUND 1. The Singapore economy turned in another year of very strong performance in 2000, but since early 2001, has begun to slow markedly. Singapore’s economy grew by 10 percent in 2000-up from 6 percent in 1999-recording one of the best growth performances in the region (matched only by Hong Kong SAR, Figures 1 and 2). Fueled by strong global electronics demand and the regional recovery, external demand RdGIRGmwth 24 24 provided the main engine of growth. 20 20 Robust domestic demand also 16 16 contributed-private consumption I?. 12 recorded a sharp increase in 2000, and 1 8 fixed investment, while still relatively 4 weak, recorded positive growth for the : - 0 61 first time since 1997 (Figure 3, 4’ $N ‘4 -8 Table 1). However, with the slowing of 47. ;, - -12 the U.S. economy and the sharp -I6 I I, ,,j1,,,- ,,,,,, III I” I I, III I” I I, III I” I ,I 111 I” I -I6 1997 1998 ,599 2m XXII downturn in the global electronics IIConmhti*mmgnti. industry, the momentum of growth in Singapore began to moderate by early 2001 (Box 1). GDP growth slowed to 4% percent (y/y) in Ql 2001 from 11 percent (y/y) in the previous quarter; on a seasonally adjusted basis, GDP declined by nearly 3 percent over the previous quarter. 2. The robust cyclical expansion in 2000 generated broad-based employment growth but labor market conditions have recently begun to soften. With strong employment growth in the manufacturing and services sectors, and a turnaround in the construction sector, the average unemployment rate declined from 3% percent in 1999 to about 3 percent in 2000 (Figure 4).’ Recent survey data, however, points to a slowing in employment growth overall and a contraction of manufacturing sector employment in the course of 200 1. Strong productivity gains in 1999 and 2000 resulted in a fall in unit labor costs, despite robust growth in wages and the partial restoration in the employers’ Central Provident Fund (CPF) contribution rate. However, in Q 1 200 1, unit labor costs rose, owing to a decline in productivity growth. This is, however, unlikely to be sufficient to reverse the trend of the past three years of falling relative unit labor costs. 3. Inflationary pressures that had built up during the course of 2000 are now dissipating. With the estimated closure of the output gap by early 2000, the inflation rate picked up speed around mid-2000, and both headline and core inflation rose to around ’ Despite these cyclical gains, the sizeable retrenchments from the relocation overseas of the production of disk-drives and other PC components reflecting Singapore’s move up the value-added chain in electronics (see forthcoming background paper on the evolution of the structure of the Singaporean economy) has kept the unemployment rate well above the pre- crisis average of 2 percent. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4- Box 1. The Electronics Sector in Singapore The high degree of openness of Singapore’s economy implies that its business cycle is mainly driven by external demand, and in particular, by the global electronics cycle given the large share of electronics in domestic exports. l The manufacturing sector accounted for 25 percent of GDP in 2000 but its importance in the economy is much larger, as the rest of the economy is closely tied to it. The first panel of the figure shows industrial production versus GDP in current prices. The high correlation between these two variables is obvious, particularly in the last two years. Electronics dominates the manufacturing sector with a value added share of 47% percent in 1999. l Non-oil domestic exports represented 71 percent of GDP in 1999, of which 85 percent are manufactured goods, and 53 percent are from the electronics sector. More than 77 percent of electronics output is exported. Thus, exports, and in particular electronics exports, are an important engine of growth for the economy. The recent slowdown in the US and the sharp downturn in the global electronics cycle has precipitated a sharp decline in activity in the electronic sector, with broad-based spillover effects. l During Q 1 200 1, domestic exports grew only by 3 % percent (versus 14% percent in Q 1 2000) and exports of electronics declined by 1 percent (versus growth of 10 percent in Ql 20001) in nominal terms (reflecting both a weakening in quantities exported as well as sharp declines in prices). Consequently, real GDP growth has decelerated from 11 percent in 44 2000 to 4% percent in Q 1 2001. The second panel shows that industrial production of electronics declined sharply, following closely exports to the US. The relationship between production of electronics and exports to the US became particularly tight after March 2000, which coincided with the beginning of the sharp correction in NASDAQ. Panel 3 shows that Singapore’s industrial production is also closely related to sales of semiconductors in the Americas, a good indicator of activity in global electronics. l However, the effect of the global slowdown on Singapore’s trade balance will be mitigated by the fact that electronics exports have a large import content. The share of value added in electronics represents only 22% percent in 1999, and most of the inputs are imported. Indeed, non-oil imports decelerated from 20 percent growth in Q 1 2000 to 8 percent in Q 1 2001 (with likely a sharper decline in imports of electronics components). l An important characteristic of technology sector-driven slowdowns is that there are global, and therefore there is little room for market diversification. This is shown in panel 4 where sales of semiconductors in Asia and Pacific region, the Americas, and Europe are highly correlated. Consequently, Singapore exports have sharply declined in tandem across all major markets (panel 5). Fully recognizing the potential vulnerabilities from a high concentration of industrial production, including excess volatility in output, Singapore’s industrial policy during the last twenty years has been focused on diversifying the industry base and moving it up the value-added chain. l Although it remains true that the electronics sector dominates, the diversification effort has led to the emergence of the chemical cluster as a major sector with 18 percent of the manufacturing value added in 1999 (compared to 4 percent in 1980). Diversification also occurred within the electronics sector. For example, while manufacturing of computing and data processing equipment was at its infancy in 1980 (with only 2% percent of manufacturing value added), it accounted for 25 percent of manufacturing value added in 1999. l The continuing restructuring process, aimed at moving Singapore’s industrial base up the value-added chain, has also been successful. During the last two decades, important labor relocation toward higher value-added sectors have taken place, facilitated by numerous programs aimed at upgrading skills and the active promotion and reform of the education system. For example, traditional sectors such as textiles, wearing apparels, leather, and wood & wood products accounted for more than 18 percent of manufacturing employment in 1980, but only 2% percent in 1999. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-5- 1595 =m Box 1 (added): The Electronic Slowdown in singpre i#llh~*s 1!%9=ll.Xl lwhkm@~aboas 160 Industrial PmhctbnandNominalGDP 46 150- -4 - 42 MO- -40 PO- - 38 160 Eltxdronics Pmhction and Ekports to th U.S. 150 a m- . SemmmkborSaksandImh&ialPmh&on 57m -(Xwnmth cmtwtzinwvirgmen& 54X- 5100 - 4SXl- 45m- _... ^-. _ stoh4aiorMarkets 2800 A 3aQ 2m 26crl 24al ml MM) l&xl la0 1m Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-6- 2 percent (y/y) in December. The iMptG~pUldlnnIlli00 significant increase in oil prices in ndvc-moru* pelEP”l r*n&T 2000 also contributed. The domestic supply price index (which measures the change in prices of imported and locally manufactured goods retained for use in the economy) rose by 10 percent in 2000, compared to the more benign increase of 2 percent in ’ 1999. However, CPI inflation subsided to around 1% percent in the first four months of 2001 and there is evidence I/ Fxchdiig ho”ri”g Emnodaion n* pi”* d tmapnt that upstream price pressures have all but dissipated, largely owing to falling petroleum product prices. The domestic supply price index fell by % percent (y/y) in March 2001. Moreover, the narrowing of the positive output gap portends subdued price pressures from domestic sources in the period ahead. The behavior of asset prices was mixed-property prices recovered in 2000 from a two-year slump, but the stock market ended 2000 with a 22 percent loss and continued its steep descent in Ql 2001, largely driven by the plunge in technology stocks worldwide. 4. Singapore’s external position continues to be strong and external vulnerability is very limited. The current account surplus narrowed only marginally to 23% percent of GDP in 2000, due to a moderation in the surplus in the merchandise account, reflecting both the large import content of exports and CmodhtiBdW high import prices. However, the 40 40 services account and in particular trade 35 35 ca .sW”ices. inconteond rransfers. IF, related services, recorded robust growth 30 30 (Figure 5 and Table 2). The deficit on Is 21 the capital and financial account 20 20 narrowed in 2000, due to smaller net Is I5 outflows reflecting repayment of loans ” 10 by Asian Currency Units (ACUs). The ’ 5 overall balance of payments surplus 0 Cl thus widened to about US$7 billion, 4 4 ,998 ,993 zam x01 increasing official reserves to US$8O% billion, the equivalent of 7% months of imports, or more than seven times gross external debt (Table 3). In early 200 1, export (and import) growth slowed sharply but the outlook for the external accounts remains robust. 5. The performance of the financial sector strengthened in 2000. Value-added in the financial services sector grew by 4 percent in 2000, up from less than 1 percent in 1999, with the rebound largely driven by stronger performance by commercial banks, insurance companies and the fund management industry. Bank lending resumed positive growth since May 2000, after almost two years of contraction, expanding by more than 7 percent in Ql Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-7- 2001 (Table 4 and Figure 6). Banks’ risk-weighted capital ratios remained at around 20 percent, well in excess of the regulatory minimum of 12 percent, while nonperforming loans fell from the crisis-related peak of 12% percent to 9 percent in March 2001. 2 6. The policy to allow a gradual 1 hsmtaw condiliom Ioder modest appreciation of the Singapore J”W ,99*=,00 Pelrem dollar on a trade weighted basis has been maintained thus far. Amid the marked strengthening in economic activity, the authorities reinstated the appreciating scope of the (undisclosed) target exchange rate path in mid-2000. Monetary conditions tightened markedly in the second half of 2000, reflecting the appreciation of the real 1995 ,996 ,997 m9.s effective exchange rate. Early in 200 1, the authorities reiterated this policy stance, noting that it will help cap incipient inflation pressures while remaining supportive of activity. However, the real effective exchange rate has weakened, mainly because of the weakness of the S$ against the U.S. dollar, but remains within the policy band. The authorities have also recently stated that they stand ready to intervene to keep the exchange rate within the band. Staff estimates, based on a CGER-type analysis of macroeconomic balances, suggest that the real effective exchange rate remains broadly in line with medium-term fundamentals.3 7. The fiscal accounts registered another large surplus in FY20004 and the budget for FY2001 aims at a broadly neutral fiscal policy stance. The stronger-than-anticipated growth in 2000 generated a primary operating surplus of 1% percent of GDP, surpassing the budget target of minus I% percent of GDP as a result of stronger revenue collections from income, profits, sales taxes (Table 5 2 These figures refer only to nonbank loans. There are no nonperforming interbank loans. 3 This assessment is corroborated by measures such as deviation of the real effective exchange rate from trend and is consistent with market estimates of “fair value” for the bilateral S$/US$ exchange rate. 4 FY2000 refers to the period April 2000 to March 2001. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-8- and Figure 6), and lower net lending.5 The budget for FY2001 aims at a primary operating surplus of around 1 percent of GDP. The individual and corporate income tax cuts are carefully calibrated to provide a boost to consumption and investment in the medium term and to keep Singapore competitive as a business location, without a major near-term injection of stimulus (Box 2). On the expenditure side, the budget includes increased investment in pharmaceuticals, chemical and bio-tech industries, with the aim of further diversifying Singapore’s manufacturing base. II. NEAR- AND MEDIUM-TERM OUTLOOK 8. Against the backdrop of a significant weakening in the world economy and a sharp downturn in the global electronics cycle, Singapore faces the prospect of a marked slowdown in growth in 2001. The global economic outlook is characterized by weak growth in the U.S. through the end of 2001, a marked slowing of growth in global electronics sales, and a moderation in the pace of activity in Japan and Europe. Leading indicators of activity in Singapore such as the Purchasing Managers’ Index and nonoil import growth suggest further weakness in the manufacturing sector. In this environment, the staff expects that Singapore’s growth will slow to around 4 percent in 2001, before picking up gradually in 2002, but likely remaining below the estimated range of potential growth.6 9. Even with the downgrading of growth forecasts, the risks to the short-term growth outlook appear tilted to the downside, although the underlying strengths of the economy limit the vulnerability to a major crisis. A rebound in Singapore’s economy will depend, to a large extent, on external factors, mainly on the recovery in the U.S. and in Singapore’s trading partners in the region, and on the adjustment of the global electronics sector to any inventory and capacity overhang. Under the alternative “Harder Landing” scenario presented in the World Economic Outlook, the staff estimates that the weaker external environment would limit the growth rate in Singapore to 1 percent in 200 1, about 3 percentage points below the baseline. Other downside risks emanate from the heightened potential for political instability in the region and for sharp and possibly disorderly exchange rate movements in some regional currencies. Thus, the outlook remains clouded by considerable uncertainty, and a steeper and more prolonged downturn cannot be ruled out. However, even in such an event, Singapore’s strong external position and highly capitalized banking system should be well capable of absorbing the strains without a major crisis or loss of confidence. 5 The figures shown in Table 5 are based on the new classification of revenues and expenditures announced in February 2001. Under the old classification (shown in SM./OO/86), the budget target was a primary operating surplus of 1% percent of GDP. The actual outcome would have been a surplus of about 2% percent of GDP. 6 The authorities forecast growth of 3X-N percent in 2001. Potential growth in Singapore is estimated to be in the range of 5% -6% percent. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-9- Box 2. Singapore-Budget for FY2001 The central focus of the FY2001 budget is “to position Singapore for a new era of growth where knowledge and ideas are the key” and to implement permanent changes to the tax regime to create a more favorable environment for business. Major proposals for permanent tax changes and spending initiatives are as follows. D A new corporate tax regime will be introduced. The corporate tax rate will be lowered from 25.5 to 24.5 percent, and tax-exempt income will be expanded to three-quarter of the first S$lO,OOO and half of the next S$90,000. D Other pro-business measures include: reduction in the property tax rate from 12 to 10 percent; expanded tax exemption for stock option gains under the Company Stock Option scheme; exemption from withholding tax on payments for certain software; and write-down allowed over a five-year period for expenditures on certain intellectual property items. l Individual income tax rates will be reduced. Tax rates for all income brackets will be reduced, including the reduction of the top-bracket rate from 28 to 26 percent. Combined with tax exemption for the first S$7,500 of taxable income, the tax burden of a median tax payer (income earner in the 83rd percentile) will fall by about one-quarter. Taxpayers will enjoy a S$250 GST rebate. l Tax relief for the CPF contributions by the self-employed will be allowed up to 36 percent of income, subject to a maximum of S$72,000, thereby being equalized to the tax benefits that employees receive on the combined contribution by themselves and employers. l In addition, a number of one-off measures were also announced: another CPF top-up to be made by January 2002; a one-time personal income tax rebate of 10 percent for the 2001 assessment year; rebates for utility, service and conservancy charges for those living in BDB housing; an increase of S$150 in the monthly allowance for pensioners; S$250 million contribution to the ElderCare Fund; and S$ 100 million contribution to the Medical Endowment Fund. l Expenditure commitments include: more than S$30 million on the Manpower Development Assistance Scheme and other initiatives to upgrade skills of the workforce; a second contribution of S$500 million to the LifeLong Learning Endowment Fund; S$7 billion allocated for a five-year Science & Technology Plan beginning in 2001. l In fiscal year 2001, a new item called “NII (Net Investment Income) Contribution” was created within operating revenue. The NII Contribution comprises interest earnings from development loans-which used to be part of Other Revenues-and no more than half of the investment income from government reserves. The new accounting method is intended to be a systematic way of protecting the investment income from being used to finance current expenditures. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- lo- 10. Beyond the near term, however, the outlook for Singapore continues to be positive. Fiscal and structural policies are aimed at further diversifying the manufacturing sector into industries with strong growth potential including pharmaceuticals and chemicals and liberalization of key sectors to enhance the role of the private sector. Likewise, the progressive liberalization of the financial sector will facilitate its consolidation and increase its potential for growth. In addition, the aggressive push to upgrade skills and strengthen the educational system can be expected to be the source of continuing productivity growth. Accordingly, growth is expected to average 6 percent in 2002-06, and the current account surplus is expected to gradually narrow to about 19 percent of GDP by 2006 (Annex I). III. POLICY DISCUSSIONS 11. The discussion focused on the mix of macroeconomic policies necessary to support growth while keeping inflationary pressures in check. For the past two years, policies have been focused on enabling Singapore to benefit from an external demand-led recovery, while remaining vigilant to inflation pressure. The challenge now is to design policies appropriate to a situation where the substantially weaker global environment portends a marked, and possibly prolonged, slowing of activity, and emerging slack in the domestic economy. A. Near-Term Demand Management Policies 12. The mission noted that the stance of macroeconomic policies outlined in late February was consistent with the information then available about the cyclical position of the economy and the external outlook. Faced with the expectation of a relatively short- lived external slowdown and continued concern about upward pressure on CPI inflation largely from domestic sources, the authorities reaffirmed the policy of targeting a gradual appreciation of the exchange rate, and the budget for FY200 1 remained appropriately focused on medium-term objectives while implying a broadly neutral fiscal policy stance. 13. With the balance of risks having now shifted away from inflation and toward a sharp slowing of growth, the mission suggested that the authorities consider a moderate move to easing the stance of monetary policy. There are several reasons to expect a rapid dissipation of pipeline inflationary pressures. These include the sharp slowing of the pace of activity in Singapore in the first quarter, the likelihood of some easing in labor market conditions (including from continued restructuring in the electronics industry), and the demand dampening effect of the sharp fall in the stock market. Accordingly, the mission took the view that the time may now be right to consider a modest and preemptive move in the direction of monetary policy easing. This could be accomplished by eliminating the appreciating trend in the target path for the trade-weighted exchange rate, thereby shifting from the present tightening bias to a more neutral stance. 14. While agreeing that the risks to the growth outlook outweigh those to inflation in the near term, the authorities stressed their preference to take a “wait and see” approach. Notwithstanding the uncertainties, they believe that the most likely outcome is a Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-ll- short-lived downturn, and that Singapore’s flexible economy would rebound quickly when global growth picks up. Moreover, current monetary conditions were viewed as being relatively easy, as reflected by adequate liquidity and low interest rates. The authorities have announced that they will review the policy stance in July. 15. The authorities also cited a number of operational reasons for their reluctance to change the stance of monetary policy. The authorities do not view the exchange rate as an instrument of short-term demand management, especially in the face of a cyclical slowdown in external demand. Rather, monetary policy in Singapore is conducted with a medium-term focus on price stability. Thus, they felt that policy credibility could be undermined if they were perceived as responding to cyclical events and to market pressure about the policy stance. 16. The mission welcomed the release of the first formal monetary policy statement in February 2001, and suggested that greater transparency about the ultimate objective of monetary policy could give the authorities more room to maneuver to respond to cyclical developments. The monetary policy statement and the plan to release a similar statement at least semi-annually have been very well-received by market participants. That said, the mission noted that, under the present modus operandi, the exchange rate plays the role of both a policy instrument and a nominal anchor for market expectations. Looking ahead, the liberalization of CPF investments, and the efforts aimed at developing Singapore as a global financial center-including the lifting of most restrictions on nonresidents’ access to the %$--could increase the volume and possibly also the volatility of cross-border capital flows, which, in turn, could complicate the conduct of monetary policy.7 While continuing to use the exchange rate as the principal policy instrument, the staff suggested that giving greater emphasis to an explicit medium-term target for the inflation rate-the ultimate policy objective-could provide scope for using monetary policy somewhat more actively for countercyclical purposes. The authorities said that they do not see the need to make any move in this direction at this stage, but admitted that over time, they would likely gravitate toward the direction of greater transparency about the target path and/or the policy objective. 17. The mission agreed that the track record of prudence provided scope for providing additional fiscal stimulus in the event of a more severe downtown than currently expected. The authorities have indicated that, if growth in Singapore should falter, they would be prepared to take “whatever measures are necessary” to stabilize the economy. During the discussions, the authorities said that, in such a situation, they would consider fiscal stimulus and cost-cutting measures, as well as adjusting the target path for the 7 To date, the impact of the reforms on the exchange rate-which are relatively recent-has been quite small. Going forward, because the reforms are likely to affect both inflows and outflows of capital, it is difficult to tell what the impact on the exchange rate is likely to be. Further details on the internationalization of the Singapore dollar can be found in the forthcoming background paper. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12- exchange rate, as they had in the aftermath of the Asian crisis. * The mission agreed that the strong fiscal position provided considerable room for maneuver but cautioned against using changes in CPF contribution rates as a macroeconomic stabilization tool; instead the CPF scheme should be refocused on its original purpose-the provision of retirement income. Moreover, increased use of bonuses and variable components in wage setting-by providing a means for greater flexibility in business costs-could serve to reduce the need for discretionary changes in CPF contribution rates for countercyclical purposes. The authorities responded that cuts in the CPF contribution rates would only be considered in the event of a severe cyclical downturn. 18. Some progress has been made in the area of fiscal transparency, but the assessment of Singapore’s fiscal position and policy stance remains complicated. The mission welcomed the efforts being made to improve fiscal practices using the Fund’s Fiscal Code and other international best practices as benchmarks, but noted that there remain a number of unresolved issues. Disbursements from endowment funds are not reported as part of expenditures, no information is available on the stock of government foreign assets,9 and indicators of the impact of fiscal policy on aggregate demand and published medium-term policy targets with the underlying economic assumptions are not available.” The authorities responded that disbursements from endowment funds have been small, and the risk of populist pressures to spend the surpluses made it difficult for them to provide more information on the government’s foreign assets. They also noted that because Singapore’s fiscal policy is focused on medium-term objectives and not on aggregate demand management, except in the event of a severe downturn, they saw no pressing need to develop and publish measures of the impact of fiscal policy on aggregate demand. At the same time they felt that Singapore’s vulnerability to external shocks made medium-term budgeting unduly constraining on policy flexibility. B. Medium-term Policy Issues 19. The discussions reviewed the structural reforms that are being implemented across a broad front as part of the economic restructuring process initiated in late 1997. The focus of the reforms has been on enhancing the financial sector, laying the groundwork * In response to the sharply weakening economic outlook in 1998, the authorities eliminated the appreciating slope of the target exchange rate, widened the target band, and implemented a fiscal package. The fiscal package primarily focused on one-time cost cutting measures, including temporary cuts in the employers’ contributions to the CPF, as well as a range of temporary rebates on property taxes, utility tariffs and corporate and individual income taxes. See SiWOO/83 and SM/OO/86 for details on CPF. 9 Data on total government assets are available at historical rather than market value, and foreign assets of the government are not separately identified. lo The practice of not including the estimated impact of revenue measures proposed in each budget is a further complication in this regard. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13- for the development of a knowledge-based economy, with reduced direct government involvement in the corporate sector, and strengthened corporate governance and disclosure requirements. 20. The staff welcomed the recent reforms in the financial sector which have given new impetus to growth in a range of financial market activities without weakening the soundness of the financial system. Continuing with the phased but comprehensive liberalization of the financial sector, the authorities have implemented a number of important reforms since the last consultation (Box 3). Key results of the reforms have been the increase in bond market capitalization from 44 percent of GDP in 1999 to 49 percent of GDP in 2000, the 160 percent increase in corporate debt issuance, the sharp rise in average daily turnover in the government bond market, and the sizable increase in assets under management in Singapore. The recent inclusion of Singapore Government Securities (SGS) in the JP Morgan Government Bond Index is also a positive development. The authorities noted that the focus in the near future will be to consolidate these gains by further improving liquidity in the bond market and widening the investor base. To this end, the authorities intend to give banks greater flexibility in liquidity management, introduce SGS futures later this year, and launch a campaign to raise the profile of the Singapore market amongst foreign investors. On the regulatory and supervisory side, the focus has been on further strengthening some aspects of bank and capital market regulation while moving progressively away from the “one-size-fits- all” mode of supervision to a risk-based approach. This regulatory reform is expected to improve the profitability and capital management of banks without compromising the overall soundness of the supervisory framework. The authorities have agreed to participate in the FSAP (expected to begin towards the end of 2001) which should help to identify any potential areas of vulnerability arising from recent reforms. 21. The authorities agreed that there is a strategic imperative for stronger efforts to divest their share of government linked companies (GLCs), but noted that the timing would need to be chosen carefully. They agreed that divestment of GLCs would facilitate their efforts to extend their regional and global reach, and noted their willingness to relinquish veto power over management decisions in key GLCs (e.g., SingTel and DBS). However, the authorities stressed that the timing of privatization will be determined based on market conditions and the availability of strategic investors. They also agreed that allowing greater opportunities for foreign participation could mitigate concerns about the pace of divestment arising from the limited size of the domestic stock market but said that the specific mechanisms for such participation would need careful consideration. 22. The mission also discussed other policies to enhance Singapore’s strength as a business location and to promote an innovative and entrepreneurial private sector. A key initiative is to further strengthen corporate governance, disclosure, and accounting standards. To this end, the authorities commissioned three committees to examine corporate governance and disclosure practices, and have issued a Code of Corporate Governance which aims not to prescribe corporate behavior but to ensure sufficient disclosure to enable outside investors and observers to form an informed assessment of the corporate performance and practices (Box 4). The mission strongly supported these initiatives and stressed the importance of the improvement in corporate governance as a way to facilitate the divestiture Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14- Box 3. Singapore-Recent Financial Sector Reforms This box updates the status of reforms in the financial sector undertaken in 2000 and thus far in 2001. * Relaxation of policy of non-internationalization of the S$ In December 2000, MAS announced the following measures: l Banks can now lend S$ to non-residents for investment purposes in Singapore. They can also extend S$ credit facilities to non-residents to fund offshore activities, as long as the S$ proceeds are swapped into foreign currency. As a result, non-residents can now obtain S$ funding for investment in S$ equities, bonds and real estate. This will help to broaden the investor base for S$ assets. l Banks can now transact in S$ currency options with other banks and financial institutions in Singapore that are regulated under MAS Notice 757 or its equivalent. Allowing interbank options will facilitate the use of currency options for hedging, and offer a new growth opportunity for the treasury industry. Measures to promote the S$ bond market and debt markets In addition to the relaxation of the policy of non-internationalization of S$ policy, MAS has made several changes to promote the S$ bond market and debt market as a whole: May 2000: Measures to boost the repo market, including allowing SGS held as a result of repo transaction to be qualified as an asset for minimum liquid assets requirement regardless the tenure and type of counterparty; allowing offshore banks to engage in SGS repo transactions with non-bank customers; introduction of an SGS repo facility that will be available to primary dealers; enlarging benchmark issue sizes; and improving price transparency in secondary market. July 2000: Relaxation of the license requirement for fund management. September 2000: Guidelines released for asset securitization and for credit derivatives. December 2000: Announced the launch of the 15year government bond, beginning in September 2001. January 2001: Relaxation of the restriction on on-selling of bonds issued (previously only permitted for sophisticated investors). February 2002: Announced the launch of the SGS Bond Futures contract beginning in mid-200 1. March 2001: The requirement to hold reserves against S$ swaps, and restrictions on the purpose and value of the S$ swap transaction were lifted. Other measures l Relaxation of Capital Adequacy Ratio: In September 2000, MAS lowered its requirement on Tier-l CAR of banks from 10 percent to 8 percent (double the Basle minimum), while it maintains total CAR at 12 percent (4 percentage points above the Basle minimum). The change is intended to give banks more flexibility in managing their capital as well as to facilitate MAS’ policy to move away from a “one size fits all” approach to one that is risk-focused and institution specific. However, MAS retains the right to require higher CAR for individual banks when necessary. l The authorities announced that intemet banking, including internet-only banks (IOBs), will operate within the same prudential framework as traditional banking. l In June 2000, MAS announced regulations requiring the separation of financial and non-financial businesses and unwinding of cross-shareholdings within the local banking groups, which will limit the risks of contagion to banks from nonbanking activities and enhance transparency. The new regulation complements measures introduced last year to upgrade the local banks and form a necessary part of Singapore’s ongoing efforts to strengthen and liberalize the domestic banking sector. ‘Further details can be found in the forthcoming background paper. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 15- Box 4. Corporate Governance Reforms Following the recommendation by the Corporate Finance Committee in 1998, three committees have been set up to undertake a broad study of the issues relating to corporate governance and regulation. While Singapore is rated highly in these areas, the authorities intend to continuously improve its corporate governance, which will in turn provide a climate conducive to the orderly development of capital markets and enhance shareholder value. The three committees have moved ahead in sequence. The Committee on Corporate Governance recently produced the Code of Corporate Governance, which was finalized by the government in April 200 1. The Committee on Disclosure and Accounting Standards is soliciting public comments on its consultation paper. The Committee on Company Legislation and Regulatory Framework has been given the mandate to recommend revisions to the Companies Act, which can be accomplished only after the finalization of recommendations by the other two committees. The Code of Corporate Governance adopts a balanced approach, which specifies the best practice but would allow deviations from it. Accordingly, corporations listed in the SGX will be required to disclose deviations from the best practice prescribed in the Code, which includes the following: l In Board Matters, board independence and dual leadership are regarded as most important. The CEO and the Chairman of the Board are recommended to be two unrelated individuals. l In Remuneration Matters, a remuneration committee comprising independent directors will determine the remuneration for directors. The remuneration will be linked to the performance, and will be disclosed in bands of $250,000. l To strengthen audit function, the Audit Committee will be organized comprising only non-executive directors including at least two experts in accounting and finance. The Audit committee will also ensure the adequacy of internal audit. l Communication to shareholders will be strengthened by requiring timely disclosure, violation of which will be legislated into a criminal offense. The Consultation Paper on Disclosure and Accounting Standards sets out both the best practice itself and ways to ensure continued development and promotion of the best practice: l The IASs (International Accounting Standards) and US General Accounting and Auditing Principles (GAAP) are recommended as the best practice, and the compliance needs to be legislated. l More active participation in the international account standard setting body is recommended. l A desirable monitoring framework would consist of a review panel with representations from the various private sector market intermediaries including SGX. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 16- of GLCs and the development of the equity market. The mission noted that further liberalization of media services would have strong synergies with ongoing efforts to promote a knowledge-based economy, and also suggested that consideration be given to following the practice of other advanced economies by introducing a competition law. 23. A number of initiatives have been taken during the past year to raise retirement savings, but the mission noted that they fall short of a comprehensive reform of the CPF scheme aimed at refocusing it as a core retirement scheme. Key changes have been to expand investment options for CPF members and to provide incentives for additional voluntary savings outside the CPF. These measures would contribute to raising retirement income if widely utilized but there remain questions about the take-up rate of the Supplementary Retirement Savings (SRS) scheme, because SRS savings will be in addition to the 20 percent that individuals already contribute to the CPF. The authorities stated that the SRS was aimed at higher income individuals, and those that do not have access to the CPF scheme (e.g., expatriate workers) and stressed that the expansion of investment options for CPF savings is likely to be the most effective step in raising replacement rates. 24. While remaining committed to a multilateral trade liberalization process, Singapore has recently undertaken the initiative to forge bilateral trade agreements with a number of its trading partners. The Agreement between New Zealand and Singapore on Closer Economic Partnership (ANZSCEP) was signed in November 2000, and came into effect in January 200 1. The authorities are in the process of concluding FTAs with a number of strategic trade partners, including Mexico, Japan, Canada, Australia. Recently, Singapore also initiated discussions with the European Free Trade Area and the U.S. The mission agreed with the authorities that such trade agreements-which are WTO compliant-are complements to regional and multilateral initiatives and could serve to accelerate the momentum for trade liberalization in the region. IV. STAFF APPRAISAL 25. The year 2000 was another impressive one for the Singapore economy--owing to the favorable external environment, pragmatic macroeconomic management, and continued progress on a range of structural reforms. The economy grew robustly, fueled by strong global electronics demand, with little evidence of imbalances in goods, asset or factor markets, and the external position remained strong. Structural initiatives aimed at further enhancing Singapore’s position as a major financial center and deregulating other important sectors contributed to this outcome. 26. Against the backdrop of an unexpectedly sharp weakening in the world economy, Singapore faces the prospect of a marked slowdown in growth in the near term. Even with the downgrading of growth prospects, the risks to the near-term outlook appear to be tilted towards the downside and arise from the possibility of more prolonged weakness in the global economy. Other downside risks emanate from the heightened potential for political instability in the region. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17- 27. The shift in the balance of risks away from inflation provides scope for the authorities to ease the stance of monetary policy by eliminating the appreciating trend in the target path for the exchange rate. The stance of macroeconomic policies outlined in late February-namely the maintenance of a modest tightening bias through a gradual appreciation of the trade-weighted exchange rate and a broadly neutral fiscal policy-was consistent with the information then available about the cyclical position of the economy and the external outlook. Since then, however, a number of signs have emerged that suggest an intensification of the slowdown as well as a rapid dissipation of any inflationary pressures still in the pipeline from last year’s strong growth. 28. While the increase in transparency implied by the first formal monetary policy statement in February 2001 is welcome, greater transparency about the ultimate policy objective could provide somewhat more room to maneuver in response to cyclical shocks. The authorities’ concern about the potential loss in credibility from varying the exchange rate target path in response to cyclical shocks suggests that, under the present modus operandi, the exchange rate is seen as playing the role both of the policy instrument and of a nominal anchor for market expectations. Looking ahead, the conduct of monetary policy could become complicated by the rise in the volume and possibly also the volatility of capital flows. In these circumstances, giving greater emphasis to an explicit medium-term target for the inflation rate-the ultimate policy objective-could, by giving markets a clear alternative nominal anchor for expectations, provide greater scope for using monetary policy somewhat more actively as a countercyclical tool. 29. The authorities’ approach to fiscal policy formulation is appropriately guided by medium-term objectives of enhancing productivity and competitiveness. In this spirit, the staff continues to suggest that contributions to the CPF scheme-whose original purpose was the provision of retirement income-not be used as a macroeconomic stabilization tool and that the scheme be refocused as a core retirement scheme. Increased use of variable components in wage setting could provide an alternative means for achieving greater cyclical flexibility in business costs. 30. The interpretation of Singapore’s fiscal position and policy stance is complicated by the lack of properly consolidated public sector financial accounts, incomplete information on the government’s assets, and the absence of published medium term policy targets. The efforts being made to improve fiscal practices using the Fund’s Fiscal Code and other international best practices as benchmarks are welcome and the authorities are encouraged to consider early completion of the fiscal ROSC. Specifically, the authorities could follow the practice of other advanced economies of publishing summary indicators of fiscal policy’s impact on aggregate demand, and medium-term policy targets with underlying economic assumptions. As for the government’s foreign asset holdings, the authorities are encouraged to compile and provide complete data on Singapore’s international investment position (IIP), as specified in the SDDS and required under Article VIII, Section S(a)(vii) of the Articles of Agreement. Statistics on trade with Indonesia (see Annex III) should also be provided, as required by Article VIII, Section 5(a)(v). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 18- 31. The staff endorses the efforts the authorities have made to push ahead with structural reforms on a broad front as part of the restructuring process. In an environment where investor sentiment about the region has once again weakened, it remains critical for Singapore to continue to distinguish itself through fundamental structural reforms as well as by strengthening transparency and corporate governance. 32. Recent financial sector reforms have contributed to broadening the base of the financial sector without undermining high prudential standards. This has been a particularly desirable outcome as prospects for certain segments of the longstanding mainstay of Singapore’s financial sector-offshore banking-continue to be weak. The staff endorses the authorities’ intention to permit foreign banks to offer a fuller range of services in the domestic market, which could encourage consolidation of the domestic banking sector. Singapore’s well-capitalized banking system is expected to make a smooth transition towards the more flexible supervisory regime. The staff welcomes the authorities’ decision to participate in the FSAP which would permit the timely identification of any potential areas of vulnerability arising from ongoing financial sector developments. 33. Good progress has been made in deregulating and opening up many sectors of the economy and in strengthening corporate governance, but there is scope for more rapid progress in some areas. Privatization of GLCs could facilitate Singapore companies’ attempts to extend their regional and global reach, and to take greater advantage of the opportunities presenting themselves outside Southeast Asia. Also divestment of GLCs could create new and profitable long-term investment opportunities for Singaporeans and thus serve to further boost capital market development. Concerns about the pace of divestment arising from the limited size of the domestic stock market could be mitigated by allowing greater opportunities for foreign participation. Further liberalization of media services would have strong synergies with ongoing efforts to promote an innovative and knowledge-based economy. Finally, consideration could be given to introducing a competition law. 34. Although the initiatives undertaken in the area of retirement savings during the past year have been broadly in the right direction, these reforms would be more effective as part of a comprehensive reform of the CPF aimed at refocusing it as a core retirement scheme. The expansion of investment options for CPF members and the provisions of incentives for additional voluntary savings could contribute to raising retirement income if widely utilized. However, questions remain about the take-up rate of the Supplementary Retirement Savings scheme (SRS), because SRS savings will be in addition to the 20 percent that individuals already contribute to the CPF. 35. The staff endorses the authorities’ recent efforts to forge bilateral trade agreements with a number of trading partners. Such trade agreements-which are WTO compliant-are likely to be complements to regional and multilateral initiatives, and could serve to accelerate the momentum for trade liberalization in the region. 36. It is recommended that the next Article IV consultation be held on the standard 12- month consultation cycle. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 19- Table 1. Singapore: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 1997-2002 Nominal GDP (2000): US$92.2 billion GDP per capita (2000): US$22,961 Population (2000): 4.02 million Quota: SDR 862.5 million 1997 1998 1999 2000 Proj. 2001 2002 Growth (percent change) Real GDP Real domestic demand Consumption Private consumption Gross capital formation Saving and investment (percent of GDP) Gross national savings Gross capital formation Inflation and unemployment (period average, percent) CPI inflation Unemployment rate Central government budget (percent of GDP) l/ Revenue and grants Expenditure, net lending, and fund transfers Overall balance Primary operating balance 21 Money and credit (end of period, percent change) Broad money (M3) 3/ Credit to private sector Interest rate (three-month interbank, in percent) Merchandise trade (percent change) Export volume Import volume Terms of trade Balance of payments (US$ billion) Current account balance (In percent of GDP) Balance on goods Exports, f.o.b. Imports, f.o.b. Overall balance International reserves and external debt Gross official reserves (US$ billion) (In months of imports) Gross external debt (USS billion) 6/ (In percent of GDP) Exchange rate (end of period) S$iuSS Nominal effective exchange rate 7/ Real effective exchange rate 7/ 8.4 0.3 5.9 9.9 4.0 5.5 10.2 -8.3 5.3 10.7 3.4 5.1 6.4 -0.9 5.2 10.3 4.1 5.4 6.2 -3.1 5.3 9.4 4.4 5.8 15.1 -17.1 5.3 11.2 2.4 4.7 58.2 56.9 58.4 55.0 53.5 52.6 39.3 32.3 32.4 31.3 30.8 30.6 2.0 -0.3 0.1 1.4 1.5 1.7 1.8 3.2 3.5 3.1 3.2 3.1 36.6 30.3 29.1 30.1 28.4 28.0 27.1 28.6 23.7 21.5 21.7 21.1 9.5 1.6 5.5 8.6 6.7 6.9 3.9 0.5 3.4 1.2 0.7 0.4 8.3 8.1 7.3 -1.8 12.7 8.0 -3.0 5.9 6.6 1.6 2.6 2.8 0.8 41 . . . 9.0 41 . . . 2.3 51 . . . 11.6 -0.3 5.4 16.8 3.6 5.5 10.2 -12.9 9.5 14.8 6.9 6.3 -2.0 0.1 -0.8 -2.5 0.7 -0.1 16.9 21.0 21.6 21.8 22.4 23.9 (17.9) (25.4) (25.8) (23.6) (22.6) (22.0) 1.1 14.8 11.2 11.4 8.7 8.1 125.7 110.6 115.6 138.9 146.0 156.9 -124.6 -95.8 -104.4 -127.5 -137.3 -148.9 8.0 3.0 4.3 6.9 7.9 9.2 71.4 (6.9) 10.7 (12.8) 75.0 (9.4) (,I?; 77.1 80.4 90.8 (8.9) (7.6) (7.9) 14.4 11.3 . . . (16.9) (12.3) . . . 102.4 (8.3) . . . . . . 1.675 1.660 1.666 1.732 1.822 51 . . . 126.3 125.6 119.2 119.6 120.8 8/ . . . 118.6 114.3 107.1 107.3 108.3 81 . . . Sources: Data provided by the Singapore authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections. l/ Fiscal year beginning on April 1. 2/ Overall balance excluding capital revenue, investment income, net lending, debt service, and fund transfers. 3/ Adjusted for the acquisition of POSBank by the Development Bank of Singapore in November 1998. 4/ March 200 1. 51 As of May 9,200l. 6/ Based on BIS data; corporate bonds outstanding and the external bank claims by the BIS reporting countries. 7/ IMF Information Notice System monthly index (1990 = 100); period average. 8/ APD estimate for April 2001. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 20 - Table 2. Singapore: Balance of Payments, 1997-2002 l/ (In billions of U.S. dollars) 1997 1998 1999 2000 Proj . 2001 2002 Current account balance 16.9 21.0 21.6 Trade balance 1.1 14.8 11.2 Exports, f.o.b. 125.7 110.6 115.6 Of which : electronics exports 66.9 59.6 62.9 Imports, f.o.b. -124.6 -95.8 -104.4 Services balance 11.1 1.4 5.0 Income balance 5.9 6.0 6.6 Transfer payments (net) -1.2 -1.2 -1.2 Net capital flows 21 -8.9 -18.0 -17.3 -14.9 -14.5 -14.6 Capital and financial account balance -13.4 -21.5 -17.1 -11.6 -14.5 -14.6 Capital account (net) -0.2 -0.2 -0.2 -0.2 -0.1 -0.1 Financial account (net) -13.2 -21.3 -16.9 -11.4 -14.4 -14.5 Direct investment (net) -0.8 7.0 3.1 2.1 2.4 2.7 Portfolio investment (net) -12.9 -7.8 -7.1 -13.9 -11.6 -7.5 Other investment (net) 0.4 -20.5 -13.0 0.3 -5.1 -9.8 Net errors and omissions 4.5 3.5 -0.2 -3.4 0.0 0.0 Overall balance 8.0 3.0 4.3 6.9 7.9 Memorandum item : Current account as percent of GDP 17.9 25.4 25.8 23.6 22.6 21.8 22.4 23.9 11.4 8.7 8.1 138.9 146.0 156.9 . . . . . . -127.5 -137.3 5.6 7.5 6.1 7.7 -1.4 -1.5 . . . -148.9 9.0 8.4 -1.7 9.2 22.0 Sources: Monetary Authority of Singapore, Economic Survey of Singapore; and staff estimates and projections. l! Data for the current account balance, the capital and financial account balance, and net errors and omissions are converted to U.S. dollars from the official presentation in Singapore dollars using period-average exchange rate. 21 Including net errors and omissions. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 22 - Table 4. Singapore: Monetary Survey, 1997-2001 l/ 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 Feb. Net foreign assets 92.8 115.5 131.0 Monetary authorities 119.3 124.3 127.1 Deposit money banks l/ -26.5 -8.8 3.8 Domestic credit 103.3 122.1 120.5 Claims on private sector 143.4 154.9 150.2 Claims on government (net) -40.2 -32.8 -29.7 Other items (net) -72.6 -76.8 -77.0 M2 123.4 160.8 174.5 Ml 27.5 27.2 31.1 Quasi-money 95.9 133.5 143.4 Domestic credit 19.5 18.2 -1.3 Claims on private sector 12.7 8.0 -3.0 M2 10.3 30.2 8.5 M3 10.3 8.1 7.3 126.3 128.2 137.8 138.8 -11.5 -10.5 126.7 129.7 159.1 163.0 -32.5 -33.3 -82.1 -83.1 170.9 174.8 33.3 33.8 137.6 141.0 5.1 6.3 5.9 8.7 -2.0 1.1 -1.8 -0.2 Source: Data provided by the Singapore authorities. 11 Commercial banks and discount houses. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 23 - Table 5. Singapore: Summary of Government Operations, 1997/98-2001/02 l/ (In percent of GDP) 1997198 1998199 1999100 2000/o 1 2001/02 Budget Est. Budget Proj. 21 Total revenue Current revenue Tax revenue Investment income 31 Other nontax revenue Capital revenue 41 Total expenditure Current expenditure Operating expenditure Debt servicing Agency fees on land sales Investment expenses Transfer payments Development expenditure and net lending Development expenditure 51 Net lending Fund transfers 61 Overall balance Primary operating balance 71 Memorandum items : Government saving Structural primary operating balance 81 Fiscal impulse based on operating balance 91 36.6 23.1 16.1 2.6 4.3 13.5 27.1 11.0 9.9 0.7 0.1 0.1 0.2 15.8 6.3 9.5 0.4 9.5 3.9 11.7 3.6 -1.9 30.3 29.1 28.2 30.1 28.8 28.4 23.9 25.4 23.6 25.5 24.6 24.2 15.8 15.5 14.4 16.1 16.6 16.2 3.5 4.4 5.8 5.8 5.1 5.1 4.7 5.5 3.4 3.6 3.0 3.0 6.3 3.7 4.6 4.6 4.2 4.2 28.6 23.7 26.1 21.5 21.7 21.7 11.7 11.2 10.6 13.0 12.3 12.3 10.7 10.2 10.0 11.5 10.9 10.9 0.7 0.6 0.4 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.0 0.3 0.0 0.6 0.6 0.6 17.0 12.3 15.4 8.0 8.9 8.9 9.0 7.0 8.0 5.8 6.4 6.4 8.0 5.3 7.4 2.1 2.5 2.5 0.0 0.2 0.0 0.5 0.5 0.5 1.6 5.5 2.1 8.6 7.1 6.7 0.5 3.4 -0.5 1.2 1.2 0.7 12.3 14.0 13.0 12.0 11.8 11.4 1.0 3.7 -0.6 1.1 1.2 0.8 2.6 -2.7 4.3 2.6 -0.1 0.3 Sources: Data provided by the Singapore authorities; and staff estimates and projections. l! Fiscal year runs from April 1 through March 3 1. 21 Includes the adjustment for proposed tax rebates and cuts in the property tax and business tax. 31 Includes all investment income from government assets and interest earnings on development loans from 200010 1. 41 Sale of government property. 51 Includes the land reclamation expenditure. 6/ Includes transfers to the Edusave Endowment Fund, the Medical Endowment Fund, the Lifelong Learning Endowment Fund and the ElderCare Fund. 71 Overall balance excluding capital revenue, investment income, net lending, debt service, and fund transfers. 81 Calculated with the elasticity of revenue with respect to output equal to 1.1, and a zero elasticity of expenditure with respect to output. 91 Calculated as increase in the structural primary operating deficit. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicAnnual percent change Annualpercent change - 24 - Figure 1. Singapore: Regional Comparisons: Key Domestic Indicators 8 1999 2000 Percent of GDP 6 I I I ; < If*,; 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 -6 12 r ( 1onsumer Price Inflation 9 , - 6 ,- ...I ..---. l \ ,’ .\ ; .I..,’ ,’ \. ‘: 3 c I- -? I- 9 4 i- \ .I ‘, .\ . . 3 . . . . . 0 BpsrOlb, - y , ,‘-r~$’ 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2Oc!a 2001 -6 160 80 60 40 2c Stock Market Indices 160 Sources: IMF, World Economic Outlook; Information Notice System; and data provided by the Singapore authorities. I/ Overall balance on a calendar year basis. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicAnnual percent change - 25 - Figure 2. Singapore: Regional Comparisons: Key External Indicators 40 Export Growth 11 40 ProJ, 35 m - Singapore - 6sI 35 Korea 25 -5 -10 0 Malaysia Hong Kong sgpo3* ,~8,~“~“~; ** \ ., I I I I I I -15 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 -15 January 1995=100 Lea1 Effective Exchange Rates 130 - 120 - 80 - 60 - - - - Korea . . m . - - Malaysia I . I . - Hong Kong -.’ I 4 50” 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 -1 -1 -1 80 70 60 50 25 Percent of GDP 30 1995=100: U.S. dollar basis 1995=100: U.S. dollar basis 160 160 1998 - Singapore Sources: IMF. World Economic Outlook; Information Notice System; and data provided by the Singapore authorities. I/ Exports of goods and services, BOP basis. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 26 - Figure 3. Singapore: Current and Leading Indicators of Economic Activity euarter-on-guarterpereenl change; seasonally odjt*rted ‘* Real Gross Domestic Product I2 9- I -9 6 6 3 3 0 0 -3 -3 B Real GDP - Mom&wing - - - Business andfinancial services :: ‘I : ’ .p..x. -I2 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 1990=100 190 Leading Economic Indicators Percent 40 - 30 - 20 - 10 -0 - -10 - -20 SgpHm IL0 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 Billions of Singapore dollars 3.3 Investment Commitments in Manufacturing 2.8 - - 2.7 - 2.2 - 1.6 Sources: Data provided by the Singapore authorities. Year-on yem,wcent change 36 1 Real Domestic Demand 136 30 30 24 24 18 18 12 12 6 6 0 0 -6 -6 -12 ctz=] Total domestic demand -12 - Private consumption -18 - - - Gross fued cupttalformation -18 IpwJsmlb -24 I I, I I, 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 ;oit -24 Year-on-warpercent change: U.S. dollars 6o Global Semiconductor Market Developments 3/ 50 - A 60 - 50 Shipments (three-month moving overage) - 40 - 30 - 20 - 10 -0 1 -10 40 ) 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 -20 Billions of Singapore dollars ’ Construction Contracts Awarded A 8 O I ,. I ,,,,,,,,,.,I,_ 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 O II Percentage change of firms expecting an improvement in business conditions in the manufacturing sector. 2/The composite leading index has nine components which include money stock, stock of finished goods, company formation,wholesale price changes in manufactured goods, inverted real unit labor costs for manufacturtng, inverted default rates for manufacturing, the business forecast for wholesale trade, new orders, and the stock price index. 3/ Based on data by the Semiconductor Industry Association. Reflects value of shipments in a single month. Sales data are on an annual basis. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 27 - Figure 4. Singapore: Labor and Asset Market Developments Twelve-quarter moving average. 1990=100 160 La1 Estate Property Prices pma oypce space 8o L...I...I...,.,,,...,.,.,, 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 200 January 1995=100 Four-quarterpercent change 160 Stock Exchange: Straits Times Index 180 160 160 80 In percent; seasonally adjusted 5.0 Unemployment Rate IS.0 1.5 I sgpsroIb : 2.0 1.5 I I I I I II,,,,,,,,,I,,,,,,, ‘.O 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 Zb! ‘.O - 4.5 lf 12 a 4 a -8 -12 t Labor Costs Monthly earnings . . *. .-, --.*. .* a--. ._-* -. a..,,’ qpdlosa -16 “““‘I, j “I ” ” * ’ ” 8 3 ’ 1 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 20( 16 8 4 -8 .I2 .I6 Sources: CEIC Database: and data provided by the Singapore authorities. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-28 - Figure 5. Singapore: External Developments Twelve-month percent change lkade Volume 4( ) . 3( ) i 2( 1C c -1C -20 Percent of GDP 40 Domestic - 30 ISI -30 I ,,,I,,, I, , , I, , I, , , I , , , 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 Billions of Singapore dollars lalance of Payments ‘EP I ,,,I,., I,, I .,,,,,,I, 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2ot 2( 1t 12 8 4 a -4 I , , I , , 1995 1996 1997 Services &xl Income 0 Transfers - Total I I.,,,,,,,,,,. 1998 1999 2000 2M 24 16 8 July 1997=100 115 Exchange Rates - U.S. dollar/Singapore dollar - U.S. dollar/Singapore dollar - Japanese yen /Singapore dollar - Japanese yen /Singapore dollar 115 110 80 Sources: IMF. International Financial Statistics; Information Notice System; and data provided by the Singapore authorities. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTwelve-month percent change Percent of GDP 21 24 18 6 -3 -6 - 29 - Figure 6. Singapore: Monetary and Fiscal Indicators vioney and Credit I/ 27 - 24 In percent 10 Interest Rates 1 / 9 8 Percent of GDP 3: 22 24 SC 12 8 1997198 Central Government Expenditure m Current 1998 199 1999mO 2000/01 2001/02 28 24 16 8 Sources: CEIC Database; and data provided by the Singapore authorities. I/ Adjusted for the purchase of POSBank by DBS Bank in November 1999. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 30 - ANNEX I Singapore-Illustrative Medium-Term Scenario 1. The staffs medium-term scenario illustrates that notwithstanding the weakening of near-term prospects owing to the global slowdown, Singapore’s medium-term prospects remain robust. Accordingly, growth in Singapore is projected to decelerate from its cyclical high of 10 percent in 2000 to 4 percent in 2001. Growth in economic activity is projected to pick up in 2002 to 5% percent, slightly below the range of estimated potential growth. The full cyclical rebound is expected to occur in 2003 with 7 percent growth before converging toward potential growth of 6.0 percent. 2. The growth projections are predicated on the assumption of a gradual recovery in the US economy beginning during the second half of 200 1. More specifically, it is assumed that U.S. growth will reach 1 ‘/z percent in 2001 and 2% percent in 2002, with activity picking up in the second half of 2001, in line with May 2001 World Economic Outlook. The projections also take into account the fact that previous capacity investment will come on stream in 2001 and that investment commitments remained strong in 2000 and thus far in 200 1. The fast- growing chemical cluster will also help sustain growth in the manufacturing sector, with two major pharmaceutical plants coming on stream in the second half of 200 1, There have been several high value-added investment projects committed in Ql 2001, scheduled to begin production in 2003/2004, which will further strengthen the sector. The medium-term projections also take into account the productivity gains that can be expected from the wide- ranging ongoing structural reforms, skill-upgrading programs and the continued progressive shift toward a knowledge-based economy. 3. Private saving, and hence national saving, is projected to gradually decline over the projection period as private consumption increases its share in GDP. Export and import volumes are projected to remain strong after the cyclical rebound, owing to the opening of new markets (through new Free Trade Agreements) and consolidation of old ones. The decline in private saving implies a decline in the current account surplus as a share of GDP, reaching 19 percent by 2006, but official reserves are assumed to be maintained at approximately 8% months of imports. Inflation will remain below 2 percent and the unemployment rate is expected to decline steadily to 2.8 percent. 4. On the fiscal side, it is assumed that the share of the public sector in GDP decreases slightly during the projection period, reflecting the government’s intention to promote the private sector as well as the impact of the corporate and personal income tax cuts that were announced in the FY2001 budget that are to take effect largely in FY2002. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3l- ANNEX I Singapore: Illustrative Medium-Term Scenario, 1998-2006 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 Real growth (percent change) GDP Domestic demand Private consumption Public consumption Fixed investment Exports of goods and services Imports of goods and services Saving and investment (percent of GDP) Gross national savings Central government Private and other Gross capital formation Inflation and unemployment (period average, percent) CPI inflation Unemployment rate Central government (percent of GDP) Revenue and grants Expenditure, net lending, and fund transfe Overall balance Primary operating balance l/ Merchandise trade (percent change) Export volume Import volume Terms of trade 2/ Balance of payments and offkial reserves (in billions of U.S. dollars) Current account balance (percent of GDP) Balance on goods Exports, f.o.b. Imports, f.o.b. Balance on services Balance on income and transfers Overall balance Gross official reserves (in months of imports) 0.3 5.9 9.9 4.0 5.5 7.0 6.5 6.0 6.0 -8.3 5.3 10.7 3.4 5.1 7.2 6.2 5.8 5.7 -3.1 5.3 9.4 4.4 5.8 7.4 6.8 6.5 6.3 8.0 5.0 13.7 3.0 3.6 3.8 3.0 3.1 3.2 -7.1 -3.9 5.9 4.9 4.7 8.0 6.5 5.8 5.8 -5.8 8.6 15.5 4.6 6.4 9.4 9.5 9.0 8.9 -10.2 8.9 14.3 6.6 6.6 9.8 9.7 9.2 9.0 56.9 58.4 55.0 53.5 52.6 52.0 51.0 50.1 49.8 12.2 13.7 12.9 12.5 12.1 12.1 12.1 12.1 12.1 44.7 44.7 42.1 41.0 40.4 40.0 38.9 38.1 37.7 32.3 32.4 31.3 30.8 30.6 30.8 30.8 30.8 30.8 -0.3 0.1 1.4 1.5 1.7 1.8 1.8 1.8 1.8 3.2 3.5 3.1 3.2 3.1 2.9 2.8 2.8 2.8 31.9 29.4 29.8 28.8 28.2 28.0 28.0 28.0 28.0 28.3 24.9 22.0 21.6 21.3 21.1 21.1 21.1 21.1 3.6 4.5 7.8 7.2 6.9 6.9 6.9 6.9 6.9 1.3 2.6 1.7 0.9 0.6 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 -0.3 5.4 16.8 3.6 5.5 9.3 9.5 8.8 8.8 -12.9 9.5 14.8 6.9 6.3 9.4 9.4 9.1 8.9 0.1 -0.8 -2.5 0.7 -0.1 -0.2 -0.2 0.3 -0.1 21.0 21.6 21.8 22.4 23.9 (25.4) (25.8) (23.6) (22.6) (22.0) 14.8 11.2 11.4 8.7 8.1 110.6 115.6 138.9 146.0 156.9 -95.8 -104.4 -127.5 -137.3 -148.9 1.4 5.0 5.6 7.5 9.0 4.8 5.5 4.8 6.2 6.8 3.0 4.3 6.9 7.9 9.2 75.0 77.1 80.4 90.8 102.4 (9-4 (8.9) (7.6) (7.9) (8.3) 25.7 27.0 28.5 30.5 (21.2) (20.2) (19.4) (19.0) 8.4 9.2 10.3 10.7 174.6 194.3 215.6 235.7 -166.2 -185.1 -205.4 -224.9 9.6 10.3 11.8 12.9 7.6 7.5 6.4 6.9 9.9 10.7 12.0 12.8 114.7 127.6 141.6 155.9 (8.3) (8.3) (8.3) (8.3) Sources: Data provided by the Singapore authorities; and staff estimates and projections. l! Overall balance excluding capital revenue, investment income, net lending, debt service, and fund transfers. 2/ Based on changes in export and import unit values. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 32 - ANNEX II Singapor-Fund Relations (As of April 30,200l) I. Membership Status: Joined August 3, 1966; Article VIII II. General Resources Account: SDR Million % Quota Quota 862.50 100.0 Fund holdings of Singapore dollars 611.98 71.0 Reserve position in Fund 250.56 29.1 III. SDR Department: SDR Million % Allocation Net cumulative allocation 16.48 100.0 Holdings 109.02 661.7 IV. Outstanding Purchases and Loans: None V. Financial Arrangements: None VI. Projected Obligations to Fund: None VII. Exchange Rate Arrangement: Singapore has accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2,3, and 4 and maintains an exchange system that is free of restriction on the making of payments and transfers for current international transactions. Singapore follows a policy under which the Singapore dollar is permitted to float. The Monetary Authority of Singapore (MAS) monitors its value against an undisclosed basket of currencies and intervenes in the market to maintain this value within an undisclosed target band. The U.S. dollar is the intervention currency. As of May 14,2001, US$l = S$1.82. VIII. Article IV Consultation: The 2000 Article IV consultation discussions were held in Singapore in March 2000. The consultation was concluded by the Executive Board on June 5,200O. At that time, Directors endorsed the conduct of monetary and fiscal policies, but emphasized the need for vigilance against a possible pickup in inflationary pressures. Over the medium-term, Directors recommended a comprehensive reform of the Central Provident Fund, and welcomed the liberalization measures undertaken up to that point while noting that there was considerable scope for a more aggressive move to reduce the role of government in the economy. IX. Technical Assistance: None X. Resident Representative/Advisor: None Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-33 - ANNEX II XI. Exchange System: Singapore has accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2,3, and 4 and maintains no restrictions on the making of payments or transfers for current international transactions.’ Singapore maintains several restrictions on Singapore-dollar credit facilities, bonds and derivatives. Financial institutions (banks, merchant banks, and finance and insurance companies) may, without prior consultation with the MAS, extend Singapore-dollar credit facilities to: Singapore residents for any purpose; and to nonbank nonresidents if the Singapore-dollar proceeds from these credit facilities are used for pre-approved economic activities in Singapore or for hedging the Singapore-dollar exchange rate and interest rate risks arising from these economic activities, to finance investments such as commercial properties in Singapore if the credit facilities do not exceed S$5 million in aggregate, and via fully collaterized repurchase agreements of Singapore government securities and the I?mds are managed in Singapore. Financial institutions are not allowed to extend Singapore-dollar credit facilities to nonresidents for speculating in the Singapore-dollar currency and interest rate markets; financing third-country trade between countries not involving Singapore; financing the acquisition of shares of companies not listed on the Stock Exchange; and financing any activities outside Singapore, except when approved by the MAS. The MAS may, upon consultation, approve the extension of Singapore-dollar credit facilities to non- residents for overseas projects and the Singapore-dollar proceeds from these facilities must be converted or swapped into foreign currency for use outside Singapore. Financial institutions may, without prior consultation with the MAS, invest in Singapore- dollar bonds issued by nonresidents if the Singapore-dollar proceeds from the issuance are used for pre-approved economic purposes in Singapore. Financial institutions must consult the MAS before investing in Singapore-dollar bonds issued by non-residents where the Singapore-dollar proceeds are to be used outside Singapore or for non-pre-approved economic purposes in Singapore. The Singapore-dollar proceeds from all such bond issues by nonresidents must be converted or swapped into foreign currency for use outside Singapore. Financial institutions may, without prior consultation with the MAS, lend in the Singapore dollar through currency swaps with nonbank nonresidents for hedging the Singapore-dollar exchange rate and interest rate risks arising from pre-approved economic activities in Singapore; lend in the Singapore-dollar through currency swaps or transact in Singapore- dollar interest rate swaps with Special Purpose Vehicles incorporated in Singapore for the express purpose of securitising Singapore-dollar mortgages of financial institutions in Singapore; and transact Singapore-dollar interest rate futures in Singapore with nonresidents. ’ Singapore continues to maintain restrictions on payments and transfers against Iraq and Libya in compliance with U.N. Security Council resolutions, which have been notified to the Fund under Decision No. 144 (52/5 1). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 34 - ANNEX III l SingaporeStatistical Issues Data Reporting 1. Singapore provides data to the Fund on a generally timely basis and meets the SDDS specifications for the coverage, periodicity, and timeliness of the data, and for the dissemination of advance release calendars since January 200 1. However, there are a number of deficiencies in statistical practice, particularly in the external and fiscal areas. The main issues are: 0 Trade statistics do not include trade with Indonesia, although trade transactions with Indonesia are captured elsewhere in the current account; other goods and services receipts and payments, which are substantial, are not disaggregated. However, the authorities have completed a new survey of the services receipts and payments which should permit the provision of disaggregated data. 0 While financial account data have been improved, notably by including Government Investment Corporation outflows under official flows, they are subject to frequent revision, often with a significant time lag.’ Surveys on nonofficial external liabilities were initiated recently, but the coverage of the survey needs to be enlarged. At present, the survey covers FDI companies with the assets exceeding US$5 million. l Information on government assets held abroad is not published nor provided to the Fund on a confidential basis. Interest on these assets and debt service payments on domestic debt made from the off-budget Government Securities Fund, is published on an annual basis but is not fully reflected in the fiscal position. More generally, data on the financial position of the consolidated public sector are not published. 2. During the course of the year, staff receive a steady flow of economic data from published sources, via the Reuters monitor, various official websites, and through the TREND database. Most data are received on a timely basis. 3. Annual balance of payments data are reported each year to STA. Quarterly financial account data as provided by the authorities are not sufficiently detailed for publication in the International Financial Statistics. ’ This results in a corresponding change in errors and omissions. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-35 - ANNEX III 6 8 s CY u 8 3 U 5 U U 5 a a I 5 I a P I 5 a a a a w ,o s [I w Lu z a Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-36- ANNEX IV Singapordfkial Development Assistance 1. Singapore provided subsidy contributions accruing from net income on a loan of SDR 40 million to the original ESAF (now renamed PRGF) in 1987 and from an additional loan of SDR 40 million to the enhanced ESAF in 1994 at an interest rate of 2 percent per annum. In November 1998, Singapore agreed to roll over the loan of SDR 40 million from the original ESAF to the ESAF-HIPC Trust. In December 1999, Singapore agreed to transfer its balance from the SCA-2 to the PRGF Subsidy Account in the form of noninterest bearing deposits. Singapore’s contributions to the PRGF-HIPC Trust are estimated at about SDR 16.5 million on an “as needed” basis. 2. Singapore has also committed to lend up to SDR 340 million in the New Arrangements to Borrow (NAB), representing 1 percent of total NAB resources. In December 1998, Singapore also lent SDR 99.35 million, under the NAB, to finance the standby credit for Brazil. 3. Singapore has provided technical assistance to other developing countries since the 196Os, primarily through technical training programs directed at government officials. The range and scope of such assistance have increased significantly since the establishment in 1992 of the Singapore Cooperation Program (SCP). The SCP offers both bilateral and joint training programs in collaboration with individual countries and international organizations. At present Singapore sponsors training and study visits for about 4,000 officials annually from more than 135 developing countries. 4. The Fund and the Singapore authorities have jointly set up the IMF-Singapore Regional Training Institute (STI) in May 1998. The ST1 is administered by the IMF, in collaboration with the Monetary Authority of Singapore, with the assistance of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. The STI’s training activities are targeted at officials from the Asia-Pacific region. Courses on macroeconomic adjustment, reform policies, financial programming, transition economies, monetary and exchange operations, public finance, banking supervision, and statistics. As of end April 2001, ST1 has conducted 48 courses and seminars and has trained approximately 1,530 officials from 38 countries. The participants came from central banks, ministries of finance, bank supervisory authorities and statistical agencies. 5. Singapore made a contribution of US$4 million to the 7fh replenishment of the Asian Development Fund (ADF). ADF loans are provided on concessional terms to ADB’s poorer developing member countries. They support broad-based sustainable economic growth, the provision of social development such as education and health and the strengthening of good governance. 6. In response to the crisis, Singapore also increased its technical assistance programmes to the region. At the APEC Economic Leaders’ meeting in Kuala Lumpur in Novemver 1998, Singapore announced capacity-building initiatives involving training in finance and healthcare. At the ASEAN Summit in Hanoi in December 1998, Singapore also announced that it would offer S$l2 million under the Singapore Cooperation Programme to provide about 30 undergraduate scholarships per year for ASEAN students over the next three to four years to study in Singapore. For FY 2001,60 undergraduate scholarships will be awarded. These two projects have been implemented. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 37 - ANNEX IV 7. Recognising the hardships that the economic crisis has caused Indonesia, Singapore announced in July 1998 that it would extend S$12 million worth of humanitarian assistance in rice and medicines to the Indonesian people to help alleviate their difficulties. This assistance programme has been completed. Following an earthquake in Bengkulu in Jun 2000, Singapore joined in the relief efforts by sending a 20-member armed forces medical team together with emergency medical supplies and tents. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-38- ANNEX V Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 01/xX FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE International Monetary Fund 700 lgth Street, NW Washington, D. C. 20431 USA IMF Concludes Article IV Consultation with Singapore On June 29,2001, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded the Article IV consultation with Singapore.’ Background The Singapore economy turned in another year of very strong performance in 2000, but has begun to slow markedly since early 2001. The economy grew by IO percent in 2000, recording one of the best growth performances in the region. Fueled by strong global electronics demand and the regional recovery, external demand provided the main engine of growth, but robust domestic demand also contributed. With the sharp slowing of the US economy and the downturn in the global electronics industry, the momentum of growth in Singapore began to moderate in early 2001, with GDP growth in Ql, 2001 slowing to 4% percent compared to 11 percent in the previous quarter; on a seasonally adjusted basis, GDP declined by nearly 3 percent over the previous quarter. The robust cyclical expansion in 2000 generated broad-based employment growth but labor market conditions have recently begun to soften and inflationary pressures that had built during the course of 2000 are now dissipating. The average unemployment rate declined from 3% percent in 1999 to 3 percent in 2000, but recent survey data point to a contraction in manufacturing employment during the course of 2001. Following a three-year decline, unit labor costs rose slightly in early 2001, owing to a decline in productivity growth. With the estimated closure of the output gap in early 2000, the inflation rate picked up speed around mid-2000, reaching 2 percent (y/y) in December 2000. However, CPI inflation subsided to 13/4 percent in I Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial information, and discusses with officials the country’s economic developments and policies. On return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the country’s authorities. This PIN summarizes the views of the Executive Board. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 39 - ANNEX V the first four months of 2001 and there is evidence that upstream price pressures have all but dissipated, largely owing to falling petroleum product prices. The domestic supply price index (which measures the changes in prices of imported and locally manufactured goods retained for use in the economy) falling by W percent (y/y) in March 2001. The behavior of asset prices was mixed-property prices recovered in 2000 from a two-year slump, but the stock market ended 2000 with a 22 percent loss and continued its steep descent in Ql , 2001, largely driven by the plunge in technology stocks worldwide. Singapore’s external position continues to be strong, with the current account surplus remaining in the range of 2% percent of GDP. The deficit on the capital and financial account narrowed in 2000, due to smaller net oufflows reflecting repayment of loans by Asian Currency Units (ACUs). The overall balance of payments surplus thus widened to US$7 billion, increasing official reserves to about US$80% billion or the equivalent of 7l% months of imports. Since early 2001, export (and import) growth have slowed sharply but the outlook for the external accounts remains robust. The performance of the financial sector strengthened in 2000. Value added in the financial services sector grew by 4 percent in 2000, up from less than 1 percent in 1999, owing to stronger performance by commercial banks, and in the asset management and insurance industries. Bank lending resumed positive growth since May 2000, after almost two years of contraction, expanding by more than 7 percent in Ql, 2001. Banks’ risk-weighted capital ratios remained at around 20 percent, well above the regulatory minimum of 12 percent, while nonperforming loans to nonbank clients as a share of total nonbank loans fell from the crisis- related peak of 12l% percent to 9 percent in March 2001. The positive (appreciating) slope of the (undisclosed) target exchange rate path, reinstated in mid-2000 amid the marked strengthening in economic activity, has been maintained thus far. Monetary conditions tightened markedly in the second half of 2000, reflecting the appreciation of the real effective exchange rate. Since then, however, despite the maintenance of the tightening bias in the policy stance, the real effective exchange rate has weakened, mainly owing to the weakness of the S$ against the US dollar. The fiscal accounts registered another large surplus in FY2000, and the budget for FY2001 aims at a broadly neutral fiscal policy stance. The stronger-than-anticipated growth in 2000 generated a primary operating surplus of 1% percent of GDP, surpassing the budget target of % percent of GDP as a result of stronger revenue collections from income, profits, sales taxes, and lower net lending. The budget for FY2001 aims at a primary operating surplus of around 1 percent of GDP. The individual and corporate income tax cuts are carefully calibrated to provide a boost to consumption and investment in the medium term and to keep Singapore competitive as a business location, without a major near-term injection of stimulus. On the expenditure side, the budget envisages increased investment in pharmaceuticals, chemicals, and bio-tech industries, with the aim of further diversifying Singapore’s manufacturing base. Against the background of a significant weakening in the world economy and a sharp downturn in the global electronics cycle, Singapore faces the prospect of a marked slowdown in growth in Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4o- ANNEX V 2001. Accordingly, the staff expects that Singapore’s growth will slow to around 4 percent in 2001, before picking up gradually in 2002, but likely remaining below the estimated range of potential growth. Even with the downgrading of growth forecasts, however, the risks to the short-term outlook appear tilted to the downside. Although there are reasonable prospects that the slowdown will be relatively short-lived, the outlook remains clouded by considerable uncertainty, and a steeper and more prolonged downturn cannot be ruled out. Beyond the near term, the outlook for Singapore continues to be positive and is likely to be strongly influenced by the ongoing efforts to diversify the economic base, upgrade skills, and liberalize key sectors of the economy. Public hformafion Notices (PINS) are issued, (i) at the request of a member country, following the conclusion of the Article IV consultation for countries seeking to make known the views of the IMF to the public. This action is intended to strengthen IMF surveillance over the economic policies of member countries by increasing the transparency of the IMF’s assessment of these policies; and (ii) following policy discussions in the Executive Board at the decision of the Board. , J Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public