DOCUMENT OF INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND NOT FOR PUBLIC USE SMlOOl258 CONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION November 20,200O To: Members of the Executive Board From: The Secretary Subject: Myanmar-Staff Report for the 2000 Article IV Consultation Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staff report for the 2000 Article IV consultation with Myanmar, which is proposed to be brought to the agenda for discussion on Monday, December 4, 2000. As of the time this paper is circulated to the Board, the Secretary’s Department has received a communication from the authorities of Myanmar indicating their preference not to publish it. Questions may be referred to Mr. S. Schwartz (ext. 37740) and Mr. Soueid (ext. 39649). Unless the Documents Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the WTO Secretariat on Thursday, November 30, 2000; and to the Asian Development Bank following its consideration by the Executive Board. Att: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicCONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND MYANMAR Staff Report for the 2000 Article IV Consultation Prepared by the Staff Representatives for the 2000 Consultation with Myanmar Approved by R. Anthony Elson and Mark Allen November 17,200O l Discussions for the 2000 Article IV consultation were held in Yangon during September 7- 19, 2000. The mission met with Minister of Finance and Revenue, U Khin Maung Thein; Governor of the Central Bank of Myanmar, U Kyaw Kyaw Maung; Minister to the Office of the Chairman of the State Peace and Development Council (SPDC), David 0. Abel; as well as with other senior officials and private sector representatives. The 1999 Article IV consultation was concluded on October 13, 1999. l The staff team comprised Messrs. Schwartz (head), Soueid, Rumpeltin (all APD), and Barinshtein (STA). Mr. Elson (APD) participated in the discussions from September 12-15. The team was assisted by staff of the World Bank (Mr. Hood) and AsDB (Ms. Tamura), who joined the mission to update their respective structural and poverty assessments, Mr. Hoezoo (STA) accompanied the mission to provide follow-up technical assistance in balance of payments statistics. l Surveillance of Myanmar’s economic and financial developments is severely hampered by the scant provision of data between consultations. The data are also subject to long reporting lags and inconsistencies, and suffer from serious shortcomings in quality and coverage. l Myanmar continues to avail itself of the transitional arrangements under Article XIV although it has eliminated all Article XIV restrictions. Myanmar maintains exchange restrictions and multiple currency practices subject to Article VIII jurisdiction. l The authorities do not wish to consider publication of the Article IV staff report at this stage, and have opted not to issue a PIN. l The principal author of this report is Mr. Schwartz. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2- Contents Page I. Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... 3 Il. Background and Recent Developments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5 III. Near-term Outlook and Policies.. ......... . .............................................................................. 10 A. Macroeconomic Outlook and Policies .................................................................... 10 B. Structural Policies ................................................................................................... 13 IV. Medium-Tern1 Prospects ,.................................................................................................... 15 V. Staff Appraisal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16 Text Boxes 1. Poverty and Human Development.. ..................................................................................... .4 2. Foreign Direct Investment ................................................................................................... .6 3. Detemlinants of Inflation.. .................................................................................................... 8 Charts 1. External Indicators, 1995/96- 1999/00.. .............................................................................. 18 2. Selected Economic Indicators, 1995/96-l 999100.. ............................................................. 19 3. Public Sector Developments, 1995/96-l 999/00.. .............................................................. .20 Tables 1. Selected Economic Indicators, 1995/96-2000/01.. ............................................................ .2 1 2. Summary Operations of the Nonfinancial Public Sector , 1997/98-2000/01..................... 22 3. Monetary Authorities’ Accounts and Monetary Survey, 1996/97-2000/O 1. ..................... .23 4. Balance of Payments, 1995/96-2000/O 1.. .......................................................................... .24 5. External Debt and Arrears, 1995/96-1999/00 ................................................................... .25 6. Medium-Term Scenario, 1997/98-2005/06.. ..................................................................... .26 7. Policy Reform Scenario, 1997/98-2005106.. ..................................................................... .27 Annexes I. Social Indicators.. ............................................................................................................... .28 II. Recent Changes in the Exchange and Trade System.. ....................................................... .29 Ill. Statistical Issues.. ............................................................................................................... .30 IV. Fund Relations ................................................................................................................... .34 V. Relations with the World Bank Group.. ............................................................................. .36 VI. Relations with the Asian Development Bank.. .................................................................. .37 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3- 1. INTRODUCTION 1. At the conclusion of the 1999 Article IV consultation, Executive Directors expressed serious concern about the precarious state of the economy. Foreign reserves were low, external arrears and the use of administrative controls were increasing, and poverty was widespread. They noted that structural reform remained stalled, and that investor interest was lacking. Directors urged the authorities not to delay initiating reforms across a broad range of areas, including unification of the exchange rate, granting greater autonomy to the central bank, strengthening the tax effort to restore spending levels on infrastructure and social needs, restructuring state enterprises, and liberalizing trade and exchange restrictions. They viewed these as a prerequisite for the resumption of external financial assistance. 2. Against a backdrop of entrenched macroeconomic imbalances, policy-making in recent years has perpetuated a vicious circle of ad hoc controls and deteriorating economic prospects. This contrasts with the progress achieved during 1988-93, when private sector activity and foreign investment were liberalized. While the reforms succeeded in breaking with the isolationist and command economy prior to 1988, liberalization was only partial, and the reform effort stalled. In recent years, fiscal deficits have routinely been monetized, leading to rapid monetary growth and periods of high inflation.’ Chronic foreign exchange shortages have induced the authorities to introduce a variety of import and administrative controls whose effect, ultimately, has further constrained reserves by undermining exports and foreign investment. 3. Economic performance has fallen well short of Myanmar’s considerable potential, and poverty is endemic. Weak governance has contributed to this outcome. Decision-making powers are highly concentrated, and policy implementation is frequently arbitrary and non- transparent. According to the most recent household expenditure survey, in 1997 nearly one- quarter of households, or about 13 million people, had expenditures Myanmar Development Indicators (1993-98) below minimum subsistence levels. --Pacific Life Expectancy (years) 60 69 63 Malnutrition and mortality rates are Child Mortality Rate (per 1000) 118 43 92 high, and public expenditure on health Child Malnutrition (o/b) 43 20 and education, which has been falling Pubhc Expendlhre Health (% of GDP) 0.2 1.7 1.3 as a share of GDP, is exceptionally low Educatlon (% of-GDP) 1.2 2.9 3.2 by international standards (Box 1 and Source: 2000 World Bank Development Indicators. J Annex I). Though harshly criticized by the authorities for its methodology and use of outdated data, the World Health Organization’s most recent World Health Report ranked Myanmar 190 out of 191 countries in overall performance of the health care system. 4. There is a large gap between official and private sector accounts of economic developments, underlining the severity of problems with the statistical database. While official data for 1999/00 (fiscal year ending March 3 1) point to favorable economic developments, marked by rapid output growth and low inflation, independent observers remain skeptical. Assessments are hindered by the lack of timely and reliable economic ‘The Central Bank of Myanmar (CBM), which is a department within the Ministry of Finance, lacks autonomy and automatically finances budget deficits. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4- Box 1. Poverty and Human Development’ Education expenditure is low and falling. Myanmar devoted just 0.6 percent of GDP to public expenditure on education in 1999/00, compared to 3.3 percent for low-income countries. Despite a number of new programs to improve the accessibility and quality of education, the share of the budget devoted to education has fallen steeply for a decade, from almost 20 percent in 1991/92 to 11 percent in 1999/00. Data from a 1997 Ministry of Health/UNICEF survey showed a primary school enrollment rate of 80 percent, which exceeds the 76 percent average for low-income countries. However, the secondary school enrollment rate is only 34 percent compared with 5 1 percent for low-income countries. Official figures show improvements in education indicators over the period 1989190 to 1998199, which is difficult to reconcile with the sharp decline in public expenditure. There is evidence that private expenditures have risen to offset in part the falling public provision of education services. Public expenditure on health services is also low and falling. In 1999/00 public health expenditure was just 2.8 percent of the budget, equivalent to 0.2 percent of GDP, and only one-tenth the average level of low-income countries. In principle, all citizens have health care coverage. A public health care plan covers the 400,000 workers registered for social security, and the military provides its own medical facilities. The remainder of the population is eligible for free health care through public hospitals. In practice, however, funding levels are inadequate to deliver these services, and increasingly those who can pay rely on services delivered through the growing private system. A bright spot is the relatively successful immunization program for children covering tuberculosis, diphtheria, pertussis, tetanus, polio? and measles, with 77 percent of one-year-olds fully immunized against these diseases. AIDS is an urgent problem. Official estimates put the number of cases of HIV/AIDS infection at 27,000 as of September 1999. However the LJNAIDS project estimates that there were over half a million cases as of end- 1999, with some 185,000 deaths by the end of 1998. The government has established the Myanmar National AIDS Program. Ignorance of the disease and risk factors have contributed to its spread. A broad range of national and international NGOs have come together to assist the government. Over 4,000 health and development workers are being trained. Nevertheless, the scale of the operation and resources are much smaller than in neighboring countries. Poverty remains high and income is not well distributed. Indicators of malnutrition and mortality rates are high. Death rates have fallen over the last two decades, but have done so at a much slower rate than in most other developing countries. Rates of rural and urban poverty are about the same although the majority of the poor (and population) live in rural areas. Rural poverty can be traced to lack of off-farm job opportunities as well as inappropriate policies including the high implicit taxation of key commodities and absence of private ownership of land. In urban areas the poor are concentrated in large townships at a distance from the city-center, where access to services and jobs is poor and travel costs are high. Policy-changes are needed to improve social sector outcomes. Agricultural policies are thwarting development in rural areas. In urban areas, development of the manufacturing sector is being hindered by inappropriate exchange rate and tax policies. The steady reduction in public expenditure on health and education is eroding human capital. The longer the delay in implementing policy changes, the greater will be the eventual cost of reversing the decline in social sector outcomes. ‘Prepared by World Bank staff, References: Ministry of Health and UNICEF? Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey, 1995 and 1997; World Bank? Myanmar: An Economic and Social Assessment, September 1999; World Bank, World Development Report. 2000 and 200 1. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-5- information-for the past two years the authorities have not published their annual official review of the economy (Review of the Financial, Economic, and Social Conditions). 5. In this environment, and in light of concerns about human rights and narcotics- trafficking, foreign investment and official support have dried up. After peaking in 1996/97 at $2.8 billion, foreign investment approvals have collapsed, to under $60 million in 1999/00 (Chart 1 and Box 2). Notwithstanding Myanmar’s admission to ASEAN in 1997, a rising tide of investment sanctions, withdrawal of preferential trade privileges, and consumer boycotts, have further dimmed economic prospects. No financing has been received from international financial institutions in well over a decade, II. BACKCROUNDANDRECENTDEVELOPMENTS 6. Given Myanmar’s limited integration with neighboring economies, the Asian financial crisis had only a limited impact on economic output. According to the latest official statistics, real GDP growth held up relatively well in 1997/98 and 1998/99, at 53/4 percent, down from an average of 6% percent the preceding two years (Table 1). The market-determined (FEC) exchange rate’ depreciated sharply following the collapse of the Thai baht in 1997, but stabilized from late- 1998, and thereafter closely followed the baht. With the depreciation, as well as the monetization of fiscal deficits (5% percent of GDP), inflation accelerated to almost 50 percent (period average) in 1998/99 (Chart 2). Gross reserves bottomed out at less than one month of imports in mid- 1997. 7. To help weather the crisis and conserve foreign exchange, the authorities have introduced an array of administrative measures. The majority were imposed in 1997-98, and remain in effect. They include a tightening of import controls, restrictions on private-sector commodity exports, and revocation of private banks’ foreign exchange licenses (Annex II). The controls were further tightened over the past year, with the banning of additional import items (mainly foodstuffs) in late 1999 and early 2000, and further reductions in the limit on remittances against FECS.~ Official debt service has been curtailed, with payments to the World Bank and Asian Development Bank (AsDB) suspended since 1998. ‘Foreign exchange certificates (FECs) were introduced in 1993 to facilitate transactions of tourists and foreign companies. FECs are U.S. dollar-denominated and are issued by the CBM against hard currencies. They can be exchanged for kyat at a market-determined rate or held as FEC-denominated bank deposits. There are restrictions on conversion of FECs to dollars. ‘Reflecting a partial easing of controls, the $300 conversion requirement for tourists was reduced to $200 in July 2000. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-6- Box 2. Foreign Direct Investment’ Foreign investment approvals peaked in 1996/97 at $2.8 billion, but have subsequently collapsed to only $58 million in 1999/2000. In response to the market liberalization policies of the late 1980s and early 199Os, foreign investors flocked to Myanmar, attracted by low labor costs and the country’s considerable natural resource base. More recently, however, investors have shunned the economy, citing arbitrary and inconsistent government regulations, official corruption, and the political stigma associated with investing in Myanmar. Investment flows from neighboring countries have also been adversely affected by the Asian financial crisis. The shares of FDI by country of origin have remained steady for several years. Singapore is the largest investor, followed by the U.K. (and its possessions), Thailand, and Malaysia. The oil and gas sector has attracted the largest share (about one-third) of foreign investment, with projects valued at $2.3 billion. The sector is dominated by a few large projects, including the Yadana and Yetagun natural gas pipelines (operated by a consortium of corporations from France, the U.K., the U.S., Thailand, Japan, and Malaysia). The manufacturing ($1.5 billion), and hotels and tourism ($1 billion) sectors have also attracted large investments. Investment promotion incentives are provided under a 1988 Foreign Investment Law. The incentives, which were extended to domestic investors in 1994 under the Myanmar Citizen Investment Law, include a three-year corporate tax holiday, a three-year exemption from import duties on capital goods and raw materials, permission to repatriate profits and capital (subject to review of financial statements), and a 50 percent reduction in taxes on income from exported goods. To qualify, a minimum investment of $500,000 is required ($300,000 in the manufacturing and service sectors). The law is administered by the Myanmar Investment Commission (MIC). Investors commonly report that the investment law is cumbersome and is administered in a non-transparent manner. In contrast to investment promotion agencies found elsewhere, the MIC does not function as a “one-stop shop.” Investors must deal separately with many different ministries. For example, land-lease agreements must be negotiated with the Ministry of Construction, import license arrangements must be made with the Customs Department, and so on. As they wind their way through the approval process, investors have few assurances of receiving endorsements at the next Ministry or agency. Indeed, some foreign companies have reportedly been denied permission to import necessary inputs after operations had been set up, even though they thought they had secured all approvals in advance. A series of international sanctions and resolutions against Myanmar in recent years has also contributed to the decline in investment. The European Union adopted a Common Position on Myanmar in 1996, reaffirming its suspension of non-humanitarian aid. In addition to withdrawing GSP privileges (along with the EU and Canada), the United States imposed sanctions in 1997 banning new investment in Myanmar (existing investment was unaffected). The International Labor Organization has also issued a series of resolutions against oppressive labor conditions. ‘Prepared with input from World Bank staff. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-7- 8. According to official statistics, real GDP growth accelerated sharply in 1999/00, to Contributions to GDP Growth 10.9 percent, well above previous estimates and 1997/98 1998/99 1999100 targets. Growth was spurred by an 11 L/2 percent Real GDP Growth 5.7 5.8 10.9 increase in agricultural output (including forestry, Contributions to growth. of which: 1.6 4.9 livestock, and fisheries), largely due to favorable Agriculture 11 2.0 Energy & Mining 0.5 0.1 0.8 weather conditions.4 The government attributes Manufacturing 0.5 0.6 1.3 much of the increase to the success of its initiatives Construction 0.5 0:3 0.2 Services & Trade 2.7 2.8 3.1 to encourage greater land use, multiple cro P ping, Source: Data provided by the Myanmar authorities. and the use of high yielding seed varieties. II Includes agriculture. forestry. livestock & fisheries. Manufacturing output increased as well, particularly in the agricultural processing and export- oriented garments sectors; the energy sector also grew rapidly (though from a low base), with the starting of operations of offshore gas projects, as did services and trade. On the demand side, investment was up sharply (13% percent), reflecting the expansion in agriculture and garments, and an increase in inventories of food crops. 9. Officially reported inflation, meanwhile, has fallen to its lowest level in well over a decade. Inflation fell to about 3 percent for the twelve-month period through June. Much of the decline is due to stable food prices (with a weight of 65 percent in the CPI index) associated with the increase in agricultural output, as well as to the stable exchange rate from late-1998 through early-2000 (Box 3). The decline is also attributable to administrative measures, including the introduction of “tax-free markets.“6 Anecdotal evidence points to other factors, including government pressure on merchants and foreign exchange dealers. 10. Further contributing to the reduction in inflation was a narrowing of the 1999/00 fiscal deficit, and a somewhat reduced reliance on CBM financing. The consolidated fiscal deficit fell by more than a full percentage point of GDP, to 4% percent (Table 2 and Chart 3). This was achieved despite a weak performance on the revenue side, with tax receipts falling to an exceptionally low 2’/2 percent of GDP. The authorities attribute the decline in the tax ratio to: (i) the orientation of growth toward the agricultural sector, which is largely untaxed; (ii) a decline in customs revenues owing to a reduction in overall imports and to a shift in the 4The growth of agriculture-accounting for 60 percent of GDP and two-thirds of total employment-had been disappointing in recent years, averaging only 4 percent in 1997/98 and 1998/99. Production was weighed down by unfavorable weather, fertilizer shortages, and a weak incentive structure. ‘Under the land reclamation scheme, large-scale entrepreneurs are provided land on a 30-year lease free of charge, are given the right to export 50 percent of their production of restricted goods (e.g., rice), receive technical support and infrastructure development, and have access to preferential, low interest rate loans. Despite these incentives, as of 1999/00, reclaimed land accounted for less than 1 percent of cultivated acreage. 6”Tax-free markets” were initially introduced in Yangon, and have now spread to other parts of the country. Their main attraction is in allowing producers to sell directly to consumers, thus reducing marketing and distribution costs. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 8 - Box 3. Determinants of Inflation fhe CPI has declined for seven consecutive months (seasonally adjusted) through June 2000, bringing inflation to its lowest level in over a decade. However, caution needs to be exercised in ,nterpreting the decline. The official CPI suffers from a number of statistical problems, and may not rccurately reflect the true level of inflation (Annex III).’ Also, independent observers have questioned the accuracy of the official data. Based on anecdotal evidence and price surveys. they estimate inflation closer :o 30-50 percent in 1999/00 (compared with the official Figure of 1 I % percent), and suggest that any observed decline in inflation is due to artificial price repression. h The historical pattern of inflation exhibits large swings. Brief periods of relatively low inflation have been Followed by much higher and prolonged bursts (see Figure). The most recent decline is striking both for its 1 magnitude, and duration. IO Ai\ !i 2 Regression analysis reveals that the main drivers of ‘,%? ,Wj ,*., ,995 ,% ,*, ,99B I% 2ow inflationary trends in Myanmar are economic output, followed by broad money growth, and exchange rate depreciation.* From this perspective, the recent Jecline in inflation is not surprising, given the large increase in agricultural output (increased supply), the relatively stable exchange rate, and reduced monetization of the fiscal deficit in 1999/00. However, taken together, these factors account for less than two-thirds of the observed decline in inflation (the model predicts inflation of 18 percent in June, compared with an actual rate of 3 percent). Price repression, achieved through administrative measures and moral suasion, may also explain variations in inflation, Evidence of this comes from the fact that, as noted above, a large share of the recent reduction in inflation cannot be accounted for econometrically. Price repression is also evident from a decomposition of the CPI series into inflationary and non-inflationary periods. 3 Every non-inflationary period has been preceded by a period of extremely high inflation, and has been followed by an extended inflationary period (both relative to historical averages). This pattern-high inflation interrupted by brief interludes of declining prices, and subsequently followed by inflationary bursts-is suggestive of price repression, as it reflects sharp deviations from trend that cannot be reasonably explained by developments in other economic variables. There is also evidence from the behavior of gold prices (gold serves as an important store of value during inflationary periods) that inflationary expectations have remained high, even during periods of low inflation. ‘The authorities plan to publish a newly constructed CPI index to address some of these problems. For the recent period, the new index shows even lower inflation than the old index. *The dependent variable was the first difference in the CPI level; the independent variables consisted of a combination of the following independent variables, in levels or in first differences, depending on the specification: gold prices, FEC exchange rate, tax revenues, reserve money, broad money, and electricity production [as a proxy for monthly output). The model with the best fit was with first differences in non- seasonally adjusted CPI on levels of broad money, the FEC rate, and electricity generation. ‘Over the sample period beginning in 1992, every period (month) was classified as either inflationary (annualized inflation greater than 10 percent) or non-inflationary (less than 10 percent). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-9- composition of imports toward lower duty, essential items; and, (iii) perhaps most significantly, to weak tax compliance. The decline in the fiscal deficit was thus brought about entirely by cuts in expenditure, including both capital spending, as a number of infrastructure projects were completed, and current expenditure of the state economic enterprises (SEES). 11. Accelerating a trend begun in 1998199, ‘O ~T.BondsHe,dByPnr,,rBsn~ the public sector deficit was financed by large w ~‘b”“amofkYP” placements of treasury bonds. Strong demand for )0 the bonds by commercial banks led to a reduction 4. in the reliance on central bank financing. While interest rates on government bonds are 30 . considerably lower than bank lending rates, 20 . demand was strong given high bank liquidity 10 stemming from rapid deposit growth (50 percent 0 year-on-year through end-March) and given that Mar 98 Mar99 hmw seQ99 Dcz!xJ MvMJ May 00 the bonds can be counted against banks’ reserve requirements.’ Consequently, the share of commercial bank credit to the government rose from 3 percent to 14 percent during 1999/00. 70 60 50 40 50 20 10 0 12. At the beginning of the current fiscal year on April 1, a five-fold wage increase was granted to civil servants and military personnel.* The increase was the first wage adjustment since 1993-during which time the CPI has risen by a cumulative 350 percent-and affects around 1.3 million public servants, including soldiers, teachers, and state enterprise employees. The budgetary impact for the public sector in 2000/01 is about kyat 50 billion (2 percent of GDP), and is to be partially offset by cuts in other current and capital government expenditures. 13. In view of the decline in inflation, and with the aim of stimulating economic activity, the central bank lowered interest rates on April 1. The central bank rate was reduced by 2 percentage points, to 10 percent, following a 3 point cut a year earlier. Bank deposit and lending rates, which are administratively linked to the central bank rate, fell by a percentage point. Even so, real rates turned positive, given the steep decline in inflation. 14. Official reserves remain precariously low, at around $340 million through end- August, the equivalent of less than two months of imports. While the current account deficit narrowed in 1999/00 by over $200 million (to $710 million, or 7% percent of official GDP valued at a weighted exchange rate), the capital account weakened as foreign direct investment and loan disbursements continued to decline (Table 4). The narrowing of the current account ‘New issuance during 1999/00 consisted mainly of 5-year treasury bonds that carried an interest rate of 11 percent through end-March 2000, falling to 9 percent in April (bond rates are administratively linked to the central bank rate). By comparison, bank lending rates were 16 percent at end-March, falling to 15 percent in April. ‘Salaries of public servants in Myanmar are notoriously low, and are only a fraction of pay scales found in the private sector. Even after the increase, the civil service pay scale ranges from about $10 to $40 per month (at the market exchange rate). This does not include additional in- kind benefits, such as transportation and subsidized rice and fuel. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- IO- deficit was mainly due to import compression (-6% percent in dollar terms), due in part to the intensification of import and exchange controls; the winding down of infrastructure projects also resulted in a sharp fall in capital goods imports. Overall export growth was sluggish (1% percent in dollar terms), as strong sales of manufactured goods (especially garments) failed to offset a decline in agro-based exports. Myanmar’s reduced access to concessional loans has resulted in a shift in the composition of capital inflows toward commercial credits, particularly from the People’s Republic of China for imports of capital goods. Consequently, the authorities’ debt- servicing priorities have shifted over time toward commercial, rather than concessional bilateral and multilateral debts. Total arrears amounted to almost 40 percent of external debt at end- 1999/00 (Table 5), and continue to rise, including to the World Bank and AsDB. III. NEAR-TERI\~ OUTLOOK AND POLICIES A. Macroeconomic Outlook and Policies 15. A key issue of the discussions 160 concerned the credibility of official estimates of GDP growth in 1999/00. The 140 staff noted inconsistencies between indicators of economic activity on the one I20 hand-falling imports and flat tax revenue, among others-and the reported double-digit 1~ GDP growth rate on the other. Independent observers remain skeptical of the authorities’ 8o estimates, putting growth anywhere between O-6 percent9 The staff inquired whether 60 technical factors, such as a change in Selected Indicators 01 Economic Activlry (199Si96 - 100) Imports IUSS) 19?W96 l996!97 1997198 1998r99 ,999/00 I60 loo 80 60 methodology for calculating GDP or an understatedGDP deflator, may have led to an overestimation of real growth. The authorities responded that they were confident in their estimates, and ruled out technical factors (there had been no change in methodology). The apparent inconsistencies between other indicators could be explained by the orientation of growth toward the agricultural sector, which is largely untaxed, and is not import-dependent. 16. While acknowledging that outcomes for 1999/00 had been favorable, the mission noted that the outlook for 2000/01 is considerably weaker.” Real GDP growth is likely to decelerate to 5% percent, as agricultural output levels off from last year’s increase. Inflation is projected to increase to 15 percent by end-year, as the effects of recent exchange rate depreciation feed through, and more importantly, as the effects of the public sector wage increase take hold. The authorities agreed that the favorable outcomes for GDP growth and inflation were unlikely to be repeated this year. However, they were more optimistic than staff about prospects for inflation, arguing that measures the staff viewed as having only a temporary effect (e.g., tax-free markets) would be more enduring. ‘Skepticism was heightened in July after a statement by the Deputy Minister of National Planning dismissing official growth figures as exaggerated. He was subsequently dismissed. ‘“In light of data weaknesses, the projections are subject to more than the usual degree of uncertainty. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- ll- 17. The external position is also expected to remain weak. The current account deficit is likely to narrow further in 2000/01 as exports from the Yetagun and Yadana gas projects materialize, and as imports, constrained by restrictions and a decline in public sector imports associated with planned cuts in capital expenditures, remain compressed. Prospects for the capital account are not strong, with FDI inflows and loan disbursements projected to continue to decline. On this basis, gross reserves by end-year would remain close to present levels (1 ‘/ months of imports) and, with no strategy currently in place to normalize relations with creditors, external payments arrears would rise by another $200 million. Monetary and exchange rate policy 18. The mission stressed that unification of the official exchange rate with the market rate is a priority for the reform agenda. The official exchange rate, which applies to about 30 percent of total trade (all by the public sector), is severely overvalued (about 6 kyat per dollar compared to the market rate of over 380).” As such, the exchange regime contributes to a misallocation of resources, creates rent-seeking, and distorts economic statistics. Moreover, by waiting to reform the system, the authorities have allowed the distortions to grow over time, as the market and official exchange rates continue to diverge by wider and wider margins. Once unification is complete, a flexible exchange rate regime would be appropriate given the low level of reserves. 19. The authorities agreed with the merits of unifying the exchange rate, but were reluctant to proceed without assurances of external financing. The recent turbulence in regional exchange markets gave them pause, and they were concerned that exchange rate unification might not be a smooth process in any case. They were also apprehensive about social instability arising from higher domestic prices, as importing SEES would need to pass on higher import prices to consumers.‘* The authorities thus argued that an exchange stabilization fund and social safety net would first need to be in place. The staff accepted that unification might entail short-term costs; however, by sending a signal of the authorities’ intent to reform the economy, unification would boost confidence and encourage stabilizing capital inflows. 20. The mission discussed proposals for gradual unification. The staff noted that no progress had been made over the past year toward gradual unification, possibly because of “Foreign exchange is allocated to state economic enterprises (SEES) through the foreign exchange budget at the official exchange rate. The system acts as a subsidy to importing SEES and as a tax on exporting SEES. The ability of SEES to import at less than l/50 the price that would be paid by the private sector gives rise to high effective rates of protection. All private sector transactions are conducted at the market exchange rate. “Rough staff calculations put the inflationary impulse of a one-time unification at around 20 percent. Unification would also have a budgetary impact. Current estimates suggest that as a group, SEES would benefit from unification (the gains to exporting enterprises would more than offset the losses to importing enterprises), while the central government would bear losses. These estimates, which would need to be refined using detailed SEE balance sheet data, indicate the overall effect on the consolidated public sector would be negligible. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12- difficulties in selecting individual SEES to remove from access to foreign exchange at the official rate (as proposed in last year’s consultation). The mission developed two alternatives: l Mixing rates. Unification could be achieved by gradually reducing the share of foreign exchange bought and sold through the foreign exchange budget at the official rate. Whereas 100 percent of SEES’ foreign exchange revenues and expenditures were currently conducted at the official rate, the share could be gradually reduced on a pre-announced schedule. Greater flexibility should be given to SEES, who would be given time to adjust to the new cost structure under the gradual phasing. The approach would apply to SEES uniformly, obviating any need to choose SEES selectively. l Taxes and subsidies. A second approach would be to eliminate the official exchange rate all at once, and replace it by an explicit system of taxes and subsidies (included in the budget) to offset exactly the financial impact of unification on SEE operations. SEES’ financial positions would remain unchanged, but elimination of the dual exchange system would have the benefit of freezing the implicit taxes and subsidies at current levels. The taxes and subsidies would then be withdrawn gradually to allow SEES time to adjust. The authorities welcomed the staff proposals for gradual unification. In their view, however, a stabilization buffer may still be required, and technical assistance would be needed to quantify the impact of unification and the necessary level of taxes and subsidies. 21. Automatic deficit financing by the central bank has undermined sound economic management, and has contributed to high inflation. The mission stressed the importance of improving the operating framework for monetary policy by, among other things, imposing limits on access to CBM deficit financing. A degree of autonomy in formulating and implementing monetary policy needs to be vested in the CBM, with a view to establishing its full independence for policy making over time. 22. Greater flexibility in interest rate determination is also needed. The authorities explained that the decline in inflation had provided scope to ease interest rates, and that the recent cuts had not led to deposit withdrawals. However, the staff cautioned that there was a risk that real interest rates could again become negative if inflation picked up. Thus, interest rates may need to rise in the period ahead to ensure that they remain positive in real terms. Ultimately, the system of administratively controlled interest rates should be eliminated. The authorities responded that, while they had no plans to eliminate controls, they intended to adjust interest rates flexibly, in both directions. They indicated that deposit rate ceilings had been useful in preventing private banks (which had only begun operations in 1992) from engaging in harmful competition, while lending rate caps had helped contain business costs. Fiscal policy 23. While welcoming the narrowing of the fiscal deficit in 1999/00, the staff expressed concern about the way it had been achieved. The deficit had been curtailed entirely through expenditure restraint, rather than through progress on revenues. The authorities noted that curtailment of spending reflected efforts to reduce nonproductive expenditure. While this was a sound objective, the staff noted that, given Myanmar’s substantial infrastructure needs, there was a risk that additional cuts in capital and social spending might diminish medium-term Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13- growth prospects. On the revenue side, formal tax collection, at only 2% percent in 1999/00, has fallen over time, and is exceptionally low by international standards. To restore spending on pressing social needs, the mission urged a step-up in the revenue effort by improving tax compliance and limiting exemptions. The authorities requested technical assistance in this area, and in implementing a value-added tax. Further, although budgeted defense spending has fallen as a share of GDP, it is still more than twice as high as social spending (based on the 1999/00 outcome). The staff therefore saw scope to reallocate resources toward the social sector. 24. The staff projected the fiscal deficit to widen to 6 percent of GDP in 2000/01. With offsets anticipated in capital and nonwage expenditures, the deficit would widen by somewhat less than the 2 percent of GDP increase in spending on public sector wages. The authorities hoped to contain the deficit to no more than 5 percent of GDP, based on higher revenue collection than projected by the mission, and additional cuts in capital and SEE expenditures. While welcoming efforts to contain the deficit, the staff had reservations about prospects for higher revenue collection (no specific measures had been implemented), as well as the viability of plans to contain expenditures. Roughly half of the projected deficit would be expected to be financed by placements of government bonds. B. Structural Policies 25. To enhance Myanmar’s medium-term growth prospects, the staff urged the authorities to reduce government intervention and liberalize the economy. The increasing resort to ad hoc administrative controls, while tempting given the foreign exchange constraint, had been counterproductive. The private sector (which now accounts for over three-fourths of GDP), remained subject to an array of controls and restrictions that were discouraging investment and exports. While accepting that the reform task would be easier with the support of external financial assistance, the mission reiterated that much could be achieved before such support was secured, and urged the authorities not to delay undertaking reforms. Trade and exchange system 26. A key priority is the removal of trade and exchange restrictions. The mission expressed regret that the controls imposed since 1997 had not been loosened and had, to the contrary, been tightened over the past year. The staff also urged the authorities to eliminate the vast array of export controls and disincentives. I3 The authorities agreed with the medium-term desirability of eliminating import restrictions, but argued that these had been necessitated by the limited foreign reserves position. Myanmar continues to maintain exchange restrictions and multiple currency practices subject to Fund approval under Article VIII. Exchange restrictions arise from limits on purchases of foreign exchange by residents for foreign travel and from prior approval requirements on the remittable portion of wages of nonresidents, as well as from the monthly limits on conversion of FECs for payments and transfers relating to invisible and other ‘3Myanmar’s tariff levels range from O-40 percent, with an average rate of about 6 percent (reflecting the widespread granting of exemptions, the effective rate is only about 2 percent). Under AFTA, tariffs on an inclusion list will be reduced to O-5 percent by 2008. Since January 1999, exports have been subject to a 10 percent tax (consisting of a 2 percent income tax and 8 percent commercial tax), payable in foreign exchange. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14- current international transactions. A multiple currency practice arises from the divergence between the exchange rate used for official transactions and the FEC rate. Agriculture 27. The staff urged further liberalization of agriculture, Farmers should be permitted greater latitude to export their crops. The monopoly of state enterprises in major exports, including rice, rubber, cotton, and teak has constrained the growth of the private sector; reduced the quality of key crops, and undermined export growth. l4 The mission stressed the benefits of gradually dismantling the procurement system, whereby farmers are required to sell a quota of their rice crop (and more recently, pulses and beans) to the government at below market prices, and replacing it with a more transparent tax.” The authorities disagreed that the procurement system had been a burden to producers, noting that any costs were offset by an “advance purchase system” and provision of agricultural extension services (e.g., training).16 Finally, the mission noted that the land reclamation effort carried environmental and financial risks, and that efforts to enhance productivity would be more fruitful. Privatization and State Enterprise Reform 28. The mission recommended that greater efforts be undertaken to implement SEE reform. This would improve economic efficiency and stem the drain on the public finances. SEES should be increasingly subject to hard budget constraints. In tandem with gradual exchange rate unification, greater flexibility in their pricing should also be introduced, and management should be carried out on a commercial basis. 29. The mission also observed that privatization had so far been limited to small-scale operations, and had been based on a piecemeal approach. The staff encouraged the authorities to develop a more comprehensive program. The authorities noted that privatization was an inherently slow process. Their program had delivered results, and progress would have been faster were it not for shortages of capital and managerial skills in the private sector.” ‘“According to the Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research, Myanmar was the world’s largest rice exporter prior to WWII. In contrast, rice exports in 2000 are projected to amount to less than 5 percent of that of the world’s current largest exporter, Thailand. “For 1999/00, the staff estimates the implicit tax from the procurement system to have amounted to 1% percent of GDP, over half of the total yield of the formal tax system. 16The advance payment system, in which farmers receive pre-payments from the government for their procurement quota, was recently increased from 50 percent to 100 percent. “A total of 124 factories, cinema halls, and hotels have been privatized since the program’s inception in 1995. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 15- Financial sector 30. The staff discussed the status of banking supervision and the overall health of the banking system. The authorities explained that the Asian financial crisis had been a wake-up call to the vulnerabilities that could emerge in the banking sector, and they were determined to avoid problems that had developed elsewhere in the region. Private banks were generally profitable and had high returns on equity. Moreover, their client base was expanding steadily, and private banks now accounted for two-thirds of the total loans and deposits of the banking system. The system-wide level of NPLs had fallen somewhat over the past two years (from 7 percent to 5 percent at end-March 2000), but there was a large variation across banks, with a few of them reporting much higher NPL levels.” The authorities indicated they had intensified their monitoring efforts, and were in close contact with the management of banks with high NPLs in order to develop plans for gradual reductions. To strengthen their monitoring capacity further, the authorities requested technical assistance in banking supervision. 31. The staff encouraged the authorities to develop plans to modernize and enhance the efficiency of the banking system. It would be important to ensure a level-playing field for all banks, and advantages accorded to state-owned banks (i.e., the exclusive right to handle foreign exchange transactions, and regulatory forbearance in enforcing capital adequacy ratios) should be withdrawn. Joint-venture participation and foreign bank licenses should also be encouraged. The authorities believed the domestic banking system was not yet ready for the introduction of foreign banks. While this would be permitted in the future, in their view domestic banks still needed time to develop and, in any case, foreign interest was still lacking. Statistical issues 32. Shortcomings in Myanmar’s statistics and data dissemination inhibit policy formulation, Fund surveillance, and private sector assessments of economic developments. Problems arise from long reporting lags, the recording of external transactions at the official exchange rate, incomplete coverage, definitions that do not conform to international standards, and inconsistencies in intersectoral accounts. The staff noted that, following technical assistance provided in monetary ( 1998 and 1999) and BOP (1999) statistics, there had been improvements in the quality of monetary statistics, and some limited progress in compiling BOP data. The authorities agreed that efforts were needed to strengthen data dissemination, including data provision to the Fund. They hoped to improve the quality and timeliness of economic statistics, and requested further Fund technical assistance. IV. MEDIUM-TERRY PROSPECTS 33. Medium-term prospects would be constrained under a continuation of present policies, but would be considerably brighter with comprehensive reforms. The staffs baseline medium-term scenario projects that growth would trend down to 4 percent by 2004105 (Table 6). Following the exceptionally high levels recorded in 1999/00, agricultural growth would decelerate, and would be constrained over the medium term by foreign exchange shortages and disincentives to private sector activity. Industrial production and services growth 18NPLs in Myanmar are defined as loans that are more than 6 months overdue. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 16- would decline for similar reasons. Notwithstanding favorable prospects for the energy sector,” the forei n exchange constraint would persist, as FDI and new loan disbursements remain limited. 8 In contrast, a scenario with comprehensive reforms would be associated with larger capital inflows and higher domestic and foreign investment, leading to more rapid GDP and export growth (Table 7). In light of the need to increase reserve cover and eliminate external arrears, the reform scenario also assumes debt restructuring and concessional support from the international financial community. V. STAFF APPRAISAL 34. The near-term outlook for growth and inflation is considerably less strong than suggested by recent favorable developments. Growth is likely to decelerate and inflation is projected to increase. With the fiscal deficit widening due to the public sector wage increase, the growth of monetary aggregates will remain high. The external position is expected to remain weak, despite an increase in gas exports, as FDI inflows and loan disbursements continue to fall. 35. The present stance of structural and macroeconomic policies is unsustainable. In large part, this reflects weak governance and an increasingly ad hoc and nontransparent approach to economic policy-making and implementation. A better coordinated policy-making framework would enhance the sustainability and continuity of policies. The recent favorable growth and inflation outcomes, and the regional recovery, provide an opportunity to initiate the reform process and place macroeconomic policies on a sustainable path. 36. A pressing reform is unification of the exchange system. The present arrangement is an enduring symbol of the authorities’ unwillingness to liberalize the economy. While the authorities are reluctant to proceed without external support, the staff believes a gradual approach to unification is possible before external assistance is secured. The staff has developed proposals for unification that overcome a number of impediments identified by the authorities. 37. Another priority is the removal of trade and exchange restrictions. Little or no progress has been made in liberalizing restrictions imposed in 1997 and 1998. To the contrary, restrictions have intensified over the past year with a tightening of import controls and a further reduction in the limit on remittances. Liberalization of these controls would encourage greater foreign investment and boost exports. In addition, the vast array of export controls and disincentives should be removed. Myanmar maintains restrictions and multiple currency practices that are subject to Fund jurisdiction under Article VIII. In view of the absence of a clear timetable for their elimination, the staff does not recommend their approval. “The authorities anticipate significant foreign exchange earnings from offshore gas fields, and are undertaking further exploration activities. Gas exports are projected to yield $ lOO-$200 million per year over the medium term. ” Reflecting the decline in access to concessional bilateral and multilateral lending (and the increase in arrears to those creditors), disbursements would increasingly consist of commercial (suppliers’) credits. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17- 38. The narrowing of the 1999/00 fiscal deficit is welcome, but the way it was achieved raises concern. The deficit was curtailed entirely through expenditure restraint, rather than through progress in revenues. Cutting nonproductive expenditures is a sound objective, but care needs to be exercised so that Myanmar’s infrastructure and social needs are met. Myanmar’s formal tax collection is exceptionally low, and health and education spending levels are inadequate. Restoring spending levels will require an improvement in the revenue effort. Non- transparent mechanisms of revenue collection, including the agricultural procurement system, should be replaced by more efficient tax measures. In the staffs view, there is also scope to reallocate defense spending toward the social sector. 39. Efforts should be made to accelerate SEE reform and privatization. This is needed to improve economic efficiency and stem the drain on the public finances. SEES should increasingly be run on a commercial basis and, in tandem with gradual exchange rate unification, should be given greater flexibility in their pricing. Privatization has been slow, and has so far been based on a piecemeal approach. A more comprehensive program needs to be developed, based on a reassessment of the appropriate role of the state in the economy. 40. Much remains to be done to improve the operating framework of monetary policy. Interest rates should be adjusted flexibly to prevent real rates from becoming negative if, as expected, inflation picks up. Greater autonomy should be vested in the CBM, with a view to establishing its full independence over time. 41. The authorities’ attention to banking supervision is commendable. However, given the high level of NPLs in a few banks, special efforts are needed to ensure that problems are contained. Targets should be set and plans for NPL reduction should be developed. To encourage further financial sector development, it will be important to ensure a level-playing field for banks. Thus, the exclusive right of state-owned banks to handle foreign exchange transactions should be withdrawn, and prudential regulations should be enforced even-handedly. Caution should be exercised in pressuring banks to finance agricultural projects. 42. Inadequate data dissemination and poor data quality remain glaring shortcomings. In contrast to the improvements across the Fund’s membership, in Myanmar the trend has been toward less transparency and dissemination. There is considerable scope to enhance the dissemination of economic statistics to the public, and to improve the quality and timeliness of data reporting, including to the Fund. Lacking data to assess economic developments, the private sector has had to resort to anecdotal evidence on which to base its assessments. As such, observers may tend to take a more negative view than is warranted. The authorities are urged to resume publishing their annual review of the economy, and to begin disseminating a minimum set of data on variables such as official reserves, broad money, foreign debt, and NPLs. Such an effort, along with a demonstration of implementation of past technical assistance, could form the basis for future provision of Fund technical assistance. 43. It is recommended that the next consultation with Myanmar be held on the standard 12-month cycle. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 18 - Chart 1 MYANMAR External Indicators 1995/96-1999100 500 400 300 200 100 0 1400 I 1400 1 Current Account Deficit 1200 t (In millions of US dollars) <“” Ofticial Reserves (In millions of US dollars) 1000 800 600 400 200 0 1000 800 600 95196 96197 97198 98199 99100 325 275 225 175 125 75 325 275 225 175 125 75 150 150 140 - Exchange Effective Rates - (1996=100) 140 130 \ - 130 Exports and Imports of Goods (In millions of US dollars; _ 3-mo. moving average) Exports and Imports of Goods (In millions of US dollars; I’ 3-mo. moving average) lh! 120 110 100 90 80 70 60 50 40 7n 1 120 Rt?al 4 110 - 80 - 70 - 60 based on weighted average exchange rate 19% 1998 1999 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 250 1QQ 45 40 35 30 25 20 dd”” c Foreign Direct Investment 3000 (In millions of US dollars) ‘ourist Arrivals n thousands of visitors) ‘otal arrivals From EU, US and Canada (right scale) 2500 1500 1000 500 0 / (left scale) 95196 96197 97198 98199 99100 95196 96197 97198 98199 99/00 Sources: Data provided by Myanmar Authorities; and IFS. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 19 - Chart 2 MYANMAR Selected Economic Indicators 1995/96-1999/00 I4 . Real GDP and Agriculture , , (Growth. in percent) L - I4 200 t 200 Outout of Selected Sectors I/ m 12 10 8 6 4 2 0 ( I99%96= 100) ,,..” Power, Energy. & /’ Mining ,,..” ,/ i’ IO - q GDP q Agriculture 8 - I 175 150 125 100 75 175 150 125 100 75 1 I/ National Accounts Basis 95!96 96197 97198 98199 99100 95196 96197 97198 98199 99100 50 70 45 6o 50 40 40 35 30 30 20 25 10 20 0 70 60 50 Broad Money (I 2-month percentage change) mflation and Interest Rates mflation and Interest Rates CPI (12-mo. oi change) (12-mo. oi change) 25 ML------ 19% 1997 1998 1999 2000 60 Contribution to Broad Money Growth / 1996 1997 1998 1999 2m 150 125 I loo 15 50 25 0 60 150 Composition of Domestic Credit ITo private sector ‘To pubhc sector 50 125 Total real domestic credit; 1995/%=100 \ 40 100 30 75 20 50 IO 25 0 0 L IJ 98199 I 10 * Y 19% 1997 1998 1999 2oco 95196 96197 97198 99100 Sources: Data provided by Myanmar Authorities; and IFS. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 20 - Chart 3 MYANMAR Public Sector Developments, 1995/96-1999/00 (In percent of GDP) 4.5 4.0 3.5 2.5 16 6 2 4.5 1 Defense Expenditure & Social Spending 4.0 0 3.5 3.0 -2 2.5 2.0 4 1.5 -6 1.0 0.5 -8 0.0 4 l Dcfense expcndim 0 social spending (excl. pcasioas) Fiscal Balance Current balance 9m6 96m 97m 98199 9!Noo 95&‘6 96D7 97198 9w99 99m 16 16 14 14 8 8 6 6 4 4 2 2 2 9 0% 7 6 -I 5 -2 4 -3 3 4 2 -6 o 16 14 12 8 6 -3 4 -5 -6 Total Receipts ONontax revenue aod grants 0 Tax rwmue otal Expenditure .b L 95i96 9697 97198 Domestic Bank Flnandng 95196 96l97 97l98 98199 99foo Sectoral Fiscal Deficit 9 8 7 6 OCommmial BIlnkS ID Centml Bank [exclusive of t&al transfers) 0 Union Government A. * 95l96 96f97 97l98 98199 9!mo 95196 96l97 97i98 9w99 99100 Source: Data provided by the Myanmar authorities. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 1. Myanmar: Selected Economic Indicators, 1495/96-2000/O 1 l/ GDP (1999100): US%93 billion 2/ Population (1999/00): 48. I million Quota: SDR 258.4 million I995/96 1996197 1997198 1998/99 1999/00 Prov. 2000/0 1 Staff proj. Growth Real GDP Fixed Investment Consumer prices (period average) 21.8 Consumer prices (end of period) 12.5 Public sector operations 3/ Total revenue (including grants) Total expenditure Overall balance Domestic bank financing Money and credit Broad money Domestic credit Public sector (net) Private sector Velocity of broad money Interest rates (percent, end of period) Central Bank rate 4/ Balance of payments Trade balance Exports Imports Current account balance (excl. grants) Overall balance Gross official reserves In millions of U.S. dollars In months of merchandise imports External debt Total debt Debt-service obligations (In percent of exports of g & nfs) External debt arrears Terms of trade (percent change) 15 Exchange rates (end of period) Official exchange rate (kyats per US.%) Parallel (FEC) rate (kyats per US$) 41 6.9 28.2 6.6 6.8 12.8 13.3 -6.2 -6.5 8.2 4.4 34.0 39.1 28.7 21.6 31.4 28.6 40.8 29.5 28.5 21.2 30.7 28.7 36.7 18.8 20.4 21.3 36.5 35.0 60.1 12.6 50.9 40.3 19.5 15.0 2.9 2.8 3.0 3.4 3.5 3.2 12.5 -931 895 1,832 -416 -20 381 2.5 5.479 300 23 I.480 5.9 6.2 6.4 6.3 6.4 6.4 125 165 243 323 330 386 6.4 22.8 20.0 26.6 15.0 (Percent change) 5.7 5.8 8.0 16.5 33.9 49.1 45.1 33.1 (In percent of GDP) 7.9 7.3 13.0 13.0 -5.1 -5.7 4.0 3.5 (Percent change) 15.0 12.0 (In millions of U.S. dollars) -1,016 - 1,280 - 1,600 930 I,01 1 1,113 I.946 2,291 2,713 -728 -1,132 -93 1 -615 -600 -365 288 331 395 1.8 1.7 1.7 5,485 5.610 5,915 352 312 327 25 20 18 I .455 1.608 1,913 -24 -24 -9 10.9 5.5 9.2 6.8 II.4 10.3 5.6 15.0 5.3 5.4 9.9 Il.4 -4.6 -6.0 5.3 6.0 12.0 10.0 -1,408 -1,010 1,132 1,532 2,539 2,542 -710 -307 -312 -226 343 329 1.6 1.6 6,470 6,410 319 427 20 22 2,309 2,522 18 . . . Sources: Data provided by the Myanmar authorities, and Fund staff estimates. 11 Fiscal year (April-March). 21 Officially reported GDP converted at a weighted exchange rate. 3/ Consolidated public sector; includes the Union Government and nonfinancial state enterprises 4i Figure for 2OOOM)l is as of October 2000. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 22 - Table 2. Myanmar: Summary Operations of the Nonfinancial Public Sector, 1997/98-2000/01 (In percent of GDP) 1997198 1998199 1999/00 2000/o I Staff Est. Budget Staff Est. Union Government Receipts Tax’revenue Transfers from SEES Other nontax revenue Foreign grants I / 1.9 7.3 5.3 4.5 5.4 4.1 3.3 2.5 1.9 2.5 2.4 2.7 2.0 1.7 2.0 I.? 1.2 0.8 0.9 0.9 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Expenditures 8.7 7.6 6.6 5.0 7.4 Current expenditures 4.3 3.9 3.9 3.4 5.1 Wages/Salaries 0.7 0.5 0.4 0.3 1.6 Goods and services 1.3 1.2 1.0 0.9 I.1 Maintenance and repairs 1.4 1.1 1.0 0.9 I.0 Contributions 0.2 0.5 0.7 0.5 0.4 Interest payments 0.7 0.7 0.8 0.8 1.0 Domestic 0.1 0.7 0.8 0.8 1.0 External (due) I/ 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Other a.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Capital expenditures 21 4.5 3.7 2.8 1.6 2.4 Current Balance 3.6 3.4 1.5 1.1 0.3 Overall Balance -0.9 -0.4 -1.3 -0.5 -2.0 State Economic Enterprises Receipts Expenditures Current Capital 16.5 15.0 14.4 12.9 14.4 20.8 20.4 17.6 15.2 18.4 19.2 19.2 16.7 14.6 17.4 1.6 1.2 1.0 0.7 I.0 Current Balance -2.6 -4.2 -2.3 -1.7 -3.0 Overall Balance -4.2 -5.3 -3.2 -2.4 -4.0 Consolidated Accounts Receipts Tax Nontax Grants Ii 1.9 1.3 5.3 4.5 5.4 4.1 3.3 2.5 1.9 2.5 3.6 IT 2.8 2.6 2.9 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Expenditures 13.0 13.0 9.9 7.4 II.4 Current 6.9 8.1 6.2 5.1 8.0 Capital 6.1 4.9 3.1 2.3 3.4 Current Balance 1.0 -0.8 -0.8 -0.6 -2.6 Overall Balance -5.1 -5.7 -4.6 -2.9 -6.0 Financing Foreign loans (net on accrual) 1: Foreign loans (gross) Amortization due Change in external arrears I! Interest Principal Domestic financing Domestic bank financing Central Bank Commercial banks Nonbank financing 5.1 5.7 4.6 2.9 6.0 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 -0. I -0.1 -0.1 -0.1 -0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 4.0 4.7 4.6 2.9 6.0 4.0 3.5 5.3 0.0 6.0 4.0 3.2 2.9 0.0 3.2 0.0 0.3 2.5 0.0 2.8 0.0 1.2 -0.7 0.0 0.0 Memorandum Items: Union Government balance exclusive of SEE transfers SEE balance exclusive of transfers Nominal GDP (billions of kyat) -3.3 -3.1 -3.3 -2.2 -4.0 -1.8 -2.6 -1.2 -0.7 -2.0 1.119.5 1,609.g 2.190.3 2.408.4 2,548.g Sources: Budget Department, Ministry of Finance and Revenue; and Fund staff estimates 1: Valued at the official exchange rate 2i Includes net lending. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 23 - Table 3. Myanmar: Monetary Authorities’ Accounts and Monetary Survey, 1996/97-2000/01 I/ 1997 I998 Mar. Mar. Mar. 1999 2000 June Sept. Dec. Mar. June 41 Monetary Authorities’ Accounts Foreign assets (net) 2/ -23 Domestic credir (net) 229.003 270.837 Claims on central government (net) 208,547 252.942 Claims on deposit money banks 20,456 17,895 Other items (net) Of which : Capital accounts Reserve money 1.172 -1,681 207.375 Other (nonreserve) liabilities to deposit money banks 22,556 I.443 -2,882 249,337 22,935 Monetary Survey Foreign assets (net) -12.861 -I 1,289 -10.358 -10,252 -11,151 -10.845 -11,533 -I 1,095 Domestic credit 297.43 I 382.133 485,940 506,480 550.996 585,994 634,891 653.920 Claims on public sector (net) 2 18,773 263,402 319.375 347,565 378,501 397,345 435,879 450,568 Claims on private sector 78,658 118,731 166,565 158,915 172.495 188,649 199.012 203,352 Orher items (net) 2.22 I -1.734 -4,734 -12,688 -4.259 -12,926 -4,871 -5,889 Broad money (at official exchange rale) 286.791 369. I24 470,852 483.542 535,569 562.224 618.484 636,933 Narrow money 198.401 259.121 307,523 306,986 329,272 345,765 382,573 392.825 Quasi-money 88,390 I IO.003 163.329 176,556 206,297 2 16,459 235.91 I 244,108 Domestic credit 29.5 28.5 27.2 26.6 29.2 29.2 30.7 33.3 Claims on public sector (net) 18.8 20.4 21.3 27.9 34.8 33.4 36.5 40. I Claims on private sector 72.6 50.9 40.3 24.0 18.4 21.1 19.5 20.4 Broad Money (at official exchange rate) 39.1 28.7 27.6 26.5 29.4 29.7 3 I .4 33.2 Narrow Money 35.2 30.6 18.7 19.0 21.3 22.6 24.4 26.7 Quasi-money 48.8 24.5 48.5 42.1 44.7 43.0 44.4 45.4 Reserve Money 29.2 20.2 20.6 16.6 19.4 18.7 21.9 27.8 Memorandum items: (In percent) Velocity 2.8 3.0 Currency/broad money 61.2 60.5 Currency/deposits (broad money) I .6 I.5 Quasi-money/Broad money 30.8 29.8 FECs+FC deposits/broad money 31 6.2 10.2 FC deposits/total deposits 3i 11.2 18.8 3.4 55.2 50.8 48.4 I .2 I .o 0.9 34.7 36.5 38.5 Il.4 11.5 10.7 19.0 17.9 16.1 . 48.5 0.9 38.5 10.3 14.6 3.5 48.5 47. I 0.9 0.9 38.1 38.3 11.0 10.8 15.6 14.7 (In millions of kyats. end of period) 1,327 324,003 304,152 19.85 I -359 -4.876 300,778 24. I96 1,149 3 16.447 306,223 10,224 -2.761 -4,876 290,775 24,061 398 386 39 330.709 351.027 389.160 320,604 33 1,425 366,765 10.105 19,602 22,395 -4,894 -7.433 -4.874 -4,874 302,888 23,326 320,579 23,402 538 -5,285 366,708 23.032 408.666 396.732 I 1,934 -2,84 I -5.283 382,759 (Annual percentage change) Sources: Central Bank of Myanmar; and Fund staff estimates. I/ FEC denotes Foreign Exchange Certificates and FC denotes foreign currency-denominated deposits. 2/ Comprises accounts ofthe Central Bank of Myanmar and foreign assets of the Myanma Foreign Trade Bank, Myanma Investment and Commercial Bank and Myanma Economic Bank. with a contra-entry included in Other (nonreserve) liabilities lo deposit money banks. 31 FECs and FC deposits valued at FEC market exchange rate. 4/ Monetary Survey data are for May 2000. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 24 - Table 4. Myanmar: Balance of Payments, 1995/96-2000/O 1 (In millions of U.S. dollars) 1995/96 1996197 1997198 1998199 1999100 2000/01 Prov. Proj. Trade balance Exports, mainly f.o.b. Imports, mainly c.i.f. -937 895 I .832 1,016 -1,280 -1.600 -1,408 -1,010 930 1,011 1,I I3 1,132 1,532 1.946 2,291 2,713 2,539 2,542 Services, net Receipts Payments Interest due 60 -169 -317 178 402 485 554 678 342 654 871 500 70 71 59 67 229 482 253 6’ L 469 232 444 211 55 Private transfers, net 460 457 465 490 471 Current account, excl. grants -416 -728 -1,132 -93 1 -710 -307 Official grants 132 109 259 91 76 105 Nonmonetary capital movements 211 91 338 649 174 -25 Long-term. net -110 -221 -81 60 -128 -272 Disbursements 120 59 171 321 129 100 Repayments due 230 281 252 261 257 372 Foreign Direct Investment 324 316 421 592 304 250 Other capital, net -3 -3 -2 -3 -3 -3 Errors and omissions, net 53 -87 -64 -174 148 0 Overall balance -20 -615 -599 -365 -312 -226 Financing 20 615 599 365 312 226 Net International Reserves (- increase) 19 193 -43 -64 54 I4 Gross reserves (- increase) 45 93 -44 -64 52 14 Short-term liabilities -25 99 0 0 2 0 Net increase in arrears -1 153 207 219 214 213 Memorandum items: Current account balance (in percent of GDP) I/ Gross reserves, end-period (In months of total imports) Net Reserves. end-period Total debt (In percent of GDP) l/ External debt to exports of g & nfs External debt arrears 2/ -5.1 -10.4 -17.2 -13.4 -7.7 -2.9 381 288 331 395 343 329 2.5 1.8 1.7 1.7 1.6 1.6 381 188 232 296 242 228 5.479 5,485 5,610 5,915 6,470 6,410 66.8 78.7 85.3 84.8 69.9 61.6 4.3 3.9 3.6 3.3 4.0 3.3 1,480 1,455 I >608 1,913 2,309 2,522 Sources: Data provided by the Myanmar authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections. l/ Excluding grants: based on offtcially recorded GDP. converted at a weighted exchange rate. 2! Includes valuation adjustments. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 25 - Table 5. Myanmar: External Debt and Arrears, 1995/96-1999/00 l! (In millions of U.S. dollars) 1995196 I996197 1997198 1998199 1999JOO External Debt Total 21 Bilateral Of which: Japan Germany Multilateral Of which: IDA AsDB Suppliers’ credit Commercial banks Short-term 3/ Stock of arrears Total 1,480 1,455 1,608 1,913 2,309 Principal 1,153 1,109 1,226 1,454 1,756 Interest 326 345 382 459 553 Bilateral 3/ 1,047 1,123 1,139 1,375 1,707 Principal 831 872 883 1,065 1,325 Interest 215 251 256 310 383 Private creditors 3/ 433 332 455 490 513 Principal 322 238 333 357 372 Interest 111 94 122 133 141 5,479 5,503 5,647 5,882 6,040 3,694 3.176 2,853 2,973 3,300 2,813 2,377 2,155 2,239 2,607 568 514 452 469 399 1,178 1,128 1,067 1,064 1,091 797 765 719 720 742 356 343 321 319 328 138 421 360 455 487 144 318 406 450 507 326 445 482 558 655 Sources: Data provided by the Myanmar authorities; and Fund staff estimates. 11 End of peroid. Includes valuation adjustments. 2/ Excludes syndicated loans for Yedana and Yetagun gas projects (amounting to approximately $370 million by 1999/00). 31 Figures may not be consistent with the balance of payments due to lags in recording payments and valuation adjustments. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2b - Table 6. Myanmar: Medium-Term Scenario. 1997/98-2OOYO6 I997198 I958199 I999100 2000!0 I 2OOliO2 2002/03 2003104 2004io5 2005/06 Real growth GDP 5.7 5.9 10.9 Agriculture 11 3.7 4.5 11.5 Industrial productlon 21 8.3 6.9 21.3 Services and trade 7.0 6.7 6.4 4.8 4.0 4.0 3.0 2.8 2.8 6.0 4.5 4.5 6.0 5.0 5.0 Saving-Investment 3i Gross investment 14.9 15.6 14.5 National saving -2.3 2.3 6.8 Foreign saving Il.2 13.4 7.7 (Percent Change) 5.5 5.2 5.2 3.3 3.3 3.2 8.5 8.0 7.8 6.5 6.0 6.0 (In percent of GDP) 13.9 13.6 13.6 I I.0 IO.9 IO.9 2.9 2.7 2.7 (In millions of U.S. dollars) 13.5 13.5 13.5 10.8 IO.8 IO.4 2.7 2.6 3.1 Balance of Payments Trade balance -I ,280 - 1,600 - 1,408 -1.010 .I,005 -1,055 -1.1 I3 .I,172 - 1,236 Exports I.011 I,1 I3 1.132 1.532 1,639 1,749 I.863 1,985 2.1 I4 (percent change) 8.7 10.1 1.7 35.4 7.0 6.7 6.5 6.6 6.5 Imports 2.29 I 2.713 2,539 2,542 2.644 2,805 2.976 3,158 3.350 (percent change) 17.8 18.4 -6.4 0. I 4.0 6.1 6.1 6.1 6.1 Senices (net) -317 178 229 232 231 260 274 290 242 Private transfers (net) 365 490 469 471 473 480 510 542 580 Official grants 259 91 76 I05 I30 129 133 135 I50 Current account (excluding grants) -1.132 -93 1 -710 -307 -300 -316 -329 -340 -414 Capital account Long-term capital (net) Disbursement Repayments due FDI Other capital (net) Errors and omissions Overall balance 33s 649 -81 60 171 321 252 261 421 592 7 .; -3 -174 -599 -365 I74 -25 -128 -272 129 100 257 372 304 250 -3 -3 I48 0 -312 -226 Financing NIR (- = increase) Net increase in arrears 599 365 312 226 -43 -64 54 l-l 207 219 214 213 -42 -229 115 344 190 -3 n -212 212 0 ?I2 ?I 89 I32 -196 -168 -14-l I20 130 I40 316 298 284 230 260 280 -3 -3 -4 0 0 0 -155 -108 -73 I55 108 73 -34 -66 -86 I89 174 I59 I39 -157 150 307 300 -4 0 -12.5 I25 -49 174 External Debt and Reserves Total debt (In percent of GDP) 41 Debt sewice due (percent of x of gsinfs] External debt arrears Gross official reserves (In months oftotal imports) 5,610 5,915 6.470 6.410 6.394 6,387 6,392 6,407 6.424 85.3 S4.8 69.9 61.6 57.2 54.3 51.9 49.9 48.1 20.0 18.4 19.9 21.7 19.1 16.3 14.4 12.9 13.0 I .608 1.913 2,309 ? 517 A3 -& 2.734 2.923 3.097 3.256 3.431 331 395 343 329 330 364 430 516 565 1.7 1.7 1.6 I.6 I .5 1.6 I.7 2.0 2.0 Sources: Data provided by the Myanmar authorities; and Fund staff estimates I / lncludmg livestock. fishery and forestry. 2! lncludmg manufacturing. power, energy, construction and mining. 3i Based on official national income accounts with foreign transactlons valued at a weighted exchange rate. Foreign saving is identical to the external current account deficit. 4i Based on officially recorded GDP. converted at a welghted exchange rate. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public. - 27 - Table 7. Myanmar: Policy Reform Scenario. 1997/98-2005/06 -. 1997198 1998199 1999ioo 2ooo:o I 200 I IO2 2002/03 2003;O-l 2004lO5 2005iO6 Real growth GDP 5.7 5.9 10.9 Agriculhxe I / 3.1 4.5 11.5 Industrial production ?! 8.3 6.9 21.3 Services and trade 7.0 6.7 6.4 Saving-Investment 31 Gross investment 14.9 15.6 14.5 National saving -2.3 2.3 6.8 Foreign saving 17.2 13.4 7.7 22.3 24.5 24.7 Il.9 15.1 16.1 IO.4 9.4 8.6 Balance of Payments (Percent Change) 5.5 7.5 8.7 3.3 5.6 5.6 8.5 I I.0 13.0 6.5 8.0 10.0 (In percent of GDP) 16.2 I87 20. I 9.1 10.7 9.7 1.2 8.0 IO.4 (In millions of U.S. dollars) Trade balance -1.280 -I .600 - 1,408 -I .463 -1.643 -1,832 - I.988 -2.049 -2,100 Exports I.01 I 1,I 13 1,132 I.584 1,806 2.059 2.347 2.676 3.050 (percent change) 8.1 10.1 I.7 40.0 14.0 14.0 14.0 14.0 14.0 Imports 2.291 2.713 2.539 3,047 3,450 3.89 I 4,335 4,725 5.150 (percent change) 17.8 18.4 -6.4 20.0 13.2 12.8 Il.4 9.0 9.0 Services (net) -317 178 229 289 327 370 408 445 468 Private transfers (net) 465 490 469 560 580 600 610 620 625 Official grants 259 91 76 IO5 130 129 133 135 150 Current account (excluding grants) -1.132 -93 I -710 -614 -737 -862 -969 -984 - 1.007 Capttal account 338 649 I74 672 842 967 957 916 966 Long-term capital (net) -81 60 -128 285 415 450 310 220 170 Disbursement 171 321 129 600 815 875 715 760 800 Repayments due 252 261 257 315 400 425 465 540 630 FDI 421 592 304 390 430 520 650 700 800 Other capital (net) -2 -3 -3 -3 -3 -3 -3 4 -4 Errors and omissions -64 -174 148 0 0 0 0 0 0 Overall balance -599 -365 -312 163 235 234 121 67 109 Financmg NIR (- = increase) Net increase in arrears Restructuring of arrears 599 365 312 -163 -235 43 -64 54 -163 -235 207 219 ?I4 -770 -770 0 0 0 770 770 -234 -234 -770 770 5.3 I 1 64.1 17.9 0 975 3.0 -121 -67 -109 -121 -67 -109 0 0 0 0 0 0 External Debt and Reserves Total debt (In percent of GDP) 4: Debt service due (percent of S g&nfs) External debt arrears Gross official reserves (In months of lotal imports) 5.610 5,915 6.470 S.985 5,630 85.3 84.8 69.9 69.8 68.6 20.0 18.4 19.9 17.9 19.4 I .608 I.913 2,309 1,539 769 331 395 343 506 742 I .I I .7 1.6 2.0 2.6 9.0 9.2 9.2 5.7 5.6 5.5 14.0 14.2 14.0 10.0 10.2 10.3 5.621 5,841 6.01 I 60.5 55.9 Cl.1 16.9 17.1 19.0 0 0 0 I.097 I.164 I .x3 3.0 3.0 3.0 Sources: Data provided by the Myanmar authorities; and Fund stanestimates. Ii Including livestock. fishery and forestry 2: Including manufacturing. power. energy, construction and mming. 3! Based on official national income accounts with foreign transactions valued at weighted exchange rate through 2001102, and thereafter at the unilied exchange rate. Foreign sawng is identical to the external current account deficit. 4: Based on oflicially recorded GDP. converted at a weighted exchange rate. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 28 - Myanmar: Social Indicators ANNEX I Latest single year 1970-7s 1980-85 1993-98 Same region/income group East Asia & Low- Pacific income POPULATION Total population, mid-year (millions) Growth rate (X annual average) Urban population (% of population) Total fertility rate (births woman) per 30.4 37.5 44.5 1,817.l 3.536.4 2.3 2.1 1.0 1.0 1.4 23.9 24.0 26.9 33.9 30.5 5.8 4.6 3.1 2.1 3.1 POVERTY (“0 qfpopulationl National headcount index 22.9 28.5 . INCOME Consumer price index ( 1995= 100) Food price index ( 1995= 100) 8 13 228 130 136 . . . 11 236 SOCIAL INDICATORS Public expenditure Health (o/b of GDP) . . . 0.2 Education (O/b of GNP) 1.7 2.0 1.2 Social security and welfare (% of GDP) 0.9 0.2 Net primary school enrollment rate i? 0 ff age group) Total Male Female 63 77 99 99 86 65 78 100 99 89 61 75 99 99 82 1.7 1.3 2.9 3.2 Access to safe water (% of population) Total Urban Rural . 27 38 84 . . . . 36 36 89 . . . . . 21 39 82 . . Access to health care Population per physician (persons) Immunization (%I under 12 months) Measles DPT Child malnutrition (% under 5 years) . . . 5,000 1.834 . . . . . . . 88 93 80 16 90 93 82 38 43 20 Life expectancy at birth (jlears) Total Male Female 50 53 60 69 63 48 51 58 67 62 51 54 62 71 64 Mortality Infant (per thousand live births) Under 5 (per thousand live births) Adult (15-59) Male (per 1,000 population) Female (per 1,000 population) Maternal (per 100.000 live births) 122 106 78 35 68 179 134 118 33 92 384 270 188 235 313 223 145 208 230 . . Source: 2000 World Development Indicators CD-ROM, World Bank. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 29 - ANNEX II Myanmar: Recent Changes in the Exchange and Trade System’ Payment system Foreign exchange licenses of all private banks were suspended (March 1998). All foreign exchange accounts were transferred to either the Myanmar Foreign Trade Bank or the Myanmar Investment and Commercial Bank. Invisible transactions and current transfers The limit on remittances against FECs for payments on invisible transactions and current transfers was reduced from $50,000 to $30,000 a month (1998/99). The limit was further reduced to $20,000 in March 2000, and to $10,000 a month in August 2000. The requirement for each tourist to convert at least $300 into FECs upon arrival was reduced to $200 in July 2000. Import and export systems Imports of all goods not on two lists (A and B) of priority goods were banned (March 1998). Private importers are required to import 80 percent of their imports from List A (essential goods) and 20 percent from List B (less essential goods). The number of goods on list B was widened in the first half of 1999. The approval of imports under both Lists A and B also became concurrent (whereas licenses had previously been issued first for List A goods, and only thereafter for List B goods). Imports of various foodstuffs were banned in November 1999 (border trade) and February 2000 (overseas trade), including MSG, soft drinks, fruit, beer, and cigarettes, among others. Private sector exporting through overseas trade of 3 1 key goods (including rice, rubber, and gems) was prohibited (March 1998). For border trade, there is an additional restriction on the private sector export of teak. Private entrepreneurs who carry out reclamation of wetlands were allowed to export 50 percent of their produce (rice and other restricted products except edible oil seeds). The limit is 55 percent for rubber plantations. Exporters were required to pay in foreign exchange an 8 percent commercial tax (January 1999) in addition to a 2 percent income tax (levied since December 1997). These taxes replaced a 5 percent commercial tax. The practice of automatic issuance of open general import licenses to selected SEES, and joint- ventures that needed to import frequently under the Foreign Investment Law, was replaced by approval by the Ministry of Commerce on a case-by-case basis (1998199). ‘Changes since the last Article IV consultation are indicated in bold italics. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 30 - ANNEX III Myanmar:StatEtical Issues 1. Myanmar compiles and disseminates a range of economic and social statistics. The Central Bank of Myanmar (CBM) reports a number of core statistics to the Fund on a monthly basis (attached table) and provides more comprehensive data for the Article IV consultation missions.’ However, although there have been recent improvements in the quality of statistics, particularly in the monetary area, data shortcomings continue to hinder the monitoring of economic developments and the assessment of policy proposals. National accounts 3 National accounts statistics are available only on an annual basis and revisions are typically not issued before a new year starts. Private sector transactions are underestimated, as all informal sector activities are excluded. The use of the highly overvalued official exchange rate for conversion purposes results in understatement of external trade and the foreign exchange content of consumption, government expenditures, and investment. In addition, the GDP in constant prices base year is 1985/86, which is increasingly outdated in view of the extent of structural changes in the economy. Substantive changes in relative prices since price liberalization complicate the interpretation of GDP deflators. Price indices 3. The CPI is based primarily on the results of the expenditure survey conducted in Yangon in 1986 and thus does not capture rural price developments. Data are available with a delay of 3-4 months. In the past, the CPI may have underestimated inflation because of its limited coverage of both commodities (gasoline, for example, is excluded) and regions (only Yangon, the capital, is surveyed), failure to fully take into account black market prices, and inclusion of only a few imported goods that account for less than 10 percent of the total weights. Weights for non-essential commodities were last compiled in 1978. The authorities have constructed, and soon plan to publish, a new index, in which the base year has been changed from 1986 to 1997 using new weights derived from the 1997 Household Income and Expenditure Survey. The new CPI comprises 135 consumption items compared to the current 79 items. Its regional coverage is expanded, and the consumption items include a larger share of imported goods. ‘The Central Statistical Organization (CSO) publishes the Statistical I’earbook, which includes a large number of economic, social. and demographic time series; however, the yearbook is published with a considerable lag (the most recent issue is for 1998). The CSO also publishes the bi-monthly Selected Monrhl~ Ecmonric Indicators, which include monthly data on consumer prices, selected producer prices and output volumes, tourism, transportation, and foreign trade and investment. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3l- ANNEX III Government finance 4. There is no comprehensive monthly and quarterly compilation of fiscal data. Although a flash report is produced by the CBM on a monthly basis, and the Budget Department prepares every four months a summary report based on provisional information on cash expenditures collected from the ministries; the coverage of these reports is incomplete. Annual comprehensive data are compiled with delays of up to twelve months after the end of the reference year, and expenditure is aggregated following a functional classification; expenditures by economic classification is produced with a longer delay. In addition, only consolidated data for State Economic Enterprises (SEES) are available, and some transactions are recorded partly on an accrual basis and partly on a cash basis. Fiscal and monetary data are not consistent. Budget estimates and actuals tend to differ by wide margins in part because the approved budget allows for little if any inflation. 5. Annual data on the operations of the consolidated central government are reported to the Fund’s Statistics Department (STA) for publication in the Governmer~t Finance Statistics Yearbook. The reported data, however, do not include an economic classification of expenditure or debt data. Monetary accounts 6. The CBM compiles and reports to APD a monetary survey with a lag of 3-6 months. The lag reflects the lack of technological infrastructure for timely collection and processing of data from a geographically widespread bank branch network, and the delay in compiling government accounts at the Myanma Economic Bank which manages them rather than the Ministry of Finance and Revenue. For the 2000 Article IV consultation, the authorities provided monetary accounts based on internationally accepted methodology (the same classification system used for publishing Myanmar’s monetary data in International Firlarlcial Statistics (IFS). 7. The monetary survey compiled by the CBM (in its own format) covers the central bank and all commercial banks, state-owned and private. However, due to incomplete coverage, net foreign assets approximates net international reserves, rather than net claims on nonresidents. In addition, (i) claims on the government include the CBM’s holding of three- month treasury bills, whereas holdings of 3- and 5-year treasury bonds by commercial banks are not included; (ii) claims on the private sector include only lending and exclude (still rather small) other types of claims; (iii) narrow money includes currency issued instead of currency outside the banks, but the Foreign Exchange Certificates (FECs) outside banks are excluded; and (iv) broad money includes foreign-currency-denominated deposits of nonresidents and of the government. 8. The quality of monetary data reported and published in IFS has improved recently reflecting assistance provided by STA in the context of the 1998 and 1999 Article IV consultation missions. Improvements in the compilation of monetary accounts led to the resumption of publication of monetary statistics for Myanmar in the August 1998 issue of Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 32 - ANNEX III IFS. Starting with the July 1999 issue of IFS, the coverage of the banking system was expanded to include private commercial banks established since mid-1992, in addition to the four state-owned banks. The 3-6 month lag in reporting data for publication in IFS is due to the same reason as noted for the time lag in compiling the CBM’s monetary survey. 9. The quality of monetary statistics could be improved further by: (i) the use of the market exchange rate rather than the overvalued official exchange rate for valuing foreign currency-denominated balance sheet accounts; (ii) reporting on a gross basis all interbank claims and claims on the public sector; (iii) the booking of all debit balances (overdrafts) as claims, and the booking of all credit balances as liabilities; (iv) a review of the interbank accounts for consistency in positions between the CBM and the commercial banks, including thefinancial adjustment accounts, and (v) a review of the recording of the Fund accounts in the CBM’s balance sheet to ensure consistency with standard procedures. Balance of payments 10. Balance of payments data have various shortcomings arising from the poor quality of data sources and gaps in coverage of the external transactions of the private sector. The use of the overvalued official exchange rate to convert private sector transactions leads to distortions because these transactions actually take place at or near the market rate. The official trade data exclude military imports, and no adjustment is made for military imports in the balance of payments. Detailed data on services and financial flows are generally not available. There are large discrepancies in the external debt data reported by creditors and debtors. Transactions on arrears are not reported separately. 11. Overall export and import volume and price indices are not fully reported. The export volume and unit value indices computed by the Fund and published in IFS are unsatisfactory and have been discontinued. Data on exports and imports by partner country are reported for calendar years but contain insufficient specification. 12. Technical assistance provided by STA in June 1999, has resulted in progress by the CBM in improving its balance of payments compilation system. However, the system is not yet capable of producing reliable and comprehensive data. Progress has been mainly confined to streamlining collection procedures of data from various agencies. There have been improvements in the collection of data compiled by commercial banks and data on interest and loan repayments on external debt. No progress has been made, however, in broadening the compilation system to include the private sector through specialized surveys. 13. No progress has been made in improving the dissemination of BOP data within Myanmar. Other problems areas include the measurement of direct investment capital flows, and the classification of external transactions by commercial banks. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicMyanmar: Survey of Reporting of Main Statistical Indicators l! (As of October 3 1, 2000) Date of latest observation Date received Exchange International Reserve/ Central Broad Interest Consumer Exports/ Current Overall GDP/ External Rates Reserves Base Bank Money Rates Price Index Imports Account Govem- GNP Debt Money Balance Balance ment Sheet Balance I l/O0 8/00 6100 6100 s/o0 7100 6100 4100 3100 FY FY ’ 3100 99100 99100 I l/O0 I l/00 I l/O0 I l/O0 1 o/o0 9100 9100 9100 9100 9100 9100 9100 Frequency of data M M M M M M M M A A A A Frequency of reporting M M M : M M M M V V V V Source of data A Mode of reporting Fax A Fax A Fax A Fax A Fax A Fax A Fax A A A A A Fax Mission Fax Fax Mission Confidentiality No Yes Yes Yes Yes No No No No No No Yes I / The codes are given below: Frequency of data and reporting: D - daily, M - monthly, Q - quarterly, A - annual, V - irregular. Source of data: A - direct reporting by the Central Bank of Myanmar. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicI. II. III. IV. V. VI. -34 - ANNEX IV Myanmar: Fund Relations (As of September 30,200O) Membership Status: Joined on January 3, 1952; Article XIV General Resources Account: SDR million Quota 258.40 Fund holdings of currency 258.40 SDR Department: SDR million Net cumulative allocation 43.47 Holdings 0.12 Outstanding Purchases and Loans: None Percent of quota 100.0 100.0 Percent of allocation 100.0 0.3 Financial Arrangements: Amount Amount Approval Expiration Approved Drawn Type Date Date (SDR million) (SDR million) Stand-by 6/12/81 6/l l/82 27.00 27.00 Stand-by 7128178 7127179 30.00 30.00 Stand-by 5106177 5105178 35.00 35.00 Projected Obligations to Fund (SDR Million; based on existing use of resources and present holdings of SDRs): Overdue Forthcoming 9/30/00 2000 2001 2002 2003 Charges/interest 0.0 0.5 2.0 2.0 2.0 Total 0.0 0.5 2.0 2.0 2.0 VII. Exchange Rate Arrangement: 2004 2.0 2.0 The kyat has been pegged to the SDR at K 8.5057 per SDR since May 2, 1977. Myanmar applies margins of two percent in respect of spot exchange transactions. Starting in February 1993, the Central Bank of Myanmar started issuing foreign exchange certificates (FECs) at a rate of 1 FEC = US$l . In December 1995, the authorities established FEC exchange centers and allowed market trading of FECs. The FEC traded at K 386 per U.S. dollar at end-October 2000. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-35 - ANNEX IV VIII. Article IV Consultation: The Executive Board discussed the staff report for the 1999 Article IV consultation on October 13, 1999. It was proposed that the next Article IV consultation take place on the standard 12-month cycle. IX. Technical Assistance: A substantial program of technical assistance financed by the United Nations Development Program (UNDP) was initiated in 1989190 in the expectation of comprehensive policy reforms. The program foresaw extensive technical assistance supported by training in the areas of bank accounting and supervision; monetary, fiscal, and price statistics; tax and customs administration; public finance; and government financial management. As the anticipated policy reforms did not materialize, the UNDP decided to scale back assistance to Myanmar. As a result, the project on government financial management was canceled in September 1992 and the funding for the remaining projects was reduced. Following the tripartite review of the technical assistance program conducted during the 1993 Article IV consultation discussions, the authorities were informed that it would be difficult to justify an extension of the program and that the ongoing projects would come to an end by the scheduled closing date of December 3 1, 1993. By that time, 53 person- months of technical assistance and 172 weeks of training had been delivered. Since then technical assistance has continued only in the form of training on a reduced scale. The 1998 and 1999 Article IV consultation missions each included a STA economist, who provided technical assistance in the area of monetary and balance of payments statistics, respectively. X. Resident Representative: None Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 36 - ANNEX V Myanmar: Relations with the World Bank Group’ 1. Myanmar became’s member of the World Bank in 1952, IFC in 1956, and IDA in 1962. During 1956-61, the Bank made three loans totaling $33.3 million (of which $0.2 million was canceled), all for transportation projects. No lending was requested during 1962-72. Lending was resumed again in I973 and 30 IDA credits totaling the equivalent of $804 million were committed of which $752.8 million equivalent was disbursed and $92.7 million was canceled. About 26 percent of total TDA/IBRD disbursements were in support of agricultural projects, including irrigation, rubber, livestock, seed development, and grain storage. About 24 percent was for energy sector projects, 16 percent for forestry projects, 17 percent for transportation projects, and the remaining 16 percent for projects in the mining, manufacturing, construction, and telecommunications sectors. 3 A. There has been no new lending approved since July 1987. The last project closed on December 3 1, 1993. IFC had made no investments in Myanmar. Since September 1998, Myanmar is on a non-accrual status with the Bank and the amount overdue totaled about $5 1.4 million as of end-October 2000. 3. Up to the late 1980s. the World Bank provided advice on the formulation and implementation of development policies. Policy recommendations emphasized the need for: fundamental and sustained macroeconomic policy reform, including measures to adjust the exchange rate, price liberalization, especially in agriculture, export promotion and private sector development, and steps to improve the efficiency of state enterprises. During the 1990s. the Bank prepared only two economic reports (in 199 I and 1995). Myanmar: IBRD and IDA Lending (As of September 30,200O) (In millions of U.S. dollars) Sector Agriculture 0.0 204.1--.. 204.1 26.0 0.0 Energy and Power 0.0 190.0 190.0 24.2 0.0 Forestry 0.0 127.4 127.4 16.2 0.0 Mining 0.0 15.8 15.8 2.0 0.0 Manufacturing 0.0 36.8 36.8 4.7 0.0 Construction industry 0.0 19.8 19.8 2.5 0.0 Transportation 33.1 102.9 136.0 17.3 0.0 Telecommunications 0.0 56.0 56.0 7.1 0.0 Total 33.1 752.9 785.9 100.0 0.0 1 Disbursed Undisbursed IBRD IDA Total Percent 4. In June 1999, the Bank conducted a technical mission to update its knowledge base about the country at the same time as the Fund’s mission for the Article IV Consultation. The resulting report, which was released under green cover to the government for comment, focuses on poverty and human development, agriculture, private sector development and social services. The previous economic report, Myanmar: Policies for Sustaining Economic Reform, was prepared in November 1994, and was discussed with the government in August 1995. The final report was issued in October 1995. 5 -. Myanmar Aid Group: The last Consultative Group meeting was held on January 14, 1986 in Tokyo, under the chairmanship of the World Bank. The aid pledges totaled about S 1 .O billion for the subsequent two years. There has been no meeting since then. ’ Prepared by World Bank staff. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public._ . - 37 - . ANNEX VI Myanmar: Relations with the Asian Development Bank’ 1. Myanmar joined AsDB in 1973 and operations started the same year. The AsDB has so far provided 32 loans totaling $530.9 million for 28 projects. Of these, two loans amounting to $6.6 million were from AsDB’s ordinary capital resources, and 30 loans amounting to $524.3 million were from its Special Fund’s resources. All of the loans to Myanmar have been closed. The AsDB has so far provided technical assistance (TA) totaling $10.7 million for 38 projects. Of these 38 technical assistance projects, 28 were project preparatory and 10 were advisory. 2. AsDB has not processed any new loan or TA project in Myanmar since 1988. However, the it sends periodic consultation missions to Myanmar, the most recent of which took place in July 2000. Furthermore. Myanmar is involved in the Program of Economic Cooperation in the Greater Mekong Subregion (GMS Program). In that capacity, Myanmar participates in regional meetings and workshops supported by the AsDB’s regional technical assistance. Close coordination is being maintained with the IMF, the World Bank, and the UNDP with particular emphasis being given to assessment of the government’s economic reform program and recommended policy actions. Liaison is being maintained with Myanmar’s major bilateral donors regarding the status of their assistance program. Myanmar has not paid its loan service payments due to the AsDB since January 15, 1998. As of October 23, 2000, total overdue loan-service payments were equivalent to $56.3 million, 3. The sectoral distribution of cumulative AsDB lending to Myanmar remains unchanged as shown below: Sector Loans Loans (Number) ($ million) Percent Agriculture & Agro-Industry 15 316.1 59.5 Energy 5 31.8 6.0 Finance & Industry 4 41.4 7.8 Transport & Communications 2 42.5 8.0 Social Infrastructure 6 99.1 18.7 Total 32 530.9 100.0 4. The majority of AsDB assistance has been provided for the development of the agricultural sector. Assistance in sectors other than agriculture has stemmed from an attempt to achieve sectoral balance in lending and to avoid overextending the absorptive capacity of the country’s agricultural executing agencies. To some extent, diversification has also resulted from the government’s own desire to proceed with particular projects in various sectors which had already cleared the government approval process, and for which, therefore, priority has been established. ‘Prepared by the staff of the AsDB. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public