DOCUMENT OF INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND NOT FOR PUBLIC USE FQR AGENDA sM/o1/117 CONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION April 20,200l To: Members of the Executive Board From: The Secretary Subject: Suriname-Staff Report for the 2001 Article IV Consultation Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staff report for the 2001 Article IV consultation with Suriname, which is tentatively scheduled for discussion on Wednesday, May 9,200l. At the time of circulation of this paper to the Board, the Secretary’s Department has not received a communication from authorities of Suriname indicating whether or not they consent to the Fund’s publication of this paper; such communication may be received after the authorities have had an opportunity to read the report. Questions may be referred to Mr. Mackenzie (ext. 36550) and Mr. Bindley-Taylor (ext. 38655). Unless the Documents Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the WTO Secretariat on Monday, April 30,200l; and to the European Commission, the Inter-American Development Bank, and the Islamic Development Bank, following its consideration by the Executive Board. Att: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicCONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND SURINAME Staff Report for the 2001 Article IV Consultation Prepared by the Staff Representatives for the 200 1 Consultation with Suriname (In consultation with other Departments) Approved by David Goldsbrough and Jesus Seade April 19,200l Contents Page Executive Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 I. Introduction.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 II. Recent Economic Developments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..*.*.......................................................... 4 III. Report on the Discussions ................................................................................................ 8 A. The Outlook for 2001.................... ....................................................................... 8 B. Fiscal Policy ......................................................................................................... 10 C. Monetary Policy and the Banking System ........................................................... 12 D. Exchange Rate Policy and External Developments ............................................. 14 E. Public Sector Reform and Environmental Issues ................................................. 16 IV. Medium-Term Projections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19 V. Staff Appraisal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20 Tables 1. Selected Economic Indicators ......................................................................................... 23 2. Gross Domestic Product by Sectors of Origin at Constant Prices .................................. 24 3. Central Government Operations ...................................................................................... 25 4. Summary Accounts of the Banking System .................................................................... 26 5. Balance of Payments ....................................................................................................... 27 6. Public and Publicly-Guaranteed External Debt ............................................................... 28 7. Medium-Term Projections ............................................................................................... 29 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2- Boxes 1. The Structure of Banking in Suriname . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15 Figures 1. Nominal and Real Effective Exchange Rates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7 2. Realized Prices of Alumina and Spot Prices of Aluminum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7 Appendices I. Fund Relations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30 II. Statistical Issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32 III. Financial Relations with the Inter-American Development Bank . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3- EXECUTIVESUMMARY After a few years of satisfactory performance in the mid 1990’s following more than ten years of instability and decline, Suriname’s economic performance deteriorated markedly in 1999-00. During this period, GDP declined by over 10 percent in real terms, inflation reached triple digits, the deficit on the external current account increased to an average of 18 percent of GDP, and gross international reserves were virtually exhausted. Misguided economic policies are largely to blame for this poor performance. In particular, the budget has not been under control. The central government deficit is estimated to have increased from 4 percent of GDP in 1997 to 13 percent in 2000, with current expenditure increasing from 32 percent of GDP to 39 percent of GDP. In addition, the official exchange rate has generally been uncompetitive, the foreign exchange market fragmented, and foreign exchange has been allocated by fiat. 1 The authorities who assumed office in August 2000, took a number of measures to redress the difficult situation they inherited. They devalued the official exchange rate from Sf 1,162 per U.S. dollar to Sf 2,200 per U.S. dollar in early October; eliminated a number of special exchange rates; raised tariffs on water and electricity; and eliminated the subsidy on oil products and a number of food items. They also ended the budget’s reliance on central bank financing. The government did borrow from the commercial banks in the last fourth months of the year, but commercial bank lending to the government is included in the overall credit ceiling that applies to commercial banks. In order to end the budget’s excessive reliance on monetary financing, the mission proposed a deficit target of 3 percent in 200 1. The large fiscal adjustment of 10 percent of GDP results from the impact of the devaluation on the taxes paid by the bauxite companies and importers; the elimination of once-off expenditure by the previous government associated with the election in May 2000; excise tax measures; and expenditure restraint, especially of civil service wages, which in 2000 reached 15 percent of GDP. The proposed fiscal adjustment will be facilitated by Suriname’s use of a guarantee on its sovereign borrowing that the Netherlands is prepared to extend. Although monetary policy has been subordinated to the budget, its task has not been helped by a cumbersome system of credit ceilings. The mission proposed that the system be either scrapped or rationalized. Sustained fiscal adjustment will require civil service reform. Public sector employment is about 12 percent of the population, and 75 percent of formal sector employment. Efforts also need to be made to rationalize the public enterprise sector. Finally, Suriname’s statistics are very weak and seriously compromise the conduct of economic policy. Technical assistance from the Fund and the IDB has started to show results, but much more remains to be done. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4- 1. INTRODUCTION 1. The 2001 Article IV consultation discussions with Suriname were held in Paramaribo during February 13-March 1,200 1.’ The staff team comprised Messrs. Mackenzie (Head), Bindley-Taylor, Gomez-Oliver, Gapen, Papaioaunou and Ms. Kelley (Assistant), (all WHD). Mr. van Beek (WHD) joined the mission for its last week. The mission was joined in the field by Mr. Martin, the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) desk officer for Suriname, and worked closely with a World Bank mission led by Mr. Nallari. The mission met with the Ministers of Finance, Planning, Agriculture, Natural Resources, Health and Education as well as the President of the Central Bank of Suriname (CBS) and with their advisors. The mission also met with representatives of the private sector and the labor unions. On the mission’s last day, the Bank and Fund teams met with President Venetiaan 2. The last Article IV consultation with Suriname was concluded by the Executive Board on June 30, 1999. On that occasion Executive Directors expressed serious concern at the weakening fiscal position. They urged the authorities to control expenditure, and to resist wage pressures in particular. Directors emphasized the importance of civil service reform for a lasting solution to the country’s fiscal problems. In addition, directors strongly encouraged the authorities to establish a market determined exchange rate. They also expressed concern over the poor condition of Suriname’s economic and financial statistics. 3. The administration of President Venetiaan took office in August 2000 following elections held in May. The coalition’s platform promised to stabilize the deteriorating economy and to restore good governance, and notably transparency and efficiency in government operations. 4. Suriname provides some core statistics to the Fund, but these data are of generally poor quality. Data from all sectors suffer from serious misclassification and narrow coverage, and are not compiled and disseminated promptly. The Fund and the IDB have provided technical assistance recently to improve the national accounts, balance of payments and trade, price and money and banking statistics, and some progress has been made. 5. Suriname is an Article VIII member and is on a 12-month consultation cycle. Staffing constraints and complications created by the delay in the change of administration resulted in a delay in the 2001 consultation. II. RECENT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS 6. Suriname’s economy seriously deteriorated in 1998-00. Real GDP fell by over 10 percent in 1999-00, inflation reached triple digits, the deficit on current account of the ’ Fund relations with Suriname are summarized in Appendix I. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-5- balance of payments remained high, usable international reserves dwindled and financial intermediation declined. 7. Following several years of slowing growth, real GDP (excluding the informal sector) is estimated to have declined by around 4 percent in 1999 and by 8 percent in 2000. (Table 1). Output fell in most sectors other than mining (Table 2). The impact of the decline in GDP on incomes was cushioned to some extent by an apparent increase in informal sector activity, particularly in the production of gold. 8. A fall in agricultural production in 2000 reflected declines in the major crops of rice and bananas. The imposition until October 2000 of a regulation obliging rice producers to sell their foreign exchange earnings at a substantially appreciated exchange rate discouraged planting and reduced investment. Prospects for a good banana harvest after several years of drought were dashed when a storm destroyed much of the replanted acreage. 9. In construction, the winding down of work on two large bridges begun in 1998 largely explains the 15 percent drop in activity. A decline in the volume of lending activity (see Section III C) resulted in a contraction in the financial services sector. Manufacturing output growth in 2000 was lowered by the closure of the aluminum smelter in April 1999, and by the uncertain economic environment. In addition, since Suriname’s entry into CARICOM in 1996, local manufacturing has lost market share to more efficient producers in other member countries. The mining sector, which including related processing accounts for around 18 percent of GDP, grew marginally in 2000. Alumina production dropped because of work stoppages to protest low wages, but this decline was offset by an increase in crude oil extraction resulting from new operations coming on stream. 10. In the first half of 2000, the fiscal stance remained very expansionary, and monetary policy remained accommodating. In the run-up to the May elections, the authorities increased civil service compensation by 60 percent.2 They also stepped up their efforts to finish the bridges. Having lost the election, the outgoing government used the May-August transition period to pay off election-related bills estimated at slightly over 3 percent of GDP. No new tax measures were adopted before October, and the large gap between outlays and revenue was financed mainly by borrowing from the CBS. 11. The new government took a series of measures not long after taking office in August to address the difficult situation it had inherited. On October 3, the authorities devalued the Surinamese guilder by 88 percent to Sf 2,200 per U.S. dollar, and eliminated the special exchange rates for import duties, rice exports and petroleum imports as well as the 2 In late 1999 the government failed to muster sufficient support to pass its draft 2000 budget. Consequently, it was in principle obliged to hold expenditure to the levels of the approved 1999 budget, until a 2000 budget was approved. The budget was approved in December 2000. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-6- Treasury rate applying to the transactions of commercial banks.3 The devaluation entailed a significant depreciation in real effective terms (Figure 1). The authorities also stopped all borrowing from the CBS, although they secured legislation that allowed borrowing from commercial banks (see Section III C). On October 11, the authorities removed the subsidies on most foodstuffs and petroleum, and increased electricity and water tariffs. They also introduced several social safety net measures, including lump-sum increases in civil service salaries and in pensions. 12. The efforts of the new administration kept the overall deficit to an estimated 13 percent of GDP in 2000, up from 10 percent in 1999 (Table 3). Domestic financing was in excess of 19 percent of GDP, as net external financing was substantially negative despite the considerable new external borrowing undertaken by the previous government to help pay off external obligations falling due. 13. Net credit from the CBS to the central government increased by about Sf 147 billion during 2000, or over 60 percent of the stock of broad money at the beginning of the period (Table 4). Commercial bank credit to the private sector, as reported to the CBS, declined in nominal terms in 2000, which given the rate of inflation through the year entailed a real decline of about 50 percent. These figures may overstate the decline in private sector credit, although it is likely that credit fell in real terms.4 14. The deficit on the external current account fell from US$175 million, or 20 percent of GDP in 1999, to US$142 million, or 17 percent of GDP in 2000 (Table 5). This reflected the combined effects of a moderate increase in the price and volume of exports of alumina (Figure 2) and a reduction in imports as real domestic demand fell. Declining economic activity also reduced net payments for services. In the capital account, grant receipts declined moderately to US$l7 million. Net official borrowing was negative, as scheduled repayments of short-term commercial debt of US$l 18 million exceeded new commercial borrowing of US$94 million. Positive errors and omissions of US$93 million are likely to reflect both unrecorded informal sector exports and unrecorded inbound private transfers. The overall balance was a deficit of US$l2 million. 3 Previously, the conversion of foreign exchange earnings of the mining companies for local purchases and the valuation of imported goods for tax purposes used exchange rates that were more appreciated than the official exchange rate. After the exchange rate adjustment in October, all imports and the tax receipts of the mining companies are converted at the prevailing official exchange rate. A special exchange rate, now Sf 1,100 per dollar applies to baby milk and formula. 4 Other assets, net of commercial banks grew rapidly over the period. This item may be concealing lending to the private sector, including foreign-currency denominated lending, that was misreported to circumvent the existing credit ceilings. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-7- Figure 1. Suriname: Nominal and Real Effectivk. Exchange Rates, Figure 1. Suriname: Nominal and Real Effectivk. Exchange Rates, January January 1996-January 1996-January 200 200 1 1 170 170 (Index (Index 1996=100) 1996=100) - - ll( ll( 160 - r 160 -- -- lot lot 150 150 140 - 140 - -- -- 90 90 -- 80 -- 80 -- -- 70 70 130 130 -- -- 60 60 120 120 -- -- 50 50 110 - ~- ~- 40 40 100 -- -- 30 30 Figure 2. Suriname: Realized Prices of Alumina and Spot Prices of Aluminum, 1980-2000 (US dollars per metric ton) 2000 1900 1800 1 1700 4 1600 1200 i 1100 i -Aluminum (Ml scale) -Alumina (right scale) 1000 c 1980 1981 1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 320 300 280 260 240 200 180 160 140 120 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-8- 15. Public and publicly guaranteed external debt, which had risen from US$l52 million (23 percent of GDP) at end-1996 to US$212 million (24 percent of GDP) in 1998, is estimated to have increased to US%240 million (28 percent of GDP) at end- 2000 (Table 6). The share of bilateral debt in the total declined from 77 percent at end-1996 to 48 percent at end-2000. Its decline was mirrored by an increase in the share of private creditors from 2 percent to 3 1 percent over the same period0 16. Despite a depreciation of the official exchange rate from Sf 860 per U.S. dollar at end 1999 to Sf 1,162 in September 2000, the loose policy stance and election-related uncertainty raised the parallel market premium from 23 percent to 113 percent over the same period. When the official rate was adjusted in early October 2000, the premium fell to around 25 percent, but increased again to 33 percent at end-October. The CBS responded by setting bands around the official rate and by relying on moral suasion to encourage cambios and commercial banks to operate within these margins.5 By end- December 2000 the premium had declined to about 5 percent, although this decline was no doubt facilitated by the seasonal increase in remittances from expatriate Surinamese and the impact of a weak economy on the demand for foreign exchange. 17. The 1Zmonth rate of inflation in December 2000 was 82 percent, compared with 113 percent in December 1999. Monthly inflation, after averaging 1 percent in the last quarter of 1999, rose to 9 percent in the month of September 2000, as the guilder depreciated rapidly in the parallel market. Monthly inflation averaged 13 percent in October and November because of the adjustments in the exchange rate and in administered prices, before declining to zero in December. III. REPORT ON THE DISCIJSSIONS 18. The discussions concentrated on the policies that had to be implemented in 2001 to address the Surinamese economy’s severe internal and external imbalances and arrest its deterioration. They gave particular attention to the role of fiscal adjustment, and in particular to the size and the composition of the fiscal adjustment needed to minimize domestic bank financing. Authorities and staff also exchanged views on exchange rate and monetary policy, and explored the prospects for public sector and financial reform. A. The Outlook for 2001 19. The successful stabilization of the economy in 2001 will require a very large fiscal adjustment in light of Suriname’s limited access to international capital markets, the lack of 5 Specifically, the CBS threatened to revoke the operating license of any bank or cambio trading in dollars outside of the established bands. The allowable trading band was first set at Sf 500 on either side of the official rate; this was subsequently reduced to Sf 200 in December 2000 and then to Sf 175 in February 200 1. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-9- domestic nonbank financing sources and the need to minimize domestic bank financing. The staffs projections of the macroeconomic outlook for 2001 reflect the basic economic objectives of the authorities, and embody a tight fiscal stance that is complemented by a supportive monetary policy. This policy mix will forestall any substantial reversal of the real depreciation of the guilder that took place at end 2000, and should greatly reduce the rate of inflation, thus largely obviating the need to rely on the inflation tax. The sustained improvement in Suriname’s external competitiveness will boost exports, and the more stable financial climate fostered by the adjustment will increase financial intermediation and help revive demand for investable funds from the banking system. As a result, economic activity is projected to recover after two years of decline. 20. In more specific terms, the staff project that real GDP will grow by 2 percent in 2001 on the strength of growth of mining and manufacturing and a recovery of financial services. Crude oil production is expected to increase because new fields have come on stream, and the bauxite companies are projecting an increase in the production of alumina of 2 percent.6 The financial sector’s value added was severely affected in 2000 by a decline in lending activity, which should be at least partly reversed in 200 1. 21. Suriname’s external accounts will benefit from the steady growth of mining exports and some decline in consumer goods imports entailed by the real depreciation of the guilder near the end of 2000. Agricultural exports are not likely to be buoyant, given world prices and the continued deterioration of the sector’s physical infrastructure. Nonetheless, the external current account deficit is projected to decline to US$ll3 million in 2001. Net capital inflows are projected rise substantially in 200 1, on the assumption that the government will borrow about US$l 10 million under a guarantee from the Netherlands (see Section III B). This operation increases the average maturity of the public debt and allows the CBS to partially reconstitute its net international reserves. 22. The 12-month rate of inflation of consumer prices is projected to decline to 16 percent by December 2001, with average inflation for the year as a whole at 50 percent.7 The projected decline in inflation will lead to some remonetization (an increase in the ratio of both narrow and broad money to GDP). Together with the decline in demand for bank credit from the budget, this will allow a substantial increase in credit to the private sector. 6 The aluminum smelter formerly operated by Suralco, the larger of the two companies in the bauxite sector, has been closed since April 1999 and is expected to remain closed. It is a small-scale and therefore a relatively high cost facility, and its operation is not profitable at current aluminum prices. 7 The carryover of consumer price inflation from 2000 is 39 percent. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-lO- B. Fiscal Policy 23. The authorities emphasized the difficult budgetary situation they had inherited. Their efforts to control expenditure had been further handicapped by the fact that obligations incurred by the outgoing administration late in its term had not been properly recorded.8 Nonetheless, the authorities were determined to gain control of the budget, which they saw as the key to successful stabilization. Although revenue increases would play a role in reducing the deficit, the burden of adjustment would have to fall on expenditure. The mission emphasized that to consolidate the gains of fiscal adjustment in 2001 in subsequent years, it would be necessary to reduce the size of the civil service and public enterprise sectors (see Section E on public sector reform.) 24. Based on its macroeconomic framework, the staff estimated that it would be necessary to reduce the central government’s deficit from 13 percent of GDP in 2000 to 3 percent of GDP in 2001 in order to contain financing from the commercial banks to 3 percent of GDP. This limit on the budget’s reliance on bank credit would prevent the crowding out of creditworthy private sector borrowers and would be consistent with the programmed decline in inflation.’ 25. About two-thirds of the required fiscal adjustment would result from the impact of the average depreciation of the real exchange rate on the tax bases of the mining sector, which are denominated in U.S. dollars; the increase in excise tax rates announced in October and effective January 1,200 1; and the natural adjustment resulting from the elimination of once- off spending associated with the transitional period of May-August 2000. lo The remainder would result from the restraint of other expenditure, and notably spending on wages and salaries. ’ A special debt commission was established in October 2000 to establish the true extent of the government’s debts. It submitted a report at end-March 2001. 9 The decline in the yield of the inflation tax will partially offset the contractionary impact of the sizeable fiscal adjustment. lo The excise tax increases were as follows: cigarettes and tobacco: 17 percent to 100 percent; alcohol: 18 percent to 45 percent; beer: 13 percent to 30 percent; soft drinks: 5 percent to 10 percent. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-ll- Contribution of Budgetary Measures to Adjustment (In percent of GDP) Impact of depreciation on tax bases of mining sector 1.8 Increase in excise taxes 2.1 Elimination of once-off spending 3.4 Restraint of wages and salaries 2.3 Restraint of other expenditure 1.6 Total l/ 11.2 l/ The total yield of the measures exceeds the projected decline in the deficit because of a projected fall in the ratio of grants to GDP of 0.9 percent. 26. The staff emphasized the paramount importance of wage restraint. Although the government might not be able to avoid granting an increase of some amount, the staff urged the authorities to keep any increase to the absolute minimum.” The authorities agreed that a fiscal adjustment of the order proposed by the staff was both necessary and desirable. They planned to use the staffs analysis as an input into their own budgetary projections for 2001, which were to be submitted to the National Assembly in May. They acknowledged that wage restraint was essential for fiscal adjustment, given the size of the wage bill and its share of total expenditure, and noted that no general or sectoral wage increases were planned for the moment. l2 27. Regarding the financing of the central government’s deficit, some US$49 million in external debt repayments fall due in 2001, of which about US$33 million is short-term commercial debt at high rates of interest. The authorities explained that they had approached the Netherlands on using all or a part of the remaining “guarantee” funds under the Independence Treaty (f1390 million or about US$165 million) to refinance this debt and pay off US$20 million in outstanding arrears through one or more sovereign borrowings of 15 years maturity in the international capital market. In addition to the funds raised for this purpose, an additional amount, of the order of US$40 million would be raised to repay Treasury debt to the CBS and help reconstitute its reserves. The arrangements for the l1 Labor unions were already calling for increases of up to 200 percent. A leading federation of trade unions was reported in early March to be demanding an increase of 150 percent. l2 Wage negotiations are normally held in mid-year. Settlements have recently been effective retroactively to the first of the year. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12- borrowing would be finalized in consultation with the Netherlands once the commission tallying the central government’s domestic and external obligations had finished its work. 28. The monitoring of the government’s financial operations has been handicapped in the past by problems with the expenditure reporting system, and by a lack of coordination between the staffs of the CBS and the Ministry of Finance.13 The authorities are determined to rectify this problem, given its fundamental importance for a successful fiscal adjustment. They have constituted a small team of staff from the two agencies to ensure the timely, comprehensive and accurate monitoring of the budget, and are seeking technical assistance with budgetary management from the Netherlands. C. Monetary Policy and the Banking System 29. Despite the shortcomings of the statistics on commercial bank lending already noted, it is clear that the budget received a disproportionate share of the expansion in bank credit that took place in 2000. Monetary policy was essentially passive in the first eight months of 2000 as the CBS accommodated the government’s financing needs. Subsequently, the government stopped borrowing from the CBS, and, under legislation enacted in August placed some Sf 38.7 billion in notes with the commercial banks in the last four months of the year. This borrowing was subject to the limits of the credit ceilings applied to commercial bank lending. 30. The nominal lending rates of Suriname’s commercial banks have in recent years ranged from 25 percent to 40 percent, with the bulk of lending taking place in the 35- 40 percent range. Nominal lending rates have changed little despite the large increase in inflation since 1997. The staff conjectured that this might reflect relatively inelastic expectations regarding inflation, as well as an element of moral suasion. The authorities agreed that moral suasion had played a role in the past, but they also observed that bank borrowers were often prone to money illusion, and did not make an adequate distinction between nominal and real rates of interest. At the same time, they noted that the cost of loan service becomes onerous in periods of high nominal interest rates even when real interest rates were low or negative. Staff and authorities agreed that high and variable inflation had discouraged lending, and long-term lending in particular. The staff emphasized that once stabilization had reduced the rate of inflation to single digits, competitive pressures should lead to a substantial decline in nominal interest rates from their current level. Under stable financial conditions, real interest rates would normally be positive but not prone to excessive fluctuations. As a result, the attractiveness of medium-term commercial borrowing to both borrower and lender would be enhanced. 31. Monetary policy in Suriname is conducted by means of ceilings on the credit expansion of the individual banks. The permissible increase in commercial credit is l3 The deficiencies of the current fiscal reporting system are described in Appendix II. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13 - determined by applying a set of coefficients to increases in the components of the broad money stock. Credit Ceiling: Coefficients Determining Increase in Allowable Credit Class of deposit Applicable coefficient Demand deposits Savings deposits Time deposits of maturity of less than 1 year Time deposits of maturity of 1 year or more 0.00 0.90 0.75 1.00 32. The commercial banks are expected to ensure that the increase in credit does not exceed the permissible level at the end of each month, which requires that the banks estimate what the stock and composition of their deposit base will be at month’s end. A bank not wishing to violate the ceiling would want to increase its holdings of liquid assets, which in effect means increased balances with other banks or unremunerated reserves at the CBS. The mission considered that the system might pose an undue administrative burden. The authorities agreed that it was not ideal. 33. The mission noted that the zero coefficient on demand deposits made it unprofitable for banks to pay interest on these deposits, since they could not be used to extend credit or be invested in interest-earning assets. Apart from their increased security, demand deposits were no more attractive an investment than cash. In periods of high inflation, demand deposit holders were in effect being taxed like holders of cash, with no compensation in the form of interest. It was likely that the zero coefficient applied to demand deposits was reducing demand for them and increasing demand for currency and near money. 34. The mission proposed that the CBS consider a move to a uniform fractional reserve system, with a uniform reserve coefficient applying to all classes of deposits. If such a move was not thought feasible at present, the mission suggested that the coefficient on demand deposits be raised, and those on other deposit classes lowered, in order to eliminate the artificial discouragement to holding demand deposits. The authorities are considering this proposal, but have no immediate plans to replace the credit ceiling mechanism. 35. Under the previous administration, the CBS had been actively engaged in trading industrial gold-buying gold mined in Suriname and selling it abroad. The CBS remained obligated to acquire a certain amount of gold for resale under a commercial agreement negotiated by the previous administration. Apart from this operation, the authorities explained, the CBS was no longer involved in the market for industrial gold. They agreed with the mission that the CBS should deal only in monetary gold, adding that the government intends to establish a commercial mint. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14- 36. Suriname has seven commercial banks, including three small state banks and a national development bank. Commercial banking is dominated by three banks, one of which is partly owned by the government (see Box 1). The regulation and supervision of the commercial banks has fallen well short of international norms in the past. In particular, the three large commercial banks do not follow generally accepted practices with regard to loan loss provisioning and interest capitalization. The current Bank Act, which dates from 1968, is in need of revision, since it does not embody the Base1 Core Principles (BCP) and fails to give the CBS adequate authority to ensure effective compliance. A draft act embodying the BCP was being prepared for submission to the national assembly later in the year. The CBS has made efforts in recent years to upgrade on-site inspection procedures and has instituted effective training programs for bank inspectors under the guidance of the MAE resident advisor. D. Exchange Rate Policy and External Developments 37. The changes to the exchange rate regime made in October 2000 partially liberalized it. Nonetheless, under the current regime, the foreign exchange earnings of the mining sector (bauxite and oil) that are used to pay local expenses (e.g. tax payments and wages and salaries of the employees of the bauxite companies and the state oil company Staatsolie) must be surrendered to the CBS at the central bank rate of Sf 2,200 to the U.S. dollar. A surrender requirement also applies to all other exporters, although they may sell their foreign exchange to the commercial bank of their choice at a rate within the current band of plus or minus Sf 175 around the central bank rate. No restrictions apply to current account transactions. 38. The authorities reported that apart from very small high-cost trades, all foreign exchange trades were taking place within the bands. They emphasized that they relied primarily on fiscal and monetary policy to keep the rate within the band, although they did resort to moral suasion as a complementary measure to prevent the development of a parallel market outside the bands. 39. The authorities emphasized that the central bank rate was not rigidly fixed. Their basic aim was to unify the foreign exchange market, and they intended to reduce the width ( the band around the central bank rate over time. They would adjust the central bank rate whenever there was clear evidence that it was uncompetitive, however. I4 The mission endorsed the goal of unification, but stressed that moral suasion was generally not an effective strategy, and was not a substitute for supportive monetary and fiscal policies. 40. The mission urged the authorities to eliminate the export surrender requirement as soon as possible, since its presence would only discourage the repatriation of foreign Df l4 The real effective exchange rate the staff calculates remains well above its base year level (Figure 1). The multiplicity of rates in the past makes it difficult, however, to infer changes in competitiveness from the behavior of the REER. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 15- Box 1: The Structure of Banking in Suriname Suriname’s banking system consists of three relatively large commercial banks, one of which is part publicly-owned, one small private commercial bank, three small publicly-owned commercial banks, and a national development bank. Deposits at the three large commercial banks amounted to Sf458 billion or about 80 percent of the market for deposits. Savings deposits are a large proportion of the total deposits of the three large banks. Their loans amounted to Sf 116.5 billion, or 69.6 percent of the total loans of all banks in the system. Composition of deposit base of the three largest commercial banks Deposit class Percent of total 1 Demand denosits-Sur. Guilder I 24.15 I 1 Demand deposits-forex I 13.83 1 Time deposits 14.65 Savings deposits 47.37 Total deposits 100.00 Based on balance sheet figures filed with the Central Bank at end-2000, the book value of the assets of tbe three largest commercial banks was Sf 537.3 billion, or 82 percent of the total assets in the banking system. The biggest bank owns 38 percent of total assets, while the other two had 29 percent and 15 percent, respectively. The remaining 18 percent of total assets in the system represent essentially the assets of the three state banks. The balance sheet figures are provided before any adjustment for loan loss allowances and provisions, since banks are not currently required to report this information to the CBS. The risk-weighted capital asset ratios of the three largest banks were calculated by the MAE resident expert to be 27.4 percent, 9.3 percent and 8.1 percent, respectively, on the basis of the banks’ own classification system. These risk-weighted capital to assets ratios as filed with the CBS meet the 8 percent minimum Basle requirement. However, loan balances of banks in the system include capitalized income for loans where arrears exist for more than three months, and there is no provision for losses. Adjustments for overcapitalization of income and inadequate provisioning could entail a significant charge to the capital bases of banks and thus lower the capital to assets ratio. The available information does not make a definite assessment of the soundness of these banks possible, however. The financial situation of the smaller state-owned banks is problematic. An action plan to address their difficulties is under consideration at the CBS. One major difficulty is how to deal with the high level of nonperforming loans in their portfolios, given that loss provisioning appears not to have been adequate. The CBS is responsible for the supervision of all banks operating in Suriname. The legal basis for the CBS’s supervisory authority is an act that dates back to 1968. The main shortcomings of this act are (1) the Basle Core Principles are not reflected in it, and (2) it does not contain sufficient provisions to enable its adequate and effective enforcement by the CBS. All banks are monitored by the CBS’s Supervision Department using both on-site and off-site supervision techniques. Since 1998, and with the assistance of the Ih4F Resident Advisor, full on-site examinations of the three largest banks in the system have been conducted using a working draft of a new Financial Institutions Act. This Act is now being revised by the CBS’s legal department, with a view to its being made law later this year. The pending Financial Institutions Act will incorporate the Basle Core Principles for the review of commercial banks’ internal controls and management information systems and will also provide for the determination of regulatory (adjusted) capital. Off-site reviews continue to include an assessment of monthly balance sheets and related material. An on-going check for compliance with existing guidelines and regulations is also conducted routinely. To strengthen its supervisory function, the CBS has asked the IMF Resident Advisor to draft directives that would apply to banks operating in Suriname. These directives, which would eventually become regulations, would cover capital adequacy, classification and provisioning of loans, legal lending limits, insider lending, fixed assets and foreign exchange risk management. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 16- exchange. In any case, in a stable financial environment it would not be necessary, since exporters would face no disincentive to exchange their foreign currency earnings for holdings of domestic currency. The mission also noted that the particular surrender requirement applying to the mining sector created a multiple currency practice, since the gap between the rate at which the mining companies and other exporters sold foreign exchange could (and actually did) exceed 2 percent. 41. Since becoming a member of CARICOM in 1996, Suriname has completed four of the five phases of tariff reduction. Suriname has maintained its common external tariff (CET) at 25 percent, rather than lower it to 20 percent, the target under phase five, which was to have been achieved by 1998. The less rapid pace of tariff reduction in Suriname reflects concerns over the impact of a further reduction on the competitiveness of local manufactures. l5 42. Suriname reformed its import licensing regime in September 1999. The previous regime was highly restrictive, being used to ration foreign exchange and protect domestic industries. The current system is not used for these purposes. A license is no longer required for each and every shipment of imports, only a general license, renewable every three years. Licenses are required for certain goods for reasons of national security (arms and ammunition); health (medicines and narcotics); and environmental protection (flora, fauna, waste products, and agricultural goods). For similar reasons, licenses are also required for a small number of exports. E. Public Sector Reform and Environmental Issues Civil service reform 43. The central government civil service employs approximately 38,000 persons, or about 60 percent of the formal sector’s labor force, and 9 percent of the population. Civil service l5 The CET rate of 20 percent refers to final goods. Agricultural products are excluded from the CET, and their tariffs are determined under the Agricultural Protocol. The general tariff for agricultural products is 40 percent. Special concessions have been given to various members to charge higher rates on selected agricultural products. Rates under the CET are determined by the nature of the commodity being taxed. Competing products (those commodities where regional production can satisfy at least 75 percent of regional demand) are subject to a tariff of 10 percent if they are primary products and capital goods, 15 percent if they are intermediate inputs and 20 percent if they are all final goods. For noncompeting products the rate is between O-5 percent. Limited exemptions may be claimed on the grounds of national development and in some cases to maintain a traditional revenue base. In particular, substantial discretion is allowed respecting tariffs on luxury goods like cars, alcohol and tobacco products. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17- employment is estimated to have grown by 6 percent during 2000, an election year. Public sector employment is roughly estimated at 53,000. Public Sector Employment as a Share of Population and Total Employment. (In percent) country Share of Total Employment Share of Population Suriname 76.9 11.5 Belize 6.3 2.0 Barbados 21.3 9.8 Costa Rica 14.3 5.2 Trinidad and Tobago 12.2 4.3 44. The share of public sector employment in population in Suriname is the highest in the region and is also higher than the share of general government employment in population in any of the G-10 countries. Moreover, over employment is also evident in the case of particular ministries. For example, the Ministry of Agriculture has one employee for every eight farmers; the Ministry of Education has one administrative employee for every three teachers; and there is one active teacher for every two on the payroll. 45. Lack of control over employment has resulted in declining average real salaries, because successive administrations have sought to contain the wage bill by compressing salaries. The combination of low pay and a flat salary profile discourages the more able and highly skilled, and has led to an exodus from the civil service at senior and professional levels. Moonlighting and absenteeism are both high. For civil servants who would have difficulty finding alternative employment, however, or who can remain on the payroll without spending many hours at the job, public employment provides a valuable safety net, since it provides both medical and pension benefits at a nominal cost. 46. The authorities clearly recognize the chronic character of the problem of overstaffing and have commissioned a survey of the civil service, which they intend to use as a basis for a program of rationalization. The mission stressed the importance of this step. It emphasized that civil service reform is the key to medium-term fiscal viability in Suriname, since a wage bill of 15 percent of percent of GDP-the level reached in 2000-was not sustainable. Compression of wages was a short-term expedient that could play a role in the first year of a stabilization program. However, it could not achieve a lasting reduction in the wage bill, and would only aggravate the problem of low pay for the better performers. The authorities Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 18- agreed with the mission’s views overall, but noted that civil service reform in Suriname was complicated by the country’s ethnic diversity. l6 As a result, reductions in employment had to be carefully handled to avoid the charge of favoritism or discrimination. 47. The mission recognized that this was a delicate issue, but noted that the problem of excess employment was not simply an inheritance from the past, but reflected a lack of control over the hiring of new employees even now. Noting that an ounce of prevention was worth a pound of cure, the mission urged the authorities to ensure that the hiring was adequately controlled and subject to budgetary limits. This lack of control had vitiated the impact of a hiring freeze imposed by the previous government, since exceptions to the freeze became routine. Public sector enterprises 48. Little is known of the estimated 108 public sector enterprises or agencies that are part of Suriname’s public sector. Employment in the sector is estimated to be about 15,000, but many of the smaller entities may be insolvent or nonoperational. They are not a major drain on the budget, as explicit subsidy payments to enterprises in total were about 1 percent of GDP. The staff, drawing on the findings of the World Bank mission, emphasized the importance of a thorough inventory of these entities. The assets of many of these enterprises might be better redeployed in the private sector, and the proceeds of asset sales would help reduce the need for government borrowing. The authorities agreed that this problem needed to be addressed, although they noted again the delicate issues posed by downsizing in a multicultural environment. Environmental issues 49. Gold mining in the interior of the country is a major part of the informal economy, and is thought to generate about US$l50 million per annum of unrecorded exports. The industry is largely unregulated, and current production techniques, which use excessive quantities of mercury, pose a major threat to the environment. In particular, mercury pollution is a potentially serious threat to the water supply of certain parts of the interior. The authorities believe that better regulation of the industry would allow them to alleviate this problem, especially since there are equally effective mining techniques that do not involve imperiling the environment. More effective regulation would also bring this industry into the tax net. l6 Employment at different agencies or ministries tends to be the preserve of particular ethnic groups. The same is true of public enterprises. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 19- IV. MEDIUM-TERM PROJECTIONS 50. The staffs medium-term projections assume that the large fiscal adjustment required for 2001 is accomplished. The external environment is assumed to be benign. Alumina prices and volumes are each assumed to increase by 2 percent per annum. Crude oil extraction is assumed to increase by 10 percent per annum, and crude oil prices to remain at current levels. In addition, both the level of grants and foreign direct investment are assumed to increase gradually, although grants remain below the highs they reached in the mid 1990s. The government is assumed to follow a conservative debt strategy, avoiding external borrowing, apart from that which would be guaranteed by the Netherlands. The stock of external debt will increase, but short-term commercial debt contracted at high interest rates will drop to zero. Debt service ratios will decline as a result. Net foreign assets of the CBS increase to 3 months of imports by 2002. (Table 7.) 51. Because the budget deficit is reduced so markedly in 200 1, the stance of fiscal policy needs to be tightened only modestly in 2002-03. Provided the budget deficit can then be contained, domestic bank financing of the central government will remain comparatively low, allowing an adequate supply of bank credit to the private sector. Inflation is projected to decline to below 10 percent by December 2002, and to the low single digits by December 2004. The decline of inflation fosters some remonetization, and the banks’ role as financial intermediaries is enhanced. 52. Maintaining the projected fiscal stance will, however, require both continued wage restraint and civil service reform. The reform’s impact on the wage bill takes place only gradually, because the salary savings that result from exits from the civil service will be at least partly offset by severance pay and similar payments to departing civil servants. By 2004-05, it should be possible to offer wage increases to occupational groups that are relatively underpaid. Public sector capital outlays-in particular, much needed investment in both physical and social infrastructure-should rise with the increase in grants, and a less tight budgetary constraint. 53. The improved prospects stemming from the stabilization of the economy will attract the interest of both domestic and foreign investors, and private investment levels are accordingly projected to rise. Over time, financial reform should increase the efficiency of the private sector investment financed by the banking system. The privatization of the least efficient public enterprises should increase the productivity of their assets. Higher levels of more productive investment and financial stability can be expected to increase the rate of growth. Accordingly, real GDP growth is projected to increase gradually to 5 percent in 2006. Import levels remain relatively high because of an increase in capital goods imports generated by increases in grants-financed investment and FDI. 54. The principal uncertainty in Suriname’s external environment is the price of its main export, alumina. Growing capacity in crude oil extraction helps to reduce Suriname’s vulnerability to external shocks in oil prices and production. A 10 percent drop in the price of alumina relative to baseline would reduce exports by about US$35 million (4 percent of GDP Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 20 - in 2000). The first round impact on the current account-deficit would be an increase of about US$20 million.17 The first round impact in the budget deficit would be about US$12 million. Assuming no change in government expenditure and no new tax measures to close the gap, central government borrowing from the banking system would be increased by about US$12 million (1% percent of GDP). The expansionary impact of this increase on the money supply would be offset by the decline in NFA, which would increase by about US$12 million less than programmed. ’ * The loss of reserves in 2001 could be avoided by a further tightening of fiscal policy. Given the extent of the fiscal adjustment already programmed for 200 1, however, it would appear preferable to allow the CBS’s reserves to absorb the shock. V. STAFFAPPRAISAL 55. The last three years have been very difficult for Suriname. They have witnessed a return to the instability that has marked the past two decades apart from a brief interlude in 1995-96. Most of the economy’s problems in 1998-00 are the result of misguided economic policies-especially fiscal policy-rather than a difficult external environment. In particular, few of the rules and procedures of budgetary preparation, execution and control were followed. As a result, realized expenditures bore little resemblance to approved parliamentary allocations and did not even reflect the government’s basic expenditure priorities. The new administration has made a good start in its efforts to right the unbalanced economy it inherited. The devaluation of the central bank rate, the elimination of all but one of the special exchange rates, and the adjustments to the prices of certain basic goods made in October 2000 were all necessary and overdue measures. 56. Gaining control over the budget, as the authorities well recognize will require formulating a limit for total expenditure for 2001 derived from a realistic forecast of revenues and a targeted deficit that can be financed without excessive recourse to domestic credit. Given the constraint on total expenditure, it is absolutely essential to set a target for the wage bill that does not squeeze other expenditure unreasonably. It is also essential to track the central government’s financial operations through the course of the year. Projections of revenue in particular are always uncertain, and revenue collections below target will normally require that adjustments be made to the ceilings on expenditure. However efforts to control expenditure should safeguard basic social expenditure programs. Additional tax measures, such as adjustments to the rates of excise tax, could help in this regard. .” ” The difference between the impact on exports and the impact on the current account reflects profits transfers and payments to the parent companies of the two bauxite companies. ‘* The first-round impact of the price decline on the current account is reduced by the induced decline in demand for imports by bauxite sector employees and others affected by the decline in the sector’s earnings. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2l- 57. Fiscal policy has overburdened monetary policy in recent years, making an independent monetary policy difficult under any policy regime. However, the credit ceiling mechanism is a cumbersome and distortionary instrument of monetary control that is prone to evasion and poses a compliance problem for banks. The authorities should seriously consider a move to a fractional reserve system. In the meantime, they should eliminate or reduce the artificial disincentive for banks to offer demand deposits that the credit ceiling in its present form creates. The authorities are also encouraged to proceed quickly with the reform of the legal framework for supervision and regulation of the banking system. Years of instability have discouraged the development of the banks’ normal role as financial intermediaries by preventing the development of the longer-term loan market. 58. Fiscal adjustment without public sector reform is unlikely to be successful. Civil service numbers need to fall to reduce the wage bill to a sustainable level and to pay the better qualified and more highly skilled employees salaries comparable (with due regard to differences in job security) to what they would earn in the private sector or abroad. At the same time, the budget must control new civil service hires. Granted the difficulty of such a policy, its pursuit is essential for the country’s economic health. The size of the public enterprise sector also needs to be reduced. 59. The initial measures taken to unify the exchange market in October 2000 were important steps in the right direction. The next step, which may be taken once it is clear that fiscal stabilization has taken hold, is full unification, and the elimination of the surrender requirements for exporters. Some further adjustment of the exchange rate may be necessary, and once the economy is stabilized the authorities may wish to consider an arrangement other than an adjustable peg with bands. Whatever exchange rate regime is ultimately adopted, the pursuit of prudent fiscal and monetary polices will be necessary to its stability and effectiveness. 60. The state of Suriname’s economic and financial statistics is very weak, and compromises the conduct of economic policy. The statistical deficiencies also make the practice of good governance very difficult. The staff would urge the authorities to take full advantage of the technical assistance that has been or will be provided by the IDB and the Fund, beginning with the public finance and monetary statistics, where improvements can be made with the least difficulty. It welcomes the efforts underway to rebase the national accounts and the CPI. 61. The practice of requiring exporters of bauxite and petroleum derivatives to surrender foreign exchange to the CBS at a rate of Sf 2,200 to the U.S. dollar, together with the surrender requirement imposed on other exporters, given the current width of the band, constitutes a multiple currency practice, since the spread between the bands and the central bank rate exceeds 2 percent. The preferential rate of Sf 1,100 per dollar that applies to imports of baby milk and formula also entails a multiple currency practice. In the absence of a definite schedule for their removal, the staff does not recommend Fund approval for the retention of these measures. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 22 - 62. It is recommended that the next Article IV Consultation with Suriname be held on the 12-month cycle. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 23 - Table 1. Suriname: Selected Economic Indicators 1996-01 1996 1997 1998 1999 Prel. Proj. 2000 2001 (Annual percentage change, unless otherwise indicated) National income and prices GDP at 1980 prices (including infomral sector) l/ GDP current market prices (including informal sector) l/ Consumer prices (end of period) Consumer prices (annual average) 11.2 7.2 4.1 -5.0 -5.6 1.9 19.9 20.3 34.2 77.4 48.7 47.5 0.5 18.3 22.9 112.8 82.4 15.6 -0.8 7.3 19.0 98.8 59.1 50.2 National accounts Gross domestic investment Private sector Public sector Gross national saving Foreign saving Central government Revenue and grants Currmt reveune Grants Expenditure and net lending Current expenditure Capital expenditure Overall balance Financing Domestic External Exceptional financing Money and credit Domestic assets (net) Of which: Public sector Private sector Money and quasi-money (M2) Velocity (GDP relative to M2) External sector 21 Current account Merchandise exports, f.o.b. Merchandise imports, f.o.b. Capital and financial account (In percent of GDP, not including informal sector) 19.3 19.9 10.4 12.5 8.9 7.3 6.6 10.8 12.7 9.1 (In percent of GDP, including infomral sector) 46.7 35.7 30.3 26.7 16.5 9.0 44.2 39.7 38.1 32.2 6.0 5.4 2.5 -4.0 -2.5 4.0 1.7 3.7 -4.2 0.3 0.0 0.0 (Annual percentage change, unless otherwise indicated) 94.7 128.5 -70.6 1993.2 585.4 54.6 286.9 22.3 2.5 2.4 24.5 21.7 15.3 17.8 10.1 13.1 11.9 13.8 14.4 8.6 3.4 4.0 8.9 -6.2 -8.1 -5.0 15.6 27.9 23.4 22.8 36.0 24.0 28.6 31.7 29.7 21.3 26.6 30.6 6.2 2.7 2.0 1.1 49.8 34.3 41.6 34.3 34.6 26.8 39.1 31.4 11.6 6.1 2.5 2.9 -13.8 -10.3 -13.0 -2.7 13.8 10.3 13.0 2.7 2.8 5.4 16.9 -4.2 5.5 4.5 -6.8 -10.0 5.5 0.4 3.0 17.0 47.4 63.5 89.4 4.3 228.9 63.3 178.1 -23.5 14.6 37.0 -10.1 28.6 36.8 35.2 77.7 40.5 2.4 3.1 2.6 2.7 (In percent of GDP, including infomral sector, unless otherwise indicated) -8.8 -6.7 -11.5 -20.0 -16.8 -16.4 66.3 68.3 46.4 53.3 57.3 73.0 -61.6 -61.0 -45.0 -55.1 -54.7 -64.6 8.6 5.9 2.8 4.9 4.4 13.9 Of which: External borrowing: central government Errors and omissions (net) Change in reserves (in millions US%) (increase -) Net international reserves 3/ (in months of imports) Stock of total debt (in millions US%) 3/ Ofwhich: Short term 3/ Total debt in percent of GDP, incl. informal sector Short term debt as a percent of total debt Total debt in percent of exports, goods and services Debt service (in millions USS) Debt service in percent of exports, goods and services 0.3 2.4 2.0 1.2 -2.7 8.0 -6.6 27.0 7.8 4.2 2.8 2.7 152.1 158.4 212.0 22.6 29.0 60.0 81.2 40.2 18.8 23.2 20.1 24.2 31.3 28.4 43.6 14.9 18.3 28.3 31.5 16.8 6.0 29.1 25.2 37.6 47.3 43.3 52.0 17.5 23.3 14.7 13.2 121.4 56.2 3.3 3.7 2.6 2.4 21.9 9.8 2.1 11.1 15.9 5.2 11.0 14.2 87.9 7.5 -60.3 0.5 0.3 1.9 257.9 239.5 299.5 Sources: Central Bank of Surinam e; Ministry of Finance; General Bureau of Statistics; and Fund stalf estimates. l/Includes estimate of informal sector as of 1995. 2/ Baaed on amounts expressed in U.S. dollars. 31 End of period. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 24 - Table 2. Suriname: Gross Domestic Product by Sectors of Origin at Constant Prices 1996 1997 1998 Est. Proj . 1999 2000 2001 Gross domestic product 1,362.3 1,485.7 1,534.5 1,471.g 1,361.5 1,388.g GDP including informal sector 1,737.l 1861.4 1,937.0 1840.2 l739.6 L771.9 (In millions of Surinamese guilders at 1980 prices) Agriculture Mining Manufacturing Electricity, water and gas Construction Trade, restaurants and hotels Transport and communication Finance Government Personal services Less: inputed service charge Informal sector Of which : Gold Gross domestic product GDP including informal sector Agriculture Mining Manufacturing Electricity, water and gas Construction Trade, restaurants, hotels Transport and communication Finance Government Personal services Less : inputed service charge Informal sector Of which : Gold 141.9 145.3 140.4 168.2 150.7 160.1 193.3 219.3 229.7 240.1 242.2 265.8 197.3 200.4 198.1 178.4 144.4 151.0 121.3 125.6 121.2 99.8 88.0 89.8 53.7 55.5 60.3 56.7 48.0 47.6 110.2 141.6 151.1 144.5 143.8 137.4 97.3 107.8 125.6 120.6 121.8 129.1 211.9 256.0 245.9 189.0 126.3 116.2 272.7 285.9 308.7 300.7 303.1 297.7 11.0 11.0 12.0 11.8 11.5 11.3 -48.1 -62.9 -58.6 -37.7 -18.6 -17.1 374.8 375.7 402.5 368.3 378.1 383.0 327.7 328.2 351.0 320.7 329.5 333.3 (Percentage change) 12.3 9.1 11.2 7.2 -2.9 2.4 6.0 13.5 3.1 1.6 11.1 3.6 10.3 3.4 48.0 28.6 5.3 10.9 83.5 20.8 5.3 4.9 -31.3 0.0 125.2 30.7 7.4 0.3 7.4 0.2 7.0 -8.6 2.7 1.2 3.3 4.1 -4.1 -5.0 -7.5 -5.5 2.0 1.9 -3.4 19.8 -10.4 6.3 4.7 4.5 0.9 9.7 -1.1 -10.0 -19.0 4.5 -3.5 -17.7 -11.8 2.0 8.7 -5.9 -15.3 -1.0 6.7 -4.4 -0.4 -4.5 16.5 -4.0 1.0 5.9 -3.9 -23.2 -33.2 -8.0 8.0 -2.6 0.8 -1.8 9.1 -1.7 -2.5 -1.7 -6.8 -35.6 -50.7 -8.0 7.1 -8.5 2.7 1.3 Sources: General Bureau of Statistics; various Ministries; and Fund staff estimates. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 25 - Table 3. Suriname: Central Government Operations 1996 Prel. Proj . 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 Revenues and grants 46.7 35.7 36.0 24.0 28.6 31.7 Revenues 30.3 26.7 29.7 21.3 26.6 30.6 Direct taxes 14.6 13.0 11.9 7.8 13.2 13.7 Indirect taxes 12.8 10.3 13.0 12.2 11.1 13.3 Nontax revenues l/ 2.9 3.4 4.8 1.3 2.3 3.6 Grants 16.5 9.0 6.2 2.7 2.0 1.1 Expenditures and net lending Current expenditures Wages and salaries Goods and services Of which: Extraordinary expenditure Subsidies and transfers Of which: Private sector Public sector Households Interest Net lending Capital expenditures 44.2 39.7 49.8 34.3 41.6 34.3 38.1 32.2 34.6 26.8 39.1 31.4 10.1 13.0 18.8 13.8 15.0 12.7 19.3 13.4 11.1 9.3 18.7 14.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 3.4 0.0 7.7 5.2 3.8 3.2 4.6 3.3 . . 3.3 4.4 0.9 0.0 6.2 0.2 0.1 3.3 0.9 3.7 11.6 Current balance -7.8 -4.8 Overall balance 2.5 -2.5 1.3 0.4 -4.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 . . 1.8 3.4 0.5 2.1 5.4 -5.5 -4.0 4.0 1.8 1.9 0.3 0.0 0.0 0.0 -13.8 Financing Central bank (net) Other domestic (net) External (net) Exceptional financing Domestic Foreign 13.8 1.1 1.7 5.5 5.5 5.5 0.0 0.5 0.9 0.0 0.0 1.1 1.1 2.2 2.4 2.0 0.5 0.8 1.2 1.3 0.0 0.0 6.1 2.5 2.9 -5.5 -12.6 -0.9 -10.3 -13.0 -2.7 10.3 13.0 2.7 5.2 13.2 -6.9 0.2 3.7 2.7 4.5 -6.8 -10.0 0.4 3.0 17.0 0.4 3.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 17.0 Memorandum item: GDP at market prices (Including the informal sector) (In percent of GDP) (In billions of Surinamese Guilders) 271.3 320.1 424.7 752.7 1,118.9 1,650.2 Sources: Ministry of Finance; Central Bank of Suriname; and Fund staff estimates. l/ Includes capital revenue. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 26 - Table 4. Suriname: Summary Accounts of the Banking System (In millions of S urinamese guilders, as of December 3 1) 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 Proj. 2001 I. Central Bank Net internatiomd reserves l/ 56,737 45,896 42,758 18,488 24,605 192,996 Net other foreign assets 409 -16,960 -3,488 -4,804 117 124 Net domestic assets Net claims on the public sector Ofwhich: -28,013 4,246 12,515 71,599 144,133 27,806 440 11,926 44,086 82,677 231,386 118,122 Central gov-ent (net) Net liabilities to commercial banks Net claims on other banking institutions Net liabilities to non-bank fm. institutions Credit to the private sector Capital accounts Of which: -2,551 8,66 1 40,321 79,53 1 226,809 113,408 -16,931 2,63 1 -11,736 4,416 -89,176 -109,540 9 59 218 486 599 616 -2,168 -23 1 -594 -2,562 -6,845 -7,050 75 7,127 1,669 3,941 5,550 3,859 -4,017 -7,020 -28,473 -28,666 - 18,974 -10,543 Reserve valuation 0 901 40,424 62,797 139,759 171,484 Other asset23 (net) 21 -5,33 1 -10,245 7,345 11,307 21,594 32,342 Liabilities to the private sector 29,133 33,183 51,784 85,283 168,856 220,296 Currency in circulation 27,343 32,187 50,443 81,652 155,007 204,128 Demand deposits 1,496 818 826 656 2,364 3,591 Gold certificates 294 178 515 2,975 11,484 13,207 Net international reserves I/ 2/ 56,737 45,896 42,758 Net other foreign assets 16,949 236 6,970 Net domestic assets Net claims on public sector Of which: 42,180 96,389 142,100 232,274 439,974 459,062 940 19,680 64,734 105,729 294,075 225,024 Central government (net) Credit to the private sector Capital accounts Of which: -2,565 14,536 58,792 100,695 288,874 219,668 45,606 70,509 80,773 110,643 99,419 127,840 -4,107 -7,020 -28,473 -28,666 -18,974 -10,543 Reserve valuation 0 901 40,424 62,797 139,759 171,484 Other assets (net) 21 -259 13,220 25,066 44,568 65,454 116,741 Liabilities to the private sector 115,866 142,521 191,828 265,750 460,062 637,524 Currency in circulation 27,343 32,187 50,443 81,652 155,007 204,128 Demand deposits 26,652 36,294 40,755 52,023 113,621 165,517 Time, savings, and other deposits 52,865 62,200 87,624 108,172 161,062 234,274 other liabilities 9,005 11,840 13,024 23,904 30,371 33,605 II. Bankii System 18,488 14,988 24,605 192,996 -4,517 -14,535 Sources: Central Bank of Suriname; and Fund staffestimates. l/ Gold holdings valued at market prices. 2/ Adjusted to include external arrears. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 27 - Table 5. Suriname: Balance of Payments (In millions of U.S. dollars) 1996 1997 1998 1999 Prel. 2000 Proj. 2001 Current account -57.5 -52.5 -121.5 -175.2 -141.6 -112.7 Trade balance 30.7 57.0 15.4 -15.4 22.2 57.9 Exports 434.3 538.1 491.3 466.7 483.8 501.8 Imports -403.6 -481.1 -475.9 -482.1 -461.6 -443.9 Services, net -91.6 -102.2 -124.9 -95.4 -90.1 -93.7 Transportation -36.6 -44.2 -47.9 -44.0 -43.0 -44.1 Travel 6.1 -2.6 -8.9 -3.6 -6.5 -6.6 Government services -18.1 -12.5 -17.9 -8.8 -19.0 -20.5 Other services -43.0 -42.9 -50.2 -39.0 -21.6 -22.5 Income, net 2.3 -8.3 -9.7 -62.9 -71.6 -75.4 Compensation to employees -1.3 -1.2 -0.8 1.1 -0.8 0.0 Investment income 3.6 -7.1 -8.9 -64.0 -70.8 -75.4 General government (interest on debt) -0.4 -5.4 -9.2 -1.7 -3.8 -5.4 Other sectors 4.0 -1.7 0.3 -62.3 -67.0 -70.0 Current transfers, net 1.1 1.0 -2.3 -1.5 -2.1 -1.5 General government 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Other sectors 1.1 1.0 -2.3 -1.5 -2.1 -1.5 Capital and financial account 56.5 59.7 68.1 32.9 37.5 95.4 Capital account 41.6 14.6 19.8 3.5 17.3 7.5 Public sector grants 41.6 14.6 19.8 22.5 17.3 7.5 Financial account 14.9 45.1 48.3 29.4 20.2 87.9 Public sector -15.0 2.9 20.3 -0.6 -24.4 -49.5 Drawings 1.9 18.7 21.4 18.3 93.9 0.0 Repayments due -16.9 -15.8 -1.1 -18.9 -118.3 -49.5 Private sector 29.9 42.2 28.0 30.0 44.6 28.3 Direct investment 19.1 9.0 9.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 Portfolio investment 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Other investment 10.8 33.2 18.9 30.0 44.6 28.3 Assets 25.5 15.2 18.6 27.1 23.8 25.0 Currency and deposits 25.5 15.2 18.6 27.1 23.8 25.0 Liabilities -14.7 18.0 0.3 2.9 20.8 3.3 Banks -12.8 -1.6 16.8 6.2 21.9 3.3 Other sectors -1.9 19.6 -16.5 -3.3 -1.1 0.0 Drawings 11.9 39.7 9.0 0.0 4.5 0.0 Repayments -13.8 -20.1 -25.5 -3.3 -5.6 0.0 Exceptional finance 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 109.1 Net errors and omissions 7.6 -32.6 46.6 37.7 92.6 Overall balance 6.6 -25.4 -6.8 -104.6 -11.6 Financing Change in net international reserves Change in foreign assets Monetary gold 97.6 80.3 -80.3 -60.3 Special drawing rights Reserve position in the fund Foreign exchange Change in short-term foreign liabilities Change in arrears -6.6 25.4 6.8 104.6 11.6 -6.6 27.0 7.8 87.9 7.5 -20.8 -5.0 -178.2 202.8 9.5 17.1 3.7 -120.3 107.8 5.7 -0.3 -0.6 -9.1 17.6 0.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 -8.2 0.5 -37.6 -8.1 -48.8 85.6 2.8 14.2 32.0 186.0 -114.9 -2.0 0.0 -1.6 -1.0 16.7 4.1 -20.0 Sources: Central Bank of Suriname; and Fund staff estimates. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 28 - Table 6. Suriname: Public and Publicly-Guaranteed External Debt 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 Stock of total debt, in millions of U.S. dollars l/ (end of period) Stock of total debt, in percent of GDP 23.2 20.1 24.2 31.3 28.4 43.6 Stock of total debt, in percent of exports of goods and services Debt service, in millions of U. S. dollars Amortization Interest payments Debt service, in percent of exports of goods and services Arrears, in millions of U.S. dollars (end of period) 152.1 158.4 212.0 257.9 239.5 299.5 29.1 25.2 17.5 23.3 16.9 17.4 0.6 5.9 3.3 20.6 3.7 19.0 37.6 47.3 14.7 13.2 2.1 7.2 12.6 6.0 2.6 2.4 21.9 9.8 18.0 34.7 38.8 20.6 43.3 52.0 121.4 56.2 114.2 49.1 7.2 7.1 Sources: Ministry of Finance; Central Bank of Suriname; and Fund staff estimates and projections. l/ Includes principal arrears. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 29 - Table 7. Suriname: Medium-Term Projections 2000-06 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 National income and prices (Annual percentage change unless otherwise indicated) GDP at 1980 prices (including informal sector) l/ -5.6 1.9 2.5 GDP at current market prices (including informal sector) 48.7 47.5 14.2 Consumer prices (end of period) Consumer prices (annual average) 82.4 15.6 8.1 59.1 50.2 11.4 (ln percent of GDP, not including informal sector) National accounts Gross domestic investment Private sector Public sector Gross national saving Foreign saving Central government Revenue and grants Current revenue Grants Expenditure and net lending Current expenditure Capital expenditure Overall balance Financing Domestic External Exceptional financing Money and credit Domestic assets (net) Of which: Public sector Private sector Money and quasi-money (M2) Velocity (GDP relative to M2) 15.3 17.8 19.1 11.9 13.8 14.2 3.4 4.0 4.9 -8.1 -5.0 -2.4 23.4 22.8 21.3 (In percent of GDP including informal sector) 28.6 31.7 32.7 26.6 30.6 31.2 2.0 1.1 1.5 41.6 34.3 34.5 39.1 31.4 31.0 2.5 2.9 3.5 -13.0 -2.7 -1.9 13.0 2.7 1.9 16.9 -4.2 -4.1 -6.8 -10.0 -1.7 3.0 17.0 7.7 (Ammal percentage change unless otherwise indicated) 89.4 4.3 -9.8 178.1 -23.5 -33.7 -10.1 28.6 16.1 77.7 40.5 20.7 2.6 2.7 2.6 3.0 3.5 4.0 5.0 10.2 9.2 9.1 10.2 6.2 4.9 4.9 4.9 7.0 5.5 4.9 4.9 20.5 23.5 26.0 27.1 14.8 15.1 15.5 16.0 5.8 8.4 10.5 11.1 -1.2 1.4 4.8 7.1 21.6 22.0 21.0 19.8 33.6 34.1 34.2 34.9 31.8 32.1 32.2 31.9 1.8 2.0 2.0 3.0 34.7 35.6 36.2 36.3 30.5 29.6 28.6 28.3 4.1 6.0 7.5 8.0 -1.1 -1.5 -2.0 -1.4 1.1 1.5 2.0 1.4 0.5 1.0 1.5 0.8 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 11.3 11.6 12.5 10.8 12.2 13.4 19.3 10.1 13.2 10.6 9.5 9.2 11.3 10.9 10.7 10.4 2.6 2.5 2.5 2.5 (In percent of GDP including informal sector unless otherwise indicated) External sector 2/ Current account (in millions US%) Current account Merchandise exports, f.o.b. Merchandise imports, f.o.b. Capital and financial account Of which: External borrowing: central government Errors and omissions (net) External debt 3/ External debt (in millions USS) 31 Change in reserves (in millions US%) (increase -) Net international reserves (in months of imports) 3/ -141.6 -112.7 -102.0 -106.5 -16.8 -16.4 -15.3 -15.5 57.3 73.0 79.7 81.4 -54.7 -64.6 -67.8 -69.7 4.4 13.9 11.6 6.9 11.1 15.9 8.9 2.2 11.0 14.2 11.4 9.1 28.4 43.6 50.9 49.9 239.5 299.5 339.0 342.6 7.5 -60.3 -51.0 -4.0 0.3 1.9 3.3 3.2 -113.4 -114.7 -115.7 -15.8 -15.1 -14.2 82.2 82.9 83.0 -71.0 -71.5 -71.6 7.5 7.8 8.9 2.1 8.9 48.2 346.4 -4.0 2.0 1.5 8.1 6.3 46.1 43.6 350.5 354.9 3.1 -6.0 -8.0 3.0 3.0 Sources: Central Bank of Surinam e; Ministry of Finance; General Bureau of Statistics; and Fund staff estimates. I/ Includes estimate of informal sector as of 1995. 2/ Based on amounts expressed in U.S. dollars. 31 End of period. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3o- APPENDIX I Surinamc+Fund Relations (As of February 28,200l) I. Membership Status: Joined 4/27/78; Article VIII. II. A. Financial Relations General Resources Account: SDR Million Quota 92.10 Fund holdings of currency 85.98 Reserve position in Fund 6.13 Percent of Quota 100.0 93.4 6.7 Percent III. SDR Department: SDR Million Allocation Net cumulative allocation 7.75 100.0 Holdings 1.71 22.0 IV. Outstanding Purchases and Loans: None V. Financial Arrangements: None VI. Projected Obligations to Fund: (SDR Million; based on existing use of resources and present holdings of SDRs): Overdue Forthcoming 02/28/01 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 Charges/Interest 0.0 0.2 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 Total 0.0 0.2 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3l- APPENDIX I B. Nonfinancial Relations VII. Exchange Rate Arrangements: The national currency is the Surinamese guilder, which at present is fixed to the U.S. dollar at 2,200 guilders per dollar. A commercial or parallel market exists for banks and cambios, in which the Central Bank has mandated a selling and buying band around the official rate , of not more than 200 guilders above or below the official buying and selling rates respectively. A special exchange rate applies to milk products. VIII. Last Article IV Consultation: The last Article IV consultation was concluded by the Executive Board on June 30, 1999 (SM/99/120). Suriname’s exchange restrictions were not approved. Suriname is on the standard 12-month consultation cycle. IX. Technical Assistance: FAD - A mission visited Paramaribo in May 1997 to review the budget preparation process. MAE - A mission visited Paramaribo in June 1997 to make recommendations for improving financial sector soundness. A MAE bank supervision expert has been at the Central Bank since May 1998. STA ( BOP) - A mission visited Suriname in April 2000 to make recommendations for improving the compilation and reporting of balance of payments statistics. MAE - An MAE expert visited Suriname during November 14-21,2000, to review the exchange rate system and to advise the authorities on methods to improve the efficiency of the foreign exchange operation of the bank and cambios. STA ( MAB) - A mission from the Money and Banking Division visited Suriname in January 8,200l to make recommendations for improving the compilation and reporting of banking statistics and to complete a diagnostic study of the banking system. X. Consents and acceptances: Quota increase approved. XI. Resident Representative: None. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 32 - APPENDIX II Surinam*Statistical Issues Suriname has traditionally failed to supply accurate core statistics to the Fund, on a timely basis, due to inadequate resources and, sometimes to deliberate attempts to withhold information, as was the case in recent years. With the exception of data on prices and the exchange rate, most information is received with substantial lags. While data on central government current revenue and expenditure fiscal are received regularly, components of the fiscal accounts such as nontax revenue, capital expenditure, grants and financing are received with substantial delays thereby lengthening the time flame for presenting a complete picture of the fiscal situation. Real sector The last information on the national accounts is estimates for 1999. In 2000, strikes disrupted the sending out of surveys and the compilation and analysis of data; as a consequence, no official GDP data are available for that year. In addition, there are rough estimates that the informal economy may be as much as 40 or 50 percent of the size of the formal economy; however, the General Bureau of Statistics has made no attempts to measure the size of the informal economy. The constant price series is based in 1980 and the weights need to be revised. There is generally no effort to reconcile the data with balance of payments data. The CPI, though reported regularly+xcept for the first three months of 2000 in which industrial unrest prevented the collection of information-is based on a household survey that dates from April-March 1968-69. The weights are severely out of date and in need of revision. With the help of the IDB, a new CPI series has been prepared and will be published during 200 1. Public finances Central government finances are the only financial accounts available for the public sector; however, a substantial amount of adjustments and additional information is needed to get a relatively accurate and comprehensive picture of these fiscal accounts. With respect to revenue, data are collected on a cash basis by the Inland Revenue Department and the Nontax Revenue Division. There is a Central Paymaster Department which also produces records on a cash basis, for both revenue and expenditure. The records of the paymaster form the basis for Central Bank’s statement of government operations (produced daily, weekly and monthly), and this in turn is the basis for the liquidity report on revenue and expenditure prepared by the Ministry of Finance. Some capital expenditure items pass through the Central Paymaster account, but the majority of capital expenditure seems to be recorded at ministerial level and is not reflected in the paymasters’ accounts. Consequently, capital expenditure has to be inferred from the level of external grants, the source of which has to be the external agency, as there is no central domestic registry for receipts of external grants. In the compilation of nontax revenue, the authorities’ figures include genuine nontax items as well as grants, and domestic and foreign loans. Much effort is needed determine the true nontax items. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-33 - APPENDIX II Since there is no central point for the overall collection and reconciliation of the various sources of data, at any one point in time the Ministry of Finance, the Treasury department, the Central Bank and the Central Paymaster will have differing numbers for the same category of revenues and expenditures. The authorities have pledged to streamline the system of fiscal reporting, improve the reconciliation process and standardize the reporting format. However, there is some indication that the authorities have already run into difficulties in attempting the first step, namely the preparation of the 2001 budget by economic classification. The problem stems in part from the fact that the revised budget codes developed in conformity with the Fund’s (GFS) standard (under an IDB-sponsored project), were never formally adopted by the line ministries. More importantly the functional classification presently used for budgetary purposes is so aggregated, it is virtually useless for analytical purposes. Since 1991, no data on the central government operations in Suriname has been published in the IFS. During April-May 200 1, a budget oversight committee will attempt to prepare and present the 2001 budget with (GFS) standards of economic classification. Also, in the course of 2001 the Ministry of Finance and the Central Bank will develop a template of classification of revenue and expenditure that will result in a common reporting format for both institutions. For the rest of the public sector, as a very first step there needs to be an audit of how many of these entities do exist. There is an official number of approximately 108 entities, but some are dormant, others are social associations (for the blind, handicapped etc.) and many are small. None of them, however, produces accounts on a timely basis and their impact of fiscal operations, domestic credit and employment is not known with any certainty. World Bank technical assistance is needed in this area and the authorities are seeking to renew their relations with the World Bank, after an hiatus of about ten years. Monetary accounts Data have traditionally been provided with long lags of between 6 to 14 weeks. The reporting format is old, some adjustment is required for analytical purposes and in the last two years reporting of Central Bank was distorted to hide the true position with respect to loans from the Central Bank to the Central Government and the true state of the foreign assets of the Central Bank. A Fund mission visited Suriname in the period January 9-l 8,200l to advise on the country’s reporting format on monetary data, to help prepare a template for more transparent accounting of the assets and liabilities of the Central Bank and commercial banks, and to advise on ways to prepare and promote a faster and more accurate dissemination of monetary data. In contrast to the monetary recommendations of the 1995 multisector mission, most of which were not implemented, the new authorities wish to improve the reporting and have taken a keen interest in the suggestions and recommendations of this mission. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 34 - APPENDIX II Balance of payments The balance of payments data are prepared on a cash basis in Suriname. While trade data are relatively reliable, data on services and capital inflows suffer from poor compilation systems and procedures, misclassification and poor reconciliation controls. During April-May 2000, an STA technical mission visited Suriname to examine and report on the required changes need to bring the balance of payments reporting system to the level required by the Balance of Payments Manual 5 (BMPS). The mission made extensive comments with respect to changes in format, methods of collection of data, the need for surveys, and the need for new classification of transactions. The migration of the classification to the BPMS was completed for the period 1995-98. The mission also noted the need for additional training of more staff in the methodology of the BPMS and the need to strengthen the legal framework in which the Central Bank can request data from private enterprises. The authorities have received the report of the technical mission and have indicated their willingness to implement the suggested measures. In October 2000, the authorities appointed a committee to review the total outstanding debt of the central government. This committee reported its findings in late March 200 1. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicAPPENDIX II Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 36 - APPENDIX III Suriname-Financial Relations with the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) (As of December 3 1,200O) TABLE 1 SURINAME: LOANS IN EXECUTION (as of December 31,200O) Upgrading Nickerie Hospital 809lSF 1148lOC Upgrading Nickerie Hospital Agriculture and Trade Policy Reform Loan 10/21l87 1,455 84.0 11 I24198 30,000 60.7 1158/OC Preparation of Low-Income Shelter Program 12/l 0198 350 82.2 1181/OC Preparation of Decentralization Program 06/01/99 750 85.0 I/ Approved by IDB but not yet signed by the Government of Suriname. TABLE 2 SURINAME: TECHNICAL COOPERATION PROJECTS IN EXECUTION (as of December 31,200O) I\TN/SF-5552 qTN/SF-5769 JTN/SF-5941 4TN/JF-6146 \TN/JF-6223 C & D Countries Action Plan Strength. Tax Administration Office 01101198 11 I25197 1,830 234 99.3 69.8 I Environmental Management I 05/06/98 I 1,380 I 42.9 Modernization of Telecommunications Utility 09/I 7198 700 21.1 Support for Health Sector Reform 11104l98 750 0.0 4TN/SF-6223 1 Support for Health Sector Reform 1 l/04/98 1 1,370 1 16.9 I I I ATNIJF-6338 Preparation of Community Dev. Fund 12/I 0198 708 87.4 YTNISF-6859 Preparation of the Year 2000 Census 01/12/00 150 100.0 4TN/SF-6861 Electoral Assistance Program 01 II 4100 140 93.3 4TN/SF-6917 Tourism Development - Conservation Strategy 03122100 75 55.1 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-37- APPENDIX IV TABLE 3 SURINAME: LOANS IN OPERATIONAL PROGRAM 2001-2002 II su-0025 Preparation of the Year 2000 Census I SU-0024 TC Loan For Financial Sector Reform 10.0 SU-0023 Improvement of Basic Education 10.0 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public