DOCUMENT OF INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND NOT FOR PUBLIC USE FOR ARCHIVES AGENDA ROOM HQ C-532 0450 SWOO/168 CONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION July 18,200O To: Members of the Executive Board From: The Secretary Subject : Azerbaijan Republic-Staff Report for the 2000 Article JY Consultation Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staff report for the 2000 Article IV consultation with the Azerbaijan Republic, which is tentatively scheduled for discussion on Tuesday, August 1, 2000. Mr. Owen (ext. 38811) is available to answer technical or factual questions relating to this paper prior to the Board discussion, Unless the Documents Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the European Commission, the Islamic Development Bank, and the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development, following its consideration by the Executive Board. Att: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicCONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AZERBAIJAN REPUBLIC Staff Report for the 2000 Article IV Consultation Prepared by the StaffRepresentatives for the 2000 Consultation with the Azerbaijan Republic Approved by Oleh Havrylyshyn and Christian Brachet July 17, 2000 D Article IV discussions were held in Baku during April 27-May 10. D The staff team comprised Messrs. Gwen (head), Christiansen, Mered, and Prokopenko (alI EU2), Ms. Inchauste (FAD), Mr. Singh (PDR), and Ms. Moulton (EU2). Mr. Dunn the resident representative, also participated in the discussions. Mr. Odling-Smee (Director, EU2) joined the mission during May l-3. The mission also worked closely with World Bank staff in the field to assist the authorities with bank restructuring and the preparation of an interim PRSP. D The mission met with President Aliyev, Prime Minister Rasizade, Azerbaijan National Bank (ANB) Governor Rustamov, Finance Minister Alekperov, other senior government officials, and members of the business, diplomatic, and donor communities. D Azerbaijan’s three-year arrangement under the PRGF and EFF expired on March 19, 2000, after a three-month extension to provide additional time for implementation of six prior actions for the final review. As these actions were not implemented satisfactorily, the final review was not completed. The authorities were thus unable to draw the remaining amounts of SDR 11.70 million under the PRGF and SDR 5.27 million under the extended arrangement. Discussions for a new Fund- supported program are underway but have not been completed. 0 The last Article IV consultation was completed on June 30, 1999 (EBS/99/102). While commending the authorities for their successful policy response to the external shocks experienced in 1998, Executive Directors stressed the need for intensifying structural reforms, including strengthening the legal and regulatory framework, public sector reform, and bank restructuring, A key challenge for the authorities was viewed as the need to improve governance, including through the establishment of transparent procedures for investing oil revenues. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2- Contents Page Executive Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 I. Recent Economic Developments . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . .4 II. Policy Discussions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11 A. Monetary Policy and the Exchange Rate ............................................................. 12 B. Fiscal Policy ........................................................................................................ 13 C. External Sector .................................................................................................... 14 D. Institutional and Structural Reforms.. .................................................................. 17 E. Statistical Issues ................................................................................................. .21 F. Interim Povery Reduction Strategy Paper ........................................................... .2 1 G. Future Fund Relations ........................................................................................ .22 III. Staff Appraisal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . _ . . . . . . . . . . .22 Text Tables 1. Selected Economic Indicators ............................................................................ .7 2. Macroeconomic Framework ............................................................................ .25 3. Consolidated Operations of the General Government ....................................... .26 4. Balance Sheet of the Azerbaijan National Bank and Monetary Survey.. ........... .27 5. Balance of Payments.. ...................................................................................... ,28 Text Boxes 1. Report on the Observance of Standards and Codes-Fiscal Transparency ........ .12 2. Medium-Term Macroeconomic Outlook ........................................................... 15 3. Reforming the Azerbaijan National Bank (ANB) ............................................. .20 4. Preparing an Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper.. ................................. ,21 Figures 1. Monetary Indicators. .......................................................................................... .5 2. Exchange Rate Developments., .......................................................................... .6 3. General Government Deficit ............................................................................. 10 4. Medium-Term Macroeconomic Indicators ........................................................ 16 Appendices I. Fund Relations ................................................................................................. .29 II. Relations with the World Bank ........................................................................ .32 III. Statistical Issues ................................................................................................ 34 IV. Public Information Notice-Background Section ............................................. .37 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3- EXECUT~SUMMARY l In the past year, Azerbaijan’s macroeconomic performance has benefited from sound policy adjustments- an easing of monetary policy and a controlled depreciation of the exchange rate-and strong oil prices; these developments have allowed the economy to fully recover from the external shocks experienced in 1998. However, the implementation of structural reforms has virtually stalled, compromising the effort at poverty alleviation. Government ownership of reforms appears to have been lacking. l GDP continued to grow strongly in the first quarter of 2000, and consumer price inflation, which was slightly negative at end-1999, remained low at just over 1 ‘/z percent in the 12 months to May. While oil-related sectors such as construction and transportation contributed to the growth of the non-oil economy, employment- intensive sectors (agriculture and manufacturing) remained sluggish. 0 Financial policies are on track. Despite continued shortfalls in non-oil revenue collection, higher oil prices are expected to lead to a small fiscal surplus (excluding foreign financed project spending) in 2000. The external current account deficit fell sharply in 1999, as oil exports surged, on account of higher oil prices and increased production. As a result, gross international reserve targets were exceeded by a wide margin at end-1999. Projections for 2000 indicate a balance of payments surplus and a substantial accumulation of foreign assets. l Discussions centered on a review of recent macroeconomic policies and the unfinished structural reform agenda. While the staff supported the current monetary framework, it argued that greater flexibility in interest and exchange rates would be needed over the medium term, requiring reforms to deepen the foreign exchange and securities markets. On the fiscal front, the staff stressed the need for reform of the tax and customs administrations, prudent management of oil resources, and the need to build capacity for investment planning and debt management. l The staff noted the need to prioritize reforms, including establishment of a transparent and accountable mechanism to manage the oil fund; civil service reform; restructuring of the cabinet of ministers; adoption of a satisfactory privatization program; and completion of the merger of three state-owned banks. The staff also stressed that work should begin on developing strategies to reform the energy and social sectors over the medium term. l The staff indicated that a new Fund arrangement could be discussed in the future, but only if there were a clear indication of greater ownership of the reform effort. The key tests of improved ownership would include implementation of many of the priority measures discussed above, especially governance reforms aimed at reducing corruption and improving the delivery of public services. Access to Fund resources would depend upon the re-emergence of a balance of payments need. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4- I. RE~JCNTECONOMICDEVELOPMENTS 1. Macroeconomic performance has been strong over the past year, supported by rising oil prices and judicious policy adjustments. Real GDP rose by just over 7 percent in 1999 and by 6% percent in the first quarter of 2000 (over a year earlier), helped by substantial increases in crude oil production (Table 1). Non-oil GDP, which declined in the wake of the 1998 Russian crisis and oil price fall, has recovered, partly reflecting the authorities’ decision to ease monetary policy and permit a controlled depreciation of the manat from July 1999. r However, growth in the non-oil sector is still dominated by the strong performance of sectors directly related to the oil sector (construction, transportation, communications), while manufacturing and agriculture sectors, which have perhaps the greatest potential for creating jobs and higher incomes for the poor, have shown little recovery.’ Following an 11 percent depreciation of the manat against the U.S. dollar during 1999 and a strong recovery in reserve money in the second half of the year, annual consumer price inflation has increased from sharply negative values in 1999, but it remains low (Figure 1). The real effective exchange rate of the manat has now returned to around its level before the Russian crisis (Figure 2). 2. Financial policies have remained on track. All program quantitative performance criteria and virtually all indicative targets through end-December 1999 were met,3 as were targets for end-March 2000 under the authorities’ financial program developed with staff during a mission in January 2000. As oil prices recovered and confidence in the manat returned in the second half of 1999, the authorities accommodated rising demand for money by purchasing foreign currency, resulting in a substantial rise in gross international reserves. However, despite continued strong inflows to the oil sector, the central bank has faced increased pressure to sell foreign exchange during the first half of this year, with reserve money and gross international reserves both declining moderately (Table 4).4 This has been ’ This was in line with understandings reached during the 1999 Article IV consultations (EBS/99/102). ’ A World Bank survey classified over 60 percent of households in Azerbaijan as poor, based on 1995 food expenditure data, Evidence on trends since then is inconclusive, but suggests no significant reduction in poverty. Chapter III of the Selected Issues paper (to be issued shortly) includes an assessment of the limited available evidence on poverty, and also reviews the effectiveness of social sector spending. 3 The end-December 1999 reserve money target was exceeded somewhat, reflecting a rise in money demand associated with higher oil prices and a stronger balance of payments position. 4 From January 1,2000, substantial resources accruing to the government from the oil sector are no longer included in the international reserves--see paragraph 4. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-5- Figure 1. Azerbaijan: Monetary Indicators Monetary Developments 4,, _ (12-month percent change) -Manat reserve money - - - Manat broad money - . . - - .cp1 25 23 21 19 17 15 13 11 9 7 5 Real Interest Rate (90 day manat deposit rate minus 12-month CPI inflation, percent) Source: Azerbaijan authorities. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-6- Figure 2. Azerbaijan: Exchange Rate Developments Nominal Exchange Rate 11 (Manat per U.S. dollar, period average) 170 160 r Real Exchange Rate Developments 1/ {Index Jan 1995=100) -Real Effective Exchange Rate _ _ . - . .Real Exchange Rate vis-A-vis the U.S. dollar Sources: Azerbaijan authorities; and Fund staff estimates. II An upward movement indicates appreciation. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-7- Table 1. Azerbaijan: Selected Economic Indicators 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 Proj. Consumer prices (percent change) End-of-period -7.6 -0.5 3.0 3.0 3.0 Real GDP growth (in percent) 10.0 7.4 5.0 7.9 8.6 Of which: non-oil 7.5 4.7 6.0 8.0 10.0 External sector Current account balance (-deficit; millions of U.S. dollars) In percent of GDP External debt -1,363 -600 -512 -951 -1,695 -32.6 -15.0 -12.3 -21.4 -34.5 In percent of GDP 15.9 24.2 27.9 28.9 29.8 External debt service In percent of exports of GNFS Gross official reserves (end-of-period) In millions of U.S. dollars In months of next year’s imports In months of next year’s imports (excluding oil sector imports) 3.7 4.3 7.2 8.8 449 676 2.8 4.0 3.8 5.4 7.6 617 2.9 4.5 617 642 2.3 2.2 4.0 4.0 Exchange rate End-of-period, manatW.S. dollar 3,890 4,378 . . . . . . . . . 1.1 -1.9 . . . Money (end-of-period; percent change) Reserve money -20.1 -3.4 -4.2 16.2 16.0 . . . General government finances (in percent of GDP) Financial balance l/ Fiscal balance, cash basis -2.7 1.4 -5.4 -1.8 0.2 -1.8 Sources: Azerbaijan authorities; and Fund staff estimates. l! Defined as fiscal balance, excluding foreign financed project spending. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-8- accompanied by an increase in the share of foreign currency deposits in broad money to 3 8 percent at end-March 2000. In part, this may reflect declines in both nominal and real manat interest rates, as policy has been eased and inflation has picked up. 3. Helped by rising oil prices and improved competitiveness, the external current account deficit narrowed significantly from 33 percent of GDP in 1998 to 15 percent of GDP in 1999 (Table 5). Oil export earnings nearly doubled in 1999, while non-oil imports declined from the high level reached in the wake of the Russian crisis and the depreciation of the Russian ruble. Preliminary information indicates that these trends continued into the first quarter of 2000. 4. From end-1999, substantial profits (after recovery of accumulated operating and capital costs) began to accrue to the Azerbaijan International Operating Company (AIOC), the consortium that is developing Azerbaijan’s major oil field. Under the government’s Production-sharing agreement with the consortium, a proportion of this, known as profit oil, accrues to the government.’ In the first half of 2000, the state oil company (SOCAR) received about US$lOO million of profit oil on behalf of the government. In addition, it received oil bonus payments associated with newly signed contracts amounting to US$lOO million. A presidential decree of December 29, 1999 indicated that these resources would be transferred to the government and invested through a new state oil fund. However, so far they remain with SOCAR, pending decisions on the operational management of the oil fund. 5. Fiscal pressures eased markedly in the second half of 1999, as oil prices recovered (Table 3). Budgetary revenues rose to 19% percent of GDP in 1999, from 17 percent in 1998, although revenues were lower than programmed despite higher-than- expected oil prices.6 Thus, non-oil revenues continued to fall short of targets, despite apparent efforts by a new head of the tax inspectorate to strengthen tax administration, This trend continued in the first quarter of 2000, with revenue collections no higher than budget targets, even though oil prices were nearly double the level assumed in the budget. Tax arrears continued to increase and reached over 20 percent of GDP by end-1999, though the 5 Under the production sharing agreement, the consortium’s revenues from oil exports are divided as follows: first, the revenues can be used to cover operating costs in full; from the remainder, 50 percent is retained by the consortium to recover past capital expenditures; the remainder, after deducting operating and capital cost recovery, is called “profit oil” and is shared between the consortium (70 percent, of which the state oil company (SOCAR), as a partner, receives 7 percent) and the Azerbaijan government (30 percent). Under the contract, the government’s share is paid by the AIOC to SOCAR. 6 Oil prices averaged US$18 a barrel in 1999, compared with an assumption of US$14 underlying the program. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-9- rate of increased slowed markedly in the second half of the year, mainly on account of higher payments by SOCAR. 6. Higher revenues allowed room for increases in wages and pensions and the clearance of wage and pension arrears. Budgetary expenditures increased from 21 percent of GDP in 1998 to 25 percent in 1999, but about half of this reflected a sharp increase in foreign financed project spending. There was also a significant increase in capital spending. While wage and pension arrears were eliminated during 1999, other arrears, especially to utility companies, remain substantial, though of uncertain magnitude.’ 7. The overall fiscal deficit exceeded the program target in 1999, but this was more than accounted for by higher-than-expected foreign-financed project spending. Excluding this, the deficit was 2% percent of GDP, ‘/4 percentage point below target (Figure 3). Similarly, the fiscal deficit in the first quarter of 2000 was below the budget target. The deficit continues to be financed using oil bonuses, privatization revenues, and World Bank and other external concessional lending; there has been no recourse to central bank financing or commercial debt. 8. In contrast to generally strong macroeconomic policies, structural reforms are moving forward very slowly, particularly in the important area of governance. Several measures included in the now expired PRGFLEFF-supported program have been seriously delayed and in many cases are still outstanding: 0 A satisfactory external audit of the 1998 accounts of SOCAR has not been completed because the management of SOCAR’s main oil refinery denied the auditors access to its accounts. l The new tax code was finally approved by parliament in early July 2000, nearly two years after the original target date under the program. Regulations need to be quickly drafted and introduced to facilitate smooth implementation of the new tax law. a A new privatization program has not yet been adopted, 18 months after the expiry of the first program. Agreement has not been reached with World Bank sta.fT on the framework and principles of the new program, to address lack of transparency and corruption that characterized the initial phase of privatization. A framework privatization law recently approved by parliament fails to address these issues. l The draft law on the public service has been revised to reflect some of the proposals by World Bank staff but is still being debated in parliament. ’ In particular, there are disputes between the government and utilities companies about the size of arrears, which cannot easily be resolved because of the lack of adequate metering and commitments controls in the past. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public20 15 10 5 0 -5 Figure 3. Azerbaijan: General Government Deficit (In percent of GDP) I -Overall deficit . \ . --- . . Deficit excluding foreign project spending ‘\ . ---.. -Non-oil deficit * . \ -__----- -- \ ---- \ \ 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 Sources: Azerbaijan authorities; and Fund staff estimates. Projection Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- ll- l No action has yet been taken on submitting to the president’s office a satisfactory plan to restructure and streamline the cabinet of ministers (COM)? Consultants have arrived in Baku to assist with the preparation of the plan, but the authorities seem far from convinced of the need for reform. l Following a review of the bank restructuring strategy last year, the authorities agreed with Fund and Bank staff to merge parts of Agroprom Bank and Prominvest Bank with Savings Bank, and to transfer all bad loans to a loan recovery unit. Some progress has been made, including issuance of a license for the new bank and appointment of its senior management, but actions to close the three old banks and formally begin operations of the new bank have been delayed. 9. In view of delays to these key measures, the final review under the PRGF/EFF- supported program was not completed. Delays in reaching agreement between the authorities and World Bank staff on a range of public sector reforms, including government and civil service reform, public expenditure management, and legal and judicial reform, have also held up the World Bank’s proposed public sector reform adjustment credit (PSRAC). This is now unlikely to be presented to the Bank’s Board before the fourth quarter of 2000. II. POLICY DISCUSSIONS 10. Discussions focused on the measures needed to avert emerging macroeconomic pressures and on the urgent structural reforms needed to ensure broader-based growth and poverty alleviation. The staff argued that poverty had not been reduced primarily because of the poor implementation of critical structural reforms, particularly in the public sector. High levels of public sector corruption were discouraging investment and job creation in the non-oil sector, and contributing to inefficient and poorly targeted social services. Lack of progress on reforms to improve governance and establish transparent arrangements for the management and use of the oil windfall were a particular cause for concern, and appeared to reflect a lack of broad ownership of reforms. 11. In the context of the Article IV discussions, the s-reviewed the status of the exchange and trade regime; implementation of STA’s technical assistance recommendations (Appendix III); the steps being taken by the authorities to address problems identified in FAD’s recent report on fiscal transparency (Box 1);9 and measures to strengthen safeguards regarding use of Fund resources. In conjunction with Bank staff, the mission also assisted the authorities with the preparation of an interim poverty reduction strategy paper (I-PRSP). * The cabinet of ministers is the administration that supports the prime minister and several deputy prime ministers. Its functions overlap substantially with those of line ministries and the staff of the president’s office. 9 Release of this report is awaiting clearance from the Azerbaijan authorities. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12- Box 1. Report on the Observance of Standards and Code+Fiscal Transparency Fiscal transparency practices were reviewed in early 2000 by an FAD mission, which produced a report describing current practices in Azerbaijan relative to the requirements of the IMP Code of Good practices on FhcuZ Zhnspmency. The highlights of the report include the following: l The public sector is relatively large and there are contintig difficulties in distinguishing private and public activities. l Government intervention in the private sector is extensive, and in many cases regulations either are not clear or their enforcement is not transparent l No legislative framework compmhensively defines the fiscal management roles of the three branches of government. l Taxes, duties, and charges have an explicit legal basis, but the existence of many amendments and discretionary provisions reduces transparency. l Although information is not a secret, there does not seem to be a commitment to regularly publish tiscal data. The actual budget document that is submitted to parliament and published with its approval is missing key information. l The budget preparation process does not reveal the basis for revenue or expenditure estimates. There is no external audit of the government financial accounts. A new law established an accounting chamber to perform this fonction in August 1999, but the provisions of the law are very weak, and the number of tasks it must perform too large for the nine staff members it has been assigned. The authorities have taken some steps to address these issues, including the passage of the new tax code, which will consolidate all tax legislation into a single document, thus making it more tmnsparent and accessible. A budget code is uuder preparation that will comprehensively define the fiscal management roles of the branches of govermnent. Further, a new macroeconomic unit in the ministry of finance has developed a macroeconomic framework and can systematically incorporate macroeconomic data in the budget process. The treasury established in 1998 enables the minis@y of finance to produce more reliable and timely information on the government’s fiscal operations using a GFS-based classification. Commitment controls were introduced in 1999, and an inventory of the stock of payment -before 1999 was compiled. In addition, there are planned measures included in the PSRAC program that would address some other issues, such as the introduction of a new budget systems law and strengthening the accounting chamber. The new budget system law aims to increase budget coverage, improve its presentation, strengthen expenditure planning and integrate public investment into the budget. A. Monetary Policy and the Exchange Rate 12. The staff acknowledged that the easing of monetary policy and the depreciation of the exchange rate in 1999 had been effective, but cautioned that recent pressure in the foreign exchange market might signal the need for some tightening. The real exchange rate has now returned to a more appropriate level, non-oil sector growth has revived, and inflation remains low. Reserve money has leveled out in recent months, following its strong recovery during 1999 from the impact of the Russian crisis. The authorities’ monetary program for 2000 assumes velocity will decline slowly, following the Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13- 15 percent decline during 1999, with reserve and broad money both projected to rise by 16 percent. Net international reserves (excluding resource accumulation in the oil Curd) are targeted to remain at about the same level as at end- 1999. In this regard, with net international reserves declining in the first half of the year, the staff noted that relatively low manat deposit rates may provide insufficient compensation for the predictable, albeit gradual, depreciation of the nominal exchange rate, combined with the added risk associated with holding manat. lo The authorities indicated their willingness to take measures to tighten monetary policy, including raising the bank refinance rate, if current pressures in the market persist or if inflation rises further. 13. The staff accepted the authorities’ view that the framework of monetary policy, based on a managed exchange rate and monetary indicative targets, was appropriate in current circumstances, but urged the authorities to reduce intervention and allow more flexibility in the exchange rate. The authorities argued that, with foreign exchange trading currently dominated by a few large, state-owned enterprises (including SOCAR and the International Bank), a genuinely flexible regime was not feasible. Furthermore, the lack of development of securities markets, including the treasury bill market, hampered active monetary policy. The staff stressed the need for the development of strong private sector companies and viable securities markets to help deepen the foreign exchange market, broaden the range of monetary instruments, and allow more flexibility in monetary policy. B. Fiscal Policy 14. The fiscal deficit is expected to decline sharply in 2000 on account of higher oil prices. The overall fiscal deficit is projected at 2 percent of GDP, down from about 5% percent of GDP in 1999, despite a further projected rise in project disbursements. Excluding project loans, a small fiscal surplus is projected in 2000. Revenues are projected to rise by 6 percent of GDP, including profit oil of nearly 4 percent of GDP. Expenditures (excluding project spending) are budgeted to increase by about 2 percent of GDP. Significant increases in capital and social spending are planned, though to the extent that the latter mainly reflects higher wages, it is not clear whether it will contribute much to raising the quality of public services. 15. Despite these apparently favorable trends, the staff expressed concerns regarding some recent fiscal developments, which, if not addressed, could undermine further efforts at fiscal consolidation. These include the continued shortfall in non-oil revenues; pressures for increased spending; and the rapid rate of disbursement of project loans contracted or guaranteed by the government. lo The average rate on three-month manat deposits is currently 14 percent, compared with 11 percent on three-month dollar deposits. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14- 16. The staff argued that revenue collections during the first quarter of 2000 should have substantially exceeded targeted levels, given favorable oil price developments. Tax payments from SOCAR were only moderately above target, while those from other state enterprises and the private sector fell short. The staff argued that the practice of negotiating targets for tax payment in advance with major taxpayers should cease, and that enterprises should pay the taxes they owe, in accordance with the tax law. The authorities recognized the problem but favored the introduction of a supplementary budget to raise SOCAR’s tax targets. Noting that the non-oil fiscal deficit was projected to widen in 2000, the staff expressed concern that higher oil prices appeared to have eased the pressure to raise collections from the non-oil sector, and that this would leave the budget vulnerable to oil price volatility. ’ ’ Reforms of tax administration and customs were urgently needed, in line with recommendations of recent technical assistance from FAD, to strengthen collections and reduce corruption in these agencies. 17. The authorities indicated that higher oil sector revenues would be used to finance unavoidable increases in spending, including the need to cover defaults on publicly guaranteed loans and to transfer resources to newly created municipalities. In view of uncertainties regarding higher revenues, the staff strongly advised against any overall spending increase in the proposed supplementary budget, and recommended that offsetting cuts be identified elsewhere. The authorities responded that any increases would be modest. 18. The staff stressed the significant risks to the budget from continued rapid contracting and guaranteeing of project loans, many to unrestructured public enter- prises. This underlined the need for better investment planning and debt management. The mission recommended that no guarantees be issued for such projects unless they had been subject to careful scrutiny by a project evaluation unit, which should be established at the ministry of finance to ensure a strong link with debt management. Also, noting the recent sharp increase in external debt, the staff proposed that the capacity to undertake debt sustainability analysis be developed at the ministry. While the authorities accepted these recommendations in principle, there was no consensus on where the project evaluation function should be located. C. External Sector 19. The current account deficit is projected to narrow slightly in 2000 on account of continued buoyancy in oil prices and rising oil production, though the impact of this is largely offset by a sharp rise in profits due to the foreign partners in the oil consortium. Imports to the oil sector are projected at about the same level as in 1999. Over the medium term, the deficit is expected to widen as the next phase of oil and gas investments get underway, and associated imports rise, before declining by the middle of the decade as oil ” The staff estimates that a fall in the oil price of US$l a barrel would reduce government revenues (including profit oil) by about 0.3 percent of GDP in 2000. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 15- exports take off l2 (Box 2 and Tables 2 and 5 set out the medium-term projections). However, vulnerability due to the lack of trade diversification and the high dependency of the external sector on oil developments is likely to continue. I3 In this context, and despite the depreciation of the real exchange rate over the past year to a more appropriate level, the staff stressed the urgent need for structural reforms to strengthen the competitiveness of the non-oil sector. Box 2. Medium-Term Macroeconomic Outlook The medium-term macroeconomic outlook has been revised to reflect the latest projections of oil production and investment (Pigore 4). The main change is a postponement in the next phase of development by the AIOC, with production now expected to begin in 2005 instead of 2004. In the intervening years, total oil production may fall slightly, reflecting declining production from old fields. Growth in the non-oil sector is expected to rise sharply from 6 percent in 2000 to 10 percent in 2002. This mainly reflects the impact of increasmg foreign direct investments in the oil sector and the associated rise in demand for some non-tradables. Consequently, it would be consistent with strong growth in oil-related sectors such as construction, transportation and comrmm.ications. However, in the absence of any substantial acceleration of structural reforms, which could lead to a marked pickup in investment outside the oil-related sectors, continued sluggish growth in manufacturing and agriculture is projected. Total GDP growth is projected to be 5 percent in 2000, rising to peaks in 2002, associated with the peak in oil sector investment, and 2005 as oil exports begin to surge. GNP is projected to be well below GDP and to growth more slowly in 2000, reflecting the increase in profits due to foreign oil companies. Partly offsetting this, however, real income is benefiting from the substantial terms of trade improvement in 2000 associated with the rise in the oil price. Gross investment is projected to increase significantly over the next three years from 25-26 percent of GDP in 1999-2000 to 44-47 percent in 2002-2004. The increase is expected to be financed primarily by rising foreign direct investment. Public investment is expected to remain stable at around 5 percent of GDP, although within this the amotmt of foreign-financed project spending is projected to decline while domestically fimmced investment is projected to rise. Gross national saving is projected to rise in the medium term, reflecting an increase in public savings as higher oil revenues arc invested through the oil fund, either in domestic lnfrastructue or foreign finaucial assets. 20. The balance of payments is projected to be comfortably financed in 2000, with substantial accumulation of government assets in the proposed oil fund.14 Foreign direct l2 The projections are based on WE0 oil price assumptions: US$26.4 per barrel for 2000, declining to an average of US$21 in 2001-05. The staff estimates that a fall in the average oil price of US$l a barrel would reduce oil exports in 2000 by US!§SO million; reduce profits due to foreign oil companies by US$l5 million; increase the current account deficit by US$35 million; and reduce the government’s share of profit oil by US!§7 million. I3 Oil is projected to account for 84 percent of Azerbaijan’s exports in 2000. l4 The projections assume that the oil fund is established, and profit oil and bonuses currently held by SOCAR are transferred to the fund, before the end of 2000. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 16 - 50 40 30 20 10 0 -10 Figure 4. Azerbaijan: Medium Term Macroeconomic Indicators Real GDP Growth n percent) -Whole economy --- Oil sector - - - - - .Non-oil sector Projectlion / e--w- -\ / / \ / / 1997 199s 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 mJ!l Current Account Balance (In percent of GDP) 50 . -current amxJn1 balance - - - Current account balance exd. oil sector imports --.. - 30 *Foreign direct inves@p$ .- . - . _ _ -- - . _ _ _ _ . . I. -----me *. - -- . -..- . -. I-.- _a-- -. 10 --..._ -em._..-- -.-- --. - -50 rrolecllon 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 Savings - Investment Balances 51! -5 - -15 . -25 . -35 . -45 . -55 L n Dercent of GDP) -Current account balance -Government - - - Private Projection 1997 1998 1999 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 Sources: Azerbaijan authorities; and Fund staff estimates. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17- investment, net of cost recovery by the oil consortium, is projected to be flat in 2000, before rising from 2001, reflecting the next phase in the development of the main oil field and development of the large gas tield discovered in 1999. The external debt to GDP ratio rose sharply in 1999, mainly reflecting large disbursements by bilateral donors and the Fund, as well as exchange rate depreciation. It is expected to rise a little further before stabilizing at around 30 percent. Debt service is projected to average about 8 percent of exports of goods and non-factor services over the medium term. 21. The authorities have not taken any steps over the past year to further liberalize the trade or foreign exchange regimes. They recently introduced new tariff bands at 3 percent and 10 percent, increasing the number of bands from three to five, and widened the range of goods in the zero rate band.ls The recent FAD technical assistance mission to improve customs administration (March 2000) found the tariff structure to be distortionary and administratively complex. It recommended a rationalization and simplification of the tarif?C system and a streamlining of the ad hoc system of exemptions. The FAD mission also noted that the continued use of specific minimum tariff rates and the ad valorem declaration processing fee on imports may complicate Azerbaijan’s accession to the WTO. Regarding acceptance of the obligations of Article VIII sections 2,3, and 4, the need to clarify the legal framework regarding the taxation of proceeds held by non-residents as a result of current international transactions continues to be an outstanding issue (EBS/99/102).i6 Pending a resolution of this, the authorities indicated that they would prefer not to formally accept Article VIII obligations. D. Institutional and Structural Reforms 22. The staff argued that, while there had been some early progress in price and trade liberalization, and privatization of small-scale enterprises and agricultural land, structural reforms had effectively stalled in recent years. It noted that the privatization process had become discredited by lack of transparency, and large-scale privatization had yet to begin. The banking sector remained fragile, with limited intermediation. The structure and quality of public spending were poor, and issues of managing oil revenues transparently and with democratic controls had not yet been settled. The failure to restructure large public utilities in the water and energy sectors contributed to a waste of national resources. ” Zero rating was previously limited to investment goods, accounting for about 36 percent of imports in 1999. Azerbaijan has a rating of 5 (on a scale of l-10) on the Fund’s index of overall trade restrictiveness, but this may now be adversely affected by the increase in dispersion of tariffs. l6 Azerbaijan no longer maintains any exchange restrictions under Article XIV, and has eliminated previously identified exchange restrictions subject to Article VIII (EBS/99/102, Box 7). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 18- 23. Most importantly, critical public sector reforms with the aim of improving efficiency and fighting corruption continue to lag. In particular, deiays in civil service and social sector reforms are now impeding the major objective of poverty alleviation. The staff argued strongly that foreign and domestic investment in the non-oil sector, which is essential for broad-based growth, would only materialize if measures were taken to improve governance and reduce corruption. Macroeconomic management could also be at risk from slow implementation of reforms, for example by limiting monetary policy flexibility and constraining government revenue collections. 24. The staff felt that top priority should be given to completing public sector reforms being prepared under the World Bank’s PSRAC, including the restructuring of the cabinet of ministers; establishment of a transparent oil fund accountable to parliament; adoption of a satisfactory privatization program; and completion of the merger of the three state-owned banks. However, there was no consensus among the authorities on the way forward in most of these areas. In some-notably proposals regarding cabinet of ministers reform, the oil fund, and privatization- the leadership of the country expressed clear opposition to Fund and Bank recommendations and appeared set to pursue a different course. 25. The staff stressed the importance of reorganizing the cabinet of ministers. This would enable much more effective coordination and implementation of the remaining reforms. The objectives would be to have the COM focus on policy coordination, eliminate duplication of functions with ministries, and strengthen the teams responsible for social and economic policies. However, the authorities felt that such reforms in other CIS countries had not yet proved successful, and they remained unconvinced of the need for any significant change in the size or role of the COM. 26. The staff expressed its deep concern that the oil fund might be established without taking into account staff recommendations designed to ensure transparency and accountability. In line with its previous advice, the staff recommended the introduction of clear regulations regarding the use and management of oil resources; regular publication of external audits; and parliamentary approval of all expenditures from the fimd through the normal budgetary process. The authorities refused to share with staff the draft oil fund proposal that is currently being developed (apparently without any involvement from the central bank or ministry of finance). They strongly opposed the notion of parliamentary accountability, arguing that, as Azerbaijan was a presidential republic, the fund should be under the exclusive control of the president. The staff responded that, in this regard, there was no justification for treating oil revenues any differently from any other revenues, which were subject to the budgetary process approved by parliament. They also warned that the effective establishment of a second budget, independent of ministry of finance control, would undermine macroeconomic control and stability. 27. The staff regretted that the authorities appeared to be moving forward with a privatization framework law and program that reflected few of the essential elements discussed with a World Bank mission in April 2000. In particular, the draft law (which was approved by parliament after the Fund mission left, on May 16) lacked a strong and clear Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 19- commitment to open and transparent tender methods, using reputable international investment advisers. Nor did it include any firm guidelines for case by case privatization, but instead allowed wide scope for discretion, with many issues, including the extent of use of vouchers, to be decided later by the executive authorities, through decrees. Clarity in these areas is crucial to avoid a repeat of the abuses under the first program. The staff urged the authorities to resume a constructive dialogue with World Bank staff on this issue. 28. Banking sector reforms are moving forward, albeit slowly. The authorities informed the staff that the new merged bank would be operational beginning in July or August 2000. Whereas they intended to revoke the licenses of all three old banks, there might be a delay in the case of Agroprom Bank to facilitate the recovery of non-performing loans. The staff cautioned strongly against any attempt to keep Agroprom Bank open as an agricultural lending bank in view of its demonstrated inability to fLlfil1 this role in the past. The staff also expressed concern about the continued delays in completing the sale of the International Bank and pointed out the need to modify the privatization plan so as to attract a strategic investor, if EBRD participation is to materialize. 29. Despite the reform efforts of recent years, the banking sector remains vulnerable. ” Despite high margins of intermediation, the profitability of the system is declining because of the rising level of non-performing loans to public enterprises. The banks, hampered by the sluggish development of much of the non-oil economy and declining liquidity ratios, have been unable to attract substantial manat deposits, and as a result loans have largely been fmanced by central bank credit. While much has been done to develop the regulatory framework and strengthen bank supervision, enforcement of prudential regulations is uneven and resolution of problem banks is too slow. The stafT urged the authorities to broaden their focus from restructuring of the state-owned banks and begin a comprehensive reform of the banking system, in line with the recommendations of recent MAE missions. 30. In line with poverty alleviation objectives, the staff urged the authorities to focus more attention on the energy sector and the use of public resources in the social sector. l The staff noted that the energy sector is characterized by huge distortions, including below-cost pricing, massive non-payment by final consumers and the energy utility companies, and large tax arrears. The resulting energy subsidies to the population are poorly targeted, hinder growth, and could threaten macroeconomic stability. As such, they have an adverse impact on poverty. The staffrecommended that a comprehensive energy reform program be worked out, with World Bank assistance, to ensure that prices fully cover costs, increase collection rates, develop a targeted social safety net to gradually replace the existing subsidies, and prepare the sector for privatization. Governance reforms at SOCAR, to address problems identified by the r’ An assessment of the stability of the banking sector as a whole is provided in the Selected Issues paper, Chapter II. Reforms at the Azerbaijan National Bank are described in Box 3. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 20 - recent audit and to complete the audit of the refinery that had previously refused access to the auditors, would be important first steps. 0 The recent FAD mission on expenditure policy argued that a reallocation of resources to primary services in the health and education sectors was critical for poverty reduction. The staffrecognized that the authorities were developing a strategy for reform of education and health spending and, in this context, stressed the need to address the excessive concentration of public resources in secondary education and highly specialized medical care, and on wages. The staRnoted that health and education reforms needed to be affordable, within a medium-term, sustainable fiscal strategy. Box 3: Reforming the Azerbaijan National Bank (ANB) The ANB has agreed to publish the next external audit based on 1999 data, which is expected to be completed by July 3 1,ZOOO. An anmral external audit of the ANB, based on international accounting stand&s (IAS), is required by law, and has been conducted regularly since 1997. In 2000 and beyond, the central bank governor plans to undertake a thorough modem&ion of the ANB . Management is cmrently developing a resa plan for discussion at the ANl3 Board The main aspects of this include improvements in staff recruitment, audit and control, and in the research capabilities of the central bank. To learn from experience elsewhere, the governor recently visited the central banks of Poland and the Czech Republic. As a first step, a qualified chief accountant has been hired; with this appointment, the central bank has prompted a break with the usual low government pay scale. Recruitment efforts for an internal audit chief and a research department head are also proceeding. The ANB has requested additional technical assistance from MAE to improve audit and control capabilities. Upon Board approval of the plan to resnuctnre the central bank, management intends to approach the Fund for furthex teclmical assistimce. The 1997 and 1998 audit reports made recommendations to improve certain operational practices of the ANB Highlights of these proposals by Pricewaterhonse-Coopers are listed below. . Auditors felt a number of accounting principles deviated from IAS, particularly in the areas of accruals, provisioning, accounting of fixed assets, and revahtation. Some steps have been taken to correct this, as the ANB recently began to use the new chart of accounts developed by MAE and STA inline with IAS. . Auditors stressed the need to enhance the role of the internal audit department. The audit department has begun to perform audits of cash settlement centers and operations. However, a more stmctnred and broader involvement by the audit depanment is required. . Procedures need to be introduced to monitor the N’s non-performing loan portfolio, particularly regatding overdrafts of the insolvent state-owned banks. The ANE3 provisioned only about manat 11 billion in 1998 towards the resolution of this problem However, auditors felt an assessment of the credit portfolio and regular provisioning is needed on a timely basis. . A number of specific measures have also been recommended to improve the use of information ~ technology for proper audit and control. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-21- E. Statistical Issues 31. The staff considers that macroeconomic statistics are adequate for the purposes of program monitoring, but that both monitoring and surveillance would benefit from an acceleration of efforts to improve statistical methodology and coverage (Appendix III). ln the area of government finance, there is a need to develop timely and accurate estimates of expenditure and tax arrears, including through computerization and strengthening of commitment controls at the treasury. Regarding external sector statistics, the staff recommended a thorough review, with the assistance of STA, of the treatment of oil sector flows, given their increasing importance and complexity. The staff also urged the authorities to accelerate implementation of the recommendations of recent STA missions regarding national accounts and consumer prices. F. Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper 32. The authorities, led by the ministry of economy, have made a good start in preparing a first draft of an interim poverty reduction strategy paper, However, there are signs that the planned consultative process to build broad ownership may be difficult, with the government apparently reluctant to engage in open public debate on economic policies with civil society. Box 4 summarizes the planned process. Box 4. Preparing an Interim Poverty Redaction Strategy Paper Responsibility for preparing the interim poverty reduction strategy paper (I-PRSP) has been assigned to the ministry of economy. The ministry completed the first draft of the I-PRSP in April 2000 in consubation with the ministry of labor aud social protection Recoguizing the iterative process that is necessary for successful prepara- tion of the I-PRSP, the authorities have solicited cormnents on the first draft and plan to complete a revised draft which will be discussed witbin tbe government during Jnly and August, in au effort to build broad government ownership. The final version of the I-PRSP will be completed in September 2000. Once the I-PRSP is fin&~ the autlmrities plan to begin preparing the full PRSP. This process is expeckd to include consuhations with civil society and the donor community, though tlte authorities have no clear plans yet on how this will be condncted. The aim will be to complete the d&l PRSP by the end of 2000 and the final version by the end of April 2001. Responding to comments made on the first draft, the authorities plau to incorporate several revisions in the next version, while limiting the I-PRSP to outlining the preparation process and content of the full PRSP. First, the authorities plan to develop a more complete set of poverty indicators and outline their plans for developing a thorough assessment of the nature and extent of poverty. Second, the scope of the I-PRSP will be expanded to include the government’s strategy for creating aud operating au oil fund; plans for reforming the energy sector and the public sector; plans for improving governance; aud plans to strengthen the performance of the non-oil economy. Particular emphasis will be given to methods for generating employment intensive growth that is outside the oil and old indusuial sectors. Third, the I-PRSP will demonstrate the links between the strategic priorities and policy goals identified by the authorities and efforts to reduce poverty. Finally, the I-PRSP will include a description of mechanisms that will be used to consult with civil society and donors on the poverty reduction strategy that will be presented in the full PRSP. Thus far, the level of ownership by the ministry of economy seems high, but involvement of other ministries has so far been minimal. Senior miuistq of economy officials clearly value the opportuuity to articulate their own strategy rather than respond to a donor vision They noted that even the early stages of preparing the I-PRSP bad increased their awareness of poverty in Azerbaijan. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 22 - G. Future Fund Relations 33. The authorities remain interested in discussing a new Fund arrangement, including access to Fund resources under the PRGF. The staff indicated that it would continue to offer policy advice in the context of its regular surveillance with a view to achieving poverty reduction in Azerbaijan. However, it emphasized that, unless there was increased support and ownership for much needed reforms, it would not be possible to resume discussions for a new program. The staff suggested that strengthened commitment to the reform effort, which could be supported by a precautionary stand-by arrangement, would need to be demonstrated by substantial progress in implementing the high priority reforms, in line with the discussion in section D. Actual access to Fund resources would be conditional on a re-emergence of a balance of payments need. 34. Azerbaijan’s economy has recovered fully from the effects of the external shocks of 1998, helped by good macroeconomic policies and the strong recovery in the oil price. Macroeconomic policy adjustments in mid-1999-an easing of monetary policy and a decision to allow a controlled depreciation of the exchange rate-helped reduce the impact of the shocks on output, while maintaining an outstanding inflation performance. Higher oil prices have led to a substantial rise in tax revenues, and a small fiscal surplus is projected for 2000 (excluding foreign-financed project lending). Similarly, as oil exports have surged as a result of higher prices and production, the external current account deficit has fallen sharply, and the balance of payments is now fully financed, with a substantial accumulation of foreign assets. 35. Apparent success in macroeconomic performance in recent years has not, however, been suffkient to deliver any significant reduction in poverty. Growth in Azerbaijan has been too concentrated in oil and oil-related sectors, where employment opportunities are few. The key barrier to more broad-based growth has been the failure to move ahead rapidly enough with structural reforms, especially public sector reforms. This has contributed to the development of an unfriendly business environment, characterized by inadequate legal protection and corruption, which has discouraged investment. 36. Sustained growth in the non-oil sector requires the continuation of strong macroeconomic policies. The stafftherefore urges the authorities to address emerging macroeconomic pressures quickly. In the short term, monetary policy will need to be tightened if recent pressures in the foreign exchange market persist or if inflation rises further. More importantly, high oil prices must not lead to complacency in the effort to strengthen tax collections. Implementation of the new tax code and reforms of the tax and customs administrations are urgently needed, both to strengthen revenues and reduce corruption. And, while external debt remains relatively low, much more care is needed in future regarding the contracting and guaranteeing of project loans to public enterprises, to Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 23 - avoid serious risks to the budget that could undermine future fiscal consolidation. To support this, a strengthening of investment planning and appraisal is urgently needed. 37. Over the medium term, as oil revenues rise, particular care will be needed to avoid excessive real exchange rate appreciation and wasteful use of resources. This points to the need to run fiscal surpluses, so as to save some of the windfall revenues, for example in the proposed oil fbnd. It also argues for greater flexibility in monetary policy, requiring structural reforms to deepen and broaden financial markets so as to facilitate a more flexible exchange rate regime and increase the range of available monetary instruments. 38. Slow progress on structural reforms has in part reflected limitations in implementation capacity, but a much bigger problem has been the lack of sufficiently strong and broad-based ownership of reforms. The reforms that are needed now are more difficult to implement than earlier reforms, because they threaten the position of powe&l vested interests. As the power of these groups has increased, and higher oil revenues have relieved macroeconomic pressures, the momentum of reform has been lost. 39. It is essential to move forward rapidly to complete the unfinished structural reform agenda. Most importantly, institutional and governance reforms are needed quickly, to remove the key obstacles to growth in the non-oil sector and to ensure that oil revenues are used wisely, for the benefit of the whole population. These include establishment of an oil fund, which should be accountable to parliament and linked to the budget; civil service reform; restructuring of central government, especially the cabinet of ministers; a strengthening of the auditing of government; and legal and judicial reform. Many of these measures are key elements of the World Bank’s public sector reform adjustment credit. They would also address many of the issues highlighted in FAD’s recent report on fiscal transparency. Other high priority measures include passage of a privatization program that addresses the problems with the first program, and reforms to reduce the vulnerability of the banking sector, including completion of the merger of three state-owned banks, the privatization of the International Bank, and initiation of a comprehensive reform of the private banking sector. Work has been underway on most of these measures for several years, supported by substantial technical assistance. With sufficient commitment, they could all be implemented quickly. 40. More attention needs to be paid in future to reforms of the energy and social secfors, which could have a significant role in reducing poverty. Time will be required to develop reform strategies for the energy sector-including measures to address governance problems identified in the audit of SOCAR, raise low collection rates, and restructure, privatize or, if necessary, liquidate enterprises- and for the social sector. However, in view of the lack of any significant progress in these areas so far, it is important to make a start soon. 41. The authorities have expressed a strong interest in a new Fund arrangement, including access to Fund resources. The staff has indicated that it is willing to discuss a new arrangement, but only if there is clearly widespread support for resuming the reform Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 24 - process. Key tests of ownership would include implementation of a substantial proportion of the highest priority measures identified in paragraph 39 prior to discussions, and of most of the remaining ones prior to Board consideration of a new arrangement. In addition, it would be important to build broad support for reforms through a genuinely open consultative process during the preparation of a poverty reduction strategy paper. Regarding access to Fund resources, the staff recognizes that, though there is no obvious need at present, a need could re-emerge in the finure, given Azerbaijan’s dependence on oil exports, and the volatility of world oil prices. The staff also recognizes that poverty remains widespread in Azerbaijan and looks forward to continuing to provide policy advice directed at poverty alleviation. The staff strongly urges the authorities not to allow the current abundance of oil revenues to distract attention from the urgent need to revive the reform process, so as to ensure that the people of Azerbaijan can benefit fully from the country’s enormous potential. 42. The staff recommends that the next Article IV consultation with Azerbaijan be held on the standard 12-month cycle. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 25 - Table 2. Azerbaijan: Macroeconomic Framework 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 Projections Output and prices Real GDP growth (in percent) Ofwhich: oil GDP growth non-oil GDP growth 10.0 7.4 5.0 7.9 8.6 7.1 6.2 12.6 23.1 20.0 0.8 7.4 2.8 -1.3 -3.0 44.0 7.5 4.7 6.0 8.0 10.0 9.0 8.0 7.0 lnflation (in percent) GDP deflator Consumer prices (period average) Consumer prices (end-of-period) -6.9 -5.1 -0.8 -8.5 -7.6 -0.5 Nominal GDP (in billions of manat) 16,177 16,489 Nominal GDP (in millions of U.S. dollars) 4,181 3,996 Nominal GDP per capita (in U.S. dollars) 549 521 Money (growth in percent, end-of-period) Reserve money Broad money -20.1 16.2 -17.0 22.2 Public finances (in percent of GDP) General government fiscal balance General government financial balance 11 General government revenue General government expenditure Current Capital Foreign financed project spending 2/ -4.2 -5.4 -1.8 -1.9 -1.8 -1.8 -2.0 -0.1 -3.4 -2.7 1.4 1.1 0.2 0.2 0.0 1.9 17.0 19.4 25.8 25.1 25.2 25.7 26.0 28.4 21.1 24.9 27.6 27.0 27.0 27.5 28.0 28.5 19.2 20.6 22.4 22.0 22.5 22.5 22.5 22.5 1.1 1.6 2.0 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0 0.8 2.7 3.2 3.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 External sector External current account balance (in percent of GDP) Gross official reserves (end-of-period): In millions of U.S. dollars External debt (in percent of GDP) External debt service (in percent of exports of GNFS) 31 World oil price (average, U.S.%/bbl) -32.6 -15.0 -12.3 -21.4 -34.5 -34.6 -32.2 -12.5 449 676 617 617 642 650 670 700 15.9 24.2 27.9 28.9 29.8 29.4 30.2 29.5 3.7 4.3 7.6 7.2 8.8 10.1 8.4 6.0 13.1 18.1 26.4 23.0 20.5 20.4 21.0 21.2 Saving-investment (in percent of GDP) Foreign saving National saving Private Public Of which: Oil fund Gross investment Private Public 32.6 15.0 12.3 21.4 34.5 34.6 32.2 12.5 6.1 11.3 12.4 12.3 11.3 12.0 12.1 13.3 8.4 12.4 9.0 9.3 8.7 8.8 8.6 7.4 -2.3 -1.1 3.4 3.1 2.7 3.2 3.5 5.9 0.0 0.0 3.9 2.7 2.3 2.3 2.1 4.1 38.7 26.3 24.7 33.7 45.8 46.6 44.3 25.8 36.8 22.0 19.5 28.7 41.3 41.6 38.8 19.8 1.9 4.3 5.2 5.0 4.5 5.0 5.5 6.0 7.2 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.2. 2.0 2.2 3.0 3.0 2.5 2.0 2.0 3.0 3.0 3.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 18,548 20,383 22,613 24,782 26,888 30,876 4,159 . . . .,. . . . . . . . . . 539 574 630 686 740 845 16.0 . . . .,. . . . . . . . . . 16.0 . . . .,. .a. . . . . . . Sources: Azerbaijan authorities; and Fund staff estimates. l/ Excluding foreign financed project spending. 21 Mainly onlending of project loans. 3/ Exports of goods and nonfactor services, excluding oil sector exports. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 26 - Table 3. Azerbaijan: Consolidated Operations of the General Government 1998 Billions Percent of Manat of GDP 1999 2000 Billions Percent of Billions Percent of Manat GDP Manat GDP Projections Total revenues 2,755 17.0 3,206 19.4 4,777 25.8 Individual income tax Enterprise profits tax Social security contributions Value-added tax Excise taxes Land tax Property tax Royalties Customs revenue Profit oil Other revenues Ofwhich: Grants 408 2.5 448 2.7 340 2.1 368 2.2 405 2.5 422 2.6 719 4.4 791 4.8 95 0.6 114 0.7 25 0.2 42 0.3 23 0.1 49 0.3 171 1.1 180 1.1 293 1.8 318 1.9 276 1.7 475 2.9 13 0.1 61 0.4 504 2.7 526 2.8 524 2.8 927 5.0 135 0.7 57 0.3 60 0.3 344 1.9 340 1.8 728 3.9 631 3.4 80 0.4 Total expenditure (excluding project spending) 3,300 20.4 3,653 22.2 4,513 24.3 Wages and salaries 813 5.0 959 5.8 1,210 6.5 Purchases of goods and services 943 5.8 1,036 6.3 1,078 5.8 Interest payments 17 0.1 24 0.1 90 0.5 Transfers to households 1,096 6.8 1,335 8.1 1,624 8.8 Of which: Pensions 528 3.3 695 4.2 817 4.4 Subsidies 20 0.1 19 0.1 29 0.2 Other current expenditures 12 0.1 27 0.2 71 0.4 Capita) investment 185 1.1 261 I .6 376 2.0 Other 214 1.3 -8 0.0 35 0.0 Balance excluding foreign financed project spending -54s -3.4 -447 -2.7 263 I.4 Foreign financed project spending 130 0.8 452 2.7 591 3.2 Overall balance, cash basis -675 -4.2 -895 -5.4 -328 -1.8 Available financing 675 4.2 895 5.4 328 1.8 Domestic financing, net 233 1.4 -33 1 -2.0 -1,051 -5.7 Net borrowing Corn ANB l/ 129 0.8 -345 -2.1 -1,028 -5.5 Privatization proceeds 108 0.7 117 0.7 57 0.3 Other 2/ -5 0.0 -103 -0.6 -81 -0.4 Foreign financing, net 443 2.7 1,226 7.4 1,379 7.4 Disbursements 443 2.7 1,237 7.5 1,383 7.5 Project loans 154 0.9 457 2.8 600 3.2 Oil bonuses 289 1.8 612 3.7 647 3.5 World Bank SAC 0 0.0 168 1.0 136 0.7 Repayments 0 0.0 12 0.1 6 0.0 .Memorandum items: Changes in arrears 3/ Overall balance, commitment basis Non-oil balance 4/ 90 0.6 -90 -0.5 0.0 0.0 -765 -4.7 -805 -4.9 -328 -1.8 -946 -5.8 -1,235 -7.5 -I ,623 -8.8 Sources: Ministry of Finance, Tax Ministry, Azerbaijan National Bank; and Fund staffprojections. I/ includes the effect of accumulation of government deposits on oil bonus and profit oil. 2/ Includes bank restructuring costs. 3/ Comprises only Republican budgetary arrears on wages and pensions. There continue to be arrears on goods and services. 4/ Excludes revenue from profit oil, oil royalities, and the portion of profit taxes paid by SOCAR. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 27 - Table 4. Azerbaijan: Balance Sheet of the Azerbaijan National Bank and Monetary Survey (In billions of manats, end-of-period stocks; unless otherwise indicated) 1998 1999 2000 Ql Q2 Q3 Q4 Program Actual Pmjections Balance Sheet of the Azerbaijan National Bank Net foreign assets 565 Net international reserves (convertible) 488 Gross international reserves (convertible) 1,745 Foretgn liabilities (convertible) -1,257 Oil Fund Investment Other 77 Net domestic assets 580 Domestic credit 736 Credit to general government (net, incl. counterpart funds) I/ 64 Oil Fund deposits ,.. Claims on banks I/ 672 Other items (net) -156 Reserve money 1,140 Manat reserve money 1,057 Required reserves in foreign currencies a3 0th~~ deposits 5 Monetary Survey 1,238 1,175 2,959 -1,783 63 90 -473 89 397 -166 427 -281 -797 -210 678 -307 -682 631 633 -307 ,338 1,325 1,425 1257 1,351 68 74 3 4 Net foreign assets Net international reserves of the ANB (convertible) Net foreign assets of commercial banks (convertible) Oil Fund Investment Other 695 488 215 .., -9 1,584 1,175 409 0 Net domestic assets Domestic credit Credit to general government (net, incl. counterpart funds) I/ Claims on enterprises and individuals l/ Other items (net) 1,018 508 2,203 1,987 12 -296 2,190 2,283 -1,185 -1,479 Broad money Manat broad money Currency outside banks Manat deposits Foreign currency deposits 1,713 2.092 2,249 2,190 1,218 1,404 1,509 1,356 926 1,136 1,189 1,072 292 269 320 284 494 688 740 834 Memorandum items: ANB refinancing to banks 21 672 818 Claims on enterprises and individuals 21 2,190 2,423 ANB gross international reserves (in millions of U.S. dollars) 449 676 ANB net international reserves (in millions of U.S. dollars) 126 268 Exchange rate (manam .S dollar, end-of-period) 3,890 4,378 Velocity of broad money (level) 3/ 12.1 9.0 Velocity of broad money (annual percentage change) 26.5 -14.8 Broad money multiplier (level) 1.5 1.6 Reserve money (annual percentage change) -20.1 162 Broad money (annual percentage change) -17.0 22.2 1,902 1,219 1,146 1,163 2,994 2,893 -1,848 -1,730 682 74 56 I I ,304 ,248 55 4 2,286 1,146 458 682 0 1 1 ,682 2,339 2,579 3,087 ,163 1,112 1,146 1,222 516 445 459 489 782 974 1,376 3 0 0 0 -37 508 1,442 1,881 -845 -235 2,287 2,116 -1,479 -1,373 971 713 2,627 2,256 681 656 260 264 4,400 4,413 ..' 1.6 1.7 40 1 28.2 44.8 41.1 1,969 2,200 2,678 1,112 1,146 1222 2,187 2,793 2,810 -1,674 -I ,646 -1,588 782 974 1,376 75 80 80 -533 -749 -1,135 -195 -41 I -797 -778 -886 -1,308 -782 -974 -I ,376 583 475 511 -338 -338 -338 1,432 1,446 1,536 1,358 1,371 1,457 74 75 79 4 5 7 61 -206 -659 1,434 1,167 714 -828 -912 -1,355 2,262 2,079 2,069 -1,373 -1,373 -1,373 2,400 2,372 2,428 1,516 1,531 1,628 1,195 1,207 1,282 322 325 345 883 841 800 823 715 751 2,502 2,319 2,309 625 620 617 249 254 268 4,460 . . . . . . a.7 "' -3.6 1.7 1.6 1.6 46.3 25.2 16.0 56.8 26.5 16.0 Sources: Azerbaijan National Bank; and Fund staff estimates. I/ Including impact of resolution of bad loans problem, which involves transfer of nonperforming loans to the government against a cancellation of the banks’ debts to the ANB, with the ANB being compensated by receiving government securities. The actual amount issued in the first quarter of 1999 was manat 140 billion. An amount of manat 100 billion in government secunties is included in the second quarter of 2000. 2/ Excluding impact of resolution of bad loans problem. 3/ Velocity is defined as annualized nominal GDP divided by fourth quarter broad money. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 28 - Table 5. Azerbaijan: Balance of Payments (In millions of U.S. dollars; unless otherwised indicated) 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 Prel. ProJections Current account -1,363 400 -512 -95 1 -1,695 -1,865 -1,885 -836 Trade balance -1,046 -408 38 -320 -863 -993 -1,053 143 GOOdS Expons Ofwhich: oil sector Imports Ofwhich: oil sector 678 1,025 1,542 1,553 1,466 1,522 1,496 2,45 I 434 801 1,296 1,291 1,190 1,222 1,168 2.09 I -1,724 -1,433 -1,504 -I ,872 -2,329 -2.5 15 -2,548 -2,308 -356 -325 -318 -568 -881 -1,009 -968 -71 I Servms Exports Imports Ofwhich: oil sector debits -369 -228 -245 -419 -64 1 -654 -614 -477 332 256 276 296 314 336 362 395 -701 -484 -522 -715 -955 -990 -977 -872 -286 -189 -206 -368 -569 -589 -556 -447 Income and current transfers Income Compensation of employees Of which: oil consortiums Interest payments on public external debt Invesment mcome. net Of which: protit of oil consortium Of which: income from portfolio assets Current transfers Otkal transfers 52 -17 -24 -20 -17 24 69 24 36 -305 -213 -191 -218 -218 -502 -45 -398 -297 -270 -299 -301 -589 -46 -47 -58 -54 -63 -78 -38 -29 -44 -58 -54 -63 -78 -38 -22 -42 -49 -55 ,61 -67 -75 23 -308 -190 -160 -175 -157 -476 -379 -281 -26 I -289 -29 1 -636 71 90 I01 114 134 159 81 93 84 79 81 83 87 56 33 34 24 21 18 17 Capital account 1,266 828 815 1,234 1,883 2,124 2,176 1,234 Net direct investment (after cost recovery by consortium) 1,024 510 437 889 1,517 1,795 1,804 838 Of which: oil companies 832 350 277 729 I.357 1,635 1,644 678 Official medium- and long-term loans (net) 60 204 236 210 228 198 242 259 Dlsbunements 90 225 276 252 276 248 272 299 Project loans 90 183 246 222 276 248 272 299 Program loans 0 42 30 30 0 0 0 0 Amortization -30 -21 -40 -42 -48 -50 -30 -40 Other 182 114 134 I35 138 130 130 137 Errors and omissions 38 -97 0 0 0 0 0 0 Overall balance -59 131 304 282 189 258 290 398 Futancmg Central bank gross reserves IMF 59 I8 41 Oil fund assets (- increase) -131 -304 -282 -189 -259 -290 -397 -227 59 0 -25 -8 -20 -30 96 -55 -42 -52 -77 -55 -45 -308 -240 -112 -174 -215 -323 Memorandum items Cost recovered by consortium (Interest and principal) Gross reserves of the ANB In months of total imports of GNFS In months of imports, excluding oil sector I I In percent of M2 Short term debt to reserves ratlo Oil fund tnflows From profit oil -377 449 676 28 40 38 5.4 102 140 0.05 0.04 -492 617 2.9 4.5 173 0.15 308 163 I45 -12 28 8 -505 -479 -518 -505 -1,026 617 642 650 670 700 2.3 2.2 2.2 2.5 2.6 4.0 4.0 39 40 4.2 From oil bonuses Current account m percent of GDP -33 -15 External debt in percent of GDP 16 24 External debt service in percent of exports of GNFS 4 4 0.1'4 0 I’Q 0.20 240 112 174 I20 112 124 120 0 50 -21 -34 -35 29 30 29 7 9 10 0 13 215 125 90 -32 30 8 0.14 323 273 50 -12 29 6 Sources. Azerba1ja.n authorities; and Fund staff estimates II Imports of GNFS , excluding the oil sector operanon. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. -29- APPENDIX I Azerbaiian: Fund Relations As of June 30,200O Membership Status: Joined: 09/18/1992; Article XIV General Resources Account: SDR Million %Ouota Quota 160.90 100.0 Fund Holdings of Currency 356.23 221.4 Reserve position in Fund 0.01 0.0 SDR Department: SDR Million %Allocation Holdings 5.37 N/A Outstanding: Purchases and Loans: SDR Million %Ouota Stand-by arrangements 34.59 21.5 Extended arrangements 53.24 33.1 Contingency and Compensatory 56.32 35.0 Systemic Transformation 51.19 31.8 PRGF arrangements 81.90 50.9 Financial Arrangements: Approval TvDe Date EFF 12/20/1996 ESAF/PRGF 12/20/1996 Stand-by 1 l/17/1995 Expiration Amount Approved Amount Drawn Date (SDR Million) (SDR Million) 03/l 9/2000 58.50 53.24 03/19/2000 93.60 81.90 1 l/16/1996 58.50 58.50 Projected Obligations to Fund:(SDR million; based on existing use of resources and present holdings of SDRs): Overdue Forthcoming 0613 O/2000 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 Principal 19.5 30.9 37.8 56.0 40.3 Charges/Interest A 53 90 39.9 75 45.3 53 31 Total 24.8 61.3 43.4 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3o- APPENDIX I 7. Exchange rate arrangements The currency of Azerbaijan is the manat which became sole legal tender on January 1, 1994. Currently, the exchange rate is allowed to float against all currencies. Noncash exchange rates are determined five times a week at the foreign exchange auctions conducted by the Baku Interbank Currency Exchange (BICEX). Exchange rates for cash transactions are quoted by commercial banks licensed to deal in foreign exchange on the basis of market conditions. The Azerbaijan National Bank (ANB) determines an official exchange rate against the U.S. dollar every day, it is equal to a weighted average of all foreign exchange markets, including the off-auction interbank market, the retail intra-bank market, and the bank note market located in foreign exchange bureaus. Azerbaijan has been classified by the staff with the group of countries whose exchange rate regimes are managed floats, Azerbaijan avails itself of the transitional arrangements under Article XIV. 8. Article IV Consultation The sixth Article IV consultation with Azerbaijan was concluded on June 30, 1999. 9. Resident Representative Mr. Michael Mered, the Fund’s fourth Resident Representative took up his duties in Baku in July 2000. 10. Resident Advisers An adviser on the establishment of the Treasury in the Ministry of Finance, Mr. Nurcan Akmrk, was stationed in Baku from December 1994 until September 1996. He was succeeded by Mr. B.K. Chaturvedi, whose assignment is now extended through August 2000. A technical long-term adviser for tax administration, Mr. Mark Zariski, was stationed in Baku from April 1995 until April 1996. Mr. Isaac Svartsman is currently the resident advisor in the ANB for bank supervision and restructuring; his assignment has been extended for a one-year period beginning in September 1999. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3l- Azerbaijan: Technical Assistance 1995-2000 APPENDIX I Fund Department Area of Assistance Mission Dates FAD MAE FAD STA STA MAE FAD FAD FAD STA MAE FAD FAD FAD STA MAE MAE FAD MAE STA MAE FAD LEG MAE FAD MAE BCS LEG FAD LEG STA LEG MAE FAD STA STA FAD FAD FAD Social safety net Central bank operations Tax administration Balance of payments statistics Monetary statistics Central bank operations Treasury project inspection Tax administration project inspection Tax policy Balance of payments statistics Central bank operations and banking sector reform Treasury project inspection Expenditure policy Treasury project inspection Monetary statistics Foreign exchange management Financial market development Tax administration Multitopic mission Balance of payments statistics Bank restructuring and payments systems Tax administration Tax code legislation Multitopic mission Treasury project inspection Bank restructuring Book entry system Tax code legislation Tax administration Tax code Balance of payments statistics Tax code Bank restructuring Tax administration Bank restructuring Price statistics National accounts statistics Tax administration Customs administration Expenditure policy Source: International Monetary Fund. February 1995 March 1995 April 1995 April 1995 May 1995 October 1995 December 1995 December 1995 February 1996 March 1996 July/August 1996 September 1996 October 1996 December 1996 December 1996 January 1997 January 1997 January 1997 March 1997 April 1997 May 1997 August 1997 September 1997 October 1997 April/May 1998 May 1998 October 1998 November 1998 December 1998 Jan./Feb. 1999 Mar./April 1999 Mar./April 1999 April/May 1999 Sept./Ott. 1999 oct./Nov. 1999 November 1999 November 1999 Jan./Feb. 2000 March/April 2000 April/May 2000 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-32- APPENDIX II Azerbaijan-Relations with the World Bank Azerbaijan became a member of the IBRD in September 1992 and of the International Development Association in late March 1995. The current Bank assistance strategy focuses on four main areas: (i) establishment of a policy and institutional framework conducive to efficient and equitable private sector led sustainable growth; (ii) enhancement of competitiveness in critical economic sectors, largely in agriculture; (iii) alleviating poverty; and (iv) resettlement and rehabilitation of Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs). In addition to the above, environment was identified as an urgent issue that the Bank should address. A new Country Assistance Strategy was issued on November 29, 1999. As of April 30,2000, the Association has committed US$369.2 million for 12 operations, of which US$212.4 million has been disbursed: Petroleum Technical Assistance (US$20.8 million, approved April 1995); Baku Water Supply (US$61 million, approved June 1995); Institution Building Technical Assistance (US!§ 18 million, approved July 1995); Rehabilitation Loan (US%65 million, August 1995); Gas Rehabilitation (IS$20.2 million, September 1996); Farm Privatization (US$l4.7 million, January 1997); Structural Adjustment Credit (US$70 million, July 1997 and US$7 million, March 1999); Urgent Environment Investment (US$20 million, June 1998); Pilot Reconstruction (US$20 million, July 1998 and US% 10 million, June 1999), Education Reform (US%5 million, May 1999) and Agriculture Development and Credit (US$30 million, June 1999). One project is due for Board approval this fiscal year 2000-Irrigation/Drainage (US$42million, June 22,200O). The following economic and sector work has also been undertaken: a Country Economic Memorandum in September 1993; an energy sector review in December 1993; studies on the agriculture and financial sectors in July and October 1995, to determine sectoral performance, prospects and constraints; a poverty assessment in February 1996; a National Environmental Action Plan was finalized in cooperation with the government in December 1997; a paper on a strategy to phase out leaded gasoline was presented in an interministerial conference in Denmark in June 1998; an energy sector update was completed in June 1998; and, a credit worthiness analysis was made in February 1998. For 1999, a Public Sector Strategy paper was completed and a Public Sector Reform Workshop was held in March 1999. Work on trade support initiated in FY98 was completed in June 1999, as were informal notes on pension reform (June 1999) and infrastructure privatization (April 1999). For 2000, a country economic report is scheduled to be completed together with a report on Water and Wastewater. A multi-country paper on Caspian Oil and Gas will be presented at the Annual Meetings 2000 in Prague, Advisory services continue to be provided to the financial and private sectors. The Bank organized a Pre-Consultative Group meeting in Paris in December 1992 and a full Consultative Group meeting in May 1995 to mobilize support from bilateral and multilateral donors, including the Fund. The second Consultative Group meeting took place in Tokyo in Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-33 - APPENDIX II January 1998. The Bank also organized a Conference of International Investors in Paris in December 1995 to solicit interest from potential foreign investors in investment opportunities in agro-industry, health care and business tourism in Azerbaijan; an investors’ conference was also organized in Tokyo in January 1998. Furthermore, the Bank has provided grants from its Institutional Development Fund to help the government manage the coordination of external financial and technical assistance and to upgrade the government’s capability in public procurement and to improve household expenditure surveys and other related statistics. In September 1995, the Bank opened a Resident Mission in Baku. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 34 - APPENDIX III Azerbaijan-Statistical Issues’ Macroeconomic statistics are adequate for purposes of surveillance and program monitoring; these are provided by the authorities on a timely basis (see attached matrix). Most of the data are supplied through the resident representative’s office to ensure good coordination. Data are also supplied to the Fund’s statistics department for publication in International Financial Statistics. In the staffs view, there have been continued improvements in statistics. However, several major issues need to be addressed in the areas of government finance statistics, balance of payments, national income accounts, and consumer and producer prices. In this connection, additional technical assistance may be needed from the Fund. Government finance statistics The Treasury system is improving and commitment accounting, introduced from January 1, 1999, is working well. Nonetheless, more work is needed in the following areas: 0 to further strengthen commitment controls and improve reporting, the establishment of a verification system is necessary; l data on public sector employment and wages should be reported on a regular basis; ad l while monthly data for State budget revenues are now available, the Tax Ministry should take steps to provide accurate and timely data for tax arrears; Money and banking statistics It would be preferable if the authorities could report money and banking statistics and interest rates directly to STA. There is also a need to expand coverage of interest rates. External sector statistics The stti believes that the existing methodology for preparing balance of payments statistics may not be capturing adequately the income due to foreign oil companies associated with their large investments in the oil sector, As such, the recent official balance of payments estimates may understate the size of the external current account deficit. The National Bank intends to request a technical assistance mission from the Statistics Department (STA) to ’ This appendix highlights major changes since the 1999 Article IV consultation (see EBS/99/ 102, Appendix III). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-35- APPENDIX III review the balance of payment treatment of oil sector flows ‘. Other weaknesses in the balance of payments compilation are: (i) exclusion of valuation changes from the data on foreign assets and liabilities of the banks and the foreign exchange component of reserve assets; (ii) identification of the components of gross reserves; (iii) compilation of nonguaranteed external debt; and (iv) lack of data on migrants’ transfers. National accounts There is a need to improve coverage and methodology of the national accounts. The recommendations of the recent STA technical assistance mission (November 1999) have yet to be implemented. The staffurged the authorities to develop quarterly GDP estimates and its components at constant prices, update the business register, and amend the statistical law on small business (passed in August 1999), which tends to undermine reporting by small businesses. Price statistics Good progress has been made to develop a producer price index (PPI). A sample of 490 enterprises has been selected including a broad coverage of products. The authorities intend to publish a PPI for the first time in early 2001; they expect to request a follow-up STA mission to assist with finalizing the PPI calculations. Work on the consumer price index, however, has not been completed. The basket used for consumer price calculations needs to be updated and the procedure to correct for missing items (self-correcting price imputation technique) should also be implemented. 2 While a technical assistance mission in March-April 1999 reviewed the general methodology for compiling balance of payments statistics and made recommendations for capturing oil sector flows, the follow-up mission would focus on the progress made on this issue. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicSurvey of Reporting of Main Statistical Indicators Observations as of end-May 2000 Country: Azerbaijan Central Reserve/ Bank Exchange international base balance Rates Reserves money sheet Broad money Date of latest Observation Date received Frequency of data Frequency of reporting Source of data Mode of reporting D M M M M Frequency of publication U U U U U Confidentiality Explanatory Notes Consumer Current Overall Public Interest Price Exports/ Account government debt/debt Rates Index tmpons Balance balance l/ GDP/GNP service End-May End-May Q4 1999 04 1999 01 2000 May 04 1999 1 June 23 IJune 12 IApril 8 001 April 10 1 April 10 I June 221Ao1 2000 2000 . ril 10 2000 W M Q Q Q 11 M Q W M Q Q 0 M 0 A A A A A A A C C C C C C V W M M Q V M Q U I U I U I U I U I U I B I Frequency of data: D-daily, W-weekly, M-monthly, Q-quarterly. Frequency of reporting: M-monthly, Q-quarterly, V-irregularity in conjunction with staff visits. Source of data: A-direct reporting by central bank, ministry of finance, or other official agency, N-official publication or press release. Mode of reporting: C-electronic mail or facsimile, V-staff visits, or O-other. Confidentiality: (8) for use by the staff and the Executive Board prior to publication, and (U) for unrestricted use. I w m I 1/ Deficit calculated from data on financing. . Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-37- Public Information Notice (PIN) No. OO/-- FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE APPENDIX IV International Monetary Fund 700 19’ Street, NW Washington, D. C. 20431 USA IMF Concludes Article IV Consultation with Azerbaijan Republic On August 1, 2000, the Executive Board concluded the Article IV consultation with Azerbaijan Republic.’ Background Azerbaijan’s three year economic program which was supported under the Fund’s Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility and Extended Fund Facility ended on March 19, 2000. During this period, Azerbaijan achieved strong economic growth combined with very low inflation. Over the past year, there has been a full recovery from the effects of the external shocks of 199~the Russian financial crisis and the oil price collapse-reflecting sound macroeconomic policies and the recovery in oil prices. Macroeconomic policy adjustments in mid-1999-an easing of monetary policy and a decision to allow a controlled depreciation of the exchange rate helped reduce the impact of these shocks on output, while maintaining price stability. Real GDP rose by just over 7 percent in 1999 and 6% percent in the first quarter of 2000 (over a year earlier), helped by substantial increases in crude oil production. Non-oil GDP, which declined in the wake of the Russian financial crisis and the collapse oil prices, has recovered. However, growth in the non-oil sector continues to be dominated by the strong performance of sectors such as construction and transportation which are directly related to developments in the oil sector, while the recovery in employment-intensive sectors such as manufacturing and agriculture has been limited. I Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial information, and discusses with officials the country’s economic developments and policies. On return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the country’s authorities. In this PIN, the main features of the Board’s discussion are described. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-38 - APPENDIX IV Annual consumer price inflation, which was slightly negative at end-1999, has increased but remains low at around 1 W percent as of end-May 2000. Price stability has been maintained despite an 11 percent depreciation of the manat against the U.S. dollar during 1999 and a strong recovery in reserve money in the second half of the year. Monetary policy was eased, beginning in the second half of 1999, to accommodate the rising demand for money as oil prices recovered and confidence in the manat returned. In response, as inflation has picked up, real interest rates have declined. Following these adjustments, the real effective exchange of the manat has now returned to around its level before the Russian financial crisis. Fiscal performance improved markedly in the second hatf of 1999 and the early months of 2000, on account of higher oil prices. However, while overall budgetary revenues rose, non-oil revenues continued to fall short of target despite efforts made to strengthen tax administration. Cash expenditures increased sharply, reflecting the clearance of wage and pension arrears, higher capital spending, and wage increases. Nonetheless, the fiscal deficit excluding foreign financed project spending declined to 2% percent of GDP, somewhat lower than expected. The external current account deficit narrowed significantly from 33 percent of GDP in 1998 to 15 percent of GDP in 1999, mainly on account of higher oil prices and improved competitiveness. Oil export earnings nearly doubled in 1999, while non-oil imports fell from the peak level reached in the wake of the Russian financial crisis and the Russian ruble depreciation. Although net capital inflows declined in 1999, reflecting increased cost recovery by the oil consortium developing Azerbaijan’s main oil field and reduced direct investment inflows, gross international reserves increased to US$676 million by end-l 999, covering about 4 months of imports. In the first half of 2000, despite continued strong inflows to the oil sector, the resewes have fallen back, reflecting official sales in the foreign exchange market and amortization payments (including to the Fund). However, this has been more than offset by the accumulation of foreign assets by the state oil company (SOCAR), amounting to nearly US$200 million, reflecting receipts of oil signature bonus payments and the state’s share in the profits of the oil consortium. A presidential decree of December 29, 1999 indicated that these resources would be transferred to the government and invested through a new state oil fund. However, so far they remain with SOCAR, pending decisions on the operational management of the oil fund. In contrast to generally strong macroeconomic policies, structural reforms are moving forward only slowly, particularly in the important areas of governance and measures to tackle corruption. Over the past year, there have been substantial delays in implementation of a new privatization program, a wide range of public sector reforms to be supported under the World Bank’s public sector reform adjustment credit, and bank restructuring and privatization. Passage of the new tax code was also substantially delayed, but this was approved by parliament in early July 2000. Transparent arrangements for managing oil revenues have still not been settled. However, reforms are under way to strengthen the operations of the central bank, improve macroeconomic analysis at the ministry of finance, and further improve public expenditure control and management. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 39 - Azerbaijan Republic: Selected Economic Indicators 1997 1998 1999 2000 II Real economy Real GDP CPI (end-period) Money and credit Manat reserve money Manat broad money Credit to the economy Public finance Revenue Expenditure (incl. net lending) General government balance Balance of payments Current account External debt Debt service ratio (in percent of exports) Gross international reserves In millions of U.S. dollars In weeks of next year’s imports Government deposits in the oil fund (in millions of U.S. dollars) Exchange rate Exchange rate regime Manat per U.S. dollar (end-period) Real effective exchange rate (1995=100) (Changes in percent) 5.8 10.0 7.4 5.0 0.4 -7.6 -0.5 3.0 35.1 -21.1 18.9 15.9 29.2 -21.7 15.2 15.9 7.6 7.6 4.2 -9.4 (In percent of GDP, unless otherwise stated) 19.1 17.0 19.4 20.8 21.1 24.9 -1.6 -4.2 -5.4 -23.1 -32.6 -15.0 10.2 15.9 24.2 7.4 4.6 4.3 467 449 676 10 12 17 . . . . . . Managed floating 3,880 3,890 4,378 107.1 110.7 108.7 25.8 27.6 -1.8 -12.3 27.9 7.6 617 13 308 . . . .,. Sources: Azerbaijan authorities; and IMF staff estimates. l! Staff projections. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public