DOCUMENT OF MONETARY FUND AND NOT FOR PUBLIC USE SMIO l/262 CONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION August 17,200l To: Members of the Executive Board From: The Secretary Subject: Islamic Republic of Iran-Staff Report for the 2001 Article IV Consultation Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staff report for the 2001 Article IV consultation with the Islamic Republic of Iran, which is tentatively scheduled for discussion on Friday, September 7,200 1. At the time of circulation of this paper to the Board, the Secretary’s Department has not received a communication from the authorities of the Islamic Republic of Iran indicating whether or not they consent to the Fund’s publication of this paper; such communication may be received after the authorities have had an opportunity to read the paper. Questions may be referred to Mr. Jbili (ext. 36973) and Mr. Shabsigh (ext. 35364). Unless the Documents Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the Islamic Development Bank, following its consideration by the Executive Board. Att: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicCONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF IRAN Staff Report for the 2001 Article IV Consultation Prepared by Staff Representatives for the 200 1 Consultation with the Islamic Republic of Iran (In consultation with other departments) Approved by Pierre Dhonte and G. Russell Kincaid August 16,200l l Discussions for the 2001 Article IV consultation were held in Teheran from June 19 to July 5, 2001. The staff team consisted of Messrs. Jbili (head), Shabsigh, Goswami, and Hameed (all MED), Ms. Simard (FAD), and Ms. Calika (PDR). Mr. Dhonte (MED) participated in the concluding meetings. Mr. Mirakhor, Executive Director, and Mr. Shojaeddini, Advisor to the Executive Director, participated in the discussions. l The mission met with Governor Nourbakhsh; Deputy Governors Mojarrad and Komijani; Mr. Ebadi, Deputy Minister of the Management and Plan Organization; Messrs. Vahaji and Nahavandian, Deputy Ministers of Commerce; senior officials of the Ministry of Finance and Economic Affairs; National Iranian Oil Company (NIOC). The staff also met with representatives of commercial banks and the business community. l In concluding the 2000 Article IV consultation discussions with Iran on August 3, 2000, Directors commended the authorities’ efforts for maintaining prudent fiscal and monetary policies and reducing external debt. They welcomed the reform steps taken, including the introduction of a more market-based exchange rate system. Directors called on the authorities to introduce in 2000/O 1 a unified market-based exchange rate system, accelerate the pace of trade reform, introduce greater market sensitivity to financial rates of return, and strengthen the financial sector. They also encouraged the authorities to establish a well-defined timetable for public enterprise restructuring and privatization, reduce the number of commodities that are subject to price controls, and take steps to implement an adequate social safety net. Directors also noted that technical assistance from the Fund and other sources could facilitate the implementation of the envisaged reforms. l Iran continues to avail itself of the transitional arrangements under Article XIV. It also maintains exchange restrictions and multiple currency practices that are subject to approval under Article VIII, Sections 2(a) and 3. l The principal authors of this report are Messrs. Jbili and Shabsigh. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2- Contents Page Executive Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .4 Basic Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .......... 5 I. Background and Recent Developments ........................................................................ .7 A. Developments During 2000/O 1 ............................................................................ .8 B. Outlook for 2001/02.. ......................................................................................... .l 1 II. Report on Discussions ................................................................................................. .12 A. Demand Management Policies in 2001/02 ........................................................ .12 B. Exchange Rate Unification and Exchange System Reform.. ............................. .14 C. Structural Reforms .............................................................................................. 16 III. Medium-Term Outlook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22 IV. Statistical Issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23 V. Staff Appraisal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23 Text Boxes 1. Exchange Rate Unification ......................................................................................... .15 2. Subsidy System.. ......................................................................................................... .19 3. The Oil Stabilization Fund.. ........................................................................................ .2 1 Figures 1. Selected Economic Indicators, 1997/98-2001/02.. ..................................................... .27 2. Monthly Broad Money Developments, April 1999-March 200 1. .............................. .29 3. Monthly Exchange Rate Developments, September 1998-March 200 1 .................... .30 4. Selected Medium-Term Economic Indicators, 1999/200&2005/06 .......................... .3 1 Tables 1. Key Indicators, 1997/98-200 l/02.. ............................................................................. .33 2. Central Government Operations, 1997/98-200 l/O2 ................................................... .34 3. Monetary Survey, 1997/98-2001/02 .......................................................................... .35 4. Balance of Payments, 1997/98-2001102.. ................................................................... .36 5. Summary of External Debt and Debt Service, 1997/98-2001/02.. ............................. .38 6. Vulnerability Indicators, 1997/98-2000/01 ................................................................ .39 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3- Appendices I. Fund Relations ............................................................................................................. 40 II. World Bank Relations.. ............................................................................................... .43 III. Statistical Issues.. ........................................................................................................ .44 IV. Illustrative Medium-Term Scenario ............................................................................ .46 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4- EXECUTIVE SUMMARY Background. Iran is endowed with abundant oil and gas resources and has a relatively diversified production base, but economic performance has been constrained by the administrative allocation of resources, the public sector’s dominance in the economy, a distortive price system, widespread subsidies, trade restrictions, and multiple exchange rates. A broad reform strategy aimed at enhancing growth and employment creation was adopted in 2000/O 1. Recent developments. Economic performance improved in 2000/O 1, with real GDP growing by an estimated 5.6 percent and inflation rate declining to 12.6 percent. The external position strengthened, with the current account surplus reaching 13 percent of GDP, external debt declining to 8.3 percent of GDP, and gross official reserves rising to the equivalent of 8.4 months of imports of goods and services. The fiscal balance recorded a surplus of 8.6 percent of GDP, owing to higher oil revenue and expenditure restraint. However, unemployment edged up slightly to about 14 percent. Advances were made in several structural reform areas, including establishing an Oil Stabilization Fund, adopting a more market-based exchange system, improving tax administration, and initiating trade reforms. Progress was slow in other areas, however, including increasing banking system flexibility, adjusting energy prices, privatization, and labor market and social safety net reforms. Summary of discussions. On the basis of the current oil price forecasts, Iran’s external position is expected to remain in surplus in 2001/02 and over the medium term. In the short run, policies would need to focus on reducing inflation, completing the preparatory work to achieve a successful unification of the exchange rates at end-year, and accelerating structural reforms. While fiscal policy is expected to remain restrained, allowing for further buildup of savings in the oil stabilization fund, tight monetary conditions will be needed to avoid an acceleration in inflation. Upon unification of the exchange rates, the authorities plan to adopt a managed float exchange system and eliminate all exchange rate restrictions. Exchange rate policy would need to focus on promoting competitiveness and economic diversification, which would require strong disinflation efforts and steadfast implementation of structural reforms, including trade liberalization. Nontariff barriers are targeted to be eliminated by end-year, a plan is being prepared to make subsidies explicit and improve their targeting, bank supervision is to be enhanced, and privatization will need to be accelerated. Staff appraisal. The transition to a market economy is reaching a critical stage and the challenge is to sustain growth and generate employment. While the financial position is expected to remain comfortable, the authorities would need to maintain tight fiscal and monetary policies to reduce inflation and avoid a sustained appreciation of the real exchange rate. The staff underscored the importance of deepening and broadening the structural reforms, including trade and price liberalization, financial sector and monetary policy reforms, public enterprise restructuring and privatization, the regulatory environment for private investment, and labor market and social safety net reforms. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-5- Islamic Republic of Iran: Basic Data I. Social and Demographic Indicators Area (square kilometers) Population (2000/01) Urban Rural Population growth rate (2000/01) Life expectancy at birth (1997/98) Infant mortality rate per thousand (1998/99) Education-enrollment rates in percent of age group Primary (1997) Of which: Female Secondary (1996) Of which: Female Literacy ratio (15 years and over) (1997) Literacy ratio (6-29 years) (1999) Density: population per sq km of agricultural land (1989) Density: population per sq km (2000/01) Active population (2000/O 1) Employed population (2000/O 1) Per capita income (2000/01) Population per physician (1996) Per capita energy consumption (in kg of oil equivalent, 1990) Daily calorie supply per capita (1989) 1,648,OOO 63.8 million 40.79 million 23.07 million 1.7 percent 69.5years 29 96 81 66 58 79.7 percent 96.3 percent 91.2 38.7 18.7 million 15.7 million US$1,506 1,354 1,026 3,181 1980-85 1986-90 1991-95 1996197 1997198 1998199 1999/2000 Additional health indicators Infant mortality rate l/ Maternal mortality rate 2/ Access to safe water Access to sanitation Access to health care Hospital beds/lOO,OOO Physicians/lO,OOO Dentists/lO,OOO Nurses/lO,OOO Immunization DPT Immunization measles Death rate, crude 3/ Life expectancy at birth Male Female 91.6 140 50 60 50 148 3.4 8.5 29 69 11 59 65 64.6 68.2 63 65 67.1 70.3 59 91 71 65 73 151 3.6 0.7 8.7 77 80 10 50 40 89 82 90 158 6.2 1.2 . . . 88 84 6 31.7 40 90 90 164.1 8.5 1.6 23.4 4.7 30.7 29 37 ... ... ... ... ... “’ 157.6 159.6 164.6 9.0 9.7 10.1 1.7 1.8 1.9 68.4 70.6 ,,, Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-6- Islamic Republic of Iran: Basic Data (concluded) 1993194 1994195 1995196 1996197 1997/98 998/l 999 1999l2000 Indices of educational quality Student to class 30.4 30.3 29.8 29.6 29.3 28.9 28.4 Student to teacher 24.2 24.9 24.6 23.7 21.5 20.7 19.5 Sources: Data provided by the Iranian authorities. l/ Per 1,000 live births. 2/ Per 100,000 live births. 31 Per 1,000 population. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-7- 1. BACKGROUNDANDRECENTDEVELOPMENTS' 1. Iran is a major world oil and gas producer, with a per capita GDP of about US$1,500 in 2000/01.’ Iran is endowed with abundant oil and gas resources, the population enjoys high literacy rates, and the labor force is relatively well educated with long- established trade and handicraft traditions. While the economy remains heavily dependent on the oil and gas sector, which accounts for about 15 percent of GDP and 80 percent of export earnings, the production base is relatively diversified with agriculture and manufacturing accounting for about 34 percent of GDP, and services, including the government, representing close to one-half of GDP.3 The role of the public sector in the economy is significant both in terms of ownership and share in GDP (60-70 percent), but the private sector is dominant in agriculture, construction, and certain services. Also, a large number of public organizations and private foundations are involved in the provision of social services, including pension and social insurance administration and charitable activities. Iran’s social indicators have improved significantly in recent years, particularly in the health and education areas (see Basic Data). 2. Economic performance over the past decade has been relatively modest. Average real GDP growth was only about 3.8 percent during the past five years, or well below the level needed to provide employment opportunities for a young labor force that is growing at about 4 percent a year. Growth during the 1990s remained well below potential owing to structural rigidities, including trade and exchange restrictions; the dominant role of the public sector and constraints on private sector initiative; administrative allocation of resources; and a distortive price system. Other impediments included constraints on Iran’s access to the international financial markets. 3. A broad reform strategy was adopted by the Third Five-Year Development Plan (TFYDP) (2000/01-2004/05). The TFYDP aims at an orderly transition to a market economy as a means of accelerating growth, generating employment, and achieving financial stability. It aims at raising real GDP growth to 6 percent per ammm on average and reducing unemployment to about 11 percent at the end of the Plan period. The TFYDP calls for wide- ranging structural reforms, including exchange rate unification and exchange system reform, trade liberalization, financial sector reform, and restructuring and privatization of public enterprises. ’ Iran’s relations with the Fund are described in Appendix I. Relations with the World Bank are summarized in Appendix II. Appendix III reviews the statistical issues. ’ The Iranian year begins March 2 1. 3 These figures are average ratios over the past five years. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-8- 4. The recent presidential election will help strengthen the participatory system. The landslide victory of President Mohamed Khatami in the June 8,200l elections, and the large rate of voter participation have reinforced the movement of political and social reform, providing greater focus on economic reforms, transparency, and the rule of law. A. Developments During 2000/01 5. Overall economic performance improved significantly in 2000/01 because of improved terms of trade and the positive supply response to the economic reforms. Real GDP grew by an estimated 5.6 percent, up Tom 2.8 percent in 1999/2000, reflecting mainly strong growth in the oil sector and a partial recovery in agriculture from last year’s drought. Other sectors also registered robust growth performance. Production of crude oil rose by 11 percent, in line with the increase in OPEC quota. The increase in non-oil GDP growth was relatively broad-based, particularly in manufacturing and construction. With total consumption estimated to increase only moderately, gross national saving is estimated to rise to a record high of about 40 percent of GDP, reflecting the large fiscal and current account surpluses (Table 1). 6. Labor market developments, however, were mixed. According to the annual survey of the Central Statistics Office (CSO), which covers urban and rural areas, the unemployment rate rose from 13.5 percent in 1999/2000 to 14.3 percent in 2000/01. However, unemployment in urban areas declined slightly to 12 percent, according to the quarterly survey of the central bank of Iran, the Bank Markazi Jomhouri Islami Iran (BMJII). 7. Inflation, as measured by the consumer price index (CPI), declined to an average 12.6 percent in 2000/01 from 20.1 percent in 1999/2000. The deceleration reflected the relatively cautious monetary policy during the first half of 2000/O 1, the slowdown in the increase in food prices, and lower import prices in dollar terms (Figure 1). A 10 percent cap imposed on administered price increases helped contain inflationary pressures.4 Broad money growth accelerated during the last quarter of 2000/01, but its effect on the inflation rate may be felt with some lag in 2001/02. 8. The overall fiscal balance improved considerably in 2000/01, recording a surplus of 8.6 percent of GDP (Table 2).5 The sharp rise in oil prices allowed a buildup of savings in the recently established Oil Stabilization Fund (OSF) equivalent to 8 percent of GDP. Non- oil revenue, however, increased only by 4 percent, owing to the underperformance of income 4 Administered prices apply to basic commodities, energy, and the prices of public enterprise products. 5 Includes the operations of the central government and the OSF. The budgets of municipalities are relatively small (about 2 percent of GDP) and are managed outside the government budget. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-9- tax receipts and profit transfers from public enterprises.‘j Expenditure and net lending increased by 32 percent, or 1 percentage point of GDP, reflecting mainly a relatively high growth of current expenditure (30 percent) due to retirement bonuses for public sector employees, compensation for the losses caused by the drought, and higher-than-budgeted spending on education, social benefits, and defense. The improved fiscal situation allowed the government to repay about 1.2 percent of GDP of its debt to the banking system, mostly for loans to cover foreign exchange losses associated with the multiple exchange rate regime. 9. Monetary policy was relatively cautious during the first half of 2000/01, but was relaxed during the remainder of the year. Broad money grew at a rapid pace of close to 30 percent, the highest observed since 1996/97 (Table 3). Two factors contributed to this outcome: (a) an expansion of bank lending to the private sector and public enterprises which, in good part, financed the construction and manufacturing activities; and (b) a substantial, and mostly unsterilized, purchase of foreign exchange by the BMJII from the government during the second half of the year (Figure 2). Financial rates of return on bank deposits and lending (which are set by the BMJII) remained unchanged at the levels prevailing over the past few years. The decline in the inflation rate has resulted in positive real rates on long- term deposits and bank lending. 10. The external position strengthened significantly. The current account surplus doubled to the equivalent of 13 percent of GDP (Table 4), mainly reflecting the sharp increase in crude oil exports. Non-oil exports grew by 4.5 percent to US$4.1 billion, owing to favorable performance of petrochemicals and other industrial goods exports (compared to traditional Iranian exports such as carpets and dried fruits). Imports grew by 13 percent, in line with the expansion in economic activity. Lower capital inflows and accelerated debt service payments resulted in a decline in the outstanding external debt to US$8 billion (8.3 percent of GDP) (Table 5). Consequently, the overall balance amounted to US$6.9 billion in surplus and gross official reserves, including the OSF, stood at US$12.6 billion at end-year, equivalent to about 8.4 months of imports of goods and services.’ 11. The average free market exchange rate appreciated in real terms. With the elimination of the “export” exchange rate at the beginning of 2000/01, there was a step depreciation of the weighted average exchange rate (combining the free and official rates) by over 44 percent in nominal terms. However, the average (free) exchange rate quoted at the Tehran Stock Exchange (TSE) depreciated only by about 2 percent, resulting in a real ’ This was mostly because public companies in the oil, energy, and telecommunication sectors were allowed for the first time to retain the proceeds of their price increase to finance their investments. ’ The OSF resources that are not on-lent to the private sector are held with the central bank in foreign currency deposits and are included in international reserve assets. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- lo- appreciation of 17.5 percent (Figure 3).8 During the middle of the year, the TSE exchange rate came under strong pressure to appreciate, but BMJII countered the pressures by further building up its international reserve position through (unsterilized) direct purchases of government foreign exchange revenue. 12. Initial steps in the reform of the exchange and trade systems were reinforced. In addition to the elimination of the “export rate”, a more market-based exchange rate system was introduced with the elimination of trading in import certificates at the TSE and its replacement by foreign exchange transactions through trading in foreign exchange certificates of deposits (CDs).’ Banks were allowed to conduct limited interbank foreign exchange trading (on behalf of their clients) and have open positions within established prudential limits. The trade regime was further liberalized, with the expansion of the positive list, even though the list remained burdened with nontariff trade barriers (NTB) in the form of licensing and permit requirements from line ministries. The authorities adopted a program to replace the NTBs with tariffs by end 2001/02, and significant progress has been achieved toward meeting this target. 13. Advances were made toward improving tax administration and reforming the financial system. These included the establishment of a large taxpayer unit (LTU) and preparation for the introduction of a value-added tax (VAT). An OSF was established in 2000/01, ahead of the TFYDP’s target of 2001/02. The establishment of private banks and insurance companies was authorized and the government adopted a plan to recapitalize the state-owned commercial banks. In March 2001, the BMJII started issuing the Central-bank Participation Papers (CPP) as a prelude to introducing indirect monetary policy management. lo 14. Reforms, however, proceeded at a much slower pace in other important areas. There was no progress in increasing the flexibility of financial rates of return and only limited reduction in directed bank credit. Domestic petroleum product prices were adjusted * On end-period basis, the TSE rate appreciated by 3 percent in nominal terms. The discount to the curb market rate remained well below 2 percent. 9 The remaining exchange rates are the official “floating” exchange rate of Rls 1,750 per U.S. dollar, which applies to oil and gas exports, the imports of essential goods and government imports, and the public- and publicly-guaranteed debt service; and the TSE exchange rate (around Rls 8000 per U.S. dollar), which applies to all non-oil export receipts and all other permissible transactions not covered by the official rate. Moreover, commercial banks are allowed to conduct limited foreign exchange transactions that cannot take place at the other markets at a negotiated rate that is very close to the TSE rate. The exchange rate arrangement in Iran remains a conventional peg as the BMJII continues to intervene in the TSE market to ensure a certain path for the exchange rate. ‘O Given the limited stock of government securities, and their project-specific nature, the BMJII was authorized to issue CPPs up to Rls 8 trillion for monetary management purposes. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- ll- only marginally in 2000/01 and remain very low (about a quarter of border prices); and the privatization program is still at an early stage of preparation. The adoption of the new Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) law was delayed on technical grounds.” Finally, little progress was achieved in labor market and social safety net reforms. B. Outlook for 2001/02 15. The outlook for 2001/02 is relatively favorable. Real GDP growth is projected at 5 percent, despite an expected decline in oil output in line with OPEC quota reduction during 2001/02. This reflects continued recovery of agriculture from the drought and sustained growth in manufacturing (including capacity expansion in the petrochemical industry), construction, and services. Moreover, domestic demand is projected to rise by 8 percent in real terms, led in part by an increase in investment (by both the public and the private sectors) in response to the improvement in the external position and the ongoing reform process. The CPI inflation rate could rise to about 16 percent, reflecting the lagged effect of last year’s monetary expansion and a possible rise in import prices in 2001/02 (in U.S. dollar terms). 16. The balance of payments is expected to remain in surplus. The current account surplus in 2001/02 is estimated to decline to about US$8.7 billion, reflecting primarily a 13 percent drop in crude oil exports owing to lower oil export prices and lower production. Non-oil exports are projected to rise by close to 9 percent on the strength of petrochemicals exports. Import growth is estimated at about 10 percent owing to continued trade liberalization and the projected robust economic growth. The deficit in the capital account is expected to narrow to US$124 million, owing in part to buyback financing and lower scheduled amortization payments. With the overall balance of payments surplus estimated at US$8.6 billion, gross official reserves at end-2001/02 (including the OSF) are projected to rise to US$21.3 billion, equivalent to over 13 months of imports of goods and services. The external debt stock is projected to decline in 2001/02 to US$7.3 billion (about 6 percent of GDP). 17. The fiscal position (including the OSF’) is expected to remain in surplus in 2001/02, albeit lower than in the previous year. The overall surplus is estimated to decline from 8.6 percent of GDP in 2000/01 to 2.7 percent of GDP mostly on account of the expected decline in oil revenue. Non-oil revenue, however, is estimated to rise by 22 percent on account of higher fees for some government services and social security contributors. Total expenditure and net lending are expected to increase by about 23 percent, but would remain at about the 2000/01 level of 25 percent of GDP. Current expenditure is projected to ” The delay in enacting the new FDI law reflects concerns that the proposed law unnecessarily favored foreign investors over resident investors. A revised law is under consideration that will provide for equal treatment to foreign and resident investors. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12- increase by 19 percent to some 15 percent of GDP while capital expenditure is expected to remain unchanged in nominal terms. Overall, the non-oil fiscal deficit (in percent of non-oil GDP) is projected to decline by about 2 percentage points. 18. Broad money growth may accelerate significantly due to the buildup of banks’ excess reserves in the last quarter of 2000/01, the expansionary effects of a series of measures contemplated in 2001/02, and continued strong foreign exchange inflow. However, the BMJII could contain the growth of broad money to 20 percent through a series of measures to absorb excess liquidity, which would leave sufficient room for growth in credit to the private sector. II. REPORT ON DISCUSSIONS 19. The discussions were held against the background of renewed optimism following the presidential election, improved economic conditions in 2000/01, and greater focus on economic reforms with the objective of raising growth and reducing unemployment. In this context, intensive preparations are under way to complete the reforms envisaged in the TFYDP, including, in particular, the unification of the exchange rates, trade liberalization, and financial sector reform. 20. The current economic environment has improved. The mission shared the authorities’ views that prudent fiscal and monetary policies, including the establishment of the OSF, coupled with advances in trade liberalization, the sharp reduction in external debt, and the buildup of international reserves have helped improve the environment for investment and economic activity in Iran. This has facilitated private sector initiative and attracted interest for investment in oil and gas from major international oil companies, as evidenced by the recent large “buy-back” contracts. 21. Nevertheless, major challenges lie ahead as the transition to a market economy is reaching a critical stage. The authorities agreed that broad-based reforms will need to be implemented, including stronger measures in the key areas of price reform, restructuring and privatization of public enterprises, and financial sector reform. Intensive consultations are under way between the various government levels and the Parliament that would help accommodate a faster pace of reform. The authorities indicated that reducing unemployment was a top priority in their agenda given the current high unemployment rate and the projected rapid growth of the labor force. While sharing the authorities’ concern, the mission stressed that policies should also put emphasis on financial stability. A. Demand Management Policies in 2001/02 22. Against the background of continuing strong external position in 2001/02 and solid output growth, the mission stressed the need for demand management policies to firmly focus on containing inflationary pressure. The authorities indicated that monetary policy in 2001/02 would aim at containing broad money growth to about 20 percent compared to 30 percent in 2000/01 to prevent an acceleration of inflation, while accommodating private Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13 - sector activity. To achieve this target, monetary policy in 2001/02 will need to absorb banks’ excess reserves and counter the expansionary impact of measures taken recently or those under consideration. These include the reduction of advance import deposit requirement from an average of 50 percent to 10 percent (possibly eliminating it completely in 2001/02), and the planned reduction in the legal reserve requirements by about 5 percentage points. Furthermore, the expected buildup of BMJII’s foreign exchange reserves by US$8.6 billion will also result in a significant expansion of liquidity. 23. The authorities agreed to consider several measures to slow monetary growth. These include delaying, or phasing in, the reduction in legal reserve requirements, issuing additional CPPs on a net basis,12 tightening banks’ access to BMJII’s overdraft and other credit facilities, and reactivating the central bank’s open deposit account at competitive rates (close to banks’ lending rates).13 The mission urged the authorities to implement all necessary measures to ensure the achievement of the monetary target, including, if necessary, raising the ceiling on CPP issuance (Rls 8 trillion), and selling additional foreign exchange in the TSE. 24. Since strong inflow of foreign exchange is likely to continue in 2001/02 in connection with the projected balance of payments surplus, the exchange rate could come under increasing pressure to appreciate. The authorities recognize that sustained real exchange rate appreciation will undermine their efforts to diversify the Iranian economy, and enhance competitiveness. They are hoping, however, that the ongoing trade liberalization and structural reform would relieve some of the appreciation pressure and foster economic efficiency. The mission shared this view and urged the authorities to accelerate trade reform and adopt a stronger anti-inflationary stance, including through restrained fiscal expenditure and tighter monetary policy. 25. The mission stressed the importance of maintaining a tight fiscal policy stance to contain inflationary pressures. While reiterating their commitment to the main fiscal objectives as stated in the TFYDP, the authorities indicated that given current oil market conditions, the overall fiscal position will record a sizable, albeit smaller, surplus in 2001/02, which would allow for further buildup of savings in the OSF of nearly 3.5 percent of GDP. The mission supported the authorities’ policy to build fiscal surpluses to provide a cushion against the fluctuations in oil revenue. This will also reduce the pressure on the exchange rate to appreciate. The mission pointed out, however, that non-oil revenue may turn out to be lower than budgeted given the tax exemptions granted to certain sectors, the lower transfers of profit from public enterprises, and a possible overestimation of customs revenue. It also drew attention to the relatively large increase in nominal current expenditure (19 percent) compared I2 So far, the BMJII has issued about Rls 3 trillion. I3 This is a term deposit facility for banks that the BMJII used in early 199912000 to absorb banks’ excess liquidity. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14- to the fiscal outcome for 2000/01 and called for restraint on expenditure, particularly on subsidies and transfers. The authorities indicated that capital expenditure was expected to be about Rls 7 trillion (about 1 percent of GDP) below the budgeted amount, mainly owing to slower project implementation, and that the contingency budget may not be fully implemented. 26. The authorities reported that coordination of fiscal, monetary, and exchange rate policies had strengthened. The Money and Credit Council (composed of government and BMJII representatives), which is responsible for the implementation of monetary policy, has been meeting with increased frequency. In addition, the preparations for exchange rate unification are being carried out under close coordination between the BMJII and the government (see below). The mission underscored the need for added flexibility in the institutional framework that governs the setting of monetary policy. In particular, it highlighted the need for monetary policy making to be relatively independent and for the central bank to have sufficient operational independence to implement monetary policy. Also, it called for effective de-linking of fiscal and monetary policies, while increasing coordination between them, as recommended by the March 2001 FSAP follow-up mission.14 B. Exchange Rate Unification and Exchange System Reform 27. The staff commended the authorities for moving forward with reform of the exchange system. Active preparations are under way to unify the exchange rates by March 2002 (Box 1). The authorities reported that several committees were examining various aspects of the unification process, including preparations for launching an interbank foreign exchange market. In addition, a joint BMJII and government committee has been established to prepare the 2002/03 budget on the basis of a unified exchange rate. The mission welcomed the authorities’ decision to fully budget the cost of unification and avoid its monetization, make the implicit exchange rate subsidy an open entry in the budget, and prepare the groundwork for introducing a targeted system of subsidies to replace the current generalized subsidy system. The authorities aim to finalize all preparatory reports by mid-2001/02 and begin testing the new system during the second half of the year. 28. The authorities agreed to eliminate any remaining restrictions on foreign exchange transactions under the Fund’s Article VIII, Sections 2(a) and 3. They pointed out that foreign exchange regulations have recently been further liberalized, including the abolition of the surrender requirement, and the reduction in the advance import deposit requirement. The authorities stated their commitment to eliminate all remaining restrictions and accept the obligations of the IMF’s Article VIII at the time of the exchange rate unification.15 I4 The current legal framework for the formulation and implementation of monetary policy gives the government significant influence in setting monetary policy targets. I5 These stem from restrictions on making of payments and transfers for current international transactions (i.e., unremunerated import deposits and advance payment requirements) and multiple currency practices. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 15 - Box 1. Exchange Rate Unification The government has decided to unify the exchange rates by end 2001/02. The official and TSE rates will be eliminated and the exchange rate will be determined in the interbank foreign exchange market. Technical preparations are under way to address the rules and regulations (that would govern the interbank foreign exchange market); licensing procedures for foreign exchange dealers and their appropriate relations with their customers; code of conduct for interbank operations and market; BMJII’s operations and role in the interbank market (including intervention rules), and the information and training needs. Work has been proceeding on the rules for BMJII intervention in the interbank market, the operational rules, the appropriate international reserve target, hedging against risk, and other points. Plans are to establish a policy committee with regular meetings to deal with both foreign exchange and monetary issues. No decision has yet been made with respect to the BMJII’s participation in the market ex ante or at the end of the day. A decision has been made to allow commercial banks to have open foreign exchange positions with specified prudential limits. BMJII and the government are coordinating the 2002/03 budget preparation on the basis of a unified exchange rate. The intention is to finance the full cost of unification, with no monetization of any part of the costs. The exchange rate to be used for the government budget would be the market rate on the date of the sale of the foreign exchange. The customs valuation rate would be the market rate applied in short intervals (weekly or bi-weekly). The total unification cost to the budget is estimated to be about Rls 40 trillion (about US$4.9 billion), of which, Rls 29 trillion due to making implicit subsidies explicit; an increase in current expenditure by about Rls 4 trillion on account of the change in exchange rate; and Rls 7 trillion (about 1 percent of GDP) due to the cost of contingent claim liabilities (representing debt, letters of credit and other obligations contracted by the public sector and guaranteed by the government). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 16- 29. Against this background, the exchange rate unification offers an opportunity for exchange rate policy to be grounded in the need to diversify the economy away from oil and increase employment. The authorities agreed with this objective and confirmed their intention to introduce a managed float foreign exchange system to be supported by prudent fiscal and monetary policies along with an ambitious trade liberalization.16 They agreed with the mission’s suggestion to continue to use broad money as a nominal anchor while maintaining an ambitious foreign exchange reserve target. 30. The mission underscored the need to avoid a de facto fixed exchange rate or a sustained real appreciation of the rial, which would erode the competitiveness of the non-oil sector. Achieving the latter objective would be particularly challenging given the expected continued large inflows of foreign exchange as well as the limited flexibility of monetary policy in managing these inflows. Notwithstanding these difficulties, the authorities will need to achieve a faster reduction in inflation, while targeting an ambitious buildup of international reserves, as well as accelerating trade and price liberalization. These efforts will need to be supported by structural reforms aimed at enhancing the competitiveness of non-oil activities, including, inter alia, accelerating the modernization of the domestic industry and eliminating labor market rigidities. C. Structural Reforms Trade reform 31. The mission welcomed the progress in trade liberalization. The authorities explained that the trade reform was being implemented in two stages spanning the TFYDP’s period. The first phase places emphasis on eliminating export restrictions and replacing the existing NTBs with tariffs. The second phase (covering the last three years of the TFYDP), will involve a full-fledged tariff reform to rationalize the tariff structure, reduce the dispersion of tariff bands, and lower the effective tariff protection. Significant progress has been made in the first phase with the elimination of restrictions on all exports and NTBs on about 2900 import items, representing 57 percent of tariff lines or about 90 percent of total imports. The remaining NTBs will be phased out and replaced with tariffs by end 2001/02. The authorities explained that the current level of tariffs is high in nominal terms (23 percent), but because customs duties are calculated on the basis of the overvalued official rate of Rls 1,750 per U.S. dollar, actual tariff protection is relatively low (5 percent).” Once the exchange rates are unified at the more depreciated rate, the tariff rates will be reduced I6 The authorities are not contemplating a fixed exchange rate regime, which they believe would not provide them with the needed flexibility to support the ongoing reforms. ” Detailed data to confirm these figures were not available. In addition to customs duties and the commercial benefit tax on imports, there are numerous duties and fees on imports. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17- proportionally. The authorities explained that the tariff reform will take into account the need to maintain adequate protection for key sectors and industries, which will undergo restructuring to enhance their competitiveness. It will also take into account the progress in the negotiations for Iran’s accession to the WTO. The mission recommended that the authorities streamline the customs procedures as part of the ongoing efforts at trade facilitation, and encouraged the authorities to consider formally adopting a “negative list” for imports, which would strengthen the credibility of the authorities’ commitment to trade liberalization. Financial sector reform 32. The mission expressed concern that the reform of the complex and government controlled financial system was not moving in tandem with other reforms. While it acknowledged that some limited steps have been taken, including raising the share of credit to the service sector that banks can freely allocate, the mission called for more ambitious liberalization steps to ensure sufficient financial sector flexibility and more effective signaling of monetary policy. In particular, to increase competition among banks, the mission recommended that all rate restrictions on deposits be eliminated and the central bank’s mandated lending rates should be unified in one (or two at most) rate to be set as a floor. More generally, the mission stressed the importance of stepped-up efforts to implement the recommendations of the FSAP follow-up mission, including overhauling BMJII’s credit facilities, liberalizing the rates of return, establishing an interbank money market, enhancing banking supervision, and accelerating capital market reform. 33. The authorities stated their intention to provide banks with more flexibility in setting financial rates (on both deposits and lending sides). In 2001/02, a floor rather than a specific rate will be established on banks’ lending to the services sector, which accounts for about 20-25 percent of bank lending. In addition, banks will be allowed to issue special project-specific certificates of deposits (CDs) and will be able to lend the mobilized resources freely, which would further increase the scope of their free lending operations. The rate paid by banks on the special CDs and the lending rate of the mobilized deposits will not be subject to restrictions. The authorities agreed to consider the mission’s recommendation to issue the CPP on market basis (either through auctions or in the TSE), and remove any restrictions on their secondary trading. The CPP rate would therefore become an important financial benchmark that would provide the authorities with a market-based financial signaling mechanism and prepare the ground for the introduction of open market operations 34. The authorities indicated that they have licensed two private banks and are considering other applications, including two from already operating nonbank credit institutions. The government has also significantly reduced its share equity (to 10 percent) in one of the state-owned banks in favor of its partner the Social Security Organization; the latter is planning to float its shares in the TSE. The authorities have also reaffirmed their intention to improve access to credit for medium and small enterprises in an effort to promote employment creation. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 18- 35. The authorities reiterated their commitment to strengthen banking supervision and reform prudential regulations. A reform plan has been prepared along the lines recommended by the Fund and includes, inter alia, institutional reform and capacity building measures. To strengthen the banking system, the government will recapitalize the state- owned banks with Rls 5 trillion. The mission suggested that further capital injections might be needed to meet the Base1 capital adequacy ratio.18 Fiscal reforms 36. The authorities are pressing ahead with efforts to modernize and reform the fiscal system. Preparations to introduce the VAT within the next two years are moving on schedule, and the draft VAT law was presented to Parliament in June 2001, including the proposed repeal of various indirect taxes. The authorities do not expect difficulties in enacting the VAT law, and preparations are underway to put in place the necessary infrastructure. In addition, the Parliament approved in June 2001 the establishment of the National Tax Organization, which will include a Large Taxpayer Unit (LTU). Moreover, in an effort to limit the scope of tax exemptions and enhance transparency, the authorities are preparing a new system under which exemptions will be incorporated in the budget. Taxes would be paid in full and exemptions would be made in the form of refund of taxes directly from the budget. 37. Efforts to contain the growth of government expenditure will focus on reducing subsidies and improving their targeting. Preparations are under way to review the budget subsidies, improve their targeting, and reduce their budgetary impact (Box 2). The 2002/03 budget will record a large step increase in subsidies as a result of the exchange rate unification and the authorities’ decision to make explicit the current implicit exchange rate subsidy. Once a targeted subsidy scheme is developed, the authorities intend to begin adjusting the prices of essential goods with the objective of phasing out the subsidies on all essential goods (except for wheat) by the end of the TFYDP. Work is also under way to make the energy subsidy explicit and bring domestic petroleum product prices closer to the market price, but this would be implemented over several years (see below). 38. The mission encouraged the authorities to carry out a public expenditure review to help improve efficiency and rationalize government spending. In this regard, the authorities expressed their commitment to achieving the TFYDP’s objective of reducing the size of government employment by 5 percent by the end of the plan’s period and indicated that specific resources for the retrenchment program have already been budgeted. In addition, the government is examining the possibility of achieving savings by outsourcing selected services to the private sector. I8 The March 2000 FSAP mission concluded that Rls 8 trillion capital injection would be needed to achieve the minimum Base1 capital adequacy ratio. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 19- Box 2. Subsidy System Explicit subsidies The commodities subsidized directly by the budget are: wheat and bread, sugar, milk and cheese, rice, vegetable oil, beef and chicken for university canteens, fertilizer, pesticides, tractors and combines. The total cost of these subsidies in 2000/O 1 was Rls 8.1 trillion, about 1.4 percent of GDP, and is projected to be at Rls 10.5 trillion or 1.5 percent of GDP in 2001/02. The price (at the factory, wholesale and distribution stages) of these commodities is regulated by the Organization for the Protection of Consumers and Producers (OPCP). The distribution of these commodities (organized according to a coupon system for vegetable oil, imported rice, sugar and cheese) is overseen by the Council of Economy. The wheat subsidy is the largest, representing about 80 percent of total subsidies on necessities (excluding fertilizer). The authorities are currently developing a policy to rationalize subsidies and improve their targeting with the objective of eliminating all subsidies, except those for wheat, by the end of 2004/05. Implicit subsidies Additional de facto subsidies arise from the dual exchange rate regime and from prices set below world prices for certain commodities. Due to dual exchange rate regime All export revenue from crude oil accrues to the budget at the official exchange rate of Rls 1,750 per U.S. dollar. Some of this revenue is allocated in U.S. dollars according to the import of necessities, fertilizer, and other items comprising the central government’s current expenditures (such as pharmaceutical products, medical appliances, defense-related goods and services, other services and scholarships) and capital expenditures. In 2001/02, the amount allocated to implicitly subsidized imports is US$4.3 billion. The total implicit subsidies are Rls 27.1 trillion, or 4.3 percent of GDP. Due to regulated prices The prices of utilities and petroleum products are regulated by the government. Although these prices are sometimes increased significantly (see table), they remain below world prices-and even below production costs in the case of petroleum products. The implicit subsidy due to regulated prices for petroleum products alone is estimated at around Rls 75 trillion for 2001/02, or about 11 percent of GDP. Any price increase exceeding 10 percent must be approved by Parliament. Percentage increase in petroleum products prices 1999/2000 2000/200 1 Gasoline 75 10 Gas oil 67 9.1 Kerosene 68 9.1 Fuel oil 67 12.7 Electricity 20 16.9 Sources: Data provided by the Iranian authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 20 - 39. The establishment of the OSF last year was an important step to cushion the budget against fluctuations in oil revenue (Box 3). The OSF accumulated resources amounting to US$5.9 billion at end-2000101 (8.1 percent of GDP), which are expected to reach US$8.8 billion by the end of the current fiscal year.” Up to 50 percent of the OSF resources can be used to support domestic private sector investment through lending in foreign currency and the authorities have established a board to supervise the domestic lending operations. The mission argued that OSF resources should be used for precautionary budgetary savings only; domestic lending activity might undermine the objective of insulating the budget and the economy from fluctuations in oil prices, complicate demand management and expose the OSF resources to credit risks. The authorities indicated, however, that they would be very cautious in providing the OSF resources for domestic lending. The mission commended the authorities on their decision to consolidate the OSF operations into the government budget next year, and underscored the need for full transparency and accountability of the use of OSF resources. Energy prices 40. The authorities informed the mission that they are developing a multi-year program for adjusting domestic energy prices toward market levels. The authorities are working closely with the World Bank to develop mechanisms for compensating consumers and for gradually phasing out the energy implicit subsidy. The preparatory work is expected to be finalized before the end of the year, and a proposal will be presented to parliament in conjunction with next year budget. Given the very low level of current oil prices, the adjustment process would be complex and politically sensitive. Recognizing that this would constitute a key element for a successful economic reform program, the authorities remain determined to forge ahead with its energy price reform. The mission reiterated the importance of adopting a well-defined and time-bound energy price adjustment plan. Such a plan would need to be made public to ensure that domestic industry (which now is heavily dependent on cheap energy) and consumers adjust in an orderly manner. The mission also called for early steps to developing a comprehensive and well-targeted social safety net to help protect the vulnerable segments of the population and overcome the resistance to price liberalization. Other structural reforms 41. The mission pointed out that progress in developing a comprehensive privatization program was slower than expected, and that limited privatization took place during 2000/01. The authorities indicated that in May 2001 a new organization was established to carry out the privatization program, and some 1,038 enterprises were reviewed, of which 737 were put on the privatization list and 86 were to be liquidated. I9 The resources are held in a special account with the central bank. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2l- - Box 3. The Oil Stabilization Fund The Oil Stabilization Fund (OSF) was established in December 2000 with the objective of insulating the budget from fluctuations in oil prices. The Fund has been established as a foreign currency account at the BMJII and is managed by an Executive Committee comprised of the Minister of Finance, the head of the Management and Planning Organization, the Governor of the BMJII, and two members selected by the President. Transfer of crude oil export revenue. The TFYDP has established a ceiling on the oil export revenue that can be transferred to the budget, based on an oil price of US$l5.75 per barrel. Additional transfers must be approved by the parliament and are typically included in a contingency budget. Oil revenues in excess of the budgeted amount are transferred to the OSF. Drawing on resources from the OSF. If the realized crude oil export revenue is less than the TFYDP figure by the end of the eleventh month of the fiscal year, the BMJII draws from the OSF the amount required to compensate for the shortfall and transfers its equivalent in Iranian rials to the Treasury. Investment of OSF reserves. All OSF assets are held in a foreign deposit account at the Central Bank and at most 50 percent may be lent out domestically in foreign currency to the private sector. Based on Executive Committee’s decisions, the BMJII is responsible for announcing on a quarterly basis the amount available for loans and their terms. Lending facility for the private sector. A firm may borrow from the OSF over a three-year period and is required to reimburse its loan from the fifth to the eight year of the project. Firms that are eligible for loans are those in the industrial, mining, agricultural, transportation, technical, and engineering services sectors. The loans are extended to investment projects based on feasibility studies demonstrating an expected rate of return at least equal to that charged on the loan. Although the currently announced lending rate is 7.5 percent, discounted rates are available for industry restructuring (less by 0.2 percentage points) and underdeveloped areas (less by 0.5 percentage points). The penalty for delayed repayment is 1 percent per annum. The required collateral for the loan may be land, machinery, equipment and corporate bonds. OSF financial position. At the end of 2000/01, the OSF had accumulated US$5.9 billion, net of US$50 million which had been drawn for domestic lending. An additional transfer of US$3.9 billion is projected in 2001/02 of which US$l billion is expected to be lent out domestically. The total reserves of the OSF at the end of 2001/02 are projected at US$8.8 billion. J Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 22 - 42. Efforts are under way to improve the investment environment and foster employment. The new FDI law is being redrafted to provide domestic and foreign investors with equal treatment, allow for arbitration under bilateral treaties rather than under Iranian law alone, and establish a one-stop shop for all investments procedures. The authorities pointed out that the labor law was amended last year giving small-size companies (employing five or less persons) increased flexibility in certain labor practices. The mission underscored the need to remove the existing rigidities in the labor market to foster private sector activity, and called for a more comprehensive labor market reform. More generally, the mission pointed out the need to streamline the regulatory environment and reduce the scope of public enterprise monopolies. Finally, the authorities intend to promote the development of small and medium size companies, which offer great potential for private sector growth and employment generation. III. MEDIUM-TERMOUTLOOK 43. Iran is faced with the challenge of achieving higher sustainable growth over the medium term to increase employment opportunities and improve living standards. To absorb the fast growing labor force, real GDP growth should exceed 6 percent a year on average. This growth objective could be achieved given Iran’s natural and human resources and its significant potential in, inter alia, petrochemicals, manufacturing, and tourism. Much will depend, however, on the progress toward accelerating the pace of economic reforms and facilitating the restructuring and modernization of the domestic industry, and more generally, promoting efficiency and competitiveness. Also, developments in the oil sector and further deepening of Iran’s economic relations with major partners will be key to attracting foreign direct investment and promoting economic diversification. 44. Illustrative medium-term projections for the period 2002/03-2005/06 are based on the current WE0 assumptions for oil prices and assume implementation of the reforms outlined above (Figure 4 and Appendix IV). Real GDP is likely to grow at 5-5.5 percent in spite of lower oil output growth, and CPI inflation is projected to decline to 10 percent. The fiscal position, including the OSF, will move from a surplus to near balance. The balance of payments position will likely remain in surplus throughout the next five years, even though it would gradually decline with the projected weakening of oil prices; and official external reserves are projected to remain at a comfortable level of about 15 months of imports of goods on services. The external debt is projected to increase only modestly to about US$l 1 billion (7 percent of GDP) by the end of the TFYDP. These projections are, however, subject to downside risks related to the volatility of international oil prices and any delays or weakening of the reform effort.” 20Achangeino’ p 11 rices by US$l per barrel would translate into a change in the external current account position of 0.7 percentage point of GDP on average. Over the medium term, the external current account would be in balance at an average price of Iranian crude oil of about US$l4 per barrel. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-23 - IV. STATISTICAL ISSUES 45. Improvements have been made in the statistical data base. In particular, the national accounts statistics are being compiled on the basis of the System of National Accounts (SNA) 1993, and quarterly data are now being prepared. The authorities intend to prepare the 2002/03 budget according to the Government Finance Statistics presentation, which would enhance transparency and help improve fiscal management. The mission encouraged the authorities to broaden the coverage of capital account transactions in the balance of payments, and compile and disseminate a comprehensive set of data on the operations of public enterprises and private sector foundations. It also underscored the need to enhance the availability and quality of prudential information on the financial system. While data availability is adequate for the analysis and monitoring of economic developments in Iran, the mission welcomed the authorities’ agreement to increase the frequency of data reporting to the Fund in-between Article IV consultations. The authorities expressed interest in subscribing to the Special Data Dissemination System (SDDS) and requested Fund technical assistance in this area, including in adopting the SDDS-based benchmarks in the areas of reserves, foreign currency liquidity, and external debt. V. STAFFAPPRAISAL 46. During 2000/O 1, the Iranian economy benefited from improved terms of trade, a rebound in agricultural output, and the early effects of economic reform. Real GDP growth was high and broad-based, inflation decelerated, and large fiscal and external account surpluses helped reduce the external debt, build foreign exchange reserves, and contribute to government savings in the Oil Stabilization Fund. These developments have reinforced the momentum for economic reform with increasing attention to sustained high growth and employment creation. In particular, more liberalized exchange market and trade regimes were introduced, progress was made toward restructuring the tax administration and preparing for the introduction of a value-added tax, and the central bank issued the first CPPs as a prelude to indirect monetary management. More generally, the active preparations under way to initiate or complete reforms in various areas as called for under the current five-year development plan, bode well for the economy’s medium-term prospects. 47. The outlook for 2001/02 is expected to be favorable with GDP estimated to grow by 5 percent and the fiscal and balance of payments’ position to remain in surplus, albeit lower than during 2000/01. Iran’s achievements in substantially reducing its external debt, regularizing financial relations with creditor agencies, and strengthening its external position should greatly facilitate its access to the international capital market, which could help support the reform process. 48. Serious challenges lie ahead, however, as the transition to a market economy reaches a critical stage. Sustained implementation of structural reforms will help remove impediments to growth and enhance efficiency, but would need to be supported by firm demand management policies to achieve financial stability and enhance policy credibility. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 24 - This would require that policies, over the short run, strike the right balance between pursuing a stance of high growth and employment creation and tightening macroeconomic management to reduce inflation. 49. The authorities’ intention to pursue prudent demand management policies in 2001/02 to contain inflation is commendable. Containment of broad money growth and inflation represents an important challenge to monetary policy in 2001/02. While the relaxation of monetary policy during the last quarter of 2000/01 did not affect the inflation outcome during the year, it created a liquidity overhang that needs to be neutralized to ensure macroeconomic stability. Thus, to prevent an acceleration of inflation, the growth of broad money would need to be reduced to no more than 20 percent in 2001/02 compared to about 30 percent in the previous year. Achieving this objective would require implementation of pre-emptive monetary measures to absorb excess liquidity and restrain bank lending to public enterprises and, to a lesser extent, to the private sector. The staff welcomes the authorities’ determination to take the necessary measures to achieve the above monetary target, which is in line with their monetary program, and encourages them to liberalize the banks’ financial rates and begin auctioning the CPPs. These measures will facilitate a more responsive monetary policy and help achieve the monetary growth target. 50. The authorities are making determined and timely efforts to successfully complete the unification of the exchange rates by the target date of March 21,2002. The staff welcomes the breadth of the preparatory work for the exchange rate unification and the participation of wide-ranging segments of the public and private sectors. The decision to fully budget the cost of the unification and not allow its monetization is a critical measure that will ensure a continued stable macroeconomic environment and sustain a successful exchange rate unification. Also, the authorities are to be commended for their firm commitment to eliminate all exchange restrictions for current account transactions at the time of unification and accept the obligations of the IMF’s Article VIII. This would give a strong signal to the international community on Iran’s commitment to economic reform. 51. The staff supports the authorities’ intention to move to a managed float foreign exchange system after the rate unification. In this context, exchange rate policy would need to allow the rate to reflect market conditions and avoid a de facto fixed exchange rate regime and a sustained appreciation of the real effective exchange rate that would be harmful to competitiveness. While this task is likely to be difficult to achieve, given the projected inflow of foreign exchange in the coming years, policies would need to emphasize reducing inflation, liberalizing trade, and phasing out price controls. At the same time, steadfast implementation of structural reforms should help enhance competitiveness over the medium term. 52. Financial sector reform would need to be deepened over the medium term to support the ongoing economic liberalization and promote financial stability. The staff encourages the authorities to remove rate restrictions on deposits and unify the BMJII’s mandated lending Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 25 - rates. In addition, consideration ought be given to raising the amount of bank credit that is not subject to sectoral allocation while announcing a firm policy to phase out the remaining controls over the next two years. 53. Monetary policy formulation and implementation would also need to gain added institutional flexibility and operational agility for effective and timely action. The staff emphasizes the need for reforming the current process, which is subject to considerable institutional constraints, including in particular through changes in the legal and institutional structures that would effectively separate monetary policy making from fiscal policy, while allowing for a high degree of coordination between them. 54. The staff notes the authorities’ commitment to strengthen banking supervision and reform prudential regulations and calls for a faster pace of implementation. The government’s recapitalization of the state-owned banks with Rls 5 trillion is an important step to strengthening the banking system. The staff reiterates the recommendation of the March 2001 Fund/World Bank technical assistance mission to inject additional capital as needed to achieve the Base1 capital adequacy ratio. The licensing of two private banks, and possibly more in 2001/02, is an important step in reforming the banking system and increasing its efficiency. Once the private banks become operational, it would be essential not to make them subject to the current restrictions on banking activities in terms of credit allocation and financial rates of returns, which should also be removed gradually on state-owned banks. 55. The staff notes that fiscal policy in 2001/02 is relatively restrained and will allow for further buildup of surpluses from oil revenue in the OSF. Nevertheless, there is room for broadening the non-oil revenue base, and containing the growth of current expenditure, including on the wage bill and subsidies, especially in view of the cost of the exchange rate unification that will weigh on the budget in 2002/03. In this respect, the authorities’ determined efforts to introduce the VAT and restructure tax administration are encouraging. These steps will, in the medium term, enhance tax revenue performance, eliminate distortions in the tax system and help reduce the budget’s reliance on oil revenue. Further steps in that direction could aim at simplifying the corporate tax rate structure according to international practices; abolishing indirect taxes (other than customs duties and a selected small number of excises) prior to instituting the VAT; and eliminating all miscellaneous charges and surtaxes. 56. The authorities’ intention to prepare by mid-2001/02 a comprehensive plan to reform the current subsidy system is welcome. Such a plan is expected to make all subsidies on essential goods explicit, introduce a targeted subsidy mechanism starting in 2002/03, and phase out the subsidies (except on wheat) during the remaining three years of the TFYDP. However, the wheat subsidy, which represents the bulk of the subsidies, would remain very high and would need to be reduced through improved targeting. 57. An ambitious adjustment in domestic energy prices is needed to help improve the economy’s efficiency in a more competitive market environment . While the staff shares the authorities’ concern regarding the social and political sensitivity of the issue, it encourages - - Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 26 - the authorities to work closely with the World Bank to establish a system that would gradually raise the domestic energy prices to market levels over a reasonable period of time, while mitigating the cost for the needy. Such a program ought to make subsidies explicit and include a well-defined and preannounced decline in subsidies over a specified period of time. 58. The staff commends the authorities’ efforts toward trade reform, particularly the tariffication of NTBs, and welcomes their intention to reform the tariff system. Further steps are needed to incorporate numerous duties and fees on imports into the tariff structure, and adopt a program to reduce the number of tariff bands and the maximum average tariff rates. 59. The authorities have taken steps in early 2001/02 to speed up the privatization process, including centralizing it in a newly established organization, identifying the enterprises that are targeted for privatization, and preparing a strategy for restructuring public enterprises. These steps are welcome and the authorities are encouraged to move decisively in privatizing and restructuring public enterprises, including putting together a well-defined timetable and making the enterprises subject to hard budget constraints. It is important that this process is harmonized with the rationalization of the pricing system and the planned financial sector reform to avoid a rapid deterioration in the financial position of public enterprises. 60. The authorities would need to further streamline the regulatory environment for private sector investment, including introducing anti-trust laws, reducing the monopoly power of state enterprises, liberalizing the labor laws, and enacting the new FDI law. The authorities are rightly focusing their attention on promoting small- and medium-sized private companies, which can be an important vehicle for the development of the private sector during the transition period and generate additional employment opportunities. 61. Significant progress has been made to improve the statistical base, which is now adequate for the analysis and monitoring of economic developments in Iran. The authorities have expressed their intention to subscribe to the SDDS for which they have requested Fund technical assistance. In addition, they intend to prepare next year’s budget according to the GFS classification. The staff welcomes these steps and encourages the authorities to continue their efforts to further improve the statistical database, including broadening the coverage of capital account transactions in the balance of payments, compiling a comprehensive data set on public enterprises, and improving the availability and quality of prudential information on the financial system. There is also a need to strengthen the dissemination of information on the operations of public enterprises and private sector foundations. Fund technical assistance might facilitate these and other reforms. 62. It is recommended that the next Article IV consultation with Iran be held on the standard 12-month cycle . Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-27- Figure 1. Iran: Selected Economic Indicators, 1997/98-200 l/O2 Real GDP Growth CPI Inflation (in percent) (in percent) 15 10 ---_ \ 5 0 -5 Food CPI -10 ’ I 0 1997198 1998199 1999/00 2000/01 200 l/O2 1997198 1998199 1999100 2000/01 200 l/O2 Current Account Balance External Debt ( in percent of GDP) (in billions of U.S. dollars) 15 20 10 - 5 - ::: -\ 0 5 - -5 + 0 40 30 20 10 0 1997198 1998199 1999/00 2000/01 2001/02 1997198 1998199 1999/00 2000/o 1 2001/02 Broad Money Growth (in percent) Velocity of Money 1997198 1998199 1999/00 2000/01 2001/02 2.6 2.4 2.2 2.0 1997198 1998199 1999/00 2000/o 1 2001/02 - Sources: Data provided by the Iranian authorities; and Fund staff projections. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public35 30 25 20 15 10 5 0 -28 - Figure 1. Iran: Selected Economic Indicators, 1997/98-2001/02 (concluded) Fiscal Revenue Fiscal Expenditure (in percent of GDP) (in percent of GDP) 1997198 1998199 1999100 2000/01 200 l/O2 30 - 25 20 15 10 5 0 - Total -#d----m_ ------- Current t ----._. ___.----------_.____ Capital I . 1997198 1998199 1999/00 2000/01 2001/02 Fiscal Balance Domestic Petroleum Prices (in percent of GDP) (in percent of world prices) 8 - 6 - 4 - 2 - -v 1997198 1998199 1999100 2000/o 1 2001/02 5 - 0 1997198 1999100 2001/02 REER and NEER l/ Exchange Rates (Index, 1992/93 = 100) (Rials/ U.S. dollar) 140 , I 9000 , 01 I 199211993 199411995 199611997 199811999 2000/2001 8000 1 _----m- 7ooa 0 / 01 ' .- 1997198 1999too 200 l/O2 Sources: Data provided by the Iranian authorities; and Fund staff projections. l/ REER and NEER are calculated based on most depreciated exchange rate. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 29 - - Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 30- Figure 3. Iran: Monthly Exchange Rate Developments, September, 1998-March, 2001 Nominal Exchange Rates (Rials per U.S. dollar) 10000 9000 - Tehran Stock Exchange rial rate 8000 - ---0 ------\ / P-,---- L----- 7000 - rJ/ 0 6000 - / a--- I 5000 - Weighted average exchange rate 4000 - 3000 - 2000 I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I II e ( I n * 1 II 11 Sep-98 Dee-98 Mar-99 Jun-99 Sep-99 Dee-99 Mar-00 Jun-00 Sep-00 Dee-00 Mar-01 Real Effective Exchange Rates l/ (Index, 1999/2000 = 100) 140 130 - 120 - Based on Teheran Stock Exchange (TSE) rial rate 110 - 100 - 0 / +A-/ 90 - \ / \ 9+--W+ 1’ 80 - BaseYd on weighted average rate 70 I I I I I, 1, I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I Sep-98 Dee-98 Mar-99 Jun-99 Sep-99 Dee-99 Mar-00 Jun-00 Sep-00 Dee-00 Mar-01 Sources: Data provided by the Iranian authorities; and Fund staff calculations. l/An increase in the index indicates appreciation. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3l- Figure 4. Iran: Selected Medium-Term Economic Indicators, 1999/2000-2005/06 Real GDP Growth (in percent) CPI Inflation (in percent) 2 I I I I I I 1999100 2001/02 2003lO4 2005/06 45 30 15 0 Current Account Balance (in percent of GDP) 1999/00 2000/01 2001/02 2002/03 2003/04 2004/05 2005/06 1999/00 2000/01 2001/02 2002/03 2003/04 2004/05 2005/06 Gross International Reserves Weeks of imports of Billions of U.S. dollars d , 20 15 10 5 0 1999/002000/012001/022002/03 2003/042004/052005/06 5 t 1999/00 2001/02 2003/04 2005/06 Export and Imports (in billions of U.S. dollars) 30 - Total exports 25 - -.-- e- 20 - -.-- 1-e... -._.__a---- __-- 15 - Total imports 10 - Non-oil exports 5 - ______------- _-mm- 01 External Debt (in billions of U.S. dollars) A 1999/00 2000/01 2001/02 2002/03 2003/04 2004/05 2005/06 - - Sources: Data provided by the Iranian authorities; and Fund staff projections. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 32 - Figure 4. Iran: Selected Medium-Term Economic Indicators, 1999/2000-2005/06 (concluded) Fiscal Revenue Fiscal Expenditure (in percent of GDP) (in percent of GDP) 35 35 30 - Total 3o - Total 25 - 25 - 20 4 - ' '. Oil 20 - Current 15 ---+ - .J' - %-a. - 15- ------/)H ---_ ----_ / --.* ____.---I-- ---- c-- - - - - - - 1o --w- 10 - Capital 5 Non-oil - 5 _ ------.. -.--...-------- __-_.___ 01 I 01 1999100 2000101 2001/02 2002103 2003104 2004105 2005106 1999100 2000101 2001102 2002103 2003104 2004/05 2005106 Fiscal Balance Domestic Petroleum Prices (in percent of GDP) (in percent of world prices) 10 , I 45 40 35 30 25 20 15 10 5 0 1999100 2000101 2001102 2002/03 2003104 2004105 2005106 1999100 2001/02 2003104 2005106 Sources: Data provided by the Iranian authorities; and Fund staff projections. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 33 - Table 1. Islamic Republic of Iran: Key Indicators, 1997/98-2001/02 l/ 1997198 Prel. Est Proj 1998199 199912000 2000/01 2001/02 (In percentage change unless otherwise indicated) Output and prices Crude oil production (millions of barrels/day) Average oil export price (in U.S. dollar per barrel) Nominal GDP at factor cost Real GDP at factor cost Real oil GDP Real non-oil GDP Domestic demand (constant prices) Inflation rate CPI inflation (average) CPI inflation (end-of-neriod) GDP deflator at facto; cost ’ Non-oil GDP deflator at factor cost Unemployment rate 21 Investment and savings Total fixed investment Public Private Gross national savings Public Private Savings/investment balance Central government finances Revenue Expenditure Overall balance Transfers to the Oil Stabilization Fund Monetary sector Net domestic assets Ofwhich: credit to private sector credit to public enterprises Broad money Velocity of broad money External sector Exports of goods and services Imports of goods and services Current account balance External public and publicly guaranteed debt Ofwhich: short-term debt Gross official reserves (end of period) In months of imports of goods and services Memorandum items: GDP at factor cost (in billions of U.S. dollars) Nominal GDP (in billions of Iranian rials) Real effective exchange rate 31 TSE Weighted exchange rate Average exchange rate (Ria1sllT.S. dollar) TSE 102.1 94.2 280,908 316,646 118.7 119.3 65.8 62.9 4,656.0 5,404.o Weighted exchange rate 2,752.0 3,363.0 Sources: Data provided by the Iranian authorities; and Fund staff estimates. 11 Fiscal year ending March 20. 21 Based on CSO data on rural and urban unemployment. 3/ Using 1992/93= 100. 3.6 16.4 17.2 2.4 -4.8 3.2 2.4 3.7 3.4 10.5 18.6 12.7 34.2 17.3 19.3 14.4 17.6 13.1 3.6 2.8 1.8 -4.6 3.8 3.5 1.3 0.7 18.1 20.1 19.9 19.0 8.8 30.5 15.5 21.0 12.4 13.5 (In percent of GDP) 3.8 25.3 36.3 5.6 9.7 5.3 3.4 12.6 11.2 29.1 18.4 14.3 3.7 23.0 19.6 5.0 -1.4 5.5 8.2 16.0 13.9 19.4 29.2 30.4 28.4 27.1 30.6 10.6 9.4 9.5 8.5 9.0 18.6 21.0 19.0 18.5 21.6 30.7 28.1 34.9 40.2 38.1 8.2 2.4 8.9 17.2 11.7 22.5 25.7 26.0 23.0 26.4 1.5 -2.3 6.5 13.1 7.5 24.9 27.4 -2.4 0.0 19.9 24.5 32.8 26.8 25.0 24.1 -6.9 -0.6 8.6 0.0 0.0 8.1 (Annual percentage change) 27.6 24.9 2.7 4.6 24.2 24.4 46.5 10.1 2.2 32.2 16.9 24.7 28.5 40.4 31.1 28.5 9.8 15.7 25.8 20.2 29.8 2.2 2.3 2.5 (In billions of U.S. dollars) 15.2 14.6 10.0 20.0 2.5 20.0 15.1 22.4 30.1 27.8 -18.2 -17.8 -16.4 -18.1 -19.5 2.2 -2.1 6.6 12.6 8.7 14.7 14.1 10.8 8.0 7.3 5.1 4.5 4.0 3.7 3.7 5.3 3.7 5.8 12.6 21.3 3.5 2.5 4.2 8.4 13.0 101.8 96.2 116.0 424,887 579,275 692,626 100.3 117.9 62.4 52.0 7,908.O 8,078.O 4,172.0 6,019.O Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 34 - Table 2. Islamic Republic of Iran: Central Government Operations, 1997/g&200 l/02 11 Est. 21 Budget 31 Proj 1997198 1998/99 1999/2000 2000/01 2001/02 2001/02 Revenue Revenue from oil and gas exports Ofwhich : Revenue from sales of foreign exchange 4/ Earmarked revenue for OSF Tax and nontax revenue Tax revenue Nontax revenue Earmarked revenue 5/ Expenditure and net lending Current expenditure Of which : wages and salaries subsidies Capital expenditure Earmarked expenditure 6/ Foreign exchange losses 71 Net lending Of which : lending from Oil Stabilization Fund Overall balance (deficit (-)) Excluding OSF Non-oil balance (deficit) Financing Net domestic Banking system (net) ofwhich : OSF Nonbank Net external Revenue Revenue from oil and gas sales Tax and nontax revenue Expenditure and net lending Current expenditure Of which : wages and salaries subsidies Capital expenditure Earmarked expenditure 6/ Foreign exchange losses 71 Net lending Overall balance (deficit (-)) Excluding OSF Non-oil balance (in percent of non-oil GDP) 70,012 62,88 1 37,493 22,530 10,429 5,932 . . . . . . 32,519 40,351 17,345 18,686 8,777 12,734 6,397 8,931 103,891 44,487 18,532 189,989 128,205 61,057 47,023 61,784 33,298 12,004 16,481 168,111 78,883 56,371 . . . 59,404 38,757 9,072 11,575 89,228 45,389 20,727 23,112 191,010 115,630 61,040 32,078 75,380 38,389 13,879 23,112 76,842 84,843 106,302 44,498 53,632 67,987 28,699 35,713 47,163 7,548 7,236 7,65 1 19,061 17,655 24,942 6,397 8,666 11,575 7,216 5,077 1,993 -330 -187 -195 139,892 88,068 60,036 8,118 30,115 16,48 1 2,028 3,201 399 171,435 105,210 10,538 37,617 23,112 1,200 4,296 172,151 104,924 67,601 9,682 30,470 23,112 1,200 12,446 8,150 -6,830 -21,962 -44,323 -44,492 7,062 22,434 7,065 16,895 4,891 12,056 . . . 2,174 4,839 -3 5,539 -2,411 -2,411 -46,898 2,411 2,291 -390 . . . 2,681 120 50,096 -3,324 18,859 3,472 -3,324 -5,070 -78,109 -82207.0 -88,622 -50,096 3,324 -18,859 -50,173 2,097 -20,086 -52,217 -772 -23,929 -46,625 0 -23,928 2,044 2,869 3,843 77 1,227 1,227 (In percent of GDP) 24.9 19.9 24.5 32.8 24.3 27.6 13.3 7.1 10.5 22.1 11.4 16.7 11.6 12.7 14.0 10.7 12.9 10.9 27.4 26.8 25.0 24.1 24.8 24.9 15.8 16.9 16.0 15.2 15.2 15.1 10.2 11.3 11.1 10.4 n.a. 9.8 2.7 2.3 1.8 1.4 1.5 1.4 6.8 5.6 5.9 5.2 5.4 4.4 2.3 2.7 2.7 2.8 3.3 3.3 2.6 1.6 0.5 0.4 0.2 0.2 -0.1 -0.1 0.0 0.6 0.6 1.8 -2.4 -6.9 -17.9 -15.4 -0.6 8.6 -0.5 2.7 -0.6 0.6 -0.5 -0.7 -13.0 -17.4 -14.5 15.6 ( In billions of Iranian rials) Sources: Bank Markazi Jomhouri Islami Iran; Plan and Budget Organization; and Fund staff estimates and projections. l/ Fiscal year ending March 20. 21 Including Rls 12,958 billion in executed contingency budget, Rls 1,934 billion in approved additional spending, and US$869 million at Rls 8,000 per U.S. dollar to reimburse foreign exchange losses on LCs at 70 Rls per U.S. dollar. 3/ Including Rls 10,230 billion in contingency budget. 4/ From sale of a portion of oil and gas revenues at the “export” and TSE exchange rates. 5/ Mostly revenue of the Social Security Organization and medical services provided by universities. 6/ Counterpart of earmarked revenue. 71 Budget outlays to cover the foreign exchange losses of the central bank. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 35 - Table 3. Islamic Republic of Iran: Monetary Survey, 1997/98-2001/2002 l/ 1997/98 Proj 1998199 1999/2000 2000/o 1 2001/02 Net foreign assets Of which : OSF Net domestic assets Domestic credit Claims on Government (net) Ofwhich : OSF Claims on NFPEs Claims on private sector Other items, net Broad money Currency outside banks Total deposits Demand deposits Quasi-money Net foreign assets Net domestic assets Domestic credit Claims on Government (net) Of which : OSF Claims on NFPEs Claims on private sector Other items, net Broad money Net foreign assets -63.0 Net domestic assets 24.2 Domestic credit 27.0 Claims on Government (net) 12.6 Claims on NFPEs 46.5 Claims on private sector 24.4 Other items, net 48.8 Broad money 10.1 Memorandum items: Velocity 21 Currency/broad money (in percent) Term/demand deposits Broad/reserve money Claims on NFPEs (in percentage change) Claims on private sector (in percentage change) 2.2 2.2 2.3 2.5 2.5 11.7 11.4 11.2 9.8 10.0 1.51 1.42 1.52 1.39 1.50 2.34 2.49 2.57 2.79 3.36 46.5 28.5 9.8 15.7 10.0 24.4 28.5 40.4 31.1 13.9 (In billions of Iranian rials) 7,090 939 6,510 18,088 0 0 0 10,238 123,826 163,692 191,429 238,760 143,454 185,758 227,577 262,227 33,046 43,898 41,762 25,932 0 0 0 -10,238 33,969 43,640 47,902 55,424 76,439 98,220 137,913 180,871 -19,628 -22,066 -36,148 -23,467 130,916 164,63 1 197,939 256,848 15,380 18,766 22,120 25,158 115,536 145,865 175,819 231,690 46,092 60,248 69,881 97,000 69,444 85,617 105,938 134,690 (Change in percent of initial stock of broad money) -10.2 20.3 25.7 4.0 0.0 9.1 12.6 -5.4 10.1 -4.7 3.4 30.5 16.8 32.3 25.4 8.3 -1.3 2.0 3.0 7.4 2.6 16.6 24.1 -1.9 -8.6 25.8 20.2 (Percentage change) -86.8 593.3 32.2 16.9 29.5 22.5 24.5 -4.0 28.5 9.8 28.5 40.4 12.4 63.8 25.8 20.2 5.8 5.9 23.9 14.1 17.5 11.8 -8.0 -0.6 3.0 -1.9 3.8 2.2 21.7 10.3 6.4 2.3 29.8 20.0 177.9 83.9 24.7 15.2 15.2 11.5 -30.3 -6.4 15.7 10.0 31.1 14.6 -35.1 -25.3 29.8 20.0 33,257 15,150 274,960 292,499 24,275 -15,150 60,966 207,258 -17,539 308,218 30,822 277,396 110,958 166,438 Sources: Iranian Authorities; and Fund staff estimates. I/ The Monetary Survey is prepared based on accounting exchange rate of Rls 1,750 per U.S. dollar. 2/ Velocity is defined as the ratio of nominal GDP to the broad money average of the current and previous years. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-36 - Table 4. Islamic Republic of Iran: Balance of Payments, 1997/98-200 l/O2 l/ (In millions of U.S. dollars) 1997198 1998199 199912000 Prel. 2000/01 Proj 2001/02 Current account (In percent of GDP) Trade balance Exports Oil and gas Crude oil export Exports of petroleum products and gas Refined product - Gas export Non-oil Imports 2,213 1.5 4,258 18,381 15,471 14,009 1,462 1,257 205 2,910 -14,123 -2,140 6,589 12,645 8,692 -2.3 6.5 13.1 7.5 -1,168 7,597 13,138 9,200 13,118 21,030 28,345 25,913 9,933 17,089 24,226 21,440 8,586 14,718 21,490 18,599 1,347 2,371 2,736 2,841 1,137 2,151 2,497 2,580 210 220 239 261 3,185 3,941 4,119 4,473 -14,286 -13,433 -15,207 -16,713 Services account -2,438 -1,469 -1,533 -1,114 -1,046 Credits 1,658 2,023 1,396 1,787 1,839 Freight and insurance 323 298 310 588 337 Interest income 466 230 181 404 661 Other 869 1,495 905 795 841 Debits 4,096 -3,492 -2,929 -2,901 -2,885 Freight and insurance -1,550 -1,711 -1,240 -1,342 -1,671 Interest payments -725 -731 -473 -604 -216 Other -1,821 -1,050 -1,216 -955 -997 Transfers 393 497 525 621 539 Capital and financial account 37 Medium-term and long-term capital -2,823 Bilateral project financing 966 Disbursements 1,774 Repayments -808 Repayments of rescheduled debt -3,896 Official financing 2/ 107 840 4,811 -4,897 -124 -251 -2,944 -2,555 -624 598 -1,159 -473 203 1,521 829 653 1,000 -923 -1,988 -1,126 -797 -2,928 -1,581 -884 -327 68 81 10 18 448 -448 0 0 1,563 163 -1,208 -518 -544 -330 -326 0 489 -330 -326 0 -1,033 0 0 0 1,285 -1,937 -2,416 0 350 400 400 500 Borrowing by MoF (collateral by securities) Oil prefmancing 3/ Short-term capital LC related bank borrowing Oil prefinancing other capital 4/ Foreign direct investment and other Errors and omission -6,254 -227 417 Overall balance -4,004 Financing 4,004 Change in NFA (increase -) 4,170 465 851 -386 2,395 0 -1,527 2,195 1,527 -2,195 1,533 -2,026 -868 6,880 -6,880 -6,880 0 8,569 -8,569 -8,668 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 37 - Table 4. Islamic Republic of Iran: Balance of Payments, 1997/98-2001/02 (concluded) 11 (In millions of U. S. dollars) 1997198 1998199 199912000 Prel. 2000/01 Proj 2001/02 Memorandum items: Gross official reserves ( in millions of USS) Of which : Oil Stabilization Fund 5/ (in months of imports of goods and services) Oil exports (million barrel/day) Oil exports average price (U.S. dollar/barrel) 6/ Exports volume growth Oil Non-oil Imports volume growth 5,263 3,730 3.5 2.5 2.4 2.3 16.4 10.5 -1.1 0.4 0.2 -1.8 -6.7 9.5 4.6 1.2 5,756 12,636 21,304 5,944 8,880 4.2 8.4 13.0 2.1 2.3 2.2 18.6 25.3 23.0 0.4 7.5 1.6 -5.7 8.5 -0.7 23.7 4.5 8.6 4.3 7.7 9.2 Sources: Data provided by the Iranian authorities; and Fund staff estimates. l/ Fiscal year ending March 20. 21 Includes World Bank lending. 3/ Negative figures reflect net repayments of oil prefinancing. 41 Reflecting borrowing of the Bank Markazi from the commercial banks and some deferred trade payments of banks. 5/ Represents the part of OSF assets that will be kept in foreign exchange (i.e. excluding the OSF resources onlent to the domestic private sector). 61 Projection is based on WE0 prices. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 38 - Table 5. Islamic Republic of Iran: Summary of External Debt and Debt Service, 1997/98-2001/02 l/ (In millions of U.S. dollars) Prel. Proj. 1997198 1998199 199912000 2000/01 2001/02 Total external debt Medium- and long-term debt 11 Bilateral debt Official financing 2/ Rescheduled debt Of which: 1998 rephased debt Borrowing by MoF (collateral by securities) Oil prefmancing Short-term debt l/ LC related bank borrowing Arrears Oil prefinancing Total external debt services 12,681 -10,122 -10,248 -7,692 -5,660 Medium- and long-term debt -5,442 -4,999 -5,299 -3,646 -1,940 Short-term debt -7,239 -5,123 -4,949 -4,046 -3,720 Total amortization 11,898 -9,648 -9,865 -7,386 -5,444 Medium- and long-term debt -4,73 1 -4,525 -4,9 16 -3,340 -1,724 Short-term debt -7,167 -5,123 -4,949 -4,046 -3,720 Interest Total interest payments 31 Medium- and long-term debt Short-term Memorandum items: Debt service ratio (excluding short-term debt) 27.8 33.5 23.8 12.3 7.2 Debt outstanding/GDP (including arrears) 14.4 15.0 10.6 8.3 6.3 14,677 9,624 3,619 625 5,380 0 . . . 5,053 3,845 175 1,033 -783 -474 -383 -306 -216 -711 -474 -383 -306 -216 -72 . . . 0 0 0 14,085 10,815 7,952 7,328 9,582 6,811 4,274 3,650 4,217 3,058 2,585 2,788 693 774 784 802 2,661 1,253 387 60 386 1,032 355 44 448 0 0 0 1,563 1,726 518 0 4,503 4,004 3,678 3,678 4,334 4,004 3,678 3,678 169 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Sources: Data provided by the Iranian authorities; and Fund staff estimates. l/ Figures have been adjusted to reflect when transactions actually took place. 2/ Includes World Bank loans. 31 Includes interest on projected new borrowing for 2000/01-2001102. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-39 - Table 6. Islamic Republic of Iran: Vulnerability Indicators, 1997/98-2000/01 I/ (In percent; unless otherwise indicated) Prel. 1997/98 1998/99 1999/2000 2000/01 External solvency indicators REER (TSE, average period, percent change) Total external debt (in billions of U.S. dollars) (in percent of GDP) Short-term external debt (in billions of U.S. dollars) (in percent of GDP) (in percent of exports) External debt service (in percent of exports of goods and services) External liquidity indicators Total official reserves (in billions of U. S. dollars) In months of imports of goods and services In percent of short-term external debt In percent of Ml 2/ Commercial banks net foreign assets (in billions of U.S. dollars) Foreign assets Foreign liabilities Oil and oil-related exports/total exports Public sector solvency indicators Government’s net domestic debt/GDP Oil revenue/total revenue Financial sector indicators Net domestic credit (percent change) Private sector credit (percent change) Net domestic credit/GDP Capital Adequacy Ratio 3/ Market assessment/financial market indicators Stock market price index (percent change; end of period) Stock market capitalization (in percent of GDP) 4/ Stock market turnover ratio (in percent) 4/ Moody’s investor services rating 22.5 0.5 -15.9 17.5 14.7 14.1 10.8 8.0 14.4 15.0 10.6 8.3 5.1 4.5 4.0 3.7 4.9 4.8 3.9 3.8 25.2 29.7 17.8 12.2 27.8 33.5 23.8 12.3 5.3 3.7 5.8 12.6 3.5 2.5 4.2 8.4 104.2 82.9 143.9 343.6 23.6 15.9 26.1 62.3 -0.1 -1.8 -0.6 -1.2 2.2 1.4 3.0 5.3 2.3 3.2 3.7 6.5 77.2 65.6 76.2 80.4 16.3 18.8 15.3 11.5 53.6 35.8 42.8 67.5 27.0 29.5 24.4 28.5 43.5 44.9 22.5 15.2 40.4 31.1 50.2 52.3 5.6 5.2 -14.6 -7.0 9.4 8.2 8.0 9.1 . . . . . 43.4 35.0 9.0 10.3 10.4 14.7 B2 B2 Sources: Iranian authorities; and Fund staff estimates. l/ Iranian years ending on March 20. 2/ Monetary data valued at weighted average exchange rate. 3/ Staff estimates as of end-December 1999 and end-December 2000. Measured as own funds/risk-weighte 41 As of December 3 1. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 40 - APPENDIX I Islamic Republic of Iran: Fund Relations As of June 30,200l I. II. III. IV. V. VI. VII. VIII. IX. Membership Status: Joined: 12/29/1945; Article XIV General Resources Account: Quota Fund holdings of currency SDR Million 1,497.20 1,497.20 Percent of Quota 100.0 100.0 SDR Department: Net cumulative allocation Holdings SDR Million 244.06 267.02 Percent of Allocation 100.0 109.4 Outstanding Purchases and Loans: None Financial Arrangements: None Projected Obligations to Fund: None Implementation of HIPC Initiative: Not applicable. Safeguards Assessments: None Exchange Arrangements: The foreign exchange market has operated mostly under a multiple exchange system over the past few years. A dual fixed exchange rate system was introduced in 1995, consisting an official exchange rate pegged at Rls 1,750 per U.S. dollar and a second official exchange rate-the “export” rate-pegged at Rls 3,000 per U.S. dollar. In July 1997, the Tehran Stock Exchange (TSE) market for foreign exchange was introduced. Upon full surrendering at Rls 3,000 per U.S. dollar to the banking system, non-oil exporters are given the right in the form of “import certificates” to repurchase the full amount of foreign exchange from Bank Markazi, and can either use this right themselves for importing, or sell the right to an legal importer on the TSE and, thus, effectively give rise to a more depreciated TSE rate. Significant exchange market reforms were implemented since April 1999. The backlog of unmet demand for foreign exchange was cleared in mid-l 999 through substantial depreciation of the TSE exchange rate. Since then, and although still closely managed on a day-to-day basis by Bank Markazi Jomhouri Islami Iran (BMJII), the TSE rate has been significantly more market-based than previously (i.e., the BMJII now actively clears the daily balance of supply and demand in the TSE market, at rates that are gradually depreciating, broadly in line with inflation differentials). Imports financed at the official “export” rate of - Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4l- APPENDIX I exchange (US$l = Rls 3,000) have been progressively and substantially shifted to the TSE rate. The export rate and the import certificate system were abolished and a transitional foreign exchange certificate of deposit market in the TSE was established by end- March 2000. Government oil export proceeds are fully surrendered to BMJII at Rls 1,750; in return, they are mostly earmarked for government imports (including essential goods) and external debt service at the same rate, with a small share allocated at Rls 3,000 and TSE rate to public enterprises for capital imports. The TSE rate applies to imports based on a positive list of 30 categories (mostly raw industrial materials). In May 1998, an interbank rate linked to the TSE rates was introduced for certain current account transactions on services. The period between the date goods are exported and the date export earnings are repatriated has been extended to a uniform 8 months for all exports. A bonus system is in place (in the form of retention allowance) which is equivalent to 1 percent per month of the export proceeds for early repatriation and surrendering. Iran continues to avail itself of the transitional arrangements under Article XIV but maintains no exchange restrictions under these arrangements. It maintains an exchange restriction on travel payments and multiple currency practices-multiple exchange rate system and bonus payment for early repatriation of non-oil export proceeds and advance import deposits and payment requirements-that are subject to approval under Article VIII. X. Last Article IV Consultation: The last Article IV consultation was concluded by the Executive Board on August 3,200O. XI. FSAP Participation and ROSCs: Iran participated in the FSAP mission conducted during the period February 19- March 5,2000. The FSAP report provided the basis for assessing the observance of standards and codes in the areas of monetary and financial policy, banking and supervision and nonbank financial intermediation. XII. Technical Assistance: Since FY 1999, Iran received the following technical assistance: FAD FY 1999 - Tax system and VAT FY 2000 - Tax administration and VAT FY 2001 - Tax administration and VAT Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 42 - APPENDIX I FSAP FY 2000 - FSAP mission FY 2001 - Follow up multi-topic mission Banking Supervision FY 1999 - Short visit in context of policy discussions on banking sector restructuring FY 2000 - Short visits by MAE expert on banking supervision FY 2001 - Short visits by MAE expert on banking supervision Monetary Instruments, etc. FY 1999 - Follow-up in two technical assistance missions dealing mainly with exchange system reforms - Staff visit on details of central bank securities FY 2000 - Follow up in one short visit, and in one technical assistance mission dealing mainly with exchange system reforms Exchange System FY 1997 - FY 1998 - FY 1999 - FY 2000 - STA FY 2000 - FY 2002 - Multi-topic mission covered foreign exchange reserves management None Two technical assistance missions dealing mainly with exchange system reforms, each followed by policy discussions on implementation of reforms Follow up in one short visit, in context of further policy discussions One technical assistance mission on details of implementation of exchange system reforms Balance of payment statistics Government finance statistics National accounts statistics Monetary and financial statistics XIII. Resident Representative: None. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 43 - APPENDIX II Islamic Republic of Iran: Relations with the World Bank Group’ World Bank lending to Iran resumed in May 2000 with the approval by the Board of Executive Directors of two projects: the Second Primary Health Project (US$87 million) and the Tehran Sewerage Project (US$145 million). These loans were approved after a hiatus of seven years during which Bank activities were limited and focused mainly on supervision of ongoing projects and limited economic work. While approving the two loans, the Executive Directors requested that Staff prepare an interim assistance strategy note reviewing the progress in economic reform and developments and outlining the Bank Group’s approach in Iran. This interim assistance strategy note was discussed by the Board of Directors in May 10,200l. It outlines the interim assistance strategy that the Bank Group will follow while preparing a full Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) for consideration by the Executive Directors within the next two years. The CAS will reflect the further deepening of the Bank’s knowledge of Iran’s development process and priorities. The World Bank Group Interim Assistance Strategy over the next two years would follow a two- pronged approach: (a) policy dialogue on the reform program through nonlending services; and (b) targeted lending in the key social and environment areas consistent with the TFYDP and focusing on projects that have the most tangible benefits and quickest impact on the population, that are least affected by policy distortions that could constrain their effectiveness, and that are resilient to Iran’s risk factors In support of the government’s reform efforts, the Bank will intensify economic and sector work covering the main reform areas, and provide support for capacity building in the formulation of economic and sector policies, their sequencing, and implementation. This nonlending support will also be use&l in the preparation of the full CAS. A series of economic studies is either under way or planned over the next two years to provide the basis for policy dialogue and policy analysis and to prepare the CAS. These include a study on the reform of the energy pricing system; a Trade and Foreign Exchange System reform study; a Public Expenditure Review; a Country Economic Memorandum providing analysis of the medium-term framework for the economic transition and the sequencing of reforms; an evaluation of the costs of reforms and how to address them; as well as other sectoral studies, including a Water Management Policy Review note, and sectoral strategy notes on housing, agriculture, and air pollution control. Lending during this transitory period will focus mainly on priority areas such as low income housing, sewerage, urban upgrading, and community-based infrastructure and employment creation schemes for the poor. Small technical assistance lending will also be considered in support to the structural reform program. The Bank will continually assess the lending program on the basis of progress in macroeconomic performance and policy outcomes and project implementation in the areas identified as a priority for Bank involvementThe IFC and the World Bank Institute will combine efforts in support of this reform program. ’ Prepared by the World Bank staff. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 44 - APPENDIX III Islamic Republic of Iran: Statistical Issues The data transmitted to the Fund, through direct contacts with the authorities and/or through the Executive Director’s office, provided a basis for sound assessment of economic developments and to form a realistic perspective on Iran’s medium-term prospects. The new Bank Markazi’s Economic Accounts Department has implemented significant improvements in the statistical database, including in the estimation of the national accounts data. Real sector statistics National accounts statistics are reasonably sound and compilation follows the System of National Accounts 1993 methodologies. MED has received national account estimates for 1999/2000 and preliminary data for 2000/2001, both in current and constant terms (base year 1990191). Bank Markazi has also updated the quarterly GDP statistics for the period 1988- early 2000. Price statistics have generally been reported to the Fund in a timely manner. The base year for the consumer price index was recently changed to 1997/98 from 1982/83. Labor market statistics, however, still need improvement, particularly with regard to employment data. Government finance statistics Preliminary estimates of the central government accounts for 2000/01 were provided to the mission. Projected figures for the 2001/02 budget were also provided to the Fund staff. The authorities will prepare the 2002/03 budget according to the Government Finance Statistics classification which would enhance transparency and help improve fiscal management. Reporting of quarterly data for the central government accounts to the IMF staff would be helpful. Improvements are needed in the compilation and reporting of data relating to social safety expenditures, local governments and the public enterprises that are supported by the central government budget. Monetary statistics Monetary data are in general provided on a timely basis, and their compilation has followed Fund methodology. However, the accounting methodology for the Oil Stabilization Fund, and issues arising from foreign exchange valuation, and treatment of central bank paper need to be addressed. STA is providing technical assistance on these issues, as well as assistance on revising and updating current procedures for compiling monetary statistics including the coverage of broad money. External sector data Information on balance of payments and international reserves for the year 2000/01 was provided to the mission. While the mission welcomes the steps taken to improve the statistical database on external debt, it recommended broadening the coverage of capital account transactions in the balance of payments. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 45 - APPENDIX III Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 46 - APPENDIX IV Islamic Republic of Iran: Illustrative Medium-Term Scenario, 2001/02-2005106 A medium-term illustrative scenario was prepared for the period 2001/02-2005/06, taking into account oil prices as projected by the WE0 and the current policies and reform measures that have been adopted or are under way. The medium-term outlook is sensitive to variations in the global oil prices, the pace of price adjustment of energy and other subsidized goods, and trade and other structural reforms. These reforms will determine the magnitude of private sector investment, which the authorities view as the main engine for supporting growth and providing additional employment opportunities in the medium term. The TFYDP envisages an average growth rate of 6 percent and a reduction in unemployment rate to 11 percent. However, given the projected weakening of oil prices, and the implied constraint on oil output, real GDP growth may be slightly below the plan’s target. Based on the current policy stance and projected external sector developments, real GDP is expected to grow at an annual average of about 5.2 percent during 2001/02-2005/06, rising to 5.6 percent only at the end of the period. Growth projections are dampened somewhat by the expected weakening of the oil sector (in line with the decline in oil prices) which is projected to grow by an annual average of about 2 percent. Non-oil real GDP is projected to grow by an annual average of about 5.5 percent, rising to about 5.8 percent by the end of the projection period. Commensurate with this growth, unemployment could fall from the present 14.5 percent to about 13 percent in 2005/06. Higher private sector investment and productivity gains are expected to drive medium-term economic growth. Private fixed investment is projected to rise from 18.5 percent of GDP in 2000/01 to 23 percent by 2005/06, while productivity enhancements through education, training and technology acquisition (including the effects of the planned modernization of industrial equipments) could raise labor productivity growth to about 3.4 percent in 200 1/02- 2005/06 compared to only 1.4 percent growth in 1995/96-2000/01. These assumptions are also consistent with a steady increase in total factor productivity growth from an estimated -0.1 percent in 1995/96-2000/01 to about 1.4 percent in 2001/02-2005/06.’ The authorities are targeting a gradual reduction in inflation. Accordingly, the inflation rate is projected to decline to about 10 percent by 2005/06; the growth of broad money supply is projected to decelerate from 20percent in 2001/02 to about 14 percent in 2005/06, consistent with the inflation objective and taking into account the build up in international reserves. Medium-term fiscal projections reflect expected changes in oil prices, the impact of the tax reform and expenditure restraint policy.2 Total revenue is projected to decline from ’ Productivity growth figures are preliminary and based on staff estimates. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 47 - APPENDIX IV 28 percent of GDP in 2001/02 to 24 percent in 2005/006. The revenue decline reflects lower revenue from oil exports which are offset only partially by a strong increase in tax revenue. The improvement of the latter reflects the energy price adjustment and the impact of the implementation of the VAT starting 2003/04. Expenditure is expected to decline only marginally from 25 percent of GDP in 2001/02 to 23 percent in 2005/06, reflecting mostly the rationalization of subsidies and lower wage bill (partly on account of the on-going retrenchment program of government employees). Accordingly, the overall fiscal position will move from a surplus of 2.7 percent of GDP in 2001/02 to a near balance in the following years by the end of the medium-term period. If the TFYDP’s ceiling on oil revenue transfers to the budget is maintained,3 the budget (excluding the OSF) will record a deficit of about 2.3 percent of GDP starting in 2002/03 which is expected to decline to 1.9 percent in 2005/06. It should be noted that the non-oil budget deficit, which better reflects the fiscal adjustment effort, is projected to rise to some 22 percent of non-oil GDP on account of the exchange rate unification costs (including making all subsidies explicit), but would decline thereafter to 12 percent of GDP in 2005/06. The external current account will decline steadily from 9.3 percent of GDP in 2001/02 to 0.1 percent in 2005/06. This decrease mainly reflects the projected weakening of global oil prices and, to a lesser extent, the rise in imports in line with the trade reform and the sustained economic growth. Non-oil exports are projected to grow by an average of about 7 percent (in U.S. dollar terms) led by exports of petrochemicals and , to a lesser extent, electronics, machinery, and other industrial goods. Total external debt is projected to rise moderately from US$7.3 billion in 2001/02 to US$10.8 billion in 2005/06 (reflecting mostly bilateral and World Bank financing), but will in all probability decline in percent of GDP over the same period from 8 percent to 7 percent. This would leave significant scope for raising substantial foreign capital to finance the reform and modernization of the domestic industry if Iran’s access to international capital markets is improved. 2 The fiscal medium-term projections are based on an accounting exchange rate of Rls 8,150 per U.S. dollar, in part to provide a clearer picture of the impact of the underlying demand management policy choices and external developments. 3 The ceiling, which was put in place to ensure that sufficient resources are transferred to the OSF, in equivalent to oil price of U.S. dollars 15.8 per barrel on average during the TFYDP. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-48- APPENDIX IV Islamic Republic of Iran: Illustrative Medium-Term Scenario, 1997/98-2005/06 l/ 1997198 Prel. Est Baseline scenario proj. 1998/99 199912000 2000/01 2001/02 2002/03 2003104 2004/05 2005106 Oil sector Total oil exports (in billions of U. S. dollars) Average oil export price (in U.S. dollar/barrel) Crude oil production (millions of barrel&lay) National accounts Nominal GDP (in billions of rials) Real GDP at factor cost Real oil GDP Real non-oil GDP Inflation rate CPI inflation (average) CPI inflation (end-of-period) GDP deflator at factor cost Unemployment rate Investment and savings Total fixed investment Public Private Gross national savings Public Private Savings/investment balance Public Private Budgetary operations Budgetary revenue Oil Non-oil Budgetary expenditure current Capital Budgetary balance Transfers to the Oil Stabilization Fond Monetary sector Net foreign assets Net domestic assets ofwhich : credit to private sector Broad money Velocity of broad money External sector Exports Oil Non-oil Imports Current account balance External public and publicly guaranteed debt ofwhich: short-term debt Memorandum items: Real effective exchange rate 2/ TSE Weighted exchange rate Average exchange rate (RialsiUS$) TSE Weighted exchange rate 15.5 9.9 17.1 16.4 10.5 18.6 3.6 3.7 3.4 24.2 21.4 20.9 25.3 23.0 20.8 3.8 3.7 3.8 (In percentage change) 20.5 20.7 21.2 19.7 19.1 18.7 3.9 4.0 4.1 280,908 316,646 424,887 2.4 3.6 2.8 -4.8 1.8 -4.6 3.2 3.8 3.5 979,749 1,147,344 1,337,606 5.0 5.5 5.6 2.9 2.9 2.1 5.2 5.7 5.8 17.3 19.3 14.4 13.1 la.1 20.1 12.0 11.0 10.0 8.8 30.5 12.43 13.54 579,275 692,626 836,160 5.6 5.0 5.0 9.7 -1.4 3.7 5.3 5.5 5.1 12.6 16.0 13.0 29.1 13.9 15.0 14.25 14.00 13.50 (In percent of GDP) 11.6 11.0 10.4 13.25 13.00 12.75 29.2 30.4 28.4 27.1 30.6 31.1 31.4 31.6 32.5 10.6 9.4 9.5 a.5 9.0 9.7 9.6 9.4 9.2 18.6 21.0 19.0 18.5 21.6 21.4 21.8 22.2 23.3 30.7 28.1 34.9 40.2 38.1 37.1 34.8 32.9 32.6 a.2 2.4 a.9 17.2 11.7 8.2 9.7 9.2 9.5 22.5 25.7 26.0 23.0 26.4 28.8 25.1 23.7 23.1 1.5 -2.3 6.5 13.1 7.5 6.0 3.4 1.3 0.1 -2.4 -6.9 -0.6 8.6 2.7 -1.5 0.1 -0.2 0.3 4.0 4.7 7.0 4.5 4.8 7.5 3.3 1.5 -0.2 24.9 19.9 24.5 13.3 7.1 10.5 11.6 12.7 14.0 27.4 26.8 25.0 15.8 16.9 16.0 6.8 5.6 5.9 -2.4 -6.9 -0.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 32.8 27.6 27.9 22.1 16.7 16.8 10.7 10.9 11.1 24.1 24.9 29.4 15.2 15.1 18.0 5.2 4.4 4.4 8.6 2.7 -1.5 8.1 4.6 0.1 (Annual percentage change) 26.5 24.8 23.6 13.6 11.3 9.6 12.9 13.5 14.0 26.4 25.0 23.2 16.5 15.2 14.0 4.4 4.4 4.0 0.1 -0.2 0.3 1.5 1.3 1.6 -86.8 593.3 32.2 16.9 28.5 40.4 25.8 20.2 2.2 2.3 177.9 83.9 42.0 24.7 15.2 13.4 31.1 14.7 15.8 29.8 20.0 16.5 2.5 2.5 2.5 (Jn billions of U.S. dollars) 25.1 14.1 a.7 14.6 15.7 16.0 18.4 18.5 18.8 16.0 15.5 15.0 2.6 2.6 2.7 20.0 15.1 22.4 30.1 27.8 27.9 28.6 29.5 30.6 15.5 9.9 17.1 24.2 21.4 20.9 20.5 20.7 21.2 2.9 3.2 3.9 4.1 4.5 4.8 5.1 5.5 5.9 -18.2 -17.8 -16.4 -18.1 -19.6 -22.4 -25.0 -28.2 -30.9 2.2 -2.1 6.6 12.6 8.7 6.1 4.0 1.8 0.1 14.7 14.1 10.8 8.0 7.3 7.8 8.8 9.8 10.8 5.1 4.5 4.0 3.7 3.7 3.7 3.7 3.7 3.7 118.7 119.3 100.3 65.8 62.9 62.4 4,639.0 5,404.o 7,908.O 2,752.0 3,363.0 4,172.0 117.9 52.0 8,078.O 6,019.O . . . . . . . . . .__ Sources: Data provided by the Iranian authorities; and Fond staff estimates I/ Fiscal year ending March 20. 21 Using 1992/93=100. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public