DOCUMENT OF INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND NOT FOR PUBLIC USE . ARCHIVES ROOM HQ C-532 0450 FOR AGENDA 5&I/00/153 CONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION July 7,200o To: Members of the Executive Board From: The Secretary Subject: Vietnam-Staff Report for the 2000 Article IV Consultation Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staffreport for the 2000 Article IV consultation with Vietnam, which is proposed to be brought to the agenda for discussion on Friday, July 21,200O. A draft decision appears on page 22. Ms. Puckahtikom (ext. 38780) and Mr. Cowen (ext. 37207) are available to answer technical or factual questions relating to this paper prior to the Board discussion. Unless the Documents Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the WTO Secretariat on Monday, July 17, 2000; and to the Asian Development Bank, following its consideration by the Executive Board. Att: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicCONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND VIETNAM Staff Report for the 2000 Article IV Consultation Prepared by the Staff Representatives for the 2000 Consultation with Vietnam . Approved by R. Anthony Elson and Masood Ahrned July 6,200O D The consultation discussions were held during March 7-21,2000, concurrently with continued discussions toward a possible new three-year PRGF arrangement. D The staff team comprised Ms. Puckahtikom (head), Messrs. Winglee, Cowen (all APD), Chami (PDR), Yoon (FAD), and Ms. Lee (administrative assistant, APD). Mr. de Tray, Senior Resident Representative, assisted the team. The team worked closely with the World Bank regional offrce in Hanoi. Mr. Thep, Advisor to the Executive Director for Vietnam, attended the discussions. D The team met with First Deputy Prime Minister Nguyen Tan Dung, State Bank Governor Le Due Thuy, Trade Minister Vu Khoan, former State Bank Governor Cao Sy Kiem as Vice-Chairman of the PRGF/SAC Steering Committee, Deputy Finance Minister Le Thi Bang Tam, and other senior officials; donor and private sector representatives; and the Vice Chairman and other officials of the People’s Committee of Ho Chi Minh City. l Vietnam maintains exchange restrictions under the transitional arrangements of Article XIV, Section 2, and a number of restrictions are subject to approval under Article VIII. The capital account is also subject to extensive controls. 0 Vietnam’s statistical base remains weak in most areas, despite extensive STA technical assistance, and the methodologies for macroeconomic statistics need substantial strengthening. l The principal authors of this report were Ms. Puckahtikom and Mr. Cowen. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2- Contents Page Executive Summary ................................................................................................................... 3 I. Introduction ................................................................................................................... 4 II. Recent Economic Developments .................................................................................. 4 III. Report on Policy Discussions ....................................................................................... 8 A. Medium-Term Outlook and Strategy ................................................................... 8 B. Macroeconomic Prospects and Policies in 2000 ............................................... 12 C. Structural Reforms .......................................................................................... .16 D. Statistical Issues and Policy Transparency ....................................................... 18 IV. Staff Appraisal ............................................................................................................ 19 Text Boxes 1. Sources of Economic Growth ........................................................................................ 5 2. Private Sector Development and SOE Reform .............................................................. 9 3. Banking Sector Reform ............................................................................................... 10 4. Fiscal Sustainability and Structural Reform Costs ...................................................... 14 Charts 1. Selected Economic Indicators ...................................................................................... 23 2. Monetary and Financial Indicators .............................................................................. 24 3. Exchange Rate Indicators ............................................................................................ 25 Tables 1. Selected Economic Indicators, 1994-2000 .................................................................. 26 2. Balance of Payments, 1997-2003 ................................................................................ 27 3. Summary of General Government Budgetary Operations, 1996-2000 ...................... .28 4. Monetary Survey, 1996-2000 ...................................................................................... 29 5. Medium-Term Framework, 1999-2005 ....................................................................... 30 6. Social and Demographic Indicators ............................................................................. 31 Appendices 1. Fund Relations ............................................................................................................ .32 2. Relations with World Bank Group .............................................................................. 34 3. Relations with Asian Development Bank .................................................................... 35 4. Medium-Term Balance of Payments ........................................................................... 37 5. Statistical Issues ........................................................................................................... 39 6, Public Information Notice: Background Section ......................................................... 43 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3- EXECUTMZ SUMMARY l Vietnam’s economy has begun to recover since mid-1999, following two years of deteriorating performance. Supported by accommodative macroeconomic policies, output growth has picked up on the strength of exports, inflation is in check, and the external position has improved. l The outlook for recovery is, however, clouded by persistent structural weaknesses, which have depressed private investment, especially foreign direct investment (FDI). For Vietnam, more robust and sustained growth and poverty reduction will depend on accelerated structural reforms to strengthen efficiency and competitiveness and to revive investment, as well as continued efforts to maintain macroeconomic stability. l To protect Vietnam’s record of relative financial stability, fiscal policy will need to remain cautious. Moreover, decisive reform of the related state-owned enterprise (SOE) and state-owned commercial bank (SOCB) sectors will be essential, in order to stem SOE losses and deal effectively with the high level of nonperforming loans (NPLs) and to help ensure fiscal sustainability over the medium term. Credit policy, which has been highly accommodative so far in 2000, should also be restrained, and bank credit to loss-making SOEs curtailed as a complement to SOE reform. Further flexibility in exchange arrangements will also help restore confidence. l Progress has been made, in close collaboration with the Bank and Fund staff, in defining plans for SOE and SOCB reforms and in promoting development of the private sector, but the pace of implementation will need to be sharply accelerated. The formulation of reform measures has $0 far taken longer than envisaged due to the need to build domestic consensus, particularly in the period leading up to the next five-year Party Congress in the spring of 2001. a Given the extensive preparation over the past year, a concerted implementation of policies and actions across these fronts should now be feasible. It will be critical to implement tilly the new legislation to improve the business environment for the private sector. The SOE reform plan will need to be vigorously pursued and reinforced, giving particular attention to measures to reduce SOE losses and to safety nets for affected workers. Restructuring of the SOCBs should be initiated, and the economy should be further opened, including through meeting Vietnam’s commitments under the ASEAN Free Trade Agreement (AFTA). l Maintenance of macroeconomic stability and accelerated structural reforms have formed the basis of discussions on possible Fund support under the PRGF. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4- 1. INTR~DUC~~N 1. Vietnam’s economic performance deteriorated sharply starting in late 1997, reflecting the adverse impact of the Asian crisis and domestic structural weaknesses. Owing to close investment and trade links with the region, Vietnam’s real GDP growth fell from near double digits in the mid-1990s to an estimated 3% percent in 1998 (Table 1). This was the result not only of plunging FDI, but also of stress in the SOE and banking sectors. Having had limited access to short-term capital, Vietnam did not experience an abrupt withdrawal of such capital that led to deep recessions in the Asian crisis economies, but it is facing a more drawn out adjustment process due to the reduced flows of long-term capital. 2. The crisis revealed weaknesses in the SOE and SOCB sectors as the main sources of vulnerabilities in Vietnam’s economy, stemming from a strategy that relied on capital-intensive investment and import substitution. During the economic downturn, the SOE sector proved uncompetitive and incurred large losses, leading to a high level of nonperforming loans in the SOCBs, while the private sector was small and burdened by regulations. Moreover, the sentiment turned negative for FDI, which was the engine of growth in the mid- 199Os, reflecting investors’ deep concerns over the slow pace of economic reform and the poor business environment in Vietnam. 3. In this context, at the conclusion of the 1999 Article IV Consultation in May 1999, Executive Directors called for an acceleration of reforms in order to stimulate growth. Concerned about the deteriorating performance of Vietnam’s economy, Directors considered that achieving higher and sustainable growth would require a bolder and broad- based approach to reform, with appropriate safety nets. Reform of the SOE and banking sectors, promotion of the private sector, and removal of nontariff barriers were identified as critical elements of such an approach, II. RECENT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS 4. The Vietnamese economy has begun to rebound starting in mid-1999, led by strong export performance and supported by increasingly accommodative fiscal and monetary policies (Box 1). Real GDP growth rose moderately to 4% percent in 1999 owing mainly to large increases in oil exports and rice production,’ but FDI and domestic demand remained depressed, and imports were compressed for the third consecutive year. Reflecting lower food prices and weak demand, inflation fell to near-zero at year-end, with the core (nonfood) inflation rate at 2% percent (Chart 1). The external current account shifted f?om a deficit of 4 percent of GDP in 1998 to a surplus of 4% percent in 1999 (Table 2), buoyed by a ’ Oil and rice export volume grew by 21 percent in 1999. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicBox 1. Vietnam: Sources of Economic Growth ith the implementation of structural reforms aimed at strengthening efficiency and competitive- ss and opening up the economy, the sources of economic growth in Vietnam can be expected to ange over the medium term. Vietnam is not likely to resume the growth pattern observed in the mid- 9Os, which relied heavily on import substitution and capital-intensive activities. Instead, growth is petted to be outward-oriented with greater regional and global integration. :a1 GDP growth in 1999 is estimated at 4.2 percent, compared with an offtcial estimate of S percent. The source of this growth was primarily exports, which in part were aided by larger oil lduction and a record rice harvest. Excluding oil and agriculture, other sectors of the economy grew by ly 2.7 percent in 1999, compared with 3.2 percent in 1998. The main difference between staff and ficial estimates lies in service sector growth, at 0.9 percent and 2.3 percent, respectively, in 1999. Staff timates for service sector growth are in line with retail sales growth, which was an estimated 0.6 percent real terms. Unlike the previous two years, Viehmm: Contribution to Real GDP Growth growth in 2000 is projected to be (In percentage paints of GDP growth) largely driven by domestic demand, following recent fiscal stimulus 1993-97 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 (infrastructure spending and a civil Average Est. Projected service wage increase). As a result, real GDP growth is projected by the Consumption 6.4 3.9 1.8 5.0 5.3 5.2 staff to rise to 4.5 percent.’ Domestic Investment I/ 5.8 -1.7 -3.1 1.1 1.9 2.2 private investment should also rise, Of which: gross capital formation 5.5 -4.4 -1.6 1.8 2.2 2.3 Of which: FDI reflecting the positive initial response 2.0 -5.0 -0.6 -0.2 0.5 0.7 Net exports 21 -3.4 1.2 5.6 to recent trade reforms and private -1.5 -2.2 -1.4 business deregulation, but the depth Real GDP growth 8.8 3.5 4.2 4.5 5.0 6.0 and sustainability of this response is difficult to predict. A continuation of Source: Staff estimates and projections. the regional recovery also is expected to raise demand for manufactures and II Includes changes in inventories. business- and tourist-oriented 21 Includes statistical discrepancy between expenditure- and pmduction-bascd GDP. services. tsed on performance in the first half of the year, the contribution to growth by net exports is petted to be negative in 2000, as import demand has risen rapidly following three years of compression, ,e to a further recovery in domestic activity and an easing of trade and exchange restrictions. While port growth has remained strong through June 2000, it has been tempered by a 40 percent decline in the bhtme of rice exports compared with the same period last year. Domestic rice stocks, benefiting from a .ong winter-spring crop, have risen as farmers await higher world prices, which could affect rural income owth and domestic demand. Textile, garment, and footwear exports, however, continue to benefit from ore favorable quotas with Japan and the EU. As a result, agricultural and nonagricultural growth rates are .pected to be 3.0 percent and 4.9 percent, respectively, in 2000. )r economic recovery to be more robust and sustainable over the medium term, growth will need to Ime increasingly from private investment. Foreign direct investment in particular will need to pick up ‘er the medium term in order to raise growth to the range of 6-7 percent targeted by the authorities, quiring an acceleration of structural reforms. Further discretionary stimulus to the economy, beyond the crease in fiscal impulse envisaged in 2000, would risk undermining the good inflation performance and eaken the medium-tetm fiscal outlook, given the current revenue performance and the pending fiscal 1st~ of state- owned enterprise and banking sector reforms. The authorities are targeting real GDP growth at 5.5-6 percent for 2000 and have reported growth of 6.2 :rcent for the first half of the year, compared with the same period last year. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-6- 23 percent rise in exports.* Accordingly, gross official reserves rose strongly to US$2.7 biilion, or 9 weeks of next year’s imports.3 5. Economic recovery continued in the first half of 2000, again driven primarily by exports, but imports also began to pick up on account of oil, inputs for exports, and rising domestic demand. Thus, the surplus on the external current account is likely to have narrowed significantly. However, FDI inflows remained very low and gross official reserves fell slightly to just under US$2.7 billion at. end-April 2000. While demand stimulus has been stepped up, the core inflation rate was at 1% percent for the year ending June 2000, 6. In an effort to spur recovery, fiscal policy was eased cautiously in 1999 and was completely foreign financed. The overall budget deficit (on a cash basis, excluding onlending) is estimated at 0.9 percent of ODP, compared with 0.5 percent in 1998 (Table 3 and chart).4 The larger deficit reflected additional fiscal Vietnam: Recent Fiscal Developments, 1994-2000 (In percent ofGDP) stimulus, introduced at mid-year, through authorization of new capital spending mainly on rural projects,’ and extraordinary outlays for flood relief late in the year. Revenue performance was better than budgeted, reflecting higher crude oil prices, but it still fell by 1% percentage points of GDP compared with 1998 on account of depressed demand (including for imports) and weak i SOE performance. Value added tax (VAT) collections exceeded budget estimates, despite implementation problems and concessions granted through * The current account surplus was partly offset by a negative short-term capital movement during the year (US$l billion), largely reflecting placement abroad of foreign currency deposits by commercial banks in Vietnam. 3 Official reserves exclude the counterpart of government foreign currency deposits (US$O.7 billion), on which the use by the :State Bank of Vietnam (SBV) is restricted. 4 The overall deficit (including onlending) is estimated at 2.3 percent of GDP, compared with the budget target of 3.8 percent, reflecting stronger-than-expected revenue performance. ’ Actual capital spending fell short of budget authorization, however, due to slow implementation and Vietnam’s limited administrative capacity. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-7- discretionary rate reductions and increased exemptions. Current expenditure was reduced by about 2 percentage points of GDP in tandem with falling revenue, raising concerns about the government’s ability to cover operational and maintenance costs and protect social spending. 7. Monetary conditions were relaxed in 1999, in response to improvements in the external position. The reserve requirement was lowered slightly in mid-l 999 to 5 percent. Moreover, the ceiling on local currency lending rates was reduced throughout 1999, with the benchmark rate falling by 3 percentage points to 12 percent by year-end. Local currency deposit rates also declined-by 6 percentage points to 4 percent by year-end, leading to a portfolio shift toward foreign currency deposits, especially following US. interest rate hikes. The large increase in foreign currency deposits also appears to have reflected a shift in the demand for money associated with a liberalization of regulations governing inward remittances from overseas Vietnamese and the opening of foreign currency accounts. 6 The combined effect of larger remittances and exports led to a substantial increase in net foreign assets of the banking system, and a 39 percent growth in broad money in 1999. With the substantial fall in velocity during the year, this liquidity growth has not yet led to an increase in inflation, which in recent years has been linked more closely to credit developments. During the year, overall bank credit rose by 19 percent (from 16 percent in 1998), mostly in support of export-oriented and agricultural-related activities, including onlending by SOCBs in connection with the government’s flood relief effort (Chart 2). 8. With the stronger external position, the exchange rate was stable through mid- 2000, and exchange controls were eased (Chart 3). Following the introduction of a more flexible exchange rate regime in February 1999, aimed at giving greater play to market forces in exchange rate determination, the dong depreciated only marginally against the US dollar, by a total of 1 YZ percent during the period February 1999-June 2000.’ Competitiveness has improved, with the real effective exchange rate depreciating by 6 percent during this period, to a level 2-3 percentage points above its mid- 1997 level. With the improved external current account, the foreign exchange surrender requirement was reduced from 80 percent to 50 percent in August 1999. More recently, in May 2000, as part of a broader package of amendments to the Foreign Investment Law, the foreign exchange balancing requirement for foreign-invested enterprises was relaxed,* and the tax on profit remittances was reduced from 6 During 1999, the share of foreign currency deposits in the total deposit base increased by 5 percentage points to 37 percent at year-end. ’ Under this regime, the SBV allows the interbank market exchange rate to depreciate by a maximum of 0.1 percent a day from the previous day’s average interbank market rate. * Previously, foreign-invested enterprises were required to balance payments in foreign exchange with receipts in foreign exchange, unless they were granted special exemptions (see the accompanying Statistical Appendix and Background Notes). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-8- 10 percent to 7 percent. Despite these changes, some market participants have reportedly continued to experience difficulty from time to time in obtaining foreign exchange. 9. Progress on structural reforms was made during 1999 and the first half of 2000, although the gap between plans and action remained wide and the pace of reform continued to be slowed by the time needed to build broad political support, l Actions to promote private sector development and SOE reform included passage of a new Enterprise Law aimed at creating a more liberal environment for domestic private enterprises (Box 2). In addition, the pace of SOE equitization quickened relative to earlier periods. l In the banking sector, the authorities continued to take action against the weakest joint- stock banks (JSBs) (Box 3). However, less progress was made on formulating SOCB restructuring plans. Other actions were focused on strengthening the regulatory framework and partially shifting policy lendin! from the SOCBs to a newly-established National Development Support Fund (NDSF). l In the trade area, agreement in principle was reached on a bilateral trade agreement with the United States in August 1999, but its fmalization has been postponed. In early 2000, quantitative restrictions (QRs) were removed on a multilateral basis on 8 products (including fertilizer and other inputs and consumables) of the 19 products subject to such restrictions, while tariffs were reduced on a range of imports under AFTA. Moreover, restrictions on foreign trade activity were eased by allowing registered firms the right to export; further liberalization of importing rights for domestic firms is envisaged for 2000. III. REPORT ON POLICY DISCUSSIONS A. Medium-Term Outlook and Strategy 10. The consultation discussions focused on the macroeconomic and key structural policies that would restore higher rates of growth necessary for a meaningful reduction in poverty. Meeting this goal has also been central to the discussions on a possible PRGF- supported program. Given Vietnam’s low per capita income, GDP growth rates in excess of the current range of 4-5 percent will be needed if poverty is to be significantly reduced.” ’ The NDSF, with an initial capital of D 3 trillion (equivalent to 2 percent of banking system liabilities), was created to fund infrastructure investment from budget transfers, onlending of concessional external support, and bond placements. lo With real GDP growth of 6-7 percent per year, it would take 15 years to double real per capita GDP, which was estimated at the equivalent of US$372 in 1999. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-9- Box 2. Vietnam: Private Sector Development and SOE Reform Private Sector Development The domestic private sector is still small and fragmented, comprising mainly small to medium-scale enterprises (SMEs)-of the 5,600 private SMEs in manufacturing, fewer than 500 have more than 100 employees. Nonetheless, private SMEs and the 600,000 household enterprises in the industrial sector accounted for about 5 percent of GDP and 64 percent of total employment. Many have remained small because of limited access to credit as well as bureaucratic and political impediments. Recognizing the importance of the private sector in improving business effkiency and providing alternative employment, the government has initiated steps to promote the private sector. In October 1999, a program to support the development of SMEs was agreed under the Miyazawa Initiative to improve equality of treatment with SOEs in some key areas, to give greater freedom for private enterprises to start and conduct business, and to set up support mechanisms for SMEs. A key measure was the passage of the Enterprise Law (June 1999) that significantly relaxed the requirement for establishing private businesses. Regulations to relax licensing and regulation were issued in early 2000 and resulted in a sharp increase in the number of new private businesses. Notwithstanding the number of measures being passed, the private sector has noted that implementation has been lagging, and many other bureaucratic and regulatory barriers remain. SOE Reform There are 5,280 SOEs, accounting for 30 percent of GDP in 1999 and the bulk of bank credit. SOE financial conditions have been deteriorating due to inefflciencies, overstaffing, and outdated technology. Despite extensive trade protection, official estimates show 60 percent of SOEs were loss makers or marginally profitable in 1998. The government’s SOE report (see below) notes that although SOEs show only small book losses, in 1997-99, the government provided about 2.2 percent of GDP annually in supplementary capital, subsidies, tax exemptions, debt write-offs, and preferential credits. Total SOE debt at end-1999 was officially estimated at D 126 trillion (32 percent of GDP), a large proportion of which is nonperforming, thus contributing to a weakening of the state-owned commercial banks. Key developments during January 1999-May 2000 included the following actions: l Equitization was accelerated in 1999 with 250 SOEs completed (167 with 65 percent or more private equity), up from 100 in 1998, bringing the total during the period 1993-99 to 370; 400 SOEs were targeted in early 1998 for equitization by end 1999. . A decree allowing outright sales of small SOEs was issued in September 1999, but in the absence of implementing regulations, very few SOEs have been sold under this method. 0 A decree establishing the enterprise restructuring fund for redundancy payments and retraining displaced workers was issued in October 1999, but payments have not yet started. In late April 2000, in preparation for a new five-year development plan, a medium-term SOE reform program was announced. Within the framework of “retaining the large SOEs and letting go the small”, 1,860 SOEs (about one-third) will be subject to equitization, outright sale or transfer, and liquidation in three years. These SOEs, plus those to be merged, cover about 25 percent of the SOE labor force, and 16 percent of total (and bank) SOE debt. Arrangements for a social safety net were also formalized, and work is underway to resolve the debt of SOEs. The economic impact of this program will depend on the extent to which it addresses the problems of the larger, poorly performing SOEs; resolves the SOE debt problems without creating moral hazard; and subjects the SOE sector to foreign competition. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- lo- Box 3. Vietnam: Banking Sector Reform The current situation The banking system is dominated by four large state-owned commercial banks (SOCBs), accounting for 80-85 percent of total commercial bank liabilities. These banks hold large portfolios of nonperforming loans (NPLs), estimated by the staff (based on external audits of these banks using the 1996-97 accounts) at about 35-40 percent of total bank assets (and 20 percent according to official estimates). Many of the NPLs are believed to be uncollateralized and/or owed by loss-making SOEs. As a result, each SOCB is judged to be insolvent if loan loss provisioning and write-offs were applied according to international standards. In general, bank management remains weak and continues to be guided by non-market based credit decisions, although initial steps were taken in late-l 999 to strengthen management and improve financial and operational autonomy. A restructuring of the joint stock banks (JSBs) has already commenced, but at a slower pace than envisaged owing to the lack of a comprehensive acition plan. Moreover, most JSBs have yet to submit individual restructuring plans to the government, as had been expected by early 2000. Troubled JSBs tend to be plagued by a small customer base, insider dealing, NPLs, and inexperienced management, which have led to problems of insolvency and illiquidity. As many as one-half of the current 48 JSBs in operation are expected to be closed, merged, or consolidated over the medium term. Key measures in 1999-2000 l JSB restructuring continued, especially in Ho Chi Minh City, with 3 JSBs closed, 2 merged, and another 13 subject to special control or supervision by the SBV (some of which are likely to be closed). l Regulations were adopted on loan classification, loan loss provisioning and write-off, foreign exchange operations, and bank inspection (including definition of the scope and responsibilities of the SBV’s Supervision Department), but new regulations governing NPLs still do not meet international standards. l External consultants (under World Bank technical assistance) completed reports in May 2000 on SOCB and JSB restructuring, asset management company (AMC) formation, and the legal and regulatory framework. l Initial steps were taken to reduce policy lending by SOCBs, through establishing a National Development Support Fund and formulating a plan to set up a separate institution for social policy lending. Reform program Based on external consultants’ reports and ongoing discussions with Bank and Fund staff, the government is preparing overall and individual restructuring plans for the SOCBs. However, the SOCB and AMC consultants did not have the necessary financial data to make a complete assessment of the extent of NPLs, and banks have yet to fully adopt new loan classification and provisioning. As a result, once the plans are finalized, fUrther efforts will be needed to identify the till extent of bad loans and to design a workout plan. The success of SOCB restructuring will depend on the government’s ability to improve banks’ management by setting performance standards and financial and operational targets in memoranda of understanding. These targets should be aimed at changing current banking practices and fully commercializing operations, with their observance used to trigger a phased recapitalization of the SOCBs. The biggest challenge will be to eliminate directed lending practices, given these banks’ close link with loss-making SOEs. For such SOEs, new credit should be sharply limited, with any debt workout offered to these enterprises linked to effective SOE reform, to provide bank management with safeguards against state intervention in lending decisions. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-ll- Moreover, in view of the mounting difficulties in the protected SOE sector, future growth will be dependent on the development of exports and the private sector. 11. Notwithstanding the economic recovery so far, the authorities agreed that the main challenges were to improve the efficiency and competitiveness of the economy and to revive investment. In the staffs view, the downside risks to the medium-term economic outlook for Vietnam stem from inadequate political will to tackle the SOE and SOCB sectors, to promote the private sector, and to open up the economy to foreign competition. Slow reforms would further depress investment, especially FDI, put even greater strains on the banking system, and keep Vietnam on a low growth path. 12. The authorities have begun to lay the groundwork for these reforms, but at a slower pace than anticipated, with the result that PRGF discussions have been protracted. In particular, in the period leading up to the next Party Congress (in the spring of 2001), the final&&ion of reform plans for the SOE and SOCB sectors has taken longer than envisaged, due to the time needed for building consensus and concerns over the impact of reform on social stability. Similarly, the main elements of trade reform are still being prepared, building on Vietnam’s existing AFTA commitments. 13. With macroeconomic stability and appropriate structural reforms, a pickup in growth over the medium term to about 6-7 percent would be feasible. On the expectation of a gradual recovery in FDI, real GDP growth is projected to rise steadily from 4% percent Vieturn: Red GDP, Exports, and FDI, 1994-2003 (mud percmuge change. ucspf FDI) 30 ‘. -8 20 (m U.S. dollam left scale) -6 10. - . ..*._. _._.. -....,, , . .: , .: .., ,,I. .;. , zI ,, ,,i. ‘cC’&--. 07 ---*My- 2 1994 1995 1996 1997 199a 1999 2ow 2001 2002 2003 Sowca: Viemmuc l uthorines. and mfTaimn*r and pmjecdonr. in 2000 to 6% percent in 2003 (Table 5 and chart). Inflation should stay in the low single digits predicated on prudent macroeconomic policies over the medium term. In line with a return of oil prices to their trend level, a moderating of regional recovery, and a steady recovery in import demand, the external current account balance is expected to shift from a surplus of 2 percent of GDP in 2000 to a deficit of 1% percent of GDP in 2003 (Appendix IV). With the projected rise in private and donor inflows, official reserves should stay at the equivalent of 9%10 weeks of projected imports through 2003. With continued availability of concessional Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12- financing, Vietnam’s debt service ratio would fall to 8 percent of exports of goods and nonfactor services.” 14. Vietnam remains one of the poorest countries in East Asia, although some of its basic social indicators, particularly those related to literacy, compare favorably with other countries at a similar per capita income level. In recent years, poverty has been reduced substantially, with the share of the population with per capita expenditure under the poverty line falling, according to World Bank estimates, from 58 percent in 1993 to 37 percent in 1998 (Table 6).12 The government remains committed to a further large reduction in poverty over the medium term as part of its overall growth and development strategy, but recognizes that achievement of this objective will depend on the formulation of a comprehensive plan, as the incidence of poverty remains uneven across region, gender, and ethnic groups in Vietnam. To this end, the authorities initiated work on an interim Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (I-PRSP) in June 2000 with assistance from Bank and Fund staff, in the context of continued discussions on a reform program. that could be supported by possible World Bank SAC and PRGF arrangements. B. Macroeconomic Prospects and Policies in 2000 15. To support economic recovery, the fiscal stance in 2000 is aimed at stimulating demand, but within appropriate bounds. Based on the approved budget, the staff expects the overall deficit to widen to 3 percent of GDP, mostly financed from domestic nonbank and external sources. Revenue is projected to remain at 18% percent of GDP. Higher crude oil prices and the economic recovery are expected to yield additional revenue, offset by lower petroleum taxes given the modest adjustment of retai1 pump pricesI Government expenditure (excluding onlending) is projected to increase by about 2% percentage points of GDP to 22% percent, in part due to a 25 percent increase in civil service wages (1 percent of ” The debt sustainability analysis in the Staff Report for the 1999 Article IV consultation showed that Vietnam’s external debt was sustainable over the long term (SM/99/102; May 5, 1999). This assessment remains valid under current prospects. I2 This outcome reflects declines in both rural and urban poverty, with the former owing to rising and more diversified agricultural incomes and the latter due to growth in nonfarm and wage employment. For details, see the accompanying Statistical Appendix and Background Notes. An assessment of the current poverty situation in Vietnam is found in Attacking Poverty (1999), a joint government, donor, and NGO report presented at the Consultative Group meeting in December 1999. l3 The retail pump price of premium gasoline was raised in April 2000 by 7 percent to about US$O.33 per liter (US$l.25 per gallon). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13- GDP),14 and the carryover of capital expenditure commitments from the previous year (0.8 percent of GDP). 16. Over the next few years, a moderate degree of fiscal adjustment will be needed to facilitate absorption of the temporary costs of SOE and SOCB reforms and ensure fiscal sustainability. Given the easin external budget support (see Box 4).’ B of the fiscal stance so far, reform costs will require To strengthen tax administration, the authorities noted that further reforms to the VAT by end-2000 were under consideration, which would reduce the number of rates, expand the scope of self assessment, and simplify documentary requirements. The staff encouraged the authorities to strengthen the revenue effort over the medium term, and to complement these changes with actions to reduce discretionary tax exemptions and incentives. On the expenditure side, the staff recommended that the size and composition of the civil service be geared to limiting overall wage bill growth while promoting business deregulation and improved service delivery. Furthermore, domestic petroleum prices should be adjusted as needed to avoid explicit budget subsidies, and nonessential recurrent expenditure restrained to make room for critical social sector spending. 17. The monetary stance for 2000 is highly accommodative, posing risks not only to inflation but also to the balance sheets of the already weak SOCBs. The State Bank of Vietnam (SBV) is projecting broad money growth at 44 percent in 2000, with overall credit growth of 30 percent. In the first quarter of 2000, credit growth accelerated, for both the SOE and nonstate sectors, to reach 25 percent compared to a year ago. While significant excess capacity might dampen inflationary pressures in the short term, the injection of dong liquidity since late 1999 appears excessive. Moreover, in a banking system under stress, cautious lending by banks would be appropriate and considerably lower credit growth would still be consistent with economic recovery. In the light of these considerations, the staff urged that credit policy be much more restrained (keeping credit growth around 22 percent) and aimed at providing adequate credit to the non-SOE sector. At the same time, the growth of credit to SOEs should be closely monitored and curtailed in order to strengthen financial discipline. 18. To strengthen monetary management, the staff emphasized that more rapid progress should be made toward the use of indirect monetary instruments. The SBV has l4 The January 1 wage increase was the first in seven years and restored government real wages to the level prevailing in 1996. Its impact on the total wage bill is expected to be partially offset over the medium term by an announced 15 percent cut in 2000 in the size of the civil service in the central administration (20 percent of the total civil service). I5 Critical details of the authorities’ SOE reform plans are not yet available to enable a more precise costing of the potential fiscal burden. Under tentative reform scenarios, the staff estimate that the current costs of reform could start at ‘/z percent of GDP in 2000, and average about 1 percent of GDP annually over 2000-03. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14- Box 4. Vietnam: Fiscal Sustainability and Structural Reform Costs Over the medium term, the budget will need to accommodate the costs of structural reform and ensure adequate funding for the sectors critical for poverty reduction, while keeping public sector debt at a manageable level. Meeting these goals will require a moderate path of fiscal consolidation, in light of the current weakened fiscal position, entailing a gradual decline in the overall deficit (excluding onlending, but including the current costs of reform) from 3%4 percent of GDP in 2000 and 2001 to 1 percent by 2005. Revenue will need to rise steadily over the medium term by 1 s-2 percentage points of GDP to 20 percent of GDP. Further economic recovery and liberalization should have a positive impact on revenue performance. In addition, measures should be taken to strengthen tax policy and Vlctnrm: Medium-Term Flscrl Outlook Under Reform Scelurlo (in percent ofGDP) 4 -.----- -24 lGvcnll d&it (excl. mlendhg), left scale -c Revalue md grulq tigbt vale -23 -+Expmdmrc, tit@ IC& I/ administration, particularly with respect to the VAT and tax exemptions, and over time to broaden the tax base. Expenditure policy will need to ensure that adequate budget provisions are made to cover current costs arising from SOE and banking sector reforms, reverse the recent compression in social sector spending, and improve and maintain essential infrastructure. Total expenditure should remain in the range of 2 l-22 percent of GDP, which will require strict prioritization of spending in line with the recommendations of the Bank’s Public Expenditure Review, 1999 2ooo 2Wl 2002 2003 2004 2005 to enable the government to intensify its poverty reduction I/ Includes current costs of SOE and bankinS ‘ector refmm. effort. Moreover, the total wage bill should be contained at its current level, implying some cuts in staffring in tandem with future wage increases. Over the period 2000-03, the costs of SOE and banking reforms and associated social spending are tentatively projected to total 12-13 percent of GDP, based on the following components ‘: l The capital costs of SOE debt resolution and bank recapitalixation are projected at 8 percent of GDP over four years. Debt resolution alone is expected to cost about 5% percent of GDP, and the asset management company (AMC) together with the residual bank recapitalixation about 2% percent of GDP; l The additional interest cost of newly issued government debt for bank recapitalization is projected at 2% percent of GDP over the next four years, starting at 0.2 percent of GDP in 2000 and rising to 1 percent of GDP by 2003; and D The cost of severance pay to affected workers, is projected at 2 percent of GDP. In 2000, the capital costs of SOE and banking sector reform would be about 2% -3 percent of GDP, mainly related to setting up the AMC and clearing frozen SOEloans. Total current costs (including the safety net) would amount to Vlctnnm: PubUe Sector Debt Under Reform Soenarto (III pcrcmt ofGDP) EI Govmmem domestic debt clGovemlnem atemd debt I &WE debt I/ about L/ percent of GDP. - Under this reform scenario and with the curtailment of new I50 - I! ./j! SOE losses, the public sector debt dynamics would remain manageable. Currently, the level of public sector debt of Vietnam is about 65 percent of GDP (staff estimate), including bank debt of SOEs. The government’s domestic debt is very small (3 percent of GDP), and its external debt 20 is all on concessional terms. Reforming the SOE sector would result in the government taking on some SOE debt, which by itself would not increase the level of debt of the 0 public sector as a whole. Public sector debt would peak at 71 percent by 2002, and begin to stabilize thereafter. lW 2oa, 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 l/ L4a.d on projecmns wing end-1997 stock of SOE debt. ‘This staff calculation is based on (i) an SOE reform scenario involving about one-third of SOEs, which would be closed, equitized, and divested over three years; (ii) an estimated D 35 trillion of nonperforming loans, as the basis for the SOE bank debt to be resolved by the government, which represents the main component of bank restructuring cost; and (iii) an average ratio of workers to be laid- off from these SOEs assumed at 30 percent, with two years’ salary as severance pay. The cost estimates should be considered a lower bound since they do not account for nonbank debt of SOEs, which is believed to be substantial but is poorly documented. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 15- recently finalized regulations governing open market operations (OMO) with technical assistance from the Fund, which it plans to start in the second half of 2000. To facilitate the introduction of OMO for liquidity management, the authorities are also considering a proposal to replace the current system of administered rate adjustments with a “base rate” mechanism for interest rate determination, which is expected to give banks greater leeway in setting lending rates. The staff urged the authorities to move quickly in both areas, particularly in light of the shift toward foreign currency deposits, and stressed that the base rate mechanism should be designed to give a key role for market forces which would be essential for OMO to function effectively. 19. The authorities shared the staff’s view that the improvement in the external position and the relative stability in the exchange market were providing a good opportunity for greater flexibility in exchange arrangements. A more liberal approach to exchange arrangements would help to ease exchange controls, ensure adequate foreign exchange for imports, and boost confidence. The authorities noted that they were keeping under review proposals for a more flexible implementation of the current regime by widening the margin for movements in the interbank exchange rate and by further reducing the surrender requirement. The staff welcomed the recent relaxation of the foreign exchange balancing requirement for foreign-invested enterprises, which was among the restrictions subject to approval under Article VIII, and urged removal of the remaining restrictions on payments and transfers for current account transactions, so that Vietnam could accept the obligations under Article VIII, Sections 2,3, and 4.16 20. Although Vietnam’s external debt vulnerability indicators are relatively low, a prudent external debt policy remains essential, given the large debt service obligations. To ensure a sustainable debt burden, the staff recommended that official financing needs be met primarily by grants or concessional borrowing, with limited recourse to nonconcessional loans, including by the private sector. The authorities agreed with this approach and noted that a comprehensive system of monitoring external debt had been established, including private sector and FDI-related borrowing, with limits set at the beginning of each year. The l6 Exchange measures subject to approval under Article VIII are: (i) restrictions arising from the foreign exchange balancing requirement that apply to payments and transfers by foreign- invested firms and foreign investors; (ii) a multiple currency practice arising from the tax on profit remittances by foreign investors; and (iii) a restriction arising from the limits on the availability of foreign exchange for payments for imports of certain commodities. Vietnam continues to avail itself of the transitional arrangements under Article XIV, Section 2, under which it maintains exchange restrictions consisting of limits on the availability of foreign exchange for certain invisible payments. Furthermore, some Fund jurisdictional questions remain outstanding which pertain to the current foreign exchange regime. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 16- authorities also indicated that rescheduling: discussions with Russia were continuing and that an agreement was expected in 2000.17 C. Structural Reforms18 21. The authorities stressed their commitment to developing a market-based economy to achieve growth and poverty reduction through closer regional and global integration. In particular, they recognized that earlier policy weaknesses had complicated the achievement of this goal by misdirecting investment. Private sector development and SOE reform 22. The authorities pointed to their recent record of actions to improve the environment for private sector development, especially through the new Enterprise Law and amendments to the Foreign Investment Law. These and other initiatives are, however, just the beginning of steps neede’d to level the playing field for private enterprises. In particular, while the originally proposed amendments to the Foreign Investment Law were positive, several changes were not approved by the National Assembly, especially those that would have given foreign-invested enterprises more of the rights now available to domestic enterprises. The staff also noted that beyond these legislative changes, sustained improvements had been thwarted by bureaucratic rigidities, SOE influence, and other vested interests, and that determined efforts were needed for a successful implementation of the new laws. 23. The staff noted that the governmlent’s SOE reform plan was a major step forward, but cautioned that the worst performing SOEs had to be tackled, in order for the SOE reform effectively to stem enterprise losses and meaningfully contribute to macroeconomic stability and banking reform. Following extensive technical preparation, a medium-term SOE reform plan has been submitted for final review, which aims at reducing the number of SOEs by one-third in three years. While the number of enterprises targeted for reform is significant, the staff expressed concern that the reform was overly concentrated on small SOEs, leaving out the larger and poorer performers in the commercial sectors. In particular, many of the enterprises in sectors viewed as strategic by the authorities have borrowed heavily for operations that are now subject to excess capacity and based on outdated technology. The authorities acknowledged some weakening of the SOE reform program compared with the earlier proposals discussed with the staff, but stressed that its approval at the highest political level and extensive discussion at various levels of government would make it more likely to be fully implemented. They also stressed that the I7 Total arrears to Russia are estimated at TR 8.6 billion. ‘* Technical assistance in most of the structural areas outlined in this section has been led by the World Bank. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17- reform plan represented a major break from the past. There was agreement on the need to ensure successful implementation of the plan by simplifying and making more effective and transparent the equitization process (including through lifting the caps on shareholding of individual domestic entities), and by giving careful attention to the design and adequacy of safety nets, the resolution of SOE debt, and a strengthening of administrative mechanisms to monitor progress. In each of these areas, technical assistance from donors would be required. Banking reform 24. The authorities recognized the need to reform the banking system and are focusing attention on developing a restructuring plan for the four SOCBs. Based on a preliminary outline of the authorities’ overall plan for the SOCB sector, management autonomy of the SOCBs would be strengthened, bank operating expenses reduced, and managers held accountable for business outcomes. Also, on a pilot basis, the sale of an equity stake in one SOCB to foreign partners would be allowed. As noted earlier, policy lending would also be separated from commercial lending, starting with the establishment of a government and donor-supported fund (NDSF) to deal with development based lending. 25. The staff stressed the urgent need for concrete plans to reform each of the SOCBs, aimed at halting the flow of bad loans. Securing management independence would be critical to shifting operations of these banks to a sound commercial basis. To this end, policy lending by SOCBs should be halted, except in very limited and explicitly specified circumstances with government guarantees. Looking ahead, to modemize the banks and enhance competition, the staff underscored the importance of offering at least one of the SOCBs for equitization to a reputable foreign bank, once restructuring was well under way. Management performance should also be improved through the use of financial and operational targets, including for debt recovery. To avoid moral hazard, the recapitalization of SOCBs should be phased over time, and made conditional on improved management, as verified by external audits according to international standards. 26. Regulations for loan classification and loss provisioning will need to move closer to international standards in order to allow a realistic assessment of the size of the NPLs and the likely fiscal costs of bank restructuring. The staff welcomed the regulations adopted in early 2000 to establish an AMC, and recommended that its role be limited to the resolution of collateralized NPLs at market-based valuations (estimated by the staff at about one quarter of the total stock of NPLs), with the remaining NPLs subject to workout in individual banks. The staff also stressed that efforts were needed to continue to strengthen the regulatory framework for the banking system. 27. Progress has been mixed in the area of JSB restructuring. The authorities noted that improvements in banking supervision (now with at least one on-site examination annually) and in enforcement of prudential guidelines had at least stabilized the situation of the most troubled JSBs. Nonetheless, the finalization of individual JSB restructuring plans has been delayed, in part reflecting the slow progress in developing a comprehensive Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 18- strategy. The staff urged that efforts in this area be accelerated, and that a more transparent resolution mechanism be introduced. Trade reform 28. The authorities agreed that trade reform and increasing integration with the regional and global economy would help to improve competitiveness, but they noted that building domestic support for this policy had proved difficult. Notwithstanding recent trade arrangements with Japan and the European Union, which fostered an expansion of key exports in 1999, the bilateral trade agreement with the United States has not yet been concluded. However, the authorities were making technical preparations toward meeting AFTA commitments, In particular, by 2006, Vietnam is committed to reducing tariffs on almost all goods (97 percent of tariff lines) from ASEAN members to O-5 percent. Moreover, by 2003, the authorities are considering reducing most of these tariffs to at most 20 percent and removing QRs, except for automobiles, motorcycles, petroleum products, and sugar. A detailed annual roadmap for achieving these targets is to be finalized by end-2000. 29. Since AFTA members are relatively efficient producers of manufactured goods, liberalization under AFTA rules would strengthen Vietnam’s external competitiveness. The staff noted that the roadmap for AFTA, which would need to be announced publicly, was a necessary complement to SOE and SOCB reforms and would serve as a key building block for Vietnam’s integration effort and private sector development. The authorities recognized that substantial excess capacity existed in sectors that would remain subject to QRs and that further rationalization could be achieved, including through the flexible adjustment of administered domestic prices; in the case of sugar, domestic prices have been allowed to fall by one-third over the last year, helping to limit excess domestic production. In the case of petroleum products, the staff noted that any future investment in domestic refining would need to be commercially viable and make best use of scarce capital. More generally, however, because Vietnam’s manufacturing and agro-based industries are similar to those of other AFTA members, Vietnam’s main export potential is likely to be outside AFTA. For this reason, completion of the trade agreement with the U.S. and resultant market access and foreign investment was seen by the staff as essential for a more competitive economy and for eventual WTO accession. In support of this approach, the staff recommended that the elimination of QRs be applied on a multilateral basis. D. Statistical Issues and Policy Transparency 30. Data quality and dissemination and policy transparency remain highly important issues for Vietnam. Reflecting greater openness with financial statistics, SBV officials reported that work was being completed on a country page for International Financial Statistics and the publication of a quarterly statistical bulletin. A Government Finance Statistics Yearbook page for Vietnam has already been introduced, and the authorities have begun to publish summaries of approved budgets and fiscal outtums. Notwithstanding these steps, the staff noted that there was considerable scope for improving the frequency, quality, and coverage of macroeconomic statistics to enable more effective - Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 19- surveillance by the Fund (Appendix V). In particular, statistical compilation methods, especially for national accounts and the balance of payments, needed to be strengthened. The staff encouraged the authorities to consider participation in the GDDS as a means for improving the production and dissemination of more comprehensive macroeonomic statistics over the medium term. IV. STAFFAPPRAISAL 31. With the waning of the Asian crisis, there are increasing signs of economic recovery in Vietnam, but the authorities are having difficulties putting in place the preconditions for sustained higher rates of growth. Supported by accommodative macroeconomic policies, economic activity has begun to rebound since mid-l 999 on the strength of exports, while inflation is subdued and external reserves have increased considerably. Despite extensive preparation of reform plans, the structural weaknesses in the economy that were revealed by the regional crisis are only ‘now beginning to be addressed, and there are still not clear signals that the authorities are prepared to subject state-owned enterprises and banks to commercial pressures. Thus, investment remains depressed. Domestic investment has been crowded out by the dominant SOE sector, by restrictions and regulations on the private sector, and by a banking system under stress. FDI has also been held back by negative sentiment about the business environment in Vietnam. 32. Restoring higher rates of growth necessary for a lasting reduction in poverty will depend on the continued maintenance of macroeconomic stability and determined efforts to improve economic efficiency and revive private investment. The cautious easing of the fiscal stance in the last two years to support economic recovery has been appropriate. Over the medium term, however, the budget faces substantial risks, given the weakened revenue performance over the last few years, the heavy debt burden and large losses of the SOE sector, and the high level of nonperforming loans in the SOCBs. To reduce these risks, sustained revenue efforts are essential, as are early actions to resolve the related problems in the SOE and the SOCB sectors to contain their potential fiscal costs. With some strengthening of the underlying fiscal position, there is scope for the budget to absorb the fiscal costs of reform, particularly in view of potential external budget support for such reform, without undue risk to medium-term fiscal sustainability. 33. Credit policy for 2000 needs to be much more restrained than now planned by the SBV, both to keep inflation in check and to avoid a further deterioration in bank asset quality, especially in the SOCBs. To counter inflation risks, the growth in bank credit to the economy for 2000 should be held to well below the SBV’s target and credit growth to SOEs should be closely monitored and curtailed. This more prudent stance would still support recovery while complementing SOE reform efforts. Consistent with this approach, interest rates should be market-determined; as a transitional step, the authorities should move quickly to replace the current ceiling on bank lending rates with a base rate system, designed to give a greater role for market forces and to allow open market operations to function effectively. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2o- 34. The recent improvement in Vietnam’s external position provides a good opportunity to increase the flexibility of its exchange system, which would help to bolster confidence. The recent steps to ease exchange controls are welcome. In the period ahead, to enhance the availability of foreign exchange for imports, the margin for daily movement in the interbank exchange rate should be widened, the foreign exchange surrender requirement should be further reduced, and exchange control procedures should be further simplified. The remaining restrictions on payment and transfers for current account transactions should also be removed to enable Vietnam to accept the obligations under Article VIII. In the absence of a timetable for their removal, staff does not recommend that any of these restrictions be approved. 35. Recognizing the importance of structural reforms to boost efficiency and competitiveness of the economy, the authorities have taken initial reform steps, including in the context of PRGF discussions. Efforts so far, however, have been gradual, and the challenge now is for stronger and more concerted policies and actions across all fronts. 36. Steps have been taken recently to promote private sector development and FBI, but much more needs to be done. The recent removal of licensing requirements for establishing new private businesses is a positive step, while the amendments to the Foreign Investment Law also go in the right direction. However, rigorous implementation of the recently adopted Enterprise Law will be essential, and strong efforts are needed to align the regulatory environment for FDI with that of domestic enterprises. 37. On banking reform, the main challenge ahead is the restructuring of SOCBs. Some progress is being made in addressing the problems of the JSBs, and plans are being drawn up to reform the SOCBs. Priority should be given in these plans to concrete steps to strengthen bank management in order to halt the flow of bad loans. This will require a sharp curtailment in directed lending and a phased recapitalization of SOCBs conditional on improved management as verified by external audits. To minimize the cost of SOCB reform, the scope of the proposed AMC should be confined to absorbing only collateralized loans at market prices. Moreover, the rules for loan classification and provisioning will need to move closer to international standards to allow for a more realistic assessment of the stock of NPLs. Equity participation by a strategic foreign partner in at least one of the SOCBs will help to enhance efficiency and competition in the banking system. 38. With technical cooperation from the Bank, the authorities have been developing a medium-term SOE reform plan, which will need to be vigorously pursued and strengthened. While the plan may not be as ambitious as would have been warranted by financial considerations alone, it represents a major step forward and is backed by broad efforts at consensus-building within Vietnam. Successful implementation will, however, require a strong administrative mechanism, appropriate safety nets for affected workers, a resolution of the SOE debt problem, and simpler, more effective and transparent procedures for equitization. Moreover, for SOE reform to be fully effective, nonviable loss-making Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-21- SOEs will need to be targeted for closure or liquidation, and reform measures to stem the losses of SOEs should apply not only to smaller SOEs but also to larger ones. 39. Some progress has been made in opening further the Vietnamese economy to competition, but the remaining agenda is large. The staff welcomes the recent removal of QRs on significant items, as well as the government’s current focus on meeting AFTA commitments especially for the three-year period to 2003, which would imply a further removal of QRs and reduction in tariff rates. Attention will now need to be given to developing a roadmap for achieving these targets to facilitate rationalization of the affected sectors. Implementation of AFTA commitments will improve competitiveness and can serve as a foundation for Vietnam’s broader integration effort. The finalization of other market- opening agreements will also be critical in this regard. 40. Further improvements in the quality and dissemination of statistics and in policy transparency will help to improve the business environment and enhance the credibility of the government’s reform efforts and surveillance by the Fund. The staff strongly encourages the authorities to proceed soon with the publication of a Vietnam page in IFS, and to make further improvements in the compilation of the national accounts and the balance of payments statistics and in the quality of published fiscal data. The staff recommends that Vietnam consider participation in the GDDS as a means of promoting improvement in its macroeconomic statistical systems over the medium term. 41. It is recommended that the next Article IV Consultation be conducted on the standard 12-month cycle. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-22- V. PROPOSED DECISION Given that Vietnam continues to avail itself of the transitional arrangements under Article XIV, Section 2, the following draft decision is proposed for adoption by the Executive Board: 1. The Fund takes this decision in concluding the 2000 Article XIV consultation with Vietnam: 2. Vietnam continues to maintain restrictions on the making of payments and transfers for current international transactions under the transitional arrangements of Article XIV, Section 2, as described in W/00/153. The Fund encourages Vietnam to eliminate these restrictions as soon as circumstances permit. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 23 - CHART 1 VIETNAM SELECTED ECONOMIC INDICATORS INFLATION ” _ Jmmy 1997 -June 2000 (12~month percentage change) FOREIGN TRADE II Jaunty 1997 -June 2000 (in mUlIons of U.S. dollars) INDUSIWAL PRODUCTION Jammy 1997 -June 2000 (12~month percentage change) FOREIGN TRADE AND RESERVES Janmy 1997 -June 2000 l/U (in bllllonr of U.S. dollars) Trade balance (leyi scale) Sources: Data provided by the Vietnamese authorities; and Fund staff estimates. l/ Through April 2000. 2/ Based on imports c.i.f., rather than imports f.o.b., as recorded in the balance of payments. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicMONETARY AND FINANCIAL INDICATORS 70 60 50 40 30 20 ‘4 1 GROWTH OF MONEY AND DEPOSITS January 1997 - April 2000 (Year-on-ycrr change) I APR JUL ocr JAN APR JUL OCT JAN APR JUL OCT JAN APR 1 1998 1999 2000 30 DOMESTIC CREDIT January 1997 -April 2000 2s - (Year-on-year change) . 15 - : , ‘. -. *.--’ -..- , ,’ .__.----,* . Credit lo SOES I/ 10 - , , I ‘* .._.’ .., - I 5JAN APR JUL OCT JAN APR JUL OCT JAN APR JUL OCT JAN APR 1997 1998 1999 2000 70 60 50 40 30 20 IO 30 25 20 I5 IO s INTEREST RATES 2l January 1997 - April 2000 (Percent per year, end of period) - 20 Nomihal - I5 ,’ *.----. . ..-- - 10 - -. #. --.* - *. ,- IO “-.;...: -. ‘. , Red 31 ‘. ,---. .** *. .’ .-.-_._ ,’ -. 5 - ---_..-, .*’ - _.-- 5 -._- OJAN 1997 APR NL cm JAN APR JUL oa JAN APR JUL OCT JAN APR 0 1998 1999 2Mlo Sources: Data provided by the Vietnamese authorities, and Fund staff estimates. II Beginning in April 1999, based on official estimates rather than actual data 2/ On short-term working capital loans. 31 Measured with respect to nominal interest rate at the end of each month and three-month moving average of year-on-year inflation. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 25 - CHART 3 EXCHANGE RATE INDICATORS lOSo 11000 11500 12000 12soa 13ooo 13soa 14000 (In dong per U.S. dollu) (June 1997-100) EXCHANGE RATES January 1997 - Msy 2000 I I, I I I. , I ,, I II I I I I I I .I,, I ,.I ,,,, I ., I, 14504~~ APR JUL OCT JAN APR JUL OCT JAN AF’R JUL OCT JAN APR 1991 1998 1999 2000 (June iS97’=lC0) 130 120 110 100 90 140 I 140 REAL EFFECTIVE EXCHANGE RATES January 1997 - April 2000 120 - 80 - . I I I . I . , 1, Thailand - 130 - 120 - 110 - 100 - 90 - 80 - 70 - 60 I,, 54AN I I I . I ,, I ., I, , I I I ., I,, I I I I I. I I. I I I APR JUL OCT IAN APR JLJL OCT JAN APR JUL OCI JAN APR 50 1997 1998 1999 2000 Sources: Data provided by the Vietnamese authorities; and Fund staff estimates. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 26 - Table 1. Vietnam: Selected honomic Indicators, 19!M-2000 Nomid GDP (1999): USS28.S billion Popolation (1999): 76.6 million GDP per capita (1999): USS372 Fund Quota: SDR 329.1 million 1994 1995 19% 1997 1998 1999 2000 2000 Hl I/ Est. Est StatTproj. Gflioial est. Real GDP (annual percentage change) Industrial output 2/ 8.8 13.7 9.5 9.3 8.2 3.5 4.2 14.5 14.2 13.8 12.5 10.4 Saving-Investment bnlunce (in peroeot of GDP) -12.3 -13.5 -10.5 -6.9 -4.6 3.9 Grc%B naticmel Bwing 12.0 11.9 15.9 19.8 17.1 24.4 Gross capital formation 24.3 25.4 26.3 26.7 21.6 20.5 Inflation (annual peroentage change) Period average End of period GDP deflator 9.5 16.9 5.6 3.1 7.9 14.5 12.9 4.4 3.6 9.2 14.0 17.0 8.7 6.6 11.1 4.1 0.5 -2.5 7/ -0.2 5.0 -0.3 71 5.7 2.3 Govemment budget (in percent of GDP) 3/ Total revenue Grant+ Total expenditure (exoluding onkndiig) 4/ Of which: current expenditure Overall fiscal balanoc (iiluding gmnts, exoluding onlending) 4/ 22.9 22.6 22.4 20.0 19.6 18.2 18.3 3.7 8/ 0.7 0.7 0.6 0.8 0.6 0.5 0.4 0.1 8/ 25.0 23.8 23.1 22.6 20.7 19.6 22.2 3.9 81 18.7 18.6 17.4 16.3 15.0 13.2 14.8 3.4 81 -1.4 -0.5 -0.2 -1.7 -8.5 -0 9 -3.5 -0.1 81 Money and credit (ennual percentage change, end of Period) Broad money Credit to the economy 29.9 22.6 22.7 26.1 25.6 39.3 25.0 46.0 71 39.8 26.9 20.1 22.6 16.4 19.2 22.0 27.5 71 Inter@ rates (in percent, end of period) Tluec-month deposits (households) Short-tclm lending (less than one year) 18.2 18.2 9.1 8.1 9.7 28.3 28.3 15.9 12.7 14.7 4.0 . . 3.6 71 11.7 . 10.2 71 Cumnt mxount (io01udiig oflioial trMEfers) (inmillions ofUS. dollars) (in percent of GDP) Exports of goods (annual ptroetttage change, U.S. dollar terms) Imports of goods (annual percentage change, U.S. dollar terms) -1,872 -2,648 -2,431 -1,664 -1,067 1,252 637 . . . -11.5 -12.8 -9.9 -6.2 -3.9 4.4 2.1 . 35.8 28.2 41.2 24.6 2.4 23.2 12.0 25.1 42.2 41.1 25.5 -0.2 -1.1 1.1 15.2 34.0 91 Foreign exchange reservex (in millions of U.S. dollars, end of period) Gross official reserves, including gold (in weeks of next year’s imports of goods and nonfactor services) Net intemationd ICBCI’VCB, inO1uding gold 838 1,323 1,673 1,857 1,765 4.1 5.2 6.4 7.2 6.7 556 946 1,136 1,350 1,259 External debt (in percent of GDP) 5/ Convertible o-cy 6/ Nonconvettiblc oorrenoy 97.0 86.1 78.1 77.7 76.8 33.2 35.0 36.6 38.6 38.1 63.9 51.1 41.5 39.1 38.8 2,711 3,279 9.1 9.7 2,197 2,787 74.0 42.5 37.1 42.5 36.9 0.0 Debt-servke s-&o (Percent of exporte of goods and nonfactor services) Debt due Debt paid 11.8 12.1 9.8 11.1 13.2 6.1 6.7 5.6 7.8 8.1 10.7 12.3 . . . Exchange rate (dongper U.S. dollar) Period average End of period Real effective exchange rate (annual percentage change) Period average End of period 10,967 11,051 -1.1 2.0 11,038 11,033 11,706 13,297 13,944 14,109 11,015 11,150 12292 13,896 14,028 14,190 6.5 6.6 3.3 8.2 -6.2 . . . 8.9 3.7 12.6 -9.3 -3.2 . . . Memorandum items: GDP (in trillions of dong at current market prices) 178.5 Per ospita GDP (ii U.S. dollars) 229 228.9 272.0 313.6 360.6 397.3 424.7 287 336 360 359 372 388 . . 4.5 . 1.7 24.5 22.8 . . . 14.5 . 2,673 71 7.9 2,181 71 . . . . . . 14,085 101 -5.8 -5.4 Sources: Data provided by the authorities; and staff estimates and projections. l! Performance through fmt half of 2000, unless othenvinc indicated. 2 Annual percentage ohange in gross value of industrial output. 31 Csnb basis. 4/ Exoludcr oqital costs of state-owned enterprise and banking sector refo+ms 5/ London Club rescheduling wm con&&d in early 1998. Restrwturing of the Russian debt is assumed to be conoluded in 2000 on terms at least comPsrable to the 1993 h-is club lWCheduhng. 6/ lnoludes the loan component of foreign direct investment and other private sector borrowing, and short-term debt 7/ An of April 2000. 8/ As of March 2000. g/For 2000 HI, rate of growth based on iqorts o.i.f.; othenviac, based on importa f.o.b. lO/ As of June 30.2000 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 27 - Table 2. Vielnrm: Balance of Pqxncnts, 1997-2003 (ln millions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise indicated) Current 8ccoullt bd8llce -1,664 -1,067 1,252 637 41 -431 -540 E.x&diag &i&l transfh -1,839 -1,239 1,121 505 -93 -567 -678 Trade balanot -1,315 -981 1,080 874 497 287 230 bporta, f.o.b. 9,145 9,365 11,540 12920 14,313 15,918 17,798 Impor&, f.o.b. 10,460 10,346 10,460 K&o47 13,816 15,631 17,567 Non-faotor ticee (net) -623 -539 -597 -735 -1,ozg -1,270 -1,358 ReWiptE f530 2,604 2,668 &713 2,810 5942 3,229 Paymenta 3,153 3,143 3,265 3,448 3,838 4,212 4,581 Inv-t income (act) -611 -669 -412 -733 -712 -784 -800 RCCCiptr 136 133 160 217 251 275 301 Paymcnb 147 802 572 950 963 1,059 1,100 Tranefert (net) 885 1,122 1.181 1.232 1,284 1,336 1,388 Private 710 950 1,050 1,100 1,150 WJQ 1,250 OfIioial 175 172 131 132 134 136 138 Capital 8ccomlt balance 1,662 216 -334 -247 14 525 1,077 Gras foreign d&t invutment (FIX) inflow9 2,074 800 700 650 775 950 1,075 Wty 1.002 240 301 200 233 285 323 Loan diaburacmcnts 1,072 560 399 450 543 665 753 FDI loan mpa~enta 174 372 603 763 827 788 680 Medium and long-term loana (net) 375 432 605 466 666 863 982 DisbUllCOl~tr 1,007 1,121 1,036 1,071 1.129 1,339 1,347 ODAloana 550 796 970 1,002 1,053 1,255 1,255 Commercial loana 457 326 66 69 76 84 92 Soheduld amortizatioa 632 690 431 606 463 475 365 Short term capital (not) E- and omiuionr over80 bhnce -612 -644 -1,036 -600 400 -500 -300 -2 327 -150 0 0 0 0 -4 -524 768 390 54 94 537 Fim Change in net fotip maeta of the Stata Bank of Vietnam (-, incroaae) Ofwhich: Change in net iatemational ruewca UK of Fund credit (net) OtherNIR AJTCM and rercbcduling 11 Debt relief 11 F-L LPP 4 524 -768 -390 -54 -94 -537 -319 -15 -1,316 -590 -454 -494 -537 -214 90 -937 -590 -454 -494 -537 -54 -78 -32 -22 -46 -71 -72 -160 168 905 -568 -408 -422 -465 323 126 548 -8,586 0 0 0 0 413 0 8,586 0 0 0 0 0 0 200 400 400 0 Memorandum Items: Gross offiial reservea, includiig gold 1,858 1,765 z711 3,279 3,687 4,109 4,515 Inwcclrsofrlcxtydsinlp~ 7.2 6.7 9.1 9.7 9.7 9.7 9.7 Ratio to short tam extcmal debt (in percent) 21 269.4 409.6 447.5 708.8 775.6 1,125.4 1,361.l Ratio to broad money (in p-t, end of period) 28.0 23.9 21.6 29.4 29.6 29.8 30.3 C-t account deficit (in percent of GDP) -6.2 -3.9 4.4 2.1 0.1 -1.2 -1.4 Excluding official tranafern -6.9 -4.6 3.9 1.7 -0.3 -1.6 -1.8 Export value growth (a~ual percentage change) 24.6 2.4 23.2 12.0 10.8 11.2 11.8 Import value growth (annual pcroentagc change) -0.2 -1.1 1.1 15.2 14.7 13.1 12.4 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 Rat. Projections Sourcea: Data provided by the Vietnamcue autboritics; aad ~t&ertimatea and projcotioxu. I/ London Club rssobcduling wan concluded ia early 1998. R&n&wing of the Rukan debt in awaned to be concluded in 2000 on tetma at least ixanparable tu the 1993 Paris Club rescheduling. 2l Short-term debt by remaining maturity refera to nowequity claimr falling due ovct the next period. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 28 - Table 3. Vletnun: Summery of Generel Government Budgetary Opemtlone, 1996-2000 l! 1999 2000 19% 1997 1998 Budget Staffest. BudectV proj. Revenue and grants 62.4 65.4 73.0 69.5 74.2 74.5 79.5 ReVClUe 60.8 62.8 70.8 67.6 72.3 72.6 77.6 Tax revmu.+ 51.8 53.1 59.0 58.7 61.8 62.0 65.5 Nontax revmuc 9.1 9.7 11.9 8.9 10.5 10.6 12.1 GTanla 1.5 2.6 2.1 1.9 1.9 1.9 1.9 Total expenditure (includiag onlmding) Total cxpmdinm (exchdng onlmding) Current expmdibnt Current non-interest expmditores cfwhich: rctrmchmmt costs Intereat p-n (Paid) (scheduled) ofwhich: interest coats of reforms Capital expmditure and onlmding ofwhzch: c&ding &tingmCY 64.3 77.6 80.2 84.4 83.5 94.7 62.9 70.7 74.8 13.6 77.8 86.7 47.3 51.3 54.2 50.0 52.3 S8.8 44.6 49.4 52.2 47.5 49.8 55.3 . . 2.7 4.1 . . . 1.9 3.9 . . . 2.1 21 . 2.5 2.5 . . . 3.5 3.5 . . . 17.1 26.4 25.9 1.4 6.9 5.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 . . . . 31.2 33.7 5.7 8.0 0.0 2.2 102.3 94.3 62.9 S8.8 2.0 4.1 3.5 0.6 37.2 8.0 2.2 Ovemll heal balance (cxeluding odmdhg) overan &Cal bablncc (iNI* onhbg) -0.5 -5.4 -1.8 -1.9 -12.3 -7.2 Financing Domestic (net) Bankingsystcm3l Nonblnks 41 Fwcign (nd) Disburscmmts Amortidon psid (-) . . 2.s 2.5 31.9 10.9 2.6 -4.1 -14.9 14.9 -0.2 0.0 -0.2 15.1 18.1 3.0 -3.6 -12.2 -14.8 -9.3 -20.2 -228 1.9 12.3 7.2 0.6 5.2 a.2 -0.3 0.0 1.6 0.8 5.2 -1.8 1.4 7.1 7.4 3.B 10.2 10.2 2.5 3.2 2.8 9.3 20.2 22.8 -1.2 7.6 7.2 -5.4 0.0 2.5 4.2 7.6 4.7 10.6 12.6 15.6 13.5 15.0 18.0 3.0 2.4 2.4 Revenue end grents 22.13 20.8 20.2 17.5 18.7 17.s 18.7 RCVelIue 22.4 20.0 19.6 17.0 18.2 17.1 18.3 Tw -UC 19.0 16.9 16.3 14.8 15.5 14.6 15.4 Nontax-u 3.3 3.1 3.3 2.3 2.6 2,s 2.9 Grants 0.6 0.8 0.6 OS 0.5 0.4 0.4 Total expetiiture (including onknding) 23.6 24.8 22.2 21.3 21.0 22.3 24.1 Total expendihaz (exchu@ odmding) 23.1 22.6 20.7 18.5 19.6 20.4 22.2 Cunvnt cxpenditurc 17.4 16.3 15.0 12.6 13.2 13.8 14.8 Cumnt nothtuest expcnditw 16.4 15.7 14.5 12.0 12.5 13.0 13.4 Interest paymmts @aid) 1.1) 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.8 1.0 Capital expmditore and onlending 6.3 8.4 7.2 8.0 7.9 7.9 8.8 Contingency 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.7 0.0 0.5 0.5 OveraU flsd belence (excluding onlending) -0.2 -1.7 -0.5 -1.0 -0.9 -2.9 -3.5 Overall tical bslance&Uing onlending) -0.7 -3.9 -2.0 -3.8 -2.3 -4.7 -5.4 FLnancing Domestic (net) Banking system 3/ Nonbank8 41 Foreign W 0.7 3.9 2.0 3.8 2.3 4.7 s.4 0.2 1.7 -0.1 0.0 0.0 1.8 1.7 -0. II 0.0 0.4 0.0 -1.4 0.0 0.6 0.3 1.7 -0.5 0.0 1.3 1.8 1.1 O.!i 2.3 2.1 3.8 2.4 3.0 3.7 Memorandum Items: (IntlilliONOfdong,lmlcsSOthcrwisCindiCatcd) Augmented balance (iincluding onlending) 51 (ii pcmmt of GDP) -1.9 -0.7 -20.2 -33.8 -4.7 -8.0 Expenditures mansg,ul at units 6f (in percent of GDP) Wageandsabrybill (ii percent of GDP) Social spending (in percent of GDP) la;! 6.0 7.!i -12.3 -9.6 -14.9 -9.3 -3.9 -2.1 -3.8 -2.3 . . 3.6 6.6 5.0 . . 1.0 1.7 1.3 18.9 19.6 21.9 21.9 6.0 5.4 5.5 5.5 7.6 6.8 6.2 6.4 6.3 6.3 1.5 1.5 27.3 27.3 6.4 6.4 6.3 6.6 (In trioioN of dong) (In percent of GDP) Sources: Ministry of Fiimu, State Budget DepsrnnenS and staff estimates and projections. 11 Cnrh basis. 2/ In 2CQ0, excl~ current and capital costs of stste-owned mteqnisc and bsnking sector reforms. 3/ The difFermcc bctwcm bank hawing and net claims on govemmmt in the monaaay survey for 1998 is due to bank ncapitalization opefstions. 41 DQIWS~C ntmbank finan&g is d&cd a~ a residual and inch&s statistical dkrepancy. 5/ Inch&a capital costs of bank rcstructurkg estimated at D 2.4 trillion (0.7 pcrcsnt of GDP) in 1998 and projected at D 11.0 trillion (2.6 percent of GDP) in 2000. 6/ Self-financed expmdhrc undertakm by admb&rative units of the central and local governments, which are excluded from the above budget presentation. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 29 - Table 4. VI&mm: MwWy Survey, 19962000 I/ 1996 1997 199a 1999 2000 March June se@ Dec. March Dec. ht. Est Est. Est. SBV StaBI W. vi Net foreign assets Foreign arsetr Forei@ liabiiitis 14.3 21.0 31.2 36.6 42.7 49.8 61.6 72.6 90.1 75.9 31.2 37.9 47.0 51.3 55.8 62.7 74.7 85.9 100.2 86.0 -17.0 -16.9 -15.8 -14.7 -13.1 -12.9 -13.0 -13.3 -10.1 -10.1 Net claima on government 2/ credit to the economy 31 chim¶ on stat-3 etlterpriscr 3141 Claims 0” other secton 3141 Other items. net so4 60.6 55.3 66.8 4.4 4.4 so.9 62.4 26.8 31.0 24.1 31.4 4.9 -6.2 Broad money @AZ) of which: total deposits ’ Dongliquidity Currency outside banks Depoth Foreign cuxncy deparits (in mi1110ns of U.S. dollan) (m percent of total liquidity) 64.7 81.6 42.0 56.5 51.5 62.9 22.6 25.1 28.9 37.8 13.2 18.7 1,180 1,521 20.3 22.9 71.2 71.0 81.0 82.7 8.4 6.0 72.7 75.9 38.1 39.6 34.6 36.3 -9.8 -11.7 102.4 107.6 75.5 81.1 78.3 80.4 27.0 26.5 51.4 53.9 24.1 27.2 1,733 1,959 23.5 25.3 70.3 71.2 81.0 82.5 83.3 89.6 4.6 4.1 2.9 77.9 79.2 86.6 39.8 38.4 41.8 38.2 40.8 44.9 -12.3 -12.0 -8.5 84.1 107.9 93.3 116.5 -1 7 3.5 94.9 113.0 45.3 49.7 -9.2 -8.6 102.4 111.1 5.5 105.7 47.3 58.3 -8.7 112.9 121.0 142.6 156.7 198.0 178.3 87.2 94.0 101.1 113.8 141.0 129.3 83.1 88.7 105.4 114.4 143.0 127.0 25.7 27.0 41 .s 42.9 57.0 49.0 57.4 61.7 63.9 71.5 86.0 78.0 29.9 32.3 37.2 42.3 55.0 51.3 2,143 2.306 2,652 3,011 3,876 3,617 26.4 26.7 26. I 27.0 278 28.8 (Annual percentage change) Net foreign l trctr Net domestic assets Lhmestic credit Net claims on govermnmt 2.’ credit to the economy 3/ Claims on stat.5 m(nprircs 3144 Clalnu on other seoton 3/ ‘II Broad money (M2) of which: total deposits Dong liquidity CurrQlcy outside banks Dcpositc Pmgn c-cy deponts 31.3 47.3 20.5 20.1 17.6 20.8 -5.5 -0.6 20.1 22.6 11.3 15.6 31.7 30.5 227 26.1 25.3 34.3 23.7 22.0 18.1 10.9 28.5 30.8 19.0 42.0 48.6 17.6 21.3 90.4 16.4 22.9 10.0 25.6 33.6 24.6 74 360 28 8 63.0 72.5 79.7 97.4 98.2 15.2 125 8.1 13.8 185 21.2 192 14.2 10.5 12.7 79.0 304 2.1 -65.0 -124.7 17 8 186 14.9 19.2 25.1 23.0 192 7.1 9.7 14.4 12.6 179 23.4 29.8 36.7 28.0 29 5 29.3 39.3 45.6 37.9 37.8 37.1 34.0 40.3 24.8 263 28.7 34.6 42.3 4.8 7.6 7.9 54.1 61.8 37.8 37.0 40.5 24.4 32.7 38.2 39.1 31.0 54.5 55.5 46.2 33.2 30 1 19.3 30.4 38:; 39.5 35 6 37.2 346 47.9 23.2 26.4 24.1 86.0 22.0 13.4 30.0 25.0 27.9 20.4 18.0 22.0 38.0 Velocity 51 Money mukiplin 6/ cmcyibroad money (ii p-t) Currency/dong depmlh (in pacent) Currmcy/total depo& (in percent) 4.2 3.8 20 2.3 35.0 30.8 78.4 66.5 53.9 44.5 3.5 2.6 2.7 26.3 24.6 525 49.2 35.7 32.7 2:; 22.0 44.9 29.5 “’ 2.8 22.3 43.7 28.7 2.8 2.5 29.1 65.0 41.1 2.1 2.4 2.7 2.6 2s 27.4 28.8 275 60.0 66.3 62.9 37.7 404 37.9 (Inrmlltonr of U.S. dollars, unlus othewise mdnted) Gross ofEcial mtemational -es (adjusted) 71 1,673 1,857 1,765 1.903 1,989 2,246 2,711 2,816 3,279 (m weeks of next year’s importr of goods and nonf&ctu services) 6.4 7.2 6.7 6.4 6.7 7.6 9.1 8.3 9.7 (changt during yew inmilbons of U.S. dollam) 350 184 -93 139 22s 481 946 105 568 Net off’cial international -es (adjusted) 7/ 1,136 1,350 1,259 1,395 1.489 1,726 2,197 2.311 2.787 Net for&m assets of the banking system I.278 1,709 2.260 2,650 3.063 3.557 4,392 5.164 6,349 5.348 (change during year. III millions of U.S. dollars) 293 431 551 390 803 1.297 2,132 772 1,957 956 (Change in Percent of be&n& of year broad money, unless otbe- indntcd) Net foreign assets 6.5 104 12 5 5.3 11.2 18.1 29.7 77 20.0 10.0 Net domestic assets 16.3 15 7 13 1 -02 -0.9 0.0 9.6 2.1 18.8 15.0 Net claims on gmmnment -0.5 0.0 4.9 -1.5 -3.7 -42 -5.3 -3.2 0.4 1.8 credit to the cconotny 16.2 178 12.6 32 5.2 6.4 13.6 5.8 18.5 13.4 (In billiora of dong end of period) Sources State Bti of Vietnam, and staffestimarcs and projections. I / Comprising the State Bank of Vietnam (SBV), four slate-owned commer cial banks. and 24 non&k-owned bzmks U Exc1wk.s D 11 trilhon to cover the expected capital costs of state~~~& commercial bank (SOCB) reforms. 3/Far 2OCQ stipmjection doer not reflect the expected transfer of D 11 billion in nonpcrfonning loans of the SOCBs to an asset management company, including this transfer. m-edit to the economy is expected to increwe by 6.5 percent m 2000. 4/ Beginnine in Juoe 1999. credit to the economy by sector are estimated rather than actual data. 51 Velocity is mewred as the ratio of GDP to end-of-period broad money (M2). 6/ Money multiplier 11 measured s the ratio of broad money (M2) to rcwve money. 71 Excludw the foreign cwency counterpart of government foreign currency deposits at the SBV. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 30 - Table 5. Viotnanx Medhun-Term Framework, 1999-2005 (In percent of GDP, unless othenvisc indicated) 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 Estimated Projected Real GDP (annual ponxntage cbonge) 4.2 4.5 5.0 6.0 6.5 6.5 6.5 lnihtion (amud percentage change) (annual average) (end of period) GDP deflator (annual percentage change) Current account balance (including offkial transfers) (excluding official transfers) saving-iItvestment balance 3.9 1.7 -0.3 -1.6 -1.8 -1.7 -1.6 Gross national saving 24.4 24.5 23.0 22.5 22.9 23.2 23.3 Gfoss inveslment 20.5 22.8 23.3 24.1 24.6 24.9 24.9 Gross of!ldd reserves (ii millions of U.S. dollars) 2,711 3,279 3,687 4,109 4,575 5,261 6,109 (in weeks of next year’s imports of goods end n&actor serviws) 9.1 9.7 9.7 9.7 9.7 9.9 10.0 General government budget Total revenue Grants Total expenditure (excluding onlending) of whick cumot reform costs Gverall balance (excluding onleading) Augmented fiscal Idance (excluding onlending) I/ (including onlendiig) Broad money (annual percentage change) 39.3 25.0 13.9 11.1 10.7 10.8 Velocity 2.8 2.4 2.3 2.3 2.2 2.2 Extemal6~11dng gap (in millions of U.S. dollars) 0 200 400 400 0 0 Debt service payments (in millions of U.S. dollars) 1,525 1,924 1.858 1,854 1,646 1,495 (in percent of exports of goods and nonfactor services) 10.7 12.3 10.9 9.8 7.8 6.4 External debt (in percent of GDP) 21 37.1 42.5 41.4 41.5 40.7 40.2 4.1 0.5 5.6 3.0 3.0 3.0 3.0 -0.2 5.0 4.0 3.0 3.0 3.0 3.0 5.1 2.3 4.7 2.5 2.8 2.9 2.8 4.4 2.1 0.1 -1.2 -1.4 -1.4 -1.3 3.9 1.7 -0.3 -1.6 -1.8 -1.7 -1.6 18.2 0.5 19.6 . . . -0.9 4.9 -2.3 18.3 18.0 18.5 19.1 19.8 20.0 0.4 0.5 OS 0.5 0.5 0.5 22.2 21.5 21.5 22.1 21.3 21.0 0.6 0.9 1.0 1.4 0.8 0.7 -3.5 -3.0 -2.5 -2.5 -1.5 -1.0 -6.1 -5.3 -4.4 -4.0 -1.5 -1.0 -8.0 -6.8 -5.9 -5.5 -3.0 -2.5 10.5 2.2 0 1,513 5.7 39.9 Sowcc: Staff estimates and projeaions I/ Includes capital cost of banking and state-owned entuprise reforms. 21 Convertible cumncy debt only. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 31 - Table 6. Vietnam: Social and Demographic Indicators Lldicator Jrmme Grorrp unit of 1985 1993 1598 Bast Low- Meaollm (or h&t year avA.ble) Asia Income POVCrty upper poverty line l/ Percent of population living below Foodpowtylinc II P-t of populauon bving k&w GDP per capita Access tc safe waer tots1 UIbM Rural Accesstohealthcare2/ I-k&h Momlity Infant mat&y Under 5 moaality Immlmition Mearl+s DPT Child malnutrition (under 5) Maternal mortality rate Population pa physician Populdon per nlnae Population per hospital bed Human nsounxr Population Age depzndency ratio urban Population growth rate urban Lie expectmcy Female advantage Total fertility rate L.aborforce(l5-64) FCmalc Natunl msourcu Area Density AgnmlturaI lands Apiculbd land under irrigation Forests and woodland Energy consumption per capita Share of top 20 p-t of households Share of bottom 40 percent of households Share of bottom 20 pcrccnt of households Education Gross mrolbnmt ratios primary ?vfalc 31 Female 31 SmOndary Pupil-teacher ratio: secondary Illiteracy Female Newspaper circulation l-bousmd dong Thouand dong U.S dollan P-t ofpopulation Percent ofpopulat~on P-t of population Percent ofpopulation ,.. .., 75 1.160 1.790 58 37 750 1.287 25 15 194 359 26 39 60 75 17 29 93 97 12 19 . .., 820 380 67 67 84 79 61 62 .., Per thousand live birth 63 42 29 36 63 Per thousand live birth 105 55 40 61 101 Percent of age group 19 Percent of age *cup 42 Perc.mt of age group 52 Per 100,000 live births 110 PGrSonS 4.061 Persons 1.245 Persons 271 93 91 51 96 93 95 95 34 24 116 2.212 1,063 790 1.490 380 612 87 90 40 2,453 731 359 1.016 Millions 59.9 69.9 75.6 1,714 3,092 Ratio 0.81 0.74 0.67 0.54 0.67 Percent of population 19.6 19.8 22.8 31.3 27.6 Annual percent 2.2 1.9 1.5 1.4 1.9 Amud percent 2.4 3.4 5.3 4.0 3.9 YeUS 62 67 68 68 62 YCarS 3.8 4.5 4.8 3.6 2.1 Birthsperwomm 4.6 3.3 2.4 2.3 36 Milliotu 28.8 36.2 39.1 943 1,442 P-t of lsbm force 49 49 49 41 33 Tholx3m& sq. h Persons per sq. km. Percent of land area PCrCCllI Thousand sq. km. Q of oil equivalent 325 325 184 215 21 24 28 28 97 83 80 105 325 232 26 30 16.368 39,092 103 78 44 53 15 18 4,060 7,150 632 364 Percent of income 44 Percent of income 19 Percent of income 8 Pet of school age population 103 87 Pet of school age population 106 86 Pet of school ege population 100 87 Pet ofscbool age population 42 47 Pupil.3 p-3 tea&e3 23 21 P-t of population age 15-I 13 11 P-t of female age 15+ 19 16 Pa thousand population 9 8 91 92 91 28 8 11 118 108 123 116 115 101 53 41 16 20 22 41 36 53 .,. Sources: Vietnam Stnb;rticcrl Yearbook (vanow yew), and General Statistical Office. Visfnam Lwing Standards Survey 1997-1998; World Bank: Vietnam Dev&pmcn!Rsporl2000: Attacking Povem, and World Development Indicators, and statTestim&s. l/ The upper poverty lime is constituted by the cost of a representative food bundle yxlding 2.100 calories per day, plus a representative nonfood component. ‘Ihe lower poverty lme rcpresmts the approximate cost of thus food bundle only. ~/FIX 1993 and 1998. rural population. 31 For 1993 and 1998, net enrollment rams. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicI. II. III Iv. V. VI. VII. Exchange Rate Arrangement: - 32 - APPENDIX I Vietnam: Fund Relations As of May 3 1,200O Membership Status: Joined: 09/21/1956; Article XIV General Resources Account: Quota Fund Holdings of Currency Reserve position in Fund 329.10 9 345.21 104:9 0.01 0.0 SDR Department: Net cumulative allocation Holdings R Million 47.66 1.98 Percent Allocm 100.0 4.2 Outstanding Purchases and Loans: Systemic Transformation PRGF arrangements R Million 16.11 235.56 ent OuoQ 4.9 71.6 Financial Arrangements: PRGF Stand-by Approval Pate 1 l/l l/1994 10/06/1993 Expiration Amount Approved Amount Drawn (SDR Million. DR . . Mr1110 1 1 l/10/1997 362.40 24L:O 1 l/l 111994 145.00 108.80 Projected Obligations to Fund (SDR Million; based on existing use of resources and present holdings of SD&): Overdue For&o&~ 05/31/2000 ia!Q 2!J!u iTzQQ2 i2QQJ 2Q& Principal 34.2 52.3 52.3 49.3 Charges/Interest x! xi 22 2.4 Total 0.0 11.7 37.9 55.6 55.2 51.7 On February 25,1999 the State Bank of Vietnam (SBV) revised the operation of the interbank foreign exchange market. Under this regime, the SBV allows interbank foreign exchange market rates to depreciate by a maximum of 0.1 percent a day from the previous day’s average interbank market rate. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-33 - APPENDIX I VIII. Article IV and XIV Consultations: Vietnam is on a 12-month consultation cycle. The Executive Board concluded the 1999 Article IV (SUR/99/55; Z&l/99/102; SM/99/104 and Supplement 1) on May 21, 1999. It concluded 1999 Article XIV consultation on December 16, 1999 (EBD/99/138) and adopted the following decision: Vietnam continues to maintain restrictions on the making of payments and transfers for current international transactions under the transitional arrangements of Article XIV, Section 2, as described in EBD/99/138. The Fund encourages Vietnam to eliminate these restrictions as soon as circumstances permit. Ix. Technical Assistance Missions: Missions: . Participation in Public Expenditure Review (FAD/APD) , January 2000. Monetary and exchange operations and markets (MAE), November 1999. Tariff policy and customs administration reform (FAD) May 1999. State-owned enterprise reform (World Bank/APD), April 1999. Bank restructuring, banking supervision, and monetary and exchange reforms (MAE), March 1999. Bank insolvency law reform (LEG), March 1999. Tax policy (FAD), December 1998. Banking system restructuring (World Bank/APD), October 1998. Fiscal transparency (FAD), September 1998. Banking system soundness, monetary and foreign exchange operations, banking supervision, and central bank accounting and auditing (MAE/APD), April-May 1998. Money and banking statistics (STA), February-March 1998. Resident Advisor 0 Tax computer&ion (FAD) through April 1998. X. Resident Representative: Mr. Erik Offerdal finished his term as Resident Representative in August 1999. He was replaced by Mr. Dennis de Tray, Senior Resident Representative in September 1999. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 34 - APPENDIX II Vietnam: Relations With World Bank Group The World Bank resumed lending to Vietnam in 1993 and opened a Resident Mission in Hanoi in 1994. The Bank Group’s relationship with Vietnam is still relatively new, but growing and deepening. During FY 1994-99, IDA approved 23 projects for a total of US$2 billion and about US$O.9 billion of disbursement. The CAS (Country Assistance Strategy) for Vietnam, which was endorsed by the Board in September 1998, proposed an expanded program of IDA support for the FY 1999-2002 period, justified on the basis of Vietnam’s huge development needs, its effective use of IDA resources, its growing absorptive capacity, and the special needs associated with the East Asian crisis. However, the scale of the program was to be strongly differentiated according to progress on the policy agenda-ranging from less than US$300 million (low case) to slightly more than US$800 million per year (high case), with an average base case of US$580 million per year. The Board discussed the CAS Progress Report for Vietnam in May 2000, and confirmed that the strategy laid out in the original CAS remains the right one, and its implementation is largely on track, albeit so far at well below the high case. The CAS noted that there is a real risk that: Vietnam will not be able to get back onto its high growth path of recent years. This calls for an accelerated reform effort, increased attention to the social costs of a further downturn and of the needed policy measures, and a well- positioned and flexible Bank Group program to be able to respond quickly in the event that risks materialize. To help address such risks, the Bank Group launched a major program of advisory and technical assistance in key reform areas of banking, the SOE, and trade policy, including design of measures to mitigate social consequences of the reform, and has been assisting the government in designing and implementing the reform programs, together with the Fund. Vietnam is current in its debt service payments to the Bank as of end-May 2000. Vietnam: World Bank Financial Operations l/ (In millions of U.S. dollars) 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 proj. Commitments 415 502 349 395 308 286 Disbursements 164 34 250 238 207 205 Of which: Program loans 91 0 60 34 0 0 Debt service 2 2 4 5 7 8 Debt outstanding 223 257 507 745 952 1157 Source: World Bank. 11 Fiscal year ending June 30. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-35 - APPENDIX III Vietnam: Relations with Asian Development Bank Asian Development Bank (AsDB) resumed its operations in Vietnam in October 1993. The objective of its operational strategy is to promote efficient economic growth, poverty reduction, and sustainable development, taking into account the particular needs of an economy undergoing transition f?rom a centrally planned to a market oriented system. Along these lines, the AsDB’s support in the medium-term addresses key constraints in the following areas: (i) policy reform and institutional development, (ii) infrastructure development, (iii) rural development, (iv) human development, and (v) environment and natural resource management. The AsDB reaffirmed in October 1999 that reduction of poverty is its overarching goal. This emphasis will be reflected in the new country operations strategy to be prepared in 2000. From October 1993 to May 2000, AsDB approved 28 loans totaling about US$ 1,79 1 million from the concessional Asian Development Fund (ADF) and US$40 million from Ordinary Capital Resources (OCR). Disbursements in 1999 totaled US$l9 1 million. Lending has mainly focused on rehabilitating the dilapidated physical infrastructure in the agricultural, energy, and transport sectors, but has also addressed social, environmental, and cross-cutting concerns; financial sector and state-owned enterprise (SOE) reform; and corporate governance in line with the government’s development strategy. In addition, the AsDB has extended technical assistance amounting to US$74.4 million for 109 projects. Since December 1998, Vietnam has been classified as a B-l country by the AsDB, which makes it eligible to supplement borrowing at ADF terms with limited amounts at nonconcessional OCR terms. Support for policy and structural reforms to improve public sector efficiency and to encourage the development of the private sector is a vital component of AsDB operations in Vietnam. Key areas targeted for policy support include (i) financial sector reforms to increase the confidence of the public in the financial system and improve the efficiency of financial intermediation; and (ii) industrial sector restructuring through facilitating FDI inflows, supporting private enterprise development, accelerating SOE reform, improving corporate governance, and enhancing labor mobility. So far, the AsDB has approved three policy-based program loans in the agricultural sector (USSSO million in 1994), the financial sector (US$90 million in 1996) and for SOE reform and corporate governance (US$lOO million in 1999, of which US$40 million was from OCR). In addition to program lending, policy dialogue is an important feature in all of the AsDB’s loan projects in Vietnam. This includes support for increased efficiency of state-owned utilities through reforming their rate structure and other measures to increase cost recovery and to strengthen financial management, policy analysis, and planning. In December 1996, the AsDB established a resident mission in Hanoi, which assists in facilitating the implementation of AsDB-financed projects. In view of the then regional crisis, the AsDB organized seminars in March 1999 in Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City to discuss economic prospects for the Asian countries and policy responses. AsDB and Fund staff work closely together to support the process of economic reforms in Vietnam. AsDB - Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 36 - APPENDIX III staff participate in Fund missions, exchange information, and consult on policy matters. The resident missions of the two institutions also cooperate closely. Table 1. Vietnam: AsDB Loans by Sector, October 1993-May 2000 (In millions of U.S. dollars) Sector Number Net Amount Lending 28 1,831.l Agriculture and agro-industry 8 464.1 Social infrastructure 8 442.0 Transportation and communication 6 525.0 Finance and Industry 4 220.0 Energy 2 180.0 Technical assistance 109 74.4 Advisory and operational purposes 79 55.4 Project preparation 30 19.0 Source: AsDB. Table 2. Vietnam: AsDB Loan Approvals and Disbursements, 19952000 (In millions of U.S. dollars) 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 l/ Loan approvals 21 233.0 303.0 359.6 284.0 220.0 .” Loan disbursements 48.2 28.7 149.3 127.8 191.2 50.4 Undisbursed balance at the beginning of the year 581.8 590.2 994.4 742.8 804.9 970.7 Memorandum item: Technical assistance approvals 11.6 9.1 9.3 5.9 10.3 1.0 Source: AsDB. 11 As of May 3 1,200O 21 For 1999, includes the Vietnam component of Greater Mekong Subregion: East-West Corridor. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-37- APPENDIX IV Vietnam: Medium-Term Balance of Payments The medium-term balance of payments projections for 2000-2005 are consistent with a reform scenario, which envisages a continuation of macroeconomic stability and an acceleration of structural reforms. More specifically, the following assumptions are used: Merchandise trade: Exports in U.S. dollar terms are projected to grow by an average of 12 percent a year during 2000-2005. This projection is based on a continued economic recovery in Asia; a decline in crude oil exports, with the fall in prices from 200 1 onward (based on the latest WE0 projections) more than offset by the small increase in volume; and an expansion of export markets especially for garments and footwear. After being depressed for three consecutive years, imports are projected to rebound sharply in 2000 and to grow thereafter in line with projected GDP growth. Trade reform envisaged during this period would also likely contribute to increasing imports. Services and transfers: Nonfactor service payments are projected to move broadly in line with imports, while receipts would increase partly on account of an improvement in tourism. The increase in factor service payments is projected to be substantial, linked primarily to earlier foreign direct investment (FDI) related loans and to equity inflows. With a moderate increase in interest receipts in line with the stock of foreign exchange reserves, the overall service balance is therefore expected to worsen over the next three years. Both official and private transfers are assumed to increase slightly over the same period. Medium and long-term loans: ODA disbursements would be constrained, as in the past, by the rate of project implementation, and are expected to rise gradually from US$l .O billion in 2000 to US$l.3 billion by 2003. Commercial borrowing, which include borrowing by joint ventures, public enterprises, and the private corporate sector, is projected to remain constrained due in part to limits set by the central bank as a part of the prudent external debt management policy adopted in 1998. Amortization payments on both medium-and long-term and FDI loans are projected in increase significantly, reflecting the structure and terms of these loans. Foreign direct investment: Assuming an acceleration of structural reforms, an improvement in the investment climate, and a continuation of recovery in Asia, FDI disbursements are projected to increase gradually over the medium term. Given investors’ concerns with the pace of structural reforms in the last few years, it will take a strong effort and a good track record of reforms before FDI returns to the high levels of the mid-1990s. Disbursements are projected to increase from US$O.8 billion in 2001 to US$1.3 billion by 2005, with the loan component assumed to remain at 70 percent. Short-term capital flows and reserves: Short-term capital movements are related mainly to the change in commercial banks’ net foreign asset position, which is assumed to decline gradually over the medium-term reflecting a portfolio shift in favor of domestic assets as confidence returns. No other changes in short-term capital flows are projected. Gross official Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-38- APPENDIX IV reserves are targeted at about 10 weeks of imports, requiring an average increase in reserves by about US$O.5 billion a year between 2000 and 2005. Financing gaps: On the basis of the above projections, financing gaps are projected to total US!§ 1.0 billion during 2000-2002. In the absence of an acceleration of reforms, export growth would be significantly lower, in particular in the private sector, which requires greater access to credit, fewer business regulations, and more open entry into export-oriented sectors. Import growth would be expected to remain subdued, owing to more sluggish real GDP growth (3%-4’% percent a year), lower FDI (US$600-800 million), and lesser liberalization of exchange controls, nontariff barriers, and other restrictions on current account transactions. However, as external imbalances would likely be suppressed, the current account deficit would be kept moderate over the medium term. Nonetheless, the external position would be more vulnerable to shocks, owing to a continued reliance on traditional exports (i.e., oil, coffee, and rice) and loss of competitiveness in other areas (i.e., textiles, footwear and garments, electronic goods) because of the impact of a heavy regulatory burden on production costs-especially in comparison to China and other emerging economies in the region. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 39 - APPENDIX V Vietnam: Statistical Issues The coverage of statistics is limited and the methodologies for compiling macroeconomic statistics continue to need substantial improvement. The authorities are cooperating with the Fund, though work is hampered in some areas by the lack of authorization to release data. Vietnam has few statistical publications that cover statistics beyond the real sector, and despite the recent publication of aggregate budget data, Fund documents are among the few publicly available sources of monetary and fiscal data. Extensive technical assistance has contributed to improvements in a number of areas, A Vietnam page was introduced in the GFS Yearbook for 1999. Moreover, STA technical assistance efforts, in collaboration with APD, also have produced a draft IFS page, which is expected to be approved by the State Bank in 2000. However, past technical assistance efforts have not yet led to regular reporting of data to STA. National accounts The General Statistical Office (GSO) provides data on external trade, output by industry, and price developments. National accounts statistics are broadly consistent with the System of National Accounts 1993 (1993 SNA), and are available beginning in 1989. However, a methodology fully consistent with the 1993 SNA, including the collection of enterprise data based on generally accepted accounting principles, has yet to be implemented. The estimates of gross domestic product by expenditure in current prices have recently been produced, but in highly aggregated form, and further work is needed on the expenditure deflators. Although coverage has been broadened recently, the authorities need to focus on improving data collection from nonstate sectors, including reconciling similar data from different sources. To improve transparency, the authorities agreed to initiate work on the publication of a monthly GSO bulletin. Prices A monthly consumer price index in line with international standards has been compiled since January 1996. The new series was phased in over a two-year period, and is now reported with minimal lags. The introduction of a producer price index is planned. Government finance statistics Annual fiscal data on government operations are produced shortly after the end of the fiscal (calendar) year, final data are produced after about six months. During the past few years, Vietnam has received considerable technical assistance from STA in government finance statistics (GFS) methodology; recently, the authorities have made progress in a number of areas related to fiscal transparency, including the implementation of an improved budget management law and the adoption of a GFS-consistent budget classification at all levels of government. The authorities published for the first time in late 1998 the fiscal results for 1997 and the approved budget for 1999, although both in highly aggregated form. However, Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 40 - APPENDIX V considerable actions remain to be taken in improving the coverage of fiscal data as recommended in the 1998 Bank-Fund report on fiscal transparency and by the recent Public Expenditure Review. As earlier agreed, the government is continuing to work toward . gazetting and publishing the annual national budget and its outturn, and publishing commune levels budgets; preparing quarterly fiscal reports for budget monitoring with a 30-day delay; implementing a GFS-based functional budget classification system; and initiating work on revising government accounting standards and introducing an integrated financial information management system for improving treasury management and fiscal reporting. In addition, the government should ensure the fiscal accounts include the accounts of extrabudgetary funds, among which are the Social Security Fund, Enterprise Reorganization Fund, National Development Support Fund, Export Support Fund, and Sinking Fund (for repayment of on-lent funds). More comprehensive information also is needed on government financing from, and balances with the banking system in order to properly reconcile fiscal and monetary data. Monetary statistics Data regularly provided by the State Bank of Vietnam (SBV) to APD include the monetary survey, the central bank balance sheet I(typically on a monthly basis with a six- to eight-week lag), and detailed consolidated balance sheets (“derivation tables”) for four state- and 24 nonstate-owned commercial banks (typically on a quarterly basis with an eight- to ten-week lag). Since the beginning of 1997, an expanded monetary survey has been compiled, raising the number of banks covered from 28 to 40 (including the joint-stock banks, joint venture banks, and branches of foreign banks). In January 1999, the SBV and commercial banks began implementing new charts of accounts for compiling money and banking data. At the time, the SBV agreed in principle to provide the monetary survey and derivation tables with a three-week lag, and to prepare a quarterly statistical bulletin for publication in 1999. The new charts of accounts were formally adopted in April 1999. However, they do not adequately sectorize credit for’monetary programming purposes, in particular the separation of bank credit to the state-owned enterprises and to other nongovernment sectors of the economy. Therefore, in addition to its regular monthly reports, the SBV is in the process of designing a new monthly report form for the commercial banks for submitting sectorized credit data to the central bank. The format is expected to follow closely the recommendations of the 1998 STA money and banking statistics mission. As a result, the SBV is in the process of requesting again a set of monthly submissions from the commercial banks dating back to early 1999, so it can reconstruct these series separately. Publication of the SBV’s quarterly bulletin also has been delayed. External sector statistics Data on foreign reserves (official reserves and net foreign assets) are derived from the monetary survey, and are therefore subject to the same six-week reporting lag as the monetary survey. In particular, gross official international reserves are derived as the U. S. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4l- APPENDIX V dollar equivalent of the SBV’s foreign assets, excluding the foreign currency counterpart of government foreign exchange deposits, the use of which by the SBV is restricted. Beginning in January 1995, trade data have been compiled on the basis of customs reports. Data on invisibles continue to be based largely on banking records, which provide incomplete coverage and identification of the types of transactions. Improvements in balance of payments statistics continue to be hampered by interagency coordination problems. Detailed data on the contracting of foreign direct investment are maintained by the Ministry of Planning and Investment. Data on the disbursements of FDI are slowly improving, but still have major deficiencies. There is a pressing need for a survey of direct investment because the banking data do not provide sufficient detail, and the administrative records may be subject to some biases. Data on contracting commercial debt are maintained by the State Bank. Some loans are reported only after an extended delay, and the reporting of disbursements and repayments remains poor. Data on contracting, disbursement, and service of official debt are maintained by the Ministry of Finance. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicVietnam: Survey of Reporting of Main Statistical Indicators l/ (As of June 30,200O) International Reserve’ reserves base money Central bank balance sheet Broad money ---I- Consumer Exports/ Interest rates price index Imports External debt Exchange rates 1 Date of latest observation 6/30/00 4loo 4loo 3100 4/00 Date received 6/30/00 6JOO 6100 6100 6lOO Frequency of data D M rvi M M M L GDP/GNP 1999 3100 4100 6/00 6100 6100 6100 6100 t” M 0 I M M I A A Frequency of reporting D M A M A M A M A Source of data A E C/A 21 E C E c I c Mode of reporting C C * D M B B Confidentiality B A B N A D N N Frequency of Publication l! The codes are as given below: Frequency of data and reporting: D-daily, M-monthly, Q-quarterly. A-annual, O-irregular (when changed). Source of data: A-direct reporting by the authorities, C-commercial electronic data provider, N-official publication. Mode of reporting: E-electronic data transfer, C-cable or facsimile, V-irregularly in conjunction with staff visits. Confidentiality: A-staff only, B-staff and Board, C-public. Frequency of publication: D-daily, M-monthly, Q-quarterly, A-annual, Q-irregular, N-not published. 2/ Initial source is commercial electronic data provider, which is later verified by direct reporting by the authorities Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-43- APPENDIX VI Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 001 FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE July, 2000 International Monetary Fund 700 lgth Street, NW Washington, D. C. 20431 USA IMF Concludes Article IV Consultation with Vietnam On July 21, 2000, the Executive Board concluded the Article IV consultation with Vietnam.’ Background Vietnam’s economic performance deteriorated sharply starting in late 1997, reflecting the adverse impact of the Asian crisis and domestic structural weaknesses. Owing to close investment and trade links with the region, Vietnam’s real GDP growth fell from near double digits in the mid-1990s to an estimated 3% percent in 1998*. This was the result not only of plunging FDI, but also of stress in the state-owned enterprise (SOE) and banking sectors. Having had limited access to short-term capital, Vietnam did not experience an abrupt withdrawal of such capital that led to deep recessions in the Asian crisis economies, but it is now facing a more drawn out adjustment process because of the reduced flows of long-term capital. The crisis revealed weaknesses in the SOE and state-owned commercial bank (SOCB) sectors as the main sources of vulnerabilities in Vietnam’s economy, stemming from a strategy that relied on capital-intensive investment and import substitution. During the economic downturn, the SOE sector proved uncompetitive and incurred large losses-leading to a high level of nonperforming loans in the SOCBs-while the private (nonstate) sector was small and burdened by regulations. Moreover, the sentiment turned negative for foreign direct investment (FDI), which was the engine of growth in the mid-l 990s reflecting investors’ deep concerns over the slow pace of economic reform and the poor business environment in Vietnam. * Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial information, and discusses with officials the country’s economic developments and policies. On return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the Board, summa&es the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the country’s authorities. In this PIN, the main features of the Board’s discussion are described. ’ The estimates for economic growth and FDI inflows in 1998-2000 are lower than the official estimates. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-44- APPENDIX VI The Vietnamese economy began to rebound starting in mid-1999, led by strong export performance and supported by increasingly accommodative fiscal and monetary policies. Real GDP growth rose moderately to 4% percent in 1999 owing mainly to large increases in oil exports and rice production, but FDI and domestic demand remained depressed, and imports were compressed for the third consecutive year. Reflecting lower food prices and weak demand, inflation fell to near zero at year-end, with the core (non-food) inflation rate at 2% percent. The external current account shifted from a deficit of 4 percent of GDP in 1998 to a surplus of 4’/2 percent in 1999, while gross official reserves rose strongly to US!$2.7billion, or 9 weeks of next year’s imports. In 2000, real GDP growth is projected to rise slightly to 4% percent, driven by domestic demand, as the contribution of net exports is expected to be negative. Also, FDI is expected to remain depressed. Monetary conditions were relaxed in 1999, in response to improvements in the external position. The ceiling on local currency lending rates was reduced throughout 1999, with the benchmark rate falling by 3 percentage points to 12 percent by year-end. Local currency deposit rates also declined, leading to a portfolio shift toward foreign currency deposits. Foreign currency deposits also rose as a result of a liberalization of regulations governing inward remittances from overseas Vietnamese and the opening of foreign currency accounts. Nonetheless, overall bank credit rose by only 19 percent (from 16 percent in 1998), most of which in support of export- oriented and agricultural-related activities, including for the government’s flood relief effort. In an effort to spur recovery, fiscal policy was eased cautiously in 1999 and the overall budget deficit (on a cash basis, excluding onlending) rose to 0.9 percent of GDP. The larger deficit reflected additional capital spending, mainly on rural projects (only partly implemented in 1999), and outlays for flood relief late in the year. In 2000, the overall budget deficit is expected to widen to 3W percent of GDP, with the carry-over of capital expenditures and a 25 percent increase in civil service wages (partly offset by selected staff cutbacks). Progress on structural reforms was made during 1999 and the first half of 2000, although the gap between plans and action remained wide and the pace of reform continued to be slowed by the time needed to build broad political support. Actions to promote private sector development included passage of a new Enterprise Law aimed at creating a more liberal environment for domestic private enterprises, and amendment of the Foreign Investment Law that included a relaxation of the foreign exchange balancing requirement for foreign-invested enterprises. On SOE reform, the pace of SOE equitization was sped up and a SOE reform plan was announced in May 2000. In the banking sector, the authorities continued to take action against the weakest joint-stock banks, but less progress was made on formulating SOCB restructuring plans. In the trade area and exchange area, quantitative restrictions were removed on 8 of the 19 key products subject to such restrictions, and the foreign exchange surrender requirement was reduced from 80 percent to 50 percent in August 1999. Executive Board Assessment Public InformaHon Notices (PINS) are issued, (i) at the request of a member country, following the conclusion of the Article IV consultation for countries seeking to make known the views of the IMF to the public. This action is intended to strengthen IMF surveillance over the economic policies of member countries by increasing the transparency of the IMF’s assessment of these policies; and (ii) following policy discussions in the Executive Board at the decision of the Board. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-45- APPENDIX VI Vietnam: Selected Economic Indicators, 1996-2000 Est. Pro]. 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 Output and prices Real GDP I/ CPI, period average CPI, end period Government budget Total revenue Grants . Total expenditure (excluding onlending) Df which: current expenditure Overall fiscal balance (including grants, exduding onlending) Money and credit (end period) Broad money Credit to the economy External sector Current account balance (in millions of U.S. dollars) (in percent of GDP) Exports of goods, U.S. dollar terms Imports of goods, U.S. dollar terms Gross official reserves (in millions of US dollars) 2/ (in weeks of next year’s imports of goods and services) External debt Total, including short-term Convertible currency Nonconvertible currency Exchange rate (end period) Dong per US$ Real effective exchange rate (annual percentage change) (Annual percentage change) 9.3 6.2 3.5 4.2 5.6 3.1 7.9 4.1 4.4 3.6 9.2 -0.2 22.4 0.6 23.1 17.4 -0.2 (In percent of GDP) 20.0 19.6 18.2 0.8 0.6 0.5 22.6 20.7 19.6 18.3 15.0 13.2 -1.7 -0.5 -0.9 (Annual percentage change) 22.7 26.1 25.6 39.3 20.1 22.6 16.4 19.2 (Annual percentage change) -2,431 -1,664 -1,067 1,252 -9.9 -6.2 -3.9 4.4 41.2 24.6 2.4 23.2 25.5 -0.2 -1.1 1.1 1,673 1,857 1,765 2,711 6.4 7.2 6.7 9.1 78.1 36.6 41.5 (In percent of GDP) 77.7 76.8 74.0 38.8 38.1 37.1 39.1 38.8 36.9 11,150 12,292 13,896 14,028 . . . 3.7 12.8 -9.3 -3.2 . . . 4.5 0.5 5.0 18.3 0.4 22.2 14.8 -3.5 25.0 22.0 637 2.1 12.0 15.2 3,279 9.7 42.5 42.5 0.0 Sources: Data provided by the authorities; and staff estimates and projections. I/ According to official estimates, real GDP growth was estimated at 5.8 percent and 4.8 percent in 1998 and 1999, respectively, and is projected at 5.5-6 percent for 2000. 21 Excludes the foreign currency counterpart of government foreign currency deposits at the State Bank of Vietnam. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:56 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public