DOCUMENT OF INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND NOT FOR PUBLIC USE FOR AGENDA SM/02/300 CONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION September 20,2002 To: Members of the Executive Board From: The Secretary Subject: Malaysia-Staff Report for the 2002 Article IV Consultation Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staff report for the 2002 Article IV consultation with Malaysia, which will be brought to the agenda for discussion on a date to be announced. At the time of circulation of this paper to the Board, the Secretary’s Department has not received a communication from the authorities of Malaysia indicating whether or not they consent to the Fund’s publication of this paper; such communication may be received after the authorities have had an opportunity to read the paper. Please note that it was intended to circulate this paper yesterday, which regretfully was not possible for technical reasons. Questions may be referred to Mr. Valdivieso (ext. 34705), Ms. 0. Liu (ext. 36134), and Ms. Poirson (ext. 37072) in APD. Unless the Documents Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the WTO Secretariat on Monday, September 30, 2002; and to the Asian Development Bank and the Islamic Development Bank, following its consideration by the Executive Board. Att: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicCONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND MALAYSIA Staff Report for the 2002 Article IV Consultation Prepared by the Staff Representatives for the 2002 Consultation Approved by R. Anthony Elson and Liam P. Ebrill September 18,2002 l The 2002 Article IV consultation with Malaysia took place during June 17-28. The team comprised Mr. Valdivieso (Head), Mr. Orsmond, Ms. Liu, Ms. Poirson, Mr. Berezin (all APD), and Ms. Tamirisa (PDR). Mr. Elson (APD) also participated in the policy discussions. Ms. Phang (OED) participated in most discussions. l The staff met with Tan Sri Dato’ Nor Mohamed Yakcop, Special Advisor to the Prime Minister; Tan Sri Dr. Samsudin Hitam, Secretary-General to the Ministry of Finance; Tan Sri Datuk Dr. Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of Bank Negara Malaysia; Dato’ Mustapa Mohamed, Executive Director of the National Economic Action Council of the Prime Minister’s Office; Dato’ Iskandar Dzakurnain Badarudin, Director General of the Economic Planning Unit; other senior government officials; and representatives of the private sector. l In late June, Dr. Mahathir Mohamed, the Prime Minister, unexpectedly announced his resignation. It is anticipated that after a 15-month transition period, Mr. Abdullah Ahmad Badawi, the current Deputy Prime Minister and Vice-President of the United Malays National Organization (UMNO), will succeed Dr. Mahathir in October 2003. Mr. Badawi’s succession could be contested during the UMNO elections in late 2003, but UMNO leaders have publicly pledged full support for his succession. l In concluding the 2001 Article IV consultation, Executive Directors considered that maintaining the pegged exchange rate system posed no immediate problem in view of Malaysia’s strong economic fundamentals. They noted that consistent macroeconomic policies over time, combined with steadfast structural reforms, are key to sustain market confidence and help manage external and domestic risks. They supported an expan- sionary fiscal stance and the resulting temporary delay in fiscal consolidation in an environment of emerging weaknesses in external demand, but stressed the importance of fiscal consolidation to ensure fiscal sustainability over the medium term. They expressed some concern related to the proper use of public funds to acquire certain companies that were in financial trouble and urged the authorities to identify clearly all potential liabilities of the public sector. The overall policy strategy pursued by the authorities during 200 1 and 2002 is broadly consistent with the Executive Board recommendations. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2- Executive Summary.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .4 I. Recent Developments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .5 II. Outlook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .7 III. Policy Discussions ......................................................................................................... 8 A. Fiscal Policy ......................................................................................................... .8 B. Monetary Policy and the Exchange Rate.. ........................................................... 10 C. Structural Policies.. ............................................................................................. .l 1 D. Malaysia’s Resilience to Unanticipated Shocks.. ............................................... .13 E. Other Issues ........................................................................................................ .14 IV. Staff Appraisal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14 Boxes 1. Recent Fiscal Developments.. ..................................................................................... .18 2. Major Nonfinancial Public Enterprises and Off-Budget Investment Operations ....... .19 3. Public Sector Debt Sustainability ............................................................................... .20 4. Recent Monetary Developments ................................................................................. . 1 5. Progress in Financial and Corporate Sector Restructuring and Performance..............2 2 6. Key Implications of China’s Accession to the World Trade Organization.. ............. ..2 3 7. Assessment of Resilience to Unanticipated Shocks: Initial Results ........................... .24 Figures 1. Real Sector Developments and Outlook.. ................................................................... .25 2. External Sector Developments and Outlook.. ............................................................. .26 3. Financial Market Developments and Confidence.. ..................................................... .27 4. Fiscal and Monetary Developments.. .......................................................................... .28 5. Interest Rate Developments ........................................................................................ .29 6. Leading Real and External Sector Indicators.. ............................................................ .30 7. External Competitiveness Indicators .......................................................................... .3 1 Tables 1. Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 1998-02 .............................................. .32 2. Balance of Payments, 1998-02.. ................................................................................ ..3 3 3. Federal Government Fiscal Operations, 1998-02 ...................................................... .34 4. Banking Survey, 1999-02.. ......................................................................................... .35 5. Indicators of Financial Institution Soundness, 1998-02.. ........................................... .36 6. Key Financial Ratios for Listed Nonfinancial and Financial Companies, 1997-O 1.. ..3 7 7. Indicators of External Vulnerability, 1997-02 ........................................................... .3 8 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3- Annexes I. Medium-Term Illustrative Scenario.. .......................................................................... .39 II. Statistical Issues .......................................................................................................... .44 III. Fund Relations ............................................................................................................ .47 IV. Relations with the World Bank Group.. ...................................................................... .50 V. Public Information Notice.. .......................................................................................... . 1 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4- EXECUTIVE SUMMARY Current setting and outlook. The authorities’ macroeconomic policy strategy since the onset of the global slowdown has been appropriate, and the economy is in a recovery phase. l Real growth turned positive and accelerated in the first half of 2002. The trade and current accounts remain in sizable surplus; capital outflows have declined; and gross official reserves are at a comfortable level. External vulnerability indicators have improved and contagion from other emerging markets appears to be contained. l The emerging recovery has been supported by a timely fiscal impulse in 2001. The intended pace of fiscal consolidation in the revised 2002 budget is appropriate as a signal of the government’s intention to return to a balanced overall position as external conditions improve. l Monetary policy has been guided by a desire to keep domestic interest rates broadly stable in the context of a fixed exchange rate regime. Improved market sentiment, together with an interest rate differential in favor of Malaysia, has contributed to lower net capital out- flows. To address the monetary impact of a more favorable capital account and continued current account surplus, Bank Negara Malaysia conducted sizable sterilization operations to build international reserves, while ensuring adequate liquidity to support domestic activity. l Improved economic fundamentals, together with a renewed impetus to banking and corporate reform, have helped to elicit a favorable market response and create conditions for a sustained recovery. Danaharta has restructured nearly all of its holdings of nonperforming loans, and the Corporate Debt Restructuring Committee has closed its operations, completing successfully all but one of its debt restructuring cases. Policy issues. The authorities and Fund staff broadly agreed on the policy priorities and main challenges in the near and medium term. l The authorities’ intention to bring about fiscal consolidation in the remainder of 2002 and 2003 is appropriate. Attaining these targets will require close monitoring of fiscal develop- ments and actions, if necessary, to ensure that the revenue targets are met, that growth in operating expenditure is contained, and that noncore development projects are scaled back in the event of a revenue shortfall. The specification of a path to return to a balanced budget over the medium term is key to signal the authorities’ commitment to fiscal prudence. l While acknowledging that it should not be difficult to defend the peg in the near term, the staff feels that a more flexible regime would broaden Malaysia’s options over the medium term to cope with future shocks and manage risks associated with capital flows. Early liberalization of interest rates would also help enhance competitiveness in the financial system. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-5- 1. RECENTDEVELOPMENTS' 1. The Malaysian economy is entering a recovery phase. Following two consecutive quarters of negative growth, real GDP growth turned positive to 1.1 percent (y-o-y) in the first quarter of 2002 and accelerated to 3.8 percent (y-o-y) in the second quarter, driven by growth in consumption and public investment, as well as rising external demand, whereas private investment remains somewhat weak. Unemployment has been moderate (below 4 percent) and inflation remains subdued (below 2 percent). The output gap is narrowing with capacity utilization at 80 percent at end-June. The recovery has been broad-based, with a significant contribution from domestic demand-driven sectors, and more recently a pick-up in external demand (Table 1 and Figure 1). 2. The external sector remained relatively robust in 2001 and early 2002 despite an adverse global environment. Both the external trade and current accounts recorded large surpluses, and these have remained relatively stable during the first half of 2002 (compared with the same period in 2001), as the growth in imports has kept pace with the recovery in exports. Net capital outflows have declined since the second half of 2001 and portfolio investment flows turned positive in the first few months of 2002, reflecting in part an improved market sentiment regarding the strength of Malaysia’s economic fundamentals, and in part the reversal of the interest rate differential (vis-a-vis the United States) in favor of Malaysia. However, net foreign direct investment inflows remained low in the first quarter of 2002, reflecting a reduction in the share capital of a foreign-owned bank, repayment of inter- company loans, and an increase in direct investment abroad (Table 2, and Figures 2 and 3). 3. Malaysia’s external debt has increased moderately (to 51 percent of GDP in 2001), but remains manageable. Total external debt as a ratio to exports is among the lowest of emerging market economies, and total external debt represents only about 6 percent of exports of goods and nonfactor services. Gross international reserves, which declined sharply in the period ending May 2001, have since recovered to $34.2 billion at end-August 2002, sufficient to cover four months of imports of goods and nonfactor services and three times short-term external liabilities by remaining maturity.2 Recent market developments have confirmed a favorable assessment of Malaysia’s outlook as reflected in an upgrading of its sovereign ratings and oversubscription for its recent international bond placements.3 ‘See Chapter I of the companion Selected Issues paper for a more detailed description of recent developments. 2The authorities publicly refer to a reserve coverage ratio of 5% months of imports (based on retained imports). They also focus on external debt by original maturity. 3Malaysia reopened the subscription to its 2011 sovereign bond in early April 2002 for an additional $750 million (to a total of $1.75 billion) that was placed at a spread of 175 basis points. In late June 2002, Malaysia issued its first $600 million Islamic sovereign bond. The (continued) Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-6- 4. The emerging recovery has been supported by a timely and carefully formulated expansion in fiscal policy, which remains the main countercyclical tool available under the current fixed exchange rate system (Table 3, Figure 4, and Boxes 1 and 2). Although the overall central government deficit (5l% percent of GDP) was smaller than anticipated under the revised 2001 budget and marginally lower than its level in 2000, the consolidated public sector deficit shifted from a surplus of 3/4 percent of GDP in 2000 to a deficit of 3 percent of GDP in 2001, providing a sizable, positive fiscal impulse.4 Two fiscal stimulus packages, amounting to 2% percent of GDP, were introduced during 2001, which were implemented mainly by entities outside the central government. The original 2002 budget envisaged an overall deficit of 2% percent of GDP for the consolidated public sector and 5% percent of GDP for the central government, which implied some fiscal consolidation at both levels. The authorities indicated that the revised 2002 budget, to be announced on September 20, is likely to target a further reduction in these fiscal deficits to about 2 percent of GDP for the consolidated public sector and to no more than 5 percent of GDP for the central government. 5. Total public sector debt reached 70% percent of GDP in 2001 (up from 61 percent of GDP a year earlier) (Box 3). The increase was accounted for by: (i) deficit financing of about 3 percent of GDP; (ii) an assumption of debt by the government (equivalent to about 3% percent of GDP) associated with the debt restructuring of Malaysia Airline System and two other large infrastructure projects (Putra and Star Light Rail), which until recently were managed and operated by the private sector; and (iii) the impact of a decline in nominal GDP. Nearly 70 percent of the increase was in the form of either direct or guaranteed debt by the central government, and 60 percent of the increase was funded from external sources. Central government debt, at 43% percent of GDP, appears to be within manageable limits as debt service accounts for 12 percent of budget revenue and 14 percent of operating expenditure. Debt of the nonfinancial public enterprises (NFPEs), at 26% per- cent of GDP in 2001, is owed mostly by the three largest NFPEs (Petronas, Tenaga, and Malaysia Telecom), whose capacities to repay have been sound. 6. The Bank Negara Malaysia (BNM) intervention rate has remained stable and above international interest rates, despite a 50 basis point cut in September 2001. The resulting interest rate differential (1 ‘/z percentage points above the corresponding LIBOR), together with improved economic fundamentals, contributed to a sharp reduction in net capital outflows and facilitated a rebuilding of international reserves. To address the monetary impact of a more favorable capital account and a continued current account surplus, BNM conducted sizable sterilization operations while ensuring adequate domestic liquidity. This action, coupled with a more liberal and competitive pricing of loans by bond, which is backed by government-owned properties as the underlying assets, was purchased mostly by investors from the Middle East, Europe, and Asia at a spread of about 100 basis points. 4For a definition of the fiscal impulse, see Chapter III of the 2000 Selected Issues paper (SM/00/147). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-7- commercial banks (resulting in lending rates below the base-lending rate, in particular for loans to the housing and corporate sectors), has complemented the fiscal stimulus in helping the economy weather the impact of a global slowdown (Table 4, Figure 5, and Box 4). 7. Banking and corporate sector reforms have been given renewed impetus. Despite the slowdown in economic activity, the banking system remains generally sound with capital adequacy ratios at 12%-13 percent since mid-2001 and satisfactory profitability levels. Net nonperforming loans (NPLs) (based on a 3-month classification) declined to slightly below 11 percent of total loans at end-July 2002 (from 11% percent at end-2001). The bank merger program that began in 1999 was completed in 2001, with 54 banking institutions merged into ten banking groups. Operational integration within each group continues to make progress. Danaharta (the asset management company established in 1998) has restructured nearly all of its holdings of NPLs, and the Corporate Debt Restructuring Committee (CDRC, also established in 1998) closed down its operations as planned at end-July 2002, completing all but one of the 48 debt restructuring cases (Tables 5 and 6, and Box 5). II. OUTLOOK 8. Malaysia’s outlook has improved significantly since late 2001, and the economy seems well placed to benefit from a global recovery in 2002 and beyond. Real GDP growth is projected to accelerate to 3% percent in 2002 and 5% percent in 2003 (compared with the latest consensus forecast of 4% percent and 53/4 percent, respectively), with continued low inflation (below 2 percent) (Figure 6). Public sector demand is expected to slow down, as private demand recovers further to become the main impetus for growth. A projected sizable surplus in the current account, together with rising FDI inflows, is expected to be partially offset by continued, albeit subdued, short-term capital outflows, allowing for a further, moderate accumulation of external reserves (Annex I). 9. Malaysia’s medium-term economic prospects depend critically on a decisive and timely implementation of the government’s policy agenda, particularly the consolidation of public finances, as well as continued efforts to strengthen the financial and corporate sectors, promote greater flexibility in labor and factor markets, and maintain a liberal trade and investment system. Based on these policies, the staff projects that real GDP growth will increase gradually over the medium term to a potential rate of 6 to 6% percent by 2004-06. Despite being lower than the authorities’ average growth rate of 7% percent under the Eighth Malaysia Plan (2001-05), achieving the potential output growth estimated by the staff would pose a significant challenge as it implies a substantial acceleration in total factor productivity (TFP) growth (to the level in line with OECD countries) and rapid improvement in human capital.5 The authorities are fully aware of this challenge and the tasks that need to be undertaken to reach such a potential growth path. ‘See Chapter II of the companion Selected Issues paper for a detailed discussion of Malaysia’s potential output growth. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-8- 10. The main risks to Malaysia’s outlook include: (i) a significant and sustained global and regional shock, including a much slower-than-expected recovery in external demand; (ii) a much weaker-than-anticipated capital account, which might be triggered in part by a reversal in the interest rate differential or a change in market sentiment that could be induced by international contagion or a deterioration in the domestic economic situation; (iii) the uncertain impact from a further opening of China, particularly through its effect on capital flows (Box 6); (iv) a slower-than-expected acceleration in productivity growth which would make it difficult to reach the potential growth objective; and (v) a large and sustained depreciation in major regional currencies that could give rise to concerns about Malaysia’s external competitiveness and the sustainability of its peg. 11. These risks stem from several institutional and structural factors. Malaysia depends heavily on exports, particularly of electronics and electrical products which account for nearly 60 percent of total exports, and are limited to relatively few trading partners. The fixed exchange rate system and the relatively low flexibility of the interest rate structure might impose an unduly severe adjustment burden on fiscal policy and real economic activity, if the country were confronted with sizable external and domestic shocks. Moreover, excessive reliance on fiscal policy is likely to erode its effectiveness and render public debt unmanageable. III. POLICY DISCUSSIONS 12. The thrust of the policy discussions in recent years has been on finding an appropriate balance between policy elements, notably as regards fiscal, monetary, and exchange rate policies, against the background of a rapidly changing economic environ- ment. Over that period, policy implementation by the authorities was judged broadly appropriate by the Executive Board. Discussions for the 2002 Article IV consultation focused on the measures needed to strengthen the emerging recovery and to build the conditions for a return to a path of high and continued growth while ensuring fiscal and external sustain- ability. In addition, there was a full exchange of views on Malaysia’s resilience to shocks, the room for policy maneuver available to the authorities to address unanticipated adverse events, and the critical trade-offs they consider in policy decision-making. A. Fiscal Policy 13. There was a consensus that the main challenge in the near term is to ensure an appropriate degree of fiscal consolidation as the economy recovers. The authorities have reiterated their commitment to fiscal consolidation and, as noted earlier, intend to limit the revised 2002 budget deficit of the central government to less than 5 percent of GDP and the consolidated public sector deficit to about 2 percent of GDP. The authorities recognized that the achievement of these targets presents significant challenges and requires close monitoring Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-9- of external and domestic developments, but they were confident that the final fiscal targets would be consistent with their intended fiscal consolidation plans.6 14. It was recognized that there were uncertainties regarding both the revenue and expenditure targets for the remainder of 2002. On the revenue side, the projections under consideration for the revised budget assume a very strong growth in revenues in relation to 2001, including the impact of one-off tax payments associated with the change in the base year for income tax assessments. The projections also assume that there will be a continued high collection of tax arrears, and increases in the collection of other direct taxes and dividends from NFPEs. On the expenditure side, some emerging rigidities have been identified-in particular, current outlays for goods and services which have grown by 2 percent of GDP in the last two years, in part related to the establishment of the new government administrative headquarters in Putrajaya-which will need to be offset if the fiscal stimulus is to be completely withdrawn in 2002-03. In addition, some new commit- ments were being added to development expenditure, which could put further pressure on the overall fiscal position if the projected increase in revenue noted above does not materialize. The authorities do not face any constraints as regards deficit financing options, but they do not intend to relax their self-imposed borrowing limits, mindful of the recent evolution of public sector debt. 15. The fiscal targets for 2003 have not been set yet, but the authorities indicated that these will be consistent with their commitment to achieve a balanced fiscal position over the medium term. The authorities gave general indications to the staff about a broad range of key parameters that are currently under consideration for 2003.7 In general, the options being considered point to a further consolidation at the level of both the central government and the consolidated public sector, driven by a partial withdrawal of the tiscal stimulus by the central government and its impact on the rest of the public sector, under the assumption that the external recovery will be relatively robust. 16. Fiscal consolidation is expected to continue over the medium term as the fiscal stimulus is fully withdrawn and automatic stabilizers start operating in line with the acceleration of real GDP growth. However, it was not possible for the staff to ascertain whether the central government or the consolidated public sector would achieve a balanced position first. Revised fiscal targets for all levels of government will only be set by mid-2003 in the context of a mid-term review of the Eighth Malaysia Plan.’ The staff reiterated its view 6The precise deficit path for 2002-03 will only be made public on September 20, when both the revised 2002 budget and the budget for 2003 are presented to parliament. 7The authorities began a two-year running budget cycle in 2002. A detailed 2002 budget was prepared along with key indicative targets for 2003, but the latter were made available only to the spending units for internal use. ‘The Eighth Malaysia Plan targeted central government balance by 2004, but its implementa- tion was modified in light of the adverse external situation. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-lO- that an early move to a neutral fiscal stance led by a return to a balanced budget at the level of the general government (including the central, state, and local governments, as well as the autonomous bodies) would be advisable. Nevertheless, the staff agreed with the authorities that consolidation should not be done abruptly, and that it should be guided by the evolution of private sector demand and the output gap, as well as public debt sustainability considerations. 17. The relationship between the central government and the rest of the public sector, in particular the NFPEs, through on- and off-budget operations will need to be better delineated if consolidation is to be successful. While the NFPEs largely operate according to commercial principles, they also conduct certain quasi-fiscal activities, such as extending implicit subsidies in the sale of oil, gas, and electricity and undertaking extensive off-budget expenditures mainly in tertiary education. The authorities have started taking steps to reduce subsidies in recent years, particularly on energy use, but they wanted to proceed cautiously. 18. There is also scope for improving financial management of the public sector. As noted earlier, during 2001-02, the government had assumed a sizable amount of corporate debt obligations in the context of corporate debt restructuring of two large infrastructure projects and the Malaysia Airline System. The staff noted that such practices, if not limited, could pose undue risks to fiscal sustainability. However, the authorities consider that these debt assumptions, which were guided by strategic and national interests, are unlikely to become a permanent feature of public policy. Discussions also disclosed that the government has sizable assets, including its stock holdings of major NFPEs and the assets held by Khazanah, an investment arm of the government, which are currently recorded at cost.g To conduct a more adequate assessment of public debt sustainability and enhance transparency, the staff encouraged the authorities to develop a system to calculate the net worth of the public sector which, in addition to the outstanding stock of public debt, would include an estimate of the market value of all public sector assets and contingent liabilities.” The authorities noted that they already envision moving in this direction on the asset side, starting with Khazanah in 2003, and that efforts to monitor contingent liabilities which started in 2001 will be intensified. B. Monetary Policy and the Exchange Rate 19. The authorities remain firmly committed to the exchange rate peg and interest rate stability. They believe that the peg provides an anchor of stability to facilitate private sector decision-making and noted that their decisions on the BNM intervention rate are ‘Total assets of Khazanah are estimated at about RM 22.4 billion (about 7 percent of GDP), of which around 70 percent are nonrecurrent assets that are grossly undervalued. “The government’s explicit contingent liabilities associated with Danaharta for bank restructuring are estimated at about 5 percent of GDP. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- ll- guided by domestic considerations. They emphasized that banks’ lending rates have been declining recently, thus helping to cushion some adverse output effects. Even though domestic rates are still somewhat higher than those in external markets, the authorities noted that the implied cost to BNM arising from its sterilization activities was small. In this connection, the authorities reported that significant progress was being achieved in moving to a more market-oriented monetary policy framework through the implementation of the new liquidity framework. 20. The authorities were of the view that the ringgit is not misaligned at present and emphasized that the stability of the peg has been important for the significant progress achieved in structural reform in recent years. Based on the existing indicators of purchasing power parity, including the most recent gains in competitiveness associated with the depreciation of the U.S. dollar, the staff agreed with the authorities’ view about the appropriateness of the current level of the peg (Figure 7). l1 In addition, it was noted that (i) since September 200 1, a forward market premium has emerged, suggesting that markets anticipate upward pressure on the ringgit, and (ii) Malaysia’s export market shares in Japan, Singapore, and the United States have remained stable, notwithstanding a significant devaluation in the currencies of its major competitors. 21. Commenting on the possibility of moving to a more flexible exchange and interest rate regime, the authorities argued that they did not see exchange rate or interest rate flexibility as an end in itself, but rather as elements of an overall macro- economic policy framework. They reiterated their intention to reconsider the peg if and when confronting or anticipating a systemic crisis, and in the context of a consistent and sound macroeconomic policy framework, after due consideration of alternative policy options and a full understanding of the basic policy trade-offs. The authorities did not view capital controls as a means to defend the exchange rate nor as a substitute for sound macro- economic policies, but rather as a temporary instrument to ensure financial stability and to prevent an excessive accumulation of private sector indebtedness. While acknowledging that it should not be difficult to defend the peg in the near term and that the ongoing structural reform efforts should translate into productivity gains to support the sustainability of the peg, the staff noted that a more flexible regime would broaden Malaysia’s options over the medium term to counter the risks associated with capital flows and to ease the burden on fiscal policy in dealing with future aggregate demand shocks. C. Structural Policies 22. The authorities assign high priority to further strengthening the banking and corporate sectors, enhancing flexibility in the labor market, and promoting greater “Preliminary estimates of the real effective exchange rate (based on ULC, CPI, and PPI) indicate that there is still a margin of undervaluation with respect to the pre-1998 crisis period. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12- foreign competition as a means of enhancing Malaysia’s resilience to shocks and creating the conditions for high and sustainable private sector-led growth. l On bank consolidation, the authorities indicated their intention to continue a sequential yet timely pace of reform as outlined in the Financial Sector Master-plan (2001-10),12 with the ultimate objective of full integration in the global market. The bank merger program was virtually completed in March 200 1 with 54 domestic banking institutions merged into ten groups. The authorities are currently focused on the system-wide and operational integration within each group with respect to the design of the strategic plan, staffing, and information technology. Efforts are also being made to further develop and strictly enforce a consolidated, risk-based bank supervision framework applicable to the newly merged financial institutions. 0 On other banking sector reforms, the authorities intend to move away from the current blanket deposit insurance scheme (during Phase I of the Financial Sector Master-plan: 2001-04) and to continue to provide banks with heightened incentives to upgrade their systems and operations as the prospect of increased foreign competition becomes more imminent. Malaysia has played an important role in developing Islamic banking and finance. A domestic market for Islamic debt instruments has been operating for several years, and more recently, as noted earlier, Malaysia successfully launched its first international Islamic bond. Regarding the possibility of conducting a joint Bank-Fund financial sector assessment (FSAP), the authorities noted that at present most of their staff resources are focused on the task of building up capacity and implementing reforms geared toward improving the operational efficiency of domestic banking institutions. Accordingly, they would welcome an FSAP at a later stage. On corporate sector reform, following the closure of the CDRC in July 2002, the authorities now intend to concentrate their efforts on corporate operational restructuring. Efforts have also been made to strengthen governance in accordance with the Finance Committee Report on Corporate Governance (World Bank, 1999) and the Capital Market Masterplan (2001-l 0). l3 Regarding labor markets, efforts are being made to provide an adequate environment for regular consultations between employers and employees, and the authorities are maintaining a close watch on retrenchment procedures to ensure that they do not impose undue costs on firms. 12For details, see Box 6 of the 2001 Article IV Staff Report (SM/01/242). 13See footnote 12. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13- l On competition issues, the government intends to liberalize further the trade and investment regime and fulfill its obligations under the WTO and AFTA, including for the protection of intellectual property rights. 23. The authorities believe that well-sequenced actions in all these fronts should help them avoid imposing the entire burden of adjustment on fiscal policy in the context of a fixed exchange rate system. D. Malaysia’s Resilience to Unanticipated Shocks14 24. The authorities welcomed the staff’s efforts at establishing a broad-based frame- work for understanding Malaysia’s resilience to shocks. They identified a number of common threads between their approach in identifying key areas of risk exposure and the approach and preliminary results of the staffs assessment (Table 7 and Box 7). Specifically, it was noted that: a Selected early warning systems in use by the Fund and some investment banks indicate a very low probability of a balance of payments crisis in Malaysia over the immediate, as well as 12-24 month, horizon. 0 Models of country (credit) risk also predict a favorable outlook, whereas so-called crisis-cost models indicate that if a crisis were to arise, its intensity and duration would likely be contained. 0 Stress tests of the balance of payments and financial and corporate sector balance sheets (based on aggregated data) suggest that a relatively significant and sustained deviation in key variables would be required to precipitate a crisis, and that the banking and corporate sector exposure to various types of risks is within manageable margins. l5 In relative terms, the exposure of banks to interest rate risk (owing to maturity mismatches on bank balance sheets) represent a significant vulnerability area, but the authorities contend that the strong capital base of the banks should help allay any concerns in this area. The staff shared the authorities’ views, but indicated that it would be desirable to conduct stress tests using more disaggregated data with a broader coverage before drawing more definitive conclusions and policy implications. 25. While noting that these preliminary results were favorable, the authorities called for caution in disseminating them, particularly to avoid any potential adverse market 14See Chapter III of the companion Selected Issues paper for a more detailed analysis. lSFor the financial sector, estimates of foreign currency and interest rate exposures take into account both on- and off-balance sheet items. Aggregate data on off-balance sheet positions of the corporate sector are not available. However, controls on derivative operations with nonresidents limit the scope for off-balance sheet exposures to some extent. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14- implications. At the same time, they underscored a need for undertaking further research efforts to make the estimates more reliable and Malaysia-specific. In this context, the authorities questioned some of the preliminary findings regarding: (i) the vulnerability to current account shocks, as in their view the high import content of exports provides an automatic stabilizer; and (ii) the vulnerability to adverse short-term capital flows, as in their view most of the “hot money” has already left the country. The authorities also urged caution in interpreting the results of this analysis because the use of aggregate, quantifiable variables ignores a number of Malaysia-specific factors, some of which cannot be quantified, but may substantially mitigate the risks.16 The staff acknowledged the preliminary nature of the current framework and its limitations, and indicated its readiness to collaborate with the authorities in further developing a specific and comprehensive framework for Malaysia. E. Other Issues 26. Malaysia has achieved significant progress in establishing a legislative framework and institutions for adequate enforcement and monitoring of its efforts on anti-money laundering and to combat the financing of terrorism (AMLKFT). The Anti- Money Laundering Act was passed in July 2001, but Malaysia has not yet signed and ratified the UN Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism. Nevertheless, significant work has been carried out to strengthen cooperation with other regional and international agencies involved in AMWCFT work. The authorities have recently provided a response to the Fund’s AMLEFT questionnaire and have agreed to a Fund assessment of the Labuan Offshore Financial Center scheduled for September 2002. 27. There has also been progress in the provision of monthly data on capital flows and short-term debt. A comprehensive system for monitoring external debt is expected to be introduced in 2002 to fulfill the requirement for disseminating to the public data on external debt and the international investment position. IV. STAFF APPRAISAL 28. The macroeconomic policy strategy pursued by the Malaysian authorities since the onset of the global slowdown has been appropriate. The provision of a timely fiscal impulse, coupled with prudent management of domestic credit expansion, has been instrumental in weathering the adverse impact of the global slowdown and to allay concerns about the sustainability of the peg that emerged in early 200 1. A clear commitment to a flexible management of macroeconomic policy and a renewed impetus to banking and corporate sector reform have helped to create the conditions for a sustained recovery, elicit a favorable market response, and strengthen the country’s resilience to external shocks. The ‘%ome of the Malaysia-specific factors which may need to be taken into account include prudential regulations which limit risks associated with foreign borrowing; natural hedges of most private sector debt; the lack of foreign exchange exposure to derivatives by the central bank; and the size of fully usable external reserves. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 15- announcement of a political transition plan that would allow Mr. Badawi to replace Prime Minister Mahathir in October 2003 has not changed the near-term positive outlook and policy requirements so far, and has been welcomed by domestic and foreign market participants. 29. There are downside risks to the economic outlook, but a preliminary, yet broad- based assessment of Malaysia’s resilience to shocks indicates that the risks are relatively moderate at present. It should be noted, however, that while useful, the initial results of the assessment conducted by the staff provide only some degree of comfort. It is the strength of economic fundamentals, the credibility of the government’s commitment to stability and reform, and the flexibility in policy implementation that can give assurances to markets that downside risks can be mitigated and that temporary adverse shocks can be managed within the current policy framework. 30. The authorities’ fiscal intentions for the remainder of 2002 and 2003 correctly signal the temporary nature of the expansionary fiscal stance, and the commencement of a return to a path of fiscal consolidation. The order of magnitude of the annual deficit targets for 2002 and 2003 discussed with the staff are appropriate. To attain these targets, the authorities would be well advised to monitor fiscal developments very closely, and be ready to take steps to ensure that the revenue targets are met, that growth in operating expenditures is contained, and that expenditures on noncore development projects are scaled back in the event of a revenue shortfall. A significant deviation from the intended targets would compromise the credibility of the budget. The staff will prepare an update of the fiscal plans for 2002 and 2003, after the 2003 budget is presented to parliament in late September, to be circulated to the Board as a supplement to the staff report. 31. The staff strongly endorses the authorities’ intention to manage the public finances with a view to ensure fiscal sustainability over the medium term. The staff concurs with the authorities’ view that fiscal consolidation should not be done abruptly, and recommends that the speed of convergence to a neutral fiscal stance be guided by the pace of recovery in external demand, the evolution of market sentiment, and medium-term public debt sustainability considerations. Fiscal consolidation should be underpinned by both revenue-enhancing and cost-reducing measures, while ensuring adequate allocations to improve TFP and enhance human capital development, as well as cover potential liabilities such as obligations that may arise from the expected closure of Danaharta in 2005. In this context, the staff would strongly recommend that the authorities consider adopting a multi- year budgeting framework at the central government level, and consider setting out clearly the desired annual pace of fiscal consolidation over the medium term at all levels of government. 32. A more arms-length and transparent link between the central government and the rest of the public sector is essential to ensure a successful medium-term fiscal consolidation. The staff is encouraged by the initial steps taken to move to a more market- based mechanism to set gas prices and thus remove some of the quasi-fiscal expenditures of the NFPEs. More generally, however, if some of these activities are viewed as essential, they should be channeled explicitly through the budget. In this vein, efforts should be made to Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 16- improve the frequency and coverage of data collection for the compilation of financial accounts of the 37 major NFPEs. There is also a need to develop a system to estimate the net worth of the public sector. In this context, the plan to value the assets of Khazanah at market prices by 2003 should be extended to all other NFPEs and off-budget nonfinancial activities. These efforts should go a long way to enhance fiscal transparency and facilitate the analysis of public debt sustainability. 33. Malaysia’s strengthened fundamentals, particularly its sizable current account surplus, comfortable level of reserves, low inflation, and existing capital account regulations, are supportive of the peg. At present, the value of the ringgit does not appear to be misaligned. In the light of this consideration, the staff believes that, baring unforeseen adverse systemic global or regional external shocks, or a dramatic deterioration in market sentiment, it should not be difIicult to defend the peg in the near term. In this context, the staff shares the authorities’ view that it is essential to monitor external developments closely and welcomes their publicly stated readiness to reconsider the peg if, and when, needed, in a broader context of a sound macroeconomic policy. 34. The staff believes that a more flexible exchange rate regime would broaden Malaysia’s options to cope with future shocks, and facilitate management of the risks associated with capital flows. While concurring with the authorities’ view that competitive- ness should best be enhanced through gains in productivity brought about by deepening structural reforms, the staff believes a flexible arrangement would broaden the options to deal with potentially large depreciations of regional currencies and the structural challenges posed, for example, by the further opening of the Chinese economy, and would encourage the private sector to strengthen its risk management practices. Such an arrangement would also allow a more active role for monetary policy to complement fiscal policy in the management of aggregate demand. 35. A move to a more flexible exchange rate arrangement, if considered, should ideally take place at a time of favorable market conditions, including a strong external environment, a positive assessment by international capital markets, and a comfortable level of international reserves. Further, the move should be accompanied by the adoption of an alternative monetary policy framework. In this context, the staff commends the authorities for the significant progress achieved in implementing the liquidity management framework, and noted that the prevailing strong infrastructure for the functioning of the money market and payments system, as well as the high and rising level of external reserves, should help create an appropriate setting for a move, sooner rather than later, to a more flexible arrangement. 36. The banking sector remains well capitalized, notwithstanding the recent economic slowdown. The staff is encouraged by the authorities’ plans to continue implementing the measures in the Financial Sector Masterplan in a timely manner, including a close monitoring of the ongoing operational merger of banks, a strict enforcement of the consolidated risk-based supervision, and the development of an appropriate mechanism that could replace the current system of blanket deposit insurance. The staff is of the view that the liberalization of interest rates envisaged in the plan would help to enhance competitive forces Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17- in the financial system, and its implementation should be expedited. The staff also welcomes the authorities’ active role in broadening the scope of the national and international regulatory frameworks to encompass Islamic banking. 37. An efficient and resilient corporate sector is also critical to attaining a high and sustainable level of economic growth. In this context, efforts should be made to ensure, to the extent possible, that the restructured loans under the CDRC continue to be performing, and that recourse to government-financed bailouts should be limited. Recent efforts to strengthen governance in accordance with the Finance Committee Report on Corporate Governance and the Capital Market Masterplan should also be continued. 38. Enhanced flexibility in labor markets and greater foreign competition could enhance Malaysia’s resilience to shocks and increase efficiency. The staff supports the call of the private sector for continued monitoring of labor retrenchment procedures. The staff acknowledges the progress made in 2001 in liberalizing further the trade and investment regime, as well as efforts at fulfilling Malaysia’s obligations under the WTO and AFTA, while strengthening the legislative framework for the protection of intellectual property rights. 39. The authorities’ efforts in establishing a framework for anti-money laundering and combating the financing of terrorism (AML/CFT) are commendable. The staff welcomes the authorities’ consent to the forthcoming Fund assessment of the Labuan Offshore Financial Center, and encourages them to take steps to expedite the signing and ratification of the UN Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism. 40. Malaysia publishes a comprehensive set of reliable economic and financial statistics which are sufficient for adequate surveillance. The ongoing development of a system for monitoring external debt and efforts to improve the coverage and dissemination of the financial account of the balance of payments, debt service, and external debt are commendable. More regular information on a broad range of fiscal operations, including for the NFPEs, and the net worth of the government would be helpful. 41. The staff notes the substantial progress made in strengthening the financial system, and encourages an early participation in an FSAP exercise as it would provide an independent view on the impact of the ongoing financial sector reform. The staff also commends the authorities’ recent response to the self-assessment Questionnaire for Fiscal Transparency, which is an initial step toward a full-fledged fiscal ROSC module. 42. It is recommended that the next Article IV consultation with Malaysia take place on a 12-month cycle. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 18- Box 1. Malaysia: Recent Fiscal Developments Fiscal policy has been the main instrument of the government to help sustain domestic economic activity. In 2001, the authorities pursued an expansionary fiscal stance, believing that the strong economic fundamentals provide Malaysia the flexibility to implement additional pro-growth policies without creating imbalances in the economy. Two fiscal stimulus packages were introduced through supplementary budgets during the year, amounting to about 2 percent of GDP. The budget for 2002 targeted a smaller fiscal deficit. Preliminary data indicate that the central government’s fiscal position was well below target for the first half of 2002. Fiscal stimulus 2001 The original 2001 budget (announced in October 2000) targeted an overall deficit of 5 percent of GDP for the central government and of 3% percent of GDP for the consolidated public sector. As evidence became clear in early 200 1 that a global recession was under way, the government announced, on March 27,200 1, a fiscal stimulus package of RM 3 billion (0.9 percent of GDP), consisting of: (i) additional development expenditures for projects that yield high employment potential, low import content, and have a short gestation period; and (ii) a 2 percentage point reduction in pension contributions to the Employees’ Provident Fund (to 9 percent), higher individual tax rebates, and an increase in allowances aimed at increasing disposable income and encouraging consumption. The government announced a second stimulus package of RM 4.3 billion (1.3 percent of GDP) shortly after the September 11 events, with allocations mainly for small projects in rural areas, upgrading ministry buildings, and training of retrenched and unemployed workers. The revised central government budget deficit was targeted to increase to 6% percent of GDP for the year. Fiscal outcome 2001 The overall central government deficit turned out to be 5% percent of GDP in 2001 (compared with 5% percent of GDP in 2000). Total revenue was higher than the revised budget target, on account of a one- time collection of income tax payments associated with the change in the base year for income tax assessments, a higher-than-anticipated recovery of tax arrears from the nonfinancial public enterprises (NFPEs), and the impact of upward adjustments in the domestic prices of petroleum products, fees for transportation services, and surcharges on the sale of motor vehicles. Collections on sales and excise taxes fell short of expectations, reflecting their close correlation with the slowdown in economic activity. Total expenditures exceeded the revised budget target by 2 percent of GDP, reflecting a marked increase in outlays for goods and services, wage supplements, and development expenditures. Significant improvements have been made in fund disbursements and procurement procedures. Over 80 percent of the deficit was financed through the issue of government debt. The overall consolidated public sector position shifted from a small surplus in 2000 (3/4 percent of GDP) to a large deficit in 2001 (3 percent of GDP). This turnaround was mostly accounted for by a sharp deterioration in the financial positions of the 37 NFPEs, reflecting in part the impact of an economic slowdown and a sharp increase in development expenditures, including an expansion in capital investment by Petronas (oil and gas exploration and production), Malaysia International Shipping Corp., Tenaga (power generation and distribution), and Malaysia Telecom. Budget for 2002 The authorities targeted a small reduction in the overall deficits of both the central government and the consolidated public sector (to 5 percent of GDP and 2% percent of GDP, respectively), signaling the intention to return to fiscal consolidation as the external environment improves. Current outlays are contained and development expenditures reduced considerably to offset the temporary effect on revenue from the one-time collection of income taxes in 200 1. For the first half of 2002, the central government deficit, estimated at 1% percent of GDP, was well below target. Total revenue registered positive growth (4 percent) compared with the same period last year, while total expenditure is on track. The government adopted a forward-looking two-year budgeting cycle starting in 2002. A detailed 2002 budget was prepared along with the main parameters for 2003, although the latter was not disclosed. Further improvements could focus on making the budgeting framework more transparent to help improve efficiency. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 19- Box 2. Malaysia: Major Nonfinancial Public Enterprises and Off-Budget Investment Operations The consolidated financial position of Malaysia’s major nonfinancial public enterprises (NFPEs) has remained in sizable surplus since 1995 (with the exception of 1998), but weakened significantly in 2001. This sector has been dominated by a few large public enterprises, most notably Petronas (oil and gas exploration and production), Tenaga (power generation and distribution), and Malaysia Telecom. Their finances are sensitive to economic cycles and world prices of key commodities, such as oil. These three enterprises account for over 80 percent of total NFPEs’ revenue and development expenditure, and over 60 percent of operating expenditure. The overall balance of Petronas has been consistently in large surplus since 1996, contributing significantly to the financial strength of the NFPE sector. Malaysia: Operations of Nonfinancial Public Enterprises, 1996-2001 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 (In percent of GDP) Total revenue 21.7 24.1 26.4 33.4 33.7 33.9 Petronas, Tenaga, and Telecom 17.3 19.6 22.0 27.0 28.3 28.0 Others 4.5 4.5 4.4 6.4 5.5 5.9 Operating expenditure 13.7 15.7 17.5 20.5 21.0 21.5 Petronas, Tenaga, and Telecom 10.2 12.1 13.9 15.1 16.2 16.2 Others 3.6 3.6 3.6 5.4 4.8 5.3 Development expenditure 5.7 7.8 10.5 8.5 6.8 10.2 Petronas, Tenaga, and Telecom 4.7 6.8 9.2 7.6 6.1 8.2 Others 1.1 1.1 1.3 0.9 0.8 2.0 Overall balance 2.3 0.5 -1.6 4.4 5.9 2.1 Petronas, Tenaga, and Telecom 2.5 0.7 -1.1 4.3 6.0 3.6 Others -0.1 -0.2 -0.5 0.1 -0.1 -1.4 Source: Data provided by the Malaysian authorities. While run on a commercial basis, some of the NFPEs, especially the major ones, conduct activities that are functions of the central government. These activities include the extension of welfare benefits and implicit subsidies. A noticeable example is in the oil and gas and energy sectors. The government retains a majority ownership of Petronas and Tenaga, and operates through them to provide petroleum products and power at subsidized prices. The sizable surplus of Petronas has allowed the government to extend a general form of social welfare without creating pressures on the budget. The government also uses Khazanah-an off-budget entity initially created with the capital from privatization proceeds-as an investment arm for strategic development projects and other activities of national interest. Khazanah’s portfolio includes holdings in Tenaga (36 percent of equity), Malaysia Telecom (37 percent), Putrajaya Holdings-the new government headquarters- (40 percent), and Malaysia Airports Holdings (23 percent). In 200 1, resources of Khazanah were used for the purchase of Renong Group (RM 3.8 billion), which raised concerns of corporate governance associated with a reported overpricing. Despite a lower net profit in 2001 (about RM 200 million), reflecting in part a stepped-up expenditure for the construction of Putrajaya, Khazanah’s financial position remains strong, particularly as the assets are recorded at cost and therefore are substantially undervalued. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-20 - Box 3. Malaysia: Public Sector Debt Sustainability To help assess the sustainability of public sector debt over the medium term, the staff examined how the profile of the public sector debt-to-GDP ratio in the baseline scenario would change if all the key variables were at their average value of the last ten years (1992-01). This analysis suggests that the baseline, which assumes a decline in public debt from about 70 percent of GDP to 50 percent of GDP during 2002-07, compares favorably against the historical scenario. Specifically, under the historical scenario the debt- to-GDP ratio would initially decline at a faster pace than the baseline, because the ten-year average values would imply a higher real GDP growth and a faster consolidation in 2002-03. However, under the historical scenario the debt-to-GDP ratio would plateau at about 60 percent of GDP over the medium term, as the historical scenario would imply no further fiscal consolidation beyond 2003. In addition, the staff conducted stress tests on the baseline projections by applying individual and combined adverse shocks to key economic variables. The individual shocks used were: (i) a reduction in real GDP growth to zero (a little over one standard deviation with respect to the ten-year historical mean); (ii) an increase in the real interest rate to about 7 percent (approximately one standard deviation); and (iii) an increase in the primary deficit of the consolidated public sector to 3.5 percent of GDP (about two standard deviations). The combined shocks considered included: (i) an increase in the primary deficit together with a high real interest rate; and (ii) an increase in the primary deficit together with low growth in real GDP. The impact of shocks on the exchange rate was judged to be modest as external debt accounts for only one-third of total public sector debt. For more details on the staff analysis of external debt sustainability, see Chapter III of the companion Selected Issues paper. 80 75 70 60 -Baseline I- -If real interest rate, real GDP growth rate, and primary balance are at average of the past 10 years. If real interest rate in 2002 and 2003 is about 7%, other variables at baseline. + If zero real GDP growth in 2002 and 2003, other variables at baseline. -O-If primary deticlt is 3.5 percent of GDP in 2002 and 2003, other variables at baseline. -+- Combined shocks, real interest rate of 7% and a primaty deficit of 3.5% of GDP in 2002 and 2003, other variables at baseline. -Combined shocks: real GDP growth of 1% and a primary deficit of 3.5% of GDP in 2002 and 2003, other variables at baseline. 996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 Stress tests suggest that even under significant adverse shocks, public debt remains manageable. A much slower real growth and a substantially higher primary deficit path would appear to pose the greatest risk to the baseline scenario. These shocks would increase the public sector debt-to-GDP ratio somewhere between 7-10 percentage points of GDP in the first two years. Shocks to the real interest rate appear to have a modest impact on debt dynamics, consistent with the fact that a substantial share (about three fourths) of public debt is linked to fixed rates. If these shocks were to occur simultaneously, the public sector debt-to-GDP ratio would rise by some 15 percentage points of GDP. In any event, if growth resumes and fiscal consolidation is pursued over the medium term as in the baseline scenario, the debt ratio would eventually return to manageable levels. The above results should be interpreted with caution. The above analysis does not take into account the public sector net asset position and contingent liabilities of the government, which may considerably change the net debt position of the public sector. These omissions could be considerable, for example, Khazanah’s assets valued at cost could be as high as 7 percent of GDP, whereas contingent liabilities of Danaharta could be close to 5 percent of GDP. There is a clear need for developing a system to compile the public sector’s net worth. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-21- Box 4. Malaysia: Recent Monetary Developments Monetary policy in 2001 continued to be conducted within the framework of a fixed exchange rate regime with some degree of control over capital movements. Monetary policy focused on managing liquidity flows to maintain stable interbank rates, providing adequate credit to the private sector, and supporting the build-up of reserves. In June 2002, the outstanding amount of Bank Negara Malaysia (BNM) intervention, including BNM bills and notes and direct borrowing from banks and nonbank financial institutions through its money market tender, stood at about RM 62 billion or 17% percent of GDP (up from RM 46 billion or 14 percent of GDP in December 2001). However, the cost of intervention, at less then % percent of GDP, has been modest. Since late 2001, BNM has tightened domestic credit significantly to sterilize the impact of rising foreign reserves. But despite a contraction in BNM’s net domestic assets (by 75 percent in relation to base money) in June 2002, base money rose by 6% percent y-o-y (compared with a contraction of 3% percent in December 2001). BNM’s current base lending rate (BLR) framework is intended as a temporary arrangement in the transition to lower lending rates and the establishment of a more market-based approach. Implemented in September 1998, the framework has been based on the use of the three-month inter- vention rate as the anchor for the BLR. The BLR framework introduces some rigidity in the interest rate structure, as reflected in a marked divergence between the intervention and interbank rates and a significant spread between average lending and deposit rates. Lending-deposit rate spreads have started to narrow since April 1999, mainly through a reduction in lending rates, but remain high in absolute terms. Interest rates are currently high in relation to foreign (U.S.) interest rates; the interest rate differential with LIBOR has turned positive in favor of Malaysia since August 2001, as a result of a marked decline in U.S. interest rates. BNM remains committed to liberalizing the BLR framework and interest rate structure as outlined in the Financial Sector Masterplan. The New Liquidity Framework (NLF) announced in July 1998 came into full operation in 2001 and represents an important step in the move toward a more market-oriented monetary policy framework. The NLF allows banks greater flexibility in managing their investment portfolios. It requires banks to maintain adequate liquidity to meet their projected obligations, plus any unexpected heavy withdrawal for at least one month (in contrast with the old arrangement where all banks, regardless of their ability to minimize maturity mismatches, were required to hold a specified percentage of their liabilities in liquid assets). The NLF implies a more flexible asset composition, which should improve the effectiveness of monetary policy transmission by increasing the sensitivity of banks’ balance sheets to interest rate changes. BNM provides direct financing to specific sectors through several special funds at below prevailing market rates. As of end-June 2002, the amount allocated to these funds was RM 10.25 billion, including the New Entrepreneurs Fund (RM 1.25 billion), the Fund for Food (RM 1.3 billion), the Fund for Small and Medium-Sized Industries (RM 1.85 billion), and the Fund for Low and Medium Cost Houses (RM 1 billion). The total amount outstanding as of end-June 2002 (drawdown minus repayments) was about RM 5.7 billion. Lending rates range from 33/ percent to 5% percent, as compared with the average commercial lending rate of 6% percent. The staff estimate of the consequent interest rate subsidy is about 0.03 percent of GDP. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 22 - I Box 5. Malaysia: Progress in Financial and Corporate Sector Restructuring and Performance The Malaysian authorities have continued to strengthen the resilience of the financial and corporate sectors during 2000-01. Various forms of restructuring have been undertaken by Danamodal (a banking recapitalization agency), Danaharta (an asset management company), and the Corporate Debt Restructuring Committee (CDRC), as well as through the bank merger program which is closely monitored by Bank Negara Malaysia (BNM). The authorities estimate the fiscal cost of bank recapitalization at about 5 percent of GNP. Danamodal. Out of the original capital injection of RM 7.1 billion to ten banks in 1998, seven of them had fully repaid at end-May 2002, reducing the total outstanding balance to RM 2.1 billion, which is expected to be fully repaid by October 2003 when Danamodal is scheduled to wind down. Danaharta. Before its window to acquire assets was closed in late 2000, Danaharta purchased a face value of RM 19.8 billion of nonperforming loans from financial institutions (805 accounts) at an average purchase price of 45.6 percent of face value. These purchases were funded via the issuance of RM 10.9 billion in zero-coupon bonds, loan financing of RM 2 billion from the Employees’ Provident Fund and Khazanah, and an equity injection of RM 3 billion from the budget. The first repayment of the bonds is due at end-2003 (RM 2.6 billion) and the final payment in March 2005 (RM 0.8 billion). Danaharta also manages RM 27.9 billion on behalf of the government and BNM (2,097 accounts) that were acquired when the Bank Bumiputra and Sime Bank groups were closed in 1998. Restructuring modalities in Danaharta for its purchased and entrusted assets include the rehabilitation of businesses, liquidation, foreclosure of collateral, and appointment of special administrators. Danaharta had virtually completed the restructuring of its portfolio at end-200 1, with the expected recovery of RM 28.5 billion on both purchased and entrusted assets, or 57 percent of face value. However, cash collection on the assets owned by Danaharta has lagged. While the total asset recovery amounted to RM 15.2 billion, only RM 8.8 billion was in cash, of which Danaharta retained RM 1.7 billion after distributing the remainder to the government for its managed assets. To help enhance cash collection, Danaharta launched in 200 1 its first asset-backed securities, with RM 3 10 million of Senior Notes issued, backed by about RM 595 million of Danaharta’s performing loans, which will mature in December 2005 when Danaharta is scheduled to be closed. The issue was oversubscribed by three and a half times. CDRC. The CDRC was created in 1998 to assist in voluntary out-of-court restructuring of corporate debt in businesses that are considered viable. New guidelines were issued in August 200 1, empowering the CDRC to complete corporate debt restructuring and activate operational restructuring (including disposal of noncore assets and separation of ownership and management) before its scheduled closure in July 2002. At its closing, the CDRC had completed 46 cases (out of a total of 48) resolving about 84 percent of the initial outstanding debt stock (RM 54.4 billion) entrusted to them. Seven large cases were recently settled (with debts amounting to RM 12 billion), including resolution of the Putra and Star light-rail projects, which involved nationalization of their debt through the issuance of RM 5.5 billion of government-guaranteed bonds to their largest creditors, and RM 4 billion of debt guaranteed by the Johor State Government. The remaining two unresolved cases at CDRC’s closure involved outstanding debt totaling RM 9.3 billion. The larger of the two cases, Lion Group (debt totaling RM 8.3 billion), was resolved in early September, under the monitoring of the Creditors Steering Committee and Danaharta. Corporate and financial sector performance. Financial company profitability and returns in 2000 and 2001 were strong, whereas the same indicators showed more moderate performance in the corporate sector (Table 6). Banks’ reliance on short-term external borrowing has declined markedly since the crisis period, while corporate debt levels have been fairly steady in recent years, with an increased share of domestic corporate bond financing and improved maturity structure toward medium- and long-term bonds. Significant progress has also been made in implementing the 1999 recommendations in the Finance Committee Report on Corporate Governance, including strengthening of minority shareholder rights, enforcement powers of regulators, amendments to the laws governing the listing requirements of the Kuala Lumpur Stock Exchange, development of accreditation programs for directors of listed companies, and the development of code of conduct guidelines. Malaysia’s corporate sector performance is also strong relative to other countries in the region. Debt-to-equity ratios are the lowest among the five Asian crisis countries, at about 100 percent compared with almost 200 percent in South Korea and the Philippines, 275 percent in Indonesia, and 350 percent in Thailand. The stock of impaired assets, estimated at about 25 percent of interest earning assets, is much lower than in Indonesia or Thailand (54 percent and 38 percent, respectively). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-23 - Box 6. Malaysia: Key Implications of China’s Accession to the World Trade Organization Further opening of China as a result of its accession to the World Trade Organization (WTO) presents both challenges and opportunities for Malaysia. Competition in third country markets and in China is likely to intensify, especially in electronics and textiles. Malaysia could benefit from greater access to China’s markets, particularly in animal and vegetable oils and crude materials and potentially in manufactures and services. Gains for Malaysia are likely to increase if it develops greater intra-industry complementarity with China in the electronics sector. All in all, China’s accession to the WTO places a premium on the competitiveness of Malaysian firms and Malaysia’s attractive- ness as a destination for foreign direct investment (FDI). The overall impact on Malaysia’s economy depends largely on domestic considerations, including progress in corporate restructuring and the extent of flexibility in factor prices. Trade. China is Malaysia’s fourth largest trading partner. In recent years, trade with China has been broadly balanced (a trade deficit of $2 11 million in 2000 and a surplus of $17 million in 200 1). In relative terms, however, China’s share in Malaysia’s trade was only 4.7 percent of the total in 2001, while trade with other countries (the European Union, Japan, Singapore, and the United States) accounted for about 62 percent of the total. Close trade links with China could potentially play an important stabilizing role for Malaysia’s balance of payments, given that China’s business cycles are unsynchronized with those of Malaysia’s major trading partners. As China’s economy opens further, competition between Malaysian and Chinese exports in third country markets is likely to intensify, especially in electronics and electrical machinery which account for about 60 percent of Malaysia’s total exports. Malaysia’s comparative advantage in manufactures vis-&vis China and other countries appears to be relatively low (see below), placing an additional premium on the need to foster competitiveness. Malaysia appears to be most competitive in animal and vegetable oils, but less so in mineral fuels, machines and transport equipment, and crude materials. The challenge for Malaysia is to strengthen its position in these relatively less competitive markets. The terms-of-trade effect of China’s accession is likely to be positive for Malaysia, however, given that China’s demand for food and energy imports is expected to rise significantly and Malaysia is a net exporter of these products. Revealed Comparative Advantage of South-East Asian Economies in China, 2000 I/ Indonesia Korea Malaysia Philippines Taiwan Thailand Crude Food and Beverage Materials, Animal and Machines, Misc. Live and Excluding Mineral Vegetable Basic Transport Manuf. Animals Tobacco Fuels Fuels Oils Chemicals Manuf. Equipment Goods 1.07 0.07 1.87 4.05 12.85 0.92 1.21 0.07 0.12 0.32 0.22 0.33 1.10 0.05 1.66 1.54 0.75 0.87 0.34 0.25 1.05 1.20 25.91 0.68 0.63 1.06 0.49 3.65 0.00 0.45 1.19 4.99 0.24 0.80 1.37 0.24 0.02 0.01 0.66 0.07 0.03 2.42 0.79 1.05 0.57 4.44 0.97 1.73 1.67 0.22 0.88 0.53 0.86 0.37 Sources: COMTRADE database, United Nations; and Fund staff estimates. I/ The revealed comparative advantage is defined as the ratio of the market share for a given SITC category to the country’s total market share A value exceeding 1 “reveals” comparative advantage. Foreign direct investment. China’s accession to the WTO could make it even more attractive as an FDI destination, reinforcing the trend decline in ASEAN’s share in total FDI to developing Asia and diverting FDI away from Malaysia. However, being a net exporter of equity investment to China (which is Malaysia’s fourth largest destination for equity investment), Malaysia has the potential to increase its FDI holdings in China, particularly in industries where its exports to China are substantial or relatively less competitive. Liberalization in China could also present an opportunity for Malaysia’s nascent knowledge-based industries. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 24 - Box 7. Malaysia: Assessment of Resilience to Unanticipated Shocks-Initial Results Existing models for assessing vulnerability to external shocks indicate that the probability of an external crisis in Malaysia (either currency or debt crisis) is low at present. In the unlikely event that a crisis were to arise, crisis cost models suggest its intensity and duration would be contained. Specifically: l Early warning system (EWS) models indicate that the probability of a balance of payments crisis in Malaysia is low over the immediate as well as a 12-24 month horizon. The two key factors that contri- buted to a high crisis probability in 1997 in Malaysia-short-term external debt and overvaluation of the real exchange rate (both in percentile termsFare not causes of concern at present. The large current account surplus and sizable accumulation of reserves in recent months have also lessened Malaysia’s vulnerability. l Models of country (credit) risk predict an improvement in Malaysia’s ratings and long-run equilibrium spreads, supporting the conclusions of EWS models. The predictions reflect Malaysia’s relatively strong fundamentals and the market’s favorable assessment of the medium-term outlook. The projected economic recovery in Malaysia also contributes to upward pressure on ratings, which are highly pro- cyclical. l Models of crisis cost suggest that, even if a crisis were to occur in Malaysia, the costs would likely be contained, because the factors that these models identify as the main contributors to the depth of the crisis in 1997 (a surge in private sector capital inflows, high pre-crisis real GDP growth rates associated with overinvestment, and fragility of the banking sector) have been largely addressed. Preliminary results of stress testing of the balance of payments, external debt, and aggregate banking and corporate sector balance sheets suggest that a relatively significant and sustained deviation in key macroeconomic variables would be required to precipitate an external crisis. Adverse single-event shocks to key macroeconomic and financial variables are modeled as two standard deviations over historical means for the post- 1998 crisis period. l Stress tests of the balance of payments suggest that a significant weakening in the current account surplus, or a large short-term capital account shock due to a sudden change in market sentiment (induced, for example, by international contagion), could pose a threat to Malaysia’s balance of payments (assuming that the government does not resort to additional borrowing). However, if pressures on the currency were to emerge as a result of these shocks, existing capital account regulations are likely to limit, to some extent, the scope for position-taking against the ringgit. l External debt sustainability could be put at risk in the case of a large depreciation of the ringgit or weak foreign direct investment (FDI) inflows. The impact from slow real GDP growth, weak portfolio flows, or a current account shock appears less significant. These risks are mitigated, however, by Malaysia’s strong external position and the authorities’ reiterated commitment to fiscal consolidation and continued financial and corporate sector reform over the medium term. Approval requirements on external borrowing by residents are also likely to limit the extent of the possible build-up in nonbank external debt. l Stress tests of the banking system and the corporate sector based on aggregate data suggest a relatively important exposure to interest rate risk (owing to maturity mismatches). Exposure to credit risk, including that related to loans previously restructured under the Corporate Debt Restructuring Committee, also requires close monitoring. This risk, however, should be substantially reduced by the ongoing progress in strengthening banking system soundness and the improved capital position of banks, as well as a recent trend toward greater reliance by Malaysian corporates on domestic fixed-rate bond financing. Both sectors’ direct exposures to exchange rate and equity price risks are relatively small, in part due to the regulatory limits on banks’ net open foreign exchange positions (currently positive), controls on external borrowing by corporates, and the “haircuts” of up to 30 percent required for the valuation of property collateral. l Medium-term balance of payments risks could stem from large fluctuations in major currencies, particularly a substantial weakening of the yen, if it were to precipitate a significant depreciation of major competitor countries in the region (especially the yuan). The impact of China’s entry into the World Trade Organization is harder to gauge, with both opportunities and challenges, particularly in maintaining export shares and FDI flows (see Box 6). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 25 - 20 15 10 5 0 -5 -10 -15 45 40 35 30 25 Figure 1. Real Sector Developments and Outlook Reflecting the global recovery, Malaysia’s growth is expected to pick up in 2002... . . . investment to hold steady... 1 Real GDP Growth (In percent) -Malaysia -- - Indonesia ~~ Korea _ _ _ _ - ,Philippines ~~‘~e~,~“Thailand I 1995 I996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 Proj . . . and savings to decline... National Savings (In percent of GDP) -Malaysia -- - Indonesia ~~~- Korea _ _ _ _ - ‘Philippines -Thailand 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 200 1 2002 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 Proj. Proj. 20 15 10 5 0 -5 -10 -15 50 40 30 20 10 45 12 4o 10 35 8 3o 6 25 4 20 2 15 0 Gross Domestic Investment (In percent of GDP) -Malaysia -- - Indonesia ___ Korea _ _ _ _ - ‘Philippines wThailand 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 Proj. . . . while injlation is expected to remain subdued. Inflation -Malaysia [Percent change) ~ Korea ’ . I I \ ’ . * . 50 40 30 20 10 8 6 Source: IMF, WEO. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 26 - Figure 2. External Developments and Outlook 25 300 250 200 150 100 50 0 The external current account is expected to remain in large surplus in 2002, although narrowinp substantiallv. 25 9 Current Account (In percent of GDP) Malaysia - - - Indonesia Korea 1 _____ -Philippines ~*~S*wThailand I 20 8 7 15 6 10 5 5 4 0 3 -5 2 I -lo 1 Foreign reserves increased in 2OOL.. 9 Reserves (In months of imports of goods and services) - 8 I i ~ Korea _____ -Philippines ,-----Thailand 1 -15 0 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 Proj. Proj. . . . and reserve cover remained External debt has increased somewhat, but adequate. the debt-service ratio remains low. 800 180 Reserves (In percent of short-term debt by original maturity) ~ Korea (left scale) _ _ _ _ _ -Philippines (let? scale) --Thailand (let? scale) -Malaysia (right scale) --- Indonesia (right scale) 700 160 600 140 120 500 100 400 80 300 60 200 40 loo 20 0 0 External Debt (In percent of GDP) ,‘, -Malaysia _ _ - Indonesia I \ K0rtX , \ - - - - - -Philippines I ’ “=--Thailand I ’ I \ I \ \ . I . C-- 180 160 140 120 100 80 60 40 20 0 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 1995 I996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 Proj Proj Sources: IMF. WE0 and APD databases. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 27 - Figure 3. Financial Market Developments and Confidence 400 350 300 250 Stock prices for Malaysia have held up in . . . as well as market capitalization. 2001... Stock Market Price Index Stock Market Price Index (1997=100) (1997=100) -Malaysia -Malaysia -- -- - Indonesia - Indonesia ~~~ Korea ~~~ Korea i i _____ _____ ‘Philippines ‘Philippines Thailand Thailand 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 Netportfolio outflows were subdued... . . . and also other capital outjlows. 400 140 350 120 300 100 250 80 200 60 150 40 100 50 2o -Malaysia ~ Korea _ - - - - ‘Philippines -__ --Thailand -15 1 1995 1996 1997 199x 1999 2000 2001 Sources: IMF, WE0 and APD databases. 0 0 10 25 20 5 15 0 10 5 -5 0 -10 -5 -15 -10 Market Capitalization (In percent of GDP) --- Indonesia (left scale) ________ Korea (left scale) ___-- Philippines (left scale) --Thailand (left scale) -Malaysia (right scale) 250 200 150 # 100 Other Capital (In percent of GDP) -Malaysia -- - Indonesia ~~ Korea _ _ _ _ _ ‘Philippines u_ _ Thailand 1995 1996 1991 1998 1999 2000 2001 25 20 15 10 5 0 -5 -10 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-28 - Figure 4. Fiscal and Monetary Developments The overall deficit of the consolidatedpublic sector . . . andpublic sector debt is expected to is expected to decrease in 2002... stabilize. 8 Consolidated Public Sector Balance (In percent of GDP) 6 -Malaysia -- - Indonesia I/ 21 ~ Korea 8 160 6 140 4 120 2 100 0 80 -2 60 -6 -6 20 -8 -8 0 200 Private sector credit picked up in relation to GDP in 2001... Private Sector Credit Private Sector Credit 180 (In percent of GDP) (In percent of GDP) 160 140 120 100 80 60 40 20 n 1995 1996 1991 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 Proj. Proj Public Sector Debt (In percent of GDP) -Malaysia -- - Indonesia I/ ~ Korea _ _ _ _ _ ‘Philippines ~~~Thailand 3/ ,*. .’ ,- --.- --_ I’ *. ’ . . I I -. . - - - _*’ / ‘\ / ‘\ / \ . . . although money growth slowed. 200 30 -Malaysia -Malaysia -- -- - Indonesia - Indonesia ~ Korea ~ Korea _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ ‘Philippines ‘Philippines ~l.,__lj “*-Thailand ~l.,__lj “*-Thailand 180 25 160 140 20 120 100 15 , 80 ~ 60 10 40 5 20 1 n n 180 160 140 120 100 80 60 40 20 0 Money Growth (Percent change) -Malaysia (M3) ~ Korea CM21 _ _ _ _ _ ,Philippkes(M3) m”““*Thailand (M2A) 25 - 20 - 15 - 10 - 5 ” ” Y 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 Proj. Proj. Sources: IMF, WE0 and APD databases. l/End of fiscal year (March) for 1996 to 1999; end-December for 2000 to 2002. 2/ Central government only. 31 End of fiscal year (end-September). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 29 - Figure 5. Interest Rate Developments Malaysia’s nominal interest rates have remained belowpre-crisis levels... .- I”” Nominal Interest Rates -Malaysia (left scale) (Percent per annum, end of period) Indrcoting femporary capifol ~- ~~~ Korea (left scale) 30 - controls introduced in September - ,998 in Malaysia. - - - _ _ *Philippines (left scale) 80 *.*a-,e.w* Thailand (left scale) --- Indonesia (right scale) 60 0 - \ _e-- -----__ 20 ---_ --___--- __---- -10 . . . . . . *. . . . . . . . . . n . . . . ..I............,.,,,,,,,,,,.,,,,, o JAN APR JUL OCT JAN APR JUL OCT JAN APR JUL OCT JAN APR JUL OCT JAN APR JUL 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 . . . and the real rate has remained low andpositive. 30 50 Real Interest Rate 25 - (Percent per annum, end of period) -Malaysia (left scale) 40 ~--~ Korea (left scale) _____ -Philippines (I& scale) 30 2o -\ “““-Thailand (left scale) 20 --- \ 15 - “‘\ \ Indonesia (right scale) / /--e--2-- ** +** ---_A- 10 --- -I---. _#.---’ 10 - ‘l +j .\, / y-1 0 / -10 , . 5 - ,---.. , I. -20 -30 0 - -40 -5 * I *. . . I .I..........,..*..,,.,......,,,,,,,., ~ ~, , , , , , , , -50 IAN APR IUL OCT JAN APR JUL OCT JAN APR JlJL OCT JAN AF’R JUL OCT JAN APR IUL 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 30 20 10 0 -10 The interest rate differential with the U.S. has been positive since September 2001. Interest Rate Differential l/ -Malaysia (left scale) _ _ _ _ _ -Philippines (IeA scale) ---=aThailand (left scale) -~--~ Hong Kong (1eA scale) - - - Singapore (let? scale) - - - Indonesia (right scale) JAN APR JUL OCT JAN APR JUL OCT JAN APR JUL OCT JAN APR JUL OCT IAN APR JUL 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 60 50 40 30 20 10 0 Sources: IMF, IFS; and APD databases. l/ 3-month interbank offer rate minus 3-month LIBOR. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 30 - Figure 6. Leading Real and External Sector Indicators Industrial production weakened in 2001, but . . . and exports have shown signs of a pick has bottomed out in early 2002... 40 Industrial Production (4-quarter percent change) 30 -Malaysia . ’ 40 160 150 30 140 -20 80 up since February 2002 . . . 180 Imports Value 160 80 60 -Malaysia -- - Indonesia KOWl _____ ‘Philippines ^, _^/, ~~-Thailand Exports Value (1998Ql=lOO, in US$ terms) 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 . . . as well as imports. Injlation remained low. 160 10 140 8 120 6 80 2 60 0 180 1 Inflation (Four-auarter oercent change) -Malaysia (left scale) Korea (left scale) _ _ _ - _ ,Philippines (left scale) a? ‘+xxe Thailand (left scale) --- Indonesia (right scale) 160 80 I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV 1 II II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 90 80 70 60 50 40 30 20 10 0 -10 Source: APD databases. I/ Figure for second quarter of 2002 refers to average of April and May. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3l- Figure 7. External Competitiveness Indicators Malaysia’s real exchange rate has appreciated Selected Asian Countries: Real Effective Exchange Rates (December 1999=100) -Malaysia ~ Korea Thailand - - - Indonesia _ _ _ _ _ -Philippines 80 70 Dee-99 Mar-00 Jun-00 Sep-00 Dee-00 Mar-01 Jun-01 Sep-01 I Dec.01 Mar-02 Jun-02 . . . However, there is still a margin of undervaluation with respect to thepre-1998 crisis 120 ---t Malaysia: NEER & REER -REER (based on CPI) -=---REER (based on PPI) (Jan. 1997=100) --- REER (based on ULC) - - - - - - NEER 110 100 90 80 70 /H----H -\-_ PC,/-- ,- 60 .-----. ” N---r /---- 401 n 0 0 I’* n n”‘a”n a”‘b n n o ( a”1”’ Jan-97 Jul-97 Jan-98 Jul-98 Jan-99 Jul-99 Jan-00 Jul.00 Jan-01 J&O I Jan-02 . . . and export market shares have held up. 8 Selected Asian Countries: Export Market Share to U.S. -Malaysia - - - China 7 - (In percent) -Hong Kong -=--*-‘Korea m m 6 - - Thailand / / / 5 4 3 t 0 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1991 1998 1999 2000 2001 Source: IMF, INS , and APD databases Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 32 - Table 1. Malaysia: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 1998-2002 1/ PA. Proj. 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 Real sector (percent change) Real GDP growth Real domestic demand CPI inflation (period average) GDP deflator -7.4 6.1 8.3 0.5 3.5 -25.2 2.3 16.0 0.1 4.9 5.1 2.8 1.6 1.4 1.8 8.5 0.0 5.0 -2.6 2.0 Saving and investment (percent of GDP) &ass domestic investment Private, including stocks Public 26.1 22.4 27.1 23.8 24.0 9.4 5.6 12.4 2.6 6.4 17.2 16.8 14.7 21.2 17.6 Gross national saving 39.9 38.3 36.5 32.0 30.9 Private 25.4 20.5 21.1 13.7 15.3 Public 14.5 17.8 15.4 18.3 15.6 Fiscal sector (percent of GDP) Federal govemment overall balance 21 Revenue 21 Expenditure and net lending 21 Consolidated public sector overall balance Total public sector debt 31 -3.2 -4.7 -5.8 -5.5 -4.9 20.0 19.5 18.1 23.8 23.1 23.2 24.2 23.8 29.3 28.0 -2.7 1.0 0.8 -2.9 -2.0 62.3 64.4 61.3 70.5 68.8 Monetary sector (annual percent change) M3 growth Net domestic assets Net claims on private sector Three-month interbank rate (period average, in percent) 1.4 7.1 -12.7 -0.3 0.5 -0.3 9.4 4.1 6.3 1.7 6.6 7.9 0.7 4.8 7.1 3.6 3.1 3.2 3.3 Balance of payments (in US$ billion) Trade balance Exports, f.o.b. Imports, f.o.b. Setices account Current account balance (In percent of GDP) 11.6 22.6 20.8 18.4 18.3 71.8 84.1 98.4 88.0 93.3 54.1 61.5 17.6 69.6 75.0 -5.1 -8.3 -10.4 -9.0 -9.7 9.5 12.6 8.5 1.2 6.4 13.2 15.9 9.4 8.2 6.9 Capital account balance Medium- and long-term Of which : Net foreign direct investment Short-term Errors and omissions Overall balance -2.6 -6.6 -6.3 -3.9 -2.6 2.7 3.3 2.9 2.4 1.7 1.9 2.5 1.8 0.3 0.9 -5.3 -9.9 -9.2 -6.2 -4.3 -2.5 -1.3 -3.2 -2.3 0.0 4.5 4.7 -1.0 1.0 3.8 International trade (annual percent change) Export value Import value Terms of trade Gross official reserves (in US$ billion) (In months of following year’s imports of goods and nonfactor setices) (In percent of short-tam debt) 41 Total external debt (in US$ billion) (In percent of GDP) Short-term external debt (percent of total) 41 Debt-service ratio -7.3 17.2 17.0 -10.6 6.0 -26.6 13.5 26.3 -10.3 7.1 -1.2 -0.3 1.3 -1.5 -0.1 26.2 30.9 29.9 30.8 34.6 4.1 3.9 4.2 4.0 4.5 209.7 318.3 333.9 265.6 290.1 42.9 42.4 41.5 44.7 45.9 59.4 53.6 46.1 50.7 49.4 29.1 22.9 21.6 26.0 26.0 (In percent of exports of goods and nonfactor setices) 6.6 6.2 4.9 6.2 334,591 6.9 Memorandum item: Nominal GDP (RM million) 283,243 300,765 342,158 353,228 Sources: Data provided by the Malaysian authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections li Period ending December 31. 21 Draft budget 2002. 31 Staff estimates; excludes non-government guaranteed domestic debt of the NFPEs. 41 By remaining mahuity. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-33 - Table 2. Malaysia: Balance of Payments, 1998-2002 1998 1999 2000 Est. Proj. 2001 2002 Current account balance 9.5 12.6 8.5 7.3 6.4 Trade balance 17.6 22.6 20.8 18.4 18.3 Exports, f.o.b. 71.8 84.1 98.4 88.0 93.3 Imports, f.o.b. 54.1 61.5 77.6 69.6 75.0 Services and income balance -5.7 -8.3 -10.4 -8.9 -9.7 Receipts 13.1 13.6 15.6 15.9 16.6 Ofwhich : Income 1.4 1.7 1.6 1.5 1.5 Payments 18.8 21.9 26.0 24.9 26.3 Ofwhich : Income 5.1 7.0 9.0 8.0 8.4 Net transfers -2.4 -1.7 -1.9 -2.2 -2.2 Capital account balance -2.6 -6.6 -6.3 -3.9 -2.6 Medium- and long-term flows, net 2.7 3.3 3.0 2.5 1.7 Public sector, net 0.5 1.8 1.3 1.9 0.3 Net federal goverment 0.5 0.8 0.2 1.7 1.0 Drawings 1.0 1.3 1.3 1.9 1.3 Repayments 0.6 0.5 1.0 0.2 0.3 Net other public sector 0.1 1.0 1.0 0.2 -0.7 Drawings 1.2 1.6 2.0 2.9 1.6 Repayments 1.1 0.6 1.0 2.6 2.3 Private sector, net 2.2 1.6 1.7 0.7 1.4 Net foreign direct investment 1.9 2.5 1.8 0.3 0.9 Inward direct investment 2.7 3.9 3.8 0.6 2.3 Outward direct investment -0.9 -1.4 -2.0 -0.3 -1.4 Net borrowing 0.3 -0.9 -0.1 0.4 0.5 Drawings 2.3 2.3 2.4 2.5 3.4 Repayments -1.9 -3.2 -2.4 -2.1 -2.9 Short-term flows, net -5.3 -9.9 -9.2 -6.4 -4.3 Commercial banks -3.1 -3.1 -1.4 -0.4 -0.1 Portfolio -0.4 -1.2 -2.5 -0.6 -1.0 Other -1.8 -5.7 -5.4 -5.4 -3.2 Net errors and omissions l/ -2.5 -1.3 4.7 30.9 -3.2 Overall balance Gross official reserves (In months of following year’s imports of goods and nonfactor services) (In percent of short-term debt) 21 4.5 26.2 -1.0 29.9 -2.4 0.0 1.0 3.8 30.8 34.6 4.1 3.9 4.1 4.0 4.1 211.2 298.4 312.4 261.8 286.1 Current account balance Trade balance Exports Imports Services and income balance Capital account balance Medium-term capital Net foreign direct investment Net short-term flows Net errors and omissions l! Overall balance (In percent of GDP) 13.2 24.4 99.4 75.0 -7.9 -3.5 3.8 2.6 -7.3 -3.4 6.2 15.9 9.4 8.3 6.9 28.6 23.1 20.9 19.7 106.3 109.3 99.9 100.3 77.6 86.2 79.0 80.6 -10.5 -11.6 -10.2 -10.4 -8.3 -7.0 -4.4 -2.8 4.2 3.3 2.9 1.8 3.1 2.0 0.3 I.0 -12.6 -10.2 -7.3 -4.7 -1.6 -3.5 -2.8 0.0 5.9 -1.1 1.1 4.1 (In billions of U.S. dollars) Export value growth 31 Export volume growth Import value growth 31 Import volume growth Terms of trade (Annual percent change) -7.0 15.9 0.5 13.2 -26.0 12.5 -18.8 10.6 1.6 0.7 16.1 -10.4 6.0 16.1 -7.5 3.2 25.3 -9.9 7.7 24.4 -8.6 4.7 -0.8 -1.8 -0.1 Sources: Data provided by the Malaysian authorities; and Fund staff estimates. l/ Includes portfolio investment. 21 By remaining maturity. 31 In gross terms. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 34 - Table 3. Malaysia: Federal Government Fiscal Operations, 1998-2002 l/ 1998 1999 2000 Revised Budget Budget Prel. Budget Proj 2001 2002 Total revenue 56,709 58,675 61,864 Tax revenue 45,334 45,347 47,173 Nonpetroleum tax revenue 37,737 38,768 40,064 Taxes on net income and profits 25,969 24,391 23,146 Sales tax and excises 9,302 11,049 13,284 Taxes on international trade 2,466 3,328 3,633 Petroleum tax revenue 7,597 6,579 7,109 Nontax revenue 11,375 13,328 14,691 Overall balance -9,123 -14,049 -19,715 Current balance 11,955 10,210 5,317 Primary balance 2,766 -4,33 1 -10,660 69,238 69,011 55,737 55,737 46,996 46,996 23,885 23,885 19,291 19,291 3,820 3,820 8,741 8,741 13,501 13,274 85,746 91,390 60,710 61,132 16,921 16,921 10,281 10,703 10,179 10,179 23,329 23,329 25,036 30,258 -16,508 -22,379 8,528 7,879 -6,329 -12,200 16,508 22,379 5,323 11,185 . . . (In percent of GDP) 79,568 73,167 81,550 61,492 56,154 65,506 50,802 47,242 57,422 32,240 28,000 37,720 15,333 16,009 16,430 3,229 3,233 3,272 10,690 8,912 8,084 18,076 17,013 16,044 Total expenditure and net lending 65,832 72,724 81,579 Current expenditure 46,765 46,699 56,547 Wages and salaries 13,984 14,436 16,357 Other expenditure on goods and services 5,795 8,443 8,642 Interest payments 6,928 7,941 9,055 Subsidies and transfers 20,058 15,879 22,493 Development expenditure 2/ 19,067 26,025 25,032 97,989 92,024 98,871 63,757 65,342 67,646 17,443 17,581 17,581 15,414 16,319 16,319 9,634 9,429 9,468 21,266 22,013 24,278 34,232 26,682 31,225 -18,421 -18,857 -17,321 15,810 7,825 13,904 -8,788 -9,428 -7,853 Financing 9,123 14,049 19,715 External 2,096 2,923 864 Domestic 7,027 11,126 18,851 18,421 18,857 17,321 6,294 6,652 6,652 12,127 12,205 10,669 Total revenues 20.0 19.5 18.1 20.7 20.6 23.8 20.7 23.1 Tax revenue 16.0 15.1 13.8 16.7 16.7 18.4 15.9 18.5 Nonpetroleum tax revenue 13.3 12.9 11.7 14.0 14.0 15.2 13.4 16.3 Taxes on net income and profits 9.2 8.1 6.8 7.1 7.1 9.6 7.9 10.7 Sales tax and excises 3.3 3.7 3.9 5.8 5.8 4.6 4.5 4.7 Taxes on international trade 0.9 1.1 1.1 1.1 1.1 1.0 0.9 0.9 Petroleum tax revenue 2.7 2.2 2.1 2.6 2.6 3.2 2.5 2.3 Nontax revenue 4.0 4.4 4.3 4.0 4.0 5.4 4.8 4.5 Total expenditures 23.2 24.2 23.8 25.6 Current expenditure 16.5 15.5 16.5 18.1 Development expenditure 2/ 6.7 8.7 7.3 7.5 Overall balance -3.2 -4.7 -5.8 -4.9 Current balance 3.3 3.8 1.6 2.5 Primary balance -0.8 -2.0 -3.1 -1.9 Financing 3.2 4.7 5.8 4.9 External 0.7 1.0 0.3 1.5 Domestic 2.5 3.7 5.5 3.4 27.3 18.3 9.0 -6.7 2.4 -3.6 6.7 1.5 5.2 29.3 26.1 28.0 19.1 18.5 19.2 10.2 7.6 8.8 -5.5 -5.3 -4.9 2.7 2.2 3.9 -2.6 -2.7 -2.2 5.5 5.3 4.9 1.9 1.9 1.9 3.6 3.4 3.0 Memorandum items: Consolidated public sector balances (in percent of GDP) Revenue Expenditure Current expenditure Development expenditure (including net lending) -2.7 1.0 0.8 32.9 35.8 34.3 35.7 34.8 33.5 18.4 18.0 18.8 17.3 16.8 14.7 -3.4 36.1 39.5 20.4 . . . 19.1 . . . -2.9 -2.7 -2.0 39.9 34.9 37.3 42.8 37.6 39.4 21.6 21.0 21.7 21.2 16.6 17.7 Nominal GDP 283,243 300,765 342,157 334,589 334,589 334,589 353,228 353,228 (In millions of ringgit) Sources: Data provided by the Malaysian authorities; and Fund staff estimates. l/ Fiscal year ending December 3 1. 21 Includes adjustment for accounts payable; for 2000, including a loan recovery of RM2,OOO; for 2002, including RM2,OOO contingent reserves. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-35 - Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 37 - Table 6. Malaysia: Key Financial Ratios for Listed Nonfinancial and Financial Companies, 1997-200 1 (In percent, unless otherwise indicated) 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 Listed nonfinancial companies Profit (after tax)/Turnover (net profit margin) 2/ Return on assets Return on shareholder’s funds Dividend yield Earnings yield (one divided by price-earnings ratio) Total debt-to-equity ratio Number of companies included in calculating these ratios Listed financial companies Profit (after tax)/Tumover (net profit margin) Return on assets Return on shareholder’s funds Dividend yield Earnings yield (one divided by price-earnings ratio) Total debt-to-equity ratio Number of companies included in calculating these ratios Corporate debt /GDP 216.5 222.3 223.7 211.6 222.6 Domestic 172.0 177.2 180.5 173.7 182.7 Bonds 22.5 26.6 37.2 41.0 42.1 Bank loans 149.5 150.6 143.3 132.7 140.6 Ofwhich : Outside Danaharta 149.5 146.0 132.0 121.7 129.2 Foreign 44.5 45.1 43.2 37.9 39.9 Of which : Short-term 3.9 4.2 3.2 2.4 3.4 Banking sector short-term foreign debt/GDP 32.3 20.3 12.7 9.3 12.1 6.9 -4.0 2.6 3.0 2.8 2.7 -2.0 0.6 1.0 0.9 6.9 -5.3 1.6 2.7 2.6 1.5 2.1 1.7 1.9 2.5 3.8 -4.7 1.0 1.8 2.0 0.89 0.99 0.98 0.97 1.05 626 667 684 707 318 11 10.9 -15.4 -1.0 13.4 8.6 2.7 -2.0 0.6 1.0 0.9 10.2 -21.0 -1.0 10.6 6.4 1.1 1.8 0.9 1.2 1.4 5.3 -20.0 -0.5 5.4 4.6 1.47 1.66 1.58 1.23 1.28 59 63 62 59 27 I/ Sources: Kuala Lumpur stock exchange data provided in March 2002; BNM Annual Report (various issues). l/ Based on partial information. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 38 - Table 7. Malaysia: Indicators ofExternal Vulnerability, 1998-2002 1998 1999 2000 Prel. 2001 Proj. 2002 Financial indicators Public sector debt (in percent of GDP) l/ 62.3 Total liquidity (M3: percent change, 12-month basis) 1.4 Private sector credit (percent change, 12-month basis) 0.5 Treasury bill interest rate (percent, 12-month basis, average) 2/ 6.9 64.4 61.3 70.5 68.8 7.1 6.3 1.7 6.6 -0.3 7.1 3.6 3.1 3.5 2.9 2.8 External indicators Exports (percent change, 12-month basis in US$) -7.3 17.2 17.0 -10.6 6.0 Imports (percent change, 12.month basis in US$) -26.6 13.5 26.3 -10.3 7.7 Current account balance (in LJS$ billion) 9.5 12.6 8.5 7.2 6.4 Current account balance (in percent of GDP) 13.2 15.9 9.4 8.2 6.9 Capital and fmancial account balance (in US$ billion) 31 -5.0 -7.9 -9.5 -6.2 -2.6 Ofwhich: Short-term capital 4/ Foreign direct investment Other investment (medium- and long-term loans) Gross official reserves (in US$ billion) (In months of imports of goods and services of the following year) Short-term foreign assets of the financial sector (in US$ billion) 4/ Short-term foreign liabilities of the financial sector (in US$ billion) Gross official reserves/total liquidity (M3) (in percent) Gross official reserves/monetary base (in percent) Total shot--term external debt by original maturity (in US$ billion) Total short-term external debt by remaining maturity (in US$ billion) Total short-term external debt by original maturity to reserves (in percent) Total short-term external debt by original maturity to total debt (in percent) Total short-term external debt by remaining maturity to reserves (in percent) Total short-term external debt by remaining maturity to total debt (in percent) Total external debt (in US$ billion) -7.7 -11.2 -12.4 -8.6 -4.3 1.9 2.5 1.8 0.3 0.9 0.9 0.8 1.2 2.1 0.8 26.2 30.9 29.9 30.8 34.6 4.1 3.9 4.2 4.0 4.5 5.6 6.8 7.9 7.4 9.2 7.5 7.0 6.2 26.0 27.7 25.2 25.6 27.0 283.9 256.7 274.5 292.9 8.5 5.9 4.6 6.1 6.6 12.5 9.7 9.0 11.6 11.9 32.3 19.1 15.4 19.9 19.2 19.7 13.9 11.1 13.7 14.5 47.7 31.4 30.0 37.7 34.5 29.1 22.9 21.6 26.0 26.0 42.9 42.4 41.5 44.7 45.9 Ofwhich: Public and publicly guaranteed debt 17.9 19.7 20.4 Total external debt to exports of goods and services (in percent) 50.5 43.3 36.3 External amortization payments to exports of goods and services (in percent) 4.3 4.1 3.3 Exchange rate (per U.S. dollar, period average) 3.9 3.8 3.8 Exchange rate (per U.S. dollar, end of period) 3.8 3.8 3.8 REER appreciation (+) (12-month basis) -20.5 2.9 2.5 NFA of commercial banks (in US$ billion) -3.6 -0.8 0.7 23.9 24.2 42.9 41.6 4.2 5.0 3.8 3.8 3.8 3.8 5.5 1.1 Financial market indicators Kuala Lumpur Stock Exchange Composite Index (KLSE) 5/ Ten-year sovereign bond spread (b.p.s.) 5/ 586 812 680 696 722 561 154 218 176 160 Sources: Data provided by the Malaysian authorities; and Fund staff estimates. 11 Excludes unguaranteed domestic debt of the NFPEs. 2/ Discount rate on three-month treasury bills. 31 tncludes errors and omissions. 4/ Includes net external position of banking system, portfolio investment, and errors and omissions. 5/ Data for 2002 refer to July. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 39 - ANNEX I MALAYSIA:MEDIUM-TERMILLUSTRATIVESCENARIO The Authorities’ Eighth Malaysia Plan (Sth Plan), 2001-05 The Economic Planning Unit produces a blueprint for Malaysia’s economic develop- ment every five years. The gth Plan for 2001-05 was published in April 2001, which outlines objectives, strategies, and programs aimed at creating an equitable and united society, generating sustainable growth, and strengthening economic resilience. The authorities are currently conducting a mid-year review of the Plan in light of recent economic developments. The sth Plan envisions an average real GDP growth rate of 7.5 percent in 2001-05, substantially higher than the average real growth rate of 4.7 percent achieved under the 7th Plan (1996-00), but consistent with the robust real GDP growth observed prior to the crisis. To achieve this target, the gth Plan projects that TFP growth will more than double to 2.8 percent annually (relative to the 1.2 percent that was achieved under the 7’h Plan), underpinned by developing a knowledge-based economy oriented towards the production of high value-added goods and services. To accomplish this goal, the government will provide more focused incentives for high value-added sectors, such as Information and Communication Technology (ICT), and continue to undertake structural reforms in the financial and corporate sectors to further improve resilience and competitiveness of the Malaysian economy. The Sth Plan envisions that investment and savings will remain large relative to GDP to support real growth through capital accumulation. The government projects that investment and savings will average 3 1.4 percent and 35.3 percent of GDP over 2001-05. To ensure fiscal sustainability over the medium term and the role of the private sector as the engine of growth, the government will seek to reduce the average fiscal deficit of the federal government to 1 ‘/z percent of GDP over the Plan period. Monetary policy under the gth Plan is aimed at maintaining price stability, with the projected average GDP deflator to grow at less than % percent per annum over the Plan period (compared to 3.9 percent per annum achieved under the 7th Plan), while the exchange rate will remain fixed. The sth Plan also envisions that the current account surplus will fall to 3.9 percent of GDP during 2001-05 (compared to 6.5 percent of GDP achieved under the 7th Plan). This will result from a modest decrease in real export growth and a more substantial increase in real import growth, with the latter stemming mainly from higher imports of capital goods. Poverty reduction and social restructuring are important components under the Sth Plan. The incidence of absolute poverty is projected to fall to % percent by 2005. The government will review current strategies and modify programs to ensure balanced participation among and within ethnic and income groups and regions. In this context, the authorities plan to develop policies to further increase the proportion of Bumiputera equity ownership in the corporate sector to 30 percent by 2010 which, in their view, would help to reduce poverty further. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4o- ANNEX I Social and Demographic Indicators (1995 and 2000) Poverty (percent of population) Total fertility rate (births per woman) Gini Index Life expectancy at birth Infant mortality (per thousand live births) 1995 2000 7.50 3.40 3.01 49.2 71.74 72.54 11.70 7.90 However, some of the original targets under the Sth Plan have become very difficult to reach. Real GDP growth of 7.5 percent per annum has become an untenable goal, given two years of substantially low growth in 2001-02 and a correction in private investment that has lowered the potential growth rate to 6-6s percent. While a balanced budget for the central government is likely to be achieved over the medium term, the pace of fiscal consolidation could be moderated and is likely to deviate from the original target if the recovery is slower than anticipated. The authorities will conduct a mid-term review of the gth Plan in 2003 to revise their targets and review the medium term objectives. Eighth Malaysia Plan (2001-05) 7’h Plan gth Plan Actual Target 1996-00 2001-05 Prel. 2001 Staff Proj. 11 2002 Real sector (percent change, average) Real GDP growth GDP deflator Gross domestic investment Gross national saving 4.7 7.5 0.5 3.5 3.9 0.4 -2.6 2.0 33.6 31.4 23.8 24.0 40.1 35.3 32.0 30.9 Fiscal sector (percent of GDP, average) Federal government Overall Balance Consolidated public sector overall balance -1.9 -1.5 -5.5 -4.9 1.5 1.5 -2.9 -2.0 Balance of payments (in US$ billion, average) Trade balance Exports, f.o.b. Imports, f.o.b. Services account Current account balance (In percent of GDP) 13.5 17.9 18.4 18.3 72.9 123.1 88.0 93.3 59.4 105.1 69.6 75.0 -7.2 -11.8 -9.0 -9.7 4.7 4.0 7.2 6.4 6.5 3.9 8.2 6.9 Source: Eighth Malaysia Plan (2001-05) and Fund staff estimates. l/ Fund staff estimates. 2/ Implied values based on 2001 and 2002 Fund staff estimates. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-41- ANNEX I Staff projections Based on the most recent baseline WE0 projections, world growth is assumed to increase to 2.5 percent in 2002, with export demand for electronics picking up significantly (Annex I Table 1). Despite increased volatility, the global and regional financial markets are expected to be relatively stable and there will be no significant pressures on the ringgit. Under this positive, but still tentative scenario, Malaysia could continue its countercyclical fiscal policy as envisaged in the 2002 budget, accompanied by a monetary policy stance that is consistent with strengthening international reserves and maintaining the peg. Over the medium term, Malaysia’s policy mix and degree of flexibility to respond to future external shocks will have a significant impact on its outlook. In addition to the stated policy intention of fiscal consolidation and further structural reforms, greater flexibility in the exchange and interest rate regimes will help improve market confidence and enhance Malaysia’s capacity to deal with unforeseen future external shocks. Near-term outlook Real GDP growth is projected to reach 3.5 percent in 2002. The main impetus for growth is anticipated to come from private sector demand, underpinned by a revival in domestic investment and a recovery in consumer confidence. Inflation is expected to remain subdued and the output gap will close gradually. Exports and imports are expected to grow by 6 percent and 7% percent in 2002, in line with the projected recovery in the global economy and a pick up in domestic demand. The trade balance is expected to remain in large surplus (19% percent of GDP), contributing to a sizable surplus in the current account (7 percent of GDP). Short-term capital outflows would continue, but they are likely to be lower than in previous years. External reserves are expected to reach $34.6 billion by end 2002 (equivalent to four months of imports and three times short-term external liabilities). Medium-term outlook Malaysia’s medium-term outlook will benefit from the ongoing structural reforms of the banking and corporate sectors, as well as improved productivity as Malaysia moves toward a knowledge-based economy. On the assumption that the global recovery will start in 2002 and be sustained over the medium term, Malaysia’s growth rate could accelerate to reach its potential of 6% percent in 2005-06. Domestic demand would grow at a faster pace than real GDP, supported by rising investments, particularly from the private sector, and improving productivity as Malaysia moves toward the knowledge-based economy. The contribution to growth from net exports is expected to be negative, but marginal. Current account balances would return to a more sustainable level of l-l % percent of GDP over the medium term, as investment-led imports pick up with the development of a knowledge-based economy. Savings are expected to remain stable (3 l-32 percent of GDP), while the investment to GDP ratio would increase markedly (to 30 percent of GDP in 2007 from 24 percent of GDP in 2002), led by the private sector. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-42- ANNEX I The central government budget is expected to be brought into a balanced position in 2004, while the public sector deficit would be reduced to 1% percent of GDP (from 2 percent of GDP in 2002). The fiscal consolidation over the medium-term would facilitate an effective reduction in public debt (by 19 percent of GDP) to around 50 percent of GDP by 2007. Even if the projected recovery in external demand does not materialize and the authorities resort to further fiscal expansion in 2003, Malaysia’s public debt dynamics indicate that fiscal sustainability over the medium term would not be in jeopardy.’ Uncertain ties and risks There are considerable uncertainties to the outlook and a number of risk factors in the external environment: A much weaker-than-anticipated recovery in external demand could trigger a reversal in confidence, with an adverse impact on domestic demand, particularly private investment, and a further erosion of the financial positions of the corporate sector. A substantial hike in U.S. interest rates would reverse the interest rate differential in favor of Malaysia, with a potential risk of exacerbating capital outflows and leading to losses of external reserves. Large and unexpected variations in major regional currencies may give rise to concerns about Malaysia’s external competitiveness and could rekindle speculative pressure on the ringgit peg. International capital and equity markets could become more unstable, particularly from contagion of a global or regional crisis, which could increase the difficulty and costs of meeting external financing requirements. Weaker-than-expected FDI inflows on a sustained basis, for example, in the context of a further opening of China, and/or a surge in short-term outflows originating from a sudden deterioration in the political outlook could also exert pressure on the balance of payments and reverse market expectations about the sustainability of the peg. ‘See Box 3 of the companion Staff Report. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 43 - ANNEX I Malaysia: Selected Medium-Term Economic and Financial Indicators, 200 l-07 l/ Prel. 2001 2002 2003 Proj 2004 2005 2006 2007 Real sector (percent change) Real GDP growth Real domestic demand CPI inflation (period average) GDP deflator Saving and investment (percent of GDP) Gross domestic investment Private, including stocks Public Gross national saving 32.0 30.9 30.9 31.4 31.5 31.4 31.5 Private 13.7 15.3 15.4 15.6 15.7 15.7 15.7 Public 18.3 15.6 15.6 15.8 15.8 15.7 15.8 Fiscal sector (percent of GDP) Federal government overall balance Revenue Expenditure and net lending Consolidated public sector overall balance Total public sector debt 21 -5.5 -4.9 -2.4 0.0 0.4 0.4 0.4 23.8 23.1 23.1 23.2 23.4 23.4 23.4 29.3 28.0 25.5 23.2 23.0 23.0 23.0 -2.9 -2.0 -2.0 -1.4 -0.9 -0.7 -0.5 70.5 68.8 65.8 61.9 57.7 53.6 49.6 Monetary sector (annual percent change) M3 growth Net domestic assets Net claims on private sector Three-month interbank rate (period average, in percent) 1.7 0.7 3.6 3.3 6.6 9.0 8.7 9.2 4.8 8.8 8.9 10.3 3.1 6.0 6.2 7.4 9.1 9.1 10.2 11.6 7.5 8.8 Balance of payments (in US$ billion) Trade balance Services account Current account balance (In percent of GDP) 18.4 18.3 19.0 19.0 18.9 17.9 16.7 -9.0 -9.7 -10.3 -10.8 -11.3 -11.7 -12.2 7.2 6.4 6.5 6.1 5.5 3.9 2.2 8.2 6.9 6.4 5.6 4.6 3.0 1.5 Capital account balance -3.9 Medium- and long-term 2.4 Ofwhich : Net foreign direct investment 0.3 Short-term -6.2 Errors and omissions -2.3 Overall balance 1.0 -2.6 -3.1 -2.9 -2.8 -1.2 -1.3 1.7 2.3 2.4 2.7 3.0 3.3 0.9 1.6 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.6 -4.3 -5.3 -5.3 -5.6 -4.2 -4.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 3.8 3.4 3.2 2.6 2.7 0.9 International trade (annual percent change) Export value Import value Terms oftrade -10.6 6.0 9.4 8.0 8.7 8.4 8.5 -10.3 7.7 10.8 9.8 10.5 11.0 10.9 -1.5 -0.1 -0.2 -0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2 Gross official reserves (in US$ billion) 30.8 34.6 38.0 41.2 43.8 46.6 47.5 (In months of following year’s imports of goods and nonfactor services) 4.0 4.5 4.5 4.4 4.3 4.2 3.9 (In percent of short-term debt) 31 265.6 290.1 318.7 359.4 316.5 368.0 355.4 0.5 3.5 5.3 6.0 6.5 6.5 6.5 0.1 4.9 5.9 7.0 7.6 8.4 8.3 1.4 1.8 2.5 3.0 3.0 3.0 3.0 -2.6 2.0 2.5 2.5 2.5 2.5 2.5 23.8 24.0 24.5 25.8 26.9 28.4 30.0 2.6 6.4 6.9 8.6 10.2 11.9 13.7 21.2 17.6 17.6 17.2 16.7 16.5 16.3 Sources: Data provided by the Malaysian authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections. l/ Period ending December 3 1, 2/ Staff estimates; excludes non-government guaranteed domestic debt ofthe NFPEs. 3/ By remaining maturity. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 44- ANNEX II Malaysia: Statistical Issues The quality and availability of Malaysia’s economic statistics are generally good. Malaysia subscribes to the Special Data Dissemination Standard (SDDS) and has taken an SDDS flexibility option for timeliness of dissemination of IIP data. National accounts: The Department of Statistics Malaysia (DOSM) has developed good quarterly National Accounts Statistics that meet the SDDS requirements. The Fund’s Statistics Department (STA) has provided technical assistance. Currently, DOSM compiles and publishes annual and quarterly estimates of GDP by activity and by expenditure at current and constant prices, and annual estimates for gross disposable income, saving, and net lending for the economy based on the 1968 SNA. The quarterly data are released with a two-month lag. l In addition, DOSM has developed experimental institutional sector income and outlay accounts in accordance with the 1993 SNA. The 1993 SNA institutional sector accounts project was undertaken with UNDP funding, and with technical support from UNSD. There are still some differences in the estimates for key aggregates, particularly for GDP, Final Consumption Expenditures (Government, Household, NPISH, and Gross Capital Formation) common to both the 1968 SNA-based GDP compilation system and the 1993 SNA-based institutional sector accounts system. l Prices: The CPI and the PPI are available on a timely and comprehensive basis. As part of the PPI program, an import price index is compiled, but not an export price index. STA has encouraged DOSM to start developing an export price index and has provided some assistance in this respect. l Labor market statistics: Data on employment and unemployment are disseminated quarterly, whereas wages/earnings are disseminated monthly. l Monetary statistics: Over the past two years Bank Negara Malaysia (BNM), with the technical support of STA, has made an effort to bring Malaysia’s monetary statistics reported to the Fund into conformity with the Fund’s new reporting format. Coverage of the monetary data has extended to Islamic banks, but there remains a need to expand the coverage of the “Other Depository Corporations Survey” to include saving and development institutions as well. A follow-up money and banking statistics mission could be considered in the near future, particularly in view of the revisions of accounting rules following the banking consolidation. l External sector statistics: Although DOSM and BNM have made some progress toward the implementation of the recommendations of the December 1998 BOP mission, the follow-up BOP mission of December 1999 concluded that many of the issues would be more effectively addressed if responsibility for compilation of the BOP data was to be formally transferred from DOSM to BNM. Since then, marked progress has been made in BOP statistics, including the publication of the quarterly BOP estimates and, more Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-45- ANNEX II recently, a move to the fifth edition of the Balance ofPayments Manual. However, there is still a lack of component details in financial accounts of the BOP, which are currently restricted to inward and outward direct investment and overall net figures for the broad functional categories or portfolio and other investment. While the BOP data are timelier and some additional financial account data are made available for surveillance purposes, submission for publication in IFS has not been timely basis. External debt data broken down by maturity (short-term, and medium- and long-term) and sector (federal government, NFPEs, and private sector for long- and medium-term debt and banks and non-bank sector for short-term debt ) are disseminated on a quarterly basis. Breakdowns of external debt by instrument and projections of debt service for medium- and long-term debt are provided annually for surveillance purposes. Available data on international investment position are partial and outdated. Disclosure of international reserves data exceeds the SDDS-based benchmark: while detailed reserves template data are disseminated monthly with a one month lag, headline figures on international reserves and data on selected components of reserve assets available on a fortnightly basis. l Fiscal accounts: Progress has been made in improving the consolidation of accounts across various levels of government. An effort has been made to broaden the coverage of major nonfinancial public enterprises (NFPEs). Existing major weaknesses pertain to the frequency and quantity of data on NFPEs and accounting of quasi-fiscal and off-budget operations. Joint efforts are necessary from the Economic Planning Unit (EPU), Treasury, and BNM to compile the data on quasi-fiscal and off-budget operations, improve the reliability of the data, and consolidate them into the fiscal accounts of the public sector. Malaysia has not provided data for the GFS Yearbook since 1997 and for the IFS since 1999. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 46 - ANNEX II 3 3 J 3 2 3 1, ;3 0 J & 0 L, Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-47- ANNEX III I. II. III. IV. V. VI. VII. MALAYSIA:FUNDRELATIONS (As of July 3 1,2002) Membership Status: Joined March 7, 1958; Article VIII General Resources Account: SDR Million % Quota Quota 1,486.60 100.00 Fund holdings of currency 878.45 59.09 Reserve position in Fund 608.16 40.91 SDR Department: SDR Million % Allocation Net cumulative allocation 139.05 100.0 Holdings 105.15 75.62 Outstanding Purchases and Loans: None Financial Arrangements: None Projected Obligations to Fund: None Exchange Arrangement: Since September 1998, the ringgit has been pegged to the U.S. dollar at the rate of RM 3.8 per U.S. dollar. This middle rate is quoted by the central bank, with the maximum spread between the buying and selling rate fixed at 2 percent for the U.S. dollar, the euro, the pound sterling, the Japanese yen, the Hong Kong dollar, and the Singapore dollar. The spread is 3 percent for all other currencies. Malaysia has accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4. Malaysia maintains bilateral payments arrangements with 24 countries. As of 1998, 19 of these arrangements potentially gave rise to exchange restrictions which, since these were set up before July 1994, had been temporarily exempted pursuant to Decision No. 10749-(94/67). The authorities have since indicated that the restrictive features of these arrangements have been eliminated. On the capital account, foreign borrowing above RM 5 million is subject to approval, and foreign ownership of Malaysian equity is limited in some sectors (notably banking). Capital control measures imposed in early 1994 have all been lifted, with the exception of reserve requirements on foreign liabilities of banks, which are viewed as leveling the playing field with sources of domestic funding. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-48- ANNEX III In September 1998, Bank Negara Malaysia imposed the following exchange and capital restrictions: 0) Transfers to and from ringgit-denominated external accounts of nonresidents not physically in Malaysia are restricted, including a one-year holding period on repatriation of portfolio capital. The restrictions were relaxed in steps in February and September, 1999: repatriation of portfolio capital is now permitted, but capital gains therefrom are subject to a 10 percent exit levy; investments in property and MESDAQ (stock exchange which lists growth and technology shares) are exempt from the levy. (ii) Ringgit funds abroad were required to be repatriated by end-September 1998, following which it was prohibited to bring in more than RM 1,000 per person per trip. The import and export of ringgit by travelers, both resident and nonresident, are restricted, also to that amount; effective March 1, 1999, the ceiling allowed for the import and export of ringgit was raised to RM 10,000 for border trade with Thailand. (iii) Effective December 20, 2000, licensed commercial banks can extend intraday credit of up to RM 200 million, and overnight credit of up to RM 10 million to non-resident stock- broking companies and non-resident global custodian banks. That replaces a complete prohibition of the extension of credit facilities to non-resident institutions. (iv) All export and import settlements must be made in foreign currency. 69 Trading in Malaysian shares on Singapore’s Central Limit Order Book (CLOB) was de facto prohibited as a result of strict enforcement of the existing law requiring Malaysian shares to be registered in the Kuala Lumpur Stock Exchange prior to trade. The issue of the blocked CLOB securities has now been resolved, and the securities are being gradually released. As of March 2000, proceeds from the sale of CLOB securities are free from exit levy. Repatriation of portfolio capital has now been permitted. Capital controls were further eased on February 1,200l; a 10 percent levy was applied only on profits made from portfolio investments that have been held for less than 12 months. On May 2,2001, the levy on portfolio investments was removed entirely. These restrictions (including the recent modifications) do not contravene Malaysia’s obligations under Article VIII, but their implementation will need to be kept under review. VIII. Article IV Consultation: Malaysia is on the standard 12-month consultation cycle. Discussions for the 2001 Article IV consultation took place during May 14-25,200l. The staff report (SM/01/242) was discussed by the Executive Board on August 29,200l. Discussion for the 2002 Article IV consultation took place during June 17-28,2002. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-49- ANNEX III IX. Technical Assistance: MAE: A mission visited Kuala Lumpur in February 1998 to assist the authorities in developing a strategy for financial sector reform, assess the vulnerability of banking institutions, advise on measures related to regulatory practices, and review liquidity and monetary management arrangements. STA: A monetary statistics mission visited Kuala Lumpur in June 1998 and made recommendations for improving the methodology for the valuation of foreign currency denominated accounts as well as the consistency of the interbank accounts in the monetary statistics. STA: A staff member visited Kuala Lumpur in October/November 1998 to provide assistance in the compilation of quarterly national accounts. The mission was a follow-up to a multisector statistics mission in April 1997 and a quarterly national accounts mission in February 1998. STA: A mission visited Kuala Lumpur in December 1998 to review Malaysia’s balance of payments and international investment position statistics. BCS: A staff member visited Kuala Lumpur in February 1999 to assist Bank Negara Malaysia in developing a centralized database system. STA: A mission visited Kuala Lumpur in May 1999 to provide further technical assistance on the development of quarterly national accounts. The mission was the last one in a series of statistics missions in the area of quarterly national accounts, following the multisector statistics mission in April 1997. MAE: A mission visited Kuala Lumpur in February 2000 to conduct a workshop in bank supervision, focusing on the issues of consolidated supervision, risk-based supervision, and accounting requirements. X. Resident Representative/Advisor: None Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 50 - ANNEX IV Malaysia: Relations with the World Bank Group (As of September 1,2002) The World Bank Group recommenced relations with Malaysia in 1998 after a three-year hiatus. As a first step in this process, the Bank prepared a Country Economic Memorandum (CEM), which was subsequently transformed into a Structural Policy Review (SPR) paper, with an emphasis on crisis-related and medium-term constraints to development. In addition, the World Bank provided technical input into the financial sector strategy that was elaborated by an MAE mission in February 1998. The World Bank also provided a fast-disbursing Economic Recovery and Social Sector Loan of $300 million in June 1998; Fund staff participated in the preparation of the loan. In February 1999, the World Bank completed its SPR and shared it with the government. The SPR focused on: social safety nets; financial and corporate sector restructuring; macroeconomic policies for growth; and public sector management. A Social and Structural Review Update was reviewed by the government and released in January 2001 under gray cover. The Bank’s Board of Directors discussed a Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) paper on March 30, 1999. The CAS proposed a program of lending and nonlending services designed to mitigate the social consequences of the regional economic crisis and support medium-term social development, and to restore short-term growth and medium- term competitiveness. Given the strength of the recovery, however, it is unlikely that the government will draw against the lending program envisaged in the CAS. The World Bank completed a Public Expenditure Review (PER) which was reviewed by the government, and distributed under gray cover in 2000. The PER: (i) assessed the government’s performance in allocating and using public funds during the crisis; (ii) addressed selective fiscal challenges in the social sectors and infrastructure facing Malaysia over the medium term; and (iii) assessed public expenditure management. Total IBRD commitments as of July 3 1,2002 stood at $4,150.6 million. With cancellations of $867.4 million, and disbursements of $3,130.2, the undisbursed amount is $153 million for the Education Sector Support Credit. Reports: “Meeting Labor Needs: More Workers and Better Skills,” February 1995 “Structural Policy Review,” January 1999 “Country Assistance Strategy,” March 1999 “Public Expenditure Review”, May 2000 “Social and Structural Review Update,” January 2001 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-5l- ANNEX V Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 021xx FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE International Monetary Fund 700 lgth Street, NW Washington, D. C. 20431 USA IMF Concludes 2002 Article IV Consultation with Malaysia On [October 16, 20021, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded the Article IV consultation with Malaysia.’ Background The Malaysian economy is entering a recovery phase. Following two consecutive quarters of negative growth, real GDP growth turned positive to 1 .I percent (y-o-y) in the first quarter of 2002 and accelerated to 3.8 percent (y-o-y) in the second quarter, driven by growth in consumption and public investment, as well as rising external demand, whereas private investment remains somewhat weak. Unemployment has been moderate (below 4 percent) and inflation remains subdued (below 2 percent). The output gap is narrowing with capacity utilization at 80 percent at end-June. The recovery has been broad-based, with a significant contribution from domestic demand-driven sectors, and more recently a pick-up in external demand. The external sector remained relatively robust in 2001 and early 2002 despite an adverse global environment. Both the external trade and current accounts recorded large surpluses, and these have remained relatively stable during the first half of 2002 (compared with the same period in 2001), as the growth in imports has kept pace with the recovery in l Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial information, and discusses with officials the country’s economic developments and policies. On return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the country’s authorities. This PIN summarizes the views of the Executive Board as expressed during the [October 16, 20021 Executive Board discussion based on the staff report. Washington, DC. 20431 l Telephone 202-623-7100 l Fax 202-623-6772 * www.imf.org Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-52- ANNEX V exports. Net capital outflows have declined since the second half of 2001 and portfolio investment flows turned positive in the first few months of 2002, reflecting in part an improved market sentiment regarding the strength of Malaysia’s economic fundamentals, and in part the reversal of the interest rate differential (vis-a-vis the United States) in favor of Malaysia. However, net foreign direct investment inflows remained low in the first quarter of 2002, reflecting a reduction in the share capital of a foreign-owned bank, repayment of inter- company loans, and an increase in direct investment abroad. Malaysia’s external debt has increased moderately (to 51 percent of GDP in 2001), but remains manageable. Total external debt as a ratio to exports is among the lowest of emerging market economies, and total external debt represents only about 6 percent of exports of goods and nonfactor services. Gross international reserves, which declined sharply in the period ending May 2001, have since recovered to $34.2 billion at end-August 2002, sufficient to cover four months of imports of goods and nonfactor services and three times short-term external liabilities by remaining maturity. Recent market developments have confirmed a favorable assessment of Malaysia’s outlook as reflected in an upgrading of its sovereign ratings and oversubscription for its recent international bond placements. The emerging recovery has been supported by a timely and carefully formulated expansion in fiscal policy, which remains the main countercyclical tool available under the current fixed exchange rate system. Although the overall central government deficit (5% percent of GDP) was smaller than anticipated under the revised 2001 budget and marginally lower than its level in 2000, the consolidated public sector deficit shifted from a surplus of 3/4 percent of GDP in 2000 to a deficit of 3 percent of GDP in 2001, providing a sizable, positive fiscal impulse. The original 2002 budget envisaged an overall deficit of 2% percent of GDP for the consolidated public sector and 5% percent of GDP for the central government, which implied some fiscal consolidation at both levels. The revised 2002 budget, announced on September 20, [... to be added]. Total public sector debt reached 70% percent of GDP in 2001 (up from 61 percent of GDP a year earlier). The increase was accounted for by: (i) deficit financing of about 3 percent of GDP; (ii) an assumption of debt by the government (equivalent to about 3% percent of GDP) associated with the debt restructuring of Malaysia Airline System and two other large infrastructure projects (Putra and Star Light Rail), which until recently were managed and operated by the private sector; and (iii) the impact of a decline in nominal GDP. Nearly 70 percent of the increase was in the form of either direct or guaranteed debt by the central government, and 60 percent of the increase was funded from external sources. Central government debt, at 43% percent of GDP, appears to be within manageable limits as debt service accounts for 12 percent of budget revenue and 14 percent of operating expenditure. Debt of the nonfinancial public enterprises (NFPEs), at 26% percent of GDP in 2001, is owed mostly by the three largest NFPEs (Petronas, Tenaga, and Malaysia Telecom), whose capacities to repay have been sound. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-53- ANNEX V The Bank Negara Malaysia (BNM) intervention rate has remained stable and above international interest rates, despite a 50 basis point cut in September 2001. The resulting interest rate differential (I’!! percentage points above the corresponding LIBOR), together with improved economic fundamentals, contributed to a sharp reduction in net capital outflows and facilitated a rebuilding of international reserves. To address the monetary impact of a more favorable capital account and a continued current accou.nt surplus, BNM conducted sizable sterilization operations while ensuring adequate domestic liquidity. This action, coupled with a more liberal and competitive pricing of loans by commercial banks (resulting in lending rates below the base-lending rate, in particular for loans to the housing and corporate sectors), has complemented the fiscal stimulus in helping the economy weather the impact of a global slowdown. Banking and corporate sector reforms have been given renewed impetus. Despite the slowdown in economic activity, the banking system remains generally sound with capital adequacy ratios at 12%-l 3 percent since mid-2001 and satisfactory profitability levels. Net nonperforming loans (NPLs) (based on a 3-month classification) declined to slightly below 11 percent of total loans at end-July 2002 (from 11 ‘/z percent at end-2001). The bank merger program that began in 1999 was completed in 2001, with 54 banking institutions merged into ten banking groups. Operational integration within each group continues to make progress. Danaharta (the asset management company established in 1998) has restructured nearly all of its holdings of NPLs, and the Corporate Debt Restructuring Committee also established in 1998) closed down its operations as planned at end-July 2002, completing all but one of the 48 debt restructuring cases. Executive Board Assessment <Begin Typing Here> Public lnformafion Notices (PINS) are issued, (i) at the request of a member country, following the conclusion of the Article IV consultation for countries seeking to make known the views of the IMF to the public. This action is intended to strengthen IMF surveillance over the economic policies of member countries by increasing the transparency of the IMF’s assessment of these policies; and (ii) following policy discussions in the Executive Board at the decision of the Board. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public