. DOCUMENT OF INTERNATIONAL,MONETARY FUND AND NOT FOR PUBLIC USE ARCHIVES ROOM IS1 l-400 0450 SM/O1/6 CONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION January 8,200l To: Members of the Executive Board From: The Secretary Subject: Solomon Islands-Staff Report for the 2000 Article IV Consultation Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staff report for the 2000 Article IV consultation with the Solomon Islands, which is tentatively scheduled for discussion on Friday, January 19,200 1. At the time of circulation of this paper to the Board, the Secretary’s Department has not received a communication from the authorities of the Solomon Islands indicating whether or not they consent to the Fund’s publication of this paper; such communication may be received after the authorities have had an opportunity to read the paper. Questions may be referred to Mr. Rosales (ext. 37 164). Unless the Documents Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the WTO Secretariat on Wednesday, January 17,200l; and to the Asian Development Bank and the European Commission, following its consideration by the Executive Board. Att: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicCONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND SOLOMON ISLANDS Staff Report for the 2000 Article IV Consultation Prepared by the Staff Representatives for the 2000 Consultation with Solomon Islands Approved by R. Anthony Elson and Shigeo Kashiwagi January 5,200l l Discussions were held in Honiara during March 2 l-April 4 and November 4-l 1,200O. On the first visit, the mission met with Prime Minister Ulufa’alu and Finance Minister Kimata, while on the second, it met with Prime Minister Sogavare and Finance Minister Rim. On both occasions the mission met Central Bank Governor Houenipwela, other senior officials, private sector representa- tives, and major donors. The first staff team comprised Messrs. Rosales (Head), Fletcher, Griffiths, and N’guiamba, while the second included Mr. Rosales (Head) and Ms. Liu (all APD). Mr. Hililan (OED) participated in discussions in the first visit, while Mr. Brown (Consultant MAE) worked closely with the second mission. l An ethnic conflict led to a political crisis in June 2000, which precipitated a change in government. The new administration shifted priorities from adjustment and reform to securing peace and restoring harmonious ethnic relations. Following the signing of a peace treaty in mid-October, the government now faces the challenges of consolidating peace and promoting reconstruction in the context of a large fall in output and a sharp deterioration in the government finances. l Solomon Islands accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2,3, and 4. However, in June 2000 exchange restrictions were introduced that impose delays on the availability of foreign exchange for current international payments. Approval of these restrictions is not recommended as there is no timetable for their removal. The Solomon Islands is on a 24-month consultation cycle. l There are serious weaknesses in the quality of fiscal and balance of payments data, and official estimates of the national accounts for the period 1995-99 are not available. Data on monetary aggregates, reserves, and inflation are reported regularly to the Fund. In general, the poor quality of data introduces a large degree of uncertainty in estimates and projections, and hampers the assessment of recent developments and policies. l Mr. Resales was the principal contributor to this report. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2- Contents Page Executive Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ,,............... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 I. Introduction and Background .,.................................,....................................................... 5 II. Recent Developments ....................................................................................................... 5 A. Developments in 1999 ............................................................................................. 5 B. Developments in 2000 ............................................................................................. 9 III. Policy Discussions ......................................................................................................... .13 A. Fiscal Policy ........................................................................................................... 14 B. Monetary and Exchange Rate Policies .................................................................. 17 C. Structural Policies .................................................................................................. 18 D. Data Reporting, Statistical Issues, and Technical Assistance ................................ 20 IV. The Medium-Term Outlook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20 V. Staff Appraisal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..I........................................................................... 21 Boxes 1. Political System and Ethnic Conflict ................................................................................ 6 2. Land Tenure and Custom .................................................................................................. 8 3. Tax Measures Implemented in January 2000 ................................................................. 10 4. The Townsville Peace Agreement .................................................................................. 11 5. Asian Development Bank Loan ..................................................................................... .16 6. Stabex Funds.. ................................................................................................................ .19 Figures 1. Selected Economic Indicators, 1995-2000 ..................................................................... 25 2. Selected Fiscal and Monetary Indicators, 1995-2000 ................................................... .26 3. Exchange Rates, Terms of Trade, and Official Reserves, 1989-2000 ........................... 27 Tables 1. Selected Economic Indicators, 1995-2001............... ..................................................... .28 2. Compliance with Indicative Targets for Monitoring the Government’s Adjustment Program, 1998-99 ........................................................................................................ 29 3. 1995-200 1 30 . Summary Accounts of the Central Government, ......................................... 4. Summary of Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt, 19962001...................... 3 1 5. Balance of Payments, 1995-200 1. .................................................................................. 32 6. Summary Accounts of the Banking System, 1995-2001 ............................................... 33 7. Vulnerability Indicators, 1996-2000 .............................................................................. 34 8. Social and Demographic Indicators ............................................................................... 35 9. Medium-Term Scenario, 1998-2005 ..................................................... i.. ..................... .36 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3- Annexes I. Performance Against Actions Proposed in the 1999 Interim Consultation.. ................. .37 II. Selected Statistical Issues ............................................................................................... 39 III. Fund Relations ................... ..: .......................................................................................... .42 IV Relations with the World Bank Group ............................................................................ 44 V. Relations with the Asian Development Bank ................................................................. 46 IV. Public Information Notice ............................................................................................... 47 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4- EXECUTIVE SUMMARY l Ethnic unrest complicated the implementation of the government’s reform program in 1999 and early 2000, triggering a sharp fall in output and a deterioration in the fiscal position. Extraordinary outlays to deal with the unrest contributed to an expansion in the overall government deficit (after grants) in 1999 to 2.7 percent of GDP, or about 2 percentage points higher than the government’s program target. l in early June 2000, the escalating ethnic conflict led to a political crisis resulting in a change in government. The new administration that took office at end-June shifted priorities, concentrating on efforts to bring peace to the country. Such efforts culminated in the signing of a peace agreement on October 15 in Townsville, Australia. l The country is now facing the challenge of consolidating peace in the context of a deep recession and a major weakening of the government finances. The peace agreement contains commitments on repatriation payments and the launching of public works to help demobilized militants move back to their home villages and find employ- ment. Rehabilitation programs are also contemplated to repair infrastructure and redress losses precipitated by the conflict. l A joint donor group visited Honiara in late October-early November 2000, including teams from the Fund, the World Bank, and the Asian Development Bank (AsDB), to assess conditions and offer support for peace and reconstruction. The authorities viewed the Fund’s role as that of assisting in the development of a macro- economic policy framework within which assistance from donors and other multilateral agencies could be programmed. In line with the external assistance that appears possible, the Fund mission recommended limiting the overall government deficit to around 2 per- cent of GDP in 2001. This target would permit a small recovery in the net international reserves (NIR) of the central bank and an expansion in bank credit to the private sector, while allowing a significant increase in development spending. If external assistance were to be larger, a higher deficit could be accommodated. l Formulation of a budget for 2001 consistent with the recommendations of the joint donor group will be essential to expedite disbursement of external assistance. The authorities were also advised to improve the efficiency and transparency of fiscal policy, intensify efforts to restore law and order, and move forward with structural reform. In the context of negotiations with the AsDB for a post-conflict rehabilitation loan, the authorities agreed in late November 2000 to the fiscal target proposed by the Fund mission. They were not prepared, however, to phase out the recently reintroduced policy of discretionary tax exemptions to selected taxpayers, but undertook to define criteria to guide this policy, possibly by early 200 1. l If the authorities are unable to adopt policies that elicit sufficient external support, the prospects for reconstruction and recovery would be very uncertain. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicI. INTRODUCTIONANDBACKGROUND 1. The Solomon Islands is a small open economy, with abundant natural resources and high potential for rapid economic growth. Its mainly rural population is growing at a quick pace and depends primarily on subsistence farming and fishing. Over the last 30 years per capita income contracted due in partto shortcomings in economic management, structural impediments to growth and, more recently, to the destruction caused by ethnic conflict. Apart from gold production which started in 1998, most foreign investment has been channeled to the forestry, fishing, palm oil, and telecommunications sectors. Since independence in 1978, the public sector has played a key role in the economy, accounting on average for about one-third of GDP and recorded employment in recent years. 2. The Solomon Islands made important progress in economic reform through June 2000. The government of Prime Minister Ulufa’alu took office in September 1997 in the midst of a severe fiscal crisis and adverse external conditions, as the onset of the Asian crisis brought an abrupt end to a boom in log exports. The government’s program aimed at resolving the fiscal crisis, strengthening the official international reserve position, and creating a more favorable environment for private sector-led growth through structural reforms. The main measures were a devaluation of the S.I. dollar, a tightening of fiscal and monetary policies, and a regularization of relations with creditors. As a result of this adjustment effort, the fiscal deficit was reduced substantially in 1998, the stock of arrears in relation to GDP was cut by about one-half, and inflation started to fall (Table 1 and Figure 1). With the policy reforms and the start-up of the large Gold Ridge mine, the external current account shifted into surplus in 1998; progress was also made on structural reforms. II. RECENTDEVELOPMENTS A. Developments in 1999 3. In the context of the 1999 interim discussions, the staff assisted the authorities in the formulation of a macroeconomic policy framework, including a quarterly monetary program to support the adjustment effort. This framework aimed at limiting the fiscal deficit to under 1 percent of GDP, avoiding recourse to domestic bank credit, eliminating virtually all arrears and regularizing relations with treasury bill holders, securing external borrowing only on concessional terms, and advancing structural reforms. At the conclusion of the interim consultation in June 1999, Directors commended the government for its generally successful record of policy implementation, and broadly endorsed the macroeconomic and structural policy framework for 1999 as a sound basis for balanced and sustainable growth in the years ahead. The World Bank took into account the Fund Board’s summing-up of the interim consultation in approving the government’s request for a Structural Adjustment Credit (SAC) on June 17, 1999. 4. Performance under the government’s adjustment program was complicated by ethnic unrest that intensified in mid-1999 (Box 1). The hostilities were associated with long-standing disputes over land control under a largely communal tenure system Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-6- Box 1. Solomon Islands: Political System and Ethnic Conflict Political system The political system is based on a constitutional monarchy, with a UK-style cabinet headed by a prime minister chosen by and from parliament. The head of state is Queen Elizabeth II, represented by a governor-general, who must be a Solomon Islander. Bartholomew Ulufa’alu was elected prime minister by parliamentary vote after the election of August 1997. Following a coup attempt in early June 2000, parliament voted on June 30 to replace Mr. Ulufa’alu with Mr. Manasseh Sogavare, in an extraordinary election to end the political crisis. The next election is due by September 2001. Nature of the conflict The ethnic violence that intensified in mid-1999 appears to have developed over a long period of time. The indigenous majority on Guadalcanal came to harbor animosity against migrant workers from the island of Malaita. This appears to have been based on the perception that Malaitans have enjoyed greater success in the competition for jobs and resources, which have been scarce in Malaita and comparatively abundant in Guadalcanal. Malaitans gained control of a growing portion of land in Guadalcanal as a result of migration in recent decades. This gave rise to frequent disputes over land control under a largely communal tenure system characterized by a degree of uncertainty over property rights. In mid-1999, small bands of lightly armed militants from Guadalcanal intensified attacks on migrant workers- many of them second generation-of Malaitan descent. The fear generated by killings and other atrocities led 20,000-30,000 Malaitans to flee. Subsequent efforts by representatives from the United Nations, the British Commonwealth, and the Red Cross to help restore peace were largely unsuccessful. Toward the end of the year, a number of Malaitan militia groups were formed in response, and launched retaliatory attacks. In early 2000, these groups united into the Malaita Eagle Force (MEF). On their part, the native Guadalcanal armed militias united into the Isatabu Freedom Fighters (IFF). Both sides demanded compensation from the government for loss of property and lives sustained over recent decades. In early 2000, the government of Prime Minister Ulufa’alu (a Malaitan) tried to promote reconciliation, while requesting international assistance to improve the security situation. However, a number of Malaitans (including in Honiara, where they are the majority ethnic group dominating the civil service and the police) appeared unwilling to support peace efforts, doubting the government’s ability to end the conflict, ensure the return of refugees, and the payment of compensation. At the same time, limited international assistance was insufficient to strengthen the government’s control over the police and to improve its capacity to address the security threat posed by militias. Violence intensified and, in early June 2000, the MEF attempted to overthrow the government. The MEF was supported by elements of the police, which had been affected by ethnic division and governance problems. In this context, Mr. Ulufa’alu agreed to an extraordinary parliamentary election, which he lost to Mr. Sogavare, leader of the parliamentary opposition. The new government of Prime Minister Sogavare secured a cease-fire agreement in August 2000? making payments to facilitate it. Peace negotiations culminated on October 15,2000, when the government and all the parties involved in the hostilities signed a peace agreement in Townsville, Australia. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-7- characterized by a degree of uncertainty over property rights (Bbx 2). Disturbances resulted in considerable loss of lives and property and the displacement of a large number of refugees (estimates vary between 20,000 and 30,000), mostly from the rural areas of the island of Guadalcanal to the island of Malaita. In spite of a mediation effort by a Commonwealth Special Representative, violence persisted and the government had to incur unprogrammed expenses related to the assistance to refugees and increased police costs. 5. In this context, the overall central government deficit rose to 2.7 percent of GDP in 1999, or about 2 percentage points of GDP higher than contemplated in the program (Tables 2 and 3). Expenditure stemming fi-om the unrest amounted to nearly 3 percent of GDP (US$ 10 million), about one-half of which was covered by an external grant from Taiwan Province of China. Unprogrammed spending also included a large transfer to the ailing electricity company amounting to nearly 1 percent of GDP. Higher-than-envisaged grant receipts earmarked for development projects also contributed to a larger-than-planned increase in development spending. Arrears to domestic creditors and on contributions to regional organizations were eliminated, but external debt arrears rose by US$2.4 million to close to US$l 1 million at end-1999 (Table 4).’ In spite of lower-than-expected external financing, proceeds from the sale of part of the government stake in the telephone company to the National Provident Fund (NPF) permitted a reduction in net government indebtedness with domestic creditors, albeit not by as much as envisaged. 6. As the security situation deteriorated, output contracted in the second half of 1999 and the external current account surplus widened (Table 5). Real GDP is estimated to have fallen by ‘/z percent, and nonmining real GDP by nearly 5 percent,2 as key activities in Guadalcanal were directly affected by the unrest. There was a sharp decline in imports which, along with a continued rise in gold exports, helped bring about a substantial increase in the external current account surplus. Notwithstanding growth in total exports, certain primary exports, most notably fish, were affected by falling export prices, and exports of palm oil ceased at midyear as the main palm oil plantation (SIPL) had to be closed because most of its labor force (largely Malaitan) was compelled to evacuate Guadalcanal. This development delayed the planned sale of the government’s stake in SIPL. 7. There was some easing of monetary conditions in 1999. The stock of central bank open market securities (bokolo bills) declined in 1999 (Table 6) as weekly auctions of treasury bills commenced, with the latter expected to become the main instrument for liquidity management. However, insufficient open market sales of treasury bills contributed ‘Since these arrears are owed by the government, they do not give rise to exchange restrictions subject to approval under Article VIII, Section 2(a) of the Fund’s Articles of Agreemeirt. ‘The mission revised the real and nominal GDP series on the basis of selected indicators, but these estimates are highly tentative due to the lack of complete information. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-8- Box 2. Solomon Islands: Land Tenure and Custom About 85 percent of tand is communally owned. Use and ownership of this land is governed by relationships residing in collective memory and sustained by oral tradition. Custom differs between islands and across ethnic and language groups and involves traditions of gift exchange and property redistribution, allowing for the sharing of surplus perishable commodities. Giving more than one receives by providing feasts or ceremonial gifts, for instance, is rewarded by rising social status. Under the wantok system, there is a strong obligation to provide assistance to extended family in return for help in time of need. This might reduce incentives to save, invest, and take risks, as savings and profits may have to be shared. On the positive side, custom underpins a resilient social safety net. Recently, for instance, displaced Malaitan workers were able to call on their extended family for aid. The remaining 15 percent of land, including Honiara and the smaller urban centers, is surveyed, registered, and governed by the Land and Titles Act. This land was originally customary land and the longstanding objective of the government has been to return all such land to the original owners, without disturbing existing leasehold interests. This would require, in a number of cases, settlement of disputes involving several claimants, in some cases from different ethnic groups. Customary land tenure arrangements may retard commercial development. Under existing legislation, only Solomon Islanders or the government may buy or lease customary land; outside investors must sub-lease, with the government acting as intermediary. This process is clearly defined but implementation capacity is low. While surveys of registered land are reasonably accurate, boundaries of unregistered customary land are often disputed, which likely deters investment. Lack of secure property rights also weakens incentives to make physical improvements to land. Difficulty in enforcing claims against land and other fixed assets on communal land prevents banks from accepting such assets as collateral. Attempts at promoting registration of customary land to facilitate leasing were made during the 1960s and early 1970s. However, due to the failure to maintain the registration and recording of transactions and inheritance, land access has since reverted to customary practice. to a smaller-than-programmed contraction in the net domestic assets (NDA) of the central bank. As had been envisaged, the central bank lowered the required reserve ratio from 40 percent to 7.5 percent, and eliminated the requirement that banks hold government securities, with only cash and deposits at the central bank allowed to count toward required reserves. 8. The central bank continued to peg the S.I. dollar to a basket of partner country currencies and inflation continued a downward trend (Figure 2). The S.I. dollar depreciated by around 5 percent against the U.S. dollar in 1999 and is estimated to have Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-9- appreciated by 2% percent in real effective terms during the year (Figure 3). Net official international reserves rose through end-September 1999 broadly in line with the program, but fell during the last quarter of the year as the NDA of the central bank expanded, largely reflecting the fiscal deviation and relaxed monetary stance. The rate of increase in consumer prices on a 12-month basis fell to 8 percent by end-1999, reflecting weak aggregate demand and a slower rate of currency depreciation. 9. Progress was made in structural reforms in 1999. In particular: l The first phase of the civil service reform was completed in March with the shedding of 447 employees and the abolition of 103 vacant posts. l A Forest Management Unit was created and Parliament passed new forestry legislation, which established a mandatory code of logging practices. l External reviews were conducted of the Development Bank of the Solomon Islands (DBSI) and the NPF.3 B. Developments in 2000 10. Amid the growing security threat, the government of Prime Minister Ulufa’alu remained committed to adjustment and reform in the period through early June 2000. With the budget for 2000, the government introduced tax changes aimed at improving incentives for saving and investment and advancing trade liberalization (Box 3). Also, following the recommendations of the consultation mission that visited Honiara in March- April 2000, the government eliminated all tax exemptions that had been granted on a discretionary basis (estimated to have cost 1.7 percent of GDP in 1999), raised the reference price on which the tax on log exports is levied, and undertook to tighten expenditure control in order to limit the central government deficit to 2% percent of GDP in 2000. A substantial part of the remaining external arrears was rescheduled in early 2000 by the Export Finance and Insurance Corporation of Australia and contacts with Marubeni Hong Kong were initiated to reschedule the remainder, which arose out of a contract dispute. Progress was also made in normalizing relations with holders of government securities. In the structural area, the government advanced preparations for divesting government assets, simplifying the registration of foreign investments, and improving financial system supervision. 11. Following an unsuccessful government effort to promote peace talks, tensions intensified in May, and on June 4 armed Malaitan rebels took control of Honiara. In an effort to end the political crisis, Prime Minister Ulufa’alu resigned on June 14, subsequently losing a parliamentary election to the leader of the opposition, Mr. Sogavare. The escalation 3Summaries of the main findings of these reviews can be found in the companion paper on Recent Economic Developments. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- lo- Box 3. Solomon Islands: Tax Measures Implemented in January 2000 l Tax cuts . Personal income tax rate from 47 percent to 40 percent for incomes over SI$60,000, and the threshold raised from SI$5,100 to SI$7,800. . Tax rate on the profits of residents and branches of foreign companies from 35 percent to 30 percent, and 50 percent to 35 percent, respectively. . Maximum customs duty band from 40 percent to 20 percent (largely applied on food, clothing, kitchenware, and other basic consumer goods).’ n Import duty surcharge (5 percent) removed. n Export duty on palm oil, copra, cocoa, and reef fish also removed. l Tax increases . Excise on cigarettes from X$180 per kilogram to SI$300 per kilogram. 9 Excise on beer from SI$2.40 per liter to SI$3.40. . Minimum tax of SI$70 per cubic meter introduced on logs priced at under SI$280 per cubic meter. n Tax introduced on sawn timber (5 percent), and on plywood/veneer from the natural forest (2.5 percent). ‘With this change the maximum duty rate declined from 220 percent in 1997 to 20 percent in January 2000. of the conflict in June-July brought about a break-down of law and order, precipitating a flight of foreign investors and capital, the closure of key activities (most notably the gold t-nine), and the suspension of most external assistance. In addition to loss of lives and private property, key infrastructure (including roads and bridges) suffered heavy damage during 2000, estimated by the AsDB at about US$30-35 million, or 10-12 percent of GDP. 12. The government that took office on June 30 focused on bringing peace to the country. It moved to secure a cease-fire agreement in August, making compensation payments to the two militias to facilitate it. Peace negotiations culminated on October 15, when the government and the parties involved in the hostilities signed a peace agreement in Townsville, Australia. The agreement envisages government action to sustain peace and promote reconciliation and reconstruction (Box 4). Key short-term commitments include repatriation payments and the launching of public works programs to help demobilized militants move back to their home villages and find employment. Rehabilitation programs are also contemplated to repair infrastructure and redress losses precipitated by the conflict. The agreement includes actions to ensure demilitarization and the restoration of law and order; in particular, on November 14 militants began surrendering weapons and returning property under the supervision of international peace monitors. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- ll- Box 4. Solomon Islands: The Townsville Peace Agreement On October 15,2000, an agreement was reached for the cessation of hostilities between the Malaita Eagle Force (MEF) and the Isatabu Freedom Movement (IFM). Parties to the agreement also included the Solomon Islands Government (SIG), the Malaita Provincial Government (MPG), and the Guadalcanal Provincial Government (GPG). The peace agreement, reached in discussions in Townsville, Australia, supercedes a cease-fire agreement established August 2,200O. Key provisions of the agreement include: Creation of the Peace Monitoring Council (PMC) and an International Peace Monitoring Team (IPMT). The PMC, comprised of representatives of Malaita and Guadalcanal provinces, will oversee the agreement. The IPMT will be composed of unarmed foreign military personnel and civilian police experienced in peace monitoring and will closely monitor compliance of the terms of the peace agreement and regularly report its findings to the PMC. A general amnesty for ail participants in the conflict, contingent upon early surrender of weapons and the return of property. Amnesty will include members of police and paramili- tary forces who assisted either the MEF or the IFM. Weapons and ammunition surrendered will be placed under the control of the IPMT for a period of two years. Subsequently, a committee formed by the SIG will assess the security situation and the state of ethnic coexistence through- out the Solomon Islands and, upon its determination of a sufficiently improved security situation, all surrendered weapons are to be disposed of in a manner to be determined by the SIG. Commitments to speedily address political and social issues which have contributed to the conflict. These commitments include: enactment of a constitutional amendment providing greater autonomy to both Malaita and Guadalcanal provinces; continued restructuring of the police emphasizing fair and equal provincial representation; and increased financial and economic assistance to both provinces in order to improve education, health, and infrastructure. A moratorium on all transactions regarding Guadalcanal land. This will be followed by the appointment of a commission of inquiry to investigate acquisition of land on Guadalcanal by non-Guadalcanal persons with a view to making findings and recommendations on the validity of land transactions which occurred prior to October 1, 1998. A fair and just process will then be established to assess the final legality of claims on land. Repatriation to home villages of all participants in the conflict. MEF soldiers will be repatriated to Malaita and IFM soldiers to Guadalcanal. Within three months after repatriation, the SIG will implement a series of programs designed to provide employment and counseling to returning soldiers and their families. Formation of a Peace and Reconciliation Committee in order to encourage and coordinate community-based reconciliation efforts. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12- 13. Economic conditions worsened in 2000 mainly as a result of the conflict. However, several key export activities were also affected by another adverse terms-of-trade shock, with export prices declining markedly, while fuel and shipping costs rose. Real GDP is estimated to have contracted by at least 14 percent in 2000, following a fall of 1.3 percent in 1999. 14. In this context, the government finances deteriorated, with the central govern- ment deficit projected at 4% percent of GDP in 2000. The government faced acute cash flow difficulties during the second half of 2000, mainly as a result of a substantial drop in tax collection. To address the cash flow deficiencies, the government made drastic expenditure cuts, particularly by halting the execution of the investment program, and asking selected staff to take unpaid leave, which further curtailed government capacity. Despite these measures, cash flow difficulties intensified during the last quarter of 2000 as a result of repatriation payments to militants, the hiring of new staff and, increasingly, a policy of tax relief for selected taxpayers affected by the crisis. With a dearth of resources, the government resorted to central bank credit, nearing the statutory limit on such credit, which had already been increased in August.4 15. The decline in NIR of the central bank through end-2000 is projected at over US$20 million. Base money fell in nominal terms from end-1999 to end-September 2000, while the NDA of the central bank expanded substantially, as net credit to government grew rapidly. An earlier drop in bank deposits was reversed over the previous months, apparently because of a shift of hoarded cash to banks for safekeeping. There are indications that, following the signing of the peace agreement, broad money and base money rose at a faster rate. 16. Central bank action to safeguard NIR was largely confined to some intensifica- tion of exchange controls. Controls were intensified following the coup attempt in June to help safeguard official international reserves by imposing delays on the availability of foreign exchange, including for current international payments, thus giving rise to exchange restrictions subject to Fund approval pursuant to Article VIII, Section 2(a).5 The central bank did not conduct monetary operations to offset the expansion of credit to the government. In 4From 30 percent to 40 percent of average government revenues over the past three years for which audited accounts were available (1995-97). ‘Until June 5,2000, exchange controls were used largely for monitoring purposes. Under the revised regulations introduced in June, payments for amounts greater than US$25,000 but less than US$40,000 are to be made in two equal weekly installments, and those for amounts higher than US$40,000 are to be made on four equal weekly installments. Also, the limit on payment applications that may be approved by commercial banks was reduced from US$5,000 to US$l,OOO, with the central bank approving all other bona fide requests. This latter limitation does not give rise to a restriction subject to Fund jurisdiction. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13- June, central bank management took the view that, in the midst of the heightened uncertain- ties stemming from the coup attempt, banks were unwilling to purchase government paper regardless of the yield, and that banks would, on their own, curtail credit to the private sector. Bank credit to the private sector had risen strongly in the year to end-June 2000, but subsequently contracted somewhat in the period through end-October 2000. 17. In the period June-early November 2000, the central bank pegged the currency to the U.S. dollar in order to avoid a rise in exchange rate uncertainty following the coup attempt and the change in government. As a result, the S.I. dollar appreciated in real effective terms at a somewhat faster pace against the US. dollar during that period. Despite a marked rise in import prices, the annual rate of increase in consumer prices appears to have declined somewhat to around 6 percent at end-September 1999. III. POLICY DISCUSSIONS 18. In late October-early November 2000, missions from the Fund, the World Bank, the AsDB, Australia, New Zealand, Japan, and the European Union (EU) visited Honiara to assess conditions and offer support for peace and reconstruction. The goal of this joint donor group was to organize a concerted international effort to provide post-conflict assistance following the signing of the peace treaty. This collaborative effort followed an informal donors’ meeting sponsored by the World Bank that took place in Sydney, Australia in August. The authorities viewed the Fund’s role as that of assisting in the development of a macroeconomic policy framework within which assistance from donors and other multi- lateral agencies could be programmed. It was not possible for the joint donor group to reach agreement with the authorities in all aspects of policy, in part because the government was still in the process of forming views in key areas. 19. The Fund mission coordinated its work with the other multilateral agencies and donors, presenting to the authorities a largely unified position. While commending the authorities on their peace-making role and welcoming recent signs of reconciliation among those involved in the hostilities, the Fund mission stressed the need to restore law and order and to maintain macroeconomic stability in order to create the conditions for an early economic recovery and for the prompt resumption of assistance from most donors. It inquired about government policy regarding demands for large compensation payments from various parties, indicating that government efforts and resources should address the needs of peace within a clearly defined budget constraint and with well-targeted projects that could be supported by the international community. 20. The authorities recognized that peace was still fragile, and that normalizing security conditions was essential for economic recovery. They indicated that efforts were under way to persuade those who had been promised compensation for loss of life and property to forego cash and accept instead the benefit of projects that would be targeted to their communities. They acknowledged that, while the surrender of weapons and the return of property would help strengthen law and order, improving the police would also be Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14- necessary to restore private sector confidence, as well as to facilitate the return of capital and the reopening of industries. A. Fiscal Policy 21. The authorities were of the view that increased external assistance was essential to address the needs of peace and reconstruction. They hoped that substantial assistance in 2000-O 1 would permit reconstructing damaged infrastructure in Guadalcanal, and building new infrastructure in the outer islands, including Malaita. They noted strong demands for greater provincial balance in the allocation of resources for government services and development expenditure. They believed that preserving national unity required ensuring that the benefits of peace and external assistance be spread across the entire country. They hoped to elicit support for projects directed to facilitate the reintegration of demobilized militants to normal life and to restore basic government services to precrisis levels. As a result of the crisis, education, health, and water services have deteriorated, particularly in Guadalcanal and Malaita, with schools closed and shortages of teachers and basic school infrastructure in some localities. 22. The authorities saw little scope for measures to contain fiscal pressures. Noting that the conflict and the sharp economic contraction had eroded the tax base and reduced government revenue, the authorities believed that an early economic recovery offered the best way to rebuild the tax base and restore govemment revenues over the medium term. Consequently, they thought that a policy of tax relief was necessary to stimulate economic activity. At the same time, they pointed to the inflexibilities in expenditure policy created by the difficult political circumstances. They reiterated that preserving peace required completing repatriation payments to militants, resuming the provision of basic services, and strengthening the police. 23. While recognizing the difficult circumstances and major challenges faced by the government, the mission emphasized the need to adopt a fiscal policy consistent with macroeconomic stability to elicit support from donors. It noted that most of the fiscal deficit in 2000, projected at 4% percent of GDP, was likely to be financed by central bank credit. The authorities acknowledged that they were nearing the recently increased statutory limit on central bank credit to government, and noted that if external assistance from most donors was not resumed promptly, such credit would continue at least until resources they hoped to obtain from Taiwan Province of China became available. The mission cautioned against continued reliance on central bank credit to fund government operations to avoid a larger expansion in the NDA of the central bank and further losses in its international reserves. 24. The mission expressed concern about the recent direction of fiscal policy, In particular, it noted the policy reversal in staffing that had led to a rise in the wage bill to a higher level than before the furlough of 700 civil servants in July 2000. Another policy Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 15- reversal pertained to the reintroduction of tax exemptions granted on a discretionary basis to selected taxpayers6 Reflecting consensus in the joint donor group, the staff suggested that this policy could give rise to governance questions as it was highly inefficient and inequitable, particularly because there was no clear criteria guiding it. The staff urged the authorities to refrain from granting new exemptions and announcing that those already given would be eliminated on March 1,2001, when the tax rate on imported goods could be lowered from 15 percent to 10 percent (the rate applicable to domestic goods). 25. The authorities recognixed that the policy of exemptions could have a potentially high fiscal cost: but reiterated that tax relief was necessary to foster a recovery. In addition, they believed that radically changing this policy would be politically difficult, pointing to a perception that the revocation of exemptions in May 2000 might have helped increase support for the coup attempt that eventually led to the change in government. However, aware of the importance that donors were attaching to a change in this policy, the authorities indicated that they would revisit this issue in the context of a review of the tax system in mid-2001. To secure a loan from the AsDB (Box 5), however, the authorities agreed in late November 2000 to a temporary suspension in the granting of exemptions. They undertook to prepare criteria, possibly by early 200 1, to guide the future granting of exemptions, and to revoke those that did not conform with such criteria. Also, they agreed to publish the list of beneficiaries of exemptions as a way to improve transparency. 26. Looking ahead, the mission argued for limiting the overall government deficit to a level that could be financed primarily with concessional borrowing in order to safeguard price stability and official international reserves. In close collaboration with the multilateral and bilateral representatives, the mission estimated that the government might obtain about US$60 million in external assistance in 2001 (only about half of what the authorities were apparently seeking), of which about half represented loans and cash grants already identified by multilateral and bilateral donors (apart from Taiwan Province of China). Only a fraction of prospective donor resources would be in the form of emergency financing extended without any conditionality. 27. On this basis, the mission suggested the broad outline of a budget for 2001 that limited the overall deficit of the central government (after grants) to around 2 percent of GDP. A higher deficit could be accommodated if the authorities are able to secure external assistance on a larger scale. The fiscal proposal includes a significant increase in grants (to 17 S percent of GDP) that would help fund a rise in development expenditure which, along with the return of foreign capital, would be expected to facilitate an economic recovery, with %ince July, total or partial duty and goods tax exemptions have been given to selected taxpayers for the importation of cigarettes, computer equipment, fuel, round logs, sawmills, spare parts, speedboats, tug boats, vehicles, and wheat. 7This cost could be in the range of 1 ‘/z -2% percent of GDP in 2001. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 16- Box 5. Solomon Islands: Asian Development Bank Loan The Asian Development Bank (AsDB) mission that visited Honiara in early November 2000 estimated damage from the coniXct.at US$30-35 million. It found that many refugee communities were without access to basic social services. Guadalcanal, in particular, suffered extensive damage to infrastructure and essential facilities. Roads and bridges were destroyed, water supplies cut, vehicles and equipment stolen or rendered inoperable, and schools, clinics, and government offices were ransacked or demolished. Other provinces, especially Malaita, were burdened by the influx of displaced people. To support reconstruction and peace, the AsDB Board approved on December 21, 2000 a Post-Conflict Rehabilitation Project Loan for US$lO million. The loan will begin to be disbursed in January 2001 under a facility with abbreviated and flexible processing and approval procedures. The loan is to be amortized over 32 years, with a grace period of 8 years. It will carry an interest rate of 1 percent during the grace period and 1.5 percent thereafter, with equal arnortization. The date of project completion is December 3 1,2003 and the executing agency for the project will be the Ministry of Finance. To secure the loan the authorities agreed in late November 2000 to: l Contain the fiscal deficit and the government wage bill in 2001 within the levels recommended by the Fund mission. l Refrain from granting new tax exemptions, pending the formulation of criteria to guide this policy. l Revoke exemptions not consistent with such criteria, once they have been approved by cabinet, possibly by early 200 1. l Publish on a regular basis the terms and beneficiaries of tax exemptions. The project will cover restoration of government offhzes, water supply and sanitation facilities, roads and bridges, schools, and health facilities and equipment destroyed during the past 18 months. In areas of Guadalcanal where communities remain or will be reconstituted, such damaged infrastructure and facilities will be replaced or repaired. However, in cases where affected communities have no prospect of returning to Guadalcanal (due to safety concerns or because their homes or means of livelihood were also destroyed), the project will restore or rebuild the essential infrastructure and facilities in other provinces, particularly in the province of Malaita, where such refugee communities have resettled. The United Nations Office for Project Services will be engaged under the loan to provide international and domestic consultants for the project. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17- real GDP expanding by 3% percent in 2001. The mission supported the authorities’ intention to refrain from granting wage increases in the public sector in 2001. In addition, it recommended avoiding increases in staffing and downsizing or preferably canceling less efficient spending programs. The mission urged the authorities to strictly control spending, avoiding expenditure commitments until resources are identified and secured, and called for intensified efforts to reschedule remaining arrears. It recommended formulating a contingency plan to safeguard adherence to the fiscal target, and to consider a temporary increase in the sales tax rate, in case cash flow difficulties were to persist. 28. The mission welcomed the authorities’ intention to review the tax system in the period ahead. It advised pressing ahead with long-standing plans for the eventual replacement of the goods and sales taxes with a value-added tax (VAT). This change would reduce input costs for exporters, but would require strengthening the administrative capacity of the tax authorities. It was recognized that technical assistance from development partners would be critical for the success of this effort. B. Monetary and Exchange Rate Policies 29. Given the difficult fiscal situation and uncertainties in external financing, the mission advised that credit policy in 2001 should be aimed at promoting a modest recovery in NIR. Under the scenario proposed by the staff, the decline in the government’s domestic net borrowing requirement would permit a small recovery in the NIR of the central bank while providing sufficient bank credit to the private sector. The mission stressed that achieving these objectives required avoiding further central bank credit to the government. Also, it underscored that, contrary to recent experience, the central bank should be prepared to conduct open market sales to ensure compliance with the proposed NIR and NDA targets. 30. The mission agreed on the need for some exchange rate flexibility. The central bank intended to use changes in the value of a currency basket of trading partners as a guide to daily variations of the parity that would be programmed to yield modest weekly depreciations of the currency against the U.S. dollar, with daily variations constrained within an undisclosed narrow band.* They hoped that this policy would help anchor prices and avoid a further real effective appreciation of the S.I. dollar. The economic program proposed by the mission assumed that the S.I. dollar would depreciate by 5 percent against the U.S. dollar by end-December 200 1, with the annual rate of increase in the Honiara retail price index amounting to 6 percent during 2001 (unchanged from the 12-month period ending September 2000). Progress in consolidating peace and security and the implementation of a budget for 200 1 along the lines proposed by the mission would help restore confidence and permit the removal of exchange controls. ‘Central bank management noted that this policy afforded a degree of autonomy to policy- making within a legal framework that required government approval for major discrete adjustments to the parity. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 18- 31. There was agreement that close vigilance should be maintained over the financial sector. The staff noted with concern indications that the quality of bank assets had deteriorated (Table 7) and that provisioning might not be adequate. On the positive side, bankers reported tighter lending criteria following guidelines from head offices in Australia and the United States.g The mission suggested that high priority should be given to the early formulation and implementation of a plan to improve the condition of the DBSI, which recently suspended virtually all lending operations to stem losses. Also, it recommended intensifying surveillance over the NPF, particularly because the recent rise in unemployment in the formal sector and related fund withdrawals had put pressure on its liquidity position. C. Structural Policies 32. The potential efficiency gains of structural reform remain large. There is scope for productivity improvements through market reforms and better protection of property rights, which would also help improve incentives for private saving and investment. Private sector representatives highlighted the need to restore law and order and ensure adequate police protection. In addition, they noted the high transaction costs and risks associated with a reported fragility of contractual arrangements under the current land tenure system. 33. While important progress has been made in a number of structural fronts,” the current government is concentrating scarcer resources in fewer key initiatives. In particular, they are focusing on restructuring the police force with assistance from the Australian government. In addition, they are working to provide greater provincial autonomy and to resolve the issue of land disputes. At the same time, the authorities were refocusing the public sector reform to emphasize the strengthening of institutional capacity in the formulation of projects that could elicit assistance from donors. In particular, they planned to intensify efforts to expedite the disbursement of Stabex resources available from the EU (Box 6). In this regard, the mission recommended that any restructuring of the DBSI involving support from the EU and/or other donors should ensure the full repayment of all DBSI deposits and other liabilities owed to the NPF. Also, under any such restructuring the DBSI should operate strictly on a commercial basis, and any subsidized loans to rural borrowers entirely funded by the government, with an intermediation fee paid to the DBSI. 34. Some progress in preparations for the sale of selected enterprises has been made recently. The mission recommended that once the recovery is under way, the authorities press ahead with the sale of these enterprises (Solomon Printers, Home Finance), with proceeds used to improve the condition of the water and electricity companies, which should be privatized following the establishment of an adequate regulatory framework. ‘All three commercial banks are under foreign control. *%ogress on structural reforms through June 2000 is summarized in Annex I. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 19- Box 6. Solomon Islands: Stabex Funds The European Union (EU) provides Stabex transfers to African, Caribbean, and Pacific (ACP) countries to compensate for shortfalls in agricultural export earnings, resulting from adverse climatic and market conditions. In the case of Solomon Islands, earnings from log exports are also considered in the determination of compensation-for shortfalls. The Framework of Mutual Obligations (FMO) specifies the conditions under which Stabex funds may be released. The most recent FM0 was signed in November 2000 and relates to the Stabex allocation of EUR 41.8 million, representing compensation for the fall in log export earnings in 1998. Another Stabex allocation for EUR 25.9 million was set in 2000 to compensate for the fall in palm oil export earnings in 1999. This fall stemmed from the closure of the palm oil plantation (SIPL) at mid- year that was prompted by ethnic disturbances. The FM0 specifying the uses for these resources is yet to be prepared. While the sum of these two allocations is considerable (over 20 percent of GDP), release of these funds is likely to take place over several years starting in 200 1. The FM0 for the 1998 Stabex allocation provides for: Constituting a trust fund (60 percent) to be invested offshore by a reputable international manager. Returns will be used to support the restructuring of the transport sector, particularly by privatizing commercial routes and subsidizing noncommercial ones; improving road and wharf maintenance; and establishing a Shipping and Aviation Regulation and Licensing Unit. Release of funds requires availability of counterpart government resources. Restructuring of Development Bank of Solomon Islands (10 percent) with a view to eliminate noncommercial operations, intensify collection of arrears, secure more independence from the government, and ensure compliance with prudential regulations under the Financial Institutions Act. Promoting rural development and export diversification (12 percent) including through the expansion of rural infrastructure, and the strengthening of the Department of Agriculture and Fisheries. A condition for the disbursement of these funds is the reform of the Department of Agriculture along the lines recommended by a study funded by New Zealand. Facilitating eco-logging and sustainable forestry exploitation (10 percent). Communities will be encouraged to harvest forestry resources in a sustainable manner and promote reforestation with new tree varieties of shorter maturities. Release of funds requires that localities undertake not to adopt large-scale commercial logging methods. Projects will be managed by a team comprising international and local experts, in close collaboration with the line ministries involved and under the supervision of a steering committee consisting of representatives of the government, the private sector, and the EU. The resources from the Stabex allocation for 1999 are likely to be used largely to support a comprehensive education reform. This would be reflected in a new FM0 that will begin to be drafted soon. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 20 - 35. The mission reiterated the importance of improving log export monitoring capabilities. Donors recommended that awarding new logging licenses should be made compatible with the objective of sustainability. Government officials noted that reducing logging to sustainable levels would take some time as a large number of logging licenses granted under the old licensing system will remain valid for a number of years. D. Data Reporting, Statistical Issues, and Technical Assistance 36. The authorities shared the view that the compilation of key macroeconomic statistics needs to be improved. With the assistance of the Pacific Financial Technical Assistance Centre, efforts have been made recently to enhance the capacity of the Statistics Office to produce national accounts and other economic information. It was recognized that the work ahead in this area was quite substantial, as official national accounts are currently available only through 1994 and countrywide indicators of unemployment and inflation are not available (the CPI is based on price developments in Honiara). The mission reiterated the need to ensure the timely and regular provision to the Fund of key data. Also, it stressed that adequate resources need to be provided to the units responsible for compiling core economic and financial statistics. The authorities expressed interest in assistance from MAE and FAD to improve financial sector supervision and review the tax system. IV. THE MEDIUM-TERM OUTLOOK 37. While the immediate priorities are rehabilitation and recovery, the principal medium-term objective is creating an economic environment conducive to sustainable growth of output and employment. To this end, the authorities have recognized that private investment should play a leading role in providing job opportunities for the rapidly growing population (Table 8). This goal would be facilitated by public investment in physical and human capital throughout the country, as well as the creation of an institutional environment that would strengthen incentives to save and invest. To foster such an environment, the judicial and regulatory systems should be improved to permit stronger enforcement of property rights and contracts, and a better functioning of markets. 38. Sound macroeconomic policies will be essential to support the government’s reconstruction and development objectives over the medium term. Key objectives should be a reduction in inflation to 3 percent a year and a recovery in annual real GDP growth to around 5 percent. External assistance would facilitate high levels of public investment starting in 2001, but would likely decline somewhat toward the end of the projection period once reconstruction is well advanced. It will thus become increasingly important to generate government saving to help fund the investment program, and the scenario proposed by the staff therefore assumes that the VAT is introduced in 2003 with a net yield of at least ‘/z percent of GDP. Fiscal deficits of around 2 percent of GDP a year would be financed largely from external concessional sources, with central government debt relative to GDP declining over the period (Table 9). With limited government demand for domestic bank Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-21- financing, the banking system could adequately accommodate private sector credit demand. Under this scenario, the external current account surplus would decline gradually as private sector investment expanded. 39. However, if the authorities are unable to adopt policies that elicit external assistance and encourage an economic recovery, the prospects for the medium term would deteriorate sharply. In spite of exchange restrictions, large and persistent new borrowing from the central bank could lead to significant losses in NIR, arrears, pressure on the currency, and a rise in inflation. In such a scenario, development expenditure would have to be curtailed, with adverse consequences for output growth and employment. V. STAFFAPPRAISAL 40. In recent years, the Solomon Islands implemented a program of stabllization and structural reform aimed at creating the basis for sustained economic growth. An improvement in fiscal discipline was at the core of the adjustment effort. Results until mid- 2000 were mixed, in part because program implementation was complicated by the effects of the Asian crisis and the recent ethnic conflict. During this period, however, the authorities managed to reduce net government indebtedness with domestic creditors, eliminate domestic arrears, and improve customs and tax administration, with tax collections relative to GDP rising somewhat. The most salient structural achievements through mid-2000 include the downsizing of the civil service and trade liberalization. 41. The government that took office on June 30,200O shifted its priorities to focus on efforts to bring peace to the country, which led to the signing of a peace agreement on October 15,200O. The country now faces the challenge of mobilizing resources to sustain peace and reconstruction in the context of a major weakening of the public finances. As a result of the crisis, the economic base of the country has been greatly eroded, with the closure of major industries (palm oil, gold mining) and damage suffered by a large number of firms, which has resulted in a substantial increase in unemployment in the formal sector. In addition to losses brought about by the conflict, several key export activities have been affected by declines in export prices and rising fuel and shipping costs. In this context, the tax base has contracted markedly and government revenues have fallen sharply, further constraining the government’s capacity to support the consolidation of peace. 42. An essential requirement for an early economic recovery is the restoration of law and order to revive private sector confidence. Establishing a safe environment for investment, with adequate security for the integrity of persons and property, requires the strengthening of the police into a disciplined force, as well as a judicial system under which legal contracts are adequately protected and property rights are clearly defined. In this regard, the staff welcomes efforts to restructure the police and recent progress in rebuilding harmonious ethnic relations, which will contribute to normalizing security conditions. 43. Sound macroeconomic and structural policies will also be essential to facilitate private investment and external assistance. Therefore, the centerpiece of macroeconomic Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-22 - policy should be the maintenance of a fiscal position consistent with price stability and an adequate level of international reserves. This will require limiting the deficit of the central government to a level that can be financed largely with concessional borrowing, while avoiding recourse to central bank credit. Consequently, the fiscal deficit for 2001 should be limited to 2 percent of GDP, but a higher deficit could be accommodated if the authorities are able to secure more external assistance than currently envisaged. Under the fiscal plan proposed by the staff, an increase in development expenditure and the return of foreign capital would facilitate an economic recovery, with real GDP expanding by 3% percent in 2001. Securing part of the cash resources will necessitate action to improve the transparency and efficiency of tax policy and to maintain control over expenditure to ensure high quality. 44. Temporary tax relief may be appropriate to promote an economic recovery and the reconstitution of the tax base, including through incentives for the return of foreign investment. However, the authorities should replace the practice of granting tax exemptions on a discretionary basis with a more transparent and efficient policy. One option could involve lowering the goods tax rate applicable on imports from 15 percent to no less than 10 percent (the rate applicable on domestically produced goods), following an early elimination of tax exemptions granted on a discretionary basis. This would effectively lower the cost of imports, including inputs and capital goods needed to restore productive capacity while enhancing efficiency and equity. 45. Adherence to the proposed fiscal target will require strict expenditure control. In this regard, the staff supports the authorities’ intention to refrain from granting wage increases in the public sector in 200 1. Also, it would be important to avoid increases in staffing from current levels and to downsize or preferably cancel less efficient spending programs. Preparing a development program including well-targeted priority projects is necessary to facilitate external assistance, including from the EU, which has allocated substantial resources for the country apparently to be disbursed over a long period under the Stabex program. 46. Contingency plans should be formulated to safeguard adherence to the fiscal target. Risks to this fiscal plan include lower real GDP and tax revenue growth than envisaged, additional emergency needs, and shortfalls. in external assistance. To guard against such risks, the staff recommends constituting an expenditure reserve fund and avoiding expenditure commitments on account of higher external loans and grant receipts until any such assistance effectively materializes. In case cash flow difficulties were to persist, the authorities might wish to consider a temporary increase in the sales tax rate. The staff urges the authorities to intensify efforts to settle remaining arrears. 47. . A restrained monetary policy will be required in 2001 in order to maintain an adequate level of official international reserves and support price stability. While it will be essential to avoid a further expansion of net credit to government, the central bank should also stand ready to conduct open market sales to maintain a quarterly path of NDA and NIR consistent with the proposed annual targets. Progress in consolidating peace and security and Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-23 - the implementation of the fiscal and monetary policies proposed by the staff would help restore confidence and permit the removal of exchange controls. 48. In its role as supervisor, the central bank should continue to maintain close vigilance over the financial sector. The increased risks associated with the unrest and the recession warrant intensifying the monitoring of the nonperforming portfolio of banks and ensuring that adequate provisioning is maintained. High priority should also be given to the early formulation and implementation of a plan to improve the condition of the DBSI. This bank should be allowed to continue to function only if its operations are conducted strictly on a commercial basis. Given the weaknesses in the quality of the assets of the NPF, close vigilance should be maintained over its operations. 49. The staff considers that some exchange rate flexibility is appropriate. With the policies proposed by the staff, the current account balance would remain in surplus over the next few years. To safeguard competitiveness over the medium-term, fiscal and monetary policies should be geared to reducing inflation to trading partner levels, with wage moderation and productivity improvements in key public services. 50. In the light of recent experience, there are clear downside risks to macro- economic performance. A deterioration of the security situation could result in new spending pressures and deepen the recession. At the same time, consolidating peace might have a higher fiscal cost. Also, the country remains vulnerable to adverse changes in the terms of trade. In view of these risks, the staff urges the authorities to adhere to the proposed policy framework for 200 1 and to resist unrealistic spending demands in order to facilitate external support, promote financial stability, enhance policy credibility, and facilitate the eventual recovery of output and employment. 51. Further progress in structural reforms is essential for improving the medium- term outlook. In particular, simplifying investment registration procedures should facilitate foreign participation in new activities and economic diversification. Implementation of forestry reform would help promote sustainable logging practices. At the same time, the efficiency and soundness of the public sector would be greatly enhanced by improving the operations of the NPF, completing the civil service reform, divesting remaining public enterprises, and establishing efficient land-leasing mechanisms. 52. Improving the quality of macroeconomic statistics and regular and timely provision of key economic data to the Fund should remain a priority. Adequate resources would need to be allocated to the statistical function to ensure that future assistance can be fully assimilated. It would be important to address deficiencies in the coverage and timeliness of public finance, balance of payments, national accounts, and price statistics. Also, the staff encourages the authorities to consider participation in the General Data Dissemination System as a basis for promoting statistical improvements over the medium term. In addition, the Fund should be kept fully informed of developments and policies to permit adequate monitoring. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 24 - 53. Approval of the exchange restrictions introduced on June 5,200O is not recommended as there is no timetable for their removal. 54. It is recommended that the Solomon Islands remain on the 24-month consultation cycle. In the interim, staff visits will be conducted as needed. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-25- Figure 1. solomon Isl8u~&kcted EcoDomk Indicators, 19!&2eel Y 16 - 12 - I- I- o- -4- -I- -12 - -16 ’ I I 1995 1996 1997 199I 1999 20 15 10 5 0 -5 -1a -15 I 1 1995 1996 I997 199I I2 11 IO 9 t 7 6 5 I- 6- 4- 2- o- -2 - 4- IO 9 8 7 6 1995 19% 1997 1999 1999 2001 5 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-26- Figure 2. Solomon Islands: Selected Fiscal and Monetary Indicators, 1995-2001 11 100 8C 6c 40 20 0 25 2c 1 1’ Central Government Debt (In percent 01 GDP, cod-of-period) I Key Interest Rates and Inflation mr..tia - - l4wY - - A~~rrlcY ‘1’ Alarlpe&ptMifdeY 1995 1996 1991 1998 1999 2ooo 25 21 - 24- 21 - I8 - 15 - 12 - 9- 6- 3- Central Government (In percent 01 GDP) Bank Credit to Private Sector (In percent, kr red termr) Sources: Mlnistry of Finance; Central Bank of Solomon Islands; and Fund staff estimates and projections. I/ Figures for 2000 and 2001 are projections. Those for 2001 are based on policies recommended by the mission. 2l Change tn the average retail price index. 31 Figure for 2000 refers to September 2000. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 27 - Figure 3. Solomon Islands: Exchange Rates and Official Reserves, 1989-2000 130 120 Effective Exchange Rates 130 300 Bilateral Exchange Rate Indices l -; (1990=100, cad-of-pedod) . . ., #. . ’ . . ’ ‘r 250 50 '...... ~.~~n~~..~~-.D~. ..'." n -... .("a 1989 1990 1991 1992 I993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 70 , I 1 Gross Official Reserves 300 250 200 150 100 50 0 Sources: IMF, Information Notice System, and International Financial Statistics. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 28 - Table 1. Solomon Islands: Selected Economic Indicators, 1995-2001 Nominal GDP (1999): USS359 million Population (1999): 409,000 GDP per capita (1999): USS879 Quota: SDR 10.4 million Proj. 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 II Growth and prices (change in percent) Real GDP Ofwhich : Nonmining CPI (end-of-period) 10.5 3.5 -2.3 1.1 -1.3 -14.0 3.4 10.5 3.5 -3.5 -1.8 -6.6 -17.3 2.9 10.7 9.6 10.4 10.3 8.0 6.0 6.0 Saving and investment (in percent of GDP) Public saving, excluding grants Public investment 21 Ojwhich : Grant-fbutnced Public saving-investment balance 3/ Private saving-investment balance 4/ National saving-investment balance (including grants) 5/ -0.7 -2.0 -3.3 0.1 2.2 2.2 2.2 14.2 15.2 10.6 17.4 20.2 9.0 15.8 10.1 13.1 9.2 12.0 14.2 8.0 14.0 -4.8 -3.9 -4.1 -1.6 -2.7 -4.5 -1.8 a.4 6.8 -4.6 6.2 12.5 7.0 9.2 3.6 2.9 -8.7 4.6 9.8 2.5 7.4 Central government operations (in percent of GDP) Total revenue and grants Of which : Grants Total expenditure Overall balance Domestic borrowing (net) Foreign borrowing (net) Privatization 35.6 34.7 29.0 35.5 38.6 29.5 10.1 13.1 9.2 15.7 15.7 10.3 40.4 38.6 33.2 37.1 41.3 34.0 -4.8 -3.9 -4.1 -1.6 -2.7 -4.5 3.0 0.9 3.4 -1.7 -0.7 5.0 1.7 1.6 0.7 3.2 1.7 -0.5 0.0 1.4 0.0 0.0 1.6 0.0 Stock of government arrears (in percent of GDP, end-period) 2.2 5.7 11.9 5.2 3.1 1.4 Domestic 1.5 3.1 7.2 2.3 0.0 0.0 External 0.8 2.6 4.1 2.9 3.1 1.4 Money and credit (annual percent change) Net foreign assets Net domestic assets Credit to government (net) Credit to private sector Broad money -1.0 152.4 41.9 48.6 9.0 -37.8 11.6 11.2 -4.3 -6.3 -19.B 0.5 62.8 5.6 5.7 -I .2 1.0 -20.6 -0.1 41.0 3.3 13.9 5.1 10.1 25.3 8.3 7.7 12.8 9.5 15.0 6.7 4.8 4.9 9.5 7.4 Balance of payments (in millions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise indicated) Exports, f.o.b Imports, c.i.f Current account (In percent of GDP) Grants Capital account 61 Of which : Public sector (net) C&tall balance 168.1 162.4 173.9 140.8 149.7 105.9 118.6 -154.3 -151.2 -209.4 -146.9 -140.1 -119.3 -134.2 13.4 12.0 -37.9 16.4 35.1 7.1 21.6 3.6 2.9 -8.7 4.6 9.8 2.5 7.4 36.9 53.5 40.0 56.3 56.3 28.6 51.2 -17.6 -2.6 31.9 3.7 -33.3 -24.6 -21.0 5.0 -1.5 3.1 22.0 11.1 -1.6 3.6 -4.2 9.4 -6.0 20.1 1.8 -17.5 0.6 Gross offtcial reserves (in millions of U.S. dollars) Net international reserves (in millions of U.S. dollars) 32.2 31.7 47.9 50.6 33.4 29.8 30.3 46.1 47.7 30.8 Central government gross debt (in percent of GOP) Domestic External (In millions of U.S. dollars, end-period) 15.1 12.6 54.1 27.5 26.6 95.6 49.7 53.4 55.4 SB.9 75.0 23.9 22.0 22.1 21.4 29.3 25.8 31.3 33.2 37.5 45.7 104.2 106.4 118.1 128.3 126.7 Terms oftrade (percent change) Exchange rate (SIB/USE, end-of-period) Real effective exchange rate (period average, 1990=100) 71 0.1 3.48 103.3 -2.4 -0.2 3.2 -3.7 3.62 4.75 4.86 5.08 110.5 120.5 112.5 115.8 -5.2 1.0 5.09 . . 118.7 37.5 17.5 39.3 -1.8 0.6 1.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 34.0 31.5 71.2 27.7 43.5 130.2 Sources: Ministry of Finance; Central Bank of Solomon Islands; and Fund staff estimates and projections. l! Based on policies proposed by the mission. 21 Defined as the central government’s development expenditure. 31 Central government operations only. 41 Derived as the difference between the national and public saving-investment balances. 51 Defined as the external current account balance including grants. 6/ Includes errors and omissions. 71 Figure for 2000 corresponds to September. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 2. Solomon Islands: Compliance with indicative Targets for Monitoring the Government’s Adjustment Program, 1998-99 1998 Dec. 3 1 Mar. 31 Prog. Actual 1999 Jun. 30 Sep. 30 Dec. 3 I Prog. Actual Prog. Actual Prog. Actual Overall deficit of central government (In percent of GDP) Net domestic assets of the CBS1 I/, 2/ Net banking system credit to the government Net CBS1 credit to the government Gross domestic borrowing by the govemment Domestic interest arrears on government treasury bills and bonds Government external arrears to multilateral organizations Government external arrears to other international organizations and regional institutions Net foreign assets of the CBS1 31 46 Memorandum items: Indicative path for reserve money (In millions of S.1. dollars) Gross reserves of the CBS1 (in millions of U.S. dollars) 130 141 136 144 152 145 141 154 153 48 49 50 50 53 56 56 69 51 27 1.6 -94 182 21 18 I 9 (Ceiling in millions of S.1. dollars) . . . . -86 -97 -87 -95 -113 -119 194 192 195 217 168 176 43 38 49 17 30 -22 0 0 0 0 0 14 . . . 9 . . . 5 . . 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 (Floor in millions of U.S. dollars) 47 48 48 51 54 54 10 0.6 -167 136 -lb 0 0 0 0 67 48 47 2.7 -75 182 IS 0 0 0 0 Sources: Central Bank of Solomon Islands; and Fund staff estimates. I I Calculated at the exchange rate of December 3 I, 1998. 21 Defined as reserve money less net foreign assets of the CBSI. 31 Defined to include off-balance sheet assets and liabilities (e.g., swaps and forward). 41 Loans with an initial maturity of up to one year, excluding normal import-related trade credit. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 30 - Table 3. Solomon Islands: Summary Accounts of the Central Government, 19952001 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 Proj. 2000 l! 2000 200121 Sep. Revenue and grants Revenue Tax Income International trade Goods and services Nontax Grants 31 445.1 506.5 468.0 613.3 670.9 319.3 315.5 319.2 269.5 291.7 289.2 81.1 90.0 101.4 145.9 149.7 135.6 42.5 52.0 52.2 49.8 23.8 30.0 125.8 191.0 148.8 Expenditure Current Wages and salaries Interest Other Development 4/ Current balance 504.6 563.7 341.4 134.7 55.3 151.4 222.2 -25.9 534.8 327.6 122.0 45.2 160.3 177.0 -8.3 364.6 155.1 44.1 165.4 170.2 AS.4 Overall balance -59.5 -57.2 -66.7 Financing (net) Foreign Domestic Privatization 59.5 57.2 66.7 21.6 22.7 11.4 37.9 13.5 55.3 0.0 21.0 0.0 Revenue and grants Revenue TU Income International trade Goods and services Nontax Grants 3/ Expenditure Current Wages and salaries Interest Other Development 4/ Current balance 35.6 25.5 21.6 6.5 11.7 3.4 4.0 10.1 40.4 26.2 9.8 3.6 12.8 14.2 Overall balance Financing (net) Foreign Domestic Privatitition -0.7 -4.8 4.8 1.7 3.0 0.0 -1.1 34.1 29.0 35.5 38.6 21.6 19.8 19.8 22.9 20.0 17.9 18.1 21.1 6.2 6.3 7.7 8.0 10.2 a.4 6.7 8.0 3.6 3.2 3.7 5.1 1.6 1.9 1.7 1.8 13.1 9.2 15.7 15.7 38.6 33.2 37.1 41.3 23.4 22.6 19.7 21.1 9.2 9.6 9.1 a.7 3.8 2.7 2,1 1.8 10.4 10.3 8.5 10.5 15.2 10.6 17.4 20.2 -1.8 -2.8 0.1 1.9 -3.9 -4.1 -1.6 -2.7 3.9 4.1 1.6 2.7 1.6 0.7 3.2 1.7 0.9 3.4 -1.7 -0.7 1.4 0.0 0.0 1.6 Memorandum item: Primary balance -0.1 -1.4 0.5 -0.9 -17.0 -13.4 -17.3 -18.4 Overall balance excluding grants Nominal GDP -14.8 (In millions of S.I. dollars) 1,250 1,461 1,612 1,728 1,739 (In millions of S.I. dollars) 342.2 398.8 313.3 366.6 132.9 139.9 116.0 138.5 64.4 88.2 28.9 32.2 271.0 272.2 640.5 718.2 340.4 366.3 156.4 152.1 36.4 30.9 147.6 183.4 300.1 351.9 1.8 32.5 -27.3 -47.3 27.3 47.3 56.1 30.4 -28.8 -11.6 0.0 28.5 (In percent of GDP) 310.5 214.6 192.8 70.5 68.6 53.7 21.8 95.9 336.0 257.6 120.8 25.3 111.5 78.4 -43.0 416.2 572.1 270.6 305.0 246.6 279.0 93.5 102.9 83.2 108.2 69.9 67.9 24.0 26.0 145.6 267.1 479.7 352.5 159.4 37.2 155.9 127.2 -81.9 599.2 358.5 159.4 40.7 158.4 240.7 -53.5 -25.0 -63.5 -27.1 25.0 63.5 27.2 1.1 -6.5 18.6 24.4 70.0 8.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..* . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29.5 37.5 19.2 20.0 17.5 18.3 6.6 6.7 5.9 7.1 4.9 4.5 1.7 1.7 10.3 17.5 34.0 39.3 25.0. 23.5 11.3 10.4 2.6 2.7 11.0 10.4 9.0 15.8 -5.8 -3.5 -4.5 -1.8 4.5 1.8 -0.5 1.2 5.0 0.6 0.0 0.0 -1.9 0.2 -14.8 -19.3 1,412 1,526 Sources: Data provided by the Solomon Islands authorities; and Fund staff estimates. l! Outturn for the period January-September 2000. 2/ Based on policies proposed by the mission. 3/ Includes in-kind funding for technical assistance. 41 Includes technical assistance. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3l- Table 4. Solomon Islands: Summary of Public and Publicly Guaranteed External Debt, 1996-2001 l/ Proj. 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2l (In millions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise noted) External debt outstanding at end of year 104.2 106.4 118.1 Drawings 4.5 2.5 17.6 Scheduled debt service . . . 4.6 5.3 Principal . . . 3.1 3.9 Interest . . . 1.5 1.4 Debt-service paid Principal Interest 1.5 0.9 0.5 1.3 0.9 0.4 7.9 5.8 2.1 Debt forgiveness Rescheduled 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.5 0.0 Change in arrears 4.1 4.2 -2.7 Valuation adjustment . . . 0.0 0.5 Stock of arrears (end-of-year) 3/ 6.8 11.0 a.3 Principal 4.8 8.0 5.2 Interest 1.9 3.1 3.2 Memorandum items: External debt arrears by type of creditor: Multilateral institutions Bilateral institutions Commercial creditors Average interest rate (percent per annum) 2.4 2.6 1.2 2.4 3.2 5.9 . . . 1.4 0.1 0.3 7.9 1.3 128.3 126.7 12.1 1.5 5.5 5.4 4.1 3.1 1.4 2.3 4.3 5.4 2.7 3.1 1.6 2.3 0.4 0.0 0.0 7.3 2.4 -7.3 1.4 0.0 10.7 3.9 6.5 . . . 4.2 . . . 0.0 0.0 10.7 1.1 0.0 0.0 3.9 1.8 130.2 6.5 5.3 3.0 2.3 5.3 3.0 2.3 0.0 3.9 -3.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 1.8 Sources: Central Bank of Solomon Islands; and Fund staff estimates and projections. l/ Historical data derived from the public sector debt recording system, which may result in discrepancies with the balance of p~yrnents. 21 Based on policies recommended by the mission. 31 Reconciliation of stocks and flows is not possible for some years due to valuation changes. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 32 - Table 5. Solomon Islands: Balance of Payments, 1995-2001 (In millions ofU.S. dollars) Proj. 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 l/ Current account balance Trade balance 13.4 12.0 -37.9 16.4 35.1 7.1 21.6 13.7 11.3 -35.5 -6.1 9.5 -13.4 -15.6 Merchandise exports, f.o.b. 168.1 162.4 173.9 140.8 149.6 105.9 118.6 Timber 83.0 98.4 83.0 40.7 46.2 45.0 51.2 Fish 42.7 29.7 48.9 40.3 32.9 21.9 24.1 Gold 0.2 0.1 0.1 14.1 37.2 la.2 20.0 Other 42.2 34.3 41.9 45.6 33.4 20.8 23.4 Imports, c.i.f. -154.3 -151.2 -209.4 -146.9 -140.1 -119.3 -134.2 Services and income (net) -48.0 -47.5 -42.1 -15.0 -30.8 -8.1 Nonfactor services (NFS) (net) 40.2 -36.9 -30.4 -4.6 -21.8 -0.1 Exports of NFS 35.2 47.1 57.2 50.9 61.1 48.9 Travel and passenger services 17.1 16.0 9.6 8.2 13.5 9.8 Other la.2 31.1 47.6 42.7 47.6 39.0 Imports of NFS -75.5 -84.0 -87.6 -55.5 -82.9 -49.0 Private sector -32.6 -36.2 -43.1 -40.8 49.2 -34.4 Public sector -42.9 -47.8 44.6 -14.7 -33.7 -14.6 Net factor income from abroad -7.8 -10.6 -11.7 -10.4 -9.0 8.0 Private sector -6.7 -7.0 -8.4 -7.5 -6.9 -6.0 Public sector -1.1 -3.6 -3.3 -2.9 -2.1 -2.0 -8.6 -0.1 51.4 11.4 40.0 -51.6 -36.2 -15.4 -8.5 -6.3 -2.1 Net current transfers 47.7 48.2 39.7 37.6 56.3 28.6 45.8 Private sector 14.0 9.6 a.9 -0.8 0.1 0.0 -3.2 Receipts 35.4 29.2 28.9 25.7 25.4 20.3 18.2 Payments -21.4 -19.6 -19.9 -26.4 -25.3 -20.3 -21.4 Public sector 33.7 38.6 30.8 38.3 56.3 28.6 49.0 Capital account balance -6.7 -11.0 44.1 21.6 -25.2 -24.6 Capital transfers 1.5 0.5 0.3 6.9 0.0 0.0 Medium- and long-term capital -8.8 -17.0 44.5 21.0 -25.5 -19.6 Public sector (net) 3.5 -2.0 2.7 15.1 11.1 -1.6 Disbursements 72 2.6 a.1 19.3 15.4 1.5 Amortization -3.1 -4.6 -5.3 -4.2 -4.4 -3.1 Private sector (net) -13.7 -15.5 10.4 1.1 -39.6 -18.0 Disbursemmts 4.9 3.2 24.0 22.8 2.1 1.0 Amortisation -18.6 -18.6 -13.7 -21.7 -41.7 -19.0 Direct and equity investment (net) 1.3 0.5 31.4 4.9 3.1 0.0 Short-term private capital 0.7 5.5 -0.7 -0.4 0.3 -5.0 -21.0 0.0 -22.0 3.6 6.5 -3.0 -31.6 4.0 -35.6 6.0 1.0 Errors and omissions Overall balance Official reserves (- increase) Change in arrears, net of rescheduling/relief (+ accumulation) -10.9 8.5 -12.2 -23.9 -8.1 0.0 0.0 -4.2 9.5 -6.0 20. I 1.8 -17.5 0.6 1.5 -17.1 0.5 -16.2 -2.8 17.2 -0.6 2.7 7.6 5.5 -3.8 1.0 0.3 0.0 Memorandum items: Current account balance Excluding ‘grants (in percent of GDP) Including grants (in percent of GDP) Overall balance (in percent of GDP) Exchange rate (end-period, SISRTSS) Exchange rate (average, SIWSS) Gross ofticial reserves (in millions of U.S. dollars) (In months of imports of goods and services) Nominal GDP -5.5 -6.5 -15.8 -6.1 -5.9 3.6 2.9 -8.7 4.6 9.8 -1.1 2.3 -1.4 5.6 0.5 3.5 3.6 4.8 4.9 5.1 3.4 3.6 3.7 4.8 4.8 15.1 32.2 31.7 47.9 50.6 0.8 1.6 1.3 2.8 2.7 367.0 409.8 433.7 358.9 359.4 -7.7 -9.4 2.5 7.4 -6.3 0.2 5.1 . . 5.1 . 33.4 34.0 2.4 2.2 277.8 292.4 Sources: Central Bank of Solomon Islands; and Fund staff estimates and projections. I/ Based on policies recommended by the mission. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-33- Table 6. Solomon Islands: Summary Accounts of the Banking System, 1995-2001 l/ 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 21 Sep. Dec. Sep. Dec. Central bank (In millions of S.I. dollars) Net foreign assets 44 108 144 224 272 -94 -131 21 -23 82 32 -60 -55 -25 -9 -90 -99 130 141 81 84 49 57 242 Net domestic assets 32 -8 -51 Net credit to the government 80 75 75 Claims 85 79 82 Deposits -4 -4 -7 Bokolo bills outstanding 0 -35 -48 Other items net -49 -48 -78 -89 15 56 -41 -8 -96 Monetary base 76 100 93 Currency outside banks 55 60 71 Reserves 21 40 22 153 101 52 178 157 168 -53 -12 -11 23 61 61 60 80 80 -37 -19 -19 0 0 0 -76 -73 -72 125 145 157 75 82 88 50 63 69 Monetary survey Net foreign assets CBS1 Commercial banks 42 106 151 44 108 144 -2 -1 7 245 242 3 Net domestic assets 300 287 269 Net credit to the government 230 227 230 Credit to rest of nonfinancial public sector 1 3 1 Credit to private sector 122 128 141 Other items net -53 -72 -103 224 270 224 272 0 -2 216 196 182 175 1 2 177 178 -145 -159 440 466 221 262 220 204 217 182 3 192 -160 Broad money Narrow money Quasi-money 342 394 420 170 198 211 173 195 209 462 266 196 177 152 170 178 157 168 -1 -5 2 283 353 373 207 257 266 4 7 7 209 207 233 -137 -118 -133 460 505 543 239 285 307 221 220 236 (Percentage change) Net foreign assets -1 152 42 49 53 9 -34 -38 12 Net domestic assets 11 -4 -6 -20 -20 1 44 63 6 Credit to government 6 -1 1 -21 -19 0 20 41 3 Credit to private sector 14 5 10 25 4 8 17 8 13 Broad money IO 15 7 5 11 5 -I 10 7 Memorandum items: Velocity of broad money 3/ Money multiplier Key interest rates on: Loans and overdrafts Deposits Treasury bills 41 Bokolo bills (CBSI) 41 Interest rate spread 3.8 4.0 3.9 4.5 3.9 4.5 4.2 . . 3.8 3.4 3.3 3.0 . . . 3.7 2.9 3.5 16.9 16.7 15.7 7.4 6.3 2.8 12.8 12.8 13.3 11.3 8.2 2.5 8.2 11.3 13.3 14.1 13.7 13.8 3.2 3.3 3.1 6.0 6.0 6.0 5.0 . . . . 9.7 10.9 10.8 15.2 3.4 7.0 . . . 3.0 3.5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Sources: Central Bank of Solomon Islands; and Fund staff estimates. l/ End-of-period. 2/ Projection based on policies proposed by the mission. 31 Nominal GDP divided by average broad money of current and preceding year. 4/ Rate on 9 1 -day bills. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 34 - Table 7. Solomon Islands: Vulnerability Indicators, 1996-2000 (In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated) Proj 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 Financial sector risk indicators Central government debt (end-period) Broad money (annual percent change) Private sector credit (annual percent change) Share of demand deposits in broad money (in percent) 91-day treasury bill rate (in percent) I/ 91 -day treasury bill rate (real, in percent) Share of nonperforming loans in total loans (in percent) 21 49.7 53.4 55.4 58.9 75.0 15.0 6.7 4.8 4.9 9.5 5.1 10.1 25.3 8.3 7.7 35.2 33.9 32.0 36.2 40.3 12.8 13.3 6.0 6.0 7.0 2.9 2.6 -3.9 -1.9 0.9 3.0 5.2 4.0 4.3 8.6 External indicators Exports (percent change, 12-month basis in U.S. dollars) Imports (percent change, 12-month basis in U.S. dollars) Terms of trade (percent change) Trade balance Current account balance Capital and financial account balance Ofwhich: Foreign direct investment Gross official reserves (in millions of US. dollars) Central bank foreign liabilities (in millions of U.S. dollars) Central bank foreign liabilities (in percent of foreign currency assets) Foreign assets of commercial banks (in millions of U.S. dollars) Foreign liabilities of commercial banks (in millions of U.S. dollars) Gross official international reserves (in months of imports of -3.4 7.1 -19.0 6.3 -29.2 -2.0 38.4 -29.8 -4.6 -14.9 -2.4 -0.2 3.2 -3.7 -5.2 2.7 -8.2 -1.7 2.6 -4.8 2.9 -8.7 4.6 9.8 2.5 -2.7 10.2 7.7 -7.0 -8.8 0.1 7.2 1.4 0.9 0.0 32.2 31.7 47.9 50.6 33.4 2.4 1.4 1.7 3.0 2.6 7.5 4.3 3.6 5.9 7.9 3.6 4.0 1.3 6.1 3.0 4.0 2.6 1.3 5.6 3.9 goods and nonfactor services (NFS)) 1.6 1.3 2.8 2.7 2.4 Gross official international reserves (as percent of broad money) 29.6 35.8 52.8 55.7 33.7 Net official international reserves (as percent of base money) 107.8 155.5 172.1 157.8 108.2 Public external debt (end-period) 25.8 31.3 33.2 37.5 45.7 Public external debt (as percent of exports of goods and NFS) 49.7 46.0 61.6 60.9 81.8 External debt-service payments (as percent of exports of goods and NFS) 3.9 3.1 3.7 3.1 3.3 Exchange rate (S.I. dollar per U.S. dollar, end-of-period) 3.62 4.75 4.86 5.08 5.09 REER appreciation (annual percent change) 31 6.9 9.1 -6.7 3.0 3.1 Sources: Data provided by the Solomon Islands authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projection. 11 Figure for 2000 corresponds to September. 2i Figure for 2000 refers to end-September. 31 IMF, Information Notice System Index, 1990=100. Figure for 2000 corresponds to end-September. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 35 - Table 8. Solomon Islands: Social and Demographic Indicators Latest Single Year l/ 1970-79 1980-89 1990-99 Population Total population, midyear (thousands) Growth rate (percent annual average) Total fertility rate (births per woman) Life expectancy at birth (years) Total Male Female Mortality Infant (per thousand live births) Under 5 (per thousand live births) Adult Male (per 1,000 population) Female (per 1,000 population) 273.0 3.5 7.1 . . . . . . . . . 47.0 99.0 . . . . . . Social indicators Public expenditure Health (percent of GDP) Education (percent of GDP) Adult literacy (percent) Primary school enrollment rate (percent of school age population) Total Male Female Access to safe water (percent of population) Total Urban Rural Access to sanitation (percent of population) Imrnunization rate (percent under 12 months) Measles DPT Child malnutrition (percent under 5 years) Food production index (1989-91=100) Human Development Index Human Development Ranking Human Poverty Index . . . 5.5 . . . . . . I . . . . . . . * ..I . . . . . . . . . 32.0 21.1 95.3 . . . . . . . . . 319.0 409.0 3.2 2.8 5.9 4.9 67.6 70.5 65.7 68.4 69.6 72.7 32.0 23.0 56.0 27.5 . . . 187.0 . . . 127.0 . . . 3.9 4.7 3.8 . . . 76.0 81.7 96.6 85.5 103.4 71.1 89.4 62.9 64.0 90.9 80.0 59.8 62.0 . . . 16.0 92.0 67.0 21.3 99.2 . . . . . . . . . 68.0 72.0 . . . 107.3 0.56 123.0 49.1 Source: World Development Indicators, World Bank; and Asian Development Bank. I/ Latest single year for indicated period for which data is available. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 36 - Table 9. Solomon Islands: Medium-Term Scenario, 1998-2005 Proj. l/ 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 Sources: Ministry of Finance; Central Bank of Solomon Islands; and Fund staff estimates and projections. l! Projections’for 2001-05 are based on policies recommended by the mission. 2/ Central government operations only. 3/ Derived as the difference between the national and public saving-investment balances. 4/ Defined as the external current account balance including grants. 51 End-period. Growth and prices (change in percent) Real GDP CPI (end-of-period) 1.1 -1.3 -14.0 3.4 4.0 4.5 5.0 5.0 10.3 8.0 6.0 6.0 5.1 4.4 3.8 3.3 Savings and investment (in percent of GDP) Public investment Public saving-investment balance 2/ Private saving-investment balance 3/ National saving-investment balance (including grants) 4/ 11.4 20.2 9.0 15.8 17.4 17.8 18.1 18.3 -1.6 -2.7 -4.5 -1.8 -2.2 -2.2 -2.2 -2.2 6.2 12.5 7.0 9.2 7.7 6.4 5.2 3.9 4.6 9.8 2.5 7.4 5.5 4.2 2.9 1.7 Central government operations (in percent of GDP) Total revenue and grants Of which : Grants Total expenditure Overall balance Domestic borrowing Foreign borrowing Privatization Central government gross debt (in percent of GDP) 5/ 35.5 38.6 29.5 37.5 38.1 38.0 37.5 37.1 15.7 15.7 10.3 17.5 17.5 16.9 16.3 15.7 37.1 41.3 34.0 39.3 40.3 40.2 39.8 39.3 -1.6 -2.7 -4.5 -1.8 -2.2 -2.2 -2.2 -2.2 -1.7 -0.7 5.0 0.6 0.6 0.8 0.9 0.9 3.2 1.7 -0.5 1.2 1.5 1.4 1.4 1.3 0.0 1.6 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 55.4 58.9 75.0 73.3 71.0 68.7 66.5 64.4 Stock of arrears (in percent of GDP, end-period) 5.2 3.1 1.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Domestic 2.3 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 External 2.9 3.1 1.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Money and credit (annual percent change) Net foreign assets Net domestic assets Of which: Credit to private sector Broad money 48.6 9.0 -37.8 11.6 19.6 17.3 IS.8 14.3 -19.8 0.5 62.8 5.6 4.6 4.8 5.0 4.7 25.3 a.3 7.7 12.8 10.2 9.4 9.0 8.5 4.8 4.9 9.5 7.4 9.3 9.1 9.0 8.5 Balance of payments (in millions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise indicated) Exports, f.o.b Imports, c.i.f. Current account Overall balance 140.8 149.7 105.9 -146.9 -140.1 -119.3 16.4 35.1 7.1 20.1 1.8 -17.5 118.6 134.2 21.6 0.6 145.6 153.1 161.9 171.2 155.4 -165.6 -177.5 -190.1 16.7 13.6 9.9 6.1 4.6 4.7 4.9 4.9 Gross official reserves (in millions of U.S. dollars) 47.9 50.6 33.4 34.0 38.6 43.3 48.2 53.2 (In months of imports of goods and nonfactor services) 2.8 2.7 2.4 2.2 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 Net official reserves (in millions of U.S. dollars) 46.1 47.7 30.8 31.5 36.2 41.0 46.0 51.0 (Percent of base money) 172.1 157.8 108.2 107.6 116.8 125.2 132.5 138.5 Central government external debt (In millions of U.S. dollars, end-period) (In percent of GDP) 118.1 128.3 126.7 130.2 134.1 139.3 143.9 148.7 33.2 37.5 45.7 45.6 44.9 44.0 42.9 41.8 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 37 - ANNEiXI Solomon Islands: Performance Against Actions Proposed in the 1999 Interim Consultation l/ Proposed Action Outcome Fiscal sector Complete civil service retrenchment program. Adopt action plan for customs, as developed in consultation with AusAID. Complete reform of the government’s accounting and budget control systems. Review excise taxation in order to introduce rationalized structure. Public debt, debt service, and arrears 1) Agree with holders of government securities on restructuring plan for treasury bills. 2) Prepare and announce a plan for launching treasury bill auctions by May 1, 1999. 3) Adhere to monthly schedule for treasury bill interest arrears clearance. 4) Clear all arrears by end- 1999. First phase of program completed in March 1999, with a net reduction of 447 civil servants and the elimination of 100 vacant positions. Observed. Plan was implemented, though not all ministries reconciled their records with those of the Treasury. Effective January 2000 the cigarette tax was raised from S 18Okg to $3OO/kg and the excise tax on beer from $2.40/liter to $3.40/liter. Treasury bills for SI$207 million were converted into medium-term bonds in first quarter of 1999. Subsequently, the remaining SI% 18 million began to be redeemed. Observed. Observed. All external arrears were cleared with the exception of SlS54.4 million owed to EFIC and Marubeni. The SLS38.6 million owed to EFIC was rescheduled in early 2000. 5) No new arrears. Some external arrears were incurred in September 1999. 6) Use all proceeds of asset sales to pay arrears Most proceeds from the sale of shares in the telephone and reduce debt. company to the National Provident Fund (NPF) were used to pay arrears and debt service. Around 25 percent was used for other purposes. 7) Give assurance that current interest payments Observed. will receive same payment priority as the clearance of iriterest arrears. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 38 - ANNEX I Solomon Islands: Performance Against Actions Proposed in the 1999 Interim Consultation l/ Proposed Action Outcome Financial sector 1) Bring DBSI under supervisory authority of CBS1 and apply same prudential standards as those for commercial banks. 2) Conduct actuarial and portfolio review of NPF. 3) Initiate public education campaign about dangers of pyramid schemes and early strengthening of punitive legislation against such schemes. Forestry, privatization, and private sector development 1) Pass new forestry legislation, 2) Review forestry taxation in light of World Bank/PriceWaterhouse Coopers study and implement measures to raise revenue and and reduce logging. 3) Complete privatization of SIPL and continue efforts to divest telephone company. 4) Conduct review of land tenure system. External review was completed. Review was completed. Observed. Observed. A minimum log tax of SI$7O/cubic meter, a 5 percent tax on sawn timber, and a 2.5 percent tax on plywood/ veneer were implemented in 1999. Operations of SIPL had to be suspended in mid-1999, and the government sold part of its stake in the telephone company to the NPF. Tracts of land were identified for leasing out to private investors. An action plan to rehabilitate land administration and land registry began to be developed. I I As of June 2000, the final month of the Ulufa’alu administration. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 39 - ANNEX II Solomon Islands: Selected Statistical Issues The Solomon Islands’ economid database is poor, with monetary and balance of payments data, which are compiled by the Central Bank of the Solomon Islands (CBSI), of generally better quality than data produced by the National Statistical Office (NSO), which include merchandise trade, national accounts, and price statistics. While there has been a noticeable improvement during 2000, shortcomings remain in the compilation of government finance statistics. The CBS1 publishes data on the real, external, and monetary sectors in its Quarterly Review, as well as in its Annual Report. It recently began including fiscal data, but reconciliation with data obtained from the Ministry of Finance remains difficult. There is a Solomon Islands country page in IFS and the timeliness of reporting monetary data has improved considerably. In recent years, the Solomon Islands has received technical assistance missions from both the Fund’s Statistics Department (STA) and the Pacific Financial Technical Assistance Centre (PFTAC), primarily in the areas of national accounts and balance of payments statistics. The technical assistance has identified the critical need for improved resourceing in all areas of data collection and compilation; improved coordination between producers and users of statistics; and improved record keeping and development of computerized procedures in all areas of government. However, the statistical authorities note that, in the absence of a greater commitment of budgetary resources, implementation of technical assistance recommendations will remain problematic. Real sector Estimates of real GDP are produced with significant lags, with the most recent official data available covering the period through 1994. Moreover, the data are mostly employment- based and fail to account for productivity changes. The government does not provide estimates or projections for GDP. Most data on production of major export commodities are reported with a lag of one year, while data on employment and wages are produced with lags in excess of two years and are quite limited in coverage. Monthly price data are produced with a relatively short lag (less than a month) but are based only on prices in the Honiara area. Money and banking statistics Monetary statistics are compiled on a weekly basis and are provided to the Fund’s Asia and Pacific Department with a 1-2 week lag. In recent months, the timeliness of data reporting to STA has generally improved. Thus, the latest data published in the December 2000 issue of IFS cover the accounts of the monetary authorities and of the deposit money banks’ for September 2000. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4o- ANNEX II Public finance During 2000 the Ministry of Finance began compiling fiscal data based on meaningful economic categories.. However, the available data still suffer from problems associated with infrequent, inconsistent, delayed, and incorrect postings. The quality of expenditure data suffers particularly from these problems, and there are still inconsistencies in the revenue data reported by Customs and Inland Revenue, the Ministry of Finance, and the central bank. Government finance statistics have not been reported to STA since 1991. External sector Quarterly balance of payments data are estimated by the CBS1 on the basis of foreign exchange transactions reported through the banking system and are available with a 3-month lag. However, in the absence of supplementary surveys (e.g., on foreign direct investment), such data are deficient in both detail and coverage. The government external debt position is recorded on a timely basis and is adjusted for exchange rate valuation effects. However, the data on private external debt are not reliable, and data on government debt are not always consistent with balance of payments data on official capital flows. A technical assistance mission which reviewed the balance of payments statistics in June 1998 additionally identified coverage deficiencies in the identification of external debt, particularly external payments arrears, both official and private; the lack of statistics on foreign direct investment; and inaccuracies in the identification of services transactions, official grants and transfers, and other private capital flows. In addition, external debt data are not published in detail on a regular basis. The most recent balance of payments data reported to STA are for 1998. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public. Solomon Islands: Core Statistical Indicators (As of December 152000) Central Reserve/ Bank Consumer Current Public Overall Exchange International Base Balance Broad lnterest Price Exports/ Account Debt/ Debt Government Rates Reserves Money Sheet Money Rates Index Imports l! Balance 1/ Service Balance 2f GDP 31 Date of Latest Observation 4/ 12/l s/O0 9/30/00 9/30/00 9/30/00 913 o/o0 9/30//00 9/00 I2199 I2199 1999 1999 1999 Date Received 4/ 12/15/00 1 o/4/00 1 o/4/00 1 Oi4loO I o/4/00 1 o/4/00 10115/00 l/31/00 l/3 l/o0 3100 3100 3KlQ Frequency of Data 5/ D W W W W W M M M A A A Frequency of Reporting 51 D M M M M M ii4 Upon Upon Upon Upon request request request request A Frequency of Publication D M M M M M M A A A A A A C Source of Data Mode of Reporting Confidentiality 6/ Public Central media Bank Internet E-mai I P P Central Bank E-mail P Central Bank E-mail P Central Bank E-mail P Central Bank E-mail P Statistics Dept. Fax P Central Bank Fax P Central Bank Fax P Ministry of Ministry of Central ’ Finance Finance Bank Fax Fax Fax P P P I/ Exports and imports on a customs basis are available annually with a five-month lag. However, detailed balance-of-payments data derived from foreign exchange transactions through the banking system are available on a monthly basis with a 3-month lag. 2/ Given the lack of availability of expenditure data, the government balance is estimated based on available data on financing. 3/ The most recent official data is for 1994, but the central bank has produced estimates through 1999. 4/ Includes data received following specific requests by Fund staff. 5/ A = annually; D = daily; M = monthly; Q = quarterly; W = weekly. 6/ P = publicly released information. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-42- ANNEX III Solomon Islands: Fund Relations (As of November 30,200O) I. II. III. IV. V. VI. VII. Membership Status: Joined g/22/78; Article VIII General Resources Account: SDR Million Quota 10.40 Fund holdings of currency 9.87 Reserve position in Fund 0.54 SDR Department: SDR Million Net cumulative allocation 0.65 Holdings 0.00 Outstanding Purchases and Loans: None Percent Quota 100.0 94.9 5.2 Financial Arrangements: Amount Approval Expiration Approved Type Date Date (SDR Million) Stand-by 6122183 6/21/84 2.40 Stand-by 5/29/8 1 5/28/82 1.60 Percent Allocation Projected Obligations to Fund: None Exchange Rate Arrangements: 100.0 0.3 Amount Drawn (SDR Million) 0.96 0.80 During June-early November 2000 the Solomon Islands dollar was effectively fixed against the U.S. dollar. In November 2000 however, the authorities resumed the policy adopted in August 1998, whereby the exchange rate for the Solomon Islands dollar is determined on the basis of a relationship between the Solomon Islands dollar and a trade-weighted basket of the currencies of the Solomon Islands’ major trading partners, with the US. dollar as the intervention currency. Without cabinet approval, the central bank may make discretionary adjustments in the exchange value of the Solomon Islands dollar each month within margins of 0.5 percent above or below the middle rate prevailing at the end of the previous month. The Solomon Islands continues to impose exchange restrictions against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) pursuant to U.N. Security Council Resolution 757 and which were notified to the Fund under Decision No. 144. VIII. Last Article IV Consultation: The 1998 Article IV consultation discussions were held in Honiara during February 23- March 5, 1998. The staff report (SM/98/107, May 21, 1998) was considered by the Executive Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicANNEX III Board and the consultation concluded on June 10, 1998. Interim discussions were held in Honiara during March l-9, 1999. The staff report (W/99/99) was considered by the Executive Bo&d and the interim.discussions concluded on June 4, 1999. Ix. Technical Assistance Date Department Purpose Short-term April 18,1994 September 28, 1994 September 8, 1994 November 28, 1994 January 2 1, 1995 July 3, 1995 July 30, 1995 September 17,1995 September 17, 1995 November 20,1995 February 19,1996 July 14, 1996 June 28,1997 November 17, 1997 January 14,1998 February 3,1998 May 4,1998 June 7,1998 June 30,1998 STA MAE MAE STA PFTAC STA PFTAC PFTAC STA STA STA PFTAC PFTAC PFTAC PFTAC PFTAC PFTAC PFTAC PFTAC November 28,1998 February 9,1999 May and September -October, 1999 October 3 1 -November 12,200O PFTAC PFTAC MAE National accounts Reserve management Bank supervision National accounts Banking supervision National accounts Tax administration Banking supervision National accounts National accounts National accounts Banking supervision Banking supervision Tax administration Statistics Tax administration Tax administration Banking supervision Balance of payments statistics Public financial management Banking supervision Treasury bill auctions and monetary operations Advisor to CBS1 Long-term June 19,1995-June 18,1999; extended in October 1999 through October 2000. MAE Advisor to CBS1 governor Duration Two weeks Three weeks Seven weeks Two weeks One week Two weeks Two weeks One week Three weeks Two weeks Two weeks One week One week Two weeks Two weeks One week Four weeks Two weeks Two weeks One week One week Eight weeks Two weeks Five years X. Resident Representative: None Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 44 - ANNEX IV Solomon Islands: Relations with the World Bank Group’ 1. The World Bank has a significant lending program in the Solomon Islands with a strong focus on education, health, and economic reform. To date, the Solomon Islands has received eight credits totaling US$49.9 million. 2. The Bank’s operations in the Solomon Islands are guided by the Bank’s broader Pa@ Regional Strategy (May 2000) which, in keeping with the Bank’s mission of poverty alleviation, identifies as a priority the provision of targeted development financing in sectors where the Bank has a proven track record and where there is a clear link to an explicit policy reform agenda. Current Bank projects support health and education sector reform and development. The other objective of the Bank’s Pacific Regional Strategy, the identification of world best-practice approaches and solutions to the development problems in the Pacific, has been carried forward through both country- specific and regional economic and sector work. Recent country work has included Pacific Islands Stakeholder Participation in Development: Solomon Islands; Voices from the Village-A Comparative Study of Coastal Resource Management in the Pat@ Islands; and the Bank’s Pacific Regional Economic Report, Cities, Seas, and Storms- Managing Change in Pacific Island Economies (forthcoming). Solomon Islands IBRD/IDA Lending Operations Undisbursed Date of Approval Value Balance (as of Dec. 2000) Completed projects (IDA) (In millions of U.S. dollar equivalent) Development Bank 1981 1.5 0.8 Primary Education 1982 5.0 0 Agriculture Development 1983 3.5 0 Guadalcanal Roads 1985 2.0 0 Education II 1986 5.0 .’ 0 Projects under supervision (IDA) Education III 1993 16.9 1.1 Structural Adjustment 1999 12.0 5.0 Health Sector Development 2000 4.0 3.7 Total Total debt outstanding 49.9 25.3 37.5 . . . Source: Data provided by the World Bank. ‘Prepared by World Bank and Fund Staff. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-45- ANNEX IV 3. A Structural Adjustment Credit (SAC) credit of US$12 million was approved in June 1999 to help support a broad-based reform program aimed at ,improving governance and productivity in the public sector, liberalizing the financial sector, implementing environmentally sound forestry policies, and improving public expenditure allocation to benefit poor and vulnerable groups. While a first tranche (US$7 million) was released in 1999, the recent ethnic crisis and associated unrest has significantly changed the economic environment in the country, and the SAC will close without disbursing the second tranche. At present, the Bank, in conjunction with other development partners of the Solomon Islands, is taking a key role in developing a program to support post-conflict recovery in the country. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-46- ANNEX V Solomon Islands: Relations with the Asian Development Bank (As of December 21,200O) 1. The Asian Development Bank (AsDB) started its operations in the Solomon Islands in 1974 and has so far provided 17 concessional loans from the Asian Development Fund totaling US$79.3 million and 53 technical assistance (TA) grants totaling US$10.9 million. The loan and TA projects have been in agriculture and fisheries, transportation, infrastructure rehabilitation, finance, power, water supply and sanitation, and ports and on the institutional development of government ministries and public agencies, particularly the executing agencies of AsDB-financed projects. 2. During 1994-97, no new operations were initiated because of government arrears on debt repayments. In 1998, with the clearance of overdue loan payments to the AsDB, lending and TA operations resumed. In August 1998, the AsDB approved a US$25 million policy-based program loan and a US$l million TA loan to support the government’s Public Sector Reform Program. The program loan helped finance adjustment costs associated with the reform program, particularly the clearance of government arrears to external and domestic creditors, and separation payments made in 1999 to civil servants. The first tranche of the program loan (USS 15 million) was disbursed in November 1998. The second tranche of the loan was not released and was eventually cancelled due to the disruption in reform program implementation caused by the ethnic unrest. In 2000, the AsDB provided US$O.8 million in TA grants for policy advice and project preparation, and a US$lO million post-conflict emergency rehabilitation project loan. 3. AsDB operations in the Solomon Islands are guided by the Pacific Strategy for the New Millennium, which was approved and adopted in 2000. Project processing is undertaken by the Pacific Operations Division (POHQ) in the AsDB’s headquarters in Manila, while project implementation is administered largely by the South Pacific Regional Mission (SPRM) located in Port Vila, Vanuatu. POHQ and SPRM are the two operational units under the AsDB’s Office of Pacific Operations. Loans, Approvals, and Disbursements, 1993-2000 (In millions of U.S. dollars) I993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 Loaq approvals 0.50 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 27.33 - 10.0 Loan disbursements 3.03 0.59 0.11 0.00 0.0 15.67 0.32 0.45 Cumulative net loan amount (as of end-of-year) 37.58 37.61 37.61 37.61 37.61 64.94 64.65 73.94 Cumulative disbursement lacnfmd~nf-vz=.ar\ 0.65 0.11 0.00 0.00 0.00 11.66 53.61 54.06 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-47- ANNEX VI Public Information Notice‘(PIN) No. XX International Monetary Fund FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE 700 19* Street, NW xx Washington, D. C. 20431 USA IMF Concludes Article IV Consultation with Solomon Islands On January 24, 2001, the Executive Board concluded the Article IV consultation with Solomon Islands.’ Background The Solomon Islands is a small open economy, with abundant natural resources and high potential for rapid economic growth. Its mainly rural population is growing at a quick pace and depends primarily on subsistence farming and fishing. Over the last 30 years per capita income contracted due in part to shortcomings in economic management, structural impediments to growth, and more recently, to the destruction caused by ethnic conflict. Apart from gold production which started in 1998, most foreign investment has been channeled to the forestry and fishing sectors. Since independence in 1978, the public sector has played a key role in the economy, accounting on average for about one-third of GDP and recorded employment in recent years. During the first half of the 1990s real GDP grew rapidly driven largely by an unsustainable increase in logging and an expansionary fiscal policy. By the mid-1990s intensifying fiscal pressures gave rise to substantial government arrears. The large fiscal deficits stemmed from generous tax exemptions, inadequate taxation of forest resources, weak tax administration, a growing government wage bill, and the lack of effective expenditure control. The accumulation of macroeconomic imbalances and the adverse impact of falling timber prices during the Asian crisis precipitated a macroeconomic crisis in 1997, when government arrears reached 12 percent of GDP, the external current account swung into a large deficit, and the Solomon Islands dollar came under intense pressure. ’ Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial information, and discusses with officials the country’s economic developments and policies. On return toheadquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the country’s authorities. In this PIN, the main features of the Board’s discussion are described. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public. -48 - ANNEX VI Against this background, the government that took power in September 1997 launched a comprehensive Policy and Structural Reform Program. It made progress in redressing macroeconomic imbalances in 1998, when the fiscal deficit was reduced substantially, the stock of arrears relative to GDP was halved, and the external current account shifted to a surplus. In addition, a tightening of monetary policy contributed to a recovery of the net international reserves of the central bank; inflation .also began to fall. Progress was also made in preparing the ground for structural reforms. Implementation of the reform program was complicated, however, by ethnic unrest that intensified in 1999 and lasted well into the third quarter of 2000. The disturbances led to a sharp fall in output and employment, a marked weakening in the government finances, and a considerable decline in the international reserves of the central bank. Notwithstanding the deepening recession, the government was able to clear nondebt external arrears as well as arrears with domestic creditors in the period through mid-2000, when inflation declined as the rate of the depreciation of the currency slowed. Also in that period, progress was achieved in structural reforms, most notably with the downsizing of the civil service, trade liberalization, enhancing the transparency and efficiency of tax policy, and measures to improve the management of forest resources. Government efforts were supported by a.Structural Adjustment Credit from the World Bank, as well as assistance from other multilateral agencies and donors. The new government that emerged in the wake of an acute political crisis in June 2000 shifted its priorities to concentrate on bringing peace to the country. A ceasefire agreement was secured in August and a peace agreement was signed on October 15, 2000 in Townsville, Australia. Under the agreement, all parties involved in the hostilities undertook to end the violence and to work to restore peace and ethnic harmony. Subsequently, the government has turned its attention to the challenges of consolidating peace and reconstructing the country with the assistance of the international community. Executive Board Assessment <Begin Typing Here> Public Information Notices (PINS) are issued, (i) at the request of a member country, following the conclusion of the Article IV consultation for countries seeking to make known the views of the IMF to the public. This action is intended to strengthen IMF surveillance over the economic policies of member countries by increasing the transparency of the IMF’s assessment of these policies; and (ii) following policy discussions in the Executive Board at the decision of the Board. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public, -49 - ANNEX VI Solomon Islands: Selected Economic Indicators 1997 1998 1999 2000 Proj. Output and prices Real GDP Consumer prices (end-period) Investment and savings Private saving-investment balance External sector Merchandise exports (f.o.b.) Merchandise imports (c.i.f.) Net current transfers Current account balance Current account (as percent of GDP) Overall balance Central government external debt (end-period) Real effective exchange rate (end-period, 1990=100) 11 Monetary sector Credit to private sector Base money Broad money (M2) Budgetary operations Revenue and grants Expenditure Saving Overall balance Annual percentage change -2.3 10.4 1.1 -1.3 10.3 8.0 In percent of GDP -14.0 6.0 -4.6 6.2 12.5 7.0 In millions of U.S. dollars unless otherwise noted 173.9 140.8 149.7 -209.4 -146.9 -140.1 39.7 37.5 56.3 -37.9 16.4 35.1 -8.7 4.6 9.8 -6.0 20.1 1.8 106.4 118.1 128.3 120.5 112.5 115.8 Annual percentage change 105.9 -119.3 28.6 7.1 2.5 -17.5 126.7 118.7 10.1 -7.5 6.7 25.3 8.3 40.9 17.7 4.8 4.9 In percent of GDP 7.7 -5.4 9.5 29.0 35.5 38.6 29.5 33.2 37.1 41.3 34.0 -2.8 0.1 1.9 -3.7 -4.1 -1.6 -2.7 -4.5 Sources: Solomon Islands authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections. I/ Figure for 2000 corresponds to September. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public