DOCUMENT INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND NOT FOR PUBLIC USE FOR AGENDA SM/02/348 CONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION November 8,2002 To: Members of the Executive Board From: The Secretary Subject: Singapore-Staff Report for the 2002 Article IV Consultation Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staff report for the 2002 Article IV consultation with Singapore, which will be brought to the agenda for discussion on a date to be announced. At the time of circulation of this paper to Board, the Secretary’s Department has not received a communication from the authorities of Singapore indicating whether or not they consent to the Fund’s publication of this paper; such communication may be received after the authorities have had an opportunity to read the paper. Questions may be referred to Mr. Senhadji (ext. 38380) and Mr. Elson (ext. 37845) in APD. Unless the Documents Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the WTO Secretariat on Monday, November 18, 2002. An: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicCONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND SINGAPORE Staff Report for the 2002 Article IV Consultation Prepared by Staff Representatives for the 2002 Consultation with Singapore (In consultation with other departments) Approved by R. Anthony Elson and Shigeo Kashiwagi November 8,2002 a The 2002 Article IV Consultation discussions were held in Singapore during September 5-17,2002. The staff team comprised Messrs. Lee (head), Senhadji, Parr-ado and Schellekens (all APD) and Drees (ICM). Mr. Elson (APD) joined the final round of policy discussions. Mr. Low (OED) also attended the meetings. l The team met with Deputy Prime Minister and Finance Minister Lee Hsien Loong, the Managing Director of the Monetary Authority of Singapore Koh Yong Guan, other senior government officials, and representatives of the private sector. a In concluding the last Article IV consultation on a lapse-of-time basis on June 29, 200 1, Executive Directors endorsed the staff appraisal that called for an easing of monetary and fiscal policies if the global downturn were more severe than expected. They suggested greater transparency for the monetary framework and improved disclosure of government asset positions and medium-term fiscal targets. Directors also endorsed structural reforms covering industrial policy, financial market development, and pension reform. a The authorities have agreed to participate in the FSAP, which began with a staff visit in August 2002; the FSSA is to be presented to the Board for the 2003 Article IV consultation. a Singapore has accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4, and maintains an exchange rate system that is free of restrictions on making payments and transfers for current international transactions. Singapore provides data to the Fund on a generally timely basis, and has subscribed to the SDDS. a The principal authors of this report are William Lee and Abdelhak Senhadji with contributions from other team members. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2- Contents Page Executive Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 I. Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 II. Background.. ................................................................................................................ 4 A. Recent Economic Developments ..................................................................... 4 B. Outlook and Risks.. .......................................................................................... 6 III. Policy Discussions ....................................................................................................... 9 A. Near-term Macroeconomic Policy.. ................................................................. 9 B. Medium-term Structural Policies.. ................................................................. 11 C. Other Issues.. .................................................................................................. 20 IV. Staff Appraisal . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20 Boxes 1. Policy Response to the Recession . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7 2. Reaction Functions as a Guide to MAS Monetary Policy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12 3. China-Trade and Investment-Implications for Singapore . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14 4. Property Finance in Singapore-Recent Reforms and Implications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16 5. Singapore’s Role as a Financial Center in a Changing Global Financial System . . . . . 18 Figures 1. Regional Comparisons: Key Domestic Indicators.. ................................................... 23 2. Labor and Asset Market Developments.. ................................................................... 24 3. Regional Comparisons: Key External Indicators.. ..................................................... 25 4. Monetary and Fiscal Indicators.. ................................................................................ 26 5. External Developments.. ............................................................................................ 27 6. Current and Leading Indicators of Economic Activity.. ............................................ 28 Tables 1. Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 1997-2003 ......................................... 29 2. Monetary Survey, 1997-2002.. .................................................................................. 30 3. Balance of Payments, 1997-2003 .............................................................................. 3 1 4. Summary of Government Operations, 1997/98-2002/03.. ........................................ 32 5. Indicators of Vulnerability, 1997-2002.. ................................................................... 33 6. Illustrative Medium-Term Scenario, 1998-2007.. ..................................................... 34 Annexes I. Recommendations of the Economic Review Committee .......................................... 35 II. Fund Relations ........................................................................................................... 39 III. Statistical Issues ......................................................................................................... 41 Iv. Official Development Assistance .............................................................................. 43 V. Draft Public Information Notice ................................................................................ 45 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3- EXECUTIVE SUI\IWIARY Key Issues: Singapore faces the twin challenges of managing the recovery from a sharp cyclical downturn and mounting competitive pressures to restructure and develop new industries. Although the authorities traditionally eschew fine-tuning, they pragmatically reacted to the recent downturn with fiscal stimulus and monetary easing. The simultaneous decline in global demand and the weak high-tech sector, however, revealed a key structural vulnerability in the disproportionately large role of electronics manufacturing in the economy. While a moderate recovery in GDP growth is projected, downside macroeconomic and event risks continue to dominate the near-term outlook. The most prominent risks stem from uncertainties about the global recovery, volatility in equity prices, and political instability in the Middle East. Furthermore, if the global recovery were to falter, incipient deflationary pressures could intensify. Responding to competitive challenges, the authorities are developing a new strategy aimed at improving competitiveness, encouraging private initiative, strengthening the service economy, and promoting internationalization. Government policies are aimed at helping to adapt domestic industries to the changing external environment, and at attracting and retaining workers with requisite skills. Specific initiatives include tax reform, changes to the Central Provident Fund, and encouraging domestic industry, especially Government-Linked Corporations (GLC), to raise efficiency and broaden their international focus. Policy Discussion and staff assessment: 0 The staff supported an easing bias in the fiscal and monetary policy stances. The authorities stood ready to make the necessary adjustments should the recovery falter, but emphasized the medium-term orientation of their fiscal and monetary policy frameworks. The staff strongly endorsed the authorities’ initiatives during the past year to improve further the disclosure of the monetary policy stance and transparency of the policy framework. It suggested, as a next step, to anchor expectations about monetary policy by identifying the authorities’ views on a range of macroeconomic fundamentals, thereby broadening market participants’ focus beyond foreign exchange market developments. The staff supported the key recommendations of the Economic Review Committee, which included lowering income tax rates, reforming the CPF, and refocusing the operating strategies of GLCs. However, it cautioned that the gains might be less than anticipated unless the implementation of the reform agenda is accelerated. The financial system remains strong despite challenges to Singapore’s position as a financial center. The ongoing FSAP will comprehensively assess these and other financial stability issues. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4- 1. INTRODUCTION 1. In the decade leading up to the Asian Crisis, Singapore achieved an outstanding growth performance while building strong fiscal and external positions. The authorities garnered a solid reputation and high credibility from their long track record of budgetary surpluses, low inflation, external surpluses, and high growth. Despite the severity of the shocks, the economy’s resilience and adroit policies helped Singapore weather the Asian crisis well, as real GDP growth rebounded during 1999 and 2000. However, in 2001, Singapore dipped into recession as a result of the global slowdown and sharp decline in the demand for electronics. At the same time, growing competition from low-cost regional producers created restructuring pressures to diversify from electronics manufacturing to knowledge-based activities in which Singapore retains comparative advantage. The twin challenges of overcoming a sharp cyclical downturn and addressing mounting structural changes framed this year’s consultation discussions. 2. The People’s Action Party (PAP), which has been in power since Singapore’s independence, obtained 75 percent of the popular vote in the last general election in November 2001. The PAP won 82 of 84 seats, the largest electoral margin in 21 years. Singapore Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong interpreted the resounding victory as a strong mandate to tackle the deep recession and structural challenges. II. BACKGROIJND A. Recent Economic Developments 3. Singapore is recovering from its most severe recession, which was exacerbated by a sharp slowdown in key export markets following the events of September 11. However, the recovery, which began this year, remains narrowly based and appears hesitant: l Real GDP declined by 2 percent in 2001 after surging by Singapore: Contnbutions to GDP Growth (chges brpercenr ofprevialryeor’l GDP) 10 percent the year before 21 21 (Table 1 and Figure 1). Last year’s 11 18 15 collapse in electronics exports led 12 17. to a slump in fixed investment and 9 9 a sharp inventory correction. So far 6 6 this year, robust manufacturing 3 3 .r 0 growth during the first half of the -3 year has been narrowly based in -6 -6 the capital-intensive chemical -9 -9 1995 ,996 ,997 ,998 ,999 *ooo 7x01 cluster, where output is highly volatile and knock-on effects are limited, as the sharp slowdown in third-quarter GDP growth confirmed. Construction and services, particularly tourist, business, and financial services continue to be weak. a The unemployment rate reached 4.5 percent (a 14-year high) in the first quarter of 2002, but eased to 4.1 percent in the subsequent quarter (Figure 2). Long-term Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-5- unemployment, however, continued to rise to 1.9 percent in June 2002, from less than l/z percent before the Asian crisis, Although consumer prices rose by 1 percent in 2001, the significant slack in the economy and low inflation in the region have contributed to mild deflation since November 2001. The decline in the consumer price index (CPI), on a twelve-month basis, has averaged around minus % percent through August 2002. Similarly, the unit labor cost index for the whole economy declined by ‘/z percent in the first half of 2002, after increasing by 7% percent in 2001 (Figure 3). 0 Demand for credit has weakened considerably since mid-2001 (Table 2). Bank lending in August 2002 was 1.4 percent lower than at end-200 1 despite lower interest rates and ample bank liquidity (Figure 4). Credit demand has been particularly weak in the real estate development and construction sectors, although mortgage lending has been robust. However, domestic bank balance sheets continue to be healthy, with capital adequacy ratios of about 20 percent, and nonperforming loan ratios of 8 percent in June 2002. l Asset prices declined in 2001 and during much of this year, mirroring the weak real economy and uncertain prospects for the recovery (Figure 2). After declining by 15% percent during 200 1, equity prices have fallen further through most of this year. Reduced risk tolerance and concerns about future prospects also depressed property prices, which have fallen by about 20 percent since the second half of 2000 and are now about 40 percent below their pre-Asian crisis peaks. 0 The external position remains strong (Table 3). The current account surplus widened to 21 percent of GDP in 2001 from 17 percent of GDP a year earlier as deteriorating export demand was more than offset by declining imports of intermediate inputs (Figures 3 and 5). Although the U.S. export share decreased by two percentage points to 22% percent, intra-Asian trade shares rose by almost the same amount. During the first half of 2002, non-oil domestic exports began to pick up. In August 2002, official reserves stood at US$80.7 billion (the equivalent of 8% months of imports). 4. While the authorities have traditionally eschewed counter-cyclical policies in favor of a medium-term focus, they pragmatically reacted to the large downturn in 2001 with sizable fiscal stimulus packages, an expansionary budget for N2002/03, and monetary easing.’ In July and October 2001, two off-budget fiscal stimulus packages were passed with measures totaling 8% percent of GDP. The measures included ’ The fiscal year begins April 1. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-6- mainly tax reductions and fee rebates for corporates and individuals, as well as transfers to households (Box 1). Subsequently, the FY2002/03 budget, released in May 2002, featured income tax rate cuts and other measures with immediate stimulative effects, although they were designed as structural reforms (discussed below).2 Taken together, the two off-budget packages reduced the overall fiscal surplus in FY2001/02 by 3% percentage points to 3% percent of GDP (Table 4). For FY2002/03, the follow-through from last year’s fiscal packages and the new measures in the budget imply a brther decline in the overall fiscal surplus to 1.9 percent of GDP. 5. Staff estimates suggest that the combined fiscal packages of N2001/02 and FY2002/03 would provide a fiscal impulse equal to 3.6 percent and 1.1 percent of GDP in N2001/02 and N2002/03, respectively. However, the actual increase in GDP may be lower. The stimulus to GDP may be dampened not just through external leakages from higher imports, but also from higher precautionary saving prompted by unusually high unemployment, the slow rate of recent job creation, and uncertainties about a sustained global recovery. 6. Monetary conditions have continued to ease since July 2001 when monetary policy shifted to a neutral stance. Since July, the trade-weighted exchange rate index (TWI) has remained in a flat band (of undisclosed width), instead of continuing its trend appreciation. In October 2001, the Monetary Authority of Singapore (MAS) widened the band to accommodate higher volatility in the aftermath of the September 11 events. Since January 2002, the width of the band has been narrowed as market volatility has subsided, 98 but monetary policy has maintained its neutral 96 1 setting. In addition, liquid money market conditions have kept domestic interest rates on a downward trend (Figure 4). I B. Outlook and Risks 7. The near-term outlook is for a moderate improvement in GDP growth, driven mainly by a pick-up in exports. Reflecting the sharp slowdown in third quarter GDP 2 The FY2002103 budget cut the top corporate and personal marginal income tax rates from 24% percent and 26 percent, respectively, to 22 percent for 2002, and to 20 percent by 2005. Other tax incentives included measures to spur the financial sector. To help offset the revenue loss from the tax cuts over the medium term, the Goods and Services Tax (GST) will be increased from 3 to 5 percent with effect from January 2003. However, an accompanying package of measures was also implemented to offset the impact of the GST hike over the next five years. This package includes income transfers (Economic Restructuring Shares), rebates on government fees, and direct subsidies to health care and public education to reduce the regressive effects of the higher GST tax. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-7- Box 1: Policy Response to the Recession The authorities have traditionally conducted monetary and fiscal policies with a medium- term orientation to avoid the impression of fine tuning. However, against the backdrop of a deteriorating external economic environment exacerbated by a sharp downturn in the global demand for electronics, the authorities pragmatically eased monetary policy and passed two fiscal stimulus packages aimed at cushioning the effects of the severe recession. Monetary policy: The Monetary Authority of Singapore (MAS) eased its policy stance in July and October 2001 to a neutral setting where the target exchange rate path was to remain flat: . MAS announced on July 11 that it would shift from a tightening to a neutral exchange rate policy stance by centering the policy band on a zero percent appreciation of the nominal effective exchange rate. . MAS announced on October 10 that the exchange rate target band would be widened to allow a more flexible management of the exchange rate because of heightened uncertainty in the external environment. 0 The band was narrowed on January 2, 2002 around the prevailing level of the nominal effective exchange rate, but the zero-appreciation target path was maintained. In July, MAS announced it would maintain this stance for the remainder of 2002. Fiscal policy: Two fiscal stimulus packages were passed in 2001 (the first announced in July and the second in October) with measures totaling S$11.3 billion or 8% percent of GDP (Table). The packages included both cost-cutting measures for corporates and tax relief for households. While the July supplementary budget (equivalent to S$2.2 billion) focused on cost-cutting measures, the October package also included tax relief for households. The authorities also announced that, following the recommendations of the National Wages Council, wage settlements would be restrained or even cut. To emphasize the call for wage restraint, civil service wages have been cut. In addition, the authorities announced a plan to distribute S$2.7 billion as dividend- paying “shares” of government revenue to all Singaporeans. These shares would pay a guaranteed dividend in the form of bonus shares, payable from March 2002, at a guaranteed minimum of 3 percent per annum. An extra dividend will be declared yearly, equal to the previous years’ real GDP growth rate (if positive). In addition, infrastructure projects totaling S$3?4 billion have been accelerated. Summary of Fiscal Measures During 200 1 (Cost in S$ million) Infrastructure Projects I 3,500 ( Training of Workers and Executives I Helping the Lower Income and unemployed New Singapore Shares 809 698 2,700 Total I 11,306 1 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicU.S Semkcdtir Sala, Slneawds Non-011 IbmwUc Wrb -8- growth this year, the staff projects real GDP to grow by 2.8 percent in 2002-in line with the authorities’ forecast for growth in the 224 percent range-and by 4.1 percent in 2003. A sustained recovery will require robust export growth, spurred by a pick-up in U.S. semiconductor demand, as the initial boost from a positive inventory swing dissipates (Figure 6). Also supporting the recovery will be the significant fiscal stimulus in the pipeline, supportive monetary conditions, and liquidity in the banking system. Regional and domestic deflationary pressures are likely to keep inflation in check even as the output gap closes.3 8. Downside macroeconomic and event risks, however, continue to cloud the near- term outlook. The most prominent risks stem from uncertainties about the strength and sustainability of the global recovery, volatility in equity prices, and the dampening effects on consumer and investor confidence from political instability in the Middle East and terrorist attacks in the region.4 Furthermore, if the global recovery were to falter, incipient deflationary pressures could intensify. In the event, Singapore’s strong balance of payments position limits its external vulnerability. Although less likely, a boost in investor confidence from a sustained equity market rally, a rebound in global capital expenditures, a stronger- than-expected global recovery, and robust intra-regional trade could provide upside surprises, 9. Singapore’s external and financial sector vulnerabilities remain limited (Table 5). Sources of strength include long-standing current account surpluses, significant external asset and reserve positions, low public debt, and a healthy domestic financial system, which helped Singapore weather the sizable shocks from the Asian crisis. Looking forward, the current account balance is expected to remain in surplus as real GDP growth returns to its potential growth rate over the medium term (Table 6). Domestic banks are encouraged to maintain high capital adequacy ratios, which should allow them to absorb potential increases in non-performing loans (NPL), which have typically lagged the economic cycle, as suggested by the experience during the Asian crisis when NPLs did not peak until early 2000. While cyclical risks faced by Singapore banks have likely peaked in 3 Other domestic factors keeping inflation subdued include the recommendations for wage restraint from the National Wage Council, which effectively sets wages for the public sector and provides guidance to private-sector wage setting. 4 With much of Singapore’s electronics exports used as inputs into capital goods, they are especially vulnerable to reductions or delays in capital expenditures Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-9- late 2001 and early 2002, in line with macroeconomic developments, high concentrations of loan portfolios in property-related loans are a potential source of vulnerability, which is currently being contained. 10. The medium-term outlook hinges importantly on Singapore’s commitment to restructure the economy and enhance its role as a regional hub. Although vulnerabilities from external shocks have been limited, Singapore is exposed to a rapidly changing external environment where emerging low-cost regional competitors for manufacturing and foreign investment, such as China, have spurred Singapore to diversify and upgrade its manufacturing sector, promote knowledge-based high value-added activities, and accelerate financial sector reforms. To face these medium-term challenges, the government formed the Economic Review Committee (ERC) in late 2001 to design a new long-term strategy for the economy. While the report is not due for release until early 2003 (discussed below), the main recommendations have already been made public (Annex I). III. POLICY DISCUSSIONS 11. The thrust of policy discussion in recent years has been on the appropriate response to rapidly shifting macroeconomic and structural policy challenges. Over the period, the Executive Board judged policy implementation by the authorities as broadly appropriate. Any difference of views with the authorities centered mainly on the timing and speed of implementing various recommendations, and on the transparency of the policy frameworks. Singapore’s policy response to the worst economic downturn since its independence was consistent with the recommendations arising out of last year’s Article IV consultation. 12. With downside risks weighing on the near-term outlook, and Singapore’s traditional role as a regional hub being challenged over the medium term, this year’s consultation discussions focused on two broad areas: a the appropriate stance of macroeconomic policies to support the restoration of sustainable growth; 0 wide-ranging restructuring and liberalization measures to promote new high value- added activities, develop the services sector, and improve labor market flexibility. A. Near-term Macroeconomic Policy 13. There was general agreement that macroeconomic policies should maintain their easing bias. The modest outlook for real GDP growth warranted the fiscal stimulus already in the pipeline and continued support from the earlier easing of monetary policy to a neutral stance. Despite concerns about heightened risk-aversion among global investors, and rising political event risks, the authorities agreed that the global economy, especially the electronics sector, was on track for a moderate recovery. However, they noted that prospects for domestic demand growth, particularly in the services and construction sectors, continued to be capped by the lackluster external environment and weak labor market. Indeed, unemployment has remained high despite measures to improve wage flexibility. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- lo- 14. Prompt fiscal stimulus implemented in 2001 provided appropriate support mostly through revenue measures and transfers. The authorities explained that the predominance of tax rebates and government fee reductions in these packages reflected a strategy directed at lowering business costs to help boost competitiveness and profitability. They also relied heavily on direct income transfers (such as the New Singapore Shares scheme) in the off-budget packages as a means to support aggregate demand. 15. Looking forward, the mission questioned the efficacy of income transfers in an environment where precautionary saving motives were elevated by increased risk aversion, high uncertainty, and diminished employment prospects. The mission recommended that the timing of the scheduled increase in the GST in January 2003 be made conditional on the recovery taking hold. However, the authorities indicated that additional fiscal stimulus would be considered if economic developments warrant further action, and noted that the anticipated drag from the higher GST rate had already been neutralized with a package that included income transfers and tax rebates. The authorities noted that increased revenues from the GST were required to offset the income tax cuts introduced in the FY2003/04 budget (discussed below), and to achieve their medium-term objective of maintaining a balanced budget. 16. The mission commended the authorities for shifting to a neutral monetary policy stance in July 2001 and subsequent policy adjustments that provided the economy with appropriate support as external conditions weakened. In light of the considerable downside risks to the outlook, and the benign inflation environment, the mission recommended that monetary policy be ready to ease Cuther should the situation warrant, With monetary conditions continuing to ease, and the high degree of liquidity in the banking system, the authorities maintained that the current policy stance was suitable for now, but would consider the need for further easing at the appropriate time. They noted, however, that the policy stance would not be responding to every perceived change in economic conditions, Indeed, they emphasized that monetary policy aimed to ensure price stability by using a policy-setting framework with a medium-term orientation (arising from policy lags and their variability). 5 17. During the past year, Singapore has continued to improve the disclosure of its monetary policy stance and the transparency of its policy framework. In February 2001, MAS launched the publication of its semi-annual Monetary Policy Statement (MPS) to publicly announce and explain its policy stance, and this year introduced the Macroeconomic Review (MR) to elaborate on the rationale for its policy decisions. The mission strongly endorsed these and related initiatives, and suggested using these platforms to reinforce 5 The monetary policy framework is focused on managing the Singapore dollar (which is pegged to a currency basket) because of Singapore’s highly open economy. The mission concurred with the authorities’ view that the medium-term orientation of the policy framework acknowledges the limited impact that monetary policy changes have on real activity. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- ll- market perceptions of monetary policy’s forward-looking and medium-term orientation. Without advocating an alternative monetary framework nor adopting explicit inflation or output targets, the mission suggested a natural next step for the authorities would be to anchor expectations about monetary policy by conveying how medium-term trends and recent developments affect price stability, and hence the policy stance. Looking forward, Singapore’s growing role as a financial center would likely be accompanied by higher volatility in foreign exchange rates and financial flows until domestic markets develop adequate depth and liquidity.6 Therefore, focusing attention on key, fundamental medium- term factors that influence the policy stance could help market participants separate policy- induced from market-based movements in the TWI. The authorities maintain that the exchange rate bands also help contain volatility. 18. The authorities acknowledged the appeal of the mission’s line of argument, which is consistent with their own plans to intensify research on monetary policy and economic fundamentals, and to use the MR to disseminate that output. They were pleased that the empirical evidence presented by the mission supported their claims that monetary policy had a forward-looking and medium-term focus (Box 2).7 Nonetheless, they maintained that they already conveyed sufficient information for market participants to accurately estimate the undisclosed policy bands used for guiding the market-determined TWI, and to quantify shifts in the monetary policy stance. Moreover, the authorities valued the policy flexibility and potential for discretion offered by not committing to explicit targets for inflation and output, nor disclosing the explicit TWI weights and target bands underlying the management of the exchange rate. B. Medium-term Structural Policies 19. Competitive pressures have prompted a broad review of government policies to restructure and upgrade manufacturing, boost corporate sector returns, and attract foreign investment. The authorities pointed to China’s accession to the WTO as having a catalytic effect in heightening concerns that Singapore’s role as a regional hub in Southeast 6 The authorities presented evidence of a structural shift to higher average volatility of the nominal effective exchange rate since the Asian crisis compared with the 1994-1997 period due to more volatile capital flows since the Asian crisis, suggesting that Singapore’s capital markets have not yet developed sufficient depth and liquidity to absorb shocks without a heightened exchange rate response 7 Staff estimates presented in this year’s Selected Economic Issues demonstrate how economic fundamentals influence the policy stance, and the estimated policy reaction function confirms the policy frameworks forward-looking and medium-term orientation. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12- Box 2: Reaction Functions as a Guide to MAS Monetary Policy’ Estimated policy reaction functions have received considerable attention, including from researchers and market observers, as a means for gauging and assessing the reaction of the monetary policy stance to changes in economic fundamentals. The following applies this methodology to characterize monetary policy in Singapore. Instead of relying on short-term interest rates or monetary aggregates as the monetary policy instrument, the Monetary Authority of Singapore (MAS) conducts policy by managing the trade-weighted exchange rate index (TWI). The policy objective has been to “promote price stability as a sound basis for sustainable growth.” For empirical purposes, a reaction function is assumed that aims the TWI at stabilizing expected inflation and maintaining output at potential. In order to avoid inducing volatility in the exchange rate, a partial adjustment mechanism is included to dampen the actual changes in the exchange rate. The estimates confirm that controlling inflation is the major focus of monetary policy in Singapore. In particular, they support the hypothesis that monetary policy can be described by a forward-looking policy rule that reacts to both inflation and output volatility. As noted in the background paper, the data indicate that the policy stance has mainly reacted to large deviations in the target variables, which is consistent with monetary policy’s medium-term orientation. The estimated changes in the TWI track the actual change relatively well, and the estimated parameters are as expected. Estimating the equation over the sample period from January 1991 to April 2002, and assuming a forward-looking horizon of twelve months the ;oefticient associated with expected inflation is positive and significant. In 3articular, it indicates that in response ;o one percentage point rise in expected .nflation, the TWI is appreciated by 1.8 percent, implying a real effective :xchange rate appreciation of 0.8 percent, yeten’s paribus. The coefficient associated with the output gap is also lositive and significant, which suggests .hat when domestic output is one lercentage point above potential, the TWI is set to appreciate by 0.5 percent. jinally, the coefficient that captures )olicy inertia is high (0.8), indicating hat the monetary policy stance to only adjusts the TWI part of the way toward ts target level. MAS Target Variation in the TWI versus Actual T WI -a4 ; ,, ,,,, , ,, , , , , , , , I, ,, , ,, , , ‘, , , , , J 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00 1 ------. Residual - Actual ---- Fitted 1 ‘roviding more guidance about these economic fundamentals, particularly on the underlying determinants )f inflation, would broaden market participants’ focus beyond the foreign exchange market, and help anchor expectations about inflation and the policy stance.2 The issues covered in this box are discussed in greater depth in the Selected Issues paper: “Singapore’s vlonetary Policy: An Analysis of Transmission Channels and Policy Reaction Functions.” Real domestic activity plays an important role in explaining forecast errors in inflation. By contrast, the TWI has less explanatory power in explaining CPI inflation forecast errors. Further details are given in the ielected Issues paper. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13 - Asia may be diminishing (Box 3).’ This has prompted the authorities to re-emphasize the importance of closer cooperation among ASEAN countries to strengthen intra-regional trade and take advantage of specialization and complementary strengths among the countries. Although still committed to multilateral trade liberalization, Singapore recently completed bilateral trade agreements with New Zealand and Japan, and is in advanced stages of negotiations with Australia and the United States. Economic Review Committee’s Strategic Reforms 20. The new strategy proposed by the ERC is aimed at improving competitiveness, promoting internationalization, encouraging private initiative, and developing the service economy (see Annex I). An overarching theme of the ERC strategy is to adapt government policies to restructure domestic industries in light of the changing external environment, and to attract workers with requisite skills. The discussions focused on the key areas where ERC working groups had already made recommendations, some of which have been adopted by the Government, as noted below. 21. Tax reform Incorporating the ERC’s recommendations, the FY2002/03 budget reduced direct and raised indirect taxes to strengthen supply-side incentives to boost growth and investment, while also broadening the revenue base.’ The authorities observed that cuts to personal and corporate income tax rates were designed to improve competitiveness, attract and retain high-skilled workers, and boost corporate returns in the medium run. Moreover, to maintain Singapore’s reputation for prudent fiscal policy, the GST rate increase scheduled for January 2003 will expand the tax net and partly offset future income tax revenue loss from a rising demographic dependency ratio. The mission endorsed this strategy, but suggested that the anticipated supply-side benefits may be too optimistic, and might require a faster phase-in of the tax cuts. The mission reasoned that with increasing tax competition, Singapore would still be at a comparative disadvantage vis-a-vis its competitors, such as Hong Kong, for attracting investment and workers in the service 8 As other countries in the region improve their infrastructure, and technology makes available more information about national markets, direct trade will increase, thereby reducing Singapore’s role as a trade intermediary. Regional competition has begun to pick up even in logistics and electronics manufacturing, areas where Singapore has been dominant: two major shipping companies have switched to Malaysia’s fast growing port; Phillips Electronics moved its Singapore regional headquarters to Hong Kong SAR; and Shell picked Malaysia over Singapore for its global IT hub. Moreover, China’s gradual market liberalization could motivate companies currently based in Singapore to relocate to serve China’s large domestic market. Offsetting these trends would be increased opportunities for Singapore to supply expertise in advanced engineering, design, logistics consultancy, and quality control, as neighboring countries develop their manufacturing capabilities, 9 The authorities estimate that the changes to the tax regime in the FY2002/02 budget could boost real GDP growth by 1.2 percent, and investment by 10 percent, over the medium term. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14- Box 3: China-Trade and Investment: Implications for Singapore Economic linkages between China and Singapore have expanded markedly in the last decade. Although China is only Singapore’s seventh largest export market, it was one of the most rapidly growing during the 1990s. During that period, the composition of exports to China has shifted from mainly commodities (refined petroleum) to manufactured goods, especially electronics-as Singapore-based firms outsourced production to China. Underlying this rapid bilateral trade growth was a history of large FDI flows from Singapore into China (directly and through Hong Kong SAR), largely to develop manufacturing and real estate (Table). Singapore: Trade and FDI Flows 1990 2000 1/ growth (Sbillion) (share) (S$million) (share) (in percent) Exports to China 1,443 1.5 9,547 4.4 561 Hong Kong SAR 6,186 6.5 19,375 8.9 213 Taiwan 3,422 3.6 9,236 4.2 170 Imports from Chma 3,774 3.4 12,901 6.2 242 Hong Kong SAR 3,365 3.1 4,987 2.4 48 Taiwan 4,678 4.3 8,804 4.2 88 FDI outflows to China 240 1.8 8,895 16.8 3,606 Hong Kong SAR 2,266 16.6 5,024 9.5 122 Taiwan 495 3.6 1,170 2.2 136 FDI inflows from ChiIla 62 878 1,327 Hong Kong SAR 3,267 4,044 24 Taiwan 225 3,064 ._. 1,262 Source: CEIC. l/ FDI outflows are dated 1998; FDI inflows are dated 1999. China’s accession to WTO could change the regional trade and investment patterns primarily through the growth of its domestic high-tech sectors and the growing share of FDI flows diverted from other destinations in Asia. In particular, China’s current low-cost advantage could be leveraged with its large pool of repatriated foreign-educated skilled labor to gain comparative advantage in what are currently ASEAN-based manufacturing activities. Moreover, post-WTO China offers global investors opportunities in previously closed sectors such as telecommunications and financial services. Factors affecting trade and investment flows: Manufacturing supply chain: The bilateral trade deficit with China reflects Singapore’s vertical position in the supply chain: Singapore is mainly exporting capital-intensive manufacturing inputs to China for labor-intensive processing. With the lowering of trade barriers from China’s entry into WTO, intra-industry trade and trade in formerly protected sectors is expected to increase. Singapore could thus benefit from its role as an ASEAN trade hub. Dynamic changes to comparative advantage: Regional intra-industry trade patterns could, however, be threatened if Singapore-based manufacturers relocate their entire production processes in China. If WTO accession accelerates capital accumulation in China, and spurs foreign investment and technology transfers, China could gain comparative advantage even in capital-intensive production. However, to the extent China’s increased production is domestically consumed, Singapore could continue to supply high-end components to lower-end manufacturing plants in the rest of the region. Competition from China for foreign investment: Singapore’s role as a financial hub for directing ASEAN investment flows could be challenged by China’s rapid reforms in corporate transparency, governance, and improvements in its regulatory and supervisory systems. If these reforms boost perceived returns on capital invested in China, foreign investment could bypass ASEAN in favor of China. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 15- sector.” The authorities replied that the 20 percent tax rate was a medium-term target that did not preclude further tax cuts. In addition, targeted tax incentives were also available to attract and develop specific industries. 22. Pension and housing reforms. Specific ERC recommendations are designed to enhance returns from the Central Provident Fund (CPF) and increase the private sector’s role in housing finance (see Annex 1). Given the high contribution rate, the mission pointed to the low replacement ratio of the multi-purpose CPF scheme (20-40 percent of final take-home pay), and discussed means to boost returns. The authorities noted that they had recently expanded opportunities to invest CPF saving in a wide range of privately managed funds that invest in both domestic and foreign markets. They also limited the large allocation of CPF savings to finance housing and shifted more mortgage financing to the banking system from the government-run Housing Development Board (HDB) (Box 4).” Although the HDB continues to offer subsidized mortgages for qualified purchasers, shifting non-subsidized mortgage financing of HDB flats to private banks should widen the choice of lending terms and mortgage products and allow more market forces to determine the flow of funds into housing. In addition, the capital markets are expected to become deeper as more funds are shifted from housing finance to financial assets. However, the mission cautioned that past CPF reforms that shifted investment tinds had appreciable impact on some financial and property prices. The authorities maintained that their reforms directly addressed the main policy challenge of striking the appropriate balance in using CPF f%nds to help meet the basic needs for retirement income and health care, while ensuring widespread home ownership. The mission welcomed the steps taken to refocus the CPF on its core purpose as a retirement fund, and to limit its other roles, including as a counter-cyclical instrument through the variation of contribution rates. 23. Industry restructuring. The authorities recognized that, despite the historical success of government-linked corporations (GLC), which spurred Singapore’s rapid development, the private sector was best placed to exploit emerging technologies and market trends. The mission supported the ERC’s recommendations to strengthen incentives lo Singapore already has one of the lowest personal and corporate income tax rates in the region, and compares favorably in both nominal and effective terms. However, Hong Kong’s corporate and personal income tax rates will continue to be lower, at 16 and 15 percent, respectively. In addition, other competitor countries for high value-added activities might also reduce their top income tax rates. l1 A previous background paper (SM/OO/96) suggested possible reforms for the CPF, many of which were also recommended by the ERC. The study noted the CPF’s success in mobilizing savings for retirement. However, it highlighted the CPF’s low returns and heavy pre- retirement withdrawals as two main factors contributing to the low replacement rate. It suggested refocusing the CPF as a core pension fimd that pays market-related rates of return, and providing incentives to bolster discretionary saving outside of the CPF. To be sure, the replacement rate gap with other advanced industrial countries is less severe when balanced by the high rate of home ownership financed with CPF savings and by the funds in the CPF medical savings account. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 16- Box 4: Property Finance in Singapore: Recent Reforms and Implications Through the Central Provident Fund (CPF) and the Housing and Development Board (HDB), property finance in Singapore has always been closely connected to the government’s objective of universal home ownership. To achieve this objective, the government has allowed Singaporeans to use CPF pension contributions to finance the purchase of private and public housing. It has also further helped the financing of public housing purchases through the mortgage facilities offered by the HDB. Home-ownership rates have exceed the 90-percent mark, with over 80 percent of households living in public housing. Notwithstanding their positive contribution to home ownership rates, the property finance facilities of the CPF and HDB have led to a number of concerns. First, with more than 40 percent of retirement savings invested in illiquid housing assets, many Singaporeans have found themselves “rich in assets” but “poor in cash” at the retirement age. Second, while restrictions on the collateralization of HDB housing assets and the limited private-sector participation in the provision of mortgages have contributed to relative stability in households’ balance sheets, they may have constrained the options available to entrepreneurs for raising investment capital. Against this background, the government has announced a series of reform measures that will change the rules of property finance. The government will tighten the caps to housing-related CPF withdrawals, raise overall and retirement-specific CPF contribution rates, increase the minimum sum that cannot be withdrawn before retirement, and study ways to help sell or extract homeowner’s equity from owner-occupied property. It will also reduce the role of the HDB in providing non- subsidized mortgages and allow banks a larger role in the financing of public flats. Related reforms will allow banks to take first charge of mortgaged property ahead of the CPF Board, down payment requirements required for mortgage financing will be lowered. The government is also currently considering ways to allow HDB flats to be used as collateral for enterpreneurial finance. The recent reforms set the stage for promoting greater financial security at retirement and more efficiency in the intermediation of capital. Of particular interest are measures that alleviate the asset-cash imbalance problems that many Singaporeans face at the age of retirement. In view of the already low replacement rates, the demographic challenges facing the CPF scheme and the difficulties associated with monetizing owner-occupied housing assets, financial security at retirement would benefit from less heavy exposure to housing. Allowing banks a larger role in supplying property finance will encourage competition, provide more choice for consumers, and lower fees as economies of scale in processing by banks are realized. Mortgage securitization may pick up as a result of the reversal in the charge position and the unlocking of HDB housing assets for enterpreneurial finance would also benefit the intermediation of capital to credit-constrained entrepreneurs. The changes to property finance rules can also affect volatility in the real economy. On the positive side, more financial deepening, greater mortgage securitization, and increased opportunities to intertemporally smooth consumption could dampen volatility. On the negative side, volatility could increase if HDB housing assets serve as risk capital or if banks show less forebearance than the HDB in taking charge of collateral. While the overall macroeconomic impact of the reform measures may be moot, any costs associated with greater volatility are likely outweighed by potentially large efficiency gains. Various measures (including the extensiveness of public housing, anti-speculative measures and restrictions to collateralization) have already contained volatility from or propagating through the property market to a low level. At this point, it is too early to conclude how the efficiency gains compare with potential increased in macroeconomic volatility. i The implications of the various reform measures are studied in an accompanying Selected Issues naner. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17- for entrepreneurial activities (including partnerships among GLCs, multinational corporations, and small-to-medium size enterprises), to ensure a level playing field through competition laws, and to divest holdings of non-strategic GLCs. Indeed, the mission suggested accelerating the timetable for reducing government ownership in GLCs to reduce potentially conflicting objectives of maximizing shareholder value and meeting national development needs. The authorities, however, maintained that such conflicts were minimal, notwithstanding the new charter of the government holding company (Temasek) that encourages GLCs to expand internationally. They also emphasized the Government’s prudential responsibilities for obtaining fair prices for the GLCs, and that market conditions thus play a role in setting the pace of privatization. 24. Service sector development. Singapore has not been as proactive and aggressive in developing services (apart from information, communications, and financial services) as compared with developing manufacturing. Because other countries have been rapidly developing their services sectors, Singapore would need to act quickly to strengthen its lead or risk falling behind. The ERC recommended targeting the following key service industries: financial services, the arts, education, healthcare, information-communication-technology, legal services, tourism, and trade and logistics. 25. Forfinancial services, the ERC specifically highlighted the wealth management industry, global processing center activities, and risk management activities as niches for positioning Singapore as a financial center (Box 5).” Given the ERC’s strategy of creating an attractive business environment for emerging or “sunrise” industries, the mission suggested that leaving in place the two remaining restrictions on the international use of the Singapore dollar could detract from efforts to bolster Singapore’s standing as a financial center. l3 Although these restrictions are considered porous in that they are not restricting actual financial market practices, some market participants have reported, and the staff agreed, that these restrictions could create perceptions that substantial restrictions remain or could be re-imposed, thereby deterring foreign issuers and investors from tapping the Singapore dollar markets. The authorities noted that the remaining restrictions served an important signaling role to discourage speculators. The mission also suggested that Singapore l2 They recognized that institutional and technological changes are among the factors that have transformed into mature or “sunset” industries many financial services (foreign exchange trading) and capital market activities (derivative trading) where Singapore has traditionally excelled. Moreover, the size of Greater China’s markets, and China’s accession to WTO, have tilted investor interest away from Singapore’s traditional hinterland toward North Asia. l3 Over the past four years, all but two restrictions have been lifted, and a wide range of activities, such as asset and currency swaps and repos, are now permitted. But nonresident financial entities are still required to swap Singapore dollar proceeds from Singapore dollar- denominated loans, equity and bond issues into foreign currency to finance activities abroad, and domestic financial institutions may not extend credit facilities larger than S$5 million to nonresidents, if there is reason to believe that the funds may be used for Singapore dollar currency speculation. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 18- Box 5: Singapore’s Role as a Financial Center in a Changing Global Financial System Singapore’s bank-centered financial system is undergoing important structural changes, at a time when global finance is evolving rapidly.’ Since 1998, the Singaporean authorities have initiated measures to enhance banking efficiency by opening up the domestic banking market; lift most restrictions on the international use of the Singapore dollar; promote fund management; and to develop domestic equity and fixed-income markets. The domestic banking system has experienced considerable consolidation in the past few years. The authorities have also begun to institute risk-based supervision of financial institutions. These domestic shifts are converging with broad trends that are sweeping the international financial system. Some trends, mostly driven by technology, point toward decentralization and dispersion of financial activities across locations. Others point toward increased centralization and concentration. Since distance matters less, more financial activities can be clustered in financial centers that facilitate innovation and certain functions, such as integrated risk management, can be centralized. The global trends have to be viewed in light of the basic features of Singapore’s financial center: . Singapore is an important international banking center, built around a large offshore banking market, the Asian Dollar Market (ADM); . Singapore is also a major foreign exchange trading center with a large OTC market for foreign exchange derivatives; . Domestic financial markets are relatively small compared with other financial centers, although the corporate bond market has grown markedly; . Asset management, though expanding rapidly, has potential for further growth given the huge amount of savings being generated in Singapore. To compete as an international financial center, Singapore may need to branch beyond standard bank intermediation in the ADM market, and boost equity, fixed-income, and derivatives markets. Although the presence of branches of internationally active banks provides access to complex financial operations, Singapore could bolster its role as a regional risk management hub by attracting trading of innovative instruments that repackage risks. However, these innovative financial services require efficient and liquid markets where financial institutions can lay off or transform financial risks. More complex operations also call for risk-based supervision of institutions and disclosure-based securities market regulations that are sufficiently flexible to safeguard financial stability without impeding financial innovation. The transition to a more internationally integrated financial system could, in principle, imply several pitfalls. Turbulence in global markets could spill over to the domestic financial system; foreign exposures of domestic banks could rise significantly; and financial and non-financial institutions could build up considerable currency and maturity mismatches. Certain market transactions, such as OTC derivatives, create counterparty risk exposures that need to be managed carefully. Off-balance-sheet activities generally can obscure where risks are accumulating in a financial system. On balance, closer integration and the trading in wholesale financial markets may not create important new sources of vulnerabilities. International spillover risks could be offset by diversification benefits and the fact that domestic shocks might dissipate in the larger combined integrated system that would comprise both the offshore and onshore segments. Moreover, less bank-oriented financial systems may tend to be more stable because risks are less concentrated in banking institutions and more widely dispersed among investors. Alternative sources of corporate funding could provide a safety valve in case of tight domestic bank credit. ’ A Selected Issues paper discusses these trends in greater detail. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- I%- could differentiate itself from other contenders as an “alternative financial center” by expanding the distinctions in market conduct rules between wholesale (professional) and retail market activities. The authorities were generally receptive to this suggestion, but noted that their new rulebook, which came into effect in October 2002, already differentiated these activities to a considerable extent. Other Structural Policies 26. Financial system risks and vulnerabilities. Singapore’s financial system has been resilient despite the sharp economic downturn. The mission observed that, while bolstering the banking system against cyclical increases in non-performing loans, high bank capital requirements combined with more intense competition have likely contributed to the relatively low rate of return earned by domestic banks, which could cause them to engage in more profitable, albeit riskier, lines of business. The authorities replied that ongoing adjustments to recent industry consolidation have also weighed on bank profitability. Another source of risk was the high exposure of banks and insurance companies to the property market, but the authorities regarded the credit risk from this sectoral concentration to be low, in part owing to tightened credit standards used by banks and the strong financial condition of commercial developers borrowing funds. l4 27. The authorities have continued to refine their risk-based supervisory framework. They explained that this framework would allow more flexibility in assigning supervisory resources and adjusting prudential requirements to rapidly changing industry practices, including the growth of financial conglomerates and capital market activities. Indeed, they noted MAS was recently reorganized with new departments specifically created to supervise and monitor complex financial institutions and analyze financial stability developments and issues. The mission welcomed these developments and suggested that this framework presented an opportunity to reduce capital requirements for banks with low risk exposures and appropriate risk management capabilities. The new Consumer Credit Bureau should also help improve banks’ credit assessments. The recently initiated FSAP will provide an opportunity to examine financial stability and related issues in greater detail. 28. Labor market. Responding to the deteriorating job market, the authorities created a ministerial-level Jobs Task Force in January 2002 to oversee national efforts to help laid-off workers. The mission observed that search-related structural unemployment is likely to continue to rise because of ongoing industrial restructuring. The mission therefore recommended that consideration be given to strengthening the social safety net, including the use of a limited unemployment insurance scheme, as traditional family resources become strained. It emphasized that reforms in this area should be carefully designed to preserve incentives for the unemployed to continue to seek re-employment. By contrast, the authorities were of the opinion that their current approach of focusing resources on re- training, and improving the efficiency of job search was preferable to institutionalizing a l4 More than 40 percent of the domestic loan book and a similar share of insurance company assets are directly or indirectly exposed to the property market. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 20 - welfare apparatus. They also noted that government-funded community resources are already available to assist families in need. C. Other Issues 29. Singapore has a legal, institutional, and supervisory framework in place for anti- money laundering and combating the financing of terrorism. The Government will enact a bill to give effect to the UN International Convention for the Suppression of Financing of Terrorism, which is expected to be ratified before the end of 2002. 30. In response to queries about their progress toward completing a fiscal ROSC and publication of medium-term fiscal targets, the authorities noted that they have still only completed the self-assessment questionnaire. They indicated that completion of the fiscal ROSC would be considered following the FSAP exercise. However, they were reluctant to publish fiscal targets, given the potential loss of credibility if the targets are not met. 31. While Singapore provides data to the Fund on a timely basis and subscribes to the SDDS, some statistical issues remain unresolved. I5 The mission noted that large errors and omissions component of the balance of payments accounts, and the incomplete reporting of government assets and quarterly data on GDP expenditure components complicate surveillance. The authorities acknowledged the gaps in the balance of payments and quarterly data on GDP expenditure components, but noted that the size of the errors and omissions was not out of line with Singapore’s large trade volume. They also pointed to limited resources and other priorities for not improving the quarterly national accounts by compiling better price deflators. Iv. STAFF APPRAISAL 32. Coming out of its most severe recession since independence, Singapore is on track for a moderate recovery this year. Singapore’s manufacturing sector firmed during the first half of this year, but the recovery is narrowly based, and unemployment remains high relative to Singapore’s historical experience. While confidence in the financial system is high and the external position remains strong, ongoing economic restructuring in the financial sector is accelerating, and broadening to include the manufacturing and services sectors as Singapore responds to competitive challenges from abroad. The outlook for the export-led recovery projected for the balance of this year, and into the next, is clouded by downside risks from growing uncertainties about the strength of the global recovery and political instability in the Middle East. 33. The authorities face twin challenges of solidifying the recovery, and addressing the emerging challenges to Singapore’s traditional hub status. They have deftly l5 Singapore has complied with the expanded SDDS requirements for data on the international investment position and, therefore, is judged to be in observance of Article VIII, Section 5. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2% - negotiated the downturn and supported the subsequent, albeit moderate recovery with appropriate macroeconomic policies. They have also aptly produced a new development strategy with wide-ranging restructuring and liberalization measures to promote new high value-added activities, develop the services sector, and further enhance labor market flexibility, while also helping those most affected by the adjustment process. 34. Two well-timed fiscal stimulus packages announced last year in July and October provided important support for domestic demand as economic conditions deteriorated during 2001. The government’s reputation for prudent fiscal policies and substantial net asset position should provide ample room for further fiscal action should the recovery be weaker than expected, especially with the scheduled increase in the GST. Indeed, with a relatively high and rising long-term unemployment rate likely to continue because of ongoing restructuring, consideration should also be given to consolidating and strengthening the social safety net as traditional family resources become strained. Given Singapore’s flexible labor market, there is ample scope before a tighter social safety net would have adverse effects on work incentives. 35. The easing of monetary policy to a neutral stance in July 2001, and subsequent adjustments, provided appropriate support as external conditions weakened. Current domestic liquidity conditions and the low interest rate environment should contribute to supporting a firming of domestic demand, including through the property market, where prices show signs of stabilizing. As the benign consumer price environment is expected to continue, monetary policy should stand ready to ease further if significant downside risks materialize. 36. The monetary policy framework, centered on the management of the trade- weighted exchange rate index, has served Singapore well since 1981. The staff strongly endorses recent initiatives taken to convey the policy intentions of the MAS to the public, and looks forward for the MAS to take further steps along these lines. Disclosing MAS analyses of key macroeconomic variables, their medium-term trends, and recent developments would help anchor expectations for monetary policy by refocusing the private sector’s attention from increasingly volatile market-driven developments in the foreign exchange market. Such a transparent approach could give MAS greater operational flexibility and allow the exchange rate to be a more effective shock absorber. 37. The staff welcomes the further shift toward indirect taxes in the FY2002/03 Budget, the supply-side incentives associated with lower marginal corporate and personal income tax rates, and the broadening of the revenue base. With global trends also pointing toward lower direct taxes, and Singapore’s solid reputation and large reserves, the budgeted tax reductions, which will be phased in gradually, may not be sufficient to encourage risk-taking, boost entrepreneurship, and attract foreign talent. An accelerated pace of tax cuts may be appropriate given the headwinds from ongoing restructuring and growing competition from China and other regional competitors. 38. Singapore has proactively implemented wide-ranging structural reforms, including of the pension system, housing policy, and the operation of GLCs. The staff supports the steps taken to safeguard CPF savings for old age by reducing the bias toward housing investment, and by encouraging diversification into alternative financial Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 22 - investments. Refraining from adjusting contribution rates as a counter-cyclical tool is another step in the right direction by the authorities toward re-focusing the CPF as a core retirement scheme. Beyond guaranteeing rates of return, the Government could boost CPF yields by returning additional earnings from government investments of CPF funds, and providing more options for self-directed investments. Since Singapore has one of the highest rates of home ownership in the world, the staff also welcomes, and encourages accelerating, the privatization of HDB’s operations, since HDB has successfully met its mandate to provide Singapore residents with adequate housing. With Singapore’s industries now at an advanced stage of development, the staff encourages increasing private ownership in GLCs to help boost entrepreneurial initiatives and efficiency. Notwithstanding current market conditions, progress in divesting GLCs already designated for sale would bolster the government’s credibility on restructuring policies and would send positive signals about its intentions to boost entrepreneurship. 39. Singapore’s financial system is supported by well-developed legal and regulatory frameworks, a risk-based supervisory approach, and a modern financial infrastructure. The staff encourages MAS to continue adapting its risk-based supervisory approach to rapidly changing financial practices. This should help MAS tailor capital requirements to individual risk profiles and promote a level playing field among domestic banks and foreign branches. Another welcome step is the creation of a new department to supervise complex financial institutions, which should enable MAS to better gauge group-wide risk-taking on a consolidated basis. The staff is also encouraged by the creation of a dedicated financial market surveillance group to track aggregate market risks and vulnerabilities. 40. Looking ahead, Singapore’s financial markets face challenges from global financial industry consolidation and technological trends funneling activities to global centers. At the same time, rapid modernization and liberalization among Singapore’s neighbors have reduced Singapore’s traditional role as a financial hub for the region. Given the stiff regional competition for financial center status, f%rther streamlining the regulatory regimes and codes of conduct for professional market participants may help to broaden Singapore’s investor base. Singapore’s attractiveness as a financial center would also benefit from removing unwarranted perceptions of restrictions that could discourage global investors and issuers from considering Singapore as a center for their operations. In this regard, the remaining two restrictions related to the non-internationalization of the Singapore dollar are candidates for early reconsideration. 41. While there has been a welcome increase in the transparency of the monetary policy framework, more progress is needed on the fiscal side. In particular, the staff encourages the publication of a medium-term budgetary framework, including medium-term fiscal targets along with underlying assumptions. To complement the self-assessment Singapore has made of the Fiscal Transparency Code, the staff recommends the preparation of a fiscal ROSC. The mission also encourages the adoption of the new methodology outlined in the revised IMP manual on government finance statistics, including the compilation and dissemination of data on the net worth of the public sector. 42. It is recommended that the next Article IV consultation with Singapore take place on the standard 12-month cycle. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-23 - Figure 1. Singapore: Regional Comparisons: Key Domestic Indicators O/--------p!+ t -IS 1999 ZOQO t’er<mr c~f GDP 16 Central Govemment Fiscal Balance 16 Prbj. ,. lgpSrolC -8 1 , I I I t 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 -8 12 :onsumer Price Inflation 12 Proj. Y 6 -6 -9 I I I I I I I I 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2OinJ 2001 2002 -9 Jmw~ry 1996 .=I110 180 Stock Market Indices 180 160 - - 160 Sources: IMF, World Economic Outlook; information Notice System; and data provided by the Singapore authorities, I/ Overall balance on a calendar year basis. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 24 - Figure 2. Singapore: Labor and Asset Market Developments 2cQ- Real Estate Property Prices t ofice space 80 rgpr05a 60 ” ‘I’ ’ “’ “““““I” ‘I”’ I . c 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 Jm,rwty/995-100 180 Stock Exchange: Straits Times Index 160 t 140 - 80 - 60 - 40- 9gprOSE 2o-““““‘..““‘“‘I” I . ~ 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 00 80 60 40 120 100 30 -2 -1 -1 1 I I , -1 - I -1 1 L- 1 , 50 80 60 40 120 100 10 50 10 20 6.0 I. r 5.5 5.0 4.5 4.0 3.5 Jnemployment Rate 1.0’. ‘. ‘. ” ” “I,. . ““I.. . “. .” c 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2coO 2001 2002 Fmr-qtrarrer prrtmt chlurge 20 Labor Costs -6 .O .5 .O ..5 1.0 1.5 1.0 !.5 2.0 1.5 1.0 -16 t SgpaDSd -20 I . . I . . I.. 8.. I . . . I.. I. L 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2Oca 2001 2002 - 21 3 - 11 6 2 -8 -a .16 .20 Sources: CEIC Database; and data provided by the Singapore authorities. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public50 40 30 20 10 0 -10 -20 -25 - Figure 3. Singapore: Regional Comparisons: Key External Indicators r JLmq /995=100 1995-100; LX dub- hk 140 130 120 110 80 :eal Effective Exchange Rates 140 pQmc . 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2Wl . . -20 ’ I I I I I I I I 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2OOQ 2001 2002 -20 160 160 Unit Labor Costs in Manufacturing 160 160 P&j. r L L 1998 1999 2OOc 1 1 2001 2001 2002 2002 0 0 100 100 80 80 Sources: IMF, World Economic Outlook; Information Notice System; and data provided by the Singapore authorities. I/ Exports of goods and services, BOP basis. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 26 - Figure 4. Singapore: Monetary and Fiscal Indicators 3o Money and Credit 11 1:: a 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2OGtl 2001 2M): 30 18 6 -6 S- -8 Three-monlh SIBOR (U.S. dollar) 7- -7 Prime i-ale 5- ‘\ \ -4 \ f’ercen1 of GDP 4s Central Government Revenue 45 Proj 32 i - 40 36 36 Central Government Expenditure Proj. 28 24 16 ’ 1995196 1996197 199715 1998/99 1999/00 2000/01 2001/02 2002/03 ’ Sources: CEIC Database: and data provided by the Singapore authorities. I/ Adjusted for the purchase of POSBank by DBS Bank in November 1998. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 27 - Figure 5. Singapore: External Developments -30 - sgpprma HO-““““““““““““““” 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 Salance of Payments I I. I I I I.. 1.. 1.. I95 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 1 1 -( 40 30 20 IO 0 -10 -20 -30 40 15 IO , 1 5 10 .15 -20 -25 nvisibles Balance I I I.. I . . . I.. 1.. . I.. 195 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2Oa2 18 24 16 8 July IYY?.; 100 115 Exchange Rates 70 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2coO 2001 2002 115 110 85 80 75 70 Sources: IMF. International Financial Statistics; Information Notice System; and data provided by the Singapore authorities. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-28 - Figure 6. Singapore: Current and Leading Indicators of Economic Activity IgplOl. -IS 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 .6 .9 .I2 .I5 1YY0=100 I90 Leading Economic Indicators Permw 40 30 20 IO 0 -10 -20 -30 mdls “O .I 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 -lo 3’5 1 Investment Commitments in Manufacturing 3.0 - 3.0 2.5 2.0 1.5 1.0 0.5 Sources: Data provided by the Singapore authorities. Yar-,,n ycurpCrC”“’ r/lu?zgr 4o Real Domestic Demand ,pslb -30 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 -30 7o Global Semiconductor Market Developments 3/ 60 70 60 50 - 50 40 - 40 30 - 30 20 moving average) - 20 10 - IO 0 .O -10 - - -10 -20 - .20 -30 t -40 t \J -1. 40 v- I -50 - 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 -50 Billimr ~t~Stnpporr &/lur:r lo Construction Contracts Awarded 9 IO 9 8- I -8 7- -7 T&d 6- I -6 5 :: ;: 5 ~~~~I O 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 O I/ Percentage change of firms expecting an improvement in business conditions in the manufacturing sector. 2/The composite leading index has nine components which include money stock, stock of finished goods, company formation,wholesale price changes in manufactured goods, inverted real unit labor costs for manufacturing, inverted default rates for manufacturing, the business forecast for wholesale trade, new orders, and the stock price index. 3/ Based on data by the Semiconductor Industry Association. Reflects value of shipments in a single month. Sales data are on an annual basis. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 29 - Table 1. Singapore: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 1997-2003 Nominal GDP (2001): US$85.6 billion GDP per capita (2001): US$20,728 Population (2001): 4.13 million Quota: SDR 862.5 million 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 Proj. 2002 2003 Growth (percent change) Real GDP Real domestic demand Consumption Private consumption Gross capital formation Saving and investment (percent of GDP) Gross national savings Gross capital formation Inflation and unemployment (period average, percent) CPI inflation Unemployment rate Central government budget (percent of GDP) l/ Revenue and grants Expenditure, net lending, and fund transfers Overall balance Primary operating balance 2/ Money and credit (end of period, percent change) Broad money (M3) 3/ Credit to private sector Interest rate (three-month interbank, in percent) Merchandise trade (percent change) Export volume Import volume Terms of trade Balance of payments (US$ billion) Current account balance (In percent of GDP) Balance on goods Exports, f.o.b. Imports, f.o.b. Overall balance International reserves and external debt Gross official reserves (US$ billion) (In months of imports) Gross external debt (US$ billion) 6/ (In percent of GDP) Exchange rate (end of period) S$/uS$ Nominal effective exchange rate 7/ Real effective exchange rate 7/ 8.5 -0.1 6.9 10.3 -2.0 2.8 4.1 8.9 -6.8 4.7 11.8 -8.7 7.2 3.9 5.8 -1.5 6.3 10.8 1.8 3.0 3.0 5.5 -3.8 6.4 9.9 0.5 1.8 2.1 13.0 -13.3 2.5 13.2 -23.4 15.0 5.5 57.8 57.3 51.9 55.3 54.5 47.7 48.4 38.6 33.3 31.9 31.6 24.3 27.1 27.5 2.0 -0.3 0.0 1.4 1.0 0.0 1.0 1.8 3.2 3.5 3.1 3.3 4.5 3.8 36.7 30.6 29.4 29.3 27.4 24.9 26.9 27.2 28.9 23.9 20.5 23.9 23.0 19.9 9.5 1.7 5.5 8.8 3.5 1.9 7.0 3.9 0.5 3.4 1.1 -3.5 -4.7 0.0 8.3 8.1 7.3 -1.8 4.0 12.7 8.0 -3.0 5.9 16.3 6.8 1.8 2.6 2.8 1.3 2.3 41 . . . -0.6 41 . . . 1.25 5f . . . 11.6 -0.3 5.4 16.8 -8.6 4.0 5.6 10.2 -12.9 9.5 14.8 -12.4 8.6 5.7 -2.0 0.1 -0.8 -2.5 -1.8 0.1 0.6 18.1 19.7 16.5 15.9 17.9 18.6 20.4 (19.2) (24.0) (20.0) (17.2) (20.9) (20.6) (20.9) 1.0 14.9 11.2 11.6 12.9 8.7 10.1 125.7 110.8 115.6 139.1 122.5 130.2 141.1 -124.7 -95.8 -104.3 -127.5 -109.6 -121.5 -131.0 8.0 3.0 4.3 6.9 -0.9 2.1 4.2 71.4 (6.9) 10.1 (12.1) 75.0 77.2 80.4 75.8 (9.4) (8.9) (7.6) (8.3) 9.2 11.7 11.3 (11.1) (13.9) (12.2) 83.3 88.6 (84 63.1) 1.675 1.660 1.666 1.732 1.851 1.786 51 126.3 125.6 119.2 119.5 121.2 119.5 81 118.6 114.3 107.1 107.2 108.1 105.2 8/ Sources: Data provided by the Singapore authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections l/ Fiscal year beginning on April 1, 2/ Overall balance excluding capital revenue, investment income, net lending, debt service, and fund transfers. 3/Adjusted for the acquisition of POSBank by the Development Bank of Singapore in November 1998. 4/August 2002. ~/AS of October 9,2002. 6/Based on BIS data; corporate bonds outstanding and the external bank claims by the BIS reporting countries. 7/ IMF Information Notice System monthly index (1990 = 100); period average. 8/ APD estimate for September 2002. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 30 - Table 2. Singapore: Monetary Survey, 997-2002 1/ 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 July (In billions of Singapore dollars at end-period) Net foreign assets 92.8 115.5 131.0 126.3 132.9 131.9 Monetary authorities 119.3 124.3 127.1 137.8 138.6 140.3 Deposit money banks l/ -26.5 -8.8 3.8 -11.5 -5.7 -8.4 Domestic credit 162.3 181.3 182.5 198.1 231.8 217.8 Claims on private sector 143.4 154.9 150.2 159.1 185.1 170.8 Claims on government (net) Other items (net) M2 Ml Quasi-money ,l 1 18.9 31.7 - 23.4 27.5 26.5 36.1 - 60.8 27.2 32.2 39.0 38.9 -153.5 ,l - 74.5 170.9 1 31.1 33.3 46.8 47.0 83.8 -171.0 80.9 178.6 36.1 34.5 Domestic credit 87.9 11.7 0.6 8.6 17.0 2.8 Claims on private sector 12.7 8.0 -3.0 5.9 16.3 2.4 M2 10.2 30.3 8.5 -2.0 5.9 4.2 M3 8.1 8.1 7.3 -1.8 4.0 3.6 95.9 133.5 143.4 137.6 144.8 144.1 (Annual percentage change of selected indicators) Source: Data provided by the Singapore authorities. l/ Commercial banks and discount houses. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3l- Table 3. Singapore: Balance of Payments, 1997-2003 l/ (In billions of U.S. dollars) 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 Proj. 2002 2003 Current account balance 18.1 19.7 16.5 15.9 17.9 Trade balance 1.0 14.9 11.2 11.6 12.9 Exports, f.o.b. 125.7 110.8 115.6 139.1 122.5 Ofwhich : electronics exports 66.9 59.7 63.0 77.0 64.9 Imports, f.o.b. ,124.7 -95.8 -104.3 -127.5 109.6 Services balance 12.1 1.1 4.5 5.1 5.7 Income balance 6.2 4.9 2.0 0.6 0.7 Transfer payments (net) -1.2 -1.2 -1.2 -1.3 -1.4 Net capital flows 21 -10.1 -16.8 -12.2 -9.1 -18.8 -16.5 -16.2 Capital and financial account balance -13.8 -21.3 -11.6 -11.0 -18.9 -16.5 -16.2 Capital account (net) -0.2 -0.2 -0.2 -0.2 -0.2 -0.1 -0.1 Financial account (net) -13.6 -21.0 -11.4 -10.8 -18.8 -16.4 -16.1 Direct investment (net) 1.3 5.6 7.5 0.4 -1.6 2.6 2.8 Portfolio investment (net) -15.0 -9.9 -5.6 -9.9 -4.5 -7.1 -7.5 Other investment (net) 0.0 -16.7 -13.3 -1.4 -12.6 -11.9 -11.4 Banks (net) 6.3 -10.6 -7.5 8.9 -3.2 0.0 0.0 Other sectors (net) -4.3 -4.6 -4.9 -7.9 -8.8 0.0 0.0 Assets -37.9 0.1 -20.0 -6.0 -15.5 0.0 0.0 Banks -12.4 2.2 -10.7 1.5 -10.3 0.0 0.0 Other Sectors -23.5 -0.6 -8.4 -5.1 -4.6 0.0 0.0 Liabilities 37.9 -16.8 6.7 4.6 2.8 0.0 0.0 Banks 18.7 -12.8 3.2 7.4 7.1 0.0 0.0 Other Sectors 19.2 -4.0 3.5 -2.8 -4.2 0.0 0.0 Net errors and omissions 3.7 4.5 -0.7 1.9 0.2 0.0 0.0 Overall balance 8.0 3.0 Memorandum item : Current account as percent of GDP 19.2 24.0 4.3 20.0 18.6 20.4 8.7 10.1 130.2 141.1 . . . . 121.5 -131.0 5.3 5.3 6.6 7.9 -2.0 -2.9 6.9 -0.9 2.1 4.2 17.2 20.9 20.6 20.9 Sources: Monetary Authority of Singapore, Economic Survey of Singapore; and staff estimates and projections. li Data for the current account balance, the capital and financial account balance, and net errors and omissions are converted to U.S. dollars from the official presentation in Singapore dollars using period-average exchange rate. 2/ Including net errors and omissions. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 32 - Table 4. Singapore: Summary of Government Operations, 1997/98-2002/03 (In percent of GDP) 11 1997198 1998199 1999100 2000/o 1 200 l/O2 2002/03 Budget Proj. 21 Budget Proj. 21 Total revenue 36.7 30.6 29.4 Current revenue 23.2 24.2 25.7 Tax revenue 16.2 15.9 15.6 Investment income 31 2.7 3.6 4.5 Other nontax revenue 4.3 4.7 5.5 Capital revenue 41 13.6 6.4 3.8 Total expenditure Current expenditure Operating expenditure Debt servicing Agency fees on land sales Investment expenses Transfer payments Development expenditure and net lending Development expenditure 5/ Net lending Fund transfers 61 27.2 28.9 23.9 11.0 11.8 11.3 9.9 10.8 10.3 0.7 0.7 0.6 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.0 0.3 15.8 17.1 12.4 6.3 9.1 7.1 9.5 8.0 5.4 0.4 0.0 0.2 Overall balance Primary operating balance 7/ Memorandum items: Government saving Structural primary operating balance 81 9.5 1.7 5.5 3.9 0.5 3.4 Fiscal impulse based on operating balance 91 11.8 12.4 14.1 11.9 11.4 7.9 8.4 6.9 3.7 I.0 3.4 0.6 1.5 -3.1 -2.5 -4.2 -2.0 2.7 -2.3 2.8 -0.9 3.6 -0.6 1.1 29.3 27.8 27.4 23.4 25.2 23.8 24.3 21.7 15.8 16.0 15.9 14.4 5.8 4.9 5.5 4.8 3.6 2.9 2.8 2.5 4.1 4.0 3.2 1.7 20.5 21.0 23.9 21.2 12.8 11.9 15.7 13.2 11.4 10.5 12.2 12.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.7 0.6 0.6 2.7 0.0 7.3 8.6 7.5 8.0 5.9 6.2 6.9 6.6 1.4 2.4 0.6 1.4 0.5 0.5 0.7 0.0 8.8 6.8 3.5 2.2 1.1 1.1 -3.5 -2.7 24.9 21.7 13.3 5.5 2.8 3.2 23.0 13.6 12.2 0.3 0.0 0.4 0.6 8.2 7.6 0.6 1.2 1.9 -4.7 Sources: Data provided by the Singapore authorities; and staff estimates and projections. l/ Fiscal year runs from April 1 through March 3 1. 21 includes the adjustment for proposed tax rebates and cuts in the property tax and business tax. 31 Includes all investment income from government assets and interest earnings on development loans from 2000/01. 41 Sale of government property. 51 Includes the land reclamation expenditure. 6/ Includes transfers to the Edusave Endowment Fund, the Medical Endowment Fund, the Lifelong Learning Endowment Fund and the ElderCare Fund. 71 Overall balance excluding capital revenue, investment income, net lending, debt service, and fund transfers. 8/ Calculated with the elasticity of revenue with respect to output equal to 1.1, and a zero elasticity of expenditure with respect to output. 9/ Calculated as increase in the structural primary operating deficit. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 33 - Table 5. Singapore: Indicators of Vulnerability, 1997-2002 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 Month for Financial sector indicators Broad money (percent change, y/y) Private sector credit (percent change, y/y) Credit to non-bank customers (percent change, y/y) Credit to the property sector (percent change, y/y) Share of property-sector credit in total non-bank credit (percent) Credit rating of local banks (S&P) Three-month Interbank rate (percent, end-year) NPL ratio (Singapore-incorporate banks, percent) Capitzal adequacy ratio of local banks (percent) 8.1 8.1 7.3 12.7 8.0 -3.0 12.8 5.9 -2.9 17.6 16.7 2.1 34.3 37.8 39.8 AN.4 AA/A 4lBBB 9.0 1.8 2.6 3.4 11.0 12.2 17.4 18.1 20.4 Asset market indicators Stock prices (percent change, y/y) P/E ratio -24.3 Stock prices of the finance sector (percent change, y/y) Real estate prices (199844~100,4-quarter moving average) I/ Residential Office space -7.6 78.0 -22.3 -15.7 19.0 99.2 20.9 16.8 4.0 120.6 -23.2 -1.9 160.4 118.3 121.3 137.1 123.4 147.8 117.8 93.3 116.6 107.8 External Indicators (U.S. $ billion) Current account balance (In percent of GDP) Gross official reserves (In month of imports of goods and services) Real exchange rate (end of period, 1990=100) Sovereign yield spread 2/ 18.1 19.7 16.5 19.2 24.0 20.0 71.4 75.0 77.2 6.9 9.4 8.9 117.4 108.5 106.3 External debt (US$ billions) 10.1 9.2 (In percent of GDP) 12.1 11.1 (In percent of exports of goods and services) 6.5 7.1 Ojwhich: Public sector external debt 0.0 0.0 11.7 13.9 8.4 0.0 -1.8 4.0 5.9 16.3 4.7 5.8 9.6 6.4 41.7 41.9 A-VBBB A+IBBB 2.x 1.3 9.1 8.0 19.4 15.9 17.9 17.2 20.9 80.4 75.8 7.6 8.3 109.5 108.5 2.1 2.1 11.3 12.2 6.8 0.0 2.3 Aug.02 -0.6 Aug.02 1.0 Aug.02 4.8 Aug.02 43.7 Aug.02 Mar-01 1.3 Sep.02 8.1 Q 1102 2.5 Sep.02 22.1 Sep.02 10.0 Sep.02 115.0 42102 90.4 Q2/02 80.7 Sep-02 105.2 Sep-02 1.6 Jul-02 Source: Data provided by the Singapore authorities. I/ The price indices are computed based on the Laspeyres method before 199844 and based on the moving average method from 199844. 21 Spread of IO-year US$-denominated bond issued by DBS over the U.S. government bond. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 34 - Table 6. Singapore: Illustrative Medium-Term Scenario, 1998-2007 - Proj. - 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 Real growth (percent change) GDP Domestic demand Private consumption Public consumption Fixed investment Exports of goods and services Imports of goods and services Saving and investment (percent of GDP) Gross national savings Central government Private and other Gross capital formation Inflation and unemployment (period average, percent) CPI inflation Unemployment rate Central government (percent of GDP) Revenue and grants Expenditure, net lending, and fund transfers Overall balance Primary operating balance l! Merchandise trade (percent change) Export volume Import volume Terms of trade 21 Balance of payments and official reserves (in billions of U.S. dollars) Current account balance (percent of GDP) Balance on goods Exports, f.o.b. Imports, f.o.b. Balance on services Balance on income and transfers Overall balance Gross official reserves (in months of imports) -0.1 6.9 10.3 -2.0 2.8 4.1 4.6 5.1 5.3 5.5 -6.8 4.7 11.8 -8.7 7.2 3.9 4.8 5.2 5.6 5.8 -3.8 6.4 9.9 0.5 1.8 2.1 3.9 4.6 5.1 5.3 8.0 6.1 14.0 6.6 6.9 5.7 4.9 4.7 4.9 4.8 -6.1 -4.0 6.3 -4.6 -4.1 5.5 5.8 6.1 6.5 6.9 -6.9 9.1 15.6 -7.1 3.2 5.0 1.7 3.8 5.8 7.6 -10.3 9.1 14.3 -11.2 7.5 5.4 1.5 3.7 6.1 7.9 57.3 51.9 55.3 54.5 47.7 48.4 48.4 48.8 49.3 50.1 12.3 13.9 12.9 12.2 9.1 10.1 11.5 11.8 11.8 11.8 44.9 38.0 42.4 42.2 38.7 38.3 36.9 37.0 31.6 38.3 33.3 31.9 31.6 24.3 27.1 27.5 28.3 29.1 29.9 30.8 -0.3 0.0 1.4 1.0 0.0 1.0 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5 3.2 3.5 3.1 3.3 4.5 3.8 3.5 3.3 3.1 3.0 32.1 29.1 29.3 27.9 25.6 26.4 26.9 26.9 26.9 26.9 28.5 25.2 21.4 23.1 22.5 20.7 19.1 18.9 18.9 18.9 3.6 4.6 8.0 4.8 3.1 5.1 7.2 7.2 7.2 1.2 1.4 2.1 1.7 -2.3 -3.2 -1.2 0.1 1.0 1.0 1.0 -0.3 5.4 16.8 -8.6 4.0 5.6 0.7 3.4 5.4 7.6 -12.9 9.5 14.8 -12.4 8.6 5.7 0.7 3.3 5.9 7.9 0.1 -0.8 -2.5 -1.8 0.1 0.6 -0.2 0.3 -0.1 -0.1 19.7 16.5 (24.0) (20.0) 14.9 11.2 110.8 115.6 -95.8 -104.3 1.1 4.5 3.8 0.8 3.0 4.3 75.0 71.2 (9.4) (8.9) 15.9 17.9 (17.2) (20.9) 11.6 12.9 139.1 122.5 -127.5 -109.6 5.1 5.1 -0.7 -0.7 6.9 -0.9 80.4 75.8 (7.6) (8.3) 18.6 (20.6) 8.1 130.2 -121.5 5.3 4.6 2.1 83.3 (8.2) 20.4 (20.9) 10.1 141.1 -131.0 5.3 5.1 4.2 88.6 (8.1) 20.8 (20.1) 10.1 144.4 -134.3 5.7 5.0 6.0 94.7 (8.5) 21.1 23.0 24.4 (19.7) (19.5) (19.3) 11.3 11.1 11.5 152.3 161.3 174.5 -141.0 -150.2 -163.0 6.2 6.9 7.1 4.3 5.0 5.8 6.6 1.1 1.6 101.3 108.3 115.9 (8.6) (8.1) (8.5) - Sources: Data provided by the Singapore authorities; and staff estimates and projections. l/ Overall balance excluding capital revenue, investment income, net lending, debt service, and fund transfers. 2/Based on changes in export and import unit values. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-35 - ANNEX I SINGAPORE-RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE ECONOMIC REVIEW COMMITTEE The government recently formed a high-level Economic Review Committee (ERC), chaired by Deputy Prime Minister and Finance Minister Lee Hsien Loong, to assess Singapore’s long-term strategy and the need for structural change. The ERC was composed of representatives from the government, labor organizations, and the business community. The areas covered by the Committee’s reports released to date included the following: diversifying and upgrading the manufacturing sector, expanding the international scope of domestic enterprises, developing the services sectors and cultural activities, encouraging entrepreneurship, promoting deregulation and privatization, reforming tax and pension systems, increasing wage flexibility, and reassessing land policy. While the final report is due in early 2003, several sub-committees have already issued their reports. 1. Report of the Sub-Committee on Policies Related to Taxation, the CPF System, Wages and Land: (a) The report on Taxation was issued in April and the key recommendations, which were adopted in the 2002 budget, are: . A reduction of the top marginal income and corporate tax rates from, respectively, 26 percent and 24% percent to 22 percent in year of assessment (YA) 2003 and to 20 percent by YA 2006.’ . A hike in the Goods and Services Tax from 3 percent to 5 percent, effective January 1, 2003 to partially offset the revenue loss from lower corporate and personal income tax rates. Income transfers in the form of Economic Restructuring Shares will be issued to citizens in three annual trenches beginning 1 January, 2003 to partially compensate for the higher GST. Most citizens will receive 1,200 shares, while citizens living in properties with annual value greater than S$lO,OOO will receive 600 shares. . Corporations can transfer gains across subsidiaries to offset losses in 2003. . Enhanced tax incentives will be given to wealth and asset management industries, in part designed to promote the derivatives market and strengthen the equity market. . Double tax deduction for approved R&D expenses of services companies, and single tax reduction for other R&D expenses that are outsourced to local or overseas R&D organizations from 2003. . Motor vehicle taxes will be reduced; the road tax, for example, was reduced by about 20 percent. ’ A year of assessment refers to the tax year for which the income is assessed. For example, the tax paid for the year of assessment 2002 is based on income earned in the year 200 1. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 36 - ANNEX I . The excise duty on cigarettes and liquor will be raised. (b) The CPF report was issued in July. Its main recommendations are: . Safeguard CPFfunds for Retirement 9 Limit CPF withdrawals for housing to 150 percent of the value of the property starting this year, and bring this valuation limit down to 120 percent over 5 years. This cap should not apply to HDB flats, nor to all existing loans. 9 Increase the contribution rate to the Special Account by one percentage point as the CPF contribution rate is restored to 40 percent. 9 Increase the Minimum Sum gradually as wages rise over time.* 9 Explore ways to help homeowners monetize their housing assets. 9 Use the CPF as a counter-cyclical, cost-cutting tool only as a last resort. . Addressing Healthcare Needs 9 Government’s intention to increase the contribution rate to the Medisave Account by 1 percentage point when the CPF contribution rate is restored to 40 percent. 9 Increase risk-pooling via enhanced medical insurance, while retaining the framework of co-payments and deductibles. 9 Explore devolving the health insurance system and other CPF-based insurance schemes to private insurers to operate and manage. . Enhanced Investment Choices for Improved Returns 9 Facilitate the provision of low-cost privately-managed pension plans to CPF members. 9 Peg the interest rate paid on Special Account balances (savings in this account are reserved for old age and can only withdrawn at age 55) to an appropriate long-term interest rate, such as the yield on long-term government bonds. . Enhancing Labor Market Flexibility 9 Lower CPF salary ceiling from S$6,000 to S$5,000, to be phased in as the CPF contribution rate is restored to 40 percent. 9 Encourage employers to make appropriate adjustments to salary packages to offset the CPF reduction and to reflect the employees’ market value. 9 Raise the employee CPF wage bands for lower-income workers from S$200-363 to S$500-750. * At age 55, members can withdraw (tax exempt) the balance in their CPF accounts after setting aside a minimum sum. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 37 - ANNEX I 2. (4 . . . . @4 9 Keep the employer’s CPF contribution rate for workers in the 50-55 age group at its present level of 16 percent, even as the rate is restored to 20 percent for other age groups. 9 Lower the employee’s CPF contribution rate for employees in the 50-55 age group from the present level of 20 percent to 16 percent, as the CPF contribution rate for the other age groups are restored. 9 Allow members aged 50-55 to continue using their Special Account to meet shortfalls in mortgage repayments for a longer transition period. 9 Encourage employers to pass on part of their cost savings to deserving workers in this age group through the variable component of their wages, depending on the circumstances of each company and the contribution of each worker. Report of the Sub-Committee on Entrepreneurship and Internationalization The report on Government Linked Companies (GLCs) was issued in May and includes the following key recommendations: Enact a competition law that prohibits cartel activities and abuse of dominant market positions, and reviews mergers and acquisitions, including of GLCs, to ensure fair competition. Establish and maintain GLCs for strategic purposes such as to manage critical resources, achieve public policy objectives, or develop new growth engines that the private sector is unwilling to take up; review constantly the stable of GLCs and divest non-strategic ones when it is commercially sensible to do so through Management Buy Outs, for example; do not interfere with the operation of the GLCs, ensure that they are commercially run, and not asked to do “national service”; attract world class talent into the GLCs. GLCs should expand their core business internationally, if necessary through acquisition of foreign companies to strengthen core competencies, even if it means dilution of Government’s stake; encourage partnerships between GLCs, multinational companies, and small and medium sized enterprises, and pursue a cluster approach when venturing overseas. Raise the profile of the local Industry Upgrading Programme and promote internationalization. The Report on Entrepreneurship and Internationalization was released in September: The thrust of this report is to recommend ways to strengthen the spirit of entrepreneurship and innovation in Singapore. The committee believes that there are 6 essential elements that need to be developed and sustained in a vibrant society, namely culture, capabilities, conditions, connections, capital and catalysts (the “6 Cs”). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-38 - ANNEX I 3. Report of the Sub-Committee on Service Industries: Several reports on services sectors were released in September, which focused on financial services, education, healthcare, legal services, the IT industry, trade services, logistics, and tourism. The main report contained the following key recommendations for financial services: . Develop Singapore as a regional leader in wealth management by 9 Expanding the government’s role in developing the asset management industry. 9 Boosting competitiveness as a pre-eminent asset center. 9 Increasing the focus on developing alternative asset cluster. 9 Developing ancillary services. . Develop Singapore as a regional/Global Processing by Establishing Regional/Global Universal Processing Centers . Develop Singapore as the Asia Pa@ Risk Management Center by Establishing the Asia Risk Exchange (ARX) . Create an Attractive Business Environment by: 9 Enhancing public-private sector cooperation. 9 Increasing the international profile of Singapore’s financial sector. 9 Sharpening the focus and raising priority of education and training initiatives. 9 Raising the international profile of Singapore’s education and training environment. 9 Further enhancing Singapore’s tax environment. 9 Providing state-of-the-art building facilities for the financial sector. 4. Report of the Sub-Committee on Enhancing Human Capital: The ERC Working Group on Arts, Culture, Sports and Recreation (ACSR) has recommended that measures be taken to enhance Singapore’s human capital through arts, culture, sports and recreation, so as to boost Singapore’s competitive edge in the New Economy. The 4 strategic thrusts put forth by the ACSR Working Group are: . To nurture a creative mindset for future generations through enhanced literature, arts and sports education in schools. . The Government to send clear signals of its commitment for a more accommodating and diverse society, and its support for ACSR. . To increase opportunities for and awareness of people to participate in ACSR activities. . To increase collaborations between disciplines to enhance cross-fertilization of ideas and reap greater economic benefits. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 39 - ANNEX II SINGAPORE-FUNDRELATIONS As of September 30,2002 I. Membership Status: Joined August 3, 1966; Article VIII II. General Resources Account: SDR million Quota 862.50 Fund holdings of currency 509.12 Reserve position in Fund 353.40 III. SDR Department: SDR million Net cumulative allocation 16.48 Holdings 127.60 IV. Outstanding Purchases and Loans: None V. Financial Arrangements: None VI. Projected Obligations to Fund: None VII. Exchange Rate Arrangement: % Quota 100.00 59.03 40.97 % Allocation 100.00 774.48 Singapore has accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4 and maintains an exchange rate system that is free of restriction on the making of payments and transfers for current international transactions. Singapore follows a policy under which the Singapore dollar is permitted to float. The Monetary Authority of Singapore (MAS) monitors its value against an undisclosed basket of currencies and intervenes in the market to maintain this value within an undisclosed target band. The U.S. dollar is the intervention currency. As of August 3 1, 2002, US$1=1.7501. VIII. Article IV Consultation: The 200 1 Article IV consultation discussions were held in Singapore during March 16-25, 2001. The consultation was completed by the Executive Board on June 29, 2001 in a lapse of time basis. At that time, Directors agreed with the thrust of the staff appraisal, commending the authorities for the impressive economic performance in 2000, which was attributed to pragmatic macroeconomic management, continued progress on a range of structural reforms, and the favorable external environment. The increased transparency implied by the publication of the monetary policy statement in February 2001 was a welcome initiative. However, the authorities were encouraged to make further efforts to improve fiscal transparency. Similarly, the efforts to push ahead with structural reforms on a broad front and recent efforts to forge bilateral trade agreements with a number of trading partners were also endorsed. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 40 - ANNEX II IX. Technical Assistance: None X. Resident Representative/Advisor: None XI. Exchange System: Singapore has accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4 and maintains no restrictions on the making of payments or transfers for current international transactions.* Singapore maintains restrictions on Singapore-dollar credit facilities, and bond and equity issuance. Singapore-dollar proceeds obtained by non-resident financial entities (such as banks, merchant banks, finance companies, and hedge funds) from loans, equity listings or bond issuance to finance activities outside Singapore have to be swapped or converted into foreign currency upon draw-down. Financial institutions are prohibited from extending Singapore-dollar credit facilities in excess of S$5 million to nonresident financial entities if there is reason to believe that the Singapore-dollar proceeds may be used for Singapore- dollar currency speculation. ’ Singapore continues to maintain restrictions on payments and transfers against Iraq and Libya in compliance with U.N. Security Council resolutions, which have been notified to the Fund under Decision No. 144 (52/5 1). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4l- SINGAPORE-STATISTICAL ISSUES ANNEX III Data Reporting 1. Singapore provides data to the Fund on a generally timely basis and meets the SDDS specifications for the coverage, periodicity, and timeliness of the data, and for the dissemination of advance release calendars since January 200 1. However, there are a number of deficiencies in statistical practice, particularly in the external and fiscal areas. The main issues are: a Trade statistics do not include trade with Indonesia, although trade transactions with Indonesia are captured elsewhere in the current account; other goods and services receipts and payments, which are substantial, are not disaggregated. However, the authorities have completed a new survey of the services receipts and payments which should permit the provision of disaggregated data. l Information on government assets held abroad is not published nor provided to the Fund on a confidential basis. Interest on these assets and debt service payments on domestic debt made from the off-budget Government Securities Fund, is published on an annual basis but is not fully reflected in the fiscal position. More generally, data on the financial position of the consolidated public sector are not published. However, Singapore has complied with the expanded SDDS requirements to include data on the international investment position. 2. During the course of the year, staff receive a steady flow of economic data from published sources, via the Reuters monitor, various official websites, and through the TREND database. Most data are received on a timely basis. 3. Annual balance of payments data are reported each year to STA. Quarterly financial account data as provided by the authorities are not sufficiently detailed for publication in the International Financial Statistics. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 42 - ANNEX III w d d t: w W y 4 a B W 2 4 a a Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 43 - ANNEX IV SINGAPORE-OFFICIAL DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE 1. Singapore provided subsidy contributions accruing from net income on a loan of SDR 40 million to the original ESAF (now renamed PRGF) in 1987 and from an additional loan of SDR 40 million to the enhanced ESAF in 1994 at an interest rate of 2 percent per annum. In November 1998, Singapore agreed to roll over the loan of SDR 40 million from the original ESAF to the ESAF-HIPC Trust. In December 1999, Singapore agreed to transfer its balance from the SCA-2 to the PRGF Subsidy Account in the form of noninterest bearing deposits. Singapore’s contributions to the PRGF-HIPC Trust are estimated at about SDR 16.5 million on an “as needed” basis. 2. Singapore has also committed to lend up to SDR 340 million in the New Arrangements to Borrow (NAB), representing 1 percent of total NAB resources. In December 1998, Singapore also lent SDR 99.35 million, under the NAB, to finance the standby credit for Brazil. 3. Singapore has provided technical assistance to other developing countries since the 196Os, primarily through technical training programs directed at government officials. The range and scope of such assistance have increased significantly since the establishment in 1992 of the Singapore Cooperation Program (SCP). The SCP offers both bilateral and joint training programs in collaboration with individual countries and international organizations. At present Singapore sponsors training and study visits for about 4,000 officials annually from more than 135 developing countries. 4. The Fund and the Singapore authorities have jointly set up the IMF-Singapore Regional Training Institute (STI) in May 1998. The ST1 is administered by the IMF, in collaboration with the Monetary Authority of Singapore, with the assistance of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. The STI’s training activities are targeted at officials from the Asia-Pacific region. Courses on macroeconomic adjustment, reform policies, financial programming, transition economies, monetary and exchange operations, public finance, banking supervision, and statistics. As of end April 200 1, ST1 has conducted 48 courses and seminars and has trained approximately 1,530 officials from 38 countries. The participants came from central banks, ministries of finance, bank supervisory authorities and statistical agencies. 5. Singapore made a contribution of US$4 million to the 7th replenishment of the Asian Development Fund (ADF). ADF loans are provided on concessional terms to ADB’s poorer developing member countries. They support broad-based sustainable economic growth, the provision of social development such as education and health and the strengthening of good governance. 6. In response to the crisis, Singapore also increased its technical assistance programmes to the region, At the APEC Economic Leaders’ meeting in Kuala Lumpur in November 1998, Singapore announced capacity-building initiatives involving training in finance and healthcare. At the ASEAN Summit in Hanoi in December 1998, Singapore also announced that it would offer S$l2 million under the Singapore Cooperation Programme to provide about 30 undergraduate scholarships per year for ASEAN students over the next three to four Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 44 - ANNEX IV years to study in Singapore. For FY 2001, 60 undergraduate scholarships will be awarded. These two projects have been implemented. 7. Recognizing the hardships that the economic crisis has caused Indonesia, Singapore announced in July 1998 that it would extend S$l2 million worth of humanitarian assistance in rice and medicines to the Indonesian people to help alleviate their difficulties. This assistance programme has been completed. Following an earthquake in Bengkulu in June 2000, Singapore joined in the relief efforts by sending a 20-member armed forces medical team together with emergency medical supplies and tents. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 45 - ANNEX V Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 02/** FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE [ ,20021 International Monetary Fund 700 lgth Street, NW Washington, D. C. 20431 USA IMF Concludes 2002 Article IV Consultation with Singapore On December 6, 2002, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded the Article IV consultation with Singapore.’ Background Singapore faces the twin challenges of managing the recovery from its worst cyclical downturn and addressing competitive pressures to restructure and develop new industries. Following a strong, but short-lived economic rebound in 2000, the Singapore economy plunged into its most severe recession last year due to simultaneous downturns in global demand and in the high- tech sector. Real GDP declined by 2 percent in 2001 after surging by 10 percent the year before. Although output growth recovered in early 2002, the rebound was narrowly based in the capital-intensive chemical cluster, where output is volatile and knock-on effects are limited. Consequently, the unemployment rate rose to 4.5 percent (a 14-year high) in the first quarter of this year, before easing to 4.1 percent in the subsequent quarter. Consumer prices rose by 1 percent in 2001, but the significant slack in the region has contributed to mild deflation since November 2001, as price declines have hovered around % percent (yoy) through August 2002. Singapore’s external position remains strong, and official reserves stood at US$80.7 billion (the equivalent of 8’/4 months of imports) in August 2002. While the authorities have traditionally eschewed counter-cyclical policies in favor of a medium- term focus, they pragmatically reacted to the large downturn in 2001 with sizable fiscal stimulus packages, an expansionary budget for FY2002103, and monetary easing. In July and October ’ Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial information, and discusses with officials the country’s economic developments and policies. On return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the country’s authorities. This PIN summarizes the views of the Executive Board as expressed during the [December, 6, 20021 Executive Board discussion based on the staff report. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 46 - ANNEX V 2001, two off-budget fiscal stimulus packages were passed with measures totaling 8% percent of GDP, and the FY2002/03 budget included personal and corporate income tax rate cuts that provided additional stimulus. Monetary conditions have continued to ease since July 2001 when monetary policy shifted to a neutral stance. The near-term outlook is for a moderate recovery in GDP growth, driven mainly by a pick up in exports. The staff projects real GDP to grow by 2.8 percent in 2002 and by 4.1 percent in 2003. The initial boost from a positive inventory swing will require robust export growth, spurred by a pick-up in U.S. semiconductor demand, to sustain the recovery. Downside macroeconomic and event risks, however, continue to dominate the near-term outlook. The most prominent risks stem from uncertainties about the strength and sustainability of the global recovery, volatility in equity prices, and political instability in the Middle East. Furthermore, if the global recovery were to falter, incipient deflationary pressures could intensify. However, Singapore’s strong balance of payments position limits its external vulnerability. At the same time, growing competition from low-cost regional producers created restructuring pressures to diversify from electronics manufacturing to knowledge-based activities in which Singapore retains comparative advantage. China’s entry into WTO heightened concerns that Singapore’s role as a regional financial and trade hub may be diminishing. The new strategy proposed by the government-created Economic Review Committee (ERC) is aimed at improving competitiveness, encouraging private initiative, strengthening the service economy, and promoting internationalization. Government policies are aimed at helping to adapt domestic industries to the changing external environment, and at attracting and retaining workers with requisite skills. Specific initiatives include tax reform, changes to the Central Provident Fund, and encouraging domestic industry, especially Government-Linked Corporations (GLC), to raise efficiency and broaden their international focus. Executive Board Assessment Public hformafion Notices (PINS) are issued, (i) at the request of a member country, following the conclusion of the Article IV consultation for countries seeking to make known the views of the IMF to the public. This action is intended to strengthen IMF surveillance over the economic policies of member countries by increasing the transparency of the IMF’s assessment of these policies; and (ii) following policy discussions in the Executive Board at the decision of the Board. 1 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public