DOCUMENT OF INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND NOT FOR PUBLIC USE SM/02/235 CONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION July 22, 2002 To: Members of the Executive Board From: The Secretary Subject: Fiji-Staff for the 2002 Article IV Consultation Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staff report for the 2002 Article IV consultation with Fiji, which is tentatively scheduled for discussion on Friday, August 9,2002. At the time of circulation of this paper to the Board, the Secretary’s Department has not received a communication from the authorities of Fiji indicating whether or not they consent to the Fund’s publication of this paper; such communication may be received after the authorities have had an opportunity to read the paper. Questions may be referred to Mr. Roger, APD (ext. 39417). Unless the Documents Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the WTO Secretariat on Tuesday, July 30, 2002; and to the Asian Development Bank, and the European Commission, following its consideration by the Executive Board. Att: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicCONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND FIJI Staff Report for the 2002 Article IV Consultation Prepared by the Staff Representatives for the 2002 Consultation with Fiji Approved by Steven Dunaway and Michael Hadjimichael July 19,2002 l Consultation discussions were held in Suva during April 22-May 2. The staff team met with Finance and National Planning Minister Kubuabola, Reserve Bank Governor Narube, other government officials, and banking, business, and union representatives.’ l Fiji joined the Fund on May 28, 1971. It has accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4. The last consultation was concluded by the Board on September 14, 1998. The consultation scheduled for 2000 (under the biennial cycle) was postponed owing to political instability following a coup that toppled the elected government. An informal staff visit was made in June 200 1, but a formal consultation was held off pending new elections that were held in September 200 1. Following the elections, Fiji was re-admitted to the Commonwealth and international sanctions were lifted. l The Fijian economy suffered a recession after the coup, but is now recovering in response to a pick-up in tourism, the lifting of sanctions, and fiscal stimulus. Inflation remains low and the current account deficit has narrowed. l The mission recommended that the focus of macroeconomic policies shift from kick-starting the recovery to implementing a medium-term strategy to raise Fiji’s sustainable growth rate. In particular, the mission urged that immediate steps be taken to reduce the large fiscal deficit, primarily through cutting current expenditures. Revenue increases are also likely to be needed to help finance higher public investment. l Structural reforms should give priority to strengthening public sector management, especially with regard to financial control, and comprehensive restructuring of the sugar industry. l The mission recommended further easing of exchange controls, especially those pertaining to current transactions, some of which have been assessed to be restrictions inconsistent with Fiji’s obligations under the Articles of Agreement. The authorities are advised to establish a clear timetable for removing such restrictions. l The principal author of this report is Mr. Roger. ’ The staff team comprised Messrs Roger (head), Ueda (both APD), and Bhatia (TRE). Mr. Riechel (PFTAC) and Ms. 00 (OED) also participated in the discussions. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2- Contents Page Executive Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..*........................................ 4 I. Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..... 5 II. Recent Developments and Short-Term Outlook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5 III. Report on the Discussions.. ................................................................................................. .6 A. Fiscal Policy Priorities .............................................................................................. 7 B. Monetary, Exchange Rate, and Financial Sector Policies.. ...................................... .8 C. Structural Measures ................................................................................................. 11 D. Medium-Term Outlook.. ........................................................................................ .13 IV. Staff Appraisal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14 Text Boxes 1. Political Developments in Fiji.. .................................................................................... .16 2. Exchange and Capital Controls, 1999-2002.. ............................................................... .17 3. Recent Exchange Rate Trends and Competitiveness ................................................... .18 Figures 1. Economic Performance, 1986-2002 ............................................................................. .19 2. Central Government Finances, 1997-2002.. ................................................................ ..2 0 3. Monetary Indicators, 1997-2002 .................................................................................. .2 1 4. External Developments, 1997-2002 ............................................................................. .22 5. Exchange Rate Developments, 1997-2002 ................................................................... .23 Tables 1. Selected Economic Indicators, 1997-2003.. ................................................................ .24 2. Output and Expenditure, 1997-2002.. ......................................................................... .25 3. Central Government Finances, 1997-2002 ................................................................ ..2 6 4. Monetary Survey, 1997-2002 ....................................................................................... 27 5. Balance of Payments, 1997-2002 ................................................................................. 28 6. Indicators of Financial and External Vulnerability, 1997-2002.. ................................ .29 7. Medium-Term Adjustment Scenario, 1998-2007 ....................................................... .30 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3- Annexes I. Fund Relations ........................................................................................................... .3 1 II. Relations with the Pacific Financial Technical Assistance Centre ........................... ..3 3 III. Relations with the World Bank Group ...................................................................... .34 Iv. Relations with the Asian Development Bank.. .......................................................... .35 V. Social and Demographic Indicators.. ......................................................................... .37 VI. Statistical Issues.. ....................................................................................................... -38 VII. Public Information Notice (PIN) ............................................................................... .41 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4- EXECUTIVESUMMARY Economic Setting: The Fijian economy is recovering from the after-effects of the 2000 coup. A rebound in the tourism sector and expansionary fiscal policy have been the main drivers of economic growth to date. With the lifting of trade and aid sanctions late in 2001, the economic recovery is becoming more broad-based. Real GDP growth in 2002-03 is projected to be in the range of 4 to 5 percent, while inflation is projected to remain under 3 percent. Earnings from tourism have led to a significant narrowing of the current account deficit, which is projected to fall to 1 percent of GDP by 2003. Policy Discussions: a The staff recommended that immediate action be taken to cut the fiscal deficit in 2002. The deficit could remain close to 6 percent of GDP, in the absence of corrective measures. The staff recommended that the deficit be reduced to around 3 percent of GDP through cuts in wage costs and scaling back of new spending initiatives. 0 The staff supported increasing gradually the flexibility of the exchange rate over time. Such flexibility would facilitate the removal of exchange controls and financial sector development. The staff emphasized that movement in this direction will need to be accompanied by fiscal and monetary policies consistent with exchange rate stability, underscoring the need for fiscal consolidation. 0 Exchange controls should be liberalized and restrictions eliminated. The wide range of controls still in place is unhelpful to Fiji’s efforts to attract foreign investment. Moreover, the staff has determined that some exchange controls constitute restrictions subject to approval under Article VIII. The staff does not recommend approval for the retention of these measures and recommends that the authorities set a clear timetable for their elimination. a The staff supported the government’s medium-term objectives of reducing the government debt GDP ratio and increasing public sector investment in order to raise the economy’s sustainable growth rate. To achieve these objectives, the staff recommended cuts in lower priority current spending and selected increases in revenues (e.g., an increase in the VAT rate). a The staff also endorsed a range of structural reforms. The staff stressed the need to strengthened public sector management, especially financial management, as this will play an important role both in achieving fiscal consolidation and in raising public sector productivity. In the private sector, comprehensive restructuring of the sugar industry is urgent, including a resolution of land issues. Moreover, the staff recommended prompt action to simplify the investment approval process, dismantle price controls, and eliminate distortionary import licenses and quotas. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-5- 1. BACKGROUND 1. At the conclusion of the 1998 Article IV consultation, Directors commended Fiji for its historical record of low inflation, fiscal prudence, and modest external debt. However, they also expressed concern with the recent deterioration in the fiscal balance and stressed the need for wage restraint to realize the gains from the 20 percent devaluation of the Fiji dollar in 1998. They also urged prompt implementation of a credible structural reform agenda, especially for the renewal of agricultural land leases, and the acceleration of privatization and deregulation, to promote private sector growth. 2. In May 2000, Fiji’s elected government was overthrown in a coup. As with the 1987 coups, the key issue was the longstanding tension between indigenous Fijians and citizens of Indian origin (Box 1). The resulting political turmoil led to the postponement of the 2000 Article IV consultation.2 In protest against the coup, Fiji’s membership in the Commonwealth was suspended, and the international community applied economic sanctions, including postponement of development assistance projects. In addition, Australian and New Zealand trade unions imposed trade sanctions on Fijian goods. Elections were held in September 2001, and won by interim Prime Minister Qarase’s indigenous Fijian SDL party. This led to an easing of official sanctions and to Fiji’s readmission to the Commonwealth. The domestic political situation also became more settled, although court challenges against the government have not yet been resolved. II. RECENT DEVELOPMENTSAND~HORT-TERMOUTLOOK 3. Monetary and fiscal policy actions helped to contain the adverse economic consequences of the coup in 2000 (Table 1 and Figure 1). Immediately following the coup, the Reserve Bank of Fiji (RBF) increased its lending rates sharply, imposed credit ceilings on bank lending, and tightened exchange controls (Box 2) in order to minimize pressure on the Fiji dollar and protect international reserves. A mini-budget was introduced in July 2000 in anticipation of a sharp decline in tax revenues. Cuts in nonsalary expenditures by 20- 30 percent and in civil service wages by 12% percent limited the fiscal deficit to 3% percent of GDP. These measures are credited with limiting the fall in consumer and business confidence. As a result, the fall in GDP of 2% percent in 2000 was much less than initially feared (Table 2). The decline in output largely reflected sharp declines in tourism earnings and tourism-related investment, and the adverse impact of external sanctions on investment and textile exports. With the slump in tourism earnings in particular, the current account deficit widened to over 6 percent of GDP. 4. As the political and security situation began to normalize, monetary and fiscal policies were eased, helping to promote recovery in 2001. Beginning in September 2000, the RBF cut interest rates progressively, eliminated the ceiling on credit growth, and scaled back exchange controls, against a background of subdued inflation pressures and foreign 2 The staff made an informal visit to Fiji in June 2001, but a formal consultation was delayed pending the outcome of elections in September 2001. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-6- reserves which, although declining, remained above four months of import cover. The 2001 budget, introduced in December 2000, included substantial increases in current and capital expenditure, together with tax cuts. As a result, the fiscal deficit widened sharply, to 6% percent of GDP in 2001, and the government debt/GDP ratio rose to 44 percent, compared with 37 percent at end-1999 (Table 3 and Figure 2). Economic activity began to recover in 2001, with real GDP rising by 2% percent, reflecting the impact of expansionary fiscal measures and a pick-up in the tourism sector. In the sugar industry, however, output and employment contracted further in 2001 as land leases expired. Moreover, private investment-including FDI-remained very weak, owing to persistent uncertainties regarding the longer-term political and economic outlook. Money and credit aggregates reflected this weakness, as broad money fell 3.1 percent in 200 1, while domestic credit shrank 2% percent, including a 5% percent decline in private sector credit (Table 4 and Figure 3). 5. Growth is expected to strengthen in 2002-03. Real GDP is projected by the authorities to rise to 4% percent in 2002, reflecting on-going fiscal stimulus, continued strengthening of the tourism sector, and the resumption of development assistance projects following the lifting of external sanctions. In 2003, real GDP growth is projected to rise temporarily to over 5 percent as the hosting of the South Pacific Games is expected to provide a major boost to tourism sector investment and earnings. 6. Inflation pressures remain subdued. Although labor statistics are poor, higher unemployment-notably in agriculture and the textile sectors-appears to have kept downward pressure on wages, while stability in Fiji’s nominal effective exchange rate has kept imported inflation low. The underlying CPI rate fell to under 2 percent in 200 1, and to 1 percent in early 2002. Although some price pressures are likely to emerge as the economy strengthens and as higher world oil prices feed through, CPI inflation is expected to remain in the range of 2 percent to 3 percent in 2002-03. 7. The current account deficit has narrowed sharply, and the Fiji dollar remains competitive (Table 5 and Figure 4). The recovery in tourism earnings and an improved balance on private transfers largely accounted for a narrowing of the current account deficit to 2% percent of GDP in 200 1. In 2002-03, the current account is expected to remain close to balance as a higher merchandise trade deficit (largely reflecting strengthening demand, especially for capital goods imports) is offset by stronger earnings from tourism. Official reserves are expected to remain adequate, although declining slightly in terms of imports to 3.9 months of coverage. Since the 20 percent devaluation in 1998, the nominal and real effective exchange rates of the Fiji dollar have been stable, as the Fiji dollar has weakened vis-a-vis the U.S. dollar and strengthened vis-a-vis the Australian and New Zealand dollars (Box 3 and Figure 5). III. REPORT ON THE DISCUSSIONS 8. Fiji’s growth performance has for some years been hampered by political instability and adverse effects of government policies on private sector activity. Although performance has been good in some important respects-notably in maintaining low inflation and moderate external indebtedness-real GDP growth over the past five years Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-7- has averaged only 2 percent per year. Emigration by professionals and skilled workers, especially from the Indian ethnic community, in response to the political situation, has contributed significantly to low productivity growth. Economic policies, including exchange and price controls, have also undermined private sector incentives, with the result that private fixed investment averaged only slightly over 4 percent of GDP during the past decade. In these circumstances, the sustainable growth rate has declined. 9. Discussions focused on the policies needed to reverse this trend and achieve the authorities’ goal of raising Fiji’s sustainable rate of growth. It was agreed that key elements of the strategy will need to include substantial fiscal consolidation; preserving low inflation; increasing the share of government spending on investment and education; easing exchange and price controls and other measures impeding foreign investment; reforming public sector management and financial controls; and restructuring the sugar sector. A. Fiscal Policy Priorities 10. The mission estimated that, without corrective measures, the fiscal deficit in 2002 would remain around 6 percent of GDP (including asset sales). For the past several years, the fiscal deficit has widened sharply as expenditures have risen while tax revenues have fallen. In 2002, spending is budgeted to rise by % percent of GDP, bringing the cumulative increase since 1999 to 2% percentage points. Revenue (excluding privatization receipts) is projected to decline by 3/4 percentage of GDP-nearly 2 percentage points below the budgeted figure-bringing the cumulative decline to 4% percent of GDP since 1999, largely reflecting cuts in income tax rates and increased tax arrears.3 The fiscal deficit in 2002 is expected to remain little changed in terms of GDP only because of the expected receipt of privatization proceeds. Adjusting for these proceeds, the underlying fiscal deficit is expected to rise from 6% percent of GDP in 2001 to 8 percent in 2002. As in previous years, the fiscal deficit is being almost entirely financed domestically, through bond sales to the Fiji National Provident Fund (FNPF).4 11. The mission urged immediate action to reduce the 2002 fiscal deficit. The mission argued that, from a stabilization policy perspective, a large fiscal deficit was not warranted in the current circumstances in which growth was expected to be well above trend. The large deficit would further boost the government debt/GDP ratio to 47 percent of GDP by end- 2002, making it more difficult subsequently to achieve the government’s medium-term target 3 The shortfall in tax revenues relative to the budget mainly reflects difficulties in improving tax compliance and reducing arrears. The authorities noted that emigration of trained staff has been an important factor. 4 The FNPF is a ready buyer of government bonds largely owing to constraints on its ability to invest abroad. Currently, it holds close to three-quarters of outstanding government bonds. With this captive source of finance, the traditional crowding-out effect of the fiscal deficit is limited. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-8- of 40 percent, and undermining the credibility of the authorities’ commitment to restoring fiscal sustainability. Moreover, the mission emphasized that privatization proceeds should be used for reducing debt, not for financing the fiscal deficit. 12. The mission recommended a cut in the fiscal deficit to around 3 percent of GDP. A cut of this size would reduce the primary fiscal deficit to close to zero, more appropriate to the cyclical position of the economy, and consistent with real GDP growth of around 3% percent of GDP, close to the rate projected in the 2002 budget. The mission recognized that fiscal adjustment on this scale would be challenging, but believed that it could be achieved through reductions in current expenditures by 2 percent of GDP, approximately equally divided between cuts in wage costs (which amount to 11 percent of GDP, or nearly half of current government spending) and the proliferation of nontransparent transfer payment programs in the last two years. Capital spending also should be reduced by 1 percent of GDP through elimination of some programs (including the Fiji Investment Corporation, the government’s new venture capital initiative) and scaling back of other new initiatives. Additionally, the mission recommended more rigorous expenditure controls to avoid further financial scandals such as the recent fraud at the Department of Agriculture, which amounted to % percent of GDP. 13. The authorities agreed on the need for fiscal consolidation. They indicated that continuing staff losses and unfilled vacancies in the public service were cutting wage costs relative to budget allocations. It was also expected that administrative constraints would delay implementation of new programs. As a consequence, actual expenditures could come out at around 1% percentage points of GDP below budget. The authorities indicated that they were hesitant to introduce significant additional measures until it was clearer that a recovery was firmly in place. They did assure the mission, however, that its recommendations would be taken seriously into account in the 2003 budget planning, which was to get under way shortly. B. Monetary, Exchange Rate, and Financial Sector Policies 14. The mission agreed with the authorities’ assessment that the current stance of monetary policy is appropriate for 2002. With inflation low-the headline CPI 12-month inflation rate was 1.2 percent in March, while underlying inflation was near zero-and the international reserves position adequate, the authorities’ view was that the RBF’s target indicator rate (on 91-day RBF notes), currently at 1.25 percent (since October 2001), should remain 10w.~ The authorities were concerned, however, that credit has continued to shrink and that commercial lending rates remain high in real terms. They attributed this mainly to excessive caution on the part of the main banks. Banks argued that caution was appropriate in view of the ongoing political and economic uncertainties, which were also dampening 5 The RBF primarily uses open market operations to achieve the RBF 91-day note rate target, and the RBF’s Minimum Lending Rate, Rediscount, and Repurchase interest rates are linked to the target rate. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-9- demand for loans by good quality borrowers. Despite the weakness of private sector credit growth, the mission discouraged the authorities from taking any measures to boost credit growth which would weaken prudent risk management practices by banks or by public sector lenders. 15. The banking system appears to be essentially sound, and the regulatory and supervisory environment is broadly adequate and effective (Table 6).6 The Fijian financial system is dominated by a few foreign banks and the FNPF. Although the economic recession led nonperforming loans of commercial banks to rise to 7.1 percent of loans and advances in 2000, the ratio has declined since then. With little in the way of syndicated lending, banks have had relatively large single-party exposures (typically to tourist resorts), but they are relatively well diversified across sectors. They are also in a position to draw on their foreign parent bank’s capital in an emergency, within limits. Consequently, the mission’s assessment was that the banking system was not highly vulnerable to external macroeconomic shocks, but domestic political and economic uncertainties were appropriately fostering cautious behavior by the banks. For other financial institutions, asset quality has generally been weaker than for the commercial banks, partly reflecting their greater exposure to loans adversely affected by the problems in the sugar sector. Partly for this reason, and given the RBF’s strong reputation and skilled staff, the mission supported proposals to expand its supervisory coverage to other institutions, beginning with the larger institutions such as the FNPF and the Fiji Development Bank. The RBF is also agreeable to an FSAP mission in 2003. Although Fiji has no offshore banking center, the mission commended the authorities for addressing the issue of money laundering and other financial crimes, notably through the establishment of a Financial Crimes Unit, and their inspection of around 30 percent of bank accounts (by value). 16. Fiji’s monetary framework is based on the long-established peg of the Fiji dollar to a basket of major trading partner currencies, which provides a nominal anchor for monetary policy. Discussions with the authorities and the private sector suggested that, since the 20 percent devaluation in 1998, the Fiji dollar has remained competitive. Although export earnings were harmed by the trade sanctions and the deterioration of the sugar sector, the lifting of sanctions and strong increases in tourist arrivals have led to a significant improvement in the current account balance that is expected to be sustained through the medium term. Against this background, the mission endorsed the authorities’ intention to retain the currency peg, but to move cautiously in the direction of slightly greater exchange rate flexibility in order to facilitate the further relaxation of exchange controls, as well as helping to provide a buffer against external shocks. This is in line with the recommendations of a 1998 MAE technical assistance mission. Initially, a narrow band for exchange rate fluctuation of, perhaps, 2 percent on either side of the central rate is being considered for 6 See also “Financial System Structure, Supervision, and Performance” in the Selected Issues companion paper. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- lo- introduction in coming months. The mission also agreed that movement in this direction needs to be approached carefully so as to avoid destabilizing exchange rate expectations.7 17. The mission advised the authorities to eliminate by the end of this year those exchange controls which are not regarded as essential to preventing significant disruptive capital flows. Although Fiji maintains a wide range of exchange controls on both capital and current account transactions, most transactions are approved routinely and rapidly and the tightening following the 2000 coup has been substantially reversed. Nonetheless, the mission suggested that, even if most controls are nonrestrictive in practice, they still detract from Fiji’s attractiveness as a destination for foreign investment, a view shared by the commercial banks. In view of the very limited degree of exchange rate flexibility envisaged in the near term, the mission recommended that priority be given to elimination of controls that do not significantly restrict outflows, but that may contribute to deterring inflows, before significantly easing the main controls on capital transactions of domestic residents.* In particular, the mission stressed the importance of eliminating controls relating to the repatriation of dividends and profits by foreign investors. The authorities indicated that they were committed to further liberalizing exchange controls and would take the mission’s views into account in the upcoming regular review of exchange controls. 18. The staff has determined that some exchange control measures constitute restrictions under Article VIII. These restrictions consist of the monetary limit imposed upon the transferability by nonresidents of dividends abroad and the tax clearance certification requirements imposed on the transfer abroad of profits and dividends and the proceeds of airline ticket sales, and on the making of external debt and maintenance payments. The staff is in the process of seeking the information necessary to clarify the jurisdictional implications of several other measures including the rules governing the making of advance import payments. 19. The mission agreed that steps toward widening the margin of exchange rate flexibility around the peg and liberalization of remaining exchange controls should take place against a background of market confidence and supportive macroeconomic policies. In order to ensure that market expectations remain well anchored, fiscal and 7 Prior to establishment of a foreign exchange market in which the commercial banks, rather than the RESF, act as market-makers, appropriate risk management and foreign exchange dealing capacity will need to be put in place. Detailed advice in this regard is being provided to the RE3F under MAE technical assistance. 8 The RBF staff indicated that virtually all transactions are approved and processed within three days; many are cleared with a simple phone call; and transactions limits for many measures are rarely reached. Discussions with banks indicated that limits on repatriation of dividends and profits worked mainly to smooth outflows over a period of time, rather than to prevent them altogether. The main restrictions appear to be on capital transactions by residents. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- ll- monetary policies need to be fully consistent with the maintenance of exchange rate stability. In this context, the mission indicated that an early move to fiscal consolidation would signal clearly the authorities’ commitment to a sound fiscal strategy. It would also have a beneficial impact on the external current account and allow some build-up of reserves. Although Fiji’s official reserves amply cover its external debt obligations, a higher level of reserves would provide greater assurance that the RBF would be in a good position to defend the boundaries of the exchange rate band. C. Structural Measures 20. The mission emphasized that the public sector management and financial reforms are essential elements of the medium-term strategy to raise growth and achieve fiscal consolidation. Management reforms are needed to raise public sector productivity directly, as well as to free up resources for productive investment, while financial management reform is essential to ensure that budget priorities and constraints are translated into reality.’ The mission expressed particular concern that the first phase of the financial management reform-the implementation of an online financial monitoring system-is not scheduled for completion until well into 2003, and recommended that interim monitoring arrangements be put in place to improve financial control. The authorities agreed that implementation of reforms needed to be accorded greater urgency and assured the mission that action was being taken to accelerate progress. 21. The mission advised the authorities to continue with privatization of public enterprises. In 2001 and 2002, the government sold part of its holdings in Fiji’s monopoly supplier of telecommunications for the equivalent of 1’55 percent of GDP, reducing its shareholding to a little over one-third. Shares were sold to Fijian residents and the FNPF, which now owns over half of the enterprise. The planned sale of part of the government’s shareholding in Fiji’s third largest bank (with 10 percent of banking system deposits), however, has been postponed while the authorities consider an alternative buy-out offer made by a foreign bank. Beyond this sale, the authorities indicated that there were no immediate plans for further privatizations, as their priorities are to improve enterprise management and financial control within the public sector, before proceeding with an expanded privatization program. The mission emphasized that the authorities needed to recognize the limits on their ability to add value, especially with regard to management, and not delay privatization. 22. The mission encouraged the authorities to press ahead urgently with far- reaching reforms of the sugar industry. Sugar production and profitability in the industry have dropped sharply as leases of land under sugar cultivation have expired.” The contraction of the industry is already adversely affecting Fiji’s economic performance-it is 9 See “Reform of Public Financial Management, the Public Service, and the Public Enterprises” in the Selected Issues companion paper. lo See “Sugar Sector Issues” in the Selected Issues companion paper. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12- estimated that the shrinkage of the sector has cut average annual GDP growth by almost 3/ percentag e p oints since 2000. Moreover, migration of rural unemployed is adding to strains on Fiji’s urban infrastructure and social fabric. Resolution of the industry’s problems will require a breakthrough on contentious issues surrounding the leasing of native lands. In addition, the government’s extensive regulation of the industry needs to be overhauled in order to improve incentives and profitability. If these problems can be addressed and regulation eased, the mission estimates that recovery of the sugar sector could add an average of a l/2 percentage point to Fiji’s real growth rate over the next several years. 23. Fiji maintains extensive controls on prices. Controls apply to basic foods items, fuel, cigarettes, and a range of services including rents, education fees, and telecoms charges, and cover about one-third of the CPI by expenditure weight. A review of the Prices and Incomes Board in 2001 concluded that a fundamental refocusing of its role was appropriate. The mission recommended that the authorities substantially reduce controls as part of their efforts to increase economic efficiency. The authorities agreed that they would act on the recommendations of the review. 24. The mission proposed prompt simplification of the foreign direct investment approvals process, in line with the government’s commitment in the 2002 budget. The mission’s discussions with the private sector indicated that the complications and delay associated with obtaining approval from a range of different government departments is a significant deterrent to foreign investment. The authorities acknowledged that there had been legitimate complaints regarding the delays, and that they had been slow in addressing the problem, but indicated that changes in the relevant legislation were now being prepared. 25. Fiji has simplified its tariff structure, and is party to several bilateral, regional, and multilateral trade agreements. Since 1997, Fiji has reduced its top tariff rate from 35 percent to 27 percent. The number of tariff rate bands has been reduced from 7 in 1998 to 4 currently (0, 3, 10, and 27 percent). Partly as a result, average duty collections have fallen from 15 percent of the value of goods imports in 1998 to just under 11 percent in 200 1. The authorities are reviewing import licenses and quotas in order to ensure that they conform to WTO policies to eliminate such restrictions. Fiji participates in a number of preferential trade arrangements. The most important of these is the ACP Sugar Protocol under the Cotonou Agreement, which subsidizes Fijian sugar exports to the European Union. Fiji belongs to several regional groups, mainly aimed at providing preferential access for Pacific island countries to the Australian and New Zealand markets. 26. The quality, coverage, and timeliness of Fiji’s economic and financial statistics are fairly good. Fiji has received extensive Fund technical assistance over the years, from both headquarters and the Pacific Financial Technical Assistance Centre. The main areas for improvement on which the authorities are working are the timeliness of merchandise trade statistics; the framework for compiling external debt statistics; the coverage of nonbank financial institutions in the monetary statistics; the compilation of expenditure GDP in the national accounts; and the quality of labor market data. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13- D. Medium-Term Outlook 27. The mission endorsed the main elements of the authorities’ medium-term fiscal strategy. These include, in particular, a medium-term target of 40 percent for the central government debt/GDP ratio and raising the target share of government expenditure on investment to 30 percent. In the mission’s view, a credible commitment to these objectives would play a key role in promoting investor confidence. Substantial fiscal consolidation will be required to achieve these objectives (Table 7), including the establishment of a primary fiscal surplus for several years in order to lower the government debt/GDP ratio from its current level to the target level. In the mission’s medium-term scenario, increased public investment spending would be feasible through a combination of increases in tax revenues over their 2001 level of around 2 percentage points of GDP (of which l/2 percentage point is expected from improved tax compliance resulting from recruitment and training of tax collectors) by 2003 and cuts in current spending of roughly 4 percentage points of GDP by 2007. Reductions in current spending of this magnitude should be feasible through reduced wage costs resulting from public sector reforms and improved prioritization and efficiency in spending programs (particularly for rural development). 28. The mission emphasized the need to focus current spending more clearly on maximizing long-term productivity gains. In this context, the mission pointed to the need for a clearer strategy for rural and agricultural development, especially regarding the sugar sector. Secondly, the mission observed that provision of productivity-enhancing areas of education and health services should not be cut. Thirdly, the mission stressed the importance of reducing the costs of government through substantial improvements in efficiency in the public sector itself. 29. The mission also advised that revenue increases will be required to help finance the desired increases in public investment spending. In particular, the mission suggested that an increase in the VAT rate, from 10 percent currently to 12 percent, should be considered in preference to increasing direct taxes. The authorities observed that the reinstatement of VAT on basic items in 2001 had not been popular, but agreed that this option should not be ruled out in their 2003 budget planning. The mission indicated that the alternatives of even sharper cuts in current spending, or increases in income taxes, would be less conducive to growth and alleviation of poverty. 30. The mission estimated that higher public and private investment could raise the sustainable rate of growth of real GDP to around 3% percent. The gradual rise in the share of government spending on investment assumed in the medium-term scenario would boost public investment to 9 percent of GDP by 2007. The scenario also envisages a significant rise in private investment, particularly in the tourism, information technology, and natural resource sectors in response to improved public infrastructure, the easing of exchange controls, and improved business confidence resulting from fiscal consolidation. Total investment is thus projected to rise to an average of 15% percent of GDP in the 2002-06 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14- period, 3% percentage points above the 1996-2001 average.” Based on studies of the impact of investment on long-term growth, the mission estimates that this would be consistent with the sustainable growth rate of GDP rising to around 3% percent over the medium term.12 31. There are significant uncertainties surrounding the projection scenario. A key risk to the outlook is that the authorities will delay or only partially implement fiscal consolidation. With higher public debt as a result, the build-up of public investment would be impeded. Failure to pursue fiscal consolidation convincingly would also jeopardize liberalization of exchange controls, undermining the projected recovery of private investment. As a consequence, the pick-up in sustainable growth would be postponed. The second major area of uncertainty concerns the projected increase in sustainable growth. Uncertainty regarding Fiji’s political stability could lead to a less positive response of private investment, especially FDI, to fiscal consolidation and higher public investment. In addition, the impact of higher projected investment on the sustainable growth rate might be less than that assumed. In either case, sustainable growth would be lower, making it more difficult to achieve fiscal consolidation. For example, if the growth rate remained at around 2 percent of GDP, as in the past five years, rather than rising to 3% percent, while government spending remained at the levels assumed in this projection, then the government debt/GDP ratio, instead of declining to 40 percent, would continue to rise toward 50 percent. IV. STAFF APPRAISAL 32. The Fijian economy is recovering from the after-effects of the 2000 coup. The authorities deserve credit for prompt monetary and fiscal actions taken to contain the adverse economic effects of the crisis. Recovery in the tourism sector and expansionary fiscal policy have been the main drivers of the recovery to date. With the lifting of trade and aid sanctions late in 200 1, the recovery is becoming more broad-based. 33. Immediate action should be taken to cut the fiscal deficit in 2002. The staff estimates that the deficit could remain close to 6 percent of GDP, in the absence of corrective measures. This is unsustainable and will undermine efforts to rebuild foreign investor confidence in Fiji. It is also inappropriate in view of the expected strength of economic growth in 2002. The staff recommends that the deficit be reduced significantly, to around 3 percent of GDP in 2002, through a combination of cuts in wage costs and scaling back of new spending initiatives. 34. The staff regards the authorities’ monetary policy stance in 2002 as appropriate. With inflation pressures low and the level of official reserves adequate, the authorities’ emphasis on keeping interest rates low in order to support the economic recovery is warranted. Although the banking system experienced an increase in nonperforming loans ‘i Approximately half of the increase in private sector investment is assumed to be financed through FDI inflows and the other half through foreign borrowing. l2 See “Public Investment and Economic Growth” in the Selected Issues companion paper. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 15- during the recession in 2000, these have since declined, and the vulnerability of the banking system to an external shock is assessed as modest. 35. The staff endorses the continued pegging of the Fiji dollar to a basket of trading partner currencies, but also supports the cautious approach being taken toward increasing the flexibility of the exchange rate. The peg of the Fiji dollar has provided an important anchor for Fiji’s price performance and financial stability, and the currency is judged to be externally competitive. Somewhat greater exchange rate flexibility, however, will facilitate the removal of exchange controls and financial sector development. Consideration of a slight widening of the band for exchange rate movements is appropriate, and this will need to be accompanied by fiscal and monetary policies consistent with exchange rate stability, underscoring the need for fiscal consolidation. 36. Exchange controls should be liberalized and restrictions eliminated. The wide range of controls still in place is unhelpful to Fiji’s efforts to attract foreign investment, and many of these restrictions could be eliminated without risking disruptive capital flows. Moreover, as explained in paragraph 18, exchange restrictions subject to approval under Article VIII arise from the monetary limit imposed upon the transferability by nonresidents of dividends abroad and the tax clearance certification requirements imposed on the transfer abroad of profits and dividends and the proceeds of airline ticket sales, and on the making of external debt and maintenance payments. The staff does not recommend approval for the retention of these measures, and recommends that the authorities set a clear timetable for their elimination. 37. The staff endorses the authorities’ medium-term fiscal objectives of reducing the government debt/GDP ratio and raising the share of public spending on investment. To achieve these objectives, the staff recommends expenditure cuts and substantial increases in public sector efficiency. In addition, revenue increases will be needed to help finance the increase in public investment expenditure, and the authorities should consider an increase in the VAT rate. 38. Raising the economy’s sustainable growth rate will also require structural reforms. Public sector management and financial sector reforms need to be accelerated, as these will play an important role both in achieving fiscal consolidation and in raising public sector productivity. In the private sector, comprehensive restructuring of the sugar industry is urgent, including a resolution to the land issues. The staff encourages the authorities to persevere in their efforts to find workable solutions. In addition, the staff recommends prompt action by the authorities to simplify the investment approvals process, dismantle price controls, and eliminate distortionary import licenses and quotas. 39. Fiji’s economic and financial statistics are adequate for effective surveillance purposes. The staff endorses the authorities’ efforts to make further improvements in the areas of trade and external debt statistics, expenditure GDP data, and coverage of the monetary statistics. 40. The staff proposes that the next Article IV consultation be conducted on the 24- month cycle. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 16- Box 1: Political Developments in Fiji Background From 1874 to 1970, Fiji was a British colony. The traditional society of Fiji was maintained by protecting indigenous Fijians from being used as a labor force and by prohibiting sales of land owned by indigenous Fijians. During the colonial era, a large number of indentured workers were imported from India to work on sugar plantations. Their descendants now comprise 44 percent of Fiji’s population of 830,000. After independence in 1970, Fiji was governed for seventeen years by the Alliance Party (AP), backed mainly by indigenous Fijians. Following the 1987 elections, in which the AP lost office to a coalition of parties mainly backed by the ethnic Indian community, the government was overthrown in two military coups. Major Sitiveni Rabuka, the coup leader, revoked the constitution and declared the island a republic. After the reinstatement of civilian government (composed of only indigenous Fijians) and the introduction of a new constitution in 1990, Rabuka became prime minister in 1992. He was re-appointed prime minister in 1994, and promised to review the 1990 constitution, a process that culminated in the adoption of a new constitution in 1997. Although less discriminatory than the 1990 constitution, the 1997 constitution limits the political rights of non-indigenous peoples to a greater extent than did the pre-1987 constitution. Political Developments 1999-2002 The May 1999 election-the first under the new constitution-was won by the Fiji Labour Party (FLP), led by Mahendra Chaudhry, an ethnic Indian. Although the FLP won a majority, it formed a “People’s Coalition” with two parties backed by indigenous Fijians. The coalition shared nearly 70 percent of the total seats. In May 2000, the government was overthrown in a coup led by a Fijian nationalist, George Speight. In the ensuing crisis, Parliament was dissolved by the president, Speight was arrested, and the Fijian military installed an interim government led by Laisenia Qarase, an indigenous Fijian banker. Following the coup, various sanctions were applied to Fiji by the international community, including the freezing of technical and financial aid by most Commonwealth countries and the European Union and trade sanctions imposed by Australia and New Zealand. In March 200 1, the interim government was declared unconstitutional by the Supreme Court, and Qarase was re-appointed to lead a caretaker government until new elections were held in September 200 1. In the elections, Qarase’s new party, the Fijian United Party (SDL), won 31 seats in the 71-seat parliament, while the FLP, led by ousted Prime Minister Chaudhry, won 27 seats. To assure a parliamentary majority, the SDL formed a coalition government with the Conservative Alliance, a small, indigenous Fijian party. Subsequently, the constitutionality of the government was challenged by the FLP, on the grounds that the constitution requires the prime minister to offer ministerial positions to parties that occupy more than 10 percent of parliament seats. In February 2002, the Court of Appeal ruled that the FLP should be included in the government. Prime Minister Qarase has appealed the case, but it remains unclear when the Supreme Court will deliver a ruling. The international community has followed the political developments carefully to evaluate the timing for the lifting of sanctions. Although international observer teams validated the 2001 election, the challenge to the government’s constitutionality has impeded normalization of Fiji’s international relations. Australia lifted official sanctions in October 200 1, other Commonwealth countries waited until late December, and Fiji was allowed to attend the Commonwealth Heads of Government meeting in March 2002. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17- Box 2. Fiji: Exchange and Capital Controls, 1999-2002 On May 22,2000, the Reserve Bank of Fiji tightened its foreign exchange controls, with the stated objective of safeguarding official foreign exchange reserves in the wake of the coup. The measures affect current-account transactions and capital outflows. They include: l Suspension of offshore investments by the Fiji National Provident Fund (FNPF) and other resident non-bank linancial institutions (NBFIs), companies, and individuals; l Suspension of forward foreign exchange contracts of commercial banks; l Reduction in the number of classes of foreign currency transactions permitted to be executed by commercial banks without reference to the RBF (“delegated facilities”); l Lowering of the amounts up to which transactions under the remaining delegated facilities were permitted to be executed by commercial banks without reference to the RBF (“delegation limits”); and l Increased documentation and reporting requirements for all transactions. The measures introduced in May 2000 have been tine-tuned once, on June 22,2000, and eased four times, on September 4,2000, January 1 and July 19, 2001, and January 1,2002. Selected comparisons between exchange and capital controls in effect at the beginning of 1999 and at the beginning of 2002 are shown below. Bona fide transactions subject to case-by-case RBF (non- delegated) approval are generally granted such approval promptly, and the public is aware of this policy. Fiji: Exchange and Capital Controls, 1999-2002 Transaction Offshore portfolio & direct investment by residents Withdrawal of FDI Emigrant allowance Principal repayments Profit repatriation BoP classification Delegation limits January 1,1999 January 1,2002 Capital account Not delegated. FNPF restricted to Not delegated. FNPF restricted to F$50 mn in 1999, other NBFIs to F$10 mn in 2002, other NBFIs to F$l5 mn total, & individuals / F$l mn each, & individuals / companies to F$20,000 each companies to F$ZO,OOO each Capital account Not delegated Not delegated Capital account F$lOO,OOO per application F$SO,OOO per family Capital account F$lOO,OOO per application F$50,000 per contract IPD & capital F$lOO,OOO per application F$SO,OOO per company per annum accounts Insurance/reinsurance payments offshore Cancelled hotel booking refunds Travel allowance for Fiji nationals Advance import payments Payments for merchanted imports Non-factor services account Non-factor services account Non-factor services account Trade account Trade account No limit, subject to Insurance Act No limit, subject to Insurance Act No limit F$lOO,OOO per booking No limit F$lO,OOO per trip No limit F$l mn per invoice No limit F$l mn per invoice Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 18- Box 3. Fiji: Recent Exchange Rate Trends and Competitiveness Exchange Rate Trends The exchange rate of the Fiji dollar is pegged to a basket of the U.S., Australian, and New Zealand dollars; the Euro; and the Japanese yen. Weights are based on three-year moving averages of Fiji’s direction of trade, are reviewed annually, and are not published. On January 20, 1998, the Fiji dollar was devalued by 20 percent against the basket. Since then, Fiji’s nominal effective exchange rate has depreciated modestly, while its real effective rate has remained stable (Figure 5). Relative stability in Fiji’s effective exchange rate indices, however, has masked large differential movements in Fiji: Exchange Rates, February 199gMarch 2002 (Cumulative percent change) bilateral rates. In the period since Fiji’s devaluation, the Australian and New Zealand dollars-with a combined weight of about 50 percent in Fiji’s currency basket- have depreciated significantly vis-&vis the U.S. dollar. As a result, the Fiji dollar has appreciated against the Australian and New Zealand dollars in both nominal and real terms, and has depreciated against the U.S. dollar. A$:F$ 7.8 NZ$:F$ 13.3 LJS$:F$ -16.0 NEER -4.2 REER 0.1 Competitiveness Comparative price data at the aggregate level do not suggest that Fiji has suffered a significant loss of export Fiji: Merchandise Exports and Non-factor Service Receipts price competitiveness since its devaluation in (Annual percent change in U.S. dollars) January 1998. On the bilateral level, movements in cross rates have resulted in some loss of competitiveness vis-A-vis Australia and New Zealand, but these have been largely offset by competitiveness gains In their discussions with the mission on external-sector prospects, private-sector representatives uniformly emphasized non-price elements over exchange rates as key drivers of competitiveness. Several sectoral examples were cited. . Garments. Export orders slumped and buyer relationships were broken as trade sanctions affected the timeliness of Fijian deliveries to Australian and New Zealand markets. . Sugar. Years of under-investment in farm infrastructure and crushing and processing facilities have resulted in declining cane quality and sugar throughput. . Tourism. Arrivals were constrained by hotel bed and aircraft seat capacity in 1998-99 and by political Fiji: Current-Account Receipts, 2001 (In millions of U.S. dollars) Merchandise exports 445.1 Of which: garments 143.3 sugar 90.5 fish 42.2 gold 34.9 forestry products 19.3 Services 514.4 Of which: tourism 228.9 Transfers 162.7 Ofwhich: ELJ sugar transfers 57.9 Total lJ22.2 uncertainty more recently, with several large investment projects deferred or cancelled in the wake of the coup. Key themes that cut across all sectors included infrastructural bottlenecks, notably high-cost and erratic electricity and water supply; labor constraints, particularly in the skilled manpower segment; and political uncertainty, which was highlighted in all meetings as the single largest impediment to private-sector investment and export-oriented activity. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 19- FIGURE 1 FIJI ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE, 1986-2002 16 16 12 12 1996-2002 aver 8 8 4 4 0 0 -4- ,N, --4 -8 I , , I I I ( 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 -8 16 16 Consumer Price Inflation l4 _ (Annual percent change) - 14 12 - - 12 10 - - 10 8 - - 8 6 - - 6 4 - 2 - 19964002 average 0 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 O D Gross national saving I: Government saving - Gross investment - - - Private fured investment 10 10 0 0 -10 ’ 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 ’ -10 Source: Data provided by the Fiji authorities and staff estimates. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 20 - o- ( o- o- o- o- FIGURE 2 FIJI CENTRAL GOVERNMENT FINANCES, 1997-2002 II (In percent of GDP) hrrent Revenue m Income tax m VAT hs9 Import duties 0 Other current revenue 1997 1998 2001 2002 Overall Balance - Overall balance 21 m Domesticfinancing 0 Foreign financing I / I I I 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 -2 0 rota1 Outstanding Debt 5( 4( 30 20 10 0 0 Domestic 0 External r-l hrrent Expenditure m Wages and salaries m Interest m Subsidies and transfers 0 Goods and services -l--l 50 40 30 20 IO 0 Source: 2002 Budget and Reserve Bank of Fiji, Quarterly Review. 1/ Provisional data for 2001 and budget for 2002. 2/ Excludes privatization and National Bank of Fiji (NBF). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public20 15 IO 5 0 -5 -10 -15 50 40 30 20 10 0 -2l- FIGURE 3 FIJI MONETARY INDICATORS, 1997-2002 I/ Monetary Aggregates A Annual percentage change) I\ - Broad money -Domestic credit Of which.’ Private sector I I , I I 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 Liquidity Position of Commercial Banks 9 Liquid assets/loans & advances ratio - Vault cash and reserves/deposits ratio - - - Of3cial securities/deposits ratio ---------. & I I I I 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 I 20 IS IO 5 0 -5 -10 -15 i0 IO 30 ZO IO 3 Contribution to Broad Money Growth (In percent of broad money) 30 ( I 20 IO 0 7 -10 -20 I IS - 1 ( 1 13 - 11 - 9- 8- 6- 4- 2- 0- - Broad money 21 m Domestic credit 0 Netforeign assets I I I I I 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 IO 10 10 0 -10 -20 hterest Rates - Reserve Bank rate - Money market rate - - - Treasury bill rate -Deposit rate -- Lending rate tn percent per annum, end of period) 13 1 11 \ \ \ \ \ -9 -. .N-- ----_ w-e-_ -8 I I I I I 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 ‘0 Sources: IMF, International Financial Statistics and Money and Banking database; and Reserve Bank of Fiji, Quarterly Review. l/ For 2002, data are as of the first quarter of 2002. 2/ Annual percentage change. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 22 - 60 40 20 a -20 I- , - - I- FIGURE 4 FIJI EXTERNAL DEVELOPMENTS, 1997-2002 I/ (In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated) Trade Statistics Merchandise imports. Jo.b./ (left scale) --- ,,-- -. ----_ --w-,0 - rrade balance (left scale) I I I I I 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 External Debt and Debt Service - Debt service 3/ (right scale) 0 External debt (left scale) 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 3 10 5 0 , -5 IO -lC External Balance - Overall balance L-l 0 Current account balance a Capital account balance 21 I I I I I 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 6% million Months 12 460 Gross Reserves - Gross reserves 4/ (right scale) n Gross resenes (7eft scale) IO 420 - 380 - 260 - Source: IMF, International Financial Statistics; and 2002 Budget and Reserve Bank of Fiji, Quarterly Review. I/ Data for 2002 are the authorities’projections. 2/ Includes errors and omissions. 3/ In percent of exports of goods and services. 4/ In months of imports of goods (f.o.b.) and services; adjusted for re-exports. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 23 - FIGURE 5 FIJI EXCHANGE RATE DEVELOPMENTS, 1997-2002 I/ 0.85 0.85 U.S. Dollars per National Currency 0.60 0.60 0.35J A J 0 J A J 0 J A J 0 J A J 0 J A J 0 J A s ’ ’ 0.35 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 140 120 100 80 60 Bilateral Real Exchange Rates (Based on Relative CPIs; Jan 1997=100) - Australia/Fiji --- New Zealand/Fiji - USA/Fiji --- Japan/Fiji IA J 0 J A J 0 J A .I 0 J A J 0 J A J 0 J 97 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 19 110 Effective Exchange Rates (Jan 1997=100) 105 i I A \ -\ /,/-_4 ----.____ Nominal --__ I ’ L)-.-,--.-/- -I 75JAJ 0 JA J 0 JA J 0 J AJ 0 J A J 0 J 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 140 120 100 80 60 Sources: IMF, International Financial Statistics; Information Notice System; and Fund staff calculations. l/The most recent devaluation took place in January 1998 by 20 percent. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 24 - Table 1. Fiji: Selected Economic Indicators, 1997-2003 Nominal GDP (2001): US$l,686 million Population (2001): 829,881 GDP per capita (2001): USS2,032 Quota: SDR 70.3 million 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 Prcl. Est. Proj Output and prices (percent change) Real GDP (at constant factor cost) Sugar cane production Tourist arm& Consumer prices (average) Consumer prices (end of period) Savings and investment (percent of GDP) Gross national savings Gross domestic investment Foreign savings Central government budget (percent of GDP) Revenue and grants of which: privatization Total expenditure I/ of which, capital li Overall balance Underlying balance I/ Debt outstanding Money and credit (percent change) Domestic credit Government (net) Official entitles Private sector Broad money (M2) Velocity Balance of payments (US% mn.) Exports, Eo.b. Imports, Eo.b. Net nonfactor services and transfers Net factor income Cm-rent account balance (In percent of GDP) Capital account balance 2/ Errors and omissions Overall balance Gross official reserves (USS mn.; end of period) 361 386 (In months of imports) 31 3.5 4.8 External debt (US$ mn.; end ofperiod) 41 (In percent of GDP) vices) Debt service (US$ mn.) 41 (In percent of exports of goods and nonfactor se, 227 225 10.7 13.6 41 42 3.3 4.4 Real effective rate (average) 51 Exchange Rate (F$ per US%; end of period) 61 112.2 1.55 93.0 1.99 -0.9 1.4 9.7 -2.8 2.6 4.4 5.2 -23.5 -26.3 41.6 -7.5 -12.5 -8.9 -1.1 5.9 33 10.4 -28.3 18.3 8.6 10 0 3.4 5.9 2.0 1.1 4.3 2.4 2.5 2.9 8.3 0.2 3.0 2.3 2.5 2.5 13.0 14 8 8.0 6.3 10.3 10.9 13.0 11.3 15.2 120 12.4 12.7 13.8 14 2 -1.6 0.3 4.1 6.1 2.4 2.9 1 1 26.3 34.8 27.4 26.7 23.5 24.5 23.5 0.0 8.5 0.6 0.0 0.0 1.9 0.0 32.9 30.2 28.0 30.0 29.9 30.6 26.8 8.7 4.7 4.7 4.3 5.3 69 4.8 -6.6 4.6 -0.6 -3.3 -6.5 -6.1 -3.3 -2.4 -3.9 -1.2 -3.3 -6.5 -8.0 -3.3 44.3 39.8 36.9 42.0 43.8 47.4 48.4 -10.1 -5.3 1.2 19.5 -2.5 4.1 9.8 -13.4 -32.6 -45.9 2131.7 65.5 18.4 11.0 12.8 -6.1 -11.2 1.1 -13.5 6.8 7.5 -13.0 -4.9 3.4 14.9 -5.6 2.2 9.9 -8.7 -0.3 14.2 -2.1 -3.1 2.2 7.5 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.3 2.6 2.7 2.7 557 423 532 515 445 416 524 819 615 774 707 680 707 760 369 268 267 126 221 243 $269 -72 -82 -100 -32 -25 -63 1-53 35 -6 -16 -98 -40 -51 .- -20 1.6 -0.3 -4.1 -6.1 -2.4 -2.9 ,-I.1 -20 78 87 105 36 57 37 -43 -39 39 40 -16 0 0 -28 34 50 47 -20 6 17 429 4.3 270 14.5 40 3.4 93.3 1.97 410 367 372 389 4.5 4.2 4.0 3.9 242 236 253 261 15.1 14.0 14 7 14.7 31 23 25 27 3.2 2.5 2.6 2.5 91.9 92.7 93.1 2.19 2.31 2.14 Sources: Reserve Bank of Fiji, Quarterly Review ; Mimstry of Finance and National Planning, 2002 Budget; and Fund staff estimates I/ Excludes National Bank ofFiji restructuring costs, and privatization receipts. 21 Excludes errors and omissions. 31 Imports of goods, fo.b., and nonfactor services. 41 Medium- or long-term debt. 51 &IF, Information Notice System Index, 1999=100. Figure for 2002 is for January-March. 61 Figure for 2002 is for end-May. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-25 - Table 2. Fiji: Output and Expenditure, 1997-2002 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 Prel. Est. Real GDP (at constant factor cost) Agriculture Sugar Nonsugar agriculture Of which: subsistence Manufacturing Nonsugar manufacturing Electricity and water Building and construction Distribution (incl. tourism) Wholesale and retail trade Hotels, cafes, etc. Transportation and communications Finance and insurance Nominal GDP (at current market prices) 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 Final Consumption 88.7 87.3 84.9 81.0 87.8 86.9 Private 11 12.1 69.8 68.9 63.1 71.4 71.4 Government 16.6 17.5 16.0 17.9 16.4 15.5 Gross capital formation Fixed Investment Public Private Change in stocks 11.3 15.2 12.0 12.4 12.7 13.8 10.0 14.5 10.9 11.2 11.7 12.8 6.4 10.7 6.1 7.3 7.5 8.5 3.7 3.8 4.9 3.9 4.2 4.3 1.3 0.7 1.1 1.2 1.0 1.0 Net exports Exports of goods and nonfactor services Imports of goods and nonfactor services 0.0 -2.5 3.1 6.6 -0.5 -0.7 57.7 56.0 57.7 59.6 60.5 61.1 57.7 58.5 54.6 52.9 60.9 61.8 National savings 13.0 14.8 8.0 6.3 10.3 10.9 Public 1.9 0.5 2.9 0.6 -1.3 1.9 Private 11.1 14.4 5.1 5.1 11.6 8.9 Foreign savings -1.6 0.3 5.9 4.1 2.0 6.1 2.4 2.9 Memorandum item: Consumer prices (percent change; average) -0.9 -13.0 -23.5 -5.7 1.4 -0.8 5.8 (Annual percent change at constant 1989 prices) 1.4 9.7 -2.8 2.6 -7.2 16.1 -1.2 -2.4 -26.3 41.6 -7.5 -12.5 3.7 5.8 2.2 2.6 0.9 1.1 1.1 1.4 4.8 9.6 -6.2 1.8 11.3 5.3 -6.1 3.6 3.4 9.9 -2.5 3.5 14.5 5.5 -11.4 3.0 6.2 10.0 3.5 6.4 5.9 10.1 9.5 5.0 1.4 9.6 -23.8 16.0 5.8 15.8 -10.9 6.1 -0.6 7.3 -1.9 -0.8 (As a percent of GDP at current market prices) 2.6 7.3 2.5 2.2 4.1 4.6 -7.1 3.4 1.1 4.3 2.4 4.4 0.4 -4.0 -0.9 1 .o 1.2 -0.9 5.1 5.4 4.9 5.0 4.6 5.4 0.5 Sources: Fiji Islands Bureau of Statistics; and Fund staff estimates. l/ Includes statistical discrepancy. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 26 - Table 3. Fiji: Central Government Finances, 1997-2002 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 Total revenue and grants 803 Tax revenue 665 Non-tax revenue 134 Of which: privatization 0 Grants 5 1141 724 415 280 3 Expenditure 1006 Current 740 Of which: wages and salaries 355 interest 99 Capital 266 Investment 87 Grants and transfers 178 Of which: NBF 129 1149 1255 946 913 441 437 100 118 202 283 126 190 76 93 0 0 Overall balance -202 Underlying balance (excl. privatization and NBF) -73 Primary balance -103 Primary balance (exckprivatization and NBF) 26 (In millions of Fiji dollars) 1005 911 789 713 214 196 20 0 2 1 1028 1024 854 877 403 429 97 96 174 147 121 96 53 51 0 0 -23 -113 -44 -113 74 -18 53 -18 24 113 32 125 -30 -18 (As a percent of GDP) 901 1004 740 771 160 231 0 76 0 2 990 835 383 114 156 103 52 0 151 -129 264 -15 -248 -252 -248 -328 -148 -134 -148 -210 Financing 202 Domestic 182 Foreign -7 -151 -123 -13 248 252 142 234 -10 17 Total revenue and grants 26.3 34.8 27.4 26.7 23.5 24.5 Tax revenue 21.7 22.1 21.5 20.9 19.3 18.8 Non-tax revenue 4.4 12.6 5.8 5.8 4.2 5.6 Of which: privatization 0.0 8.5 0.6 0.0 0.0 1.9 Grants 0.2 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 Expenditure 32.9 30.2 28.0 30.0 29.9 30.6 Current 24.2 25.4 23.3 25.7 24.6 23.7 Of which: wages and salaries 11.6 11.7 11.0 12.6 11.5 10.7 interest 3.2 3.5 2.6 2.8 2.6 2.9 Capital 8.7 4.7 4.7 4.3 5.3 6.9 Investment 2.9 3.2 3.3 2.8 3.3 4.6 Grants and transfers 5.8 1.6 1.4 1.5 2.0 2.3 Of which: NBF 4.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Overall balance -6.6 4.6 -0.6 -3.3 -6.5 -6.1 Underlying balance (excl. privatization and NBF) -2.4 -3.9 -1.2 -3.3 -6.5 -8.0 Primary Balance -3.4 8.1 2.0 -0.5 -3.8 -3.3 Primary Balance (exckprivatization and NBF) 0.9 -0.5 1.5 -0.5 -3.8 -5.1 Financing 6.6 4.6 0.6 3.3 6.5 6.1 Domestic 6.0 -3.7 0.9 3.7 3.7 5.7 Foreign -0.2 -0.4 -0.8 -0.5 -0.3 0.4 Memorandum items: Central government debt Domestic External 44.3 39.8 36.9 41.9 43.8 47.4 37.8 32.3 31.7 36.1 38.6 41.7 6.5 7.5 5.2 5.9 5.2 5.6 Source: Ministry of Finance and National Planning, 2002 Budget and various updates; and Fund staff estimates. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 27 - Table 4. Fiji: Monetary Survey, 1997-2002 1997 1998 1999 2000 Mar 2001 Jun Sep Dee 2002 Mar (In millions of Fiji dollars; end of period) Net foreign assets 505 822 922 Domestic credit 1188 1124 1137 Claims on government (net) 9 6 3 Claims on official entities 165 154 137 Claims on private sector 1014 964 997 Broad money (M2) 1359 1354 1546 Narrow money (Ml ) 445 494 694 Of which: Currency outside banks 134 160 190 Quasi-money li 913 860 852 Reserve Bank notes 150 208 201 Other items (net) 184 384 312 Domestic credit -10.1 -5.3 1.2 Claims on official entities 12.8 -6.1 -11.2 Claims on private sector -13.0 4.9 3.4 Broad money (M2) -8.7 -0.3 14.2 Narrow money (Ml) -2.4 10.9 40.6 Quasi-money -11.5 -5.8 -1 .o Net foreign assets -1.5 23.3 7.4 -6.1 -6.8 -6.1 -3.7 -8.0 4.2 Domestic credit -9.0 4.7 1 .o 14.3 5.8 0.8 4.1 -2.5 -3.1 Memorandum items: Money velocity (M2) 21 2.2 Money multiplier (M2) 3/ 5.2 Reserve money (12-month percent change) 5.0 Liquid assets (in percent of deposits) 4/ 30.6 Deposit interest rate (in percent; end of period) 51 2.7 Loan interest rate (in percent; end of period) 6/ 10.2 Net foreign assets (US$ mn.) 326 828 737 714 1359 1433 1387 74 126 141 139 156 132 1146 1151 1113 1514 1504 1466 594 619 598 163 170 172 920 885 868 312 349 353 301 317 282 (12-month percent change) 19.5 5.8 0.8 1.1 21.3 6.1 14.9 -2.3 -6.9 -2.1 2.3 1.9 -14.5 8.2 12.1 8.0 -1.2 4.4 730 762 706 1360 1325 1389 130 123 168 128 120 113 1103 1082 1108 1466 1467 1499 595 621 640 173 182 182 870 846 859 326 321 297 299 298 299 -4.1 -2.5 -3.1 -10.0 -13.5 -27.8 -6.3 -5.6 -3.7 -1.4 -3.1 -0.4 4.1 4.4 3.5 -5.0 -8.4 -3.1 (12month change as a percent of M2 at beginning of period) 2.4 2.6 2.3 . 4.9 3.6 4.3 4.6 4.5 4.3 6.3 56.8 -18.9 17.8 15.2 8.6 27.7 32.0 26.1 23.2 23.5 26.1 1.8 1.4 1.2 0.8 0.8 0.8 9.1 9.1 8.7 8.5 8.4 8.3 414 469 379 316 306 313 2.6 . 3.5 3.9 19.3 18.8 30.1 27.9 0.8 0.7 8.2 8.2 330 311 - Sources: IMF, Economic Information System; and Reserve Bank of Fiji, Quarterly Review. l/ Includes capital accounts. 2/ Ratio of GDP to average M2. 3/ Ratio of M2 to reserve money. 4/ Commercial banks’ vault cash, unremunerated deposits with monetary authorities, and holdings of government and official entity securities. 5/ On savings deposits. 6/ Weighted average rate charged by commercial banks on loans. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 28 - Table 5. Fiji: Balance of Payments, 1997-2002 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 Prel. Est. 11 Trade balance -262 -192 -242 -192 Exports, f.o.b. 557 423 532 515 Of which: garments 169 154 164 157 sugar 148 124 134 112 gold 51 36 39 36 Imports, fkb. 819 615 774 707 Of which: mineral fuels 136 80 139 140 Services and income, net 224 95 103 37 93 74 Nonfactor services (net) 296 177 203 69 118 112 Of which: travel earnings 317 248 289 199 233 247 Factor income -72 -82 -100 -32 -25 -38 Transfers (net) Private Official Of which: EU sugar transfers Current account Capital (net) -20 78 87 105 36 28 Official -5 22 54 -11 -11 I Other -8 -15 72 95 15 4 Commercial banks -1 12 1 -11 16 2 Trade credit -7 -27 71 106 -1 2 Direct investment -7 70 40 21 32 24 Errors and omissions -43 Overall balance -28 Trade balance -12.4 Current account balance 1.6 Overall balance -1.3 External debt 2/ 10.7 Debt-service ratio 3/ 3.3 Memorandum items: External debt (US$ mn.) 21 Gross offkial reserves (USS mn.) (In months of impotis) 41 73 91 63 57 103 105 -11 -7 -11 -12 41 41 84 98 74 69 62 64 56 83 63 64 58 55 35 227 225 270 242 236 232 361 386 429 410 367 346 3.5 4.8 4.3 4.5 4.2 3.7 (In millions of U.S. dollars) -235 -23 1 445 476 143 91 35 680 707 128 -6 -76 -98 -40 -51 -39 34 39 50 40 47 -16 2 -20 -21 (As a percent of GDP) -11.6 -13.0 -11.9 -0.3 -4.1 -6. I 2.0 2.7 2.9 13.6 14.5 15.1 4.4 3.5 3.2 -13.9 -13.2 -2.4 -2.9 -1.2 -1.2 14.0 13.3 2.5 2.4 Sources: Fiji Islands Bureau of Statistics; Reserve Bank of Fiji; and Fund staff estimates. l/ Authorities’ estimates. 21 Total medium- or long-term debt. 3/ In percent of exports of goods and nonfactor services. 4/ Imports of goods, f.o.b., and nonfactor services. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 29 - Table 6. Fiji: Indicators of Financial and External Vulnerability, 1997-2002 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 Est. Financial indicators Central government debt (in percent of GDP) 44.3 39.8 36.9 42.0 Public sector debt (in percent of GDP) l! 60.6 64.5 57.6 76.5 Broad money (M2) (12-month percent change) -8.7 -0.3 14.2 -2.1 Private-sector credit (12-month percent change) -13.0 -4.9 3.4 14.9 91-day Treasury bill rate (in percent; average) 2/ 2.6 2.0 2.0 3.6 Real 9 1 -day Treasury bill rate (in percent; average) 2/ 31 -0.8 -3.9 0.0 2.5 Gross nonperforming loans (as a percent of total loans) 41 5/ 6.2 3.1 3.4 7.1 Capital-adequacy ratio (in percent) 4/ 6/ 12.1 11.8 10.3 11.5 Foreign currency-denominated loans (as a percent of total loans) 41 4.4 0.2 0.3 0.2 Foreign currency-denominated deposits (as a percent of total deposits) 4/ 9.5 7.7 10.8 9.0 Foreign currency-denominated liabilities (as a percent of total liabilities) 41 7.6 7.9 10.0 7.0 Private-sector credit collateralized by real estate (as a percent of total loans) 4/ 18.7 19.5 22.5 24.6 43.8 47.4 72.4 -3.1 2.2 -5.6 2.2 1.5 1.7 -2.8 6.5 16.0 0.3 10.0 8.8 26.0 External indicators Merchandise exports, Eo.b. (12-month percent change in US$) Merchandise imports, f.o.b. (12-month percent change in US$) Terms of trade (12-month percent change) Trade balance (as a percent of GDP) Current account balance (as a percent of GDP) Capital and financial account balance (as a percent of GDP) Of which: Foreign direct investment (as a percent of GDP) -14.3 -24.1 25.8 -3.1 -13.6 6.2 -2.6 -24.9 25.9 -8.7 -3.8 3.2 1.5 -4.5 -7.9 -2.1 1.1 3.8 -12.4 -11.6 -13.0 -11.9 -13.9 -13.3 1.6 -0.3 -4.1 -6.1 -2.4 -3.0 -0.9 4.7 4.7 6.5 2.1 3.3 -0.3 4.3 -2.1 1.3 1.9 1.3 Gross official reserves (USS mn.) 361 386 429 410 Adjusted gross official reserves (US$ mn.) 7/ 361 386 429 410 Monetary authorities short-term external liabilities (USS mn.) 0 0 0 0 Commercial banks short-term external assets (US$ mn.) 89 136 200 81 Commercial banks short-term external liabilities (USS mn.) 114 98 153 110 367 372 367 372 0 84 117 Adjusted official reserves (in months of imports) 81 3.5 4.8 4.3 4.5 4.2 Broad money (M2) (as a percent of adjusted reserves) 2.6 1.8 1.8 1.7 1.8 Short-term external debt (as a percent of adjusted reserves) 91 54.4 39.7 50.7 47.4 45.6 Short-term external debt (as a percent of adjusted reserves) 101 64.0 48.1 56.6 51.9 50.5 Total external debt (as a percent of GDP) 20.0 22.9 26.1 27.2 23.9 Total external debt (as a percent of exports) 1 I/ 33.7 39.8 42.5 44.7 43.4 External interest payments (as a percent of exports) 1 l/ 121 0.7 0.8 0.6 0.6 0.5 External amortization payments (as a percent of exports) 1 li 121 2.6 3.6 2.8 2.6 2.0 Exchange rate (F$ per US$; average) 13/ 1.44 1.99 1.97 2.13 2.28 REER (12-month percent change) 14/ 4.9 -17.1 0.3 -1.5 0.5 4.0 1.7 0.5 2.3 2.14 0.7 Sources: Fiji authorities; and Fund staff estimates. li Excludes local government debt. 2/ Figure for 2002 is end-March actual. 3/ Nominal yield on 91day Treasury bills less CPI inflation. 4/ Commercial banks only. 5/ Recognised at 90 days past due. 6/ Tier I and tier II capital as a percent of risk-weighted assets. 7/ Excludes illiquid or encumbered reserves. 81 Imports of goods, f.o.b., and nonfactor services. 9/By original maturity. lO/ By residual maturity. 1 l/ Exports of goods, f.o.b., and nonfactor services. 12/ On medium- or long-term debt. 131 Figure for 2002 is end-May actual. 14/ Calculated from IMF Information Notice System Index, 1990 =lOO. Figure for 2000 is for January-March. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 30 - Table 7. Fiji: Medium-Term Adjustment Scenario, 1998-2007 (As a percent of GDP, unless otherwise noted) 1998 1999 2000 Prel. 2001 2002 2003 ProjectIons 2004 2005 2006 2007 Output and prices (percent change) Real GDP (at constant factor cost) Consumer prices (average) Savings and investment National savings Public l/ Private Gross Investment Of which: public fixed investment private fixed investment Foreign savings Central government budget Total revenue and grants Total expenditure and net lending Capital expenditure (As a percent of total expenditure) Current expenditure Of which: interest payments Overall balance Underlying balance 21 Primary balance Debt outstanding Balance of Payments Exports, f.o.b. (percent change) Imports, fo.b. (percent change) Trade balance Services, transfers and factor income (net) Current account balance Capital account balance Errors and omissions Overall balance Memorandum items: Gross official reserves (US$ mn.) (In months of imports) 3/ Medium- or long-term external debt Debt service (as a percent of exports) 41 1.4 9.7 -2.8 2.6 3.7 5.2 2.0 3.0 3.2 3.3 5.9 2.0 1.1 4.3 2.4 2.5 2.5 2.5 2.5 2.5 14.8 8.0 6.3 10.3 10.3 13.5 14.8 15.9 16.8 17.8 0.5 2.9 0.6 -1 3 3.7 1.9 1.2 0.8 0.5 0.5 14.4 5.1 5.7 11.6 6.6 11.6 13.6 15.0 16.3 17.2 15.2 12.0 12.4 12.7 13.2 14.6 15.5 16.3 16.8 17.3 10.7 6.1 7.3 7.5 7.7 7.8 8.1 8.4 8.7 90 3.8 4.9 3.9 4.2 4.5 57 6.4 6.8 7.0 7.3 0.3 4.1 6.1 2.4 3.0 1.1 08 0.4 0.0 -0.4 34.8 27.4 26.7 23.5 24.5 25.3 25.2 25.2 25.2 25.2 30.2 28.0 30.0 29.9 27.7 26.7 25.9 25.5 25.4 25.3 4.7 47 4.3 5.3 5.7 5.8 6.3 6.7 7.2 7.6 15 7 16.9 14.4 17.6 20.6 21.7 24.2 26.3 28.2 30.0 2s 4 23.3 25.7 24.6 22.0 20.9 19.6 18.8 18.3 17.7 3.5 2.6 2.8 2.6 2.9 3.0 2.9 2.9 2.8 2.8 4.6 -0.6 -3.3 -6.5 -3.2 -1.4 -0 7 -0.3 -0.2 -0.2 -3 9 -1.2 -3.3 -6.5 -5.1 -1.4 -0.7 -0.3 -0.2 -0.2 8.1 2.0 -0.5 -3.8 -0.3 1.5 2.2 2.6 2.6 2.6 39.8 36.9 42.0 43.8 44.7 43.9 43.7 42.7 41.6 40.4 -24.1 25.8 -3.1 -13.6 6.2 10.1 5.4 6.9 7.3 7.4 -24.9 25.9 -8.7 -3.8 3.2 7.5 5.3 6.7 7.1 1.1 -11.6 -13.0 -11.9 -13.9 -13.3 -11.9 -11.9 .12.0 -12.1 -12.1 113 8.9 5.9 11.6 10.3 10.8 11.2 11.6 12.1 12.5 -0.3 -4.1 -6.1 -2.4 -3.0 -1.1 -0.8 -0.4 0.0 0.4 4.7 4.7 6.5 2.1 3.3 3.3 3.3 3.3 3.3 3.3 -2.3 2.1 2.5 -1.0 0.0 00 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 2.0 2.7 2.9 -1.2 0.4 2.2 2.6 2.9 33 3.7 386 429 410 367 373 412 459 514 $8 655 48 4.3 4.5 42 4.0 4.2 4.4 4.6 4.8 5.1 13.6 14.5 15.1 14.0 14 8 15.4 16.4 17.2 17.9 18.5 4.4 3.4 3.2 2.5 2.6 2.6 2.8 29 3.0 3.0 Sources: Data prowded by Fgi authorities, and Fund staff estimates. l/ Defined as current revenue less current expenditure. Note that budget revenue is classified into current and capital revenue, as is budget expenditure. 21 Excludes National Bank of Fiji restructurmg costs, and privatization receipts. 31 Imports of goods, fo.b., and nonfactor services. 4/Experts of goods, f.o.b., and nonfactor services. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3l- ANNEX I I. II. III. IV. V. VI. VII. FIJI: FUNDRELATIONS As of June 30,2002 A. Financial Relations Membership Status: Joined: 05/28/7 1; Article VIII General Resources Account: Quota Fund holdings of currency Reserve position in Fund SDR Department: Net cumulative allocation Holdings Outstanding Purchases and Loans: None SDR million % Quota 70.30 100.0 55.30 78.7 15.00 21.3 SDR million % Allocation 6.96 100.0 4.91 70.6 Financial Arrangements: None Projected Obligations to Fund: None B. Nonfinancial Relations Exchange Rate Arrangements Since April 1975, the exchange rate of the Fiji dollar has been linked to a basket of Fiji’s five major trading-partner currencies: the U.S., Australian, and New Zealand dollars; the pound sterling (replaced by the Euro at the beginning of 2000); and the Japanese yen. The weights in the basket are based on a three-year moving average of Fiji’s direction of trade, are reassessed annually, and are not publicly disclosed. Reserve Bank of Fiji (RBF) buying and selling rates for U.S. dollars are determined and communicated to commercial banks daily. The Fiji dollar was devalued by 20 percent against the basket on January 20, 1998. Nominal and real effective rates have remained broadly stable in the period since then. The exchange rate was F$2.11 per U.S. dollar on July 19,2002. Exchange and capital controls were tightened significantly on May 22,2000, but have been eased on four subsequent occasions. There remain quantitative restrictions in Fiji dollars on offshore portfolio and direct investments by the Fiji National Provident Fund and other resident nonbank financial institutions, companies, and individuals, and payments for items ranging from merchandise imports to dividends to debt service are subject to case-by-case approval by the RBF when in excess of specified threshold amounts in Fiji dollars. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 32 - ANNEX I VIII. Last Article IV Consultation The 1998 Article IV consultation discussions were held in Suva during June 15-27, 1998. The consultation (SM/98/2 16 and SM/98/2 17) was completed by the Executive Board on September 14, 1998. The 2000 Article IV consultation was postponed as a result of domestic political instability. Fiji is on a 24-month cycle with the concurrence of the authorities. IX. Technical Assistance from Headquarters FAD: Assistance on mineral taxation, May 1994. Assistance on corporate income tax and tax incentives reform, March-April 1995. MAE: Long-term policy advisor with the Reserve Bank of Fiji, July 1993-November 1996. Assistance on monetary management, money and securities markets, and foreign exchange operations, September 1994. Assistance on bank supervision and monetary management, February 1996. Assistance on exchange rate arrangement and capital account liberalization, November 1997. Assistance on bank supervision, August 1998-August 1999. Assistance on insurance sector supervision, March 2002. STA: Balance of payments and national accounts long-term expert, January 1994-February 1997. Balance of payments long-term expert, June 1997-June1999. Assistance on GDDS metadata development, July 1998. Multisector statistics advisor, October 1999-October 2002. Assistance on multisector statistics, January 2002. X. Resident Representative: None. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-33 - ANNEX II FIJI: RELATIONS WITH THE PACIFIC FINANCIAL TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE CENTRE’ The Centre’s assistance to Fiji since 1996 has included 24 advisory missions, especially with regard to public financial management and tax administration, often in conjunction with other technical assistance providers, and a large number of informal contacts. The Centre has also arranged for various government institutions in Fiji to regularly host for training officials on attachment from other Pacific island countries. Public Financial Management Recent advice from the Centre has concentrated on assessing the New Zealand-inspired Public Finance Management Act 1999 and the scope and format for achieving its principal objectives, with appropriate prioritization and sequencing of reform in light of limited capacity and skills, as well as on training needs. In addition, in 2002, the Centre conducted a full evaluation of public financial management against domestic needs and the key principles of the Code of Good Practices on Fiscal Transparency and recommended that top priority be given to strengthening internal controls. Tax Administration and Policy Following the introduction of a value added tax in July 1992, the Centre assisted the administration with several issues of its effective implementation, including the preparation of guidelines/handbooks and training in recovery procedures and audits. The Centre also complemented the large technical assistance programs of Australia and New Zealand on tax and customs reform, including the establishment of an Investigation and Intelligence Section. Financial Sector Regulation and Supervision The presence of the Centre in the Reserve Bank of Fiji building and the close contacts with RBF management and staff have made assistance to Fiji in this area a mostly informal matter, focused mainly on functions of the supervision department and on staffing and training needs. Moreover, RBF staff and the Centre have often worked closely together on staging regional events on banking regulation and supervision. Economic and Financial Statistics Initial assistance of the Centre in this area focused on technical issues related to the establishment of current and constant price national accounts data. More recently, at the authorities’ request, the Centre assisted with the preparation of a comprehensive assessment of statistics operations in the country and the development of a multi-year action plan to strengthen both the organization and content of statistics. i The Pacific Financial Technical Assistance Centre (PFTAC) in Suva, Fiji, is a multi-donor technical assistance institution, financed by the IMF, the UNDP, the AsDB, AusAID and NZODA, with the IMF as Executing Agency. The Centre’s aim is to build skills and institutional capacity for effective economic and financial management that can be sustained at the national level. Member countries are: Cook Islands, Federated States of Micronesia, Fiji, Kiribati, Marshall Islands, Nauru, Niue, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tokelau, Tonga, Tuvalu, and Vanuatu. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 34 - ANNEX III FIJI: RELATIONS WITH THE WORLD BANK GROUP’ (As of June 13,2002) To date the World Bank has provided 13 loans totaling $143.3 million (net of cancellations). There are no Bank-supported lending projects under implementation or in the pipeline at present. There is a significant list of possible economic and sector work that has been identified by the authorities. The country office has offered to work with the authorities to expedite a review of these proposals. In addition, as part of the Bank’s work on commodity risk, the Fiji sugar industry was identified as a possible case study for market-based approaches to commodity price risk management. IFC has two venture loan investments in Fiji, $350,000 in Solander (Pacific) Fiji Limited, and $3.9 million in Outrigger Reef Resort. Solander continues to perform well, but Outrigger has been substantially impacted by the events of May 2000. The Foreign Investment Advisory Service is assisting the government in reviewing existing tax concessions, import duty concessions, and other incentives. An initial report has been prepared. A new pipeline of assistance is feasible through the Sydney-based South Pacific Project Facility: Foreign Investment Advisory Service An investment incentives overhaul was essentially completed in early 2000. Assistance with implementation has occurred through the introduction of a Duty Suspension Scheme (DSS) for exporters in January 2002. Further assistance with the fine-tuning of the DSS is anticipated. Global Development Learning Network Initial conceptual and technical discussions took place on establishing a distance learning center within the University of the South Pacific (USP) in June 2000. USP is currently discussing possible financing and content arrangements with the Bank and with AusAID. Fiji: World Bank Group Financial Operations (In millions of U.S. dollars) ” 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 Loan Approvals 39.3 0 0 0 0 0 0 Loan Disbursements 17.7 6.6 4.2 2.6 3.2 1 0 Balance Undisbursed 21.6 15 10.8 8.2 5 4 0 l! Bank calendar year. ’ Prepared by World Bank staff. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-35 - ANNEX IV FIJI: RELATIONS WITH THE ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (As of May 28,2002) To date, the Asian Development Bank (AsDB) has approved 13 loans totaling $16 1.1 million. The only ongoing loan is for the Third Road Upgrading Project, at $40 million, approved in August 1997. Project implementation progress is satisfactory. The Fiji Ports Development Project loan, at $16.8 million, was approved in February 2002. The Fiji government has provided sufficient counterpart funding for AsDB-financed projects. However, with migration of skilled staff, the availability of high caliber staff to implement programs is problematic, affecting the absorptive capacity of various government agencies. The AsDB has approved 62 TA projects, totaling $18.3 million, since 1970. There are 8 advisory TA initiatives ongoing, for public enterprise reforms, public debt management, capital markets development, road-sector reform and safety improvement, a women’s action plan, the preparation of a medium-term development plan, the Native Land Trust Board’s land boundaries mapping, and a review of the Fiji Development Bank. Most TA is being implemented satisfactorily. The AsDB continues to be involved in helping to improve the policy framework in agriculture, infrastructure, and the environment. As a result of the coup in 2000, no country programming was undertaken in 200 1, but two country consultation missions were undertaken. No TA was approved in 200 1, but in October it was agreed to resume all suspended TA. Initiatives agreed for 2002 comprise project preparatory TA for alternative livelihoods and rural electrification, and advisory TA for sugar- sector restructuring and for institutional strengthening attached to a proposed water supply and sanitation project (being processed for approval in 2002). For 2003, project preparatory TA has been identified for airports rehabilitation and tourism development, and advisory TA for IT policy and legal framework and for governance strengthening, including the implementation of the Financial Management Act and capacity building in key government ministries. The TA program, estimated at about $1.9 million in total, will next be reviewed during the 2003 country programming mission. Monitoring and evaluation There is no AsDB resident mission in Fiji, and project implementation is monitored by review missions from AsDB headquarters. Generally, Fiji has complied with project loan covenants, including submission of regular progress and audit reports. However, a few major covenants pertaining to road-sector policies are yet to be complied with due to pending reform of the Public Works Department’s road section. Lending level proposed AsDB lending to Fiji in 2002 is estimated at $50 million. Based on the strong project pipeline and the availability of new LIBOR-based loan products, proposed lending is estimated at $40- 50 million annually for 2002-2005. Grant cofinancing and opportunities for commercial cotinancing and guarantees will be sought where appropriate. Currently, there are good Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 36 - ANNEX IV prospects for cotinancing from domestic banks, as was done for the Fiji Ports Development Project. TA program The TA pipeline is designed to support the main areas of emphasis identified in the country strategy and program including project preparation, institutional strengthening, and capacity building for good governance. The TA program is envisaged to be about $1.5-2 million annually, with at least 50 percent for project preparation. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 37 - ANNEX V FIJI: SOCIAL AND DEMOGRAPHIC INDICATORS Population Total population, midyear (millions) 0.6 0.7 0.8 1,836.6 2,093.O Growth rate (percent annual average) 2.0 1.9 0.9 1.2 1.1 Urban population (percent of population) 36.7 38.5 48.6 34.5 42.9 Total fertility rate (births per woman) 3.7 3.4 2.8 2.1 2.1 Poverty (percent of population) Income GNI per capita (US$) 1,130 1,580 2,310 1010 1,200 Consumer price index (1995=100) 27 60 115 136 137 Social indicators Public expenditures Health (percent of GDP) Education (percent of GNI) . . . 4.7 . . . 2.9 1.7 2.3 6.7 2.9 4.8 Net primary school enrollment rate (Percent of age group) Total Male Female . . 97 . . . 96 . . . 97 . . . 100 100 100 99 100 99 Access to improved water source (Percent of population) Total Urban Rural . . . . 47 75 80 . 43 93 94 . . . . . 51 66 69 Immunization rate (percent under 12 months) Measles DPT Child malnutrition (percent under 5 years) . . . 57 75 69 86 . . . 8 83 87 82 87 12 9 Life expectancy at birth (years) Total Male Female 66 70 73 69 69 65 68 71 67 67 68 72 75 71 72 Mortality Infant (per thousand live births) Under 5 @er thousand live births) Adult (15-59) 40 29 18 35 32 61 42 22 44 40 Male (per 1,000 population) 257 209 155 Female (per 1,000 population) 207 152 100 Births attended by skilled health staff (%) 97 100 184 191 141 133 . . . . Latest Single Year 1970-75 1980-85 1993-99 Same Region/Income Grout East Asia Lower-middle and Pacific income Source: World Development Indicators, World Bank. Note: 0 or 0.0 means zero or less than half the unit shown. Net enrollment ratios exceeding 100 indicate discrepancies between the estimates of school-age population and reported enrollment data. Latest year for access to improved water source data is 2000. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-38- ANNEX VI FIJI: STATISTICAL ISSUES The economic database in Fiji is reasonably solid, owing in part to the considerable TA provided by the Fund in recent years, mainly through the PFTAC in Suva. The authorities are fully cooperative in providing data to the Fund in a timely manner. Although weaknesses persist (see below), the authorities have been trying to improve all these aspects. A major problem recently has been the loss of skilled staff through emigration. The RBF publishes the Annual Report, the Quarterly Review, the Monthly Economic Bulletin, and the monthly News Review. The Fiji Bureau of Statistics (BoS) publishes a quarterly Current Economic Statistics and a monthly Statistical News. Each year, the Ministry of Finance and National Planning (MoF) issues the Budget Address and the Supplement to the Budget Address. All of these publications are received by APD on a regular basis. Fiji’s formal participation in the GDDS commenced on May 9,2000, marked by the posting of Fiji’s metadata to the IMF’s Dissemination Standards Bulletin Board. Fiji has maintained its commitment to use the GDDS as a framework for statistical development, and to update the GDDS metadata at least once per year. National Accounts The BoS compiles production GDP at factor cost (i.e. net of indirect taxes and subsidies) at current and constant prices. The current price estimates are derived by extrapolation of 1989 value added by sector using output indicators. This data is available up to 200 1. The BoS plans to rebase the current national accounts series to 1995. With assistance from the PFTAC, estimates of expenditure GDP at current prices have been compiled and are available up to 2000. The BoS is conducting a new Household Expenditure and Income Survey (HEIS) based on the 1993 System of National Accounts (1993 SNA) as a conceptual framework, with a target completion date of December 2002. The HEIS will also be used to update the CPI weights from the current 1993 base. Government Finance Statistics Until 1996, Fiji was a regular reporter of data for publication in the Government Finance Statistics (GFS) Yearbook. There were however, some inconsistencies between the GFS data and fiscal data provided to APD, especially in the areas of nontax revenue, wages and salaries, other purchases of goods and services, and subsidies and transfers. The STA database included data on central government budgetary operations through 1996. Government debt data reported by the authorities for the years 1987 through 1990 have not been included in the database, owing to methodological problems. Public debt data remain weak. The MoF is considering the adoption of the new methodology in the IMF Government Finance Statistics Manual (2001). Monthly and quarterly GFS data last reported refer to 1999. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 39 - ANNEX VI Monetary Statistics Statistics on the monetary authorities and the deposit money banks are comprehensive and are provided to STA on a regular and timely basis. Data on nonbank financial institutions, including the Fiji National Provident Fund, are less regular, timely, and reliable. With such institutions representing a large part of the domestic financial system, the unavailability of a consolidated financial survey forms an important obstacle to economic and financial analysis. The RBF plans to implement the methodology of the IMF Monetary and Financial Statistics Manual (2000). Balance of Payments In the balance of payments area, the lack of timely merchandise trade data obtained from customs documentation is a major problem. The Fiji Inland Revenue and Customs Authority has adopted UNCTAD’s Automated System of Customs Data (ASYCUDA) system for processing merchandise through customs. However, ASYCUDA has made it more difficult to detect the occasional errors in breaking down volumes and prices of exports and imports. Additional problems, particularly in the measurement of external debt, derive from the absence of a consistent framework and insufficient coordination between the RBF, the BoS, and the MoF. With assistance from PFTAC, the BoS has begun to report annual balance of payments data according to the IMF Balance of Payments Manual fifth edition) format. However, the data are not timely and the latest data reported for publication by the Fund refer to 1999 and were received in October 2000. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 40 - ANNEX VI Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4l- ANNEX VII Public Information Notice (PIN) No. Xx102 International Monetary Fund FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE 700 lgth Street, NW [August XX, 20021 Washington, D. C. 20431 USA IMF Concludes 2002 Article IV Consultation with Fiji On [August 9, 20021, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded the Article IV consultation with Fiji.’ Background In May 2000, Fiji’s elected government was overthrown in a coup. In protest, the international community applied economic and political sanctions including postponement of development assistance projects and suspension of Fiji’s membership in the Commonwealth. Australian and New Zealand trade unions also adopted measures interfering with the importation of Fijian goods. Elections were held in September 2001, and led to an easing of official sanctions and to Fiji’s readmission to the Commonwealth. The domestic political situation also become more settled, although court challenges have continued against the government. Following the coup, Fiji experienced sharp declines in tourism earnings, while external sanctions adversely affected investment and textile exports. As a result, GDP fell 23/4 percent in 2000, and the current account deficit widened to 6 percent of GDP. Financial stability and the basket peg of the Fiji dollar were maintained through tightening of domestic monetary policy and exchange controls, together with government spending cuts to offset the impact of weaker growth on the fiscal deficit. As the political and security situation began to normalize, and financial market pressures dissipated, monetary and fiscal policies were eased. I Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial information, and discusses with officials the country’s economic developments and policies. On return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the country’s authorities. This PIN summarizes the views of the Executive Board as expressed during the [8, 9, 20021 Executive Board discussion based on the staff report. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 42 - ANNEX VII Economic recovery began in 2001, with real GDP rising by 2% percent, largely owing to a pick up in the tourism sector and the impact of fiscal stimulus measures boosting the fiscal deficit to over 6 percent of GDP. Inflation remained low, reflecting weak domestic demand pressures and stability in the exchange rate, and the current account deficit narrowed to 2’/ percent of GDP in 2001 as tourism earnings recovered. Growth is projected to rise to the 4 to 5 percent range in 2002-2003, partly reflecting further strengthening of the tourism sector and the resumption of development assistance projects following the lifting of external sanctions in late 2001. Despite the pickup in growth, fiscal policy has remained expansionary, and a fiscal deficit of 6 percent of GDP is projected for 2002 in the absence of corrective measures in the second half of the year. Inflation pressures remain modest and the current account is expected to remain close to balance. Despite the recovery, some important areas of economic weakness remain; in particular, the sugar industry has continued to contract as land tenure problems remain unresolved. Private investment- including FDI-also remains very weak, reflecting uncertainties of borrowers and lenders regarding the longer-term political and economic outlook. Executive Board Assessment <Begin Typing Here> Public lnformafion Notices (PINS) are issued, (i) at the request of a member country, following the conclusion of the Article IV consultation for countries seeking to make known the views of the IMF to the public. This action is intended to strengthen IMF surveillance over the economic policies of member countries by increasing the transparency of the IMF’s assessment of these policies; and (ii) following policy discussions in the Executive Board at the decision of the Board. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public