DOCUMENT OF INTERNATIONAL MONETARY AND NOT FOR PUBLIC USE FOR l-----l AGENDA SM/02/148 CONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION May 17,2002 To: Members of the Executive Board From: The Secretary Subject: Dominican Republic- Staff Report for the 2002 Article IV Consultation Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staff report for the 2002 Article IV consultation with the Dominican Republic, which is tentatively scheduled for discussion on Friday, May 31, 2002. At the time of circulation of this paper to the Board, the Secretary’s Department has not received a communication from the authorities of the Dominican Republic indicating whether or not they consent to the Fund’s publication of this paper; such communication may be received after the authorities have had an opportunity to read the paper. Questions may be referred to Mr. P. Young, WHD (ext. 38481) and Mr. 0. Williams, WHD (ext. 38632). Unless the Documents (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the WTO Secretariat on Tuesday, May 28, 2002; and to the European Commission, and the Inter-American Development Bank, following its consideration by the Executive Board. Att: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicCONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND DOMINICAN REPUBLIC Staff Report for the 2002 Article IV Consultation Prepared by the Staff Representatives for the 2002 Consultation with the Dominican Republic Approved by M. E. Bonangelino and Michael Hadjimichael May 17,2002 Contents Page General Glossary ..,..........,................................. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 Executive Summary . . . . . . . . . . . ., . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 I. Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... 5 II. Background and Recent Developments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5 III. Policy Discussions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9 A. Macroeconomic Policies ......................................................................................... 9 B. Financial Sector.. ................................................................................................... 13 C. Trade and Structural Reforms ............................................................................... 13 D. Medium-Term Outlook ......................................................................................... 15 E. Statistical Issues .................................................................................................... 16 Iv. Staff Appraisal .,.,.,.,......,.,.,,....,..........,............................ . . . . . ..*.*...................................... 17 Text Boxes 1. Unification of the Foreign Exchange Markets .............................................................. .20 2. External Debt Management.. ......................................................................................... .21 3. Fiscal Costs of Social Security Reforms ....................................................................... ,22 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2- Tables 1. Selected Economic and Financial Indicators.. ............................................................ .26 2. Macroeconomic Framework.. ..................................................................................... .27 3. Summary Operations of the Central Government.. .................................................... .28 4. Central Government Fiscal Impulse.. ......................................................................... .29 5. Effect of the 2001 Fiscal Reform ................................................................................ 30 6. Summary Operations of the Consolidated Public Sector.. .......................................... 3 1 7. Selected Indicators of the Banking System ................................................................. 32 8. Commercial Bank’s Foreign Currency Operations ..................................................... 33 9. Summary Balance of Payments.. ................................................................................. 34 10. Medium-Term External Public Debt and Debt-Service Indicators ............................ .35 11. Medium-Term Macroeconomic Framework ............................................................... 36 12. Medium-Term Summary Balance of Payments .......................................................... 37 13. Selected Indicators of Domestic and External Vulnerability ...................................... 38 14. Sensitivity Analysis.. .................................................................................................. .39 15. Social Indicators.. ....................................................................................................... .40 Appendices I. II. III. Iv. V. VI. VII. VIII. Ix. X. Fund Relations.. .......................................................................................................... .4 1 Relations with the World Bank Group.. ..................................................................... .43 Relations with the Inter-American Development Bank ............................................. .44 Domestic Debt.. .......................................................................................................... .45 Electricity Subsidies ................................................................................................... .46 Main FSAP Findings and Recommendations ............................................................ .47 Ongoing and Recently Completed Structural Reforms .............................................. .48 Statistical Issues ......................................................................................................... .49 Privatization and the Role of the State.. ...................................................................... 55 Press Information Notice.. ........................................................................................... 58 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3- GENERALGLOSSARY BCRD BIS CAMELS CDE CORDE CORPHOTELES CPI DOT DR FDI FOMIN FSAP FSSA FTAA FTZ GDP IBRD IDB IFMP ITBIS/VAT MFL NAFTA NIR NSB OECD PEIR REER SB WTO Central Bank of the Dominican Republic Bank for International Settlements Capital, assets, management, earnings, liquidity, and sensitivity to market risk Dominican Electricity Corporation Dominican State Enterprises Corporation Hotel Industry Promotion Corporation Consumer Price Index Direction of Trade Dominican Republic Foreign Direct Investment Multilateral Investment Fund Financial Sector Assessment Program Financial Sector Stability Assessment Free Trade Area for the Americas Free-Trade Zone Gross Domestic Product International Bank for Reconstruction and Development Inter-American Development Bank Integrated Financial Management Program Value-added tax Monetary and Financial Law North American Free Trade Agreement Net international reserves National Sugar Board Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development Public Expenditure and Institutional Review Real effective exchange rate Superintendency of Banks World Trade Organization Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4- EXECUTIVE SUMMARY Recent developments: The Dominican Republic was affected by two external shocks during 2001-the economic slowdown in the United States and Europe and the September 11 terrorist attacks. These shocks broadly coincided with a major fiscal adjustment implemented in 2001. The economic growth rate fell by two-thirds to 2.7 percent. On a cyclically adjusted basis, the overall fiscal stance was moderately restrictive (and broadly appropriate). Reflecting the weakness of economic activity, the authorities eased the monetary stance, leading to a sharp decline in lending rates. However, toward the end of the year, the authorities began to tighten monetary conditions out of concern about the effect of rising liquidity on the value of the peso and potential pressure on inflation. Falling oil prices contributed to a narrowing of the external current account deficit to 3.9 percent of GDP from 5.2 percent of GDP in 2000. FDI more than covered the external current account deficit. The FSAP mission found no strong signals of financial distress. However, it noted that stress testing indicated that the system is moderately vulnerable to future shocks. Policy discussions: Discussions centered on vulnerabilities to external and domestic shocks, the appropriateness of the fiscal stance, and the role of exchange rate policy. The staff urged the authorities to consider a tighter fiscal stance in order to support a more ambitious reserve accumulation target and advised that the monetary policy stance should continue to be tightened until excess liquidity is reduced substantially and private sector credit growth slows to a rate more in line with economic activity and the inflation objective. Both the staff and the authorities agreed on the need to improve external competitiveness, including improvements on the cost side. The staff advised moving away from a heavily managed exchange rate toward a more market-determined one. In this context, the staff welcomes the Monetary Board’s decision (of April 2,2002) to set the official exchange rate equal to the previous day’s market rate. Since the time of that decision, the peso has shown a generally depreciating trend. The authorities were in broad agreement with the key recommendations of the FSAP mission, including publishing the complete monetary program, conducting open market operations through weekly auctions, and implementing consolidated supervision. The central bank is modernizing its own operations, including through a plan to free itself of noncore functions. Previous trade and structural reforms have led to a more open, dynamic economy. However, new reforms are needed to ensure a sustained economic expansion. The authorities agreed with the staff that macroeconomic stability was key to sustaining FDI flows, external competitiveness, and promoting export-led growth. The authorities are making important strides in improving the quality of economic and financial statistics. The medium-term outlook for the economy remains favorable. The main risks arise from uncertainty about oil prices and the recovery of partner country demand. However, assuming prudent macroeconomic policies, complemented by growth-enhancing microeconomic reforms, these risks should be manageable. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-5- 1. 1NTRoDucT10~ 1. The 2002 Article IV consultation discussions were held in Santo Domingo during February 20-March 7.’ The staff team met with the governor of the central bank, the technical secretary to the president, the monetary board, the banking superintendent, the secretaries of finance and labor, other senior officials in the public sector, and representatives from private business organizations and think tanks. 2. The last Article IV consultation was concluded on February 23,200l. At that time, Directors commended the authorities for maintaining, over an extended period of time, strong growth and low inflation through prudent monetary and fiscal policies and the adoption of key structural reforms. Directors welcomed the revenue measures adopted in late 2000/early 2001, but stressed the need for adequate expenditure monitoring and control mechanisms as well as for a thorough public expenditure review. Directors supported the authorities’ efforts to raise the stock of official net international reserves, to rely increasingly on indirect monetary instruments, and to reduce import tariffs. In this context, they encouraged the authorities to adopt a more flexible exchange rate policy and to eliminate multiple currency practices.2 Directors also encouraged the authorities to improve the quality of economic and financial statistics in order to facilitate effective monitoring of economic developments and policy formulation. II. BACKGROUNDANDRECENTDEVELOPMENTS 3. The economy was affected by two external shocks during 2001-the economic slowdown in the United States and Europe and the September 11 terrorist attacks. These shocks broadly coincided with the introduction of a package of fiscal measures, which had been designed in response to an overheating of the economy in the run-up to the 2000 ’ The staff team comprised Mr. Young (Head, WHD), Mr. Melhado, Ms. Vera-Martin, Mr. Williams, and Ms. Ali (Administrative Assistant) (all WHD), and Ms. Saca (STA). Mr. de 10s Santos, Assistant to the Executive Director, participated in the discussions. The Dominican Republic has accepted the obligations of Article VIII. Two multiple currency practices exist, subject to Fund jurisdiction under Article VIII, and the country has not yet ratified the Fourth Amendment. Relations with the Fund, the World Bank, and the IDB are presented in Appendices I, II, and III, respectively. 2 Two multiple currency practices exist-one because of the potential for the official exchange rate to differ from the private rate by more than 2 percent at any given time, and the second because of a 4.75 percent foreign exchange commission. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-6- presidential election.3 As a result, the economic growth rate fell by two-thirds to 2.7 percent in 2001 (Table 1 and Figure 1). A decline in business and consumer confidence led to a fall in investment and consumption (Table 2). On the supply side, value added from the tourism subsector fell by 4.4 percent. The weakness of economic activity, and declining international oil prices, contributed to a halving of the inflation rate to 4.4 percent at end-200 1, while the unemployment rate rose to 15.6 percent (from 13.9 percent in 2000).4 4. The overall deficit of the consolidated public sector in 2001 was unchanged from 2000. Notwithstanding the continued deficit, the fiscal stance was still restrictive (and broadly appropriate). The overall deficit of the central government narrowed by half a percentage point of GDP to 1.7 percent in 200 1 (Table 3); with this, it exerted a negative fiscal impulse of 0.8 percent of GDP, reflecting also the weaker-than-expected output growth (Table 4). The improvement in the central government position was more than explained by the fiscal measures implemented in late 2000/early 2001 (Table 5), including an increase in the VAT rate from 8 percent to 12 percent, a new Hydrocarbons law,5 and the elimination of the subsidy for liquid propane gas. The net effect of the measures is estimated at 1% percent of GDP. An important part of the fiscal savings was offset, however, by increases in the wage bill and investment outlays. The wage bill increased by l/z percentage point of GDP to 6 percent, largely reflecting increases in public employment (in education, public health, and security forces). Fixed investment rose by % percentage point of GDP, reflecting a greater availability of foreign financing. The narrowing of the central government deficit was offset by a deterioration of a similar magnitude in the financial position of the rest of the public sector (mainly the public enterprises) (Table 6). Excluding the proceeds from a sovereign bond issue,6 which were deposited in the central bank, net bank credit to the nonfinancial public sector increased by 0.7 percent of GDP, similar to the previous two years. 5. Given the weakening of economic activity, the authorities eased the monetary stance in 2001. Through the redemption of central bank paper, the central bank (BCRD) 3 See last year’s Article IV Staff Report (SM/01/41) for a more detailed discussion of the causes of the overheating. At that time, the proposed fiscal adjustment was seen as an ambitious, but necessary, response to return the economy to a sustainable growth path. 4 Studies suggest that the official figures are about twice the true unemployment rate. The overestimation stems from a misclassification of workers (so-called “discouraged workers”) as being in the labor force, when in fact they are outside the labor force. 5 The law removed administrative discretion from the setting of domestic fuel prices and instead imposed a specific tax on domestic fuel products. 6 Issued on September 20, 2001 with a coupon rate of 9.5 percent (576 basis points over comparable U.S. treasuries), and a bullet payment due in 2006. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-7- lowered interest rates-lending rates fell by 800 basis points during the year to about 22 percent (Table 7 and Figure 2). Lower interest rates helped support economic activity through an expansion of private sector credit (24 percent, in line with the average nominal growth rate of the previous few years, but about double the rate of expansion of nominal GDP). Broad money growth nearly doubled to 24 percent in 2001 (relative to 2000), while excess reserves jumped from 2.5 percent to 4.2 percent of base money. 6. Over the last several years, commercial bank foreign currency operations have been increasing due to a combination of a heavily managed exchange rate (i.e., fixed for long periods of time), relatively lower borrowing costs abroad, and lower reserve requirements on foreign currency deposits than on domestic deposits.7 In 200 1, foreign currency deposit growth accelerated strongly, possibly reflecting a perceived increase in exchange rate risk associated with the external shocks. These deposits were intermediated by commercial banks, resulting in a corresponding increase in foreign currency lending. By end-200 1, foreign currency deposits and loans had risen to the equivalent of 7 and 8 percent of GDP, respectively, compared with 1 percent of GDP each in 1997 (see Table 8). 7. Falling oil prices led to a narrowing of the external current account deficit in 2001 (to 3.9 percent of GDP from 5.2 percent of GDP in 2000, Table 9), albeit less of an improvement than originally projected. A large decline in oil imports was partly offset by a fall in export and tourism receipts. Net capital inflows remained strong as the sovereign bond proceeds (US$500 million) and rising FDI (directed mainly to the electricity, tourism, and financial sectors) more than offset a reversal of short-term capital inflows (owing, in part, to the decline in domestic interest rates). External public sector debt increased by about 1 percent of GDP, with amortization payments partly offsetting the sovereign bond issue (equivalent to over 2 percent of GDP). The strong net capital inflows put pressure on the peso, which appreciated by 6 percent in real effective terms in 2001 (Figure 3). In all, and excluding the proceeds from the sovereign bond issue, which were not incorporated in the authorities’ original monetary program, NIR fell short of the end-2001 target (US$600 million), reaching US$462 million, an increase of only US$20 million over end-2000. Including the bond proceeds, by end-2001, gross official reserves stood at 1.8 months of imports of goods and services and 96 percent of short-term debt by residual maturity. 8. Toward the end of 2001 and into early 2002, the authorities tightened the stance of monetary policy, reflecting their concern over pressures on the exchange rate from the liquidity in the banking system. The tightened stance led to an increase in lending rates 71n line with other countries in the region, there has been an increasing trend toward currency substitution. In an attempt to slow this trend, the monetary authorities increased the effective reserve requirement on foreign currency deposits in October 1999 (though still leaving it lower, 10 percent, than on local currency deposits, 20 percent), resulting in a slowdown of the growth of such deposits (Table 8). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-8- (weighted average) of over 300 basis points during the first quarter of 2002 (see Figure 2). Furthermore, the central government curtailed spending in January and the first half of February 2002. The BCRD sold dollars in order to ease the pressure on the peso, which had depreciated by 1 percent in the official market and 3-4 percent in the nonofficial markets (Box 1) in the first two months of 2002. As a result, NIR fell by over US$200 million in January-February, compared with an average decline of less than US$lOO million in the corresponding period of the previous five years. On April 2, 2002, the Monetary Board issued a resolution mandating that the official exchange rate be set equal to the previous day’s market rate, and devalued the official exchange rate by 2% percent. Since the time of that decision, the peso has shown a generally depreciating trend. 9. The FSAP mission found no strong signals of financial distress. However, it noted that the lack of appropriately calculated indicators, and the difficulty of assessing developments over time as a result of changes in definitions and prudential norms, precluded a definitive assessment of the health of the financial system. The FSAP mission found that the financial system has insufficient capitalization and provisioning and noted that stress testing indicated that the system is moderately vulnerable to future shocks. According to official data, the ratio of nonperforming loans to total loans in 200 1 was broadly unchanged (relative to 2000) at 2.2 percent.’ The risk-adjusted capital asset ratio remained stable, while bank profitability declined somewhat in the face of larger provisions required by stricter asset classification and prudential norms.’ The Superintendency of Banks also raised penalties for misclassification of loans, established accrual accounting, and created an anti-money laundering unit.” In February 2002, the Monetary Board endorsed a draft Monetary and Financial Law (MFL), aimed at modernizing the legal and regulatory framework. The draft is to be sent to congress later this year. 10. Congressional elections were held on May 16,2002. Prior to that date, the incumbent government of the Partido Revolucionario Dominicana (PRD) held 24 out of 30 seats in the senate and 83 out of 149 in the chamber of deputies. At the time of this writing, the results of the latest elections were not yet available. The next presidential election is scheduled for May 2004. ’ Based on data published by the Superintendency of Banks. These data treat only the overdue portion of the loan as nonperforming, not the entire loan balance or interest past due. The definition is being revised to conform to international practices. 9 The Superintendency of Banks is strengthening its supervisory capacity through technical assistance from the IDB. New prudential norms became effective in June 2001. lo The Dominican Republic is not on the Financial Action Task Force list of noncooperating countries. A new anti-money laundering law is under consideration in congress. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-9- 111. POLICY DLSCUSSIONS 11. Discussions centered on the need to maintain a prudent macroeconomic policy mix against the background of remaining vulnerabilities. Despite the current economic recovery, the staff stressed the need to bear in mind remaining vulnerabilities to external and domestic shocks. Potential shocks include further disruptions to the tourism sector, export demand, and remittances, and on the domestic side, to a weakening in the health of the financial system. These vulnerabilities underscore the need for a mix of monetary and fiscal policies that would support the maintenance of macroeconomic stability and help strengthen the foreign exchange reserve position. In this regard, the staff urged the authorities to give more weight to building reserves and less to a specific exchange rate path. Complemented by an appropriate policy mix, this should help improve external competitiveness. Moreover, the staff emphasized the need to sustain the reform momentum and move ahead with second-generation reforms, critical to sustaining economic growth and alleviating poverty, such as modernization of the public sector, improving fiscal transparency, and increasing the efficiency of government expenditures. A. Macroeconomic Policies 12. The authorities explained that the high degree of uncertainty surrounding the economic and financial projections made the design of the 2002 macroeconomic framework unusually difficult. In particular, the timing and pace of recovery in the tourism and free-trade sectors is crucial to the outlook for this year. The staff agreed with the authorities that real GDP growth could rise to 4 percent in 2002, with end-period inflation increasing to 6% percent (partly reflecting the unseasonably low, and even negative;monthly price increases in late 2001). The central bank’s monetary program envisages a maximum rundown of NIR of US$SO million. The authorities noted that the reserve objective would be reviewed each quarter, with the possibility of modifying it (up or down) if circumstances warranted. 13. The staff urged the authorities to consider an alternative scenario, in which NIR would increase by US$lOO million (broadly maintaining the gross-reserves-to-short-term debt ratio constant) on the basis of a somewhat tighter fiscal stance and a slightly larger real depreciation of the peso. The staff suggested that the burden of fiscal adjustment should fall on the expenditure side, as the tax burden was broadly appropriate following last year’s revenue measures. ” The needed adjustment could be accomplished through expenditure cuts relative to the budget (mainly of nonessential current expenditures and lower priority capital l1 One of those measures included requiring companies to pay 1.5 percent of gross sales as an advance (and minimum) corporate income tax. This measure nearly doubled corporate income taxes in relation to GDP. Staff urged the maintenance of this measure, which is scheduled to be eliminated in 2003. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-lO- expenditures), equivalent to about % percent of GDP. The authorities felt, however, that it would be difficult to spend less than foreseen in the 2002 budget, particularly in view of a pressing need to rebuild basic infrastructure. The staff cautioned that a loss of reserves could send the wrong signal to investors, especially in view of the persistent criticisms by market analysts of the low level of reserves. The staff added that, going forward, it was important to have a sufficient cushion of reserves in case capital markets conditions were to become difficult in the next several years, when external debt service would peak at almost 13 percent of exports of goods and services (Table 10). 14. The staff warned of a rising trend in the wage bi11.‘2 While recognizing the need for increasing central government spending in education and health, the staff advised that it would be important to ensure that hiring policies are determined within a comprehensive strategy for ensuring the best quality education and health care possible for the least cost. General government employment expanded by 9 percent in 200 1, with the largest increases in education, the armed forces, and in two new secretariats (environment and culture). 15. Reflecting poor domestic debt management practices, public sector arrears (including intrapublic sector) have accumulated in the past. However, in 2001, these arrears declined substantially on a net basis to 2.2 percent of GDP (Appendix IV). In particular, complex electricity subsidies, combined with generalized inefficiencies in public sector financial management, have led the central government to continue to incur domestic arrears with the state-owned Dominican Electricity Corporation (CDE), and in turn, of the CDE to distributors and independent power producers (Appendix V). The staff urged the authorities to accelerate the work of a domestic debt commission in launching a comprehensive plan to further reduce the stock of domestic arrears. 16. The staff underscored the need to maintain a prudent mix of monetary and fiscal policies to avoid rekindling inflation pressures as the recovery takes hold. The monetary authorities underscored that low inflation is the BCRD’s first priorityI and explained that the reserve loss envisaged for this year largely reflected their desire to keep inflation low, since they were concerned with the pass-through effect on prices of peso depreciation. The staff l2 Although the budget presents a decline of 1 percent of GDP in the wage bill relative to 2001, there is a classification problem between wages and ‘goods and services.’ Hence, the sum of these two categories is more meaningful (and comparable with the staff projection) than either one individually. l3 Indeed, the governor noted that once congress approved the new MFL, price stability would be an explicit objective of monetary policy. However, the draft law does not state that price stability is theprimary objective. The governor expected the law to be approved before Fall 2002. The draft law has been published in the central bank web site, seeking public comment. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- ll- agreed that inflation should be the first priority of monetary policy, but advised making greater use of interest rates as an instrument rather than the exchange rate. The staff cautioned against using the exchange rate as a nominal anchor to keep inflation low, because of its effects on competitiveness. In addition, it could fuel speculative attacks, particularly given the relatively low level of reserves, exacerbating vulnerability to external shocks. The staff also reiterated that fiscal policy had an important role to play in ensuring the achievement of the inflation objective. 17. The staff advised moving away from a heavily managed exchange rate toward a more market-determined one. In this context, it welcomed the Monetary Board’s resolution of last April that gives market forces a greater role in the determination of the exchange rate. The staff strongly supported the establishment of foreign exchange auctions at the BCRD.14 The monetary authorities explained that the new MFL would permit the elimination of the remaining surrender requirements and the unification of the exchange market.t5 This would also facilitate a more efficient and transparent sale of foreign exchange through the auctions. 18. The staff expressed concern with the rapid growth of private sector credit. It welcomed the recent tightening of the monetary policy stance, while also advising that the tightening should be continued until credit growth slows to a rate more in line with that of nominal GDP. A tightening of monetary conditions should also help to slow the rate of growth of base money (closer to the expansion of nominal GDP) and limit inflation pressures, while supporting the attainment of a more ambitious reserve target. Notwithstanding the tightening to date, the authorities cautioned that, in the past, private sector credit growth has not been very responsive to upward adjustments in interest rates, as evidenced by its rapid growth in recent years, despite high real interest rates. The staff suggested that at the margin, higher interest rates could help slow credit growth and, it urged the monetary and supervisory authorities to examine the sustainability of this growth, given external vulnerabilities and the capacity of banking supervision. The authorities noted that they felt reassured by the stable level of nonperforming loans, indicating that the quality of banks’ loan portfolios did not appear to be adversely affected by the rapid growth of private credit. However, they did recognize that rising interest rates, while necessary for macroeconomic management reasons, could have adverse affects on nonperforming loans. l4 The BCRD recently created a foreign exchange desk and expanded the functions of the money desk to enhance the transparency of monetary and exchange rate policies (see Box 1). The money and exchange desks are intended to be the main mechanisms for the auction of central bank securities and foreign exchange, respectively. l5 In late 2001/early 2002, the central bank removed surrender requirements on traditional exports and selected other activities, and also required that the foreign exchange for imports of gasoline be purchased in the private market. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12- 19. The staff expressed concern also with the lack of a coherent external public debt management strategy, which has led to lumpiness of payments (Box 2). It noted a recent spate of bilateral official loan approvals (albeit undisbursed), and cautioned that without a systematic debt management strategy in place, problems in servicing external debt obligations could arise. The authorities concurred that this was an area where additional efforts were needed, and noted that institutional changes were being implemented to centralize debt management within the Secretariat of Finance and to increase the transparency of the process. The authorities’ efforts are being supported by technical assistance from the IDB. 20. The external sector has been affected adversely not only by the global economic slowdown and the September 11 terrorist attacks, but also by a loss of external competitiveness. This is reflected in a substantial decline in the country’s share of U.S. imports between 1997 and 2001. The real effective exchange rate, on the basis of either relative consumer prices or unit labor costs,16 appreciated by a cumulative 10 percent in 2000- 0 1. The authorities were in broad agreement with these estimates and there was a consensus that a redoubling of efforts to improve external competitiveness was needed. They stressed that improvements in competitiveness were also needed on the cost side, i.e., lowering electricity tariffs and making the power supply more reliable, obviating the need for maintaining expensive generators at each firm. 21. The staff urged the elimination of the foreign exchange commission, or at least a reduction to no more than its original level (1.75 percent).17 The commission is distorting resource allocation and hampering economic growth. In addition, it complicates exchange rate policy, by creating an artificial advantage for foreign exchange houses (who do not have to pay the commission) relative to commercial banks. The staff suggested that the revenue loss from the elimination of the foreign exchange commission could be offset by abolishing most VAT exemptions (which would have the added benefit of reducing VAT evasion). The authorities agreed that the foreign exchange commission was distortionary, but in light of expenditure pressures, did not see its short-term elimination as feasible. They did note, however, that the l6 Employing data on unit labor costs in the free-trade zones in the Dominican Republic, and partner country data on manufacturing unit labor costs. l7 The commission was reduced by a fourth of a percentage point to 4.75 percent in 2001. The authorities informed the Executive Board at the time of the last Article IV consultation that this commission would be reduced during 2001 to its previous level, as soon as the new fiscal measures took effect. On the basis of a pre-defined schedule for its reduction, the Board approved a decision for temporary approval of the associated multiple currency practice. In view of the absence of such a schedule at the time of the writing of this report, the staff is not recommending approval. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13- current draft of the MFL requires setting a timetable for its reduction within three months of congressional approval of the law. ‘* B. Financial Sector 22. The authorities were in broad agreement with the key findings of the FSAP mission, including publishing the complete monetary program, conducting open market operations through weekly auctions, implementing consolidated supervision, and issuing new accounting rules that are more in line with international standards (Appendix VI).” The authorities have initiated steps to modernize the legal and regulatory framework and they intend to bring the definition of nonperforming loans more in line with international standards. The MFL will provide autonomy for the central bank and the superintendency of banks, enable consolidated supervision of financial groups, establish a resolution and exit mechanism for troubled financial institutions, and provide legal protection to supervisors in the exercise of their duties. An Insurance and Secured Lending Law, which incorporates several FSAP recommendations, has been drafted and is now in congress. Superintendencies of securities and of pensions have been created, but need to be staffed. Also, regulations for implementing the new laws are still to be drafted. 23. The BCRD is modernizing its own operations. The BCRD is developing a plan to free itself of noncore functions (such as development financing and vocational training) and to improve the payment system. Pending reforms include, inter alia, the setting up of an electronic net linking the BCRD and the banks and standardization of checks. Although the functions of the money desk were redefined in December 200 1, and a new foreign exchange desk started operations this year, the BCRD still does not use the desks in a systematic fashion. Because of that, and a still shallow interbank money market, banks find it difficult to manage their liquidity. 24. Progress has been made in capitalizing the state-owned Reserves Bank (RE3). However, government bonds issued for that purpose are nonnegotiable, earn an interest rate of 1 percent a year, and are to be redeemed in 20 years with profits generated by the RB itself. The FSAP team expressed concern with the transformation of the RB into a large financial group (including the administration of the civil servants pension plan, an insurance company, and a real estate company) with the RB at its center. C. Trade and Structural Reforms 25. The Dominican Republic has made important progress in liberalizing its trade regime, with the Fund’s measure of trade restrictiveness falling from nine in 1997 to five in i8 However, the draft law (Article 79) is not explicit on the size of the reduction. l9 For more detail see the accompanying FSSA report. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14- 2001 (although this is still above the regional average of four). Most nontariff barriers have been eliminated. Further trade liberalization is occurring in the context of regional free trade agreements with CARICOM and Central American countries, and is likely to be extended further under the Free Trade Area for the Americas. Dominican exporters enjoy extensive preferential market access to the U.S. and European markets under various special trade regimes. However, in the future, these regimes will be opened up to other countries, increasing competition for market share. WTO guidelines will force the elimination of fiscal incentives to exporters. The authorities fully agreed with the staff that macroeconomic stability was key to sustaining strong FDI flows, maintaining external competitiveness, and promoting export-led growth. 26. Previous trade and structural reforms have led to a more open, dynamic economy. However, new reforms are needed to ensure a sustained economic expansion. A top reform priority is the electricity sector, where structural problems are hampering economic growth. The staff suggested that the current system of electricity subsidies is excessively complex and needs to be streamlined. In particular, the indexation and cross subsidies (defined in Appendix IV) should be eliminated, while a more transparent, and better targeted, mechanism to subsidize the cost of electricity for low-income consumers should be put in place. The latter, in particular, should help address the authorities’ concerns over possible social tensions. The authorities also expressed concern that elimination of the indexation subsidy could put upward pressure on prices and harm external competitiveness. The staff suggested that the subsidies could be phased out gradually and noted, moreover, that subsidies are not the best instrument for strengthening external competitiveness. In this respect, the World Bank and the IDB have identified a number of shortcomings in the recently approved Electricity Law, including the prohibition of private investment in transmission or hydropower generation and a lack of restrictions to prevent firms from gaining excessive monopolistic power. The staff encouraged the authorities to work closely with the World Bank and the IDB to resolve these issues. Other ongoing and recently completed structural reforms are summarized in Appendix VII. 27. There is much that can be done to improve the efficiency of government expenditures. The World Bank is assisting the authorities with a Public Expenditure and Institutional Review, which should help to define better spending priorities.20 The staff strongly supports the authorities’ efforts to strengthen financial management and improve fiscal transparency, including through the Integrated Financial Management Program supported by the IDB. The mission would urge an acceleration of efforts in this area, as progress has been slower than expected. 2o Background papers are being put together. A draft report is expected to be delivered to the authorities by September 2002. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 15- 28. The authorities acknowledged that an ample reform agenda remains, including improving basic infrastructure, strengthening the social security regime (pensions and health, Box 3) developing a comprehensive social sector strategy,21 and proceeding with further privatizations.22 While recognizing the value of these reforms, the staff cautioned that the pace of implementation would need to be consistent with the maintenance of fiscal sustainability. Many of these reforms will enhance policy transparency and remove incentives for corruption, improving governance. The authorities agreed that reducing poverty would require stronger social safety nets, and better targeting of education and health care support. Administrative and legal reforms (for example, streamlining uncertain bureaucratic procedures and establishing secure property rights) are also required so that investors can be assured of a stable working environment. The authorities noted that labor market reforms tend to be focused on promoting general employment (by putting those seeking jobs in touch with potential employers), training younger workers, and decentralizing employment policies (through the creation of regional employment offices). They did not feel that there were any major impediments to labor market flexibility, nor did the staff detect any such impediments in its discussions with the private sector. The authorities were receptive to the staff suggestion that policy transparency and credibility would be further enhanced by publishing a medium- term development plan outlining the government’s principal objectives and policies, including real GDP growth, inflation, and reserve accumulation. D. Medium-Term Outlook 29. The authorities were in broad agreement with the medium-term outlook prepared by the staff (Table 11). Key objectives of the medium-term macroeconomic framework (2003- 06) are returning to potential GDP growth rates (approximately 5% percent),23 reducing inflation to under 3 percent, and rebuilding international reserves (Table 12). 30. Assuming prudent macroeconomic policies, complemented by growth-enhancing microeconomic reforms, the medium-term balance of payments prospects appear favorable. The external current account deficit would narrow gradually, to a sustainable level of about 3 percent of GDP by 2006. Reflecting the maintenance of fiscal discipline, the 21 The World Bank has suggested a number of priority reforms to assist the government in developing a comprehensive poverty reduction strategy (Dominican Republic: Poverty Assessment, Report No. 21306, December 17,200l). For more information, see also the IDB’s Program to Support Social Sector Institutional Reform (DR-0140). 22 Appendix V discusses privatization and the role of the state. 23 See Technical Appendix of accompanying report on Selected Issues for a discussion of the techniques used to estimate potential GDP. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 16- public sector external debt-to-GDP ratio would decline gradually from 19% percent of GDP at end-2001 to about 15 percent of GDP by end-2006. The medium-term scenario is based on a still depressed growth rate for tourism in 2002 (under 2 percent), rebounding to about 7 percent over the medium term24 (less than half the average annual growth rate during 1997-2000). Net free-trade-zone exports are expected to recover more quickly than tourism receipts, and return to an annual average growth rate of about 10 percent, compared with a 16 percent average during 1997-2000. FDI flows are projected to decline slightly in 2002, recovering to a conservative growth rate of only 4 percent for the remainder of the projection period. The proposed reserve accumulation path (US$200-400 million a year starting in 2003) would strengthen substantially the various indicators of reserve adequacy, bringing, for example, the ratio of gross official reserves to short-term debt on a residual maturity basis to 160 percent by 2006 (Table 13). 31. The main risks to the medium-term outlook are that (i) oil prices remain above the path forecast in the WE0;25 (ii) external competitiveness declines further, which would hamper the growth rates of export-driven sectors, including FDI flows; and (iii) the U.S. economic recovery is delayed or short-lived.26 While the first and third risks are outside the authorities’ control, the second risk can be dealt with through the implementation of sound policies. As noted above, the staff also cautioned that the pace of structural reforms, particularly social security reform, should be such that it does not jeopardize macroeconomic stability. E. Statistical Issues 32. The authorities are making important strides in improving the quality of economic and financial statistics. Technical assistance provided by STA to develop quarterly national accounts will facilitate quarterly monetary programming as well as business cycle analysis. The implementation of the recommendations of the multisector statistics mission (April-May 2002), which conducted a comprehensive assessment of the government finance, monetary and financial, and balance of payments statistics, should further enhance data quality of the statistical systems. In this context, the staff strongly encourages the authorities to participate in the General Data Dissemination System. The recent stipulation that all external loans be registered with the Comptroller’s Office will assist in resolving the statistical 24 Most tourists arrive from the United States and Europe (see Chapter IV of the accompanying report on Selected Issues). Hence, this projection is in line with the WE0 forecast for a recovery in U.S. and European income growth. 25 The staffs baseline scenario is based on the latest WE0 forecast. The oil price projections are shown in Table 12. 26 Table 14 presents a sensitivity analysis to selected variables. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17- discrepancy in the central government fiscal accounts (which has been on the order of ‘/2 percent of GDP).27 The preparation and publication of fiscal data for the rest of the public sector are still subject to long delays, hampering, but not preventing, effective surveillance. An action plan for dealing with the most serious data weaknesses is outlined in Appendix VIII. 33. International reserves reported to the Fund are not subject to any encumbrances. Gross international reserves include only usable assets, with nonusable assets, such as Brady bond collateral and capital contributions to international organizations, excluded. The BCRD does not engage in futures markets for foreign exchange. IV. STAFF APPRAISAL 34. The Dominican authorities are to be commended for their many important achievements over the past decade. Macroeconomic stability was restored in the early 1990s. Key structural reforms helped the Dominican Republic achieve one of the fastest economic growth rates in the region, averaging 6% percent a year in 1992-2000. Throughout most of that period, inflation was held to single digits. These achievements reflected the authorities’ firm commitment to macroeconomic stability and structural reform. In the run-up to the 2000 presidential election, the economy started to overheat. However, the new administration acted promptly and forcefully to contain these pressures, implementing a fiscal adjustment package in late 2000/early 2001. This, combined with the external shocks, was behind the economic slowdown in 200 1. 35. In order to sustain the strong economic growth of the past, while maintaining macroeconomic stability, the challenge ahead is to reinvigorate the pace of structural reforms. Economic growth in 2002 is expected to accelerate to 4 percent and inflation is projected to remain manageable. In order to reduce vulnerability to shocks, it is necessary to strengthen external competitiveness substantially, build a larger foreign exchange reserve cushion, and address the vulnerabilities of the banking system. A prudent mix of monetary and fiscal policies and a flexible exchange rate regime are required to meet these objectives. 36. The authorities should consider a further tightening of the fiscal stance. ln concert with an appropriately restrained monetary policy, this would facilitate a build-up of official reserves and help strengthen external competitiveness. Financing the authorities’ ample reform agenda will require a judicious use of scarce resources. The wage bill, nonessential current expenditures, and lower priority capital expenditures should be reduced (relative to GDP) over the medium term in order to provide space for priority social spending and improvements in 27 The statistical discrepancy arose because some external loans, accounted for in the balance of payments and as external financing, were channeled directly to the executing agencies and not accounted for above the line in the central government accounts. Now they are registered both above and below the line. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 18- basic infrastructure. In this regard, the staff welcomes the authorities’ efforts, in collaboration with the World Bank and IDB, to seek out efficiency gains from public expenditure. In addition, a transparent and modem public debt management strategy is urgently needed. 37. The staff recommends that the monetary policy stance continue to be tightened until excess liquidity is reduced substantially and private sector credit grows more in line with economic activity and the inflation objective. The staff notes that available prudential indicators do not show a deterioration of loan portfolio quality. However, as noted in the FSSA report, inadequate data and changes in prudential regulations preclude a definitive assessment. Moreover, the consequences of the recent slowdown in economic activity may not yet be reflected in the available indicators. Thus, the staff urges the authorities to closely monitor the situation for signs of stress. 38. The staff welcomes the move away from a managed exchange rate toward a more market-determined one. Complemented by appropriately supportive fiscal and monetary policies, such a policy shift should help recoup some of the recent losses in external competitiveness, providing a fresh impetus to the export sector, a key engine of growth. In this context, the steps taken to create a foreign exchange desk should help lay the groundwork for transparent auctions as the sole entry point for the central bank into the foreign exchange market. 39. At the same time, the staff urges the authorities to eliminate multiple currency practices by unifying the foreign exchange market and abolishing the foreign exchange commission (or at least reducing it to its original level). While enactment of the Monetary and Financial Law would eliminate these multiple currency practices, there is still no date set for its legislative consideration. Without a timetable for their elimination, the staff does not recommend approval of the multiple currency practices. 40. The authorities have made progress in reforming the legal and regulatory framework for the financial system. The central bank has made progress in modernizing its own operations, including through the elimination of noncore functions and the work being done to modernize the payment system. Much of this progress will be consolidated upon enactment of the Monetary and Financial Law. The authorities’ participation in the FSAP is a demonstration of their commitment to strengthen the financial system. In this context, they are urged to follow up on the FSSA report’s recommendations as quickly as possible. 41. Trade and structural reforms have led to a more open, dynamic economy. However, it is essential to put in place new reforms to ensure a sustained pace of economic expansion and improvements in social welfare. The authorities should press ahead with their ample reform agenda to enhance policy transparency, remove incentives for corruption, and improve governance. A top reform priority should be the electricity sector, where high costs and complex financial arrangements are creating negative externalities. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 19- 42. The authorities are to be commended for their efforts to improve the quality of economic and financial statistics. With these improvements, effective surveillance is possible, though it is still hampered by delays in the preparation and publishing of data for the consolidated public sector and uncertainties about the extent of domestic arrears. The staff welcomes the authorities’ intention to bring banking sector statistics more in line with international standards. The authorities are encouraged to participate in the General Data Dissemination System. 43. The staff proposes that the next Article IV consultation with the Dominican Republic take place on the standard 12-month cycle. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 20 - Box 1. Unification of the Foreign Exchange Markets The Dominican Republic has threeprincipalfoveign exchange markets: the ojjicial, the commercial bank, and the exchange house markets. The exchange rates areflexible, but they are not allowed to floatfreely. The exchange rates in the banking and exchange house markets are currently somewhat rzore depreciated than the ofJicia1 central bank intervention rate. When this multiple exchange system was adopted in 1991, most current account transactions were assigned to the ofjicial market. ddditionally, with the adoption of a multiple exchange rate system, a foreign exchange commission was applied to all sales offoreign exchange.’ Gradual approach to exchange market unification: Since 1992, as part of the unification process, certain transactions were gradually transferred to the commercial bank market. At present, less than 1.5 pcrccnt of transactions are handled in the official market (including proceeds from credit cards, telecommunications, air transport, loans guaranteed by the govcmment, some petroleum imports, and public sector debt-service payments). Institutional arrangements: In November 2001, as a precursor to the adoption of a fully unified foreign exchange market, the monetary board of the central bank created a foreign exchange desk (mesa de cambio) to manage purchases and sales of foreign exchange by the central bank. Foreign exchange is to be auctioned, in a transparent manner, to the highest commercial bank bidders (exchange houses are still precluded from participating). At present, the foreign exchange desk is used occasionally, but the majority of central bank foreign exchange interventions are still done in an ad hoc manner. f The monetary and financial law: The draft law (Article 30) prohibits the central bank from imposing surrender requirements on foreign exchange transactions. This will require the elimination o all surrender requirements, and the purchase and sale of foreign exchange by all parties in a single market. The law would also require the setting of a schedule, within three months of approval, for a reduction of the foreign exchange commission (Article 79). Recent developments: As of April 2,2002, the central bank has been setting the official exchange rate on a daily basis, equal to a weighted average of the previous day’s market rates. The spread between the official and commercial bank exchange rates has fallen from about 2 percent in March 2002 to under 1 percent in late-April, while the spread between the exchange house and the official exchange rates has narrowed from as much as 4 percent in March 2002 to about 1 ‘/I percent in late-April. The wider spread reflects the distortion caused by the foreign exchange commission, which exchange houses do not have to pay, allowing them to charge a more depreciated exchange rate. l/ When first introduced (January 1991) the commission was set at 2.5 percent; it was then rcduccd to 1.75 percent (July 1998), increased to 5 percent (October 1999), and most recently rcduccd to 4.75 pcrccnt (September 2001). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2l- Box 2. External Debt Management Main findings . Contraction of external debt is carried out by multiple public sector institutions and poorly coordinated. Although the Secretariat of Finance must give final approval, there is insufficient analysis of the costs of various loans and whether such loans are consistent with an overall debt management strategy. . Although the level of external debt is low (at 20 percent of GDP), the lumpiness of the debt-service profile gives rise to reserve management difficulties (Figure 1). Despite a decline in the debt-to-GDP ratio over the last years, interest payments have not fallen accordingly (Figure 2). Key policy actions to be considered l Increase transparency and accountability of debt management. Define better the roles, responsibilities, and objectives of financial agencies responsible for debt management. l Regularly publish information on the stock and composition of government debt and financial assets, including currency, maturity, and interest rate structure. l Explain debt management strategy to the public. Identify the trade-offs between risk and return in the government debt portfolio, including strategies for hedging exchange and interest rate risk. Establish debt management strategy within an overall macroeconomic framework to ensure debt sustainability. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 22 - Box 3. Fiscal Costs of Social Security Reform The law restructuring the health and pension systems and creating the Dominican System of Social Security was introduced in 2001. The previous pay-as-you-go pension system will be replaced by individual capitalized accounts. The government’s intention is to provide universal coverage in pensions and health, including for low-income persons, those in the informal sector, and independent workers. The narrow coverage of the old pensions system facilitated its reform, since its liabilities were relatively low. The new law creates a three-pillar system: l A contributory regime, covering public and private formal workers and employers, including the government; funded by both employees and employers. l A subsidized regime, covering informal workers with income below the minimum wage, the unemployed, and the poor; funded by the government. l A contributory-subsidized regime, covering the self-employed and informal workers with above-minimum-wage income; funded by workers and complemented by government subsidies (consisting of the complementary payments to reach the minimum pension and the minimum contribution for health care insurance). The government’s financial involvement will start as early as November 2002, stemming from the payment of contributions for public sector workers in the contributory healthcare regime and financing the accident insurance of public sector workers. Fiscal costs will reach a maximum in 2005, when all three regimes will be fully in place. Given that the previous system had one of the lowest coverage rates in Latin America, actuarial pension liabilities are not substantial. The additional fiscal costs stem from the wider coverage and the government contribution to the accident insurance. The authorities have made preliminary estimates of the costs of financing the subsidized regime. If sufficient resources are not available to fund the government’s required contribution, the law contains a provision that allows the government to ration the benefits. Rationing rules would still need to be defined. The net fiscal costs of the social security reform are tentatively projected to reach 1.2 percent of GDP by 2005 and to remain at that level thereafter. A definitive assessment is difficult, due to uncertainty regarding the number of potential beneficiaries in the subsidized and contributory- subsidized regimes. The estimation of the net fiscal costs would need to be adjusted for any proceeds from the sale of the assets of the Dominican Institute of Social Security (since some of the assets are being sold to cover the actuarial debt). Healthcare expenditure is projected to remain broadly unchanged in 2002-03, as the authorities work on improving the efficiency of existing healthcare expenditures-without increasing total expenditure. From 2004 on, it is projected to rise by 0.4 percent of GDP (to 2 percent of GDP), as benefits and coverage are extended. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public12 Prices and Growth 9.0 11 Savings and Investment (In percent of GDP) 10 9 Gross domestic 8 I 6 5 4 3 Real GDP growth (right axis) 8.0 7.0 6.0 5.0 4.0 3.0 2.0 1.0 Gross national savings 2 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 15 Balance of Payments (In percent of GDP) Fiscal Indicators 10 Domestic financing 5 Service balance External financing/j, -15 Trade balance -20 Overall balance l/ -25 -23 - Figure 1. Dominican Republic: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 1997-2001 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 1997 1998 1999 2000 200 I 28 26 24 22 20 18 16 3 2 1 0 -1 -2 -3 -4 Sources: Central Bank of the Dominican Republic; and Fund staff estimates and projections. l/ Including quasi-fiscal losses. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 24 - Apr./l 5 Apr./l c\1 8 Mar./l 5 N Mar./O1 Feb./l 3 Jan./30 Jan./l 5 s Dic./31 0 P-4 Dic./l 4 Nov./30 Nov./l 6 Nov./l Oct./l 8 Octl4 Sep./l 9 Sep.15 Ago.122 Ago.17 Jul.124 Jul./l 0 Juni26 Junill May.128 May.ll4 Apr. I27 Apr. I1 2 Mar. 129 Mar. I1 5 Mar./l Feb./l4 o 8 Jan/30 N Jan/l5 Dec.129 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 25- Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 26 - Table 1. Dominican Republic: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators 1997 1998 1999 (Annual percentage changes, t~nlcss othcrwisc indicated) PiA. Staff l’roj 2000 2001 2002 lnconw and prices Real GDP Real GDP per cap&~ GDP deflator Consumer prices (cnti-period) Consumer prices (period average) x.3 7.3 x.0 7.3 2.7 4.0 6.4 5.4 6.1 5.4 0.9 2.2 8.2 5.0 6.4 7.x x.9 5.7 8.4 7.x 5.1 9.0 4.4 6.6 8.3 4.x 6.5 7.7 x.9 4.x External sector Exports (f.o.h.) Traditional exports (f.o.b.) Net f&c-trade-zme exports (fo.h.) Domestic imports (f.o.b.) Imports vnlume Terms of tradt: Tour~rm receipts 15.2 3.x 1.0 16.1 -7.0 7.6 -13.5 -8.5 20.0 -17.7 22.8 18.6 7.0 14.1 -1 .o 17.1 16.X 6.3 23.2 -7.5 26.9 23.2 3.7 21.0 -4.1 0.3 2.9 -4.8 -6.6 1.2 17.9 2.6 15.3 15.2 -6.0 Nominal effective exchange rate (end-period, depreciation -1 -0.1 -11.1 0.8 -0.2 -0.8 Real effective exchange rate (cntl-period, tlcprcciation -) 5.9 -5.8 3.3 5.9 1.5 Nonfinancial public sector Total revenue Total expendihw 29.9 13.1 11.x 13.1 1.X 11 6 27.5 12.0 17.2 12.7 1.7 9.0 Ranking system Domestic credit (not) 1/ 2/ Nonfinancial publ~ sector (net) l/ Nonfinancial private sector l/ Other I/ Private sector credit (redi) Money and quasi-money (.M2) Velocity (GDI’/M2) 3/ Lending interest ratt: (9 l-1 80 days, period average) 22.0 20.1 2.2 4.2 18.3 13.5 1.5 2.4 12.7 22.0 23.4 21.4 4.3 3.9 21.3 26.6 (In percent of GDP) 22.5 17.2 10.5 12.5 2.2 2.0 -4.3 3.7 17.7 15.2 17.6 10.8 2.6 0.0 -2.8 -2.0 20.2 14.8 12.5 14.5 23.4 13.1 23.6 16.2 3.7 3.6 3.4 3.2 25.3 26.8 24.6 25.0 Public sector ctmcnt account position 4/ Consolidatctl puhhc sector position Gross domestic investment Gross national savings External savings Public external debt (end ofpcririod, including IMF) Interest payments tm external public debt 51 Overall balance ofpayments Change in gross international reserves (increase -) Exceptional financing 5/ Net international rcscTvcs, end ofperiod Gross official roservcs, end of period (In months of imports of goods and scwices) 6/ (In percent of M2) (In percent of short-term debt) 7/ Net USL: of Fund rcsourccs Memorandum items: Total liscal impulse Primary fiscal impulse 3.7 4.3 -2.1 -2.1 19.8 23.4 18.7 21.3 1.1 2.1 23.6 22.1 1.2 1.2 (In millions of U.S. dollars) 2.5 2.3 3.8 3.5 -3.0 -2.0 -2.0 -1.5 24.3 24.0 23.4 23.6 21.8 18.X 19.4 19.7 2.5 5.2 3.9 3.9 21.0 1.0 18.6 1.0 19.5 0.9 1 x.9 1.3 95.2 12.7 163.1 -48.0 515.6 169.0 -39.5 -9x.2 -193.7 69.5 -518.5 -72.0 -ss.7 85.6 30.6 -21.5 2.9 -97.0 2.54.4 354.0 547.0 441.9 962.2 1062.2 414.5 512.6 706.3 637.1 1157.5 1229.5 0.8 0.9 1.2 1.0 1.X 1.8 10.5 11.8 13.5 11.2 16.9 16.9 61.2 64.4 71.1 50.0 96.3 95.9 -62.5 27.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 -28.0 -0.2 0.4 0.0 0.3 9.6 x.9 9.9 4.5 x.4 2.0 1.x -6.0 2.7 -fl.7 -0.x -0.6 2.7 -0.9 -0.8 -0.9 Sources: Cenntral Bank of the Dominican Republic; Joint BIS-IMF-OECD-World Bank Statistics on External Debt; and Fund staff estimates and projections. 11 In relation to liabilities to tbt: private sector at the begmning of the period. 2/ Defined as liabilities to tbc private s&or less net foraign assets, including medium- and long-term debt. 3/ Defined as the ratio of GDP to the average of the end-period stock of M2 of twcl consecutive years. Figures are in level terms. 4/ Including grants and quasi-fiscal operations. 5/ Includes use of Fund resources, net changes in anears, and debt relief 6/ In relation to months of imports of goods dnd services during the upcoming year. 7/ Debt due within a year, rasidual maturity basis. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 27 - Table 2. Dominican Republic: Macroeconomic Framework 1997 1998 1999 2000 Prcl. Staff Proj. 2001 2002 (Annual percentage change, unless otherwise indicated) Real GDP growth 8.3 7.3 8.0 Private consumption 8.5 8.9 2.9 General government consumption 1.2 6.6 3.7 Gross domestic investment 18.4 26.1 13.6 Total domestic demand 10.3 13.3 6.2 Exports of goods and services 4.6 3.4 3.7 Imports of goods and services 6.6 9.8 2.4 Consumer prices (end of year) 8.4 7.8 5.1 Consumer prices (period average) 8.3 4.8 6.5 (In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated) Gross investment Public l/ Private Gross national savings Public Private External saving Change in net international reserves (In millions of U.S. dollars, increase -) Overall fiscal balance Qf which Quasi-fiscal losses Primary balance External public and publicly guaranteed debt 19.8 23.4 24.3 7.1 6.8 6.3 12.8 16.6 17.9 18.7 21.3 21.8 5.7 5.1 4.5 13.1 16.2 17.3 1.1 2.1 2.5 -110 -100 -193 -2.1 -2.1 -3.0 -0.7 -0.5 -0.4 -1.2 -1.2 -2.2 23.6 22.1 21.0 7.3 2.7 4.0 8.7 2.4 5.1 10.5 11.2 -1.0 6.9 -2.0 2.4 7.9 2.0 3.7 11.9 -7.2 3.3 12.5 -7.2 2.8 9.0 4.4 6.6 7.7 8.9 4.8 24.0 23.4 23.6 4.5 3.7 3.3 19.5 19.7 20.3 18.8 19.4 19.7 2.9 4.5 4.4 15.9 15.0 15.4 5.2 3.9 3.9 105 -2.0 -0.3 -1.1 18.6 -520 -100 -2.0 -0.2 -1.0 19.5 -1.5 -0.3 -0.2 18.9 Sources: Central Bank of the Dominican Republic; and Fund staff estimates and projections. l/ Public investment in the national accounts f;llls (in relation to GDP) in 2001. However, in the central government accounts, capital expenditure rises. The differing trends reflect the staffs upward adjustment to central government capital expenditure to include all foreign-financed projects, not just those registered in the budget, but also those that arc rccordcd in the balance of payments. The national accounts, on the other hand, are based on official statistics only and do not reflect this adjustment. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-28 - Table 3. Dominican Republic: Summary Operations of the Central Government (In percent of GDP) 1997 1998 1999 2000 Prel. Budget Staff Proj. 2001 2002 2002 Total revenue and grants Current revenue Tax revenue Taxes on income and profits Taxes on property Taxes on goods and services Of which Oil taxes Taxes on international trade Of which Foreign exchange commission Other taxes Nontax revenue Capital revenue 16.2 16.1 15.8 16.1 16.8 15.8 16.4 15.9 15.9 15.6 15.9 16.6 15.6 16.2 14.7 15.0 14.7 14.8 15.9 14.8 15.4 3.1 3.2 3.4 3.5 4.4 3.7 4.0 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 7.0 7.2 6.1 5.5 7.4 6.4 7.4 2.4 2.6 1.5 1.0 4.2 4.3 4.8 5.4 2.1 3.6 4.3 2.1 3.6 . . 0.2 1.2 0.3 . . . 0.1 0.9 0.1 0.3 0.2 0.9 0.0 1.0 0.2 1.1 0.0 0.9 0.2 0.7 0.1 0.8 0.0 0.9 0.3 0.7 0.1 Grants 0.0 0.2 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.1 Total expenditure 17.4 17.1 19.0 18.2 18.5 17.5 17.7 Current expenditure 11.7 12.0 12.9 13.9 12.9 11.8 12.3 Wages and salaries 4.6 5.3 5.1 5.6 6.0 4.9 5.8 Goods and services 0.6 1.8 1.8 1.6 1.7 2.8 1.7 Interest 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.9 0.8 1.6 1.2 Current transfers l/ 3.7 3.6 3.7 3.4 4.1 2.4 3.5 Other 21 2.1 0.6 1.6 2.4 0.2 0.0 0.2 Capital expenditure Fixed investment Capital transfers l! Other 5.7 5.0 3.9 3.0 1.6 1.8 0.3 0.2 4.2 4.0 6.1 4.3 3.7 2.9 2.0 1.1 0.4 0.2 5.6 3.5 1.9 0.2 3.8 5.7 3.5 2.2 0.0 5.4 3.0 2.2 0.2 Current account position (incl. grants) Capital account position Overall balance Financing 31 Foreign Domestic Banking system Private sector 41 -5.5 -5.0 -1.4 -1.0 1.4 1.0 -0.2 0.0 1.6 1.0 0.5 0.5 1.1 0.5 2.8 2.1 -6.1 -4.2 -3.2 -2.1 3.2 2.1 0.8 0.5 2.4 1.6 0.6 0.8 1.8 0.8 -5.6 -1.7 1.7 2.6 -0.9 -1.6 0.7 4.1 -5.7 -1.7 1.7 0.4 1.3 1.5 -0.2 4.0 -5.3 -1.3 1.3 0.4 1.0 1.3 -0.3 Memorandum item: Domestic debt Of which Domestic arrears 5.9 3.5 6.3 5.8 7.3 3.3 5.6 5.3 3.1 2.4 4.3 2.2 1.8 1.8 Sources: National Budget Office (ONAPRES); Central Bank of the Dominican Republic; and Fund staff estimates and projections. l/ Reflects notional transfers to public enterprises to service their external debt. 21 Includes 0.6 percent of GDP in unidentified expenditure in 2000. 31 When the 2002 budget was formulated, the sovereign bond proceeds were treated as foreign financing, under the assumption that the bond would not be issued until 2002. However, the bond was issued in 200 1, and the proceeds were deposited in the banking system. Hence, their use in 2002 is treated as domestic financing. The 2002 budget financing numbers shown in this table have been adjusted accordingly. 4/ Includes the accumulation of unrecorded arrears, estimated by staff. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 29 - Table 4. Dominican Republic: Central Government Fiscal Impulse (In percent of GDP) 2000 Budget Estimate Budget Staff Proj. 2001 2002 Overall balance (excl. grants) -2.2 0.3 -1.8 -1.8 -1.4 Revenue 15.9 15.9 16.6 15.7 16.2 Expenditure 18.2 15.6 18.5 17.5 17.7 Of which: primary 17.3 14.8 17.7 15.9 16.5 Primary balance -1.4 1.0 -1.0 -0.2 -0.3 Neutral overall balance -1.4 -1.2 -1.8 -2.0 -2.0 Revenue l/ 16.6 16.6 16.6 16.6 16.6 Expenditure 2/ 18.1 17.8 18.5 18.7 18.7 Of which : primary 17.3 17.0 17.7 17.8 17.8 Fiscal stance 3/ 0.8 -1.4 0.0 -0.2 -0.6 Total fiscal impulse (change in fiscal stance) 4/ -0.7 -2.2 -0.8 -0.2 -0.6 Revenue -0.3 0.1 -0.7 1.0 0.4 Expenditure -0.4 -2.3 -0.1 -1.2 -1.0 Primary stance 0.8 -1.4 0.0 -1.0 -0.9 Primary impulse -0.9 -2.2 -0.8 -1.0 -0.9 Noninterest expenditure impulse -0.6 -2.3 -0.1 -1.9 -1.3 Memorandum items: Real GDP growth Nominal GDP (millions of RD$) Potential GDP (millions of RD$) 7.0 6.5 2.7 4.0 4.0 321,516 387,316 359,560 395,175 395,175 314,510 375,166 359,560 399,098 399,098 Sources: Central Bank of the Dominican Republic; and Fund staff estimates and projections. l/ Assumes unitary elasticity of revenues with respect to actual GDP. 2/ Assumes unitary elasticity of expenditures with respect to potential GDP. 3/ The fiscal stance is defined as the cyclically neutral balance minus the actual overall balance. Thus, a positive value implies a fiscal expansion. 4/ The fiscal impulse is a measure of the yearly change in the fiscal stance. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 30 - Table 5. Dominican Republic: Effect of the 2001 Fiscal Reform In millions In percent ofRD$ of GDP Tax amnesty Corporate income tax l/ ITBIS Gasoline tax Elimination of gas subsidy (GLP) Tobacco and alcohol Gross effect Import tariffs -6,472.1 -1.8 Net effect 1,700.o 0.5 1,797.g 0.5 3,236.0 0.9 3,955.2 1.1 788.4 0.2 731.3 0.2 3.4 1.6 Sources: Data provided by the Secretariat of Finance; and the Central Bank of the Dominican Republic. l/ Advance payment of 1.5 percent of gross sales. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-31- Table 6. Dominican Republic: Summary Operations of the Consolidated Public Sector (In percent of GDP) 1997 1998 1999 2000 Prel. 2001 Staff Proj. 2002 Current account, before grants Capital account Capital revenue Capital expenditure Unidentified expenditure Grants Overall balance of nonfinancial public sector Quasi-fiscal operations Overall balance Financing Foreign Domestic Banking system Private sector l! Financing of quasi-fiscal operations Total revenue Current revenue Central government tax revenue Other current revenue Capital revenue Total expenditure Current expenditure Of which: central government wages Capital expenditure Unidentified expenditure Grants Overall position Net operating position Capital account position Capital revenue Capital expenditure Unidentified expenditure Overall balance Memorandum items: Interest payments 31 Primary balance Current account balance, including grants and quasi-fiscal operations Stock of public sector debt Public external debt Public domestic debt I. Nonfinancial public sector 4.3 4.4 -5.7 -5.5 1.4 1.3 7.1 6.8 0.1 0.8 0.1 0.3 -1.4 -1.7 -0.7 -0.5 -2.1 -2.1 2.1 2.1 -0.3 0.0 2.4 2.1 0.5 1.2 1.1 0.5 0.7 0.5 II. General government 21 17.2 16.9 16.8 16.7 14.7 15.0 2.1 1.8 0.4 0.2 15.7 15.3 10.9 11.5 4.6 5.3 4.8 3.8 0.3 0.4 0.1 0.3 1.4 1.6 III. Public enterprises 21 -1.6 -0.9 -1.3 -1.9 1.0 1.1 2.3 3.0 -0.1 0.5 -2.8 -3.2 0.9 0.9 -1.2 -1.2 3.7 4.3 29.5 28.4 23.6 22.1 5.9 6.3 2.6 2.4 3.8 3.6 -5.5 -4.5 -5.7 -5.0 0.9 0.8 0.6 0.7 6.5 5.3 6.3 5.8 0.0 -0.2 0.0 0.0 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.2 -2.6 -0.4 -3.0 3.0 0.6 2.4 0.6 0:: -1.7 -0.3 -2.0 2.0 0.5 1.6 ::2 0.3 -1.7 -0.2 -2.0 2.0 2.6 -0.7 -1.6 0.7 0.2 -1.2 -0.3 -1.5 ::: 1.2 -::: 0.3 16.6 17.0 16.7 16.3 16.5 16.8 16.7 16.2 14.7 14.8 15.9 15.4 1.8 2.1 0.8 0.7 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 16.8 17.8 12.1 13.6 i:: 2 0.0 0.0 0.2 0.2 0.1 -0.6 17.2 12.3 6.0 4.9 0.0 0.2 -0.3 15.9 11.9 5.8 4.1 0.0 0.2 0.5 -1.8 -0.9 -0.5 -0.7 -1.0 -0.5 -0.9 -1.1 0.8 0.6 0.5 0.6 1.8 1.1 1.4 1.7 0.0 -0.2 0.0 0.0 -2.7 -1.1 -1.4 -1.8 0.9 -2.2 0.9 -1.1 0.9 -1.0 1.3 -0.2 2.5 2.3 3.8 3.5 26.8 25.9 23.8 24.1 21.0 18.6 19.5 18.9 5.8 7.3 4.3 5.3 Sources: National Budget Office (ONAPRES); Central Bank of the Dominican Republic; and Fund staff estimates and projections l/ Includes the accumulation of unrecorded arrears, estimated by staff. 21 Net of intrapublic sector transfers. For 1999, figures exclude receipts from public enterprise capitalization. 31 Accrual basis, with interest on external debt valued at the official exchange rate. Includes interest on domestic debt. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 32 - Table 7. Dominican Republic: Selected Indicators of the Banking System 1997 1998 1999 2000 Prel. Staff Proj. 2001 2002 I. Central bank (Annual change in millions of U.S. dollars) Net international reserves 110 100 193 -105 Medium- and long-term foreign liabilities 34 27 22 22 (Annual percentage change with respect to liabilities to the private sector) Net domestic credit li Net credit to nonfinancial public sector Net credit to commercial banks Net credit to rest of financial system Official capital and accumulated surplus Other Liabilities to the private sector Currency in circulation Central bank certificates and other liabilities 3.0 -0.6 3.6 2.9 -20.0 -16.1 -5.5 -1.7 13.3 13.7 11.6 0.7 20.8 9.3 18.0 7.6 2.8 1.7 II. Banking system 11.4 0.8 8.6 9.3 -3.1 -20.2 -4.4 -2.2 7.1 8.8 3.3 5.1 34.2 -6.9 30.5 -9.4 3.7 2.5 (Annual change in millions of U.S. dollars) Net foreign assets 81 -46 152 -293 Medium- and long-term foreign liabilities 34 27 22 22 (Annual percentage change with respect to liabilities to the private sector) Net domestic assets l! Net claims on the public sector Net credit to rest financial system Credit to private sector Official capital and accumulated surplus Other Liabilities to the private sector Broad money Other 20.7 21.9 2.2 4.2 -1.5 -1.0 18.3 13.5 2.5 2.6 -0.9 2.5 23.5 20.6 19.6 17.9 4.0 2.7 (In percent of GDP) 22.5 2.2 -0.7 17.7 1.0 2.3 25.7 19.7 6.0 17.3 9.5 14.8 2.0 -4.3 3.7 -2.0 -4.2 -0.6 15.2 17.6 10.8 1.5 -0.8 -0.2 0.7 1.1 1.1 12.7 20.3 15.2 10.8 19.5 13.8 1.9 0.8 1.4 Currency in circulation Base money Narrow (M 1) 2/ money Broad (M2) money Liabilities to the private sector Credit to the private sector 5.0 5.0 5.3 9.3 10.0 10.3 10.2 10.4 10.3 23.3 25.4 27.0 27.9 30.3 32.5 18.1 19.9 21.5 (Annual percentage change, unless otherwise indicated) 5.0 4.4 4.6 10.1 10.1 10.6 9.1 8.4 8.9 27.5 29.2 31.7 33.3 34.7 37.1 23.2 25.6 27.7 Currency in circulation 20.0 8.5 34.4 -10.6 10.4 16.2 Base money 20.4 22.1 15.3 10.4 13.9 15.7 Narrow (M 1) 21 money 22.2 7.8 19.7 -11.6 17.9 16.2 Broad (M2) money 23.4 21.4 23.4 13.1 23.6 16.2 Credit to the private sector 29.0 20.5 26.8 22.8 24.2 14.5 520 100 51 -54 -51.6 8.4 -37.5 29.4 -14.8 -22.7 -2.0 0.0 4.8 0.4 -2.1 1.3 2.4 14.9 8.8 14.9 -6.4 0.0 686 51 68 -54 Sources: Central Bank of the Dominican Republic; and Fund staff estimates and projections. li Defined as liabilities to the private sector less net foreign assets, including central bank’s medium- and long-term debt. 2/ Defined as currency in circulation plus demand deposits. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-33 - Table 8. Dominican Republic: Commercial Bank Foreign Currency Operations 1997 1998 1999 2000 Prel. 2001 ( In millions of Dominican pesos) Foreign assets 3,400 4,847 5,172 6,943 9,037 Foreign liabilities 2,710 6,337 7,361 12,328 11,738 Foreign currency loans 2,725 6,737 12,151 19,592 27,608 Foreign currency deposits 2,449 5,590 9,862 14,190 23,3 12 (Annual percentage change) Foreign assets 38.6 42.6 6.7 34.2 Foreign liabilities 97.5 133.9 16.1 67.5 Foreign currency loans 157.3 147.3 80.4 61.2 Foreign currency deposits 88.1 128.2 76.4 43.9 (Annual percentage change with respect to liabilities to the private sector) li 30.1 -4.8 40.9 64.3 Foreign assets 1.8 2.2 0.4 1.8 Foreign liabilities 2.5 5.5 1.3 4.9 Foreign currency loans 3.1 6.0 6.8 7.4 Foreign currency deposits 2.1 4.7 5.3 4.3 (In percent of GDP) 1.8 -0.5 7.1 8.0 Foreign assets 1.6 2.0 1.9 2.2 2.5 Foreign liabilities 1.3 2.6 2.6 3.8 3.3 Foreign currency loans 1.3 2.8 4.4 6.1 7.7 Foreign currency deposits 1.1 2.3 3.5 4.4 6.5 Source: Central Bank of the Dominican Republic. l/ Liabilities to the private sector at the beginning of the period. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 34 - Table 9. Dominican Republic: Summary Balance of Payments (In millions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise indicated) 1997 1998 1999 2000 Prel. Staff Proj. 2001 2002 Current account Trade balance Traditional exports, f.o.b. Domestic imports, f.o.b. Of which Oil imports Net free-trade-zone exports Services balance (net) Of which Tourism receipts Income (net) Transfers (net) Of which Private remittances Capital and financial account Direct investment Portfolio investment Medium- and long-term loans (net) Of which Disbursements to public sector Other, including short-term capital Errors and omissions Overall balance Financing Change in gross official reserves (- = increase) Use of Fund resources (net) Exceptional financing l/ Memorandum items: Current account (in percent of GDP) Gross reserves In months of imports of goods and services 2/ 31 In percent of M2 In percent of short-term debt 4/ Net international reserves External public sector debt In percent of GDP Scheduled external public sector debt service 5/ In percent of exports of goods and services Interest on external public sector debt 6/ Amortization of public sector debt GDP (millions of U.S. dollars) Official exchange rate (period average) 6/ Official exchange rate (end-period) 6/ Market exchange rate (period average) 6/ 71 Weighted average exchange rate (period average) 6/ Average oil import price (US$/bbl) -163 -338 -429 -1,027 -839 -852 -1,995 -2,6 16 -2,904 -3,742 -3,451 -3,481 1,017 880 805 966 795 866 -4,192 -4,896 -5,207 -6,416 -5,937 -6,206 -814 -648 -871 -1,505 -1,234 -1,160 1,180 1,400 1,497 1,708 1,691 1,859 1.275 1,182 1,602 1,854 1,704 1,719 2,099 2,153 2,483 2,860 2,690 2,738 -795 -890 -975 -1,041 -1,119 -1,282 1,352 1,987 1,848 1,902 2,028 2,192 1,089 452 421 -8 -32 109 71 -194 95 -95 -40 -63 7 -1.1 -2.1 -2.5 -5.2 -3.9 415 513 706 637 1,158 0.8 0.9 1.1 1.0 1.8 10.5 11.8 13.5 11.2 16.9 61.2 64.4 71.1 50.0 96.3 254 354 547 442 962 3,572 3,545 3,657 3,676 4,170 23.6 22.1 21.0 18.6 19.5 384 408 405 475 608 5.4 5.4 5.0 5.2 7.2 189 187 180 201 198 196 221 225 273 410 15,157 16,030 17,412 19,719 21,395 14.0 14.7 15.8 16.2 16.7 14.0 15.4 15.9 16.5 17.0 14.2 15.2 16.0 16.3 16.8 14.2 15.1 16.0 16.3 16.8 20.2 14.6 19.3 30.0 25.8 1,326 1,519 1,689 1,808 690 1,073 1,597 1,654 700 1,338 953 1,198 -21 -437 264 124 0 110 184 644 138 314 351 932 12 62 195 -312 -339 -480 -618 -300 13 163 -48 516 -13 -163 48 -516 -98 -194 70 -519 27 0 0 0 58 31 -22 3 1,953 1,320 1,169 12 73 541 66 -300 169 -169 -72 -28 -69 -3.9 1,230 1.8 16.9 95.9 1,062 4,147 18.9 793 9.1 293 500 21,996 . . . 24.4 Sources: Central Bank of the Dominican Republic; Joint BIS-IMF-OECD-World Bank Statistics on External Debt; and Fund staff estimates and projections. l/ The large negative number in 2002 reflects a projected net repayment of overdue obligations, but within the grace period, 2/ In relation to imports of goods and services during the upcoming year. 3/ Net of the free-trade zone imports. 41 Debt due within a year, residual maturity basis. 5/ Refers to interest and amortization due on medium- and long-term public debt, including Fund credits. 6/ In Dominican pesos per U.S. dollar. 7/ Average of commmercial bank buy and sell rates. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 35 - Table 10. Dominican Republic: Medium-Term External Public Debt and Debt-Service Indicators 2000 Prel. 2001 2002 Staff Projections 2003 2004 2005 2006 Sources: Central Bank of the Dominican Republic; and Fund staff estimates and projections. l/ Refers to interest and amortization on medium- and long-term debt. 21 Exports and nonfactor services. 3/ In 1998, disbursements include refinancing of debt service (US$20 million) owed to Venezuela and a US$34 million net credit for an electricity generation facility, the balance of which is settled in the capitalization of CDE in 1999, and the purchase of SDR 39.7 million from the Fund for emergency assistance for the recovery from Hurricane Georges. Total external debt (end of period) Of which IMF Scheduled debt service 1/ Amortization Of which IMF Interest Debt service paid 1/ Total external debt (end of period) Of which IMF Scheduled debt service l/ Amortization Of which IMF Interest Debt service paid l/ Scheduled debt service l/ Amortization Of which IMF Interest Debt service paid l/ Memorandum items: GDP Exports of goods and services 2/ Disbursements 3/ (In millions of U.S. dollars) 3,676 4,170 4,147 30 50 25 473 603 788 271 406 495 0 0 28 201 198 293 494 601 857 (In percent of GDP) 4,157 4,269 4,396 4,537 0 0 0 0 916 887 932 1,469 569 524 543 1,075 25 0 0 0 347 363 389 394 916 887 932 1,469 18.6 19.5 18.9 17.6 0.2 0.2 0.1 0.0 2.4 2.8 3.6 3.9 1.4 1.9 2.3 2.4 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.1 1.0 0.9 1.3 1.5 2.5 2.8 3.9 3.9 (In percent of exports of goods and services) 5.2 7.2 9.1 9.8 3.0 4.8 5.7 6.1 0.0 0.0 0.3 0.3 2.2 2.3 3.4 3.7 5.5 7.1 9.8 9.8 (In millions of U.S. dollars) 16.7 15.9 15.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 3.5 3.4 4.9 2.1 2.0 3.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 1.4 1.4 1.3 3.5 3.4 4.9 9.0 8.7 12.8 5.3 5.1 9.3 0.0 0.0 0.0 3.7 3.7 3.4 9.0 8.7 12.8 19,719 21,395 21,996 23,595 25,538 27,635 29,924 9,062 8,433 8,699 9,302 9,873 10,656 11,516 351 932 541 580 636 670 1,215 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 36 - Table 11. Dominican Republic: Medium-Term Macroeconomic Framework 2002 Staff Projections 2003 2004 2005 2006 (Annual percentage change, unless otherwise indicated) Real GDP growth 4.0 5.2 5.5 Private consumption I/ 5.1 5.7 5.5 General government consumption I/ -1.0 4.7 2.5 Gross domestic investment li 2.4 3.1 5.2 Total domes tic demand 1 / 3.7 4.9 5.2 Exports of goods and services li 3.3 6.9 6.1 Imports of goods and services 11 2.8 6.0 5.3 Consumer prices (end of year) 6.6 2.8 2.5 Consumer prices (period average) 4.8 4.5 2.5 (In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated) Gross investment Public Private Gross national savings Public Private External saving Change in net international reserves (In millions of U.S. dollars, increase -) Overall fiscal balance Of which Quasi-fiscal losses Primary balance External public and publicly guaranteed debt 23.6 23.5 23.3 3.3 2.7 2.8 20.3 20.8 20.5 19.7 19.7 19.8 4.4 4.3 4.6 15.4 15.4 15.3 3.9 3.8 3.5 -100 -200 -300 -1.5 -0.6 -0.4 -0.3 -0.2 -0.2 -0.2 0.9 1.1 18.9 17.6 16.7 5.5 5.5 5.2 5.6 2.5 2.7 5.4 5.6 5.0 5.4 7.9 8.1 6.7 7.6 2.5 2.5 2.5 2.5 23.3 23.4 3.1 3.4 20.2 20.0 20.2 20.4 5.3 5.8 14.9 14.7 3.1 2.9 -350 -0.2 -0.2 1.2 15.9 -400 -0.2 -0.1 1.1 15.2 Sources: Central Bank of the Dominican Republic; and Fund staff estimates and projections. li In terms of contribution to real GDP growth. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 37 - Table 12. Dominican Republic: Medium-Term Summary Balance of Payments (In millions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise indicated) Est. Prel. 2000 2001 2002 Staff Projections 2003 2004 2005 2006 Current account Trade balance Traditional exports, f.o.b. Domestic imports, f.o.b. Of which Oil imports -1,027 -839 -852 -890 -888 -867 -872 -3,742 -3,451 -3,481 -3,650 -3,844 -3,994 -4,255 966 795 866 950 1,004 1,072 1,137 -6,416 -5,937 -6,206 -6,556 -6,933 -7,419 -7,987 Net free-trade-zone exports Services balance (net) Of which Tourism receipts Income (net) Transfers (net) Of which -1,505 -1,234 -1,160 -1,167 -1,117 -1,119 -1,122 1,708 1,691 1,859 1,956 2,085 2,353 2,595 1,854 1,704 1,719 1,857 2,020 2,164 2,340 2,860 2,690 2,738 2,941 3,167 3,387 3,651 -1,041 -1,119 -1,282 -1,434 -1,540 -1,680 -1,762 1,902 2,028 2,192 2,337 2,476 2,643 2,804 Private remittances 1,689 1,808 1,953 2,112 2,286 2,469 1,320 1,390 1,486 1,515 1,169 1,215 1,268 1,324 12 89 74 31 73 38 139 155 2,668 Capital and financial account 1,597 1,654 Direct investment (net) 953 1,198 Portfolio investment (net) 264 124 Medium- and long-term loans (net) 184 644 1,572 1,383 25 168 Ofwhich Disbursements to public sector 351 932 541 580 636 670 1,215 Other net, including short-term capital 195 -312 66 48 6 6 -4 Errors and omissions -618 -300 -300 -300 -300 -300 -300 Overall balance -48 516 169 200 300 350 400 Financing Change in gross official reserves (- = increase) Use of Fund resources (net) Net exceptional financing l/ 48 -516 -169 -200 -300 -350 -400 70 -519 -72 -175 -300 -350 -400 0 0 -28 -25 0 0 0 -22 3 -69 0 0 0 0 Memorandum items: Current account (in percent of GDP) Gross reserves In months of imports of goods and services 2/3/ In percent of M2 In percent short-term debt 41 Net international reserves External public sector debt In percent of GDP Scheduled external public sector debt service 5/ In percent of exports of goods and services Interest on external public sector debt 6/ Amortization of public sector debt 5/ GDP (millions of U.S. dollars) Official exchange rate (period average) 61 Official exchange rate (end-period) 6/ Market exchange rate (period average) 6/ 7/ Weighted average exchange rate (period average) 5/ Average oil import price (LJS$ibbl) -5.2 -3.9 637 1,158 1.0 1.8 11.2 16.9 50.0 96.3 442 962 3,676 4,170 18.6 19.5 475 608 5.2 7.2 201 198 273 410 19,719 21,395 16.2 16.7 16.5 17.0 16.3 16.8 16.3 16.8 30.0 25.7 -3.9 -3.x -3.5 -3.1 -2.9 1,230 1,405 1,705 2,055 2,455 1.8 2.0 2.3 2.5 2.8 16.9 17.1 18.7 20.4 22.2 95.9 103.0 121.1 141.1 163.7 1,062 1,262 1,562 1,912 2,312 4,147 4,157 4,269 4,396 4,537 18.9 17.6 16.7 15.9 15.2 793 921 893 932 1,469 9.1 9.9 9.0 8.7 12.8 293 347 363 389 394 500 575 530 543 1,075 21,996 23,595 25,538 27,635 29,924 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24.4 23.4 22.3 22.3 . . . 22.3 Sources: Central Bank of the Dominican Republic; Joint BIS-IMF-OECD-World Bank Statistics on External Debt; and Fund staff estimates and projections. I/ The large negative number in 2002 reflects a projected net repayment of overdue obligations, but within the grace period. 2/ In relation to imports of goods and services during the upcoming year. 3/ Net of the free-trade-zone imports. 4/ Debt due within a year, residual maturity basis. 5/ Refers to interest and amortization due on medium- and long-term public debt, including Fund credits. 61 In Dominican pesos per U.S. dollar. 71 Average of commercial bank buy and sell rates. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-38- Table 13, Dominican Republic: Selected Indicators of Domestic and External Vulnerability (In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated) 2000 Prel. 2001 2002 Staff Projections 2003 2004 2005 2006 Financial indicators Broad money (percent change, end-period) 13.1 Private sector credit (percent change, end-period) 22.X Lending interest rate (period average) li 26.8 Lending interest rate (period average, real) 1121 17.7 Deposit interest rate (period average) 31 17.7 Deposit interest rate (period average, real) 2/3/ 9.3 Banking sector soundness indicators Nonperforming loans/total loan portfolio 41 Provisions/total loan portfolio Total loans/total deposits Total liquid assets/total deposits 2.3 3.3 86.0 33.2 External indicators Exports (percent change, in U.S. dollars) 51 Tourism receipts (percentage change in U.S. dollars) Imports (percent change, in U.S. dollars) 6/ Oil price (US$ per barrel) Terms of trade (percent change) Current account balance Capital and financial account balance Of which 14.3 -6.9 5.0 7.6 7.4 8.0 X.5 15.2 -6.0 1.X 7.4 7.7 6.9 7.X 20.4 -7.0 4.0 5.5 5.6 6.7 7.3 30.0 25.X 24.4 23.4 22.3 22.3 22.3 -6.6 1.2 2.0 1.5 0.3 0.3 0.5 -5.2 -3.9 -3.9 -3.x -3.5 -3.1 -2.9 X.1 7.7 6.0 5.9 5.8 5.5 5.3 Foreign direct investment (net) Other private investment (net) Errors and omissions Gross official reserves 71 Central bank short-term foreign liabilities 7/ Foreign assets of the deposit money banks 71 Foreign liabilities of the deposit money banks 7/ Gross official reserves in months of imports X/ Gross official reserves to M2 (in percent) Gross official reserves to short-term debt (in percent) 91 Foreign liabilities of the banking system to gross reserves (in percent) Total external debt 4.X 5.6 5.3 5.1 5.0 4.X 4.6 2.X -0.2 0.5 0.7 0.4 0.2 0.2 -3.1 -1.4 -1.4 -1.3 -1.2 -1.1 -1.0 637 1,158 1,230 1,405 1,705 2,055 2,455 165 143 141 138 139 139 139 146 328 290 235 178 113 40 472 488 476 494 517 539 562 1.0 1.X 1.X 2.0 2.3 2.5 2.X 11.2 16.9 16.9 17.1 1x.7 20.4 22.2 50.0 96.3 95.9 103.0 121.1 141.1 163.7 Public and publicly guaranteed Private nonguaranteed Total external public sector debt service due lO/ Interest due lO/ Amortization due lO/ Official exchange rate (per U.S. dollar, period average) Market exchange rate (per U.S. dollar, period average) 1 l/ Real effective exchange rate (depreciation -, percent change, end-period) 74.1 42.1 24.5 25.3 18.6 19.5 5.9 5.X 5.2 7.2 2.2 2.3 3.0 4.X 16.2 16.7 16.3 16.8 5.9 23.6 16.2 24.2 14.5 24.6 . . . 14.4 15.6 6.2 2.2 3.2 3X.X 35.2 30.3 26.2 24.9 23.X 22.7 21.7 18.9 17.6 16.7 15.9 6.1 6.1 6.0 5.X 9.1 9.X 9.0 X.7 3.4 3.7 3.7 3.7 5.7 6.1 5.3 5.1 1.5 . . . 13.0 12.0 . . . . 10.7 12.0 10.7 10.4 9.7 10.3 . . 22.9 20.7 15.2 5.6 12.8 3.4 9.3 Sources: Central Bank of the Dominican Republic; &IF, Information Notice System; Joint BIS-IMF-OECD-World Bank Statistics on External Debt; and Fund staff estimates and projections. I/ Interest rate on commercial bank loans with maturities of 91-180 days. 21 Ex-post, based on average CPI inflation. 31 Interest rate on certificates of deposit with 1X0-day maturity. 4/ The reported figure understates the true extent of nonperfotming loans as it only includes the unpaid portion of the loan and not the entire balance. 51 Of goods and services, including net exports of free-trade zones. 6/ Of goods and services, excluding imports of free-trade zones. 7/ In millions of U.S. dollars. 8/ In relation to imports of goods and services, excluding the free trade zones, during the upcoming year. 91 Total debt due within a year, residual maturity basis. lO/ On medium- and long-term debt. In relation to exports of goods and services, including net free-trade-zone exports. 1 l/ Average of commercial banks’ buy and sell rates. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 39 - Table 14. Dominican Republic: Sensitivity Analysis (In millions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise indicated) 2002 Staff Projections 2003 2004 2005 2006 Baseline scenario Merchandise exports Imports Free trade zone earnings Tourism receipts Interest payments Current account Gross reserves-flow (+ = increase) Gross reserves-stock Gross reserves-months of imports l/ Lower export growth (1 percentage point less per year) Merchandise exports Current account Gross reserves-flow Gross reserves-stock Gross reserves-months of imports l/ Higher oil prices (US$l higher per barrel) Imports Current account Gross reserves-flow Gross reserves-stock Gross reserves-months of imports l/ Lower growth in free-trade-zone earnings (1 percentage point less per year) Free trade zone earnings Current account Gross reserves-flow Gross reserves-stock Gross reserves-months of imports li Lower growth in tourism receipts (1 percentage point less per year) Tourism receipts Current account Gross reserves-flow Gross reserves-stock Gross reserves-months of imports l/ Higher interest rates (1 percentage point higher) 21 Interest payments Current account Gross reserves-flow Gross reserves-stock Gross reserves-months of imports l/ 866 6,206 1,859 2,738 293 -852 72 1,230 1.8 847 -870 54 1,200 1.8 6,254 -899 25 1,132 1.7 1,824 -887 36 1,175 1.8 2,682 -908 16 1,143 1.7 334 -893 31 1,144 1.7 950 6,556 2,006 2,941 347 -890 175 1,405 2.0 922 -919 146 1,346 1.9 6,606 -940 125 1,257 1.8 1,949 -946 119 1,294 1.8 2,854 -977 88 1,232 1.7 388 -931 134 1,278 1.8 1,004 6,933 2,185 3,167 363 -888 300 1,705 2.3 964 -927 261 1,607 2.1 6,983 -938 250 1,507 2.0 2,104 -969 219 1,512 2.0 3,045 -1,009 178 1,410 1.9 405 -930 257 1,535 2.0 1,072 7,419 2,433 3,387 389 -867 350 2,055 2.5 1,020 -919 298 1,905 2.3 7,469 -917 300 1,807 2.2 2,322 -978 239 1,751 2.2 3,226 -1,028 189 1,599 2.0 433 -911 306 1,841 2.3 1,137 7,987 2,720 3,65 1 394 -872 400 2,455 2.8 1,072 -938 335 2,240 2.6 8,037 -923 350 2,157 2.5 2,572 -1,020 252 2,003 2.3 3,445 -1,078 194 1,793 2.1 439 -918 355 2,196 2.5 Sources: Central Bank of the Dominican Republic; and Fund staff projections. l/ In relation to imports of goods and services during the upcoming year. 2/ Considers only the impact of a higher interest rate on the portion of external public sector debt subject to a variable interest rate. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 40 - Table 15. Dominican Republic: Social Indicators (Latest available year) l/ Dominican Latin America Republic and Caribbean Human resources Population (thousands) Urban (percentage of population) Population annual growth rate (percent) Urban Total labor force (between 15 and 64 years, in thousands) Natural resources Arca (thousand sq. km.) Density (population per sq. km.) Arabic land (pcrccnt of land area) Irrigated land (percentage of cropland) Health Infant mortality (per thousand live births) Under 5 mortality rate Lift expectancy at birth (years) Overall Female Immunized (percent of children under 12 month) Measles DPT Nutrition Food production index (1989-91 = 100) 104 127 Education Gross enrollment ratios (percent of school age group) Primary Secondary Primary pupil-teacher ratio (pupils per teacher) Illiteracy rate (percent of population over 15 +) Women Enrollment ratio (percent of school age group) Primary Secondary Illiteracy rate (percent of females over 15 +) Labor force (percent of total) 8,254 501,709 64 75 1.8 1.6 2.8 2.1 3,549 212,089 48 20,064 171 25 21 7 17 14 40 31 59 38 71 73 80 93 80 82 94 113 54 60 34 24 17 12 94 61 17 13 30 34 70 73 Source: World Bank Social Indicators of Development, li Most data are for 1998. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicVI. -4l- APPENDIX I Dominican Republic: Fund Relations (As of March 3 1,2002) Membership status: Joined December 28, 1945; Article VIII August 1953. The Dominican Republic has not yet ratified the Fourth Amendment. General Resources Account: SDR Million Percent of Quota Quota 218.90 100.00 Fund holdings of currency 253.64 115.88 Reserve position in Fund 0.00 0.00 SDR department: SDR Million Net cumulative allocation 31.59 Holdings 0.39 Outstanding purchases and loans: SDR Million Percent of Quota Credit tranche 34.74 15.87 Financial arrangements: Type of Stand-by Stand-by Stand-by Approval Date 07/09/93 0812819 1 04/l 5185 Expira- Amount Amount tion Approved Drawn Date (SDR Million) (SDR Million) 03128194 31.80 16.80 03127193 39.24 39.24 04114186 78.50 78.50 Percent of Allocation 100.00 1.24 Projected Obligations to the Fund: (SDR million; based on existing use of resources and present holdings of SDRs): Principal Charges/Interest Total Overdue 12/31/01 0.0 0.0 0.0 2002 14.9 1.2 16.1 Forthcoming 2003 2004 2005 2006 19.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 1.1 0.7 0.7 0.7 21.0 0.7 0.7 0.7 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 42 - APPENDIX I VII. Exchange Arrangements: The exchange rate is heavily managed. Two multiple currency practices exist, subject to Fund jurisdiction under Article VIII. One multiple currency practice (MCP) arises because of the potential for the official exchange rate to differ from the private rate by more than 2 percent at any given time. The other MCP stems from the 4.75 percent foreign exchange commission. The private rate is allowed to float, while certain operations have to be channeled at the official rate set by the central bank. The official market comprises about lo-15 percent of all foreign exchange transactions. The sources of foreign exchange to the official market are derived from government capital inflows and surrender requirements on selected transactions (for example, credit card operations and telecommunication services), while the uses include payment for oil imports and public sector debt service. As of April 2, 2002, the spread between the official and the private market rate was negligible. On the same date, the official buy and sell rates stood at RD$1753=US$l and RD$17.61=US$l, respectively. VIII. Article IV Consultation: The last Article IV consultation was concluded by the Executive Board on February 23,200l (SM/01/41). The Dominican Republic is on the standard 12- month consultation cycle. IX. FSAP Participation: FSAP missions took place in February and April 200 1, and February 2002. The relevant documents will be circulated with the rest of the 2002 Article IV documentation. X. Technical assistance: Department Dates Purpose MAE March 1997 Foreign exchange transactions STA April 1997 March 1998 January 2002 April 2002 April-May 2002 Monetary statistics Balance of payments statistics Quarterly national accounts Follow-up on quarterly national accounts Multisector mission Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicAPPENDIX II Dominican Republic: Relations with the World Bank Group (As of March 3 1, 2002; in millions of U.S. dollars) Commitments (net of cancellations) Disbursements Undisbursed Amount Total 875.6 750.0 125.5 Agriculture and irrigation I/ 129.8 110.7 19.1 Education 21 67.4 54.6 12.8 Energy 108.8 108.8 0.0 Environment 3.0 2.7 0.3 Free-trade-zone development loan 31 27.9 27.9 0.0 Health 55.0 24.4 30.7 Housing 41 3.3 3.3 0.0 Hurricane reconstruction 51 161.1 132.8 28.3 Mining 25.0 25.0 0.0 Population 61 4.9 4.9 0.0 Telecommunications 12.3 4.1 8.3 Tourism 71 42.4 42.4 0.0 Transport 229.1 208.6 21.2 Water 5.0 0.0 5.0 FY Approval 1993 1995196 1998 2000 2000 Total portfolio Company (sector) Flamenco (Hotel) Smith Enron (Power) Flamenco Bavaro (Hotel) Hospiten (Health care) Rica (Agriculture) A. IBRD and IDA Operations B. IFC Operations 81 IFC Held Quasi- Partic- Loan Equity Loan ipant 1.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 15.9 0.0 4.7 19.4 4.7 0.0 7.7 16.3 2.0 0.0 0.0 2.0 12.0 0.0 3.0 0.0 35.6 0.0 15.4 37.7 IFC Disbursed Quasi- Partic- Loan Equity Loan ipant 1.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 15.9 0.0 4.7 19.4 4.7 0.0 7.1 16.3 1.5 0.0 0.0 1.5 12.0 0.0 3.0 0.0 35.1 0.0 15.4 37.2 Disbursements Repayments Net lending Valuation adjustments Debt outstanding Interest and charges Net transfer 1993 34.8 25.6 9.2 -3.9 279.8 19.7 -10.5 C. IBRD and IDA Loan Transactions (fiscal year) 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 91 26.1 34.1 31.9 16.0 11.3 42.8 77.0 50.9 32.6 30.4 39.1 40.2 34.7 24.6 22.7 20.8 23.2 16.9 -4.3 -5.0 -8.3 -18.7 -13.3 20.1 56.2 27.7 15.7 17.7 33.3 -35.8 -15.4 -17.7 6.7 0.3 -1.3 -1.5 293.2 321.5 277.4 243.3 212.3 239.1 295.6 322.0 336.2 19.6 20.5 20.3 17.2 14.7 14.8 20.1 23.1 13.3 -23.9 -25.5 -28.6 -35.9 -28.0 5.3 36.1 4.6 2.4 Source: World Bank Group. l/ USSl.65 million of Sugar Rehabilitation loan and US$O.42 million of the Cocoa and Coffee Development loan were canceled. 21 US$5.8 million of the Vocational Training loan was canceled. 31 US$2.13 million of Free-Trade-Zone Development loan was canceled. 4/ US$7.08 million of the Technical Assistance loan and US$22.15 million of the Sites and Services loan were canceled. 51 US$O.O003 million of the Road Reconstruction III loan was canceled. 6/ US$O. 13 million of the Population and Family Health loan was canceled. 71 US$O.O8 million of the First Puerto Plats Tourism loan and US$3.54 million of the Second Puerto Plata Tourism loan were canceled. 81 As of February 2002. 91 As of March 22, 2002. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 44 - APPENDIX III Dominican Republic: Relations with the Inter-American Development Bank (As of December 3 1, 2001, in millions of U.S. dollars) Commitments Disbursements Undisbursed Amount A. IDB Operations Total 973.5 437.3 536.2 Agriculture 106.0 68.4 37.6 Transport 82.3 37.5 44.8 Financial sector 102.0 72.6 29.4 Budget administration 10.3 0.5 9.8 Executive sector 21.5 0.0 21.5 National congress 22.3 0.7 21.6 Social investment 39.0 35.2 3.8 Education 120.9 45.3 75.6 Health 61.2 19.5 41.7 Safe water and sanitation 71.0 0.5 70.5 Land administration 32.0 2.8 29.2 Hurricane reconstruction 105.0 74.0 31.0 Social sector reform 200.0 80.3 119.7 Disbursements Repayments Net lending Valuation adjustments Debt outstanding Interest and charges 31.2 31.9 33.9 40.5 36.7 Net transfer -22.2 -6.5 12.4 -20.6 60.2 B. IDB Loan Transactions 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 l/ 43.4 57.4 77.9 58.3 142.4 34.4 32 31.6 38.4 45.5 9.0 25.4 46.3 19.9 96.9 -21.1 16.1 -5.6 9.7 8.3 701.8 743.2 784 813.6 918.8 Source: Inter-American Development Bank. l/ Preliminary. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-45 - APPENDIX IV Dominican Republic: Domestic Debt 0 Government domestic debt management is inadequate. Institutional weaknesses have hampered the government’s ability to monitor debt developments and to make timely payments. Some measures are being implemented to improve debt management, including the appointment of a commission to define domestic debt policy and to identify (for future payment) overdue financial obligations. The government reduced its outstanding stock of arrears to the electricity companies in 2001 by about US$l80 million (mostly through cash payments). 0 Domestic public debt consists of recognized financial obligations stemming from the issuance of treasury certificates and public sector domestic bonds net of intra- governmental debt; recognized arrears with private suppliers and the electricity sector; and net credit from the banking sector. The definition excludes publicly guaranteed debt, contingent liabilities, actuarial liabilities of the social security reform, and floating debt (defined as the backlog of unpaid obligations due to government delays in meeting accrued obligations for goods and services received). In 2001, a shift of government financing from the state-owned Reserves Bank to private commercial banks has increased fiscal transparency by making the cost of government financing accurately reflect its market value. Net Domestic Nonfinancial Public Sector Debt (In millions of Dominican pesos; unless otherwise indicated) Domestic debt Treasury bonds Treasury certificates Arrears, excluding electricity sector Arrears to electricity sector Net debt with central bank l/ Net debt with Reserves Bank Rosario Dominicana net debt with BCRD Net debt with commercial banks Total (in percent of GDP) Total arrears (in percent of GDP) 1997 1998 1999 11.2 10.3 11.1 0.0 97.0 161.5 7,509.g 7,413.3 6,673.g . . . . . . 4,669.2 4,285.0 -1,191.g 1,183.g 1,473.7 1,798.7 232.5 386.1 12,704.6 15J74.3 5.9 6.3 3.5 3.1 . . . 4,741.8 1,384.0 2,330.4 738.8 16,041.5 5.8 2.4 2000 2001 1,551.g 961.8 174.8 180.3 5,035.g 5,194.6 5,577.3 2,681.7 6,447.0 -321.2 2,433.7 1,719.5 2,440.2 2,520.g -126.4 2,502.4 23,534.2 15,439.9 7.3 4.3 3.3 2.2 Sources: Central Bank of the Dominican Republic; Dominican Electricity Corporation; Preliminary Offering Memorandum for the 2001 Dominican Sovereign Bond Issue; and Fund staff estimates, l/ The drop in net debt in 2001 reflects the government’s deposit of the proceeds from the sovereign bond issue. Adjusting for bond proceeds, total domestic debt increases to 5.8 percent of GDP in 2001. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 46 - APPENDIX V Dominican Republic: Electricity Subsidies l In the second half of the 199Os, the state-owned electricity company (CDE) was restructured. The reform involved the sale of 50 percent of the shares of the distribution and thermoelectric companies, while the CDE maintained ownership of the hydroelectric and transmission companies. New independent power producers (IPPs) were allowed to enter the market. l Key problems facing the sector include (1) need for institutional strengthening of the CDE, the regulatory agency, and the legal framework; (2) costly contracts between the CDE and lPPs; (3) electricity theft and technical losses; and (4) a cumbersome system of electricity subsidies. Some measures have been taken to reduce subsidies, but the following subsidies remain: A generalized government subsidy of about US$O.Ol per kwh at an annual cost zf USS65 million (0.3 percent of GDP) in 2001. 0 A cross-subsidy from those that consume 700 kwh or more per month to those that consume less than that threshold. l A subsidy on the price of fuel oil sold to private generators when the price of bunker fuel oil #6 is above a trigger price. In 2001, after negotiations of a new agreement with IPPs, a trigger price of US$l7/bbl was negotiated, resulting in savings to the government of about US$l5 million per month (0.8 percent of GDP). However, if oil prices rise sufficiently high in the future (the price at end-April 2002 was about US$16.7/bbl), the government would have to pay the subsidy. In addition, the hydrocarbons law exempts power generators from taxes on their fuel-oil consumption. An indexation subsidy. Electricity tariffs are indexed to the price of bunker fuel oil, the U.S. CPI, and changes in the exchange rate. For the time being, the government has decided not to pass along the price increases that would result from application of the indexation mechanism, bearing the costs itself (about US$l54 million in 2001 or 0.7 percent of GDP). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 47 - APPENDIX VI Dominican Republic: Main FSAP Findings and Recommendations Main findings The principal sources of macroeconomic vulnerabilities are 1) a low level of international reserves, 2) high real interest rates, 3) wide bank intermediation spreads, and 4) exchange rate risk related to the rapid growth of banking system assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currency. Progress has been made in modernizing the financial system, including: Approval by the Monetary Board of the BCRD of the Monetary and Financial Law (MFL) in February 2002. Once approved by congress, this law will confer greater autonomy to the central bank and the superintendency of banks (SB), facilitate consolidated supervision, and provide speedy resolution of troubled financial institutions. Central bank divestiture of a number of assets that do not pertain to the core tasks of a central bank. The Rosario Dominicana gold mine is expected to commence operations soon through a private concession, while Pluya Grande has reopened the bidding process. Other noncore activities related to development financing and vocational training will be divested in the near future. Modernization of the payments system through reducing the number of clearing houses to one, operated electronically by the BCRD. The central bank expanded the functions of the money desk to facilitate the auction of certificates of deposit and the establishment of a short-term liquidity facility. A foreign exchange desk started operations this year to facilitate intervention through transparent auctions. Bank supervision is being strengthened. The SB has increased penalties for loan misclassification, established accrual accounting, and renovated the registry of auditors. Anti-money laundering (AML) supervision has now been incorporated in on-site inspections. Key recommendations and policy actions being taken Publish the complete monetary program, including inflation, output growth, and reserve accumulation targets-parts of program are already published. Conduct open market operations through weekly auctions-moving in this direction. Develop appropriate regulations and implement consolidated supervision, including of off-shore subsidiaries-in process. Issue new accounting and disclosure rules, in line with internationally accepted accounting standards-in process. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-48 - APPENDIX VII Dominican Republic: Ongoing and Recently Completed Structural Reforms Reform Description Status Privatization/Capitalization Playa Grande (owned by BCRD) Sale of tourist resort to the private sector State-owned sugar company (CEA) Land sales to the private sector Gold mine (owned by BCRD) Lease to private sector Dominican Painting Co., Paper Industry, Dominican Aviation Co. Create a joint ventures Sale to the private sector State-owned free-trade zone parks Financial sector Monetary and Financial Code WC) Sales to the private sector Strengthen central bank independence and banking supervision and regulation In preparation. Redrafted, and approved by the Monetary Board at the Central Bank. Social Security Law Substitute pay-as-you-go with individually Approved by congress in 200 1; administrative capitalized system regulations still pending. Capital Markets Law External sector General customs Establish policy and regulatory framework for capital market development Make customs system more efficient and transparent Pending establishment of administrative regulations. GATT valuation system implemented in summer 2001. Tariff reform Liberalize trade and reduce tariffs Tariff rates reduced in January 200 1 and further reductions are planned. Export incentives Promote exports through system of drawbacks on custom duties and levies Foreign exchange commision Gradual reduction and abolition Foreign exchange surrender requirements Public sector reform Integrated financial management program (IFMP) for public sector Abolish foreign exchange surrender requirements Aim is to improve efficiency and transparency of government operations Modernization of the Executive Power Public accounting law Public procurement law External debt management Regulatory reform Electricity law Petroleum products law Property rights regulation Anti-trust legislation Telecommunications Improve macroeconomic policy coordination, streamline government structure Modernize public accounting system Establish more competitive rules for public procurement Rationalize debt contracting and management procedures Establish modem regulatory framework and regulatory body Establish a fixed tax on domestic fuel consumption Establish new property rights law Establish legal framework to deal with anti-competitive behavior Establish modem regulatory framework First bid declared void. Second bid in process. Land leased to the private sector. Bidding process finished (allocated to Placer Dome of Canada). Contract submitted to congress for approval. Bidding process in progress. Bidding process finished and allocated to Aeropostal, but being reconsidered as the company refused to sign the contract afterward. Under analysis. Approved by congress in August 1999; admin- istrative regulations approved in February 2000. Reduced from 5 percent to 4.75 percent in September 200 1. Procedure for its reduction established in the draft of the MFC. Surrender requirements on selected activities eliminated in November 2001. Complete elimination contemplated in the draft of the MFC. Project approved by congress in October 2000; pilot programs underway in health and education sectors; discretionary expenditure account of presidency to be made transparent by 2002. Congressional approval pending. Congressional approval pending Congressional approval pending In progress. Completed in August 2001. Completed in December 2000. Approved by congress in July 2000. Pending establishment of administrative regulations, Passed two (property rights and copyright law) of five “books” of supporting legislation in July 2000. Law No. 153-98 approved in May 1998. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 49 - APPENDIX VIII Real sector Dominican Republic: Statistical Issues Published GDP estimates use an outdated 1970 base year. Moreover, the quality of these estimates is undermined by a lack of comprehensive data sources and methodological problems. A revision of the system of national accounts, initiated with assistance from the UNDP, is underway. This includes a methodological upgrade to the standards of the 1993 System ofNational Accounts and an update of the base year from 1970 to 1991. Rebased estimates of GDP at constant prices will be published by mid-2003. The authorities are seeking an external review of the revised national accounts series before releasing them. STA technical assistance missions visited Santo Domingo in January and April-May 2002 to assist the authorities with improving the quarterly national accounts. A work program was agreed with the authorities for improving and updating the annual accounts, including the establishment of a system of quarterly accounts, using 1991 as the base year. For the most part, data are reported to the IFS on a regular basis although not always with the required timeliness. Coverage of some major real sector indicators is limited, with untimely release of export and import volume and unit value indices, no information about the product breakdown of free-trade-zones imports and exports, and with no available series for producer prices, industrial production, and wages (except minimum wages). A work program for compiling the production index has been discussed with the April-May 2002 STA mission. New indices for consumer prices based on updated and more accurate consumption baskets were published in April 1999 (with the new indices beginning in January 1999). Weights have been revised on the basis of the third national survey on household income and expenditure (October 1997-September 1998). Fiscal sector Data on fiscal revenues and expenditures lack consistency with data on public sector financing. The resulting statistical discrepancy is treated as an above-the-line item in the fiscal accounts, but given its extrabudgetary nature, it is difficult to classify. Fiscal data are collected from various sources (National Budget Office, Treasury, Controller General, and the Central Bank of the Dominican Republic (BCRD)), but with limited coordination and consistency in classification. Poor information on government expenditure contributes to the statistical discrepancy. Some progress has been made recently in reducing this statistical discrepancy, by identifying the use of external loans whose associated expenditures had not previously been registered in the budget. More progress is still needed. Furthermore, information on public enterprises is often incomplete and available only with long delays. Monetary accounts Reporting of monetary statistics to STA has been regularized. In 1997 a monetary and financial statistics (MFS) mission visited the Dominican Republic. This mission assisted BCRD officials in deriving analytical accounts for banking institutions based on a new plan of accounts and the supplementary report forms submitted by the Reserves Bank. Regarding the data of the BCRD, all recommendations of the 1997 MFS mission have been Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 50 - APPENDIX VIII implemented, and revised monthly data have been published in IFS. However, with respect to the recommendations for the other depository corporations, some actions are still pending and the authorities still have to produce revised historical series of commercial banking data. In the area of MFS, the April-May 2002 STA multisector statistics mission provided technical assistance to (1) improve and update the system for compiling monetary statistics in accordance with the requirements of the Fund’s Monetary and Financial Statistics Manual (MFSM) and (2) review and improve the BCRD’s procedures for collecting, compiling, and reporting monetary statistics. Banking sector The Superintendency of Banks (SB) plans to improve on-line consultation to banks for their Central de Riesgos (a central registry with information on the credit risk of borrowers). Toward the end of 2002, the SB plans to publish the solvency index monthly (rather than semi-annually as at present), and banks will be required to report the index to the SB (currently, the SB calculates the solvency index only when it visits the banks). The SB publishes (in hardcopy form) its Boletin Informative (on banking statistics) twice a year, but selected monthly banking statistics are available on-line with a lag of about two months. Balance of payments Since February 1997, the balance of payment statistics have been produced in accordance with the methodology recommended in the fifth edition of the Balance ofPayments Manual (BPM.5). The authorities have continued to revise the balance of payments statistics, most recently in February 1999. At that time, further progress was made in finalizing the compilation of the balance of payments according to the methodology recommended in BPA45. Improvements were reported, particularly in the recording of exports and imports of the free-trade zones, public external debt data , and current transfers. Progress has also been made in improving the coverage of foreign direct investment and services transactions and to validate data derived from surveys and questionnaires, although there is room for further improvement. The Dominican Republic does not produce statistics on the International Investment Position. Errors and omissions are still a large item in the balance of payments. External debt The authorities are working on strengthening their monitoring of external debt. All public sector external debt operations are to be managed by the Secretariat of Finance. The authorities also intend to (i) improve the enforcement of legal obligations for the private sector to report new external loans (particularly for smaller companies); (ii) strengthen the quality of the data on public and private short-term debt, and (iii) improve information on new external debt, mainly as regards loan conditions and the destination of the funds, which are lacking at present. Technical assistance is being provided by the IDB to address shortcomings in the management of public sector external debt. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-5l- APPENDIX VIII Data dissemination The authorities publish quarterly reports on economic developments. The reports contain timely preliminary data on real GDP, consumer prices, interest rates, exchange rates, balance of payments, exports and imports, and operations of the central government and the banking system. The Quarterly Bulletin of the central bank contains more detailed information on sectoral developments, but the bulletin is published with delays of about four months. The central bank also maintains a website that presents selected data on a relatively timely basis. Adequacy of data for effective surveillance Data weaknesses hamper, but do not prevent, effective surveillance. Long lags in the reporting of data occasionally arise, most notably on government spending and operations of the public enterprises. The authorities have formulated an action plan to remedy the most serious data weaknesses. A multisector STA mission visited the Dominican Republic in April-May 2002 to conduct a comprehensive assessment of the statistics compiled for national accounts, prices, public finances, financial developments, and the balance of payments. A final report was not available at the time of this writing. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 52 - APPENDIX VIII Statistical Issues-Action Plan Real Issue Action Status Real GDP data are prepared on the basis of 1970 prices. Improving tourism statistics and strengthening institutional capacity to better formulate and evaluate tourism policies. Fiscal Revise the system of Real GDP data will be rebased national accounts with to 1991 price and publihed by UNDP assistance, including mid-2003. a methodological upgrade to the standards of the 1993 System of National Accounts. Program including technical The central bank is responsible assistance was signed with for the first phase of the the IDB. program which includes conducting a hotel census. The budget is presented in an unorthodox way-financing items are mixed with revenue and expenditure items. Transfers to public enterprises for external debt service are not reported as expenditure. There are usually discrepancies between budget and balance of payments data on external financing. Accurately record domestic debt including arrears. Create a working group to coordinate balance of payments and government finance data. Working group created. Implement an integrated Domestic debt unit created. financial management program with support from the IDB to strengthen control and monitoring of government expenditure and debt, including domestic arrears. Expenditure data are generally poor. For instance, government expenditure financed with some types of external financing (e.g., tied import loans) is not registered in the budget. There are large gaps in the information concerning domestic arrears. Implement an integrated financial management program with support from the IDB to strengthen control and monitoring of government expenditure, including domestic arrears. An IDB loan (US$lO million) has been approved by congress-the program is to be completed by 2002. Two draft laws on an autonomous comptroller’s office and accounting practices. Domestic debt commission created. External Data on financial flows have been Improve data collection on Results are currently being incomplete, partly reflected in large and FDI, services, and transfers. integrated in balance of fluctuating errors and omissions in the Compile International payments statistics. balance of payments. Investment Position data category (IIP).Compile the Forthcoming STA mission will Data on the Template on International reserve template. provide technical assistance to Reserves and Foreign Currency Liquidity are Improve valuation of import compile the IIP and the reserve not being compiled according the goods at customs. template. Operational Guidelines of the IMF. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 53 - APPENDIX VIII Issue Action Status 1 coherent external financing strategy is Concentrate in one unit A unit for external financing acking. The process to contract external debt responsibilities for debt management has been created, s not transparent. External debt management contraction and monitoring; although it is at a very early echniques need to be rationalized. constitute a professional stage. Complete information on team to manage exposure, the terms of contracted debt and and formulate debt the destination of funds is still management guidelines. lacking. 1ata on public and private external short- erm debt are incomplete and not well nonitored. Compliance with legal obligations of the jrivate sector to report to the BCRD new :xtemal loans is mixed, and monitoring is catchy. Complete data; develop Proposed by last Art. IV high frequency monitoring mission. on a residual maturity basis. Strengthen enforcement. Proposed by last Art. IV mission. Financial gonperforming loans include only the unpaid Modify norms to include In process. )ortion, not the entire loan balance due. entire loan balance. Classification of assets and provisioning standards is less stringent than international Gtandards. VIarket risks are not measured. Modify prudential norms on In process. the classification of assets and provisioning standards. Introduce prudential norms Done. to measure market risks. 3ease publishing the credit risk index. Poletin Informativo is published semi- mnually. Solvency index not reported by commercial banks. Report the provisioning Index has been renamed to shortfalls that result from more accurately reflect its role transitory periods to as a measure of provisions. constitute provisions. Publish Boletin Informativo Started in 200 1. on a quarterly basis. Have banks compute and To begin in 2002. report monthly. Social Statistical databases on social issues are scarce and information, including social indicators, is incomplete or obsolete. Social sector statistics lack reliability and consistency. Strengthen, with assistance Terms of reference for the from the IDB, World Bank, program coordinator are being and CEPAL, institutional prepared. Work will include capacity to develop social strengthening household survey sector statistics through systems and analysis capacity, MECOVI (Mejoramiento de improving publication of las Encuestas y la Medic& results, and presenting them in de Condiciones de Vida en seminars. Amdrica Latina y el Caribe). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicAPPENIX VIII Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 55 - PRIVATIZATION AND THE ROLE OF THE STATE APPENDIX IX Privatization The Mejia administration is continuing the privatization agenda started by the previous administration. Pursuant to the Public Enterprise Reform Law, the privatization of state- owned companies must be effected primarily through a process of share purchases (which is referred to under Dominican law as “capitalization”). Under the capitalization process, private sector companies contribute a sum equal to the value of the state-owned company subject to privatization to create a new company, 50 percent of which is owned by the government as required by law. This law also gives discretion to the Commission for the Reform of Public Enterprises to implement the government’s privatization initiatives through franchising, concessions, transfers of shares or assets, or the sale of assets. Under this law, funds obtained through the privatization process are placed in the Fondo Patrimonial (the Privatization Fund). The law concerning the use of these funds has not yet been approved. The state-owned companies that have been privatized include the following: l the Dominican Electricity Corporation (CDE); l the National Sugar Board (NSB); l companies owned by the Dominican State Enterprises Corporation (CORDE), a holding company with interest in companies operating in a wide range of economic activities; and l the Hotel Industry Promotion Corporation (CORPHOTELES). The following summarizes the steps taken to privatize these companies: l The privatization of the CDE, launched in 1999, divided the company into three separate parts, each dealing with a different segment of the electricity market- generation, distribution, and transmission. As a result of these measures, three new joint (private and state-owned) companies were established to assume the power distribution business, serving a total of approximately 1.1 million customers, and two new joint (private and state-owned) companies-Empresa Generadora de Electricidad Itabo, S.A. and Empresa Generadora de Electricidad Haina, S.A.-were established to generate thermoelectric power. l In June 1999, the government decided to lease the sugar mills owned by the NSB to pivate sector operators, in an effort to improve their performance. To date, the National Sugar Board’s ten sugar mills have been leased to four private consortiums, which have invested resources to improve the mills’ production capabilities, and the quality of the mills’ facilities. l The privatization of CORDE was launched in 1999 with the sale of two of its subsidiaries, Molinos Dominicanos and Molinos de1 Norte. These two companies merged into Molinos de1 Ozama, which was purchased by Malla y Cia. In December 1999, the government authorized the lease of two CORDE subsidiaries, Minas de Sal y Yeso and Marmoleria National, Cementos Nacionales (a subsidiary of Cementos de Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 56 - APPENDIX IX Mexico, S.A. de C. V.) and Marmotech, S.A. The privatization of CORDE continued in January 2000, when its three tobacco subsidiaries were merged into a single entity that was capitalized by CITA Caribe (a subsidiary of CITA Tabacos de Canarias). All other companies held by CORDE have been liquidated. l In the case of CORPHOTELES, 15 of the company’s 18 hotels have been leased to private operators. In 1999, the government also privatized the management of four of the country’s international airports. Aeropuertos Dominicanos Siglo XYI, S.A. (a private consortium known as Aerodom) was selected through a competitive bidding process to operate the airports for a period of 25 years. In addition, Aerodom will build a new international airport in El Catey, near the Samana resort area, and will complete construction of an airport in La Isabella, near Santo Domingo. The government is also promoting involvement of the private sector in other public endeavors, such as in the development of sulfide deposits and the construction and management of highways. The role of the state in the economy Following enactment of the Public Enterprise Reform Law on June 24, 1997, the government reduced its involvement in the Dominican economy. While in the early 1990s the government maintained a 100 percent equity ownership in existing public enterprises, the government has gradually been reducing its ownership stakes in those enterprises. The Mejia administration has promoted private sector involvement in areas that were previously restricted to the government or to firms in which the government was a stake holder. These areas include fuel imports and the construction of roads and airports. With respect to fuel imports, the Fuel Tax Law authorized private companies to import oil and derivatives. The government has submitted to congress a legislative proposal that would allow competition in oil exploration and extraction activities as well as in the marketing of oil products. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 57 - APPENDIX IX As of end-2001, the government held the specified equity ownership interests in the following companies: Government Company Equity Ownership (In percent) Description CDE, generation and transmission 100 CDE, generation and distribution National Sugar Board 50 100 Aqueduct and Sewer Corporation of Santo Domingo Banco de Reservas de la Reptiblica Dominicana Agricultural bank 100 100 100 San Rafael Insurance Company 100 CORDE 100 CORPHOTELES 100 Dominican Petroleum Refinery 50 Falconbridge Dominicana 30 Operates hydroelectric generation plants and transmission lines. Ownership interest in and privatized thermoelectric plants distribution facilities. All sugar mills are leased to the private sector. Most of NSBs land holdings were given to the state-owned Banco de Reservas in payment of debt. Owns and operates aqueducts and sewers. Public commercial bank. Development bank that provides financing for small farmers. Offers insurance services to the public; currently being transferred to the Banco de Reservas. Holding company of the government’s interest in many companies. Owns 18 hotels throughout the country. Imports oils and oil derivatives, operates the refinery and sells gasoline and other fuel products to distributors. Operates nickel-iron mines and exports nickel-iron. Additionally, the central bank owns 100 percent of the equity of Rosario Dominicana, with the leasing process near completion. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 58 - APPENDIX X Public Information Notice (PIN) No. FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE International Monetary Fund 700 lgth Street, NW Washington, D. C. 20431 USA IMF Concludes 2002 Article IV Consultation with the Dominican Republic On May 3 1,2002, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded the Article IV consultation with the Dominican Republic.’ Background A stabilization and structural reform program, initiated in the early 1990s helped to triple the average annual real GDP growth rate from 2l% percent a year in the first half of the decade to 7% percent a year in the second half. Growth was supported by rising investment, including substantial foreign direct investment in the electricity, telecommunications, free-trade-zone, and tourism sectors. However in 2001, the economy was affected by two external shocks- the economic slowdown in the United States and Europe and the September 11 terrorist attacks. These shocks broadly coincided with the introduction of a package of fiscal measures, which had been designed in response to an overheating of the economy in the run- up to the 2000 presidential election. As a result, the economic growth rate fell by two-thirds to 2.7 percent in 200 1. The weakness of economic activity, and declining international oil prices, contributed to a halving of the inflation rate to 4.4 percent at end-2001, while the unemployment rate rose to 15.6 percent (from 13.9 percent in 2000). On a cyclically adjusted basis, the overall fiscal stance was restrictive (and broadly appropriate). The central government’s fiscal deficit narrowed by half a percentage point of GDP to 1.7 percent, reflecting the fiscal adjustment. The net effect of the fiscal adjustment is estimated at 1% percent of GDP. Part of the fiscal savings was offset by increases in the wage bill and investment outlays. The overall balance of the consolidated public sector ’ Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial information, and discusses with officials the country’s economic developments and policies. On return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the country’s authorities. This PIN summarizes the views of the Executive Board as expressed during the May 29, 2002 Executive Board discussion based on the staff report. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 59 - APPENDIX X remained unchanged at 2 percent of GDP, as the improvement in the central government deficit was offset by a deterioration in rest of the public sector. As a result of the weakening of economic activity, the authorities eased the monetary stance in 2001 through the redemption of central bank paper. Lending rates fell by 800 basis points, to about 22 percent, contributing to an expansion in private sector credit by 24 percent (in line with the rate of increase in previous years, but double the rate of expansion of nominal GDP). The increase in liquidity also led to a near doubling of the rate of growth of broad money to 24 percent in 2001 (relative to 2000) while excess reserves jumped from 2.5 percent to 4.2 percent of base money. Over the last several years, commercial bank foreign currency operations have been increasing due to a combination of a heavily managed exchange rate (i.e., fixed for long periods of time), relatively lower borrowing costs abroad, and lower reserve requirements on foreign currency deposits than on domestic deposits. In 200 1, foreign currency deposit growth accelerated strongly, possibly reflecting a perceived increase in exchange rate risk associated with the external shocks. These deposits were intermediated by commercial banks, resulting in a corresponding increase in foreign currency lending. By end-2001, foreign currency deposits and loans had risen to the equivalent of 7 and 8 percent of GDP, respectively, compared with 1 percent of GDP each in 1997. Falling oil prices led to a narrowing of the external current account deficit in 2001 (to 3.9 percent of GDP from 5.2 percent of GDP in 2000), albeit less of a narrowing than originally projected. A large decline in oil imports was partly offset by a fall in export and tourism receipts (as a result of the external shocks). Net capital inflows remained strong as the sovereign bond proceeds and rising FDI (directed mainly to the electricity, tourism, and financial sectors) more than offset a reversal of short-term capital inflows (possibly owing to the decline in domestic interest rates). External public sector debt remained manageable at 19.5 percent of GDP. Excluding the US$SOO million in proceeds from the sovereign bond issue, which were not incorporated in the authorities’original monetary program, NIR fell short of the end-2001 target (US$600 million), reaching US$462 million, only US$20 million over end-2000. Including the bond proceeds, by end-2001, gross official reserves stood at 1.8 months of imports of goods and services and 96 percent of short-term debt by residual maturity. Toward the end of 2001, and into early 2002, the authorities tightened the stance of monetary policy, reflecting concern over pressures on the exchange rate from the liquidity in the banking system. Furthermore, the central government curtailed spending in January and the first half of February 2002. The central bank sold dollars in order to ease the pressure on the peso. As a result, NIR fell by over US$ZOO million in January-February, compared with an average decline of less than US$lOO million in the corresponding period of the previous five years. On April 2, 2002, the Monetary Board issued a resolution mandating that the official exchange rate be set equal to a weighted average of the previous day’s market rates, and immediately devalued the official exchange rate by 2% percent. Since then the peso has shown a depreciating trend. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 60 - APPENDIX X The FSAP mission found no strong signals of financial distress. However, it noted that the lack of appropriately calculated indicators, and the difficulty of assessing developments over time as a result of changes in definitions and prudential norms, precluded a definitive assessment of the health of the financial system. According to official estimates, the ratio of nonperforming loans in 2001 was broadly unchanged (relative to 2000) at 2.2 percent (this definition treats only the overdue portion of the loan as nonperforming, not the entire loan balance), while the risk-adjusted capital asset ratio remained stable. Bank profitability declined in part because of the economic slowdown and higher provisioning as a result of stricter classification and prudential norms. The Superintendency of Banks is strengthening its supervisory capacity through technical assistance from the IDB. The Superintendency of Banks raised penalties for misclassification of loans, established accrual accounting, and created an anti-money laundering unit. In February 2002, the Monetary Board endorsed a draft Monetary and Financial Law (MFL), aimed at modernizing the legal and regulatory framework. The draft is to be sent to congress later this year. Executive Board Assessment Public hformation Notices (PINS) are issued, (i) at the request of a member country, following the conclusion of the Article IV consultation for countries seeking to make known the views of the IMF to the public. This action is intended to strengthen IMF surveillance over the economic policies of member countries by increasing the transparency of the IMF’s assessment of these policies; and (ii) following policy discussions in the Executive Board at the decision of the Board. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-61 - APPENDIX X Dominican Republic: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators 1997 1998 1999 Real economy (change in percent, unless otherwise indicated) Real GDP Open unemployment rate (average, in percent) Gross national savings (percent of GDP) Gross domestic investment (percent of GDP) 8.3 7.3 8.0 7.3 2.7 4.0 15.9 14.3 13.1 13.9 15.6 14.6 18.7 21.3 21.8 18.8 19.4 19.7 19.8 23.4 24.3 24.0 23.4 23.6 Financial indicators (change in percent, unless otherwise indicated) Liabilities to the private sector Lending rate (91-180 days, period average) 23.5 20.6 25.7 12.7 20.3 15.2 21.3 26.6 25.3 26.8 24.6 25.0 Public finance (percent of GDP) Central government balance Consolidated public sector balance l! External public debt -1.4 -1.0 -3.2 -2.1 -1.7 -1.3 -2.1 -2.1 -3.0 -2.0 -2.0 -1.5 23.6 22.1 21.0 18.6 19.5 18.9 External sector (in millions of lJS$) Trade balance Traditional exports (f.o.b.) Domestic imports (f.o.b.) Free-trade-zone exports (net) Current account (in percent of GDP) Gross official reserves Real effective exchange rate (percent change, appreciation +) -1,995 -2,616 -2,904 1,017 880 805 -4,192 -4,896 -5,207 1,180 1,400 1,497 -1.1 -2.1 -2.5 415 513 706 5.9 -5.8 3.3 -3,742 -3,451 -3,481 966 795 866 -6,416 -5,937 -6,206 1,708 1,691 1,859 -5.2 -3.9 -3.9 637 1,158 1,230 5.6 3.0 Sources: Central Bank of the Dominican Republic; and IMF staff estimates and projections. l! Including- auasi-fiscal onerations. 2000 Prel. Staff Proj. 2001 2002 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public