DOCUMENT OF INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND NOT FOR PUBLIC USE OFF-SITE ROOM IS1 l-400 0450 FOR AGENDA W/01/5 1 CONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION February I$2001 To: Members of the Executive Board From: The Secretary Subject: Socialist People’s Libyan Arab Jamahiriya-Staff Report for the 2000 Article IV Consultation Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staff report for the 2000 Article IV consultation with the Socialist People’s Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, which is proposed to be brought to the agenda for discussion on Thursday, March 1,200l. At the time of circulation of this paper to the Board, the Secretary’s Department has received a communication from the authorities of the Socialist People’s Libyan Arab Jamahiriya indicating that they do not consent to the Fund’s publication of this paper. Questions may be referred to Mr. Mazarei (ext. 34902). Unless the Documents Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the African Development Bank, following its consideration by the Executive Board. Att: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicCONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND SOCIALIST PEOPLE’S LIBYAN ARAB JAMAHIRIYA Staff Report for the 2000 Article IV Consultation Prepared by the Staff Representatives for the 2000 Consultation with the Socialist People’s Libyan Arab Jamahiriya Approved by Paul Chabrier and Shigeo Kashiwagi February 14,200l Contents Page Executive Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..I.......................................................................... 3 I. Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 II. Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5 III. Policy Issues and Discussions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10 IV. The Outlook For 2002 and the Medium Term . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18 V. Staff Appraisal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20 Text Boxes 1. How Regulated is the Libyan Economy’ ...................................................................... 6 2. Fiscal Decentralization in Libya .................................................................................. 9 3. Suggested Economic Reforms ................................................................................... 11 Charts 1. Selected Economic Indicators, 1995-2000 ................................................................ 23 . 2. External Sector Developments, 1995-2000 ............................................................... 24 3. Exchange Rate Developments, 199 l-2000 .............................................................. -25 4. Fiscal Developments, 1995-2000 ............................................................................. 26 5. Monetary Developments, 1995-2000.. ..................................................................... .27 6. Illustrative Medium-Term Scenario, 1998-2005.. ..................................................... 28 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Publict -2- Text Tables 1. Basic Economic and Financial Indicators, 1996-200 1 .............................................. 29 2. Demographic, Social, and Human Development Indicators, 1996-98.. ................... .30 3. Balance of Payments, 1996-200 1 ............................................................................. .3 1 4. Indicators of External Vulnerability, 1996-2000 ..................................................... .32 5. Evolution and Coverage of the Special Exchange Rate.. .......................................... .33 6. Consolidated Fiscal Operations, 1996-2001 .;. ......................................................... .34 7. Monetary Survey, 1996-200 1. .................................................................................. .36 8. Illustrative Medium-Term Scenario, 1999-2005.. ..................................................... 37 Appendices 1. Fund Relations .......................................................................................................... .38 2. Relations with the World Bank Group.. .................................................................... .40 3. Statistical Issues.. ...................................................................................................... .4 1 4. Changes in the Exchange Regime Since the Last Consultation ............................... -46 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3- EXECUTIVE SUMMARY Background With the suspension of U.N. sanctions in April 1999 and rebound in oil prices, economic conditions-particularly the external and fiscal positions-have improved significantly. Monetary policy was expansionary in 1999, with strong credit growth to public enterprises, but became more restrained in 2000. The Central Bank of Libya (CBL) has eased exchange restrictions and narrowed the gap between the official and special ‘(parallel) market rates, but the official rate remains highly overvalued. The economy is oil-dependent and state- dominated, with pervasive structural distortions and rigidities. The authorities recognize this and are taking steps to open up the economy and encourage private domestic and foreign investment. Key issues a The authorities need to take advantage of the improvements in the external environment to forge ahead with a comprehensive medium-term program for correcting the cost/price structure and liberalizing the economy. Unification of the foreign exchange system, planned for end-2001, supported by price decontrol, trade reform, and measures for protecting the vulnerable groups, should be at the top of this agenda. The authorities prefer to implement a flexible exchange rate regime after unification, but have not yet decided on the rate at which it will be unified. It is critical to avoid unifying the system at an overvalued rate. 0 Although currently strong, public finances remain highly vulnerable to oil price movements, and the structure of expenditures needs improvement. Implicit and explicit subsidies need to be addressed, capital expenditure should be kept in line with administrative capacity and prudent cost benefit analysis, and rules for transfers to, and expenditures from, Libya’s (oil revenue) reserve fund should be formalized. The structure of government has been changed, with some key fiscal responsibilities now devolved to regional authorities; safeguards on their operations are needed to avoid excessive expenditures and preserve the government’s capacity to conduct fiscal policy and manage the economy. Extrabudgetary operations need to be brought under the budgetary umbrella to strengthen fiscal control, transparency, and accountability. l Conditions in the banking system are cause for major concern. Nonperforming ldans, especially of public enterprises, are large and bank supervision needs to be upgraded. The CBL is taking steps to improve bank loan quality and facilitate debt workouts. - Technical assistance on bank supervision has been requested. 0 Data compilation and reporting to the Fund have improved noticeably. However, major deficiencies remain--especially in fiscal data-and seriously hinder economic analysis and policy formulation. The recent reorganization and decentralization of government are compounding fiscal data weaknesses and hampering macroeconomic management. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4- 1. INTRODUCTION 1. A mission visited Tripoli and Sirte during October 25-November 14,200O and conducted the 2000 Article IV consultation discussions.’ Discussions focused on unification of the exchange rate regime, strengthening the management of public finances, and removing the pervasive distortions and rigidities in the economy. 2. In concluding the last consultation on February 25, 1999, Executive Directors noted that the Libyan economy was vulnerable to fluctuations in oil prices, and urged the authorities to significantly broaden, deepen, and expedite their medium-term macroeconomic adjustment and structural reform program to revitalize non-oil economic growth and expand the role of the private sector. They emphasized the importance of broad-based deregulation of the economy, focusing on prices, trade, investment, and an active privatization policy. Directors noted the considerable gap between the official and the parallel exchange rates and supported the authorities’ intention to make substantive adjustments to the official exchange rate under the dual exchange rate regime, in a pragmatic manner, as a transition to full exchange rate unification at an early date. On data issues, Directors noted that weaknesses remained in several areas and urged the authorities to sustain their corrective efforts. 3. Noticeable progress has been made in data compilation and reporting, and the authorities provided far more information to the mission than in the past, including detailed accounts related to Libya’s oil revenue reserve fund. However, major deficiencies-due in many ways to institutional weaknesses that constrain the authorities’ ability to compile data-remain and seriously hinder analysis of economic developments and the Fund’s ability to provide policy advice, especially regarding public finances. The recent reorganization and decentralization of the government are compounding data weaknesses in fiscal data and hampering macroeconomic management. ’ Article IV consultations with Libya are held on a 24-month cycle. Libya continues to avail itself of the transitional arrangements under Article XXV and the mission also conducted the related consultation discussions. Libya also maintains exchange restrictions and multiple currency practices that are subject to approval under Article VIII, Sections 2(a) and 3. The - mission consisted of Messrs. Mazarei (head), Callier, Abdallah, Hamam, and Mahyoub (all MED); Mr. Nashashibi (MED) joined the policy discussions. It met with central bank governor El-Jehaimi and other senior officials. Libya’s relations with the Fund and the World Bank are summarized in Appendices I and II, respectively. The status of economic and financial data is covered in Appendix III, and recent changes to the exchange rate regime are in Appendix IV. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-5- II. BACKGROUND 4. The Libyan economy depends heavily on the oil sector, and remains largely state controlled and regulated. During 1995-99, oil earnings accounted for 64 percent of budgetary revenues and 9 1 percent of export receipts, underscoring Libya’s continued vulnerability to global oil market conditions2 Non-oil and private sector economic activity are hindered by extensive government controls on prices, external trade, foreign exchange transactions, and labor market practices, as well as by occasional policy reversals such as in 1996 when the government closed many private businesses for alleged black market activities (Box 1). Agriculture is constrained by the scarcity of water and arable land; to remedy this, the authorities launched in 1984 the Great Man-Made River (GMR) project, which aims at transporting water by pipeline from aquifers in the central desert to the coastal area where the population and agriculture are concentrated.3 More recently, private sector activity has been encouraged in health, education, tourism, and retail distribution of petroleum products. The unemployment rate, according to official data, is 14 percent. Nevertheless, like many other oil producers in the region, Libya employs a substantial number foreign workers. 5. The U.N. sanctions against Libya were suspended in April 1999. The measures imposed by the U.N. Security Council in 1992 and strengthened in 1993 banned imports of selected equipment for downstream oil and gas activities and aviation, froze some of Libya’s foreign assets, and stopped direct flights to and from Libya. Suspension of the U.N. sanctions should allow Libya to attract direct foreign investment in the hydrocarbon sector. However, separate U.S. sanctions enacted in 1996, banning most bilateral trade, freezing Libyan assets, and extending U.S. sanctions to third party companies investing more than US!§40 million in Libya, remain in place. 6. Economic conditions have improved considerably with the rebound in world oil prices and the suspension of U.N. sanctions, and private sector confidence has strengthened. Real GDP grew by 2.5 percent in 1999 and by a projected 3 percent in 2000, being somewhat dampened by uncertainty concerning the timing of the unification of the exchange regime (Table 1; Chart 1) The manufacturing sector has not recovered from the effect of the sanctions and capacity utilization remains low. With the appreciation of the ’ Proven oil reserves stood at 29.5 billion barrels in January 2000, allowing Libya to maintain current output levels for another 60 years. Libya also has considerable potential for the production and export of natural gas. 3 Thus far, most of GMR water has been used for household consumption. The project has so far cost about US$12 billion, with an additional US$5-7 billion in costs expected by 2007. GMR operations are covered by special levies on gasoline, tobacco, and letters of credit issued by the banks, allocations from the government’s budget and from the extrabudgetary Jihad Fund, and bank borrowing. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-6- Box 1. How Regulated is the Libyan Economy? Apart from the oil sector, which operates with significant involvement by foreign entities, most aspects of production, distribution, and trade in the non-oil sectors are under public control. Trade All imports require licenses, except for imports by public enterprises for government-financed projects. There is a list of banned imports, including some agricultural and luxury items. A large part of imports takes place within the annual commodity budget: they are mainly imports by government and public enterprises of essential goods, raw materials, and spare parts, for which access to official foreign exchange is provided at the offtcial exchange rate. Also, since 1999, foreign exchange is provided at the special exchange rate for imports by individuals for non-commercial purposes and imports of raw materials and spare parts by selected enterprises. Commodity imports also take place through border trade with foreign currency obtained from the special exchange market. Public sector companies are required to deposit in advance 25 percent of import value ifusing the special rate, and 50 percent otherwise. Partnership and private sector importers have to make advance deposits of 50 percent if using the special rate, and 100 percent otherwise, unless they receive an exemption from the central bank. Import tariffs average 20 percent and range from 0 to 400 percent. Exports of a number of agricultural goods require licenses or are prohibited. There is a 60 percent surrender requirement for nonhydocarbon exports. Exports proceeds must be surrendered within three months of shipment. Since February 1996, all exports require opening of letters of credit. The open-border trade policy with neighboring countries in effect in 1989-93 was suspended in 1994, and control of border trade was progressively tightened. Foreign Exchange Foreign exchange rationing is implemented through an annual foreign exchange budget covering imports of essential goods, raw materials, spare parts, and non-commercial individual needs. The dual exchange system was legal&d in February 1999 with the introduction of the “special” exchange rate in addition to the official rate, which remains highly overvalued. Price Controls In principle, all goods and services are subject to official price control. Prices of food products, other basic consumer goods, and manufactured goods produced or imported by public enterprises are uniGormly set for the whole country and are adjusted infrequently. Prices especially of some agricultural products, such as fruits and vegetables, are determined at the local level at the market rate. Interest Rates and Credit Allocation All interest rates are administratively set and the allocation and cost of credit are subject to government policies to encourage certain activities (mostly housing, but also entrepreneurship and agricultural loans). Employment Certain job categories in both private and public sectors are closed to non-nationals if nationals can fill the position. Enterprises hiring foreign labor are required to train a number of nationals equal to 20 percent of the number of foreign workers hired, or pay the manpower authority a lump sum equal to the wages of the trainees. The layoff of excess labor requires approval by the manpower authority. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-7- parallel market exchange rate and the decline in import prices following the suspension of sanctions, inflation is estimated to have declined to 2.6 percent in 1999; these factors, combined with a tightening of monetary policy, are expected to result in a deflation of 3 percent in 2000. However, to the extent that public enterprises’ prices cannot be adjusted for higher costs, there is some repressed inflation.4 The external current account shifted from a large deficit in 1998 to a surplus of 2 percent of GDP in 1999, and a surplus of 12.1 percent is projected for 2000 (Tables 3 and 4, Chart 2). Official reserves have picked up significantly, reaching a projected US$lO.6 billion (16.5 months of imports) by end-2000.’ 7. The CBL has narrowed the gap between the offkial and parallel exchange rates, but the official exchange rate remains highly overvalued. In February 1999, a dual exchange rate system was introduced by legalizing the parallel foreign exchange market as the “special-exchange rate,” and allowing commercial banks to buy and sell foreign currency at that rate mostly for private sector transactions. However, the convergence of the two exchange rates has been achieved mostly by appreciating the special exchange rate; since mid-February 1999, the official rate has been devalued from LD 0.46 per U.S. dollar to LD 0.54 per U.S. dollar, while the special exchange rate has appreciated from LD 3.20 per U.S. dollar to LD 1.75 per U.S. dollar (Chart 3).6 Accordingly, the ratio of the special exchange rate to the official rate declined from 690 percent in February 1999 to 322 percent in November 2000. During the same period, the authorities transferred a number of transactions to the special exchange rate market (Table 5). 8. The fiscal position has strengthened significantly. With higher oil prices and profits from the sale of foreign exchange by the CBL at the special exchange rate, the fiscal balance (excluding revaluation proceeds’) shifted from a deficit of 4.2 percent of GDP in 1998 to a surplus of 11.5 percent in 1999 (Table 6, Chart 4). In 2000, despite the rise in oil revenues, the surplus is projected to have fallen to 6.9 percent of GDP; proceeds from the sale of foreign exchange at the special exchange rate dropped due to the narrowing spread between the official and special exchange rates, and tax revenues fell, mainly on account of new exemptions for public utilities. Development expenditures rose to an estimated 13.2 percent of GDP from 8.1 percent in 1999, reflecting a decision to regularly allocate 4 Libya’s social indicators are favorable by regional standards (Table 2). ’ The CBL does not undertake off-balance sheet qperations, and only about US$l50 million of its reserves, deposited with the Libyan Arab Foreign Bank, are not readily usable; otherwise, reserves are unencumbered. Less than US$40 million of CBL assets, not included in foreign reserves, remain frozen abroad. 6 The trade-weighted average exchange rate rose from LD 0.80 per U.S. dollar in 1998 to about LD 1 per U.S. dollar in 2000. The rate in 2000 would be more depreciated if unrecorded transactions were included. ’ Proceeds from the revaluation of the net foreign assets of the CBL following the devaluation of the official exchange rate that are transferred to the treasury. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-8- 70 percent of net budgeted oil revenues’ to capital outlays (with the remaining 30 percent to administrative (current) expenditures)-the 70-30 percent rule. 9. Major changes in the structure of government have occurred, with potentially significant fiscal implications. In 2000, there was a further devolution of the functions of the central government to the regional authorities established in 1998 (Box 2). The regions are now responsible for collecting all taxes except corporate income taxes and oil revenues; tax rates, however, are still established by the central legislative authority, They receive allocations for current and capital expenditures from the central government, and levy some local fees. However, there is no central oversight over their expenditure policies. 10. In 2000, the authorities resumed transfers to the oil revenue reserve fund. This fund, established in 1995, allows the authorities to save a part of the oil revenues for future generations and to smooth expenditures in the face of volatile oil prices. To the extent that actual oil prices exceed the budget assumption, the difference would be deposited with this fund.g In practice, there has been some discretion governing transfers to the fund. The rules for expenditures from the fund are not clearly established, and the authorities have undertaken some discretionary extrabudgetary expenditures from this fund. The resources of this fund are managed by the CBL as part of its foreign assets.” 11. Analysis of fiscal developments is hampered by data problems, as evidenced by the large discrepancies among budgetary, financing, and government debt &ta, and by fiscal decentralization. For example, in 1999, the discrepancy between the overall fiscal position and financing data amounted to 7.7 percent of GDP. This may be due partly to valuation issues and time lags, but it may also reflect lower revenues and higher expenditures than captured by the fiscal accounts. * Defined as oil revenue assumed in the budget less allocations for the operations of the National Oil Corporation and debt service payments. ’ The 2000 and 2001 budgets assume oil prices of US$16 and US$l8 per barrel, respectively, compared with projected prices of US$28 and US$22. lo In October 2000, the balance of the oil reserve fund stood at almost US$8 billion. In addition, the government has other foreign investments amounting to US$l.4 billion (at current market prices), managed by the Libyan Arab Foreign Investment Company. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-9- Box 2. Fiscal Decentralization in Libya Objectives: Starting in 1998, the Libyan authorities have been changing Libya’s administrative system, devolving some of the fiscal responsibilities of the central government to regional authorities, with the aim of: (1) decentralizing government and bringing decisions closer to the population in a vast country; (2) better matching expenditure with local needs and priorities; and (3) increasing administrative efficiency and governance. The process: In 1998, 3000 municipalities were consolidated into 26 regions, and a number of legislative and executive powers,were devolved to them, including control over their expenditures within the overall administrative (current) budget allocated to regions by the central government. Also, regions submit proposals for development projects for consideration by the central government. In 2000, decentralization was extended. Most central ministries were disbanded and their responsibilities were devolved to the regions: . On the revenue side, regional authorities are now responsible for collecting all taxes, except corporate income taxes and oil revenue. While regional authorities can levy some fees, the authority to raise tax rates and introduce new taxes rests with the central legislature. Given the large share of oil in total revenue, most of the revenue is still collected by the central government. . On fhe expenditure side, over 50 percent of the administrative budget is allocated to the regions. Regional authorities also execute 60 percent of the development budget in coordination with the central planning commission attached to the office of the prime minister. The challenges: While fiscal decentralization could improve services in the regions and better tailor expenditures to local needs, safeguards are needed to maintain financial discipline and macroeconomic management. In particular, safeguards are needed on the regional governments’ ability to: . Undertake unbudgeted expendituresfinanced by the banking system or other sources. Currently, they do not have the power to borrow, but are entitled to overdraft facilities with banks. l Indulge in “tax competition. ” Accordingly, only the central legislative body has the power to levy new taxes or modify tax rates. . Undermine efsective macroeconomic management at the national level. To prevent this, allocations to individual regions, including for the administrative and development budgets, are set at the national level. However, better coordination between the government and regional authorities is needed because regions can freely allocate their expenditures in ways that may have different effects on aggregate demand or the balance of payments. Outstanding issues: . Will government transfers to the regions be made equitably? In Libya, transfers from the central authorities will be the main source of revenue for the regions. There is not yet enough experience to determine whether the political process determining the regional allocations will be equitable or whether the allocation will be driven by the interests of specific regions, leading to regional imbalances. l How wiJI the provision ofnafionaIpubfic goods be coordinated? Needed mechanisms for ensuring the provision of public goods, and more generally for coordination of the composition of expenditures by regional authorities, have not yet fully emerged. To the extent that shared levels of education and healthcare benefit society at large, it is appropriate that decision on the required level of expenditures in these fields be done in a coordinated way at the national level. l How willpublic expenditure management be organised? Process and procedures need to be designed at the regional level for planning and budget preparation, implementation and revisions, financial planning and cash management, accounting, and audit and evaluation. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- lo- 12. Monetary policy was expansionary in 1999, but became more restrained in 2000. Broad money grew by 7.4 percent in 1999, up from 3.8 percent in 1998. Net foreign assets (NPA) of the banks picked up with higher oil earnings (Table 7, Chart 5). Domestic credit expansion was driven by sizable lending to public enterprises and the private sector, outweighing the sharp decline in banks’ claims on the government brought about by an improved fiscal position. Money growth slowed substantially by end-September 2000. NPA of the banking system continued to rise, but domestic credit expansion moderated, partly on account of tightened CBL supervision of public banks and uncertainties about the timing of exchange rate unification. Interest rates remained largely unchanged, and the CBL relied mostly on direct credit controls and intervention on the special exchange rate market to appreciate the dinar. With declining prices in 2000, real interest rates became more positive. III. POLICY~SSUESAND DISCUSSIONS 13. Libya seeks to open its economy, lower its reliance on oil revenues, and encourage private sector development. To these ends, the authorities are formulating a medium-term program, covering 2002-06, that will be submitted to the legislature in 200 1. The program aims to generate employment opportunities by achieving annual non-oil growth rates of 5-6 percent, raising private domestic and foreign investment, increasing non-oil exports, unifying the exchange rate regime, reforming the monetary system, and strengthening public finances. 14. The mission argued that recent improvements in the external environment provided an opportunity to forge ahead with a medium-term reform program. While a number of reforms would need to be implemented gradually, several key measures, particularly exchange rate unification and price liberalization, should be undertaken rapidly. Early correction in relative prices and trade liberalization are essential for setting a cost and price structure that is consistent with world prices. Subsidies to vulnerable social groups could continue and become more explicit and better targeted, while prudent wage and salary increases would cushion the population against the inflationary impact of unification. The mission suggested a package of specific structural measures that could, together with appropriate demand management policies, help the authorities achieve the objectives of their medium-term program (Box 3). 15. Economic conditions are expected to remain generally positive in 2001. GDP growth is expected to remain about 3 percent, with non-oil GDP growing at 3.5 percent. Reflecting in part further depreciation of the official exchange rate, consumer prices are projected to rise by 3.8 percent. With the substantial fall in oil prices, the external current account surplus is projected to decline to 6.4 percent of GDP, from 12. I percent of GDP in 2000. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- ll- Box 3. Suggested Economic Reforms To generate productive employment opportunities and new sources of income a possible package of reforms is outlined below. Phase 1 (12-24 months): Objective: Establish Appropriate Relative Prices Establishment of a link between world prices and domestic prices at the new unified exchange rate: l Unify the exchange rate; the initial level of the unified exchange rate itself to be chosen taking into account its effect on the trade balance, the budget, and the non-oil sector development; exchange rate regime could be managed floating. l Begin passing through the exchange rate changes on to the prices of essential food imports the price of which is administratively controlled. l Eliminate price controls on non-essential goods, and raise wages and salaries prudently. l Progressively increase domestic petroleum product prices to international parity. l Introduce open licenses for the import of most goods. Abolish export licensing requirements for all agricultural products. l Ensure that real interest rates remain positive. l Reduce the level and dispersion of import tariffs, and eliminate tariff exemptions. Explore removal of export taxes or set timetable for eliminating them concomitant with elimination of subsidies of non- essential goods. l Formulate and begin implementing a comprehensive plan for improving the economic database. l Fiscal and monetary policies should be aimed at maintaining a level of aggregate demand consistent with price stability and the sustainability of the balance of payments, and supportive of exchange rate unification and the new managed float regime. To deal with the consequence of relative price and/or exchange rate changes: l Strengthen social safety net to protect the vulnerable groups most affected by price changes. l Assess the impact of price and exchange rate changes on the balance sheets and prospects of private and nonfinancial public enterprises; design measures to manage financial distress, taking into account the long-term viability of the affected enterprises and the social cost of restructuring. l Assess the impact of price changes on the solvency of banks and design a mechanism to resolve financial distress in the banking system. Phase 2 (18-24 months): Objective: Establish the Institutional Foundations for the Efficient Functioning of a Modern Economy . Reform system of subsidies and transfers, including to public enterprises. l Reform the management regime of public enterprises and make them financially viable and accountable (i.e., through greater operational autonomy and hard budget constraints). . Establish the legal framework for competition and prepare for the implementation of a privatization program. 0 Revise the labor code and investment framework (including foreign direct investment). l Eliminate remaining price controls and trade restrictions. . Strengthen the financial position of the banking system and modemize prudential regulation and banking supervision. . Develop a plan and begin moving to indirect monetary policy instruments. Prepare to lift credit restrictions and allow interest rates to ration credit. . Overhaul the tax’s system to increase its efficiency. . Further strengthen the safety net. Phase 3 (12-24 months): Objective: Financial Deepening After the first two phases of the reform agenda have been sufficiently implemented, further liberalization of the financial sector and capital account convertibility could be considered. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12- Exchange rate policy 16. The exchange rate regime is expected to be unified by end-2001.” The authorities had intended to unify the exchange rates earlier, but marshalling the needed political consensus and the complementary steps are taking longer than expected. In the meantime, they plan to continue to narrow the gap between the official and special exchange rates, and transfer more transactions, such as non-oil exports, to the special exchange rate market.‘* As the authorities acknowledged, the official exchange rate is still highly overvalued. The mission stressed the need to unify the exchange rate regime by depreciating the official exchange rate toward the special rate to ensure that the unified rate provides some degree of competitiveness to the non-oil sector and to strengthen the external accounts. Moreover, the business community is waiting for a decision on unification and is postponing imports and investments. Early unification of the exchange rate regime, supported by price and trade reform, is therefore needed to end uncertainties and avoid economic slowdown. 17. The authorities prefer to implement a flexible exchange rate system after unification, but have not yet determined the rate at which it will be unified. Staff agreed that a flexible exchange rate system was desirable: (i) because it is difficult to know precisely the appropriate level of the exchange rate to unify the exchange rate system, given pervasive data shortcomings, structural rigidities, and the needed price liberalization, and (ii) to absorb relative price realignment, trade liberalization, and world oil price fluctuations. Successfully managing the exchange rate, however, requires a strengthening of CBL’s capacity for conducting monetary and exchange rate policy. Accordingly, during a period of transition to a more market-oriented economy and until improvements in the CBL’s monetary policy framework are implemented, a closely managed rate might still be necessary to provide an anchor to prices. Under this arrangement, the CBL would not peg the exchange rate and would change the rate if the foreign exchange market and other economic indicators-such as movements in reserves or the real effective exchange rate-signal that the exchange system was unified at an inappropriate rate, or if there are external shocks such as a sharp decline in oil prices. The CBL would move to a more flexible managed float as its monetary policy framework is strengthened. 18. Since February 1999, Libya has eased some restrictions on current international transactions under the transitional arrangements of Article XIV, namely those on ” Staff projections assume that the unified exchange rate becomes effective on January 1,2002. I2 Projections for 2001 assume that the CBL depreciates the official exchange rate fi-om LD 0.54 per U.S. dollar at end-2000 to LD 0.75 per U.S. dollar by end-2001. Considering that the 2001 budget was being formulated when the exchange rate was LD 0.54 per U.S. dollar, the CBL has limited scope for more substantial exchange rate changes during 200 1. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13- invisible payments related to travel, medicine, tourism, education, and other personal needs. The authorities stated that foreign companies can transfer abroad all their dividends, provided that they use the same exchange rate initially agreed in their contract. Restrictions on other invisible payments related to transfer of remittances, however, remain in place, as noted in the conclusion of the 2000 Article XIV consultation with Libya on December 27, 2000.13 Further, Libya’s complex exchange system contains restrictions subject to Fund approval under Article VIII, Sections 2,3, and 4, including the dual exchange market, which gives rise to a multiple currency practice. Staff urged the authorities to remove all remaining exchange restrictions and multiple currency practices and to move toward accepting the obligations of Article VIII. Deregulation and privatization 19. Government regulation needs to be reduced significantly to foster growth and create employment opportunities. The mission argued that efforts should initially focus on price decontrol, trade, and investment liberalization. Specifically, reform of the price and subsidy system is needed to support the exchange rate unification to allow exchange rate movements to translate into changes in relative prices. The authorities stated that the system of general price controls would be modified substantially concomitant with exchange rate unification. Prices of essential goods, however, are likely to remain controlled until 2004-05. Staff emphasized that price controls would need to be eased much earlier (as exchange rates were depreciated in 1999-2000 and further adjustments are expected to be made ahead of unification), supported by measures to alleviate the impact of higher prices on vulnerable groups. I4 Subsequent reforms should focus on restructuring public enterprises and scaling back the civil service. In this respect, the establishment in March 2000 of an agency to privatize public enterprises and the new draft oil investment law are encouraging developments. Public finances 20. Fiscal policy is the key policy instrument for strengthening financial stability. Libyan policymakers agreed with staff that fiscal policy has to be formulated in a medium- term framework that would allow the authorities to save a part of the oil revenues for future generations, and to smooth expenditure in the face of volatile oil prices. Improvements in the operations of the reserve fund could be useful in this regard, including clearer and more systematic guidelines for transfers to, and expenditures from, this fund. The authorities had I3 See EBD/OO/ 12 1, Revised 1/4/O 1. I4 The safety net in Libya includes price controls on basic commodities and services, and a social security system that provides a range of benefits to contributing workers (including self-employed) and their dependents. The social security system also covers individuals without other means of support. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14- not completed the 2001 draft budget but shared their broad intentions with the staff. Also, they were in the preliminary stages of considering the budgetary implications, in 2002, of unification. 21. Discussions on public finances took place when oil prices were significantly higher than at present.” With the high oil prices that prevailed during the mission, staff had projected a surplus of 7 percent of GDP in 200 1 (excluding revaluation proceeds), almost unchanged from 2000. Subsequently, however, oil prices have declined substantially. Under revised projections, with lower oil revenues but with expenditures in line with the authorities’ intentions, the 2001 fiscal surplus would be 4.2 percent of GDP. Oil revenues as percent of GDP would remain nearly unchanged from 2000,‘” while earnings from the sale of foreign exchange are forecast to decline with the narrowing of the spread between the special and official exchange rates. Current expenditures are expected to rise by 13.3 percent to 24.7 percent of GDP and development outlays by 12.7 percent to 13.8 percent of GDP.” The wage bill would rise by 12.2 percent, reflecting a 9 percent wage increase (after several years of frozen wages) and an expansion in the regional government civil service. 22. Expenditure restraint and reform are critical. The mission argued that there was a need for prudence regarding expenditures in 200 1, as well as in 2002 following exchange rate unification. Unification is expected to have a large positive budgetary impact, as the depreciation of the official exchange rate would lead to a significant increase in oil revenues in domestic currency (see Section IV). Such a gain in revenue would be sufficient to cover subsidies on essential goods, but pressures for expenditure increases in other areas were likely. Expenditure control and management could be helped by the following measures: l Protecting the vulnerable social groups from the adverse impact of unification through prudent salary and pension increases. The authorities intend to keep the prices of essential goods fixed during 2001 and provide larger budgeted subsidies. However, they had not yet determined the extent of the pass-through of the devaluation of the official exchange rate to the prices of essential goods upon unification at end-200 1, but preferred, in principle, a full pass-through while providing direct income support to vulnerable groups and higher public sector salaries. Staff generally agreed with this approach, but argued that some adjustments in essential goods prices, supported by ” Libyan oil prices in 2001 are projected at US$22.2 per barrel, compared with US$28.0 used during the mission. I6 Although oil revenues decline in terms of U.S. dollars, with the depreciation of the (period average) official exchange rate that is used for budgetary purposes, they rise in terms of domestic currency in line with nominal GDP. ” Development outlays will focus on the oil industry, basic infrastructure including a coastal railway, and the GMR project. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 15- prudent salary and pension increases, were needed in 2001 to pass through part of the depreciation of the official exchange rate expected in that year. Eventually, general price subsidies should be replaced with a well-targeted social safety net to protect vulnerable segments of the population from further possible exchange rate depreciation under a flexible exchange rate regime. l Reviewing and addressing the wider issue of implicit and explicit subsidies, particularly on domestic petroleum products and those cove&losses of public enterprises. The authorities intend to review subsidies in the context of exchange rate unification and their forthcoming medium-term program. l Containing development outlays in line with the government’s administrative capacity and ensuring that public investment projects are supported by adequate cost-benefit analysis. Staff cautioned that a mechanical application of the 70-30 percent rule (see paragraph 8) could lead to sizable inefficiencies and swings in development expenditures, in parallel with movements in oil prices. It argued that instead of raising expenditures in line with oil revenues, investment plans should be based on conservative budgetary assumptions for oil revenues, with any excess revenue transferred to the reserve fund. The authorities noted the mission’s concerns about higher capital expenditures and indicated that the 70-30 percent rule will not be applied mechanically. l Establishing safeguards on the fiscal operations of regional governments. Staff argued that while fiscal decentralization could improve the provision of public services to the regions, it could make fiscal policy implementation and macroeconomic management more difficult. Accordingly, it is necessary to put in place safeguards on the level and composition of the regions’ expenditures and on their ability to raise taxes and fees and finance expenditures from the banking sector and other sources. The authorities agreed with the mission’s concerns and indicated that the current safeguards will be strengthened. l Improving budgetary control and transparency requires bringing extrabudgetary expenditures, including those related to the reserve i?md and the GMR, under the budgetary umbrella, The authorities agreed with the staffs concerns, but early significant changes in this area were not expected. l Reforming the civil service, which remains the main source of employment and is expected to expand f%rther in 2001 on account of government decentralization. The authorities indicated that decisions regarding the civil service were mainly the prerogative of regional governments, but they seek to contain the size of the civil service by encouraging employment opportunities in the private sector. Staff estimates indicate that it would be possible to increase the total fiscal surplus in 2001 by 2.1 percent of GDP to 6.3 percent of GDP if the authorities do not undertake extrabudgetary expenditures from the reserve fund and also forego the intended expansion in the civil service. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 16- 23. To improve the structure of revenues, the mission recommended several measures: (i) using the unified exchange rate for customs valuation purposes; (ii) eliminating tax and customs tariff exemptions; (iii) gradually phasing increases to domestic prices of petroleum products, raising them to export equivalent prices; (iv) reducing marginal personal and corporate income tax rates, which are high by international standards; and (v) correcting distortions in the price of water from the GMR to promote efficient water use, with due attention to protecting low income users. Also, consideration could be given to broadening the tax base, including through a sales tax. The authorities indicated an interest in studying these suggestions. They stated that the tight financial situation of public enterprises was an obstacle to higher domestic petroleum product prices, and agreed that efforts were needed to further rationalize the use of GMR water. Monetary policy 24. The monetary policy framework needs to be strengthened to bolster financial stability and support exchange rate unification. Recently, monetary policy has been focused on keeping inflation in check through appreciating the special exchange rate, and the CBL has relied on intervention in the foreign exchange market’* and on credit and interest rate controls. Staff underscored the need for increased attention to aggregate domestic credit and economic conditions. Prudence in credit to public enterprises, which picked up substantially in 1999-2000, is essential. The CBL recognized the importance of improving its monetary policy framework and has recently formed a committee of experts to improve its operations. It is considering greater flexibility in interest rates and introduction of repo operations using government securities, setting the stage for moving away from direct monetary controls over the medium term. The CBL has requested Fund technical assistance in this area. 25. Staff prepared an illustrative monetary program for 2001. Under this program, which is geared to containing credit expansion in the run-up to unification, the broad money supply is projected to rise by 6.4 percent in 200 1, 1 percent below the growth rate of nominal GDP. The projected fiscal surplus would enable the government to lower its debt to the banking system, thereby allowing credit to private and public enterprise sectors to rise in line with nominal GDP growth. The NFA of banks is projected to rise by about US$l ‘/z billion. Financial sector development and soundness 26. The Libyan banking system needs to be modernized. Private banks can legally be established, and the CBL has recently supported the creation of regional cooperative banks, - including through provision of startup capital. Nevertheless, banking services remain ‘* About US$600 million in 1999 and US$725 million in the first eight months of 2000, in the form of foreign currency sales to banks for private sector transactions, representing 9 and 17 percent of total CBL foreign exchange sales during those periods. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17- predominantly in the public sector. Staff indicated that further steps are needed to improve the environment for private banks and expand bank intermediation, including strengthening bank supervision and the regulatory framework, and increasing interest rate flexibility. 27. Conditions in the banking sector cause great concern, and bank supervision and prudential requirements need improvement. Public enterprises are facing considerable difficulties in servicing their loans to the banks. Banks’ nonperforming loans stand at about 20 percent of total, and a further sizable portion is made up of weak loans. Four out of five public sector banks meet the 8 percent capital adequacy requirement, and the remaining one requires capital infusion. Also, the capital adequacy ratios of the (small) regional banks fall short of minimum standards. Staff stressed that early efforts are needed to improve conditions in the banking system, including: (i) enhancing the ability of banks to deal with nonperforming assets through better provisioning, enforcement of loan contracts, strengthened bankruptcy procedures, loan write-offs, and capital infusion; (ii) extending the supervisory authority of the CBL to specialized banks and strengthening it for regional banks; and (iii) improving supervisory procedures and regulations, including establishing prudential requirements on banks’ open foreign currency position. The authorities agreed with the staff, indicating that they had stepped up efforts since early 2000 to monitor and improve bank loan quality and arrange workouts of nonperforming loans. They also intend to raise the minimum capital adequacy requirement to 12 percent. Staff pointed out that banks’ foreign exchange exposure is small, but unification could lower the capacity of some borrowers to service their debt to banks. It was therefore important that the banks be in a position to withstand the impact of unification, and that the potential budgetary costs of strengthening banks’ balance sheets be taken into account. The authorities believed that exchange rate unification will not adversely affect the banking sector. The CBL has requested Fund technical assistance for improving its bank supervision capacity. Trade regime 28. Libya’s trade regime is highly protective. Import tariffs range between zero and 400 percent and average 20 percent, with numerous exemptions, notably for public enterprises. Additional protection is provided to domestic producers as the consumption tax on imports is substantially higher than excise taxes on local products. Staff underscored the importance of simplifying the trade regime, reducing the dispersion and level of tariffs, unifying excise tax on local goods and the consumption tax on imports, and removing nontariff barriers, particularly import license requirements. The authorities should seize the opportunity of exchange rate unification at a substantially depreciated official exchange rate to undertake trade liberalization and greater openness. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 18- External debt 29. Libya is taking steps to clear arrears and regularize its relations with its external creditors (e.g., Bulgaria, Germany, Italy, Turkey, and Yugoslavia).‘g Preliminary discussions were also ongoing with the Russian Federation. Staff urged the authorities to clear remaining arrears and regularize their relations with creditors expeditiously.20 Data issues 30. Staff urged the authorities to give priority to data issues. The authorities acknowledged that important data problems remained and seriously hampered economic analysis and policy formulation, especially in the fiscal area. They stressed that these inadequacies were due to devolution of power to regional authorities and fragmented communications between various government agencies. Staff welcomed the implementation of some of the recommendations of the 1998 IMF technical assistance mission on statistics, but stressed that major improvements in the database are urgently needed for enhancing understanding of developments in the Libyan economy, policy formulation, and Fund surveillance. In particular, it is necessary to improve fiscal data by consolidating the various budgetary and extrabudgetary accounts, monitoring the operations of regional governments, and addressing discrepancies between budgetary and financing data. Staff underscored the need for implementing the remaining recommendations of the 1998 Fund technical assistance mission, and the usefulness of participating in the General Data Dissemination System (GDDS). Fund relations 31. Considering its major reform agenda, Libya would benefit from a closer policy dialogue with the Fund. This was recognized by the Libyan authorities and they agreed to staffs proposal to move the Article IV consultations to a 12-month cycle. IV. THEOUTLOOKFOR 2002 ANDTHEMEDIUMTERM 32. Libya’s medium-term outlook is positive. ” With the suspension of U.N. sanctions, increasing investment to overcome existing bottlenecks, especially in the oil sector, and the I9 Under an end-October 2000 agreement, Italy cancelled US$260 million of Libyan debt. ” According to official estimates, external debt is currently about US$3.3 billion (9.2 percent . of GDP), nearly all medium- and long-term debt to the Russian Federation. BIS-IMF-OECD- IBRD data, which exclude debt to Russia, place Libya’s external debt at US$782 million in June 2000, of which US$502 million was short term. *’ A one-dollar drop in world oil prices entails a US$400 million (about 1 percent of GDP, at the official exchange rate) decline in the external current account balance and budget revenue. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 19- implementation of structural reforms to encourage the private sector, economic activity could pick up substantially. Under the staffs medium-term scenario, the exchange rate regime is unified effective January 1,2002 at the illustrative rate of LD 1.50 per U.S. dollar following the narrowing of the spread between the official and special rates during 2001 (Table 8, Chart 6).‘* Real GDP growth rate rises gradually from 3 percent in 2001 to 5.5 percent in 2005.23 Following unification, inflation rises to over 17 percent in 2002 from 3.8 percent in 2001 before declining to 3 percent in 2005.24 Oil exports remain broadly unchanged over the medium term while imports increase in connection with rising investment, contributing to a shift in the external current account surplus from 6.4 percent of GDP in 2001 into a deficit of 0.6 percent of GDP by 2005. The financial account improves due to increased direct investments, especially in the petroleum sector. 33. With unification, the fiscal position is expected to improve considerably. Government oil revenue is projected to jump sharply in 2002 on account of the depreciation of the official exchange rate, notwithstanding the projected drop in oil price. Gains reaped on budgeted oil revenues from unification would be sufficient to cover subsidies on essential goods (when made explicit), projected to rise from 1.4 to 2.7 percent of GDP, and higher investment expenditure.2s Wages and salaries would fall in relation to GDP. Higher dinar denominated oil and customs revenues resulting from unification will allow the government to lower import tariff rates substantially in 2002 without compromising the fiscal stance. The overall surplus (excluding revaluations proceeds) increases by 6.4 percent of GDP to 10.6 percent of GDP in 2002, but steadily declines over the medium teImz6 The deterioration 22 The equilibrium exchange rate in Libya is hard to determine given the prevailing data problems and structural rigidities. The mission’s casual observation of prices for a variety of goods suggested that the prevailing parallel market rate of LD 1.75 per U.S. dollar was competitive. Therefore, a rate of LD 1.50 per U.S. dollar is expected to support competitiveness of the non-oil sector. 23 Non-oil GDP growth is projected to rise from 3.5 percent in 2001 to 6.6 percent in 2005. 24 CPI inflation in 2002 will be greatly influenced by the government’s decision regarding the pass-through of the depreciation of the official exchange rate to the prices of imported subsidized food items. Both the baseline and alternative scenarios assume a 25 percent pass- through in 2002, with further significant increases in imported food prices over the next three years. *’ However, if prices charged by public enterprises are not adjusted, losses will mount, endangering the budget and the financial system. 26 Projections assume that during 2002-05, oil export earnings in excess of US$15 per barrel are deposited with the reserve fund, down from US$l8 per barrel in the 200 1 budget. The threshold has been lowered following the recent significant weakening in the medium-term oil price outlook and to allow the authorities to save enough of the oil revenues to move (continued.. .) Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 20 - in the government saving-investment position would underpin a decline in the overall saving- investment gap. V. STAFF APPRAISAL 34. Higher oil prices and suspension of U.N. sanctions have contributed to a considerable improvement in economic conditions in Libya since 1999. GDP growth has rebounded and the balance of payments position is strong. The suspension of U.N. sanctions should encourage foreign direct investment in Libya, particularly in the hydrocarbon sector. 35. The authorities recognized that the Libyan economy remains highly regulated, state-controlled, and dependent on oil. Steps have been taken to open the economy, and a medium-term reform program focusing on exchange rate unification and encouragement of the private sector is being formulated. Staff believes that the authorities should use the currently favorable external environment to accelerate their reform efforts, beginning with early correction of the pervasive distortions in the price and incentive system and in the regulatory framework. Particular attention needs to be paid to simplifying the external trade regime, especially by removing import licensing requirements and other nontariff barriers. 36. Early unification of the exchange rate regime at an appropriate level is essential for correcting the price and incentive system. The favorable external environment has helped the CBL reduce the spread between the official and the special exchange rates. The authorities are aware that the official exchange rate is still highly overvalued and distorts the cost and price structure, and seek to unify the exchange rate system by end-200 1. In the meantime, they plan to continue to narrow the gap between the official and special exchange rates and transfer more transactions to the special exchange market. Staff underscores that it is essential to avoid unifying the exchange rate regime at an overvalued level, which would undermine non-oil exports, hamper private sector development, and entail pressures on the external position. Unification should be accompanied by price liberalization, otherwise, with higher costs of imported inputs, public enterprises will face mounting losses. toward maintaining the net present value of hydrocarbon (oil and gas) reserves and financial assets. Under the medium-term scenario, government expenditures exceed the permanent rent derived from hydrocarbon reserves and existing financial assets. However, when non-oil revenues (i.e., other than hydrocarbon revenue and the return on the oil reserve fund) are taken into account, the scenario is consistent with preservation of the real hydrocarbon and fmancial wealth. Beyond 2004, however, expenditure begin to exceed the permanent rent and the non-oil revenue, indicating that measures should be taken over the medium term either to reduce the growth of expenditures or raise non-oil revenue if existing net wealth is to be preserved indefinitely. The fiscal projections do not include the interest cost of any bank restructuring and recapitalization, which is estimated at over 1 percent of GDP per year. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-21- 37. After unification, a flexible exchange rate regime could help the economy better absorb external shocks and the important structural changes that need to be implemented. During an initial phase when the CBL strengthens its monetary policy framework, a closely managed exchange rate would be useful in anchoring inflation expectations, but changes in the exchange rate’would be needed if there are indications that the exchange system was unified at an inappropriate rate or if there are significant changes in global oil prices. As its capacity for monetary policy and exchange rate management is strengthened, the CBL would move to a more flexible exchange rate regime. 38. Progress has been made in easing exchange restrictions. Since early 1999, the authorities have taken steps to reform the exchange system, including legalizing the parallel foreign currency market and relaxing restrictions. Nevertheless, as noted in paragraph 18 above, Libya continues to maintain exchange restrictions and multiple currency practices, including under Article XIV. Staff urges the authorities to remove all remaining restrictions. Meanwhile, with respect to those restrictions which are subject to Fund approval under Article VIII, Sections 2,3, and 4, approval of these restrictions is not being recommended, given the absence of a clear timetable for their removal. 39. Fiscal policy is the key policy instrument for strengthening macroeconomic and financial stability. Higher oil revenues have strengthened public finances, with substantial transfers to Libya’s oil reserve fund that should allow fiscal stabilization and saving of oil export earnings. Nevertheless, a number of key fiscal policy challenges remain, including: (i) shortcomings in the structure of revenues and expenditures, especially development expenditures, which need to be better controlled, kept in line with the authorities’ implementation capacity, and based on careful cost-benefit analysis; and (ii) budget management and transparency issues arising from fiscal decentralization. Additional challenges are presented by the extrabudgetary operations which need to be brought under the umbrella of the budget. Significant pressures on expenditures are likely to arise with exchange rate unification, and macroeconomic stability will depend critically on expenditure restraint. Prudent wage and pension increases and a better focused and strengthened social safety net are needed to protect the vulnerable segments of the population Tom the inflationary impact of unification. Also, development outlays and other expenditures- particularly implicit subsidies to public enterprises- need to be contained and rationalized, and a larger share of oil revenues should be transferred to Libya’s oil reserve fund, especially given the risks to oil prices. 40. Monetary policy needs to focus more on aggregate credit developments and economic conditions, allowing it to support exchange rate unification. Ln 1999-2000, the appreciation of the special exchange rate and lower import prices following suspension of U.N. sanctions have helped keep consumer prices low. In the period ahead, success in exchange rate unification and containing the inflationary pressures that may result from increased government spending require an improved monetary policy framework, with increased focus on aggregate money and credit developments, prudence in credit to public enterprises, and enhanced monetary policy instruments. The CBL’s efforts to strengthen its policy framework and tools are encouraging steps in this regard. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 22 - 41. The authorities are aware that conditions in the banking system ‘are worrisome and need to be addressed promptly. Nonperforming loans are substantial and the institutional framework for debt workouts needs to be strengthened and enforced better. Moreover, bank supervision needs to be upgraded considerably. Staff welcomes the authorities’ efforts initiated in early 2000 to address the quality of bank lending and urges that these efforts be intensified. The authorities would also need to be mindful of the fiscal implications of strengthening banks’ balance sheets, especially given the possible adverse implications of unification for the corporate sector and its ability to service its bank debt. 42. Recent efforts to clear external arrears and regularize relations with creditors are welcome. Staff urges the authorities to benefit from Libya’s improved financial position and regularize remaining external arrears. 43. Noticeable progress has been made in data compilation and reporting to the Fund, but fundamental steps to improve the statistical system remain to be taken, notably the creation of an inter-ministerial committee to coordinate statistics. Important weaknesses in the statistical system remain and seriously hamper analysis of economic developments and policy formulation. In particular, the large discrepancies between deficit and financing data, the various extrabudgetary operations, and fiscal decentralization make it very difficult to monitor fiscal developments in Libya. Staff urges the authorities to give priority to improving the fiscal data to provide a comprehensive and clear picture of fiscal developments and strengthen economic management. Expeditious efforts in other areas are also needed, including in real sector data, external debt, and monetary statistics. The authorities are encouraged to use the GDDS as a framework to address these problems. Fund technical assistance would be useful in this regard. Data on official reserves and their liquidity were provided by the authorities. 44. Staff believes that Libya would benefit from closer policy dialogue with the Fund, and proposes that Article IV consultations be moved to a 12-month cycle. It welcomes the authorities’ agreement to such a move. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 23 - Chart 1. Libya: Selected Economic Indicators, 1995-2000 Consumer Price Index 11 (Annual percentage change) IO - 8 - 6 - 4 - 2 4 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 zoo0 Real GDP (Annual percentage change) 1996 1997 1998 1999 zoo0 Gross Fixed Capital Formation (In percent of GDP) 14 14 . 12 .’ - .’ - 12 .’ 10 - Govanmmt .’ -10 _ e......--- 8 --.- mIms - - a 6 - - 6 4 - Nongovemmmt - 4 2 - - 2 0 -0 1995 19% 1997 1998 1999 zoo0 Sources: Libyan authorities; and Fund staffestimates. l/New series beginning 2000. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 24 - Chart 2. Libya: External Sector Developments, 1995-2000 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 In months of imports of GNFS, 1’ Gross Offkial Reserves 18 - 16 - 14 - 12 - 10 - 8 - 6 - 1 4 - 2 01 10 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 35 30 -3 2 25 3 20 0 5 k I5 t 10 c p 0 Balance of Payments (In billions of U.S. dollars) Exports Imports. - . - _ _ -. 6 - ..-- -A/- -. -...... 4 - 2 / - Current Account Balance / / 0 -2 - -41 -1-4 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 Customs Tariffs Relative Distribution 30 Tariff Range= 0 - 400 Simple average = 20 25 0 2 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 50 60 70 80 90 I00110120140150180200220300320400 Tariff Rate Sources: Libyan authorities; and Fund staffestimates. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 25 - 3.5 3.c 2.5 2.0 1.5 1.0 0.5 0.0 125 120 115 110 105 100 95 90 85 - 120 - 115 - 110 - 105 - 100 - 95 - 90 - 85 80 L 80 Chart 3. Libya: Exchange Rate Developments, 1991-2000 Special (parallel) market rate Libyan Dim per U.S. dollar Oficial late Libyan dim per SDR Official rate Libyan dinar per U.S. dollars 1 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 Real Effective Exchange Rate I/ (1995=100) 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 1000 800 600 400 200 0 J Parallel to Offkial Rate Ratio (In percent) 2/ Sources: Central Bank of Libya; IFS; and Fund staff estimates. 1/ Real exchange rate indices should be viewed with caution owing to shortcomings in the quality of price data. 2/ Last observation is from October 2000. 1991 1993 1995 1997 1999 - 3.5 - 3.0 2.5 2.0 1.5 1.0 0.5 0.0 1000 800 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 26 - Chart 4. Libya: Fiscal Developments, 1995-2000 (In percent of GDP; unless specified otherwise) 35 25 20 I5 IO Composition of Fiscal Revenue Composition of Fiscal Expenditure . , Non-oil ,’ . -’ . 30 15 25 IO 20 5 I5 I Development expendihues / Development expendihues (Il-cJ I . RH Goodsand \ --- Services /C--C I RH Goodsand \ --- Services IO 0 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2oOa 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 Revenues and Expenditure Fiscal Balance and Oil Prices I/ 60 605 50 - Total Revenue + A / ‘. / 1 / . 40. 50 - Total Revenue + A / ‘. / 1 / . 40. 30- xs - 20 - Oil revenue 30- 20 - xs Oil revenue IO - IO - ” 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 60 30 50 24 40 I8 30 I2 20 6 IO 0 0 a , , I t I Oil prices (In U.S. dollars per barrel) , ’ t r I l - \ I c \ I I I \ / \ I I Oil prices (In U.S. dollars per barrel) , ’ r I l - \ I c I \ I I \ / ’ I * I 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 20 I5 IO 5 0 30 24 I8 Sources: Libyan authorities; and Fund staff estimates. 11 Fiscal balance excludes revaluation proceeds. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 27 - Chart 5. Libya: Monetary Developments, 1995-2000 Monetary Survey (In billions of Libyan dinars) Broad Money 7 - 6 - 5 - 4 - 3 - 2 - /- / / Net claims on nongovemment sector J , ’ / Net claims on government 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 Interest Rates I! (In percm Lending Rate -----------------d--- \ One year deposit rate \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ L ------ 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2ooo Sources: Libyan authorities; and Fund staff estimates. I/ Last observation is September 2000. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 28 - Chart 6. Libya: Illustrative Medium Term Scenario, 1998-2005 Real GDP (Annual percentage change) ,I --A 2- l- 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 Overall Fiscal Balance I/ Gross Offkial Reserves (In percent of GDP) (In months of imports of GNFS) 16, r 16 - I2 -8 -4 -0 --4 -8 I -8 Consumer Price Index (Annual percentage change) I5 - IO - 5- O- -5 J -5 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 Offkial Exchange Rate (LDNS$) 1.6 1.6 I4 ‘1 1.2 6- 0.8 0.8 2. 0.4 0.0 -6 - -10 J 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 25 20 I5 IO Current Account Balance (In percent of GDP) 20 I5 IO 25 20 I5 IO ! I4 IO 6 _ 2 -2 -6 -10 Sources: Libyan authorities; and Fund staff projections. I/ Excluding revaluation proceeds. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 29 - Table 1. Libya: Basic Economic and Financial Indicators, 1996-200 1 (Quota = SDR 1,124 million) 1996 1997 prel. Projections 1998 1999 2000 2001 (Percent change; unless otherwise indicated) National income and prices Real GDP GDP in billions of U.S. dollars I! CPI 5.2 33.5 4.0 -1.2 2.9 2.5 3.0 3.0 34.1 29.6 33.2 35.7 28.9 3.6 3.7 2.6 -3.0 3.8 (In percent of GDP) Central government finances Revenue Ofwhich: Oil Expenditure Of which: Development expenditure Overall position (deficit -) 46.5 38.5 35.4 48.4 43.5 43.8 32.4 25.6 20.4 23.0 29.2 29.1 34.1 39.0 39.6 33.8 36.6 38.5 8.7 9.1 6.9 8.1 13.2 13.8 12.4 -0.4 -4.2 14.6 6.9 5.3 (Changes as a percent of beginning broad money stock) Money and credit Money and quasi-money Net credit to the government Credit to other sectors Deposit rate (l-year deposits, in percent) -2.9 0.2 3.8 7.4 0.9 6.4 -17.5 -4.9 4.7 -14.3 -50.6 -57.1 -10.8 9.6 -0.8 18.1 6.7 7.1 5.5 5.5 5.5 3.2 3.0 3.0 (In billions of U.S. dollars; unless otherwise indicated) Balance of payments Exports, f.o.b. Of which: Oil Imports, f.o.b. Current account balance (As percent of GDP) Overall balance (deficit -) 9.9 9.6 5.8 7.4 11.7 9.6 9.1 9.1 5.4 7.0 11.2 9.0 -6.9 -6.9 -6.0 -5.2 -5.2 -5.5 1.4 1.2 -1.5 0.7 4.3 1.8 4.2 3.6 -5.1 2.0 12.1 6.4 1.3 1.5 -1.4 0.2 3.5 1.3 Reserves Gross offtcial reserves (In months of imports of GNFS) 7.1 8.8 7.5 7.5 10.6 11.9 9.6 12.0 11.8 12.7 16.5 17.6 Exchange rate Official exchange rate (LDKJS$, period average) 0.36 Official exchange rate (LDiUSS, end of period) 0.37 Parallel market rate (LD/US$, period average) 2/ 3.20 Parallel market rate (LD/US$, end of period) 2/ 1.85 Spread = parallel rate/offtcial rate (LD/US$, end of period) 5.00 0.38 0.42 0.45 0.51 0.68 0.39 0.38 0.48 0.54 0.75 3.15 3.15 2.48 1.86 1.68 2.22 3.33 1.95 1.75 1.60 5.69 8.76 4.06 3.24 2.13 Crude oil export unit value (USVbbl) 20.3 19.3 12.9 17.9 28.0 22.2 Sources: Libyan authorities, World Currency Yearbook, and Global Currency Report; and Fund staff estimates. I/ At official exchange rate. 2/ Starting February 1999, the parallel market rate was legalized for some transactions and called the “special” rate. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 30 - Table 2. Libya: Demographic, Social, and Human Development Indicators, 1996-98 Units Libya MENA 11 1996 1997 1998 1998 Demographic indicators Population Aged O-14 Aged 15-64 Aged 65 and above Population growth Age dependency 21 Urban population Social indicators Total labor force Male Female Life expectancy at birth Male Female Infant mortality rate Immunization rate Measles DPT Education indicators Adult literacy rate Male Female Human development indicators Human development index (HDI) 3/ 5/ Gender related development index (GDI) 4/S/ Millions 5.1 5.2 5.3 285.7 Percent of total 40.8 40.0 39.2 38.0 Percent of total 56.4 57.1 57.8 58.0 Percent of total 2.8 2.9 3.0 4.0 Percent 2.2 2.2 2.2 2.1 Ratio 77.3 75.1 73.0 72.9 Percent of total 85.8 86.2 86.7 57.4 Millions Percent of total labor force Percent of total labor force Yei3l-S Y&U-S YMl-S Per 1,000 live births Percent under 12 months Percent under 12 months Percent 75.8 77.0 78.1 63.1 Percent 88.1 88.9 89.6 74.0 Percent 62.1 63.8 65.4 52.0 Index Index 1.5 1.5 1.5 93.8 78.8 78.3 77.9 73.1 21.2 21.7 22.1 26.9 . . . 70.2 70.5 67.6 . . . 68.3 68.5 66.2 . . . 72.2 72.6 69.0 . . . 24.0 23.2 45.4 92.0 92.0 . . . 96.0 96.0 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 0.760 0.635 . . . 0.738 0.635 Sources: World Bank’s World Development Indicators, 2000, and UNDP’s Human Development Report 2000. 11 Middle East and North Africa (MENA) (16 countries): Algeria, Bahrain, Djibouti, Egypt, Iran, Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon, Libya, Morocco, Oman, Saudi Arabia, Syria, Tunisia, West Bank and Gaza, and Yemen. 2/ Population under the age of 15 and over the age of 65 as a share of the total working age population. 3/ Human Development Indicators measures average achievements in basic human development in one simple composite index. Its value ranges from 0 to 1. 4/ Gender Development Index (GDI) measures achievements in the same dimensions and using the same variables as the HDI does, but taking account of inequility in achievement between men and women. 51 For HDI, the index for MENA refer to Arab States (18 countries): Algeria, Bahrain, Djibouti, Egypt, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Morocco, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Sudan, Syria, Tunisia, UAE, and Yemen. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3l- Table 3. Libya: Balance of Payments, 1996-2001 (In millions of U.S. dollars) Proiections 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 Current account balance 1,395 1,221 -1,500 666 4,319 1,841 Trade account 3,040 2,759 -159 2,269 6,578 4,070 Exports, f.o.b. 9,906 9,622 5,804 7,443 11,735 9,614 Oil sector I/ 9,147 9,082 5,393 6,953 11,160 8,984 Other exports 2/ 759 540 411 490 575 630 Imports, f.o.b. -6,866 -6,863 -5,963 -5,174 -5,157 -5,544 Cross-border imports -1,144 -1,144 -778 -675 -673 -723 Other imports -5,722 -5,719 -5,186 -4,499 -4,485 -4,82 1 Services and unrequited transfers (net) -1,645 -1,539 -1,341 - 1,603 -2,259 -2,229 Receipts 617 616 630 624 651 684 Investment income 581 639 581 557 581 610 Other 36 37 49 67 70 74 Payments -2,262 -2,215 -1,972 -2,227 -2,910 -2,913 Oil sector services and transfers -915 -908 -539 -695 -1,116 -898 Freight and insurance -661 -382 -417 -362 -361 -388 Travel and transportation -113 -355 -446 -605 -719 -772 Other government services -73 -67 -93 -104 -175 -275 Remittances of foreign workers -312 -324 -337 -35 1 -365 -379 Other -189 -179 -139 -111 -175 -200 Capital and financial account 226 -885 -512 -577 -859 -580 Nonmonetary sectors (net) -58 -24 1 -916 -90 -559 -380 Direct investment abroad -64 -282 -279 -230 -450 -200 Direct investment in Libya -138 -82 -140 -131 -135 -100 Portfolio investment (net) 0 -774 -195 -3 -174 -200 Other (net) 144 897 -302 274 200 120 Monetary sectors (net) 284 -643 404 -487 -300 -200 Errors and omissions -307 1,144 617 113 0 0 Overall balance 1,314 1,480 -1,395 202 3,460 1,261 Net International Reserves (net assets increase-) -1,314 -1,480 1,395 -202 -3,460 -1,261 Central Bank of Libya -1,103 -1,429 863 -11 -3,138 -1,261 Commercial banks -211 -51 532 -191 -322 0 Memorandum items: Official exchange rate LDAJS$ (period average) Gross official reserves (in millions of U.S. dollars) Gross official reserves (in months of imports of GNFS) External current account balance (in percent of GDP) Nominal GDP (in millions of U.S. dollars, at offtcial exchange rate) 0.36 0.38 0.42 0.45 0.51 0.68 - 7,087 8,782 7,464 7,474 10,612 11,873 9.6 12.0 11.8 12.7 16.5 17.6 4.2 3.6 -5.1 2.0 12.1 6.4 33,240 35,736 33,486 34,107 29,620 28,879 Sources: Central Bank of Libya; and staff estimates and projections. l/ Includes oil, gas and petroleum products. 2/ Includes petrochemicals. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 32 - Table 4. Libya: Indicators of External Vulnerability, (In percent of GDP; unless otherwise indicated) 1996-2000 proj. 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 Financial indicators Public sector domestic debt Broad money (percent change, 12-month basis) Private sector credit (percent change, 12-month basis) 3 I -day treasury bill yield 3 I -day treasury bill yield (real) External indicators Exports (percent change, l2-month basis in USS.) Imports (percent change, 12-month basis in US$) Terms of trade (percent change; 12-month basis) Current account balance Capital and financial account balance Ofwhich: Inward portfolio investment (debt securities etc.) Other investment (loans, trade credits, etc.) inward foreign direct investment in the form of debt or loans Gross official reserves (in millions of US$) Central bank short-term foreign liabilities (in millions of US%) Central bank foreign currency exposure (in US%) Short-term foreign assets of the financial sector (in USS) Short-term foreign liabilities of the financial sector (in USS) Foreign currency exposure of the financial sector (in US%) Official reserves in months of imports (goods and services) Official reserves to next year’s imports I/ Official reserves to broad money (M2) Total short-term external debt to reserves (in percent) 2/ Total external debt Ofwhich: Public sector debt (in millions of U.S. dollars) Total external debt to exports (goods and services) External interest payments to exports (goods and services) External amortization payments to exports (goods and services) Official exchange rate (per US$, period average) REER appreciation (official exch. rate) (-) (annual change) REER appreciation (parallel exch. rate) (-) (annual change) Financial market indicators Stock market index Foreign currency debt rating Spread of benchmark bonds (basis points; end of period) 67.2 -2.9 -22.1 . . . . . . 63.0 0.2 24.0 . . . . . . 71.3 3.8 0.5 . . . . . . 10.3 -2.8 -39.4 14.7 -0.7 -13.2 18.6 -11.0 -20.0 4.2 3.6 -5.1 0.67 -2.59 -1.73 . . . . . . . . . .,. -0.4 -0.2 7,087 8,782 1,968 1,585 . . . ,.. . . . . . . ..* . . . . . . . . . 10.1 12.7 103.3 147.3 31.7 41.4 . . . I . . . . . ,.. . . . *.. -0.5 7,464 1,060 . . . . * . . . . .a. 11.8 144.3 33.0 2.7 . . . . . . ,.. . . . . . . . . . ,.. . . . .*. 0.36 0.38 -1.0 5.5 -8.6 2.6 . . . . . . . . . . . . 0.42 3.5 -8.4 ..* . . . .a. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57.3 7.4 27.7 . . . . . . 45.5 0.9 -1.8 . . . . . . 28.3 57.2 -7.2 9.2 . . . . . . 2.0 12.1 -1.74 -2.40 . , . .,. -0.4 7,474 1,300 . . . .e. . . . . . . 14.1 144.9 38.9 6.3 . . . ,.. *.. -0.4 10,612 2,472 . . . . . . . . . . . . 24.7 191.4 61.6 4.7 . . . . . . . . . . . . 0% -13.0 7.4 ..a . . . . . . 3,300 . . . . . . . . . 0.51 -5.1 30.0 . . ._ . . . . . . Sources: Libyan authorities; and Fund staff estimates. l/ Ratio of reserves to next year’s imports of GNFS. 2/ Debt with residual maturity of less than one year, from joint BIS-IMF-OECD-World Bank Statistics on External Debt. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-33 - Table 5. Libya: Evolution and Coverage of the Special Exchange Rate, February 4, 1999-October 29,200O Effective Date Special Rate (In LD per USS) Transactions Covered 04Feb-99 3.20 13-Mar-99 30-Mar-99 3.10 2.95 05-Apr-99 2.95 Sell only; no buying from banks until further notice. O&-May-99 2.50 Sell only, on cash transactions and transfers relating to individual needs and for the needs of public enterprises for raw materials and finished goods. 08-Jun-99 2.25 Same as above. IO-Jul-99 19-Sep-99 2.00 2.00 04-act-99 1.90 20-Feb-00 1.90 04-JWl-00 1.80 27-Aug-00 1.70 29-act-00 1.70 Cash transactions, tranfers and credits related to noncommercial individual needs for travel, medical treatment abroad, pilgrimage, and tickets for travel abroad. Same 3.10 buy, 3.15 sell. Same 2.95 buy, 3.05 sell. Sell only, for individual needs as described above and for imports of goods in accordance with decree 242 (1999). Letters of credit can be opened at the special rate under certain conditions, as well as imports of raw materials, equipment, and spare parts for the following industries: (1) food; (2) medical equipment; (3) construction materials; (4) paper, wood and We1 industries; (5) fisheries; (6) sports and recreational equipment; (7) electrical and mechanical electronics; (8) health services; (9) agricultural equipment; (10) printing and drawing industry; (11) milling industry; and (12) hotels and tourism industry. Rate at which banks are authorized to buy dollars and other foreign exchange. 1.90 buy; 1.95 sell, covering same transactions as 10 July and 4 October 1999. Also, minimum required deposit for opening letters of credit is 25 percent for public enterprises and 50 percent for partnerships and other shared companies. Buy 1.80; and sell 1.85. Same coverage as above. Buy 1.70; and sell 1.75. Same coverage as above. Public enterprises not allocated a share in the commodity budget are allowed to use any foreign exchange they earn to open credit or settle liabilities, provided that the special rate is use and that they supply detailed reports of sources and uses of their foreign exchange to the Central Bank of Libya.- Source: Central Bank of Libya circulars. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 34 - Table 6. Libya: Consolidated Fiscal Operations, 1996-200 1 1996 Revised prel. Proj. Proj. 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 Revenues Oil 11 Budgetary allocations l! Reserve fund allocations Non-oil 2/ Tax revenues From tax administration From customs Nontax From tax administration From sectors and regions Ofwhich: Interest from the reserve fund Revaluation proceeds 3/ From foreign exchange sales 4/ Extrabudgetary revenues GMR Consolidation 51 Expenditure Current Administrative Ofwhich: Allocations to the regions Wages and salaries 61 Goods and services Interest payments 71 8upPlementary Food subsidies (net) Defense and other Reserve fund (extrabudgetary) Development Development budget 81 Ofwhich: Executed by the regions GMR 91 Consolidation 5/ Overall position 1,487 -53 (excluding revaluation proceeds) 1,487 -53 Financing -1,487 53 Banking system (net) 101 -1,489 -402 Nonbank and discrepencies 2 455 (In millions of Libyan dinars) 5,583 5,037 3,888 3,351 2,778 2,981 1,110 370 1,695 1,686 888 881 389 336 499 545 592 521 97 100 495 421 56 64 . . . . . . . . . . . . 235 394 235 394 -20 -110 4,096 5,090 3.072 4,008 2,455 3,037 . . . . . . 1,553 2,062 780 852 123 123 617 737 144 160 .473 577 0 234 1,045 1,192 668 645 . . . 377 ... 547 -20 -110 4,430 7,243 2.551 3,444 2,551 3,444 0 0 1,879 3,798 950 1,018 431 435 519 583 645 2,432 104 248 441 273 72 62 . . . 468 100 1,443 364 380 364 380 -80 -31 4,955 5,055 4,169 3,875 3,273 3,048 1,679 1,502 2,264 2,172 886 754 123 123 792 665 117 130 675 535 105 162 865 1,211 555 1,001 . . . . 311 210 -80 -31 -525 2,187 -525 1,719 525 -2,187 386 -1,029 7,900 8,541 5,299 5,668 3,223 4,598 2,076 1,070 2,601 2,872 892 I,1 16 443 476 449 641 1,359 1,393 100 104 178 474 106 . . . 1,081 350 350 0 283 215 600 363 363 0 6,645 7,514 4,254 4,819 3,309 3,644 1,872 2,208 2,289 2,569 897 951 123 123 710 845 130 265 580 580 235 330 2,391 2,695 2.005 2,313 1,203 1,388 386 382 0 0 1,256 1,027 - 1,256 812 -1.256 -1,027 -1,841 -1,027 139 -1,158 585 0 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 35 - Table 6. Libya: Consolidated Fiscal Operations, 1996-2001 (concluded) BeyisrdpreLpmLErp1. 1996 1997 1998 1999 2owl 2001 (In percent of GDP) Revenues Oil l/ Budgetary allocation 11 Oil: Reserve fund allocations Non-oil 2i Tax revmues From tax administration From customs Nontax From tax administration From sectors and regions Qfwhich: hnerest from the teservc fund Revaluation proceeds 3/ From foreign exchange sales 41 Extrabudgetary revenues GMR Consolidation 5/ 46.5 38.5 35.4 48.4 43.5 43.8 32.4 25.6 20.4 23.0 29.2 29.1 23.1 22.8 20.4 23.0 17.8 23.6 9.2 2.8 0.0 0.0 11.4 5.5 14.1 12.9 15.0 25.4 14.3 14.7 7.4 6.7 7.6 6.8 4.9 5.7 3.2 2.6 3.4 2.9 2.4 2.4 4.2 4.2 4.2 3.9 2.5 3.3 4.9 4.0 5.2 16.3 7.5 7.1 0.8 0.8 0.8 1.7 0.6 0.5 4.1 3.2 3.5 1.8 1.0 2.4 0.5 . . 0.5 . . . 3.0 3.0 -0.8 0.6 2.0 2.0 -0.2 . . 0.8 2.9 2.9 -0.6 0.4 3.1 9.6 2.5 2.5 -0.2 0.6 . . . 6.0 1.9 1.9 0.0 1.5 I.1 3.1 I.9 1.9 0.0 Expenditure currtnt Administrative Qfwhich: Allocation IO the regions Wages and salaries 61 Goods and services Interest payments 71 Supplementary Food subsidies (net) Defense and other Reserve Fund (extrabudgetary) Development Development budget 8/ Qfwhich: Executed by the regions GMR 91 Consolidation 51 34.1 39.0 39.6 33.8 36.6 38.5 25.6 30.7 33.4 25.9 23.4 24.7 20.5 23.2 26.2 20.4 18.2 18.7 . . . . 12.9 15.8 6.5 6.5 1.0 0.9 5.1 5.6 1.2 1.2 3.9 4.4 0.0 1.8 8.7 9.1 5.6 4.9 13.4 10.0 10.3 11.3 18.1 14.5 12.6 13.2 7.1 5.0 4.9 4.9 1.0 0.8 0.7 0.6 6.3 4.4 3.9 4.3 0.9 0.9 0.7 1.4 5.4 3.6 3.2 3.0 0.8 1.1 1.3 1.7 6.9 8.1 13.2 13.8 4.4 6.7 11.0 11.9 3.1 -0.2 . 4.2 2.5 -0.8 -0.6 . 1.4 -0.2 6.6 2.1 0.0 7.1 2.0 0.0 Overall position 12.4 -0.4 -4.2 14.6 6.9 5.3 (excluding revaluation proceeds) 12.4 -0.4 -4.2 11.5 6.9 4.2 Financing Banking system (net) IO/ Nonbank and discrepancies -12.4 0.4 4.2 -14.6 -6.9 -5.3 -12.4 -3.1 3.1 -6.9 -10.1 -5.3 0.0 3.5 1.1 -7.1 3.2 0.0 Memorandum items: Non-oil revenue in percent of non-oil GDP 1 II Nominal GDP Non-oil GDP Offtcial exchange rate (LDRISS, period average) Crude oil prices (USSkxurel) 16.5 14.3 14.3 13.1 9.6 12.9 12,002 13,068 12.498 14.958 18,154 19,493 8,971 9.798 10.437 11,704 12,247 13,175 0.36 0.38 0.42 0.45 0.51 0.68 20.3 19.3 12.9 17.9 28.0 22.2 Sources: Budget laws, budget execution reports, Secretariat of Finance; and Fund staff estimates. li Net of the National Oil Company revenues and expenditures. Projections for 2001 assumes that any revenue arising from a market price for crude oil in excess of 818 per barrel is allocated to the reserve fund. 2/ Excludes the Jihad fund and taxes on the government wage bill. 31 Proceeds from the revaluation of the net foreign assets of the central bank following changes of the offtcial exchange rate. These re,vatuation gains are usually transferred to the treasury the year following the revaluation. 4/Protits from the sale of foreign exchange at the special exchange rate by the central bank. 5/ Eliminates the double counting from the consolidation of the treasury and GMR accounts. 6/Net of income taxes and includes the contributions to the social security fund. 7/The interest-bearing public debt is constant. Advances by the cmtral bank do not carry interest. 8/ In 2000, includes also an LD 300 million investment financed through the allocation to the National Oil Corporation. For 2001, the projections are based on a target corresponding to 70 percent of the budgetary allocations from oil revenue, net of debt service and National Oil Company allocations. 9/ Includes both current and capital expenditures. IO/ Based on data from the monetary survey. 1 l/ Excluding revaluation proceeds, gains from foreign exchange sales and GMR. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 36 - Table 7. Libya: Monetary Survey, 1996-2001 1996 1997 1998 Sept. Projections 1999 2000 2000 2001 Net foreign assets Domestic credit Net claims on government Claims on the economy Claims on nonfinancial public enterprises Claims on private sector Claims on other banking institutions Claims on nonbank financial instititutions Other items (net) Broad money Restricted deposits Broad money -2.9 0.2 3.8 7.4 0.6 0.9 6.4 Net foreign assets Domestic credit Net claims on government Claims on the economy Claims on nonfinancial public enterprises Claims on private sector Claims on other banking institutions Claims on nonbank financial institutions -4.5 41.1 -11.6 11.3 73.9 88.2 60.6 -20.0 4.0 3.2 3.2 -11.0 -12.8 -5.3 -23.4 -8.2 8.6 -25.2 -45.8 -50.6 -57.1 -16.1 16.6 -1.1 28.3 7.0 6.7 7.1 -8.3 8.4 -3.2 22.1 5.8 6.0 7.6 -22.1 24.0 0.5 27.7 -1.3 -1.8 7.6 . . . . . . . . . . . . 16.8 16.6 0.0 . . . . . . . . . . . . 296.0 296.0 0.0 Net foreign assets Domestic credit Net claims on government Claims on the economy Claims on nonfinancial public enterprises Claims on private sector Claims on other banking institutions Claims on nonbank financial institutions Other items net Memorandum items: Reserve money Nominal GDP Nominal GDP growth (in percent) Nominal non-oil GDP growth (in percent) Real GDP growth (in percent) CPI inflation (in percent) (In millions of ID) 1,933 2,727 2,410 2,682 4,664 5,047 8,106 9,638 10,028 10,350 10,677 9,497 9,310 8,814 4,881 4,479 4,865 3,641 1,972 1,800 773 4,757 5,549 5,486 7,036 7,525 7,511 8,041 2,245 2,433 2,356 2,875 3,042 3,048 3,280 2,512 3,116 3,130 3,996 3,945 3,924 4,223 0 0 0 40 47 47 47 0 0 0 124 492 492 492 -2,620 -3,700 -3,510 -3,440 -4,334 -4,496 -6,387 8,260 8,272 8,587 9,224 9,276 9,307 9,902 692 782 663 695 551 555 630 (Growth rates; in percent) (Percent change over broad money of the previous year) -1.1 9.6 -3.8 3.2 21.5 25.6 32.9 -28.3 4.7 3.9 3.8 -12.8 -14.8 -5.3 -17.5 -4.9 4.7 -14.3 -18.1 -20.0 -11 .o -10.8 9.6 -0.8 18.1 5.3 5.1 5.7 -2.4 2.3 -0.9 6.1 1.8 1.9 2.5 -8.4 7.3 0.2 10.1 -0.6 -0.8 3.2 . . . . . . . . . 0.5 0.1 0.1 0.0 . . . **’ .” 1.4 4.0 4.0 0.0 27.4 -13.1 2.3 0.8 -9.7 -11.4 -20.3. 5,104 5,821 5,760 5,455 5,100 5,474 5,825 12,002 13,068 12,498 14,958 . . . 18,154 19,493 16.7 8.9 -4.4 19.7 . . . 21.4 7.4 14.6 9.2 6.5 12.1 . . . 4.6 7.6 5.2 -1.2 2.9 2.5 . . . 3.0 3.0 4.0 3.6 3.7 2.6 . . . -3.0 3.8 Source: Central Bank of Libya. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 37 - Table 8. Libya: Illustrative Medium-Term Scenario, 1999-2005 1999 2000 2001 Projections 2002 2003 2004 2005 Crude oil production (in millions of barrels/day) Crude oil exports (in millions of barrel&lay) Crude oil export price (US$ per barrel) Official exchange rate (LDAJSS, eop) Official exchange rate (LDAJSS, p.a.) CPI (percent change) GDP deflator (percent change) Gross fixed capital formation Nongovernment Government National saving Nongovemment Government Saving-investment gap Nongovemment Government Real GDP growth rate (in percent) Real non-oil GDP growth rates (in percent) Total revenue Of which: Oil revenue Total expenditure Current Capital Overall fiscal position (excluding revaluation proceeds) Exports, f.o.b. Of which: Non-oil exports Imports Current account balance (in percent of GDP) Official reserves (in months of imports of GNFS) (Assumptions) 1.32 1.35 1.37 1.39 1.41 1.43 1.07 1.07 1.08 1.10 1.11 1.13 17.85 27.98 22.19 20.74 19.30 19.06 (In percent of GDP; unless otherwise indicated) 0.48 0.54 0.75 1.50 1.50 1.50 1.50 0.45 0.51 0.68 1.50 1.50 1.50 1.50 2.6 -3.0 3.8 17.2 4.4 3.7 3.3 16.8 17.8 4.2 46.3 0.4 2.4 2.4 15.6 16.4 21.0 32.8 32.0 31.9 31.3 7.5 3.2 7.2 15.0 13.9 13.6 12.9 8.1 13.2 13.8 17.7 18.2 18.4 18.4 17.6 28.5 27.4 38.3 35.1 33.0 30.7 -2.0 8.4 9.4 10.0 9.7 9.2 8.8 19.6 20.1 18.0 28.3 25.4 23.8 21.9 2.0 12.1 6.4 5.6 3.0 1.1 -0.6 -9.5 5.2 2.2 -5.0 -4.2 -4.4 -4.0 11.5 6.9 4.2 10.6 7.2 5.5 3.5 2.5 3.0 3.0 3.5 4.0 4.5 5.5 3.2 3.1 3.5 4.1 4.7 5.4 6.6 48.4 43.5 43.8 59.2 76.2 46.7 44.2 23 29.2 29.1 40.5 36.7 34.3 31.8 33.8 36.6 38.5 41.7 41.7 41.2 40.7 25.9 23.4 24.7 23.9 23.5 22.9 22.3 8.1 13.2 13.8 17.7 18.2 18.4 18.4 11.5 6.9 4.2 10.6 7.2 5.5 3.5 1.45 1.15 18.81 (In millions of U.S. dollars; unless otherwise indicated) 7,443 11,735 9,614 9,242 8,838 8,936 9,040 490 575 630 718 790 869 956 -5,174 -5,157 -5,544 -5,905 -5,987 -6,376 -6,758 666 4,319 1,841 1,097 619 241 -135 2.0 12.1 6.4 5.6 3.0 1.1 -0.6 7,474 10,612 11,873 13,168 14,212 15,014 15,650 12.7 16.5 17.6 18.6 19.8 19.7 19.5 Sources: Libyan authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-38 - APPENDIX I I. II. III. IV. V. VI VII LIBYA-FUND RELATIONS (As of November 30,200O) Membership Status: Joined 09/17/58; Article XIV General Resources Account: Quota Fund holdings of currency Reserve position in Fund SDR Department: Net cumulative allocation Holdings Outstanding Purchases and Loans: Latest Financial Arrangements: Projected Obligations to Fund: Exchange Rate Arrangement l Official Exchange Market SDR Million 1123.70 728.2 l- 395.5 1 SDR Million 58.77 412.77 None None None % Quota 100.0 64.8 35.2 % Allocation 100.0 702.3 With effect from March 18, 1986, the Libyan dinar has been pegged to the SDR at an initial central rate of LD 1 = SDR 2.80. Effective October 3 1, 1998 the margins on either side of the central rate were widened to 77 percent, and the dinar was allowed to depreciate to the maximum extent permitted by those margins, i.e. to LD 1 = SDR 1.577. Since then, the dinar was devalued twice in 2000, to LD 1 = SDR 1.5 106 on February 28,200O and to LD = SDR 1.4204 on August 3 1,200O where it currently stands. Under the current dual exchange system, most exchange transactions, including oil exports and most public sector imports take place at the official rate. l Parallel Exchange Market Since the legalization in February 1999, for a limited number of transactions, of the’ parallel market rate (called “special rate”) at LD 3.200 per U.S. dollar, the authorities have gradually appreciated the special rate while simultaneously depreciating the official rate, thus narrowing the spread between the two rates from around 690 percent in February 1999 to 322 percent in November 2000, when the special rate stood at LD 1.75 per U.S. dollar. Concomitantly, the coverage of the special rate was extended to an increasing share of external transactions. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 39 - APPENDIX I VIII. Exchange System Libya continues to maintain restrictions on the making of payments and transfers for current international transactions under the transitional arrangements of Article XIV, namely restrictions on invisible payments related to the transfer of remittances. During the Article XIV discussions held in the context of consultations under Article IV in November 2000, the staff urged the authorities to initiate the lifting of the exchange restrictions and multiple currency practices, with a view to moving toward acceptance of the obligations under Article VIII of the Articles of Agreement. The authorities stated that elimination of these restrictions would be considered in the context of the exchange rate unification and medium-term adjustment plan they intend to initiate by end-2001. IX. Article IV Consultation Libya is on a 24-month consultation cycle. The last Article IV consultation discussions were held during November 1998. The staff report (%4/99/34,2/l O/99) was discussed by the Executive Board on February 25, 1999 (EBM/99/20). The recent Article IV consultation discussions took place during October 25-November 14,200O. X. Technical Assistance STA Monetary statistics STA Price, trade, and non-oil production statistics STA Money and banking and balance of payments STA Multisector mission February 1985 September 1985 March 1990 February 1998 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 40 - APPENDIX II LIBYA RELATIONS WITH THE WORLD BANK GROUP’ (As of December 18,200O) I. Libya has been a member of the World Bar&since 1958, joining the IBRD and IFC in September 1958, IDA in August 196 1, and MIGA in April 1993. There have been no Bank Group loans made to Libya to date; the last economic report was prepared in 1959. The development of the country’s petroleum assets from 1960 placed Libya quickly among capital-surplus oil-producing countries and provided resources to build extensive infrastructure and provide social services. II. At the September 1999 Annual Meetings, Libya indicated interest in obtaining training and technical assistance (TA) from the Bank. MENA Regional staff then accompanied the Bank Group Executive Director responsible for Libya to the country in early April 2000 to make initial contacts and discuss the modalities of likely collaboration. Those discussions were continued during the Spring 2000 Meetings, at which time Libyan Government representatives requested a Bank mission to identify training and TA requirements in national accounts, social and economic database management, customs modemization, small and medium enterprise (SME) development, and electronic bank payments system. To that end, a Bank mission visited Libya from June 17 to 27, 2000 and produced a detailed technical assistance identification report, which was shared with the Libyan authorities both in English and Arabic. Based on the report, the Central Bank of Libya has expressed interest in pursuing TA from the Bank on Electronic Bank Payment System; the Bank is currently considering the request. III. The Libyan authorities invited the Bank Group (IBRD, IFC, and MIGA) to the “International Conference on Development and Investments in Libya” that was held in Tripoli on November 14 and 15,200O. The authorities are keen to work with the Bank Group to further design their FDI policies, strategies, and institutions. ’ Prepared by the World Bank staff. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4l- APPENDIX III LIBYA STATISTICALISSUES 1. The review of existing conceptual and data systems conducted by the February 1998 STA mission revealed that there were deficiencies in both data quality and timeliness that seriously impaired the usefulness of official data. After examining the conceptual and compilation procedures underpinning the collection of statistics in national accounts, price indices and foreign trade, money and banking, government finance, and balance of payments statistics, the mission developed recommendations for improvement in these systems, where appropriate, that would enhance the quality of the data, and prepared a short-term action plan to be implemented by the authorities. 2. The 2000 Article IV consultation mission (October 25-November 14,200O) provided the opportunity to review the implementation status of the 1998 STA mission’s recommendations and assess outstanding statistical issues. The mission’s review shows that, while some of the recommendations were implemented, predominantly in money and banking and to a certain extent in national accounts statistics, slower progress was achieved in other areas. Data compilation and reporting to STA for publication in IFS improved considerably in 2000, but no progress had been achieved on the important recommendation to establish a data reporting system to MED. In reference to the latter, the mission prepared an MED reporting template for the use of the authorities. Overall, the developments above together with the recent provision of CPI and balance of payments data are encouraging signs that the authorities are paying greater attention to data issues. 3. Despite noticeable improvements in compilation and reporting, further priority would need to be given by the authorities to improving the database. Staff recognizes that some of the data shortcomings are related to a number of institutional weaknesses, such as the proliferation of agencies with unclear and often overlapping demarcation of responsibilities, the continuous reshuffling of responsibilities among them, and the lack of inter-agency cooperation which goes hand in hand with the institutional setup that encourages a tendency to treat data on a confidential basis within and between agencies. In this regard, establishment as soon as possible of the Inter-ministerial Committee to coordinate improvements in statistics would be important. 4. The following section outlines the current status of data compilation and reporting and assesses progress achieved against individual recommendations included in STA’s action . plan. 5. In the area of national accounts statistics, progress has been achieved with the compilation of GDP estimates by economic activity and expenditure through 1999. While data compilation is consistent with the 1968 System of National Accounts (1968 SNA), the production of these data continues to be hampered by high staff turnover and by some delays in the receipt of basic information from various sources, particularly from other government agencies. These data are based on outdated surveys and only partially cover the informal Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-42- APPENDIX III sector in Libya. Methodological notes highlight different approaches to measure activities in the informal sector. 6. In the area of prices, some progress has been achieved since the 1998 STA mission with the resumption of the compilation of the Consumer Price Index (CPI) using, to derive weights, the results of the 1992-93 household budget survey, as recommended by the 1998 STA mission. The new CPI, which was provided to the 2000 Article IV mission, covered 1999 and the first two quarters of 2000. However, the compilation of the wholesale price index (WPI), which officially stopped in 1991 together with the CPI, has not resumed yet. 7. In money and banking statistics, while some progress was made, more efforts are needed. The CBL implemented in 1999 and in 2000 some of the recommendations of the February 1998 STA mission pertaining to its accounts: the analytical presentation of accounts was reviewed to separately identify nonresident accounts according to the residency rather than nationality criterion. Data were collected from the newly created banks, and accounts for the various institutions (DMBs, other banking institutions, off-shore banks and nonbank financial institutions) and the government’s Social Security Fund were separately identified. New call report forms were designed. Also, the timeliness and accuracy data for publication in the IFS have improved. However, substantial weaknesses still persist: (1) the reclassification of very large unclassified assets and liabilities on the Central Bank balance sheet was partially implemented for 1999 and 2000 but not implemented for preceding years; (2) weaknesses still remain in reporting of the financial institutions, particularly with respect to the proper coverage, sectorization of accounts, and classification of financial instruments. 8. Regarding fiscal data, the Libyan fiscal information system lacks transparency. It is fragmented and designed for administrative reporting under the government finance law rather than for purposes of providing timely statistical information for economic planning and analysis. It does not conform to international standards. As a result, the authorities do not currently provide data to the Fund on the operations of the central or local government sectors, including extrabudgetary and social security accounts. Statistical legislation may be necessary to allow for the type of statistical reporting that accords with international standards. None of the recommendations of the 1998 STA mission have been implemented. In addition, as the process of decentralization moves one step further in 2000 with a large part of the budget now executed by the regions, compilation and reporting of fiscal data are set to become even more challenging. 9. Annual balance of payments data reporting to STA following the presentation of the fourth edition of the Balance of Payments Manual (BPM4) resumed in March 2000, . though with a limited breakdown. The latest data refer to 1999. The 2000 Article IV mission was provided projections for 2000. Although considerable progress has been made in data reporting to the Fund, it is not clear if the authorities have implemented the recommendations of two STA technical assistance missions that visited Libya in 1990 and 1998. 10. The table below describes the status of implementation of STA’s 1998 short-term action plan: Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 43 - APPENDIX III Target Date Status of Implementation as of November 2000 A. STATISTICAL INFRASTRUCTURE Establish a ministerial coordination committee to enhance February 1999 Not implemented the data sharing among different government agencies. B. NATIONAL ACCOUNTS, PRICE INDICES, AND FOREIGN TRADE NATIONAL ACCOUNTS l Complete the estimates of GDP by economic activity September 1999 Implemented and expenditure through 1996; fill in missing estimates for previous years, so that a complete time (series through 1999) series can be con&-ucted for the period 1980-96 at current and constant prices. l Further improve these estimates by maximizing use September 1999 Implemented of administrative sources (for example, customs and balance of payments data, government accounts, and (no customs data used yet) income tax records) and results of existing surveys. . Start developing short-term economic indicators, June 1999 Partially implemented including price indicators, and wage indicators. In this process, give priority to the timeliness of the (No wage indicators available) indicators over the degree of detail. . Emphasize the transfer of knowledge and skills in June 1999 Implemented national accounts compilation to Libyan nationals through intensive training in the UNDP program (Libya received TA from (Development, Planning and Training Project) to Syria) ensure that they take over full responsibilities in the supervision and production of these statistics. l Examine means by which a closer relationship could March 1999 Partially implemented be established between the Census and Statistics Directorate (CSD) and the General Directorate of Economic Planning (GDEP), in Tripoli and Sirte, respectively. Their location in two different places prevents close contact between them and could lead to duplication of work. initiated issue discussion PRICES l Urgently resume the compilation of the consumer April 1999 Partially implemented price index, using weights derived from the results of the 1992-93 household budget survey. Pending the development of a comprehensive index that will take some months, an interim index could be compiled, using weights at the groups’ level and prices for a simplified basket of 40 to 60 items. Prices should be collected in both private shops and department stores located in the six major cities of the country. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 44 - APPENDIX III Target Date Status of Implementation as of November 2000 l Establish a producer price index covering agriculture, June 1999 Not implemented fishing, manufacturing, telecommunications, electricity, gas, and water supply, to facilitate the deflation of national accounts aggregates. l Develop a consistent work program on price statistics June 1999 Not implemented with specific priorities and deadlines for the completion of the various tasks to prevent this area from being swamped by other large statistical undertakings, such as the 1995 population census. C. FISCAL DATA l Establish a statistical reporting function at the June 1999 Not implemented Ministry of Finance to produce timely monthly budget performance information on the recurrent and development budgets, based on the existing budget reports but also including data on transfer& interest, and financing. l Reclassify and report capital expenditure now June 1999 Not implemented included under recurrent budget expenditure as part of capital expenditure. . Develop monthly reporting by social security and the March 1999 Not implemented principal extra budgetary funds, for example, Great Man-Made River, (GMR) in the same format as the monthly budget performance reports. The monthly reports should provide information on transfers between the budget, social security, and extra budgetary Curds to allow consolidation of data for the central government. . Develop monthly reporting of outstanding March 1999 Not implemented government debt, divided into domestic and foreign debt. Domestic debt should identify intergovernmental debt to allow consolidation of debt for the central government. D. DATA REPORTING TO MED l Establish a system under which tables in IMF March 1999 Not implemented operational papers could be updated and reported to the IMF every three months. l Ensure that agencies provide provisional or aggregate March 1999 Not implemented - data to the central bank until final data become available. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public. . Libya: Core Statistical Indicators As of December 1,200O Exchange Rates Central Bank Intema- Balance Sheet tional Reserve/ Broad Money Interest Rates Consumer Exnortsi Reserves Base Money Price Index Imports Overall Govemmcnt Balance GDP/ GNP External Debt/ Debt Service Current Account Balance Nov. 2000 -l Oct. 2000 1999 Date of Latest Observation Date Received 1997 1999 Nov 1998 Sept. 2000 Sept. 2ooa M A discontinued A . . . A (since Mar. 2000) )irectorate of Central Central Statistics Bank Bank Nov. 2000 Oct. 2000 Sept. 2000 Sept. 2000 Sept. 2000 Dec. 2000 Nov. 2000 Nov. 2000 Nov. 2000 Nov. 2000 M M M M M M M M M M Nov. 2000 M Nov. 2000 . . . . . . Central Bank Article IV Tonsultation Mission A A T v V Frequency of Data I R I I M Ientral Ban1 kL Fax ( Frcqucncy of Reporting Source of Update /Clntral Ban! Mail jecretariat of Directorate Finance of Statistics C Fax 1 Fax / Fax Fax Fax Article IV Fax Consultation Mission + No No Mode of Reporting Article IV consultation Mission Mail No M Confidentiality No A No No No No No M M M M M M M M M M * Frequency of Publication Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 46 - APPENDIX IV . LIBYA Changes in the Exchange Regime Since the Last Consultation Changes during 1999: l Februar?, 14, 1999. A dual exchange rate market was introduced by legalizing the parallel market and allowing commercial banks to sell foreign exchange at that rate for authorized transactions. l February 14, 1999. Residents and nonresidents were allowed to export foreign currency bought from commercial banks. l Februay 14, 1999. Residents were allowed to purchase foreign exchange for tourism from banks without limit. l August 15, 1999. No approval is required to open foreign exchange accounts. l August 2.5, 1999. Authorized banks may open letters of credit without approval from the exchange control authority (the Central Bank) provided that they use the special exchange rate. l August 2.5, 1999. All public and private enterprises in the main following sectors are allowed to import goods needed for production at the special exchange rate: (I) food industry; (2) household cleaning; (3) construction industry; (4) steel industries; (5) fisheries and equipment; (6) plastic, wood, and paper industries. Changes during 2000: l February 20, 2000. In order to open letters of credit at the special exchange rate, the advance deposit is fixed at 25 percent for public enterprises and 50 percent for private (partnership and share) companies. l March 14, 2000. Residents and nonresidents are allowed to buy and sell foreign currency through their accounts at commercial banks for all non-commercial transfers and credit operations provided that the special exchange rate is used and that the Libyan Dinar is an intermediary. l March 14, 2000. Tourism organizations are allowed to buy foreign exchange for their activities and sell foreign exchange acquired through their activities at the special rate. l March 14, 2000. Tourists can buy foreign exchange when in Libya and sell their remaining Libyan dinars upon departure, all at the special rate. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 47 - APPENDIX IV l March 14, 2000. All transactions in foreign exchange relating to individual non- commercial needs are free provided that the special exchange rate is used. l October 29, 2000. Public enterprises not included in the foreign exchange budget are allowed to sell any amount of foreign exchange they earn at the special rate to open or settle credit and for direct transfers through the banking system, provided that they report on their sources and uses of foreign exchange. l October 29, 2000. All exports proceeds are to be repatriated within three months of shipment (instead of six before). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public