DOCUMENT OF MONETARY FUND AND FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY FOR AGENDA SM/03/57 February 7,2003 To: Members of the Executive Board From: The Secretary Subject: Bhutan-Staff Report for the 2002 Article IV Consultation Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staff report for the 2002 Article IV consultation with Bhutan, which is tentatively scheduled for discussion on Friday, February 21,2003. A draft decision appears on page 20. At the time of circulation of this paper to the Board, the Secretary’s Department has not received a communication from the authorities of Bhutan indicating whether or not they consent to the Fund’s publication of this paper; such communication may be received after the authorities have had an opportunity to read the paper. Questions may be referred to Mr. J. Gordon (ext. 37336), Ms. Abdelati (ext. 37246), and Mr. Peiris (ext. 39363) in APD. Unless the Documents Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the Asian Development Bank, following its consideration by the Executive Board. An: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicINTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND BHUTAN Staff Report for the 2002 Article IV Consultation Prepared by the Staff Representatives for the 2002 Consultation with Bhutan Approved by Wanda Tseng and Matthew Fisher February 7,2003 Discussions for the 2002 Article IV consultation discussions with Bhutan were held in Thimphu during December 3-10,2002. The mission met with Finance Minister Lyonpo Yeshey Zimba; Trade, Industry and Power Minister Lyonpo Khandu Wangchuk; Finance Secretary Dasho Wangdi Norbu; Royal Monetary Authority Managing Director Sonam Wangchuk; other senior government officials; and members of the business and donor community. The staff team comprised Mr. Gordon (Head), Ms. Abdelati and Mr. Peiris (all APD). Mr. Prasad (OED) attended the meetings. Bhutan is on a 24-month consultation cycle. In concluding the 2001 consultation discussions on May 7,200l (SUR/O1/147), Executive Directors commended the authorities for their prudent macroeconomic policies and careful development of the country’s natural resources, while achieving major improvements in social indicators. Executive Directors also endorsed continuation of the pegged exchange rate regime. In view of the vast potential for growth in the electricity sector, and strong donor support, Executive Directors considered Bhutan’s medium-term growth prospects to be very favorable. However, Directors noted that steps to deregulate the economy and foster the private sector had shown limited results to date, and emphasized the importance of devising innovative and effective approaches to broaden the economy and generate much-needed job opportunities. The authorities have yet to make a decision on publishing the staff report. Bhutan continues to avail itself of the transitional arrangements under the provisions of Article XIV, Section 2. Data limitations hamper effective surveillance of economic developments and policies in Bhutan, although the situation has improved over the last two years. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2- Contents Page Executive Summary .............................................................................................................. .3 I. Introduction.. ............................................................................................................. .4 II. Recent Economic Developments ............................................................................... . III. Medium-Term Outlook.. ........................................................................................... .9 Iv. Policy Discussions .................................................................................................... .9 V. Statistical Issues and Technical Assistance .............................................................. .17 VI. Staff Appraisal ........................................................................................................... 17 Boxes 1. Ninth Five-Year Plan ................................................................................................ .5 2. Prudential Regulations ............................................................................................... 11 3. Private Sector Developments and Strategy for the Future ........................................ .12 4. Fiscal Sustainability .................................................................................................. .14 Figure 1. Selected Economic Indicators, 1997/98-2001/02 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2 1 Tables 1. Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 1996/97-2002/03 ................................ 22 2. Government Budget Summary, 1997/98-2002/03 ..................................................... 23 3. Balance of Payments Summary, 1996/97-2001/02.. ................................................. .24 4. Monetary Survey, 1997-2002.. .................................................................................. .25 5. Illustrative Medium-Term Scenario, 2000/O l-2006107 ............................................ .26 Annexes 1. Fund Relations .......................................................................................................... .27 2. Relations with the World Bank Group ....................................................................... 30 3. Relations with the Asian Development Bank ............................................................ 3 1 4. Statistical Issues ........................................................................................................ .33 5. Public Information Notice ......................................................................................... .36 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3- Executive Summary Bhutan is undertaking political reforms. The King devolved executive powers to a Cabinet of Ministers in 1998. A new constitution is being drafted that will facilitate further devolution of decision making powers. The recently released Ninth Year plan reaffirms the government’s development strategy which aims to modernize the economy while preserving the environment and culture. The Bhutanese economy is tightly integrated with its much larger Indian neighbor and is increasingly dependent on hydropower exports. The Bhutanese currency is pegged to the Indian rupee at par and bilateral trade is virtually free of restrictions. India is also the largest donor, financing the major part of recent power sector projects. Electricity exports to India contribute nearly 40 percent of government revenue. Growth remains robust and the near-term outlook positive. Recent construction and housing finance activities have contributed to an average growth rate of 6.7 percent over the past five years. Growth prospects remain favorable given ongoing development of new hydropower projects combined with long-term electricity export contracts to India, and could rise further if private sector development were to take off. Reserve build-up has slowed over the past two years, but reserve levels remain comfortable at 19 months of imports. The growth targets of the Ninth Plan appear to be feasible provided that external assistance is forthcoming as envisaged. Macroeconomic policies remain prudent. The authorities have maintained current fiscal surpluses and have attempted to finance capital spending as far as possible with concessional external borrowing. The fiscal deficit widened sharply to over 11 percent of GDP in 2000/01 due to lumpy capital spending, but was reduced to 5% percent of GDP in 2001/02. The 2002/03 budget targets a deficit of 4% percent of GDP. The recent introduction of the Personal Income Tax should assist in meeting future demands on recurrent spending and avoiding recourse to large domestic borrowing. The exchange rate peg remains appropriate. The authorities recognized that Bhutan faces a number of vulnerabilities and policy challenges. A more dynamic private sector is needed to reduce the economy’s dependence on electricity exports and improve job creation prospects. The new foreign investment policy will help foster private sector development, but employment regulations will need to avoid undermining these efforts and raising labor costs. The newly introduced prudential regulations will need to be complemented by steps to improve asset quality and to develop a commercial banking culture that facilitates effective financial intermediation. Government borrowing-which will continue to rise to finance infrastructure investment-should be limited to amounts that are sustainable. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4- 1. INTRODUCTION 1. The Bhutanese economy has continued to perform strongly. There has been little effect from the turbulence in the global economy, and despite heavy monsoon flooding in 2000, GDP growth has remained robust. Construction of new hydropower projects has continued apace, with knock-on benefits for the transport and construction sectors. Private sector credit has picked up strongly after a number of years of stagnation. Even though tourist arrivals declined in the wake of the September 11 attacks, the balance of payments situation has remained comfortable. In line with price developments in India, inflation in Bhutan has fallen below 3 percent, its lowest level in two decades. 2. Implementation of policies has been broadly successful. The fiscal stance has remained prudent, while the exchange rate peg to the Rupee has allowed Bhutan to share in the stable monetarv conditions that have prevailed’in India.’ Under the Eighth Five-Year Plan (1997-2002), GDP growth averaged 6.7 percent per annum, Bhutan: Social Indicators Over Two Decades 1977 l/ 2000 11 Life expectancy (years) 46 (1984) 66 (1994) Child mortality rate (per 1000) 162 84 Number of basic health units 31 160 Number of primary schools 92 268 (2001) Adult literacy rate (percent) 18 54 Access to safe water (percent) 31 78 Sources: Bhutan, 2020, A Vision for Peace, Prosperity and Happiness, Roval Government of Bhutan. and Statistical Yearbook of Bhutan. 2001. 1 which was above the target of 6.2 percent. Dramatic progress has l/Unless otherwise undicated. been made in raising education and health levels. However, the private sector has yet to begin creating jobs for nationals on a sufficient scale. The recently-published Ninth Five-Year Plan (2002-2007), while again balancing exploitation of natural resources and tourist potential against preservation of the environment and culture, gives renewed emphasis to encouraging private sector activity (Box 1). 3. Close ties with India have been maintained. India is the dominant trading partner and sole buyer of electricity exports. The Bhutanese currency, the Ngultrum, is pegged to the Indian currency at par. The rupee circulates freely within Bhutan and is used interchangeably with the Ngultrum. As Bhutan’s largest foreign donor, India has financed the major part of the development of the power sector. Proximity to India, however, has led to security problems from separatist Indian militants operating from within Bhutan’s borders. ’ Chapter 1 of the accompanying Selected Issues compares Bhutan’s exchange and monetary system with the systems prevailing in other countries. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-5- Box 1. Bhutan: Ninth Five-Year Plan Bhutan’s Ninth Five-Year Plan will guide the country’s development policies for 2002/03-2007/08. The Ninth Plan places particular emphasis on decentralization and participation in decision-making by lower tiers of government. Macroeconomic Outlook The Plan aims to raise economic growth to an average of 8 to 9 percent. Increased private sector activity and new power projects are expected to be important drivers of growth. Inflation is expected to remain broadly in line with inflation in India. The Ninth Plan envisages relatively expansionary fiscal policy due to higher capital investments. Revenue collections in percent of GDP are expected to taper off faster than current spending toward the end of the plan period; but revenue projections appear to be fairly conservative. Capital expenditure will decline moderately, reflecting near completion of large hydropower projects during the period. With external financing not increasing proportionately, the government plans to issue domestic government securities to fill the resource gap. The external position is expected to remain comfortable. Close trade and exchange links with India are expected to continue. Exports are to gradually expand due mainly to increased electricity sales. The current account deficit is projected to widen with imports growing in line with GDP. Nevertheless, capital inflows in the form of project financing are expected to offset the deficit, leading to a positive overall balance and further accumulation of foreign reserves. Key Sectoral Policies The overarching theme is to enhance the participation of the private sector in the implementation of development projects, and thereby create much-needed domestic employment opportunities. Education: The priority is to increase the number of secondary and tertiary educational institutions. Since the enrollment ratio in primary schools has continued to increase, the authorities plan to build an additional 50 secondary level institutions, with priority accorded to rural and remote areas. Health: The Plan emphasizes developing appropriate human and physical resources, especially through delivering services to remote areas. As an initial step, a health survey will be conducted for the remote areas to identify their needs. The Government intends to partially cover the fiscal costs by expanding the cost recovery scheme introduced during the Eighth Plan. Social Infrastructure: There is a need to build a road network system that gives access to all rural communities. While the Plan continues to emphasize constructing new roads, it also stresses the need to maintain the existing road infrastructure. The Plan regards strengthening air transport system as an important means of overcoming the constraints arising from the country’s landlocked nature and mountainous terrain. In this regard, a civil aviation master plan will be introduced during the plan period, which includes constructing a second airport, and launching domestic helicopter services operated by the private sector. Hydropower: The hydro sector will continue to be a major engine of growth. The generation capacity is set to increase significantly, as large hydropower projects already under construction commence operations. Two large potential projects, Puna Tsangchhu (870 MW) and Mangdechhu (360 MW), have completed feasibility studies, and will be constructed during the plan period. The Plan emphasizes extending electricity supply to rural areas. The target is to provide electricity to 15,000 rural households during the plan period, with complete coverage of the population by 2020. To this end, facilities for the inter-connected transmission grid will be expanded. Trade and Industry: The plan envisages the establishment of a dry port in the south of Bhutan at Pheuntsholing. So as to reduce transactions costs and facilitate trade, consignments would be customs cleared at the dry port and then transported directly to the sea port. In addition, as a means of encouraging manufacturing activity, the authorities intend to add 5 new industrial estates around the country to the 3 that have already been set up. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-6- 4. Political reforms have continued. The drafting of a national constitution is the latest step in the process of evolutionary political change that began in 1998 when the King devolved executive powers to a Cabinet of Ministers chosen by the elected National Assembly. A first draft of the constitution was completed in December 2002 and will now be subject to public discussion. A key objective of the Ninth Five-Year Plan is the decentralization of economic power to local governments so as to facilitate implementation of reforms and improve the effectiveness of public spending. II. RECENT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS 5. Growth has been rapid and inflation has declined. GDP growth dipped below trend to 5.3 percent in 2000 as a result of the flooding in the south. The associated damage to industry was partially offset by strong growth in construction (roads, houses and power projects) and in the financial sector. Manufacturing recovered in 200 1, and with construction and financing continuing to boom, GDP growth is estimated to have increased to 6.6 percent in 2001, and to 7.7 percent in 2002. The electricity sector also grew rapidly as a result of improved transmission and the commissioning of new projects.2 Inflation remained low, declining from 4.4 percent (12-month rate) in December 2000 to 2.7 percent in June 2002. Low inflation has reflected good agricultural seasons over the last few years (food prices have a 72 percent weight in the CPI), as well as the effects of disinflation in India. 6. Fiscal policy has remained conservative. The authorities have continued to adhere to the principle that domestic revenue should more than cover recurrent expenditure, and hence have maintained a surplus on the fiscal current account. To improve the buoyancy of the tax system and to promote social equity, personal income taxation was introduced in January 2002 in conjunction with a campaign to educate taxpayers. With regard to capital spending, Bhutan’s excellent relations with donors have ensured that projects are largely covered by concessional external finance. Nevertheless, in a departure from previous practice, recourse was made to domestic financing of 6% percent of GDP in 2000/01 (fiscal year begins July 1) and 2 percent of GDP in 2001/02 (Table 2). The primary source of such financing was a run-down of government deposits with the banking system. In June 2002, the government’s domestic debt stock was 2 percent of GDP.3 2 The upper stage of Basochu and first phase of Kurichhu projects were commissioned in 2001. These two projects add 67 MW to the existing capacity of 336 MW from the Chukha scheme (which was commissioned in 1986). The other project under construction is the 1020 MW Tala scheme, which is due for completion in 2005. 3 The estimates of domestic financing of the budget recorded in the fiscal accounts tend to be much larger than the credit to government that can be identified from the monetary survey (continued.. .) Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-7- 7. The fiscal deficit has fluctuated in line with capital spending. The deficit rose to 11.1 percent of GDP in 2000/O 1, considerably above the budget target of 3.4 percent of GDP. Almost half of this divergence represented spending overruns related to rebuilding flood damaged infrastructure, but the acquisition of embassy buildings in foreign capitals (so as to save on rental expenses) and a loan to Druk Air to purchase new aircraft also played a role. By contrast, the surplus on the fiscal current account in 2000/01 of 2.4 percent of GDP was close to target. In 2001/02, capital expenditure returned to a more normal level and the fiscal deficit narrowed to 5.4 percent of GDP. 8. The 2002/03 budget targets a deficit of 4.8 percent of GDP, with higher tax receipts and lower current expenditure expected to more than offset a drop in nontax revenues. The change in revenue composition is partly attributable to the effects of the corporatization of the telecommunications provider in 200 1 and of the power department in 2002 (since corporations pay tax and dividends, whereas departmental revenue is purely nontax revenue). The tax/GDP ratio is expected to increase in 2002/03 despite the announcement in the budget of a raft of tax incentives aimed at manufacturing and the IT sector. These included tax holidays for new investments and exemptions for earnings in convertible currency. At the same time, export taxes on apples, oranges and cardamom were also abolished. 9. The pace of foreign reserve accumulation has slowed. Exports declined in 2000 and 200 1, primarily on account of the flood damage to industry, although there has also been a trend decline in nonelectricity exports since the mid-l 990s.4 Lower exports led to a wider trade deficit, which was aggravated by a drop in inward transfers, including foreign grants. As a result, the current account deficit turned from a surplus in fiscal Bhutan: Exports, 1994-2001 (In millions Of U.S. CJosarq 40 30 1 20 10 0 L 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 INon-Electricity +Electricity year 1999/2000 to a deficit of about 5 percent of GDP in 2000/01 and 2001/02. External loans were sufficient to finance these current account deficits, but the National Pension and Provident Fund (NPPF) was permitted to invest about US$20 million overseas in and balance sheets of nonbank financial institutions. The authorities are working to reconcile these differences. 4 Part of this decline reflects the government’s decision in 1999 to ban the export of unprocessed timber. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-8- early 2001,5 and there was a decline in reserves in 2000/01 of close to that amount. This reserve loss was made up in 2001/02. The large loan financing is estimated to have increased the ratio of external debt to GDP during 2000/01 and 2001/02 from 39 to 55 percent. Since much of the lending is on concessional terms, the debt service ratio remains low at 6% percent of exports. Bhutan: Assets of Deposit Money Banks, 1999-2002 End-June 1999 2000 2001 2002 10. Excess liquidity has persisted, even though credit growth has recovered. Given the fixed exchange rate, money growth has varied in line with the balance of payments (Table 4). In the absence of investment opportunities in Bhutan, the banks have continued to hold reserves with the Royal Monetary Authority (RMA) averaging about 1 Total 8,381 10,258 10,948 (In millions of ngultrum) Loans and investments 1,909 1,910 3,149 3,411 Net foreign assets 2,730 4,085 3,741 3,538 Reserves with RMA 3,742 4,262 4,057 5,129 12.078 40 percent of assets.6 Almost the same amount again has been held on (In percent of assets) 28.2 29.3 42.5 100.0 banks’ balance sheets. Nevertheless, 1 deposit with the Indian banking Loans and investments 22.8 18.6 28.8 system. Domestic lending has thus Net foreign assets 32.6 39.8 34.2 Reserves with RMA 44.6 41.6 37.1 been a relatively small part of the Total 100.0 100.0 100.0 after several years of sluggish growth, credit to the private sector Source: Royal Monetary Authority of Bhutan, Annual Report, 2002. picked up strongly in 2000, growing by 80 percent during the two years ending June 2002. Lending to trade and commerce was particularly buoyant, but borrowers in the manufacturing and construction sectors were also major beneficiaries. 11. The RMA has taken steps to consolidate Bhutan’s rupee reserves under its control. In March 2001, the RMA issued a directive instructing the banks to repatriate rupee holdings in excess of working balance requirements upon maturity, and the proportion of bank assets held in India has since declined. Upon repatriation, the rupees are being 5 The NPPF took over the operations of the Government Employees Provident Fund in June 2000 and added a pension component to the existing scheme in July 2002. In view of the limited investment options in Bhutan, the NPPF was permitted to invest almost half of its assets in the United States in 200 1. 6 As of June 2002, about 60 percent of the banks’ reserves with the RMA were excess. This excess was partly absorbed in July 2002 when the RMA raised the cash reserve ratio from 10 to 20 percent. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-9- exchanged for RMA bills. The banks were originally permitted to hold Indian assets so as to enhance their earnings opportunities, but have tended to invest in long-term deposits, and on occasion, have been caught short of rupees in their domestic operations. This has led to the rupee trading in the informal market at a premium. The RMA directive is intended to avoid such episodes recurring in the future. III. MEDIUM-TERM OUTLOOK 12. The Ninth Five-Year Plan aims for higher GDP growth and reductions in poverty. The new target for average GDP growth is 8.2 percent, which is 1.5 points above that achieved during the Eighth Plan. In light of the recent estimate that 21-34 percent of rural households are poor, compared to 2-7 percent in urban areas (Pilot Health and Expenditure Survey, 2000), and the finding of an inverse relationship between poverty and access to markets (Poverty Assessment Report by the Planning Commission and ADB in 2000), the Ninth Plan places particular emphasis on building rural infrastructure such as feeder roads. Provision of educational and health facilities is also a priority. 13. The staff reviewed the macro projections underlying the Ninth Plan with the authorities. In addition to public spending on road and social infrastructure, ongoing construction of the Tala project, and a possible start on two new power projects,7 should help to elevate growth. Staff concluded that the 8 percent growth targets were feasible providing that planned levels of external assistance were forthcoming. Staff projections also show the balance of payments position remaining comfortable over the medium-term, as well as an eventual decline in the level of foreign debt (Table 5). Greater clarity on the availability of donor finance should emerge at the Round Table Meeting with donors scheduled for February 18-19,2003. IV. POLICY DISCUSSIONS 14. In the absence of major policy differences with the authorities, the discussions focused on the key vulnerabilities and policy challenges facing Bhutan. There were few areas where the government’s policies and staff positions had diverged since the last consultation. The fiscal deficit had ballooned in 2000/O 1, but this seemed to reflect extraordinary factors, and the deficit had been brought down in the following year. Moreover, even in 2000/01, a surplus had been retained on the fiscal current account. The Ninth Plan explicitly calls for the government to borrow domestically, whereas the staff had previously encouraged the authorities to finance additional public investment through revenue mobilization. Nevertheless, the borrowing envisaged was on a limited scale, and the 7 The government proposes to construct hydropower projects in Mangdechhu (360 MW) and Puna Tsangchhu (870 MW) costing an estimated US$ 349 million and US$ 813 million respectively. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-lO- authorities had introduced Personal Income Taxation since the last consultation. Other measures taken that had been supported at that time included the adoption of an FDI policy in December 2002, and the introduction of new prudential regulations (Box 2). In the absence of the need to discuss major policy corrections, the discussions focused instead on Bhutan’s risks and vulnerabilities, and on areas where the authorities needed to remain vigilant. 15. The authorities were well aware of the danger of jobless growth. Even with higher growth, the concern remains that the dynamic sectors of the economy create little domestic employment. Moreover, although civil service employment has traditionally commanded enormous cachet in Bhutan, the authorities recognized that the government cannot be the primary employer. Growth of the private sector was therefore key. Recent progress to facilitate private sector activity had included the passage of enabling legislation,’ corporatization of government departments, and the new FDI policy, with two large foreign investments already approved in tourism. Other efforts emphasized by the authorities included the setting up of industrial estates, and the proposed establishment of a dry port facility in the south at Phuentsholing. 16. Absorbing job-seekers was a major challenge. A Private Sector Survey conducted in 2002 identified various impediments to private sector development (Box 3). In addition to the small domestic market, these included unpredictable and onerous regulations and the lack of skilled labor. With regard to the latter, the authorities explained that many of the jobs being created were low-skill, whereas increased education levels had raised the aspirations of Bhutan’s job-seekers. Moreover, even though education has increased, some of those seeking skilled jobs did not have the necessary training. Bhutan thus tended to suffer shortages of both skilled and unskilled labor. The authorities estimate that 50,000 school-leavers will enter the labor market during the course of the Ninth Plan, or about the same number of people as currently employed in the formal sector. Much remained to be done if these job- seekers were to be absorbed. 17. The discussions reviewed various sources of medium-term vulnerability. Staff noted that Bhutan was becoming increasingly dependent on the power sector, which already contributed 11 percent of GDP, about 40 percent of export earnings, and nearly 40 percent of government revenue. Electricity was exclusively exported to India and this tied Bhutan’s fortunes closely to developments across the border. Another source of vulnerability arose from natural events that could interrupt construction of new projects or supply from existing projects. These risks motivated the authorities’ attempts to broaden the economic base and diversify exports. Tourism held promise in this regard with Bhutan’s unique environment and culture expected to make the country a niche destination. However, the tourist sector would obviously be jeopardized were there to be conflict with the militant groups operating within ’ The Commercial Sale of Goods Act, the Copyright Act and the Industrial Property Act. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- ll- Box 2. Bhutan: Prudential Regulations There are four financial institutions in Bhutan: two commercial banks (the Bank of Bhutan and Bhutan National Bank) and two nonbank financial institutions (the Bhutan Development Finance Corporation and the Royal Insurance Corporation of Bhutan). At end-200 1,64 percent of the loans made by the financial institutions were classified as Standard and 23 percent as Watch (l-3 month default). This implied a nonperforming loan ratio of 13 percent at end-2001, compared to 16 % percent at end- 1999. The capital adequacy ratio (unweighted) of the financial institutions in aggregate was 9.6 percent at end-2001. Revised prudential regulations were introduced by the RMA in 2002 that supercede the regulations issued in 1999. The regulations incorporate certain minimum standards of the 25 Basic Core Principles and include: Guidelines on Directors and Chief Executives in the Financial Institutions: The guidelines specify that directors must be technically competent professionals with sound integrity. In addition, so as to prevent conflict of interest, the guidelines prevent directors from serving on more than one financial institution board. Regulations on Capital Requirements: Every financial institution should maintain a Capital Adequacy Ratio (CAR) of not less than 8 percent, and a core CAR of not less than 4 percent. The CAR is computed as the ratio of capital to risk-weighted assets plus risk-weighted off-balance sheet items. The core CAR is computed only with reference to Tier 1 capital. When a financial institution fails to meet the CAR or core CAR, it must draw up a rehabilitation plan in conjunction with the RMA. Regulations on Liquidity Management: Liquidity ratios: Every bank is required to maintain statutory cash reserves in the form of current account deposits with RMA (the CRR is currently 20 percent). Each bank shall also maintain quick assets of 20 percent of total liabilities (net of liabilities to the RMA and their capital fund), where quick assets are cash, government and RMA securities of maturity less than one year, balances with RMA (excluding statutory reserves) and short-term deposits with other financial institutions. Other nonbank financial institutions have to maintain a liquidity ratio of 10 percent. Maturity matching: By January 2005, the RMA will set mismatch benchmarks for financial institutions using a maturity mismatch ladder. Regulations on Credit Concentration: To prevent excessive concentration of risk exposure, no financial institution can extend credit to a single borrower exceeding 30 percent of its capital funds. In addition, the aggregate of loans and advances by a financial institution to its ten largest borrowers cannot exceed 30 percent of its total loan portfolio, while the total of a financial institution’s larger loans (as defined, by sector) cannot exceed eight times its capital. Regulations on Asset Classification and Provisioning: Classification of credit exposures: Assets are to be classified into five categories: Standard Assets and four types of Classified Assets (Watch, Substandard, Doubtful and Loss). Nonperforming loans: A credit exposure shall be classified as nonperforming if payments on the loan are more than 90 days overdue. Provisioning requirements: Financial institutions are required to provision as follows: a General Provision of 1% percent on Standard and Watch assets, and Specific Provisions against exposures classified as Substandard (20 percent), Doubtful (50 percent) and Loss (100 percent). Regulations on Money Laundering: Regulations include adoption by financial institutions of the principle of “Know Your Customer” and the provision that cash transactions exceeding certain limits be reported to the RMA: for example, any private single cash transaction in convertible currency exceeding US$lO,OOO must be reported. Sources: Trend Analysis of the Bhutanese Financial Sector, MA, November 2002 (www.rmn.or~.bt) and Prudential Regulations 2002, MA. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12- Box 3. Bhutan: Private Sector Developments and Strategy for the Future Despite rapid economic growth in the 199Os, the private sector in Bhutan remains embryonic. It is dominated by a handful of small and medium size enterprises, which contribute little to absorb the ever-growing workforce, especially Bhutanese school leavers. The government recognizes that the private sector will be the main engine of growth and employment generation and this assumption underlies the development strategy laid out in the Ninth Five-Year Plan. It is thus important to identify the various impediments to private sector development and to map out a clear strategy for private sector development. A Private Sector Survey was conducted in 2001 to collect better information on the constraints faced by the private sector so as to help formulate private sector policy. The results of a survey of 100 firms consistently identified five main obstacles faced by the private sector: By far the most widely voiced concern was the lack of skilled labor, combined with a labor policy that discouraged employment of non-national workers. Respondents were of the view that the shortage of skilled workers would be ameliorated by upgrading the school system and providing vocational training to better match the private sector’s skill demands. Moreover, in the interim period before Bhutanese skills develop, the authorities should develop a nondiscriminatory policy for the recruitment and retention of non-national workers to maintain the cost competitiveness of industry. The private sector also voiced concerns about opaque, ad hoc and discretionary tax and regulatory policies. This finding suggests a need for more systematized and clear business policies and regulations, along with regular consultation with the private sector. Firms complained of a lack of demand for their products due to obsolete technologies and limited market information. In this regard, upgrading management capabilities, equipment and human resources, particularly through liberalizing the FDI regime will be vital in facilitating market penetration. Financial sector issues, including high costs and poor access, were cited as constraints to business operations and investment. These issues are covered extensively by a financial sector review conducted by the ADB in 2002. Large investments in infrastructure are needed to address poor road and air transportation. Given fiscal constraints, private participation in infrastructure provision in these sectors may be the best course of action to boost Bhutanese competitiveness. In addition to addressing the impediments faced by the private sector, the Private Sector Survey also recommends a dual track regional development approach: . Along the border areas, where labor costs are lower (Bhutanese labor costs are 13 percent lower in Phuentsholing than in Thimphu) and transport costs are not such pressing issues as in the interior; firms can take advantage of low electricity prices, ease of access to Indian markets and favorable industrial relations in Bhutan to develop a heavier industrial base with a high raw material input and labor component. These areas would be ideal destinations for FDI. . In central Bhutan, the focus could be on providing services to the heavier industrial belt (e.g., accounting, IT, financial services etc.) and providing other services such as tourism, construction and transport; and developing niche markets in specialized fields (e.g., mushrooms, essential oils, Himalayan medicines, handicrafts, furniture). On a sectoral level, the Private Sector Survey identifies agroprocessing, wood-based industry, tourism, and information technology as four key areas for potential growth and absorption of excess labor by addressing their sector specific bottlenecks in order to foster comparative advantages of these sectors. Source: Bhutan Private Sector Survey, June 14,2002. Prepared by the World Bank in collaboration with the Ministry of Trade and Industry, the Bhutan Chamber of Commerce and Industry (BCCI), and the United Nations Development Program (UNDP). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13 - Bhutan. More generally, the authorities were well aware that such an event would cause their development plans to suffer. 18. The discussions identified a number of policy areas that required monitoring: l Revenue cost oftax incentives: Staff suggested that the new tax incentives be closely monitored. Given that future demands on recurrent spending were likely to be large, slow growth in revenues would make it difficult to maintain fiscal current account surpluses. Moreover, departure from this principle might be difficult to reverse. The authorities reaffirmed their commitment to maintaining a current fiscal balance. They also noted that the tax holidays were time bound and not open-ended. In any case, the incentives only applied to manufacturing, and since the sector was small, the revenue loss should not be large. l 0 Sustainable government borrowing: Staff observed that government debt and average interest costs would rise as a result of the large loans from India necessary to complete the Tala project and the recent decision to commence domestic borrowing. The Ninth Plan reaffirmed the intention to seek concessional external financing for development spending as far as possible, but the high levels of capital investment envisaged under the Plan were expected to require domestic borrowing of about 2 percent of GDP per annum. Staff analysis based on the projections in the Ninth Plan showed government debt peaking at 80 percent of GDP in 2004/05 when Tala was completed, but declining thereafter. The authorities took note of the staffs simulations of the debt dynamics, and were encouraged that debt remained sustainable even under some significant exchange rate and fiscal policy shocks (Box 4). Nonetheless, they agreed that fiscal sustainability should be kept under review. Excess liquidity: The staffs assessment in the past has been that excess liquidity does not pose major macroeconomic problems, since the risks to the balance of payments are limited by capital controls and the risks to inflation are limited by the trade links with India. Moreover, draining liquidity from the system has a cost to the RMA. Nevertheless, the authorities would like to improve their ability to absorb liquidity should the need arise and requested technical assistance from the Fund in the area of liquidity management. They also explained that the decision to make the banks repatriate their rupee deposits would enable the RMA to provide rupees to residents on demand, thereby avoiding situations where confidence in the ngultrum faltered and a parallel exchange market might emerge. a Loss ofcompetitiveness: The existing exchange arrangement had considerable advantages in terms of facilitating trade and allowing Bhutan to benefit from monetary and exchange rate stability in India. Nonetheless, some analysts had raised concerns that Bhutan could be suffering from Dutch Disease as a result of electricity export earnings pushing up prices of nontradable goods. Staff calculations of the REER showed no loss of competitiveness in recent years, although it was difficult to Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14- Box 4. Bhutan: Fiscal Sustainability Debt dynamics remain sustainable under a number of domestic and external shocks, even large exchange rate and fiscal policy shocks. Under the baseline scenario, the public debt-to-GDP ratio is expected to rise significantly from 57 percent in 2001/02 to 80 percent of GDP by 2004/05, on account of loans from India necessary to complete the Tala project, but would decline thereafter. The stress tests reveal a similar pattern of debt peaking in 2004/05 and tapering off in the following years. The combined effect of a simultaneous jump in interest rates and large depreciation of the exchange rate would result in debt peaking at about 9 1 percent of GDP and declining to a more sustainable level thereafter. Although the projected debt-GDP ratio’s appear high relative to other economies, the debt dynamics are sustainable because: l GDP is expected to grow at a rapid rate. l Average interest rates on debt remain low as a result of much of the stock being concessional. Bhutan: Public Sector Debt Sustainability Framework, 2001-2010 (In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated) 2001102 2002/03 2003104 2004105 2005/06 2006107 2007108 200X/09 2009110 I. Baseline Medium-Term Projections Public sector debt I/ Identified debt-creating flows Primary deficit Conhibution from real interest rate Contribution from real GDP growth Contributmn from exchange rate depreciation Other identified debt-creating flows (Tala) II. Key Macmeconomic Assumptions 57.0 67.8 74.7 80.1 77.2 73.8 67.9 65.3 62.9 10.8 6.9 5.4 -2.9 -3.4 -2.8 -2.6 -2.4 5.8 3.6 3.9 4.3 3.3 3.3 3.3 3.3 -2.3 -2.2 -2.3 -2.1 -1.7 -1.6 -1.5 -1.4 -3.8 -4.6 -5.3 -5.7 -5.7 -5.2 -5.0 -4.8 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.6 0.6 0.6 10.6 9.4 8.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Real GDP growth (fiscal in percent) year, 7.5 7.5 7.7 7.9 8.2 8.2 8.2 8.2 Average nominal interest rate on public debt (in percent) 21 1.9 1.9 2.0 2.5 2.9 2.9 2.9 2.9 Nominal depreciation of local (LC dollar, in percent) currency per 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 Inflation rate (GDP deflator, in percent) 5.9 5.0 5.0 5.0 5.0 5.0 5.0 5.0 Tala loans in Billions ofNu 3.1 3.1 3.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 III. Stress Tests 31 Debt/GDP Ratios Baseline 67.8 74.7 80.1 77.2 73.8 67.9 65.3 62.9 1. Real Growth falls to 5 percent in 2003104-2005106 67.8 76.3 83.5 82.6 78.8 72.0 69.1 66.4 2. Nominal interest rate jumps by 2 percent in 2003/04-2005/06 67.8 75.9 82.6 81.0 77.3 70.8 68.0 65.4 3. Revenue falls by 3 percent of GDP in 2003/04- 2005106 67.8 77.7 85.8 85.4 81.3 74.1 71.0 68.1 4. Ngultmm depreciates by 30 percent in 2003/04 67.8 83.5 88.1 84.5 80.5 73.4 70.4 67.6 5. A combnation of 2 and 4 67.8 84.9 91.0 88.8 84.4 76.7 73.3 70.3 li Public sector includes general government plus implicit liability associated with Tala. Debt figures are all gross values. 21 Dewed as nominal interest expenditure divided by previous period debt stock. 31 Details of Bhutan’s debt dynamics under different shocks is included in Chapter 2 of the Selected Issues Paper. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 15 - be definitive given the limitations of Bhutan’s predominantly food-based CPI.’ Measurement issues aside, staff argued that there did appear to be a need for Bhutanese firms to improve their competitiveness, Bhutan: &change Rates Dwlopments, 1990-2002 I/ particularly given that trade ,99o=,ofJ Ngulmmim~ 15 liberalization in India was rrghr scale, mwrred, Red ef&itiw threatening previously captive export markets. The sluggishness of nonelectricity exports was telling in this regard even though this was partly m- (kff scnle) explained by special factors SXKXSM,I- Fltt%d~ard~cak~ such as the ban on exports of lani&s~~~~~~f~~S~~~ unfinished timber and the recent floods. a Dynamism in thefinancial sector: The recent revival in credit aside, the staff heard the view that private sector development was constrained by conservative lending practices in the banks. One reason for this conservatism, which manifests itself in 150-200 percent collateral requirements, was an already high level of nonperforming loans. Moreover, interest rates continued to be fairly rigid, despite having been liberalized, while lending rates remained high as a result of large interest rate spreads. Staff suggested that the fundamental problem in the banking sector was a lack of competition and commercial orientation. The authorities explained that steps have been taken to improve the commercial culture in the banks including by training loan officers. They were also reforming the membership structure of boards of directors, although boards would continue to be appointed by government. Greater private ownership might play a role, but the authorities questioned whether the private sector currently had the skills and expertise to own and manage banks. Nonetheless, it was recognized that more needed to be done if the financial system was to be able to sustain the required private sector growth. l Property market developments: The converse risk was that the financial institutions took risks, but did not manage them well. Staff noted that the possibility of such an occurrence was suggested by the recent strong growth in construction lending. Many of the NPLs in the banking system appear to have originated from a slump in the housing market a few years ago, and staff heard concerns that rapid growth of lending to construction might again be fuelling a property bubble. However, the authorities 9 The authorities plan to introduce a rebased and reweighted CPI series in early 2003 that will have only a 46 percent weight on food and will include nontradable prices such as rents and housing. The new series should provide better information on trends in competitiveness. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 16- explained that only part of the growth in construction credit was related to private home building, since some lending was to contractors working on large government projects. Moreover, compared to the early episode, the banks were now monitoring lending more carefully and debt recovery mechanisms had been strengthened, while the new prudential guidelines would limit excessive exposure. 0 Overuse of microinterventions: Staff also questioned whether regulations such as restrictions on hiring nonnationals might undercut the gains made in creating an enabling environment for the private sector. There was a need for some labor market interventions such as ensuring minimum leave and overtime standards so that private sector opportunities become more attractive to job seekers, and expanding vocational training so as to reduce the skills mismatch. However, tightening restrictions on foreign labor seemed ill-advised if local skills had not yet become available. The authorities agreed that over-regulation could discourage private sector growth, but noted that restrictions on imported labor were designed to absorb Bhutanese labor and to encourage mechanization (which would make activities like construction attractive to Bhutanese school leavers). l Conservation offoreign exchange: Staff inquired whether the comfortable level of hard currency reserves might permit greater boldness in liberalizing trade. The authorities responded that while Bhutan was set to join the WTO by the end of the Ninth Plan, and to progressively reduce import tariffs over time, the close links with India limited the scope for further trade liberalization. In any case, tariffs were already lower on average in Bhutan than in India.” Moreover, the restrictiveness of the new FDI regulations, particularly with regard to the availability of hard currency to potential investors, reflected the desire to move cautiously in opening up to FDI. However, staff took the view that the authorities could afford to be flexible in implementing the regulations, particularly when a project promising substantial job creation was a net user of hard currency. Domestic investment might also be deterred by difficulties in obtaining foreign exchange and staff urged the authorities to move toward eliminating the remaining restrictions maintained under Article XIV,’ i and accept the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3 and 4.i2 lo Indian imports, which account for 78 percent of total imports (last three years), are duty free. For third party imports, a new tariff schedule was introduced in January 2002 associated with the WTO membership application. The new schedule has five nonzero rates, namely 5, 10, 15,20, and 30 percent, as well as two exceptional rates of 50 percent for nonalcoholic beverages and beer and 100 percent for other alcoholic beverages and tobacco. l1 The exchange system has remained unchanged since the last consultation. Restrictions under Article XIV continue to be maintained in the form of(i) prescribed limits on travel (continued.. .) Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17- V. STATISTICAL ISSUES AND TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE 19. Significant improvements have been made to Bhutan’s data over the past few years. Staff particularly welcomed the regular posting of economic data on the intemet and the upcoming launch of the new CPI. A number of important surveys had also been conducted and there had been a general improvement in the timeliness of data. While gratified by the recognition of these efforts, the authorities concurred that considerable work remained to be done to strengthen Bhutan’s statistics. In this context, staff drew particular attention to important data inconsistencies between sectors. 20. Technical assistance: FAD will field a mission to Bhutan in April 2003 to advise on implementation of the new Personal Income Tax. In addition to advice on liquidity management, the authorities also requested that MAE provide assistance in reviewing the consistency of the foreign exchange regulations with the FDI policy and in drafting the Monetary Authorities Act and Anti-Money Laundering regulations. The authorities also expressed interest in a multi-sector mission from STA that could provide a holistic assessment of the state of Bhutan’s data. VI. STAFF APPRAISAL 21. Bhutan’s economic performance over the past two years has been impressive. Aided by prudent policy making and strong support from the donor community, GDP growth targets have been exceeded, but without compromising the commitment to preserving the environment and culture. Major investments have been made in building houses, schools, hospitals and roads. Hydropower capacity has been developed with the construction and commissioning of new projects. Remarkable achievements have been made in improving social indicators, with educational levels rising across the country. The 8 percent growth targets in the Ninth Plan are ambitious, but appear to be feasible providing that external assistance is forthcoming. 22. Modernization of the economy has proceeded. New laws have been passed that will facilitate commercial activity. Personal income taxation has been introduced so as to expand the revenue base and to check potential growth in income inequality. The telecommunication and power departments have been corporatized. A foreign direct investment policy has been adopted by government and new foreign investments have already been approved in the tourism sector. A pension scheme has been introduced to provide old-age security. allowances; (ii) limits on the availability of foreign exchange for imports of services; and (iii) limits of foreign exchange for private transfers. i2 In addition, there remained a need to allow exporters retention of 10 percent of their export earnings as provided for in the Foreign Exchange Regulations. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 18- 23. Less progress has been made in ensuring that the economy creates jobs. The hydropower, construction and transportation sectors that drive growth tend to provide limited employment for nationals. This is partly because low-skill jobs in these sectors do not match the aspirations of Bhutan’s job-seekers. Moreover, even though education has increased, some of those who seek skilled jobs do not have the necessary training. The authorities have wisely decided that the civil service can absorb only a fraction of the 50,000 young job- seekers expected over the next five years. The daunting challenge is to ensure that the private sector expands sufficiently to employ the rest. 24. Bhutan faces vulnerabilities on a number of fronts. The close links with India, particularly the dependence on electricity exports, tie Bhutan’s fortunes closely to events across the border. The power sector is also vulnerable to natural events that interrupt construction of new projects or supply from existing projects. Another risk is that the recent terrorist attacks in different parts of the world will lead to a global decline in tourism that also affects Bhutan. Moreover, substantial budgetary resources may need to be diverted should there be armed conflict with militant groups operating within Bhutan. In addition to the human cost of such an event, the authorities’ development plans would also likely suffer. Bhutan’s economic vulnerabilities underscore the need to maintain a prudent policy stance, while attempting to diversify exports and achieve more broad-based growth. 25. Current fiscal deficits should continue to be avoided. There will be large demands on recurrent spending over the Ninth Plan, especially in the education and health sectors. These should be met by mobilizing revenue. The recent introduction of Personal Income Taxation should assist in this regard. By contrast, the revenue costs of the new tax incentives will need to be closely watched. Based on experience from other countries, departing from the principle of current fiscal balance is a slippery slope from which it is difficult to recover. In addition to higher borrowing, the long-term effect is likely to be a squeeze on capital spending, which is typically the easiest area to cut when the budget comes under pressure. 26. Domestic borrowing should be limited to amounts that are sustainable. Government debt is likely to mount during the Ninth Plan as a result of the borrowing necessary to complete the Tala project and the authorities’ intended recourse to domestic financing of about 2 percent of GDP per annum. Even though sensitivity analysis suggests that the borrowing program envisaged in the Plan will keep public debt on a sustainable path, the situation requires monitoring. When framing future budgets, the authorities should carefully consider the implications for debt sustainability. 27. Excess liquidity does not pose immediate macroeconomic problems. As noted in the past, the balance of payments and inflationary risks do not appear large. Nonetheless, property price developments bear watching by the authorities in light of the recent strong growth in construction lending. With regard to liquidity management, the RMA’s decision to require commercial banks to repatriate excess rupee investments from India should help to avoid the temporary shortages of rupees that have recently occurred. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 19- 28. Measures are being taken to strengthen the financial system, yet challenges remain. Under the new prudential system, risk-weighted capital adequacy and strengthened provisioning requirements have been introduced and limits on maturity mismatches will come into effect over time. So as to improve the management of financial institutions, rules specifying the qualifications of directors and preventing inter-locking membership of boards of directors have also been introduced. These steps on their own will be inadequate to ensure the independence of boards and further measures are necessary to facilitate the development of a commercial banking culture. The efforts being made to train bank officials and increase project appraisal skills should assist in this regard. However, it seems unlikely that the inertia in Bhutan’s financial sector can be shaken off without greater private ownership. 29. The exchange rate peg remains appropriate. Over the last five years, nonelectricity exports have contracted and concerns remain about Bhutan’s competitiveness. Given that the existing exchange arrangement continues to have considerable other benefits for Bhutan, the onus is therefore on industry in Bhutan to improve efficiency and reduce production costs. The new industrial estates and proposed dry port should assist in this regard. If industry cannot improve competitiveness, the dominance of electricity in the economy will only increase over time. 30. Employment regulations should become more liberal. Various measures are currently being considered to assist the absorption of the new entrants to the labor market. The current emphasis on vocational training is appropriate given the skill mismatch, but the authorities should ensure that the supply of local skills is sufficient before tightening restrictions on foreign labor. More generally, too many rules at the micro-level aimed at facilitating the absorption of labor may serve to undermine the enabling environment for the private sector that has been so assiduously built over the past few years. 31. More rapid liberalization of the trade and exchange system would be desirable. Although constraints are posed by the tight trade links with India, the scope for further trade liberalization is enhanced by the high level of hard currency reserves. The latter also provides latitude to liberalize the exchange system and the authorities should move toward eliminating the remaining restrictions maintained under Article XIV and accepting the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3 and 4. In addition, while the recent approval of an FDI policy is an important step forward, the authorities should be flexible in implementing the regulations. A project promising substantial job creation but which involves some net use of hard currency should not be ruled out automatically. 32. Important steps have been taken to improve data provision. The efforts made by the authorities over the past few years to strengthen Bhutan’s data have begun to bear fruit. There have been marked improvements in the quality, timeliness, and availability of data. The new CPI is especially welcome. Nonetheless, considerable work remains to be done to strengthen Bhutan’s statistics, and particular attention needs to be paid to removing data inconsistencies between sectors. 33. It is proposed that Bhutan remain on a 24-month consultation cycle. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 20 - VII. PROPOSED DECISION The following proposed decision, which may be adopted by a majority of the votes cast, is proposed for adoption by the Executive Board: 1. The Fund takes this decision in concluding the 2002 Article XIV consultation with Bhutan, in light of the 2002 Article IV consultation with Bhutan conducted under Decision No. 5392-(77/63), adopted April 29, 1977, as amended (Surveillance over Exchange Rate Policies). 2. As described in SM/03/57, Bhutan maintains restrictions on payments and transfers for current international transactions in accordance with Article XIV, Section 2. The Fund encourages Bhutan to eliminate these restrictions as soon as its balance of payments positior permits. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2l- Figure 1. Bhutan: Selected Economic Indicators, 1997/98-2001/02 80 60 -2a -40 . 70 60 50 40 30 20 10 0 ievenue, Grants, and Expenditure 1997198 1998199 Est. Percellr lfGDP 50. External Developments 50 Money, Credit, and Foreign Assets .----------’ , Imports r. / . , , / / ‘. lrnbpxn I 8 I J -40 1997198 1998199 1999100 2000/01 2001/02 Est. '0 50 50 40 blnbpmd -10 1 I 1997198 1998199 1999/00 2000/01 2001/02 -10 Est. Sources: Data provided by the Bhutanese authorities; and staff estimates. l/ Calendar year basis. 2/ Changes in percent of initial stock of broad money. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 22 - Table 1. Bhutan: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 1996/97-2002/03 ” Nominal GDP (2001): US$482 million GDP per capita (2001): US$708 Population (2000): 0.68 million Quota: SDR 6.3 million 1996197 1997198 1998199 1999/2000 2000/01 2001/02 2002103 Est. Proj. GDP growth and prices (percent change) Real GDP at factor cost 2/ Consumer prices Consumer prices India 5.2 7.2 6.4 7.6 5.3 6.6 7.7 7.4 9.0 9.2 3.6 3.6 2.7 5.0 9.4 6.8 13.1 3.4 3.8 4.3 4.7 Government budget (in percent of GDP) Total revenue and grants Ofwhich : Foreign grants Total expcnditorc and net lending Ofwhich : Current expenditure Current balance Overall balance 36.7 32.9 40.0 39.6 38.5 34.1 31.8 17.6 12.1 18.8 16.5 16.5 12.9 12.8 39.0 32.0 41.7 43.4 49.6 39.6 38.4 18.4 17.5 18.4 18.6 19.7 18.1 16.9 0.6 3.4 2.8 4.4 2.4 3.1 2.2 -2.4 1.0 -1.8 -3.9 -11.1 -5.4 -6.6 Money and credit (percent change) Broad money 30.9 Credit to private sector 41.7 21.4 21.4 5.5 17.6 13.2 5.4 4.1 47.9 29.3 Interest rates (end of period) Deposits (1 to 3 years) Lending RMA bills (91-days) 10.0 10.0 10.0 9-10.0 9-10.0 9.0 13-16.0 13-16.0 13-16.0 12-16.0 12-16.0 13-16 8.5 8.5 6.0 8.5 4.9 4.5 Balance of payments (in millions of US. dollars) 3/ Trade balance With India Grants Ofwhich : India Current account balance 4/ (In percent of GDP) With India (In percent of GDP) Loans (net) Overall balance (In percent of GDP) -31.9 -24.8 -57.6 -70.7 -96.8 -90.7 -119.7 4.4 9.3 -17.3 -31.0 -66.5 -54.1 -80.5 85.7 106.0 139.6 178.9 143.5 141.3 146.6 43.5 72.3 95.6 138.4 101.2 94.0 127.2 21.4 32.2 21.9 4.0 -26.7 -28.2 -61.8 6.0 8.2 5.4 0.9 -5.5 -5.3 -10.4 25.6 38.6 17.6 4.3 -37.1 -27.3 -26.5 7.2 9.9 4.3 0.9 -7.6 -5.1 -4.5 5.4 6.8 25.9 42.0 49.8 57.3 81.7 30.9 41.7 48.3 33.6 -24.0 20.4 22.4 8.7 10.6 11.9 1.4 -4.9 3.8 3.8 Extcmal indicators Gross official reserves (in millions of U.S. dollars) 176.0 215.5 258.5 292.6 294.1 316.6 339.0 (In months of imports) 16.1 19.0 19.1 19.0 18.0 20.2 18.4 External debt (in millions of U.S. dollars) 112.2 128.0 160.4 172.0 235.1 289.3 367.1 (In percent of GDP; end of period) 23.6 36.8 40.1 38.7 49.0 55.0 62.6 Debt-service ratio (percent of exports) 8.1 8.8 13.4 5.6 6.1 6.6 9.6 Memorandum items: Nominal GDP (in millions of ngultmm) 12,701 15,038 17,311 19,853 22,549 25,733 Ngulhxm per US. dollars (period average) 35.8 38.4 42.6 43.6 46.4 48.2 29,282 Sources: Data provided by the Bhutanese authorities; International Financial Sfatislics, and Fund staff estimates. l/ Fiscal year beginning July 1. 2/ On a calendar-year basis, e.g., the entry under 1997198 is for 1997, etc. 31 For 2002103, imports, grants and loans reflect accelerated construction of Tala power project. 4/ Including grants, following RMA’s new balance of payments presentation introduced in December 2002. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 23 - Table 2. Bhutan: Government Budget Summary, 1997/9X-2002/03 1997198 1998/99 1999/2000 2000/o 1 2001/02 2002/03 Budget Outcome Budget Outcome l/ Budget Revenue and grants Domestic revenue Tax revenue Nontax revenue Grams From India Other Expenditure and net lending Current expenditure Capital expenditure Net lending Current balance (excluding grants) Overall balance (including grants) Financing Foreign financing Disbursement Amortization Domestic financing Revenue and grants Domestic revenue Of which: Tax revenue Foreign grants Expenditure and net lending Current expenditure Capital expenditure and net lending 32.9 40.0 39.6 37.0 38.5 31.3 34.1 32.5 20.8 21.1 23.1 21.2 22.1 20.0 21.3 17.5 8.3 7.3 10.0 8.4 8.5 8.5 9.3 9.4 12.1 18.8 16.5 15.8 16.5 11.3 12.9 15.1 32.0 41.7 43.4 40.4 49.6 39.0 39.6 37.4 17.5 18.4 18.6 18.4 19.7 17.9 18.1 15.7 14.5 23.4 24.8 22.0 29.9 21.1 21.5 21.7 Current balance (excluding grants) 3.4 2.8 4.4 2.7 2.4 2.1 3.1 1.8 Overall balance (including grants) 1.0 -1.8 -3.9 -3.4 -11.1 -7.7 -5.4 -4.8 Memorandum item: Nominal GDP at factor cost (In millions of ngultrum) 15,038 17,311 19,853 22,549 22,549 25,733 25,733 29,282 4,950 3,134 1,247 1,887 1,816 1,045 771 4,806 2,628 1,961 218 506 144 -144 336 611 275 -480 6,919 3,656 1,266 2,390 3,263 1,929 1,334 7,224 3,178 4,106 -60 478 -305 305 554 804 250 -249 7,859 4,585 1,977 2,608 3,274 2,188 1,086 8,624 3,702 4,632 290 882 -766 766 607 812 205 158 (In millions of ngultrum) 8,342 8,686 4,777 4,975 1,886 1,917 2,891 3,058 3,565 3,711 2,220 2,55 1 1,345 1,160 9,108 11,179 4,159 4,436 4,923 6,281 27 461 619 539 -766 -2,493 766 2,493 603 1,056 818 1,269 215 213 164 1,434 (In percent of GDP) 8,058 8,787 9,531 5,140 5,470 5,118 2,196 2,397 2,762 2,944 3,073 2,356 2,918 3,317 4,413 1,340 1,565 2,765 1,578 1,752 1,648 10,047 10,185 10,945 4,611 4,664 4,598 5,203 5,447 6,319 233 73 28 529 806 520 -1,989 -1,398 -1,414 1,989 1,398 1,414 741 788 912 941 1,019 1152 200 231 240 1,047 608 500 Source: Data provided by the Bhutanese authorities. l/ 2001/02 outcome is the revised budget estimate. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 24 - Table 3. Bhutan: Balance of Payments Summary, 1996197-2001102 (In millions of U.S. dollars) 1996197 1997198 1998199 1999/2000 2000101 2001/02 Trade balance -31.9 -24.8 -57.6 -70.7 -96.8 -90.7 India 4.4 9.3 -17.3 -31.0 -66.5 -54.1 Other -36.4 -34.1 -40.3 -39.7 -30.2 -36.5 Exports, f.o.b. li 99.3 111.3 104.7 114.3 99.5 97.7 India 90.2 105.3 98.2 108.0 94.4 91.9 Other 9.1 6.0 6.6 6.3 5.2 5.8 Imports, c.i.f. 1/ India Other Services (net) India Other Income (net) India Other Transfers (net) Ofwhich : grant receipts 21 India Other Current account (including grants) India Other Foreign direct investment Portfolio investment Loans (net) India Other Errors and omissions Overall balance India Other Financing Change in net reserves (increase -) Memorandum items: Gross official reserves (In months of imports) Ngultrum per U.S. dollars (period avg.) 131.3 -85.8 -45.5 -0.4 -1.6 1.2 2.8 -2.4 5.2 50.9 85.7 43.5 42.2 21.4 25.6 -4.3 0.0 0.0 5.4 I.6 38 4.1 30.9 22.5 8.4 -30.9 -30.9 176.0 16.1 35.77 -136.1 -162.3 -185.0 -196.3 -188.4 -96.0 -115.5 -139.0 -160.9 -146.0 -40.1 -46.8 -46.0 -35.4 -42.3 -12.6 -4.5 -20.2 -9.3 -8.1 -12.1 -8.5 -22.6 -10.4 -9.8 -0.5 4.0 2.4 1.1 1.8 3.6 8.4 -10.3 -4.6 -11.7 0.9 2.4 -14.6 -9.9 -10.1 2.7 6.0 4.2 5.3 -1.6 66.0 75.6 105.3 83.9 82.2 106.0 139.6 178.9 143.5 141.3 72.3 95.6 138.4 101.2 94.0 33.8 44.0 40.5 42.4 47.3 32.2 21.9 4.0 -26.7 -28.2 38.6 17.6 4.3 -37.1 -27.3 -6.4 4.3 -0.2 10.4 -1.0 0.0 1.1 0.0 0.0 2.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 -19.0 0.0 6.8 25.9 42.0 49.8 57.3 0.0 22.7 37.0 36.8 36 9 6.8 3.3 5.0 13.0 20.4 2.7 -0.6 -12.4 -28.0 -10.8 41.7 48.3 33.6 -24.0 20.4 10.2 28.9 11.9 -19.4 -3.1 31.5 19.4 21.7 -4.6 23.5 -41.7 -48.3 -33.6 24.0 -20.4 -41.7 -48.3 -33.6 24.0 -20.4 215.5 258.5 292.6 294.1 316.6 19.0 19.1 19.0 18.0 20.2 38.39 42.59 43.64 46.39 48.21 Source: Data provided by the Bhutanese authorities. li Exports and imports are reported on a calendar year basis, and this contributes to large errors and ommissions. 21 Includes budgetary and non-budgetary grants, such as power turn-key projects. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-25 - Table 4. Bhutan: Monetary Survey, 1997-2002 1997 June 1998 June 1999 June 2000 June 2001 June 2002 June 2002 Sept Net foreign assets Rupee Other Net domestic assets -1,955.5 -3,024.9 -3,976.7 -4,317.7 -3,369.0 -3,271.5 -3,175.0 Net claims on government l/ -277.9 -648.5 -1,485.3 -1,110.7 -455.7 -744.5 -726.2 Claims on Nongovemment 1,813.0 1,894.l 1,866.3 1,862.7 2,469.9 3,021.2 3,145.4 Public enterprises 497.1 459.4 391.0 353.6 332.7 292.3 277.7 Joint enterprises 218.8 192.6 165.7 146.1 120.6 121.9 120 Private sector 1,097.l 1,242.l 1,309.6 1,363.0 2,016.6 2,607.O 2,747.7 Other items (net) 2/ -3,490.6 -4,270.5 -4,357.7 -5,069.8 -5,383.2 -5,548.2 -5,607.9 Broad money Narrow money Currency Demand deposits Other demand deposits Quasi-money 31 4,277.8 6,063.l 7,359.2 8,930.6 9,419.9 11,077.o 11,095.4 1,973.3 2,500.2 2,868.5 3,691.7 4,477.9 5,019.5 5,263.2 617.0 1,050.3 852.8 1,119.4 1,483.l 1,600.2 1,546.2 1,331.9 1,327.l 1,832.6 2,474.8 2,889.7 3,313.6 3,621.3 24.4 122.8 183.1 97.5 105.1 105.7 95.7 2,304.5 3,562.9 4,490.7 5,238.9 4,942.0 6,057.5 5832.2 Broad money 30.9 41.7 21.4 21.4 5.5 17.6 7.1 Net foreign assets 32.2 66.7 37.1 26.0 -5.1 16.6 11.4 Net domestic assets -1.3 -25.0 -15.7 -4.6 10.6 1.0 -4.3 Net claims on government 7.5 -8.7 -13.8 5.1 7.3 -3.1 -2.8 Claims on private sector -3.5 3.4 1.1 0.7 7.3 6.3 5.4 Other items (net) -4.7 -18.2 -1.4 -9.7 -3.5 -1.8 -6.6 Memorandum items: Money multiplier 4/ Broad money/GDP Nominal GDP (fiscal year) Reserve money growth 2.0 1.8 1.6 1.8 2.0 1.8 1.8 0.34 0.40 0.43 0.45 0.42 0.43 12,701 15,038 17,311 19,853 22,549 25,733 . -17.9 56.3 34.5 10.9 -4.8 27.9 6,233.3 9,088.O 708.7 1,267.8 5524.6 7,820.2 (In millions of ngultrum) 11,335.9 13,248.3 12,788.9 14,348.5 14,270.4 2,542.3 3,113.4 2,367.8 2,3 14.3 1,780.6 8,793.6 10,134.9 10,421.l 12,034.2 12,489.8 (Changes in percent of initial stock of broad money) Source: Data provided by the Bhutanese authorities. l/ Includes deposits of some public enterprises and off-budgetary entities; as such, data differ from bank financing data reported in the fiscal accounts. 2/ Includes foreign exchange valuation adjustments and capital accounts. 3/ Includes time and foreign currency deposits. 41 Ratio of broad money to reserve money. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 26 - Table 5. Bhutan: Illustrative Medium-Term Scenario, 2000/01-2006/07 2000/o 1 200 1102 2002103 2003104 2004105 2005106 2006107 Est. Staff Projection Output and prices: Real GDP li 21 Real GDP growth FY CPI Central government budget: Revenue and grants Domestic revenue Ofwhich: Tax revenue Grants Expenditure and net lending Current expenditure Capital expenditure and net lending Current balance (excluding grants) Overall balance (including grants) Balance of payments: 6.6 7.7 5.9 7.2 4.0 3.0 38.5 34.1 22.1 21.3 8.5 9.3 16.5 12.9 49.6 39.6 19.7 18.1 29.9 21.5 2.4 3.1 -11.1 -5.4 (Percentage change per annum) 7.3 7.6 7.8 7.5 7.5 7.7 5.0 5.0 5.0 (In percent of GDP) 31.8 31.4 30.8 19.1 19.6 20.0 9.4 9.7 9.9 12.8 11.8 10.8 38.4 36.0 35.8 16.9 17.0 17.3 21.5 19.0 18.5 2.2 2.6 2.7 -6.6 -4.6 -5.0 (In millions of U.S. dollars) -66.4 -9.1 -122.2 128.2 81.7 -250.4 55.9 151.7 1.6 0.0 88.1 Current account balance (incl. grants) -26.7 -28.2 -61.8 -70.3 (In percent of GDP) -5.5 -5.3 -10.4 -10.7 Trade balance li -96.8 -90.7 -119.7 -127.2 Exports, f.o.b. 11 99.5 97.7 101.3 107.8 Of which : Electricity exports 47.2 51.1 52.5 58.9 Imports, c.i.f. li -196.3 -188.4 -221.0 -235.0 Services and transfers (net) 70.0 62.5 57.9 57.0 Of which: Foreign grant receipts 143.5 141.3 146.6 149.1 Foreign direct investment 0.0 2.1 2.4 2.4 Portfolio investment -19.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Loans (net) 21 49.8 57.3 81.7 88.0 Overall balance -24.0 20.4 22.4 20.2 (In percent of GDP) -4.9 3.8 3.8 3.1 Memorandum items: Gross foreign reserves (millions of US dollars) 294.1 316.6 339.0 359.1 (In months of imports) 18.0 20.2 18.4 18.3 Total government debt (percent of GDP) 49.0 57.0 67.8 74.7 Foreign debt (percent of GDP) 49.0 55.0 62.6 69.5 External debt service (percent of exports)21 6.1 6.6 9.6 10.4 Sources: Data provided by the Bhutanese authorities; and staff estimates and projections. li Calendar-year basis. 21 Imports, grants and loans reflect accelerated construction of Tala power project in the years 2002103-200415. 23.3 3.2 382.5 18.3 80.1 74.4 10.0 7.9 8.4 7.9 8.2 5.0 5.0 29.7 29.0 19.8 19.8 9.8 9.8 9.9 9.2 35.2 33.6 17.1 17.0 18.1 16.6 2.7 2.8 -5.4 -4.6 -8.1 -1.0 -4.5 -0.5 -96.1 -92.6 150.2 163.2 90.4 100.7 -246.2 -255.8 88.0 88.1 154.3 158.3 1.5 1.5 0.0 0.0 26.7 23.1 20.1 20.0 2.5 2.2 402.6 422.6 19.6 19.8 77.2 73.8 69.7 64.3 9.7 9.4 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 27 - ANNEX I I. II. III. IV. V. VI. VII. Bhutan-Fund Relations (As of December 3 1,2002) Membership Status: Joined g/28/1981; Article XIV General Resources Account: Quota Fund holdings of currency Reserve position in Fund SDR Department: Holdings Outstanding Purchases and Loans: Financial Arrangements: Projected Obligations to Fund: Exchange Rate Arrangement SDR Million 6.30 5.28 1.02 SDR Million 0.23 None % Quota 100.0 83.8 16.2 % Allocation N/A None None Since its introduction in 1974, the ngultrum has been pegged to the Indian rupee at par. Pursuant to the UN Security Council Resolutions 1267( 1999) and 1373(2001), the RMA has issued instructions to banks and received confirmation of the absence of any suspicious accounts or transactions. Bhutan’s notification to the Fund under Decision No. 144 (52/51) was circulated to the Board under EBD/02-124 (4/4/2002). VIII. Last Article IV Consultation In concluding the 2001 Article IV consultation (May, 7, 2001), the Executive Board adopted the following decision: 1. The Fund takes this decision in concluding the 2001 Article XIV consultation with Bhutan. 2. Bhutan continues to maintain restrictions on the making of payments and transfers for current international transactions under the transitional arrangements of Article XIV, Section 2, as described in SM/O1/118. The Fund encourages Bhutan to administer these restrictions in a liberal manner and to eliminate them as soon as circumstances permit. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 28 - ANNEX I IX. Consultation Cycle Bhutan is on a 24-month consultation cycle. X. Technical Assistance a. CBD/MAE Technical assistance was provided in setting up the Royal Monetary Authority @MA) of Bhutan in 1983 and technical experts from the CBD worked in the capacity of General Advisors to the RMA during the 1980s. The last General Advisor completed his term in January 1992. A mission visited Bhutan in May 1989 to review the financial system, and another mission visited in February 1991 to consult with the authorities on new financial sector legislation, including the development of supervisory capabilities. A technical expert was assigned in July 1991 as Advisor for Bank Supervision. An MAE mission visited Thimphu in June-July 1992 to advise the RMA on the issuance of government securities. A technical expert was assigned from July 1993 to February 1996 to implement the mission’s recommendations. b. Fiscal Two FAD missions visited Bhutan (in April 1982 and June 1983) to provide assistance on tax policy, budgeting and accounting. A FAD expert participated in the Legal Department mission in April 1984. In November 1984, an expert from the FAD panel was assigned as General Fiscal Advisor to the Ministry of Finance. The assignment was extended for two more years. A new General Fiscal Advisor began a one-year term in April 1988; this assignment was subsequently extended through October 1989. A three-member technical assistance mission, which visited Bhutan during November-December 1987, completed a report on the tax system and public enterprises; a follow-up mission visited Bhutan during July 1989. A technical assistance mission on income taxation visited Bhutan in June 1992. An FAD mission will review the implementation of the Personal Income Tax in April 2003. C. Legal Several visits by a staff member of the Legal Department took place during 1982-84 in connection with the drafting of tax legislation. d. Statistics A mission from the Statistics Department visited Bhutan in September 1988 to review trade statistics. During April-May 1990, a multi-topic mission visited Bhutan to review the statistical database. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 29 - e. IMF Institute An Institute course on financial programming was held in Thimphu during April-May 199 1. XI. Resident Representative/Advisor ANNEX I None. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 30 - ANNEX II Bhutan-Relations with the World Bank Group ” (As of December 3 1,2002) Project Commitments (Original) Disbursed Undisbursed Current portfolio: Secondary Education Rural Access Project Urban Development Project sub-total IFC net commitment 21 Projects under preparation Latest economic mission October 2002 Economic and sector work Aid Consultative Group Meetings (In millions of U.S. dollars) 13.7 7.9 5.3 11.6 2.4 8.8 10.8 1.8 8.6 36.1 12.2 22.6 -- -- -- Private Sector Support Project Private Sector Study (June 2002) Foreign Investment Policy (January 2002) Round Table Meeting on Bhutan, co-chaired by UNDP, will be held in Geneva in February 2003. Source: Prepared by the staff of the World Bank. l/ Due to differences in valuation and cancellations, the total of undisbursed and disbursed amounts may differ from the total commitments. 2/ The IFC fielded a mission to Bhutan in late 2000, and financed 50 percent of the costs of a FIAS (Foreign Investment Advisory Service) assignment to develop a policy framework for Foreign Direct Investment, which was completed during 200 1. Bhutan is currently considering membership in the IFC. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3l- ANNEX III Bhutan-Relations with the Asian Development Bank (As of June 30,2002) Project Total Commitments (Original) Disbursed Multiproject (1983) Second Multiproject (1984) Chirang Hill Irrigation (1985) Roadworks Mechanization (1986) Highland Livestock Development (1986) Urban Centers Sewerage (1987) Industrial Estates (1988) Bhutan Development Finance Corporation (1988) Technical and Vocational Education and Training (1990) East-West Highway Maintenance (1993) Rural Electrification (1995) Financial Sector Intermediation Facility (Policy Loan) (1997) Financial Sector Intermediation Facility (Development Finance Loan) (1997) Urban Infrastructure Improvement (1998) Sustainable Rural Electrification (1999) 10.0 5.6 Health Care Reform Program (2000) 10.0 4.9 Road Improvement (2000) 9.6 0.7 Basic Skills development 7.0 0.3 Total 101.8 64.0 (In millions of U.S. dollars) 5.0 4.3 7.4 10.1 3.5 1.1 4.5 5.0 4.3 4.8 3.3 -- 1.2 0.8 2.5 2.3 7.1 4.6 5.2 5.2 7.5 6.6 4.0 2.4 4.0 2.9 5.7 2.4 Source: Prepared by the staff of the Asian Development Bank. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 32 - ANNEX III Technical Assistance ADB has provided technical assistance (TA) to most sectors of the economy totaling US$28.6 million as of 30 June 2002. The number of TAs provided by ADB were 27.0 percent in agriculture, 18.5 percent in finance and industry, 14.3 percent in transport, 12.4 percent in energy, and 11.8 percent in social infrastructure. There were also 16.0 percent of the total TAs addressing cross-sectoral issues through manpower planning and training, improving project implementation, enhancing external resources management, strengthening environment impact assessment capabilities, strengthening the regulatory framework for procurement and contracting, strengthening the institutional and technical capacity of government agencies, and strengthening the national statistical agency. In January 1999, the Asian Development Bank agreed to make an equity investment of US$28 1,000 in the Bhutan National Bank (formerly the Unit Trust of Bhutan). This has been the only equity participation in Bhutan to date. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 33 - ANNEX IV Bhutan-Statistical Issues Bhutan’s statistical base is weak and there is a need to improve the quality, timeliness, and coverage of data. The national income accounts, price and balance of payments statistics suffer from significant limitations but are being continuously addressed by the authorities. There are also inconsistencies between the monetary, fiscal and the balance of payments statistics. Moreover, the data are subject to frequent, and at times substantial, revisions. The key factors contributing to the data deficiency are the shortage of qualified personnel and limitations in computing facilities. The Bhutanese authorities recognize these shortcomings and are working to remedy them in conjunction with the donors. 1. Real Sector Estimates of GDP at factor cost and final use at current and constant 1980 prices are available only with significant lags and estimation procedures are sometimes ad hoc. Some deflators, most notably for government services, are inappropriate, thereby causing bias in deriving measures of output based on constant prices. Gross domestic saving is defined as gross investment minus net capital inflow, but the latter concept does not appear to correspond to either the balance on the trade account or on the current account. The present consumer price index (CPI) is based on an outdated survey (1979) of consumer expenditures. Apart from the limited coverage of household expenditure (housing costs and many other key expenditures are excluded), the CPI (December 1979=100) is only compiled on a semi-annual basis, i.e., for June and December. Technical assistance in the area of national accounts and prices, including a preliminary Household Income and Expenditure Survey (HIES), was recently provided by the Asian Development Bank. Based on this survey, the CSO plans to publish a revised CPI for December 2002 that includes a more comprehensive coverage of household expenditure but still on a semi-annual basis. Reliable data on employment and wages are not available, but a recent labor force survey (conducted with IL0 assistance) should improve the availability of labor statistics. 2. Monetary Statistics The Royal Monetary Authority @MA) of Bhutan reports monetary data to STA on a regular monthly basis, but usually with a lag of about 4 months. The balance sheets of the RMA and the two commercial banks (the Bank of Bhutan and the Bhutan National Bank) are consolidated into a monetary survey. The statistics are based on end-month balance sheets prepared by these institutions and are generally consistent with the Fund’s guidelines for the classification of monetary statistics. There is, nevertheless, room for improvement in a number of areas. Specifically: (i) monetary data prior to 1996 need to be computerized; (ii) more thorough data checks should eliminate mistakes in the computation of broad money that are sometimes reflected in the RMA Bulletin; and (iii) RMA bills need to be recorded consistently at face value in the balance sheets of banks and in the consolidated monetary survey. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 34 - ANNEX IV 3. Public Finance Despite recent improvements in the quality of government finance statistics, the fiscal data are subject to frequent and substantial revisions, particularly in the expenditure area. Revenue data would benefit from a closer coordination between the various departments in the Ministry of Finance. There are also major inconsistencies between the fiscal and monetary data with regard to bank financing, and with the balance of payments data, with regard to foreign financing. The problem seems to be related to the definition of government between the two sets of accounts. Annual data are reported for publication in the GFSY 2002 and cover consolidated central government. 4. External Sector Bhutan’s balance of payments data also require improvement. The balance of payments statistics cover a limited range of transactions and many of the key data are estimated. The problem is partly associated with the country’s unique exchange and trade system with India, as well as the large porous border between the two countries which give rise to substantial unrecorded trade in goods and services. No attempt is made to estimate the size of unrecorded trade between India and Bhutan and travel receipts and payments vis-a-vis India are based on assumption rather than on entry and exit surveys of tourists. There are also a number of other limitations. Most importantly, trade data are compiled on a calendar year basis while other external transactions are compiled on a fiscal year basis. Consequently, errors and omissions in the balance of payments presentations are large and fluctuate widely. Balance of payments for Bhutan are not included in IFS at present, but the authorities propose to supply data for publication during 2003. In the last few years, several anomalies have emerged in published balance of payments statistics which underscore the need for improving compilation techniques and training for staff. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicANNEX IV Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 36 - ANNEX V EXTERNAL RELATIONS DEPARTMENT Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 03/... FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE [February, ,2003] International Monetary Fund 700 lgth Street, NW Washington, D. C. 20431 USA IMF Concludes Article IV Consultation with Bhutan On [February 21, 20031, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded the Article IV consultation with Bhutan.’ Background The Bhutanese economy has continued to perform strongly. GDP growth dipped below trend to 5.3 percent in 2000 as a result of the flooding in the south. The associated damage to industry was partially offset by strong growth in construction and the financial sector. Manufacturing recovered in 2001, and with construction and financing continuing to boom, GDP growth increased to 6.6 percent in 2001, and to an estimated 7.7 percent in 2002. Private sector credit has picked up strongly after a number of years of stagnation. Even though tourist arrivals declined in the wake of the September 11 attacks, the balance of payments situation has remained comfortable. In line with price developments in India, inflation in Bhutan has fallen below 3 percent, its lowest level in two decades. Close ties with India have been maintained. India is the dominant trading partner and sole buyer of electricity exports. As Bhutan’s largest foreign donor, India has financed the major part of the development of the power sector. l Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial information, and discusses with officials the country’s economic developments and policies. On return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the country’s authorities. This PIN summarizes the views of the Executive Board as expressed during the [February 24, 20031 Executive Board discussion based on the staff report. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 37 - ANNEX V Political reforms have continued. The drafting of a national constitution is the latest step in the process of evolutionary political change that began in 1998 when the King devolved executive powers to a Cabinet of Ministers chosen by the elected National Assembly. A first draft of the constitution was completed in December 2002 and will now be subject to public discussion. A key objective of the Ninth Five-Year Plan is the decentralization of economic power to local governments so as to facilitate implementation of reforms and improve the effectiveness of public spending. Implementation of policies has been broadly successful. The fiscal stance has remained prudent, while the exchange rate peg to the Rupee has allowed Bhutan to share in the stable monetary conditions that have prevailed in India. Dramatic progress has been made in raising education and health levels. However, the private sector has yet to create jobs for nationals on a sufficient scale. The recently-published Ninth Five-Year Plan (2002-2007), while again balancing exploitation of natural resources and tourist potential against preservation of the environment and culture, therefore gives renewed emphasis to encouraging private sector activity. Fiscal policy has remained conservative. The authorities have continued to maintain a surplus on the fiscal current account. To improve the buoyancy of the tax system and to promote social equity, personal income taxation was introduced in January 2002 in conjunction with a campaign to educate taxpayers. With regard to capital spending, Bhutan’s excellent relations with donors have ensured that projects are largely covered by concessional external finance. Nevertheless, in a departure from previous practice, recourse has been made to domestic financing in recent years. Such financing amounted to 6 percent of GDP in 2000/01 and 2 percent of GDP in 2001/02, but much of this came from the government running down deposits with the banking system. The government’s domestic debt stock in June 2002 was 2 percent of GDP. The fiscal deficit has fluctuated in line with capital spending. The deficit rose to 11 .I percent of GDP in 2000/01 (fiscal year begins July I), considerably above the budget target of 3.4 percent of GDP. Almost half of this divergence represented spending overruns related to rebuilding flood damaged infrastructure. By contrast, the surplus on the fiscal current account in 2000101 of 2.4 percent of GDP was close to target. In 2001102, capital expenditure returned to a more normal level and the fiscal deficit narrowed to 5.4 percent of GDP. The 2002103 budget targets a deficit of 4.8 percent of GDP, with higher tax receipts and lower current expenditure expected to more than offset a drop in nontax revenues. The tax/GDP ratio is expected to increase in 2002103 despite the announcement in the budget of a raft of tax incentives primarily aimed at manufacturing and the IT sector. These included tax holidays for new investments and exemptions for earnings in convertible currency. At the same time, export taxes on apples, oranges and cardamom exports were abolished. The pace of foreign reserve accumulation has slowed. Exports declined in 2000 and 2001, primarily on account of the flood damage, although there has also been a trend decline in nonelectricity exports since the mid-1990s. The wider trade deficit was aggravated by a sharp Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 38 - ANNEX V drop in inward transfers, including foreign grants. As a result, the current account deficit turned from a surplus in 1999/2000 to a deficit of about 5 percent of GDP in 2000/01 and 2001/02. External loans from India rose sufficiently to finance these current account deficits, but the National Pension and Provident Fund was permitted to invest about US$ 20 million overseas in early 2001, and there was a decline in reserves in 2000101 of almost exactly that amount. This reserve loss was made up in 2001/02. The higher loan financing is estimated to have increased the ratio of external debt to GDP during 2000101 and 2001/02 from 39 to 55 percent. Since much of the lending is on concessional terms, the debt service ratio remains low at 6’/ percent of exports. Excess liquidity has persisted, even though credit growth has recovered. Given the fixed exchange rate, money growth has varied in line with the balance of payments. In the absence of investment opportunities in Bhutan, the banks have continued to hold reserves with the Royal Monetary Authority (RMA) averaging about 40 percent of assets. Almost the same amount again has been held on deposit with the Indian banking system. Domestic lending has thus been a relatively small part of the banks’ balance sheets. Nevertheless, after several years of sluggish growth, credit to the private sector picked up strongly in 2000, growing by 80 percent during the two years ending June 2002. Lending to trade and commerce was particularly buoyant, but borrowers in the manufacturing and construction sectors were also major beneficiaries. The RMA has taken steps to consolidate Bhutan’s rupee reserves under its control. In March 2001, the RMA issued a directive instructing the banks to repatriate rupee holdings in excess of working balance requirements upon maturity, and the proportion of bank assets held in India has since declined. Upon repatriation, the rupees are being exchanged for RMA bills. The banks were originally permitted to hold Indian assets so as to enhance their earnings opportunities, but have tended to invest in long-term deposits, and on occasion, have been caught short of rupees in their domestic operations. This has led to the rupee trading in the informal market at a premium. The RMA directive is intended to avoid such episodes recurring in the future. Executive Board Assessment <Begin Typing Here> I Public lnformafion Notices (P/A%) are issued, (i) at the request of a member country, following the conclusion of the Article IV consultation for countries seeking to make known the views of the IMF to the public. This action is intended to strengthen IMF surveillance over the economic policies of member countries by increasing the transparency of the IMF’s assessment of these policies; and (ii) following policy discussions in the Executive Board at the decision of the Board. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 39 - ANNEX V Bhutan: Selected Economic Indicators I/ 1997198 1998/99 1999/2000 2000/01 2001/02 GDP growth and prices (percent change) Real GDP at factor cost 2/ Consumer Prices Government budget (in percent of GDP Total revenue and grants Of which: foreign grants Total expenditure and net lending Of which: current expenditure Current balance Overall balance Money, Credit and interest rates (percent change, end of period) Broad money Credit to private sector Lending rate RMA bills (91-days) Balance of Payments (In millions of U. S. dollars) Merchandise exports Merchandise imports Current account balance 3/ (in percent of GDP) Loans (net) Overall balance (in percent of GDP) External indicators Gross official reserves (in millions of U. S. dollars) (In months of imports) External debt (in percent of GDP; end of period) Debt-service ratio (percent of exports) 7.2 6.4 7.6 5.3 6.6 9.0 9.2 3.6 3.6 2.7 32.9 40.0 39.6 38.5 34.1 12.1 18.8 16.5 16.5 12.9 31.9 41.7 43.4 49.6 39.6 17.5 18.4 18.6 19.7 18.1 3.4 2.8 4.4 2.4 3.1 1.0 -1.8 -3.9 -11.1 -5.4 41.7 21.4 21.4 5.5 17.6 13.2 5.4 4.1 47.9 29.3 13-l 6.0 13-16.0 12-16.0 12-16.0 13-16 8.5 6.0 8.5 4.9 4.5 111.3 104.7 114.3 99.5 97.7 -136.1 -162.3 -185.0 -196.3 -188.4 32.1 21.9 4.0 -26.7 -28.2 8.2 5.4 0.9 -5.5 -5.3 4.4 26.0 42.0 49.8 57.3 41.7 48.3 33.6 -24.0 20.4 10.6 11.9 7.4 -4.9 3.8 215.5 258.5 292.6 294.1 19.0 19.1 19.0 18.0 36.8 40.1 38.7 49.0 8.3 8.1 5.6 6.1 316.6 20.2 55.0 6.6 Sources: Data provided by the Bhutanese authorities, and Fund staff estimates. 1/ Fiscal year beginning July 1. 2/ On a calendar-year basis, e.g., the entry under 1997/98 is for 1997, etc. 31 Including grants, following RMA’s new balance of payments presentation introduced in December 2002. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public