DOCUMENT OF INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND NOT FOR PUBLIC USE SM/02/228 CONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION July 17,2002 To: Members of the Executive Board From: The Secretary Subject: Seychelles-Staff Report for the 2002 Article IV Consultation Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staff report for the 2002 Article IV consultation with Seychelles, which is tentatively scheduled for discussion on Wednesday, July 31,2002. At the time of circulation of this paper to the Board, the Secretary’s Department has not received a communication from the authorities of Seychelles indicating whether or not they consent to the Fund’s publication of this paper; such communication may be received after the authorities have had an opportunity to read the paper. Questions may be referred to Mr. Greene, INS (ext. 36357) and Ms. Sancak, AFR (ext. 36084). Unless the Documents Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the WTO Secretariat on Thursday, July 25,2002; and to the African Development Bank and the European Commission, following its consideration by the Executive Board. Att: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicCONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND SEYCHELLES Staff Report for the 2002 Article IV Consultation with Seychelles Prepared by Staff Representatives for the 2002 Consultation with Seychelles Approved by Michael Nowak and Martin Fetherston July 16, 2002 l The 2002 Article IV consultation discussions were held in Victoria during May 14-28,2002. The mission met with the Vice President and Minister of Finance, Mr. James Michel; the Governor of the Central Bank of Seychelles, Mr. Francis Chang-Leng; other senior public sector officials; members of the National Assembly; and representatives of the business and banking communities. l The staff team comprised Mr. Greene (head, INS), Ms. Sancak, Mr. El-Masry (both AFR), Ms. Khandelwal, Mr. Aiyar (both AFR-EP), and Mr. Ould-AbdaIlah (Res. Asst., AFR). Mr. Callaghan (Executive Director for Seychelles) participated in the policy discussions. l Seychelles is on the standard 12-month consultation cycle. At the conclusion of the last Article IV consultation on November 3, 2000, Executive Directors expressed concern at the steady deterioration in economic conditions and urged the authorities to implement a package of reforms emphasizing (1) a sharp decrease in the fiscal deficit, (2) a realignment in the exchange rate, to unify the official and parallel foreign exchange markets, (3) a tightening of monetary policy and rise in interest rates, (4) the removal of administrative controls on prices, profits, and foreign exchange allocation, and (5) the promotion of greater competition in domestic production and marketing. l Seychelles accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2(a), 3, and 4 in January 1978. However, Seychelles maintains restrictions on payments and transfers for current international transactions subject to approval by the Fund: restrictions on transfers of profits and dividends, a foreign exchange allocation system, and external payments arrears. The Executive Board did not approve these restrictions during the last consultation. l Extensive discussions on a possible Fund-supported adjustment program took place during 2000 but were suspended early in 2001 after public statements by President Rene expressing strong reservations against Fund staff advice on exchange rate and fiscal policies. a Elections for the National Assembly are due by March 2003. President RenC was narrowly reelected in September 2001. l Seychelles’s relations with the IMF, including recent technical assistance, are summarized in Appendix I, and its relations with the World Bank Group, in Appendix II. Statistical issues are discussed in Appendix III, and social and demographic indicators are presented in Appendix IV. . Mr. Greene prepared the staff report, with contributions from Ms. Sancak, Mr. El-Masry, Mr. Aiyar, Ms. Khandelwal, and Mr. Ould-Abdallah. The authorities have not yet indicated whether they intend to publish the staff report. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2- Table of Contents Page Executive Summary. ............................................................................................................. .3 I. Recent Economic Developments ....................................................................................... .4 II. Outlook for 2002.. ........................................................................................................... .6 III. Policy Discussions .......................................................................................................... .7 A. Fiscal and Public Sector Policies ........................................................................... .8 B. External Sector and Pricing Policies ..................................................................... 10 C. Monetary Policy, Interest Rates, and Financial Sector Reform ............................. 12 D. Other Issues: Statistics ........................................................................................ 13 IV. Medium-Term Outlook and Risks .................................................................................. 14 V. Staff Appraisal.. .............................................................................................................. 15 Boxes 1. Recent Political Developments .................................................................................. .7 2. Recent Discussions on the Use of Fund Resources. ................................................... .8 3. Assessing Fiscal Sustainability ................................................................................... .9 Tables 1. Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 1997-2002 .......................................... 17 2. Consolidated Government Operations, 1997-2002 .................................................. 18 3. Monetary Survey, 1997-2002. ................................................................................. 19 4. Balance of Payments, 1997-2002 ............................................................................ .20 5. Public Sector Debt and Arrears, by Major Creditor Group ...................................... .21 6. Scheduled Public Sector Debt Service, by Major Creditor Group, 2002-07.. ........... .22 7. Indicators of External Vulnerability, 1997-200 1. ..................................................... .23 8. Medium-Term Projections, Current Policy Scenario, 200 l-07 ................................. .24 9. Medium-Term Illustrative Projections, Adjustment Scenario, 2001-07 .................... .25 Figures 1. Broad Money Growth and Inflation, 1996-200 1 ..................................................... .26 2. Fiscal Performance, 1996-200 1 .............................................................................. .27 3. Exchange Rate Indicators, 1998-2002. ................................................................... .28 4. Total Public Sector Debt, 1999-2001.. .................................................................... .29 5. Medium-Term Projections, Stock of External Public Sector Arrears, 200 l-07 ........ .30 6. Medium-Term Projections, Overall Fiscal Balance, 2001-07 ................................... .3 1 Appendices I. Relations with the Fund .......................................................................................... .32 II. Relations with the World Bank Group. .................................................................... .34 III. Statistical Issues.. ..................................................................................................... 36 IV. Social and Demographic Indicators ......................................................................... .39 V. Public Information Notice (PIN) ............................................................................. .40 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3- Executive Summary l Economic performance in Seychelles has deteriorated markedly since the late 1990s. Estimated real GDP fell by more than 15 percent from 1998 to 2001, while the balance of payments has experienced severe difficulties, including annual current account deficits averaging 17 percent of GDP during 1999-200 1, a massive accumulation of external debt and arrears, and falling reserves. l Serious fiscal imbalances lie at the heart of Seychelles’s economic decline. The annual government budget deficit has been at least 10 percent of GDP since 1996, as government expenditures have averaged more than 50 percent of GDP, reflecting high current outlays and heavy spending for public construction projects. The use of an extensive foreign exchange allocation system, along with controls on prices, interest rates, and foreign trade, to maintain a non-market-clearing official exchange rate, has intensified the problem, contributing to a severe and growing scarcity of foreign exchange and a decline in competitiveness. l Seychelles’s main economic challenge is to restore positive real growth in GDP in an environment where widespread administrative controls and the resulting foreign exchange shortage have stymied private sector activity. In addition, the authorities must address the accumulation of massive external debt and arrears and meet heavy debt-service obligations peaking in 2002-03. l Addressing these challenges will require a substantial redirection of economic policy. A dramatic reduction in fiscal imbalances to achieve a primary surplus of at least 5 percent of GDP, through cuts in capital and wage expenditure and some reduction in existing tax concessions, would halt the accumulation of further public sector debt, improve the balance of payments, and reduce pressures on the official exchange rate. Establishing a market-clearing exchange rate would allow removal of the extremely burdensome foreign exchange allocation system and related controls on prices, interest rates, and external trade, thereby strengthening competitiveness and promoting growth. The very low level of official reserves and uncertainty regarding the market-clearing exchange rate would argue for establishing a floating rate regime as an interim measure, with the possibility of moving to a fixed-rate regime once domestic policies had adjusted and the balance of payments and exchange rate stabilized. Moving first to cut the fiscal deficit, reduce domestic liquidity, and arrange for an orderly, phased clearance of past external arrears would help reduce the extent of depreciation following the shift to a floating exchange rate regime. However, adopting a market-clearing exchange rate would assist fiscal adjustment, since depreciation is likely to raise revenue more than expenditure. l Reforms in structural policy would also help improve growth prospects. These reforms include a further substantial decline in the local assets ratio and the removal of the special privileges granted to the State Marketing Board (SMB), including its monopoly over imports of certain categories of goods, which would strengthen private sector activity. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4- 1. RECENT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS 1. Seychelles has substantially transformed its economy since its independence in 1976, but has amassed major economic imbalances in recent years. Its social and economic indicators are among the best in Africa, and per capita income exceeds US$7,000 a year at the current official exchange rate (Appendix IV). Many services approach European standards, and the environment is well protected. Seychelles’s development reflects, among other factors, the determined use of public funds for infrastructure and social services. However, heavy government spending has also led to major economic imbalances, both domestic and external. 2. Economic performance has deteriorated markedly since the late 199Os, with estimated real GDP falling by more than 15 percent from 1998 to 2001 (Table 1). Much of the drop in GDP can be traced to the manufacturing, construction, and distribution sectors, where a growing scarcity of foreign exchange has sharply constrained imports for the private sector. Tourism earnings have grown slowly, partly because of the drop in tourists after September 11, 2001. However, revenues have increased since mid-2001, with the opening of new five-star hotels, and tourist arrivals since February 2002 have exceeded their comparable 2001 levels. During 1999-2001, officially measured consumer prices rose by more than 6 percent a year, despite extensive price controls (Figure 1). However, inflation appears to have slowed since early 2002, as retail prices rose at an annual rate of less than 4 percent in March and April. The external sector has also experienced severe problems in recent years, with large deficits in the current account and overall balance of payments and sharp increases in external debt and arrears. 3. Large fiscal deficits lie at the heart of Seychelles’s economic decline and have contributed to the accumulation of substantial public sector debt. The deficit on consolidated government operations (the central budget plus the Social Security Fund) has been at least 10 percent of GDP since 1996, and 11 percent of GDP or higher during 1999-200 1 (Table 2 and Figure 2). Government expenditure has been exceptionally high, with total outlays exceeding 50 percent of GDP since the early 1990s. Current expenditure exceeded 45 percent of GDP during 1999-2001, reflecting not only large interest obligations but also a sizable civil service and generous social insurance programs. The government has also financed large capital expenditures, including most projects by the Public Utilities Corporation. Capital outlays reached 13-14 percent of GDP during 1999-2000, the peak years of the government’s massive East Coast Land Reclamation Project (ECP), before declining to 6 percent of GDP in 200 1, reflecting shortfalls in foreign financing. On the revenue side, taxes have averaged 33-3 5 percent of GDP in recent years. A new Goods and Services Tax (GST) was enacted in 2001, replacing the trades tax on domestic services and extending it, beginning in February 2002, to five-star hotels. Nontax revenue, however, fell from more than 11 percent of GDP in 1998-1999 to less than 8 percent of GDP in 2000 and under 7 percent in 2001, reflecting sharply smaller transfers of dividends and profits from the Central Bank of Seychelles (CBS) and parastatals. At end-200 1, domestic government debt exceeded 120 percent of GDP. 4. Large fiscal deficits have made the government the dominant local borrower and have contributed to rapid monetary growth. Since 1999, net credit to government has accounted for nearly 85 percent of domestic credit from the banking system and has risen by more than 10 percent a year. The rapid growth of net credit to government, in turn, has represented the Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-5- main source of monetary expansion, which averaged more than 12 percent annually during 1999- 2001, despite falling real GDP (Table 3 and Figure 1). 5. Large fiscal deficits also represent the underlying cause of Seychelles’s serious balance of payments problems, along with the use of an extensive foreign exchange allocation system and administrative controls on prices, trade, and interest rates to maintain a non-market-clearing official exchange rate. The current account balance registered deficits averaging about 17 percent of GDP during 1999-2001, with the deficit rising to more than 25 percent of GDP in 2001 because of the long-term lease of aircraft by Air Seychelles (Table 4). Seychelles’s competitiveness has also declined steadily, as indicated by the appreciation in its real effective exchange rate since 1999 (Figure 3) and a reported deterioration in the quality of tourist services below that in nearby countries such as Mauritius and Maldives, despite similar prices for package tours. At end-2001, outstanding public sector external debt exceeded 82 percent of GDP (Figure 4), including arrears on debt and other items of nearly 12 percent of GDP. At end-2001, about 59 percent of the debt stock was owed to commercial creditors, with bilateral and multilateral creditors accounting for 24 and 17 percent, respectively (Table 5). Most arrears were to bilateral (61 percent) and multilateral creditors (27 percent), however. Scheduled debt service on public sector obligations in 2001 exceeded 17 percent of exports of goods and nonfactor services, with actual payments falling more than 30 percent short of this amount. Substantial private sector arrears have also emerged, as a non-market clearing exchange rate and comprehensive foreign exchange allocation system have greatly restricted allocations for private sector imports and blocked the repatriation of dividends and management fees, At end-200 1, gross official reserves had declined to about four weeks of prospective imports, c.i.f. Moreover, important segments of future export earnings have been pledged in support of at least US$65 million in commercial loans contracted by the CBS. Scheduled debt service obligations, due mainly to commercial creditors through 2004, are forecast to peak at nearly 25 percent of exports of goods and nonfactor services in 2003 and exceed 19 percent through 2005 (Table 6). The trade regime, which is characterized by extensive nontariff barriers and high effective tariff rates on many commodities, is also highly restrictive, with a ranking of “10” out of 10 on the Fund’s restrictiveness index (with 10 being the most restrictive). 6. During 2001, the authorities intensified the existing system of foreign exchange and price controls, in an effort to ensure the availability of basic consumer goods at appropriate prices and provide foreign exchange for government debt service and capital projects, while appreciating the official exchange rate. Changes implemented in June 2001 required permits for all imports, increased the monitoring of overinvoicing and underinvoicing of imports, compelled foreign exchange earners (such as hotels) to be paid in foreign exchange, and increased the scrutiny over hotels’ receiving and depositing foreign exchange in the banking system. In addition, penalties were raised for noncompliance. Banks had to allocate fixed shares of foreign exchange receipts among ten specific categories of imports on a first-come, first-served basis, but were barred from informing customers of the new rules. In addition, allocations for outstanding claims were limited to those from June 2000 onward, with no funds provided for pre-June 2000 claims. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-6- 7. The new rules appear to have redirected, rather than reduced, the outstanding foreign exchange shortage. Data indicate little change in the amount of foreign exchange flowing through the banking system, although essential consumer goods are no longer scarce and the prices of many basic items have declined. However, shortages of “white goods” (appliances) and electronics have since emerged, and domestic firms have increasingly asked to be paid in foreign exchange. Despite receiving 45 percent of all foreign exchange surrendered, the CBS has been unable to meet outstanding debt service obligations or satisfy the foreign exchange needs of the government’s extensive public works program. Moreover, the decision, in November 200 1, to provide every citizen with US$300 in foreign exchange (US$400, since May 2002) for foreign travel has further reduced the supply of foreign exchange for private sector imports, as travel absorbs more than 20 percent of all foreign exchange retained by the commercial banks. Many private sector imports are now financed from accounts held abroad, while consumers are increasingly shopping abroad rather than using domestic retailers. Since end-June 200 1, the official exchange rate has moved little in nominal terms; meanwhile, the real effective exchange rate, though it depreciated somewhat in the second half of 200 1, remains above its level at end- 2000. Exchange rates in the parallel market are said to have depreciated slightly since late 2000, with the premium reported to be 100 to 250 percent of the official rate, depending on the type of transaction. 8. The new foreign exchange and price regulations have also benefited the state-owned Seychelles Marketing Board (SMB) relative to the private sector. Under the post-June 2001 allocation scheme, the SMB, unlike most private firms, can obtain foreign exchange both from the CBS’s allocation (for imports of “essential goods”) and from many of the categories established for the banks (for other items). Some sources thus estimate that the SMB receives over half the foreign exchange surrendered. In addition, a senior SMB official serves as chief import and price controller. Since early 2001, the SMB has displaced competitors from certain lines of commerce while opening new manufacturing operations. II. t%JTLOOK FOR 2002 9. The staff’s view of the macroeconomic outlook for 2002 under current policy is for further economic contraction, with continued large deficits in the fiscal accounts and the balance of payments. The authorities did not disagree with this view. Real GDP is projected to decline by nearly 2% percent; the continuing foreign exchange shortage is expected to reduce real value added in manufacturing, building and construction, and distribution by 7l% percent, 5 percent, and 3 percent, respectively, although the tourism sector is expected to show some improvement. The inflation rate is forecast to remain around 6 percent, despite some slowing of inflation during March-April. 10. In the fiscal sector, the staff anticipates a consolidated budget deIicit of nearly 10% percent of GDP. Although revenue is forecast at near the budget estimate, expenditure is projected to be considerably higher. Current expenditure should be nearly 1 percent of GDP above the budget estimate, reflecting higher outlays for interest and other payments, while net lending, which the budget forecast at -2.3 percent of GDP, is projected to be a net outlay of 0.4 percent, reflecting the difficulty of parastatals in repaying debt. In addition, the staff considers it very unlikely that the authorities will obtain the massive external financing (nearly 25 percent of Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-7- GDP) forecast in the budget, given the virtual absence of such financing in 2001 and the difficulty in attracting new loans. Instead a very modest level of foreign borrowing, about 2 percent of GDP, is projected. Net foreign financing (before arrears) is forecast at negative 10.4 percent of GDP, rather than the budgeted net inflow of 16 percent. As in 2001, arrears on external debt service and domestic financing are expected to absorb the difference, including non-bank financing of about SR 200 million, or nearly 6 percent of GDP, less than the authorities’ plan (see paragraph 2 1). 11. The balance of payments will remain precarious. The staff forecasts that the continuing tight foreign exchange position will limit the current account deficit to about 13 percent of GDP, as imports shrink and exports show little change. A sharp decline in new borrowing and a decrease in foreign direct investment will lower the expected surplus in the capital and financial account by nearly 60 percent, leaving a projected overall deficit of about US$38 million. External arrears are forecast to rise by the same amount, as gross reserves are only about US$40 million. At end-2002, the stock of external public debt, including arrears, is forecast to reach 88 percent of GDP. Any additional shortfall in borrowing would further constrain imports or lead to higher arrears. III. POLICY DISCUSSIONS 12. Policy discussions took place against the background of political tension related to the recent presidential and upcoming National Assembly elections (Box 1) and the unsuccessful negotiations on a Fund-supported adjustment program during 2000 (Box 2). In addition, the authorities were devoting considerable effort to meeting immediate foreign exchange requirements and securing external financing to cover current and future debt-service needs. Nevertheless, they were keen to share their vision for overcoming the country’s current economic difficulties and restoring economic growth. Discussions thus focused on the macroeconomic and structural policies needed to address these challenges. Box 1. Seychelles: Recent Political Developments Seychelles’s President is France Albert Rene of the Seychelles People’s Progressive Front (SPPF), who assumed power in 1977 and is now serving his third and final term as an elected official. During the last presidential elections, in September 2001, President RenC was reelected with 54 percent of the vote, versus 45 percent for his main opponent, Mr. Ramkalawan of the Seychelles National Party (SNP). This was a far smaller margin than in the previous 1998 election, in which Mr. Rene had received about 67 percent of the vote and Mr. Ramkalawan less than 22 percent, In the National Assembly, the SPPF holds 30 seats, versus 3 for the SNP and 1 for the Democratic Party, although the SPPF’s share of votes in the last (1998) National Assembly elections was 62 percent, versus 26 percent for the SNP (under a previous name). The next elections for the National Assembly must be held by March 2003, and support for the opposition is reported to have increased significantly. Seychelles’s economic policies are closely associated with the government of Mr. RenC and the SPPF. Prominent among these are the fixed level of the exchange rate, foreign exchange restrictions and the foreign exchange allocation system, price controls, the monopoly of the Seychelles Marketing Board (whose chairman is the President) over the import and sale of key consumer goods, and large capital projects, such as the East Coast Land Reclamation Program (ECP). President Rene reaffn-med his party’s commitment to these policies in his February 2002 State of the Nation Address to the National Assembly. However, growing opposition among the private business sector and the departure of several important civil servants during the last two years indicate increasing dissatisfaction with these policies. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-8- Box 2. Seychelles: Recent Discussions on the Use of Fund Resources During 2000, several rounds of discussions took place between Fund staff and the Seychelles authorities on an adjustment program that could be supported by the Fund. Following initial discussions during January at Fund headquarters and in March-April during a joint mission by staff from the Fund, the World Bank, and the African Development Bank, discussions continued in Seychelles during the July Article IV consultation discussions and at Fund headquarters during a visit from the Governor of the Central Bank of Seychelles (CBS) in October. The latter set of meetings yielded preliminary understandings on key elements of an adjustment program encompassing major reforms in exchange rate, fiscal, monetary, competition, and privatization policies. A use of Fund resources mission then visited Seychelles in November and reached agreement ad referendum on a letter of intent that included measures to adjust the exchange rate and reduce government expenditure that were consistent with the guidance provided to the staff by the Executive Board. Subsequently, however, President Rene expressed his disagreement with key measures set forth in the letter of intent. On February 27,200 1, in his State of the Nation Address, he stated that he did not believe in the economic policy recommendations proposed by the Fund, in particular the proposals to adjust the exchange rate and to reduce government spending. At an informal Executive Board Meeting in March 200 1, the staff informed the Board that it considered “that a large adjustment in the official exchange rate is crucial to address the country’s serious balance of payments crisis, allow for the removal of foreign exchange restrictions, and restore normalcy to the foreign exchange market.” The staff noted that the President believed that devaluation was not necessary, and instead had stated that the government would stiffen penalties for transactions in the illegal parallel foreign exchange market. Indeed, penalties were increased and restrictions intensified in June 2001, In his February 2002 State-of-the-Nation Address, President Rene again voiced his disagreement with the type of adjustment package proposed during the 2000 negotiations, and the authorities questioned many of the proposals presented by the mission during the 2002 Article IV consultation discussions. A. Fiscal and Public Sector Policies 13. The authorities acknowledged that fiscal policies needed rectification but argued that key capital projects had to be completed first. The government and members of the National Assembly agreed that fiscal policies had contributed to the growth of domestic and external debt and should in principle be tightened. However, they defended past outlays as important for the development of Seychelles and the elimination of poverty. They attached priority to completing the ECP, for which more than 80 percent of the expected US$65-70 million in outlays had already been spent, as central for allowing new business ventures and providing land for housing. They also felt it important to proceed quickly with the installation of three desalination plants, at a cost of US$25-30 million (about 5 percent of GDP), to address water shortages emerging from the past years’ prolonged drought. 14. The mission questioned the reliability of the budget forecast for 2002. As noted earlier, the mission anticipated another deficit exceeding 10 percent of GDP, reflecting higher projections for current expenditure and doubts that net lending would show a net repayment. The mission also questioned the likelihood of much new foreign borrowing in 2002, given the limited foreign financing in 200 1 and the lack of improvement in Seychelles’s external position since then. Thus, the mission contended that a sharp, immediate cut in the fiscal deficit, aimed at attaining a primary surplus of at least 5 percent of GDP in 2002 and later years, was needed to halt the further accumulation of government debt and reduce pressures on the balance of payments (Box 3). Because of the high level of taxation, the mission argued that adjustment should focus on expenditures and proposed the following measures: Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-9- Box 3. Seychelles: Assessing Fiscal Sustainability Debt dynamics suggests that fiscal sustainability can be assessed using a standard framework in which the change in public debt equals the negative of the primary balance plus the product of the initial debt stock times the difference between the real interest and growth rates, with the change in debt stock, the initial debt stock, and the primary balance all measured in percent of GDP: Ad = -pbal + (r-g)d,, where Ad = the change in the public debt to GDP ratio; pbal = the primary balance in percent of GDP; r = the real interest rate; g = the real growth rate for the economy; and do = the initial stock of public debt in percent of GDP. Stabilizing the debt-to-GDP ratio requires that Ad be set to zero. Reducing it requires that it be negative. Because Seychelles’s ratio of public debt to GDP is very high, fiscal policy should aim at a primary balance that initially stabilizes the debt-to-GDP ratio and reduces it significantly over the medium term. The following scenario offers an illustration, using data for 2002. Let us assume that the equilibrium real interest rate averages 2 percent in 2002 and the presumed real growth rate is zero. Based on the most recent data, domestic public debt was estimated at about 123 percent of GDP at end-200 1, and external public debt at about 82 percent of GDP at the end-2001 exchange rate, or 154 percent of GDP at an exchange rate more consistent with market clearing at that time. If all external debt is public or publicly guaranteed, this implies a total public debt stock of about 277 percent of GDP at end-200 1 The above equation then yields a value of 5 5 percent of GDP for the primary surplus required to avoid a further rise in the ratio of public debt to GDP: 0 = -pbal + (.02 - 0) x 2.773, and pbal = .02 x 2.773 = .0554, or 5.5 percent of GDP. Data available during the consultation discussions indicated a smaller public debt stock of about 246 percent of GDP, which would imply a required primary surplus of 4.9 percent of GDP. The staffs adjustment scenario, which assumes implementation of an adjustment program beginning early in the second half of 2002, would attain this objective in 2002, based on presumed interest payments of 15.3 percent of GDP and an overall deficit of 9.8 percent. Larger primary surpluses are targeted for 2003-05, when implementation of an adjustment program would likely contribute to higher growth, thereby reducing the required primary surplus and allowing a decline in the ratio of public debt to GDP. The target for the required primary balance in 2002 changes as key assumptions also change. For example, a 1 percent rise in the real growth rate reduces the required primary surplus by about 2.8 percent of GDP. A 1 percent rise in the real interest rate raises the required primary surplus by almost 2.8 percent of GDP. A further depreciation in the exchange rate, by one Seychelles rupee per dollar, would raise the initial level of public debt to about 292 percent of GDP, and thus the required primary surplus to about 5.8 percent of GDP-an increase of close to 0.3 percent of GDP. By comparison, the required primary surplus declines if some of the external debt is neither public nor publicly guaranteed. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- lo- l a reduction in government employment, to coincide with economic liberalization (see below); 0 some reductions in social expenditure, to be achieved through greater economies in the home health scheme and a review of the current public health service; and l restriction of capital expenditure to only the most essential projects, with strict ceilings on further outlays for the ECP, a spreading out of the installation of the desalination projects, and either a deferral of new power and sewerage projects or the giving of assurances that the Public Utilities Corporation can cover their costs, which the government has effectively financed through the budget. On the revenue side of the budget, the mission noted the government’s success in extending the new GST on domestic services to five-star hotels that were enjoying benefits under the Investment Promotion Act (IPA). It proposed that the authorities reconsider other tax concessions, such as trades tax exemptions for hotels on imports of intermediate inputs, or the exemption of these hotels and other IPA companies from paying the employer’s share of the social security tax on their local employees. 15. The authorities agreed with the mission on the need for fiscal consolidation but indicated that tightening would be difficult before the upcoming National Assembly elections, due to be held by March 2003. Because of the importance of completing outstanding capital projects and the difficulty of containing other expenditure, they anticipated that the overall budget deficit would be at least as large as forecast in the 2002 budget, or more than 6 percent of GDP, even if all revenue targets were met. For 2003, officials indicated that they wanted to target a budget deficit of 3 percent of GDP, which would be comparable to a primary surplus of more than 6 percent of GDP, in view of the government’s heavy scheduled interest obligations. Over the medium term, they aimed at producing a balanced budget. However, the authorities felt it would be hard to constrain expenditure in the coming months. They also expressed concern about retracting existing tax concessions, arguing that such changes could weaken the country’s attraction to future investors, particularly given the goal of opening new five-star hotels to raise tourism earnings. 16. To augment revenues and improve conditions for the private sector, the mission also proposed reforms for the SMB. The mission asked the authorities to review the SMB’s operations, to ensure that it provided appropriate dividends to the budget. In addition, to establish a more level playing field for the SMB and private sector suppliers, the mission urged the authorities to eliminate the SMB’s monopoly over imports of various goods and its privileged access to foreign exchange, in the context of a broader dismantling of controls. The authorities responded by highlighting the role of the SMB in ensuring the availability of basic consumer goods at affordable prices, while contributing about % of 1 percent of GDP in dividends annually to the budget. B. External Sector and Pricing Policies 17. The authorities expressed great concern that dismantling the foreign exchange allocation system and liberalizing the exchange rate could lead to a sharp depreciation of the offkial rate and impose major costs on a country where imports represented more than Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- ll- 80 percent of GDP. Thus, they preferred to maintain the existing controls and instead reduce the demand for foreign exchange through a multipronged approach that called for (1) attracting more investment in high-end tourism through generous concessions; (2) issuing new, long-term domestic debt, both to the banks and the nonbank public, in order to absorb domestic liquidity; (3) securing a new, long-term external commercial loan to repay arrears and smooth the country’s external debt profile; and (4) after the National Assembly elections, reducing the fiscal deficit. 18. While acknowledging the authorities’ concerns, the mission noted the severe costs and dislocations arising from the present allocation system and instead proposed adopting a more liberal system, based on a market-clearing exchange rate. The mission argued that the likely inflationary impact of this change would be limited because domestic prices already reflected the parallel market exchange rate to a substantial extent, as evidenced by the high pricing and continued overinvoicing of many privately supplied goods and the large margins that the SMI3 was said to realize on key consumer imports. On the assumption that the SMB could reduce its margins significantly, among other factors, the mission estimated that the inflationary impact would peak at about 30 percent during the first six months after moving to a market-clearing exchange rate and decline rapidly thereafter; however, this estimate was subject to some uncertainty. Although it recognized the authorities’ preference for a fixed exchange rate, the mission suggested that the authorities initially establish a floating rate regime, while dismantling most elements of the existing foreign exchange allocation system and removing controls over prices and interest rates. Such an approach had the advantage of letting the market determine the appropriate level of the exchange rate while minimizing the need for official reserves, since the authorities would not be bound to defend any particular rate. Shifting to a market-clearing, fixed exchange rate regime could then be considered once the exchange rate had stabilized and domestic policies adjusted appropriately. The mission noted that moving to a floating exchange rate regime could pose some difficulties for at least one bank (see paragraph 24). However, by allowing the dismantling of foreign exchange controls, the new regime could greatly reduce the foreign exchange constraint facing most private firms. The new regime would also benefit exporters and many firms in the tourism industry, as a real depreciation would raise profitability, thereby providing incentives to upgrade existing hotels and other facilities. 19. The mission identified various prior steps that could help moderate the depreciation in the official exchange rate that floating would engender. These included prior fiscal tightening, measures to reduce domestic liquidity (such as the authorities’ proposed issuance of long-term government debt), and establishment of an orderly way to clear external arrears over an extended period, as proposed in a 2001 MAE technical assistance report, so that these arrears would not immediately put pressure on the rate. However, the mission noted that postponing the introduction of a market-clearing exchange rate would delay the benefits of dismantling the current set of controls. In addition, as depreciation was likely to raise revenues more than expenditures because of the heavy weight of import-related taxes, delaying the exchange rate change would make it harder to achieve fiscal consolidation. Nevertheless, the authorities, while acknowledging the possibility of sequencing reform measures, rejected proposals for a floating rate regime or a discrete depreciation to a market-clearing rate. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12- 20. The mission asked the authorities about their views on trade policy reform, noting the extremely restrictive nature of the present trading system and the benefits that liberalization could bring in the context of a more liberal foreign exchange regime. The mission encouraged the authorities to develop a schedule for trade liberalization, with the goal of replacing nontariff barriers (NTBs) with tariffs, eliminating NTBs on those goods for which tariffs exist, and, ultimately, reducing effective tariff rates. The authorities responded that they did not currently have plans regarding trade liberalization. C. Monetary Policy, Interest Rates, and Financial Sector Reform 21. Noting the accumulation of a substantial monetary overhang, the authorities indicated their plans to issue new long-term government debt for both the banks and the nonbank sector, in order to reduce domestic liquidity. In the coming months they planned to issue some SR 400 million in long-term bonds (equivalent to nearly 70 percent of reserve money) to the nonbank public and a further SR 500 million in bonds (equivalent to about 85 percent of reserve money) to the banks. The authorities also noted the reforms that had been introduced since October 2001, such as the removal of interest rate ceilings on commercial loans (which had not changed actual rates, as the foreign exchange constraint had greatly diminished loan demand) and the reduction of the local assets ratio (the required percentage of domestic assets to be held in government securities) from 70 percent to 50 percent; the latter reform had been designed to encourage the banks to increase home mortgage lending. 22. The mission, while supporting moves to reduce domestic liquidity, noted that a substantial tightening of the budget would also help slow monetary expansion. It also stressed the importance, in the event of an exchange rate change, of raising nominal deposit rates toward positive real levels as a first step toward eventual liberalization, and of similarly raising rates on government securities to ensure the solvency of the domestic banks, while making adequate provision in the budget for the cost of such an increase. At the same time, the budget deficit should be brought under control before liberalizing interest rates. The mission cautioned the authorities against converting much of the existing domestic debt stock into long-term securities at fixed interest rates, as this action could put many banks into technical insolvency if interest rates rose as part of an adjustment program. Issuing long-term debt might also increase the banks’ overall holdings of government securities, which would be contrary to the decision to reduce the local assets ratio. In addition, the mission proposed raising the current 2.5 percent reserve requirement, which was low by developing country standards, to 5-10 percent, as part of a broader reform of the monetary policy framework. 23. The authorities acknowledged the mission’s concerns regarding the possible effects on the banks of restructuring existing public sector debt, but they emphasized that the risks were minima1 in the short run, so long as the exchange rate remained unchanged. They voiced concern about liberalizing the interest rates for government securities, noting that, in the past, Treasury bill auctions had produced rates that did not reflect market conditions, which in their view may have resulted from collusion within the limited banking sector (which comprises six commercial banks and one specialized development bank). They also argued that a higher reserve requirement was not important at present, given the banks’ considerable domestic liquidity. However, the staff has noted that higher reserve requirements would reduce excess Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13 - liquidity in the banking system and decrease pressures on the exchange rate or inflation, if the exchange rate were to float. 24. The mission acknowledged that, at present, the banking system appeared basically sound, partly because of distortions created by the existing exchange system. Available data indicated that the ratio of bank capital to risk-weighted assets was several times the 8 percent minimum set forth in the current Base1 Core Principles. In part, this situation reflected the large share of banks’ assets held in government securities, which have a risk weighting of zero. It also reflected the restrictions against transferring management fees and dividends, which have led many banks to accumulate large capital balances. However, several banks had gearing ratios of capital to deposits of less than 5 percent, a standard also used to monitor banks in Seychelles. System-wide data, based on the banks’ own reports, also suggested that the share of non- performing loans (NPLs) was quite small, less than 2 percent of total loans at end-2001, although a few banks reported NPLs of up to 4 percent of loans and noted a rise in NpLs in recent years. Provisions were reported equivalent to about 75 percent of NPLs for the consolidated banking system. Despite these generally favorable statistics, the mission warned the authorities that at least one bank, the Development Bank of Seychelles, was at risk in the event of an exchange rate change, because it lends in local currency but is fUnded mainly with foreign liabilities. Thus, it urged that the budget provide for the need to recapitalize financial institutions in the event of an exchange rate change and suggested allocating about 2 percent of GDP during the first 12 months after a large exchange rate change for this purpose. A large depreciation in the exchange rate might also require some recapitalization of the CBS, although this could be accomplished through the transfer of a zero-coupon bond by the government, which would have no impact on the budget. 25. The authorities stated that their growth strategy included developing a more extensive offshore financial center, which as of mid-2002 comprised two (dormant) insurance companies, several thousand registered but foreign-based international business companies, some 30 licensed and active international trade zone companies, and some trusts. They also mentioned rejecting many applications by would-be offshore banks as part of their efforts to maintain a “clean” offshore center. The staff noted these developments and indicated that a mission from MAE would visit Seychelles in June-July to conduct a Module 2 Offshore Financial Center (OFC) assessment and review the country’s initiatives to combat money laundering and the financing of terrorism (AMLEFT). D. Other Issues: Statistics 26. Seychelles’s provision of data to the Fund for purposes of surveillance is characterized by substantial delays in reporting balance of payments, fiscal, and national accounts statistics. The authorities noted that delays reflected the limited number of staff assigned to statistical activities and the recent staff turnover in the unit covering trade statistics. The mission urged the authorities to reduce the delays by tinding additional staff positions and by ensuring a closer coordination among agencies; these actions could allow the Central Bank (which reports regularly on exchange rates, monetary developments, and international reserves) also to report on national accounts and the balance of payments. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14- IV. MEDIUM-TERM OUTLOOKANDRISKS 27. The mission discussed the medium-term outlook for Seychelles with the authorities, based on a comparison of continuing the current approach to policy with an illustrative adjustment scenario showing how external arrears could be cleared and a modest level of reserves accumulated over the medium term. This latter scenario assumed as a first step fiscal tightening, followed by floating the exchange rate, dismantling the foreign exchange allocation system and controls on interest rates and prices, trade liberalization, and reforms in the SMB and other parastatals, starting in the second half of 2002. The scenario also assumed, as noted earlier, that inflation would peak at about 30 percent during the first six months after the exchange rate change and decline rapidly thereafter, reflecting the ability of private suppliers and the SMB to significantly reduce existing margins and the ability of hotels to lower dollar rates as real wages fell, despite an anticipated near doubling of the official exchange rate (in Seychelles rupees per U.S. dollar). The inflationary impact could be smaller, however, if the parallel market exchange rate had a larger influence on domestic prices than already assumed. From 2003 onward, the scenario assumed that exchange rate depreciation and some reduction in tax concessions would raise budget revenues above 5 1 percent of GDP (Table 9). Expenditures, which would rise initially to 56 percent of GDP in 2002 because of a jump in interest rates caused by the depreciation and accompanying spike in inflation, were assumed to decline gradually to about 50 percent of GDP by 2007, reflecting cuts in capital expenditure, lower wage and salary payments, and a return of interest rates to more normal levels as inflation subsided. No debt rescheduling was assumed, as most debt service is due to commercial creditors. 28. Continuing the current approach to economic policy would be unlikely to improve the difficult balance of payments situation, even if the opening of new hotels over the medium term ultimately leads to a resumption of limited economic growth (which could be less than shown in Table 8). Under the present policy regime, foreign exchange shortages are likely to continue, with a further accumulation of external arrears on public sector operations that could exceed US$3 50 million by end-2005, along with continued high levels of external and domestic public debt (Table 8 and Figure 5). Severe limitations on access to new loans and the difficulty of f&her drawing down official reserves would constrain import growth. Moreover, the fiscal deficit would remain high, exceeding 10 percent of GDP (Figure 6). 29. The illustrative adjustment scenario (Table 9), by comparison, should lead, over the medium term, to a resumption of real growth per capita, better fiscal performance, declining domestic and external debt, and a much-improved balance of payments, following an initial spike in inflation and interest rates. Substantial fiscal tightening could keep the fiscal deficit in 2002 below 10 percent of GDP, even after allowing for higher interest payments and 1% percent of GDP in net lending for bank recapitalization (another % of 1 percent would be provided in 2003). Revenue gains, owing largely to the depreciation, would reduce the budget deficit to about 4 percent of GDP in 2003; meanwhile, subsequent fiscal improvements would come as continued restraint on spending and reductions in interest payments with the retirement of public debt led to an overall surplus by 2005. In the external sector, the package of reforms would sharply improve the current account position beginning in 2003, largely by reducing imports and thereby helping meet the large debt-service obligations falling due. Further Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 15 - improvement would occur in subsequent years, reflecting higher export and tourism receipts, and the greater availability of foreign exchange to domestic producers and hotels. The stronger current account position would, in turn, yield a surplus in the overall balance of payments beginning in 2004, allowing an accumulation of reserves to about ten weeks of prospective imports, c.i.f. by 2007, a decline in external debt, and a gradual clearance of arrears. Thus, the authorities would be able to regularize their relations with creditors over time, although resched- uling would speed the process. The improved external position and the removal of administrative controls would also allow growth to accelerate, exceeding 3 ?A percent annually by 2005. V. STAFFAPPRAISAL 30. Economic performance in Seychelles has deteriorated markedly since the late 1990s. Real GDP is estimated to have fallen by more than 15 percent from 1998 to 200 1, and severe external sector difficulties have emerged, including large current account deficits, mounting debt- service obligations and arrears, and a fall in reserves to about four weeks of prospective imports, c.i.f. The economic decline is due mainly to persisting large fiscal deficits, along with extensive controls on foreign exchange allocation, prices, interest rates, and foreign trade used to maintain a non-market-clearing official exchange rate. 31. The authorities opted in 2001 to intensify the existing foreign exchange allocation system and price controls, rather than allowing the exchange rate to reach market-clearing levels. While these changes are reported to have eliminated shortages of basic consumer goods and reduced prices for some items, scarcities have emerged in other areas, and foreign exchange has been blocked for pre-June 2000 obligations and many other current transactions. In addition, the authorization for citizens to receive a substantial travel allowance has severely constrained the availability of foreign exchange for private sector imports. Disappointingly, the authorities have not pursued the economic reforms advised by the Executive Board during the last Article IV consultation and discussed during the recent program negotiations. 32. The staff considers that Seychelles is unlikely to emerge from its current position of low economic growth and severe balance of payments problems without major shifts in economic policies. Further large fiscal deficits will mean continuing pressures on the external sector, as reflected in large current account imbalances. Moreover, the continued reliance on foreign exchange allocation and price controls, aimed at avoiding adjusting the official exchange rate, will likely perpetuate the severe foreign exchange shortage, thereby constraining the ability of the private sector to finance enough imports to support growth in hotels and other activities. 33. Early action to reduce the fiscal deficit would improve the balance of payments and reduce pressures on the exchange rate. In view of the tax burden, fiscal consolidation should focus on expenditures, including a sharp reduction in capital outlays and measures to limit government employment and rationalize social expenditure. The authorities should also explore ways of curbing existing tax concessions. To reduce the public debt-to-GDP ratio, the primary surplus should exceed 5 percent of GDP. 34. Establishing a market-clearing exchange rate would promote growth by allowing the authorities to eliminate the extremely burdensome foreign exchange allocation system and Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 16- related controls on prices, interest rates, and external trade. The very low level of official reserves and uncertainty regarding the market-clearing exchange rate would argue for establishing a floating rate regime as an interim measure. However, the authorities would be advised to consult with important groups in society and alert them to the possible consequences of adjustment policies, such as a temporary surge in inflation. A decision on moving to a fixed rate regime could be made once domestic policies had adjusted and the balance of payments and exchange rate stabilized. Moving first to cut the fiscal deficit, reduce domestic liquidity, and arrange for an orderly, phased clearance of past external arrears would help reduce the extent of depreciation and the inflationary shock following the shift to a floating exchange rate regime. At the same time, establishing a market-clearing exchange rate would assist fiscal adjustment, since depreciation is likely to raise revenue more than expenditure. This likelihood is especially important in view of the rise in expenditures needed to cover higher interest payments, as interest rates adjust to a temporary spike in inflation, and bank recapitalization costs, after depreciation in the exchange rate. 35. To support the move toward a more liberal foreign exchange regime, the staff recommends that the authorities develop a schedule for trade liberalization, with a view to replacing NTBs with tariffs, eliminating NTBs on those goods for which tariffs exist, and, ultimately, reducing effective tariff rates. The staff would urge the authorities to give trade reform greater priority in their policy agenda. 36. The staff commends the authorities for eliminating the ceiling on commercial lending rates and reducing the local assets ratio from 70 percent to 50 percent. It recommends that they make a further substantial cut in the local assets ratio and move toward positive real interest rates on deposits and government securities as a step toward the eventual liberalization of all interest rates, once the fiscal deficit has been brought under control. 37. To promote private sector development, the authorities should eliminate special privileges for the SMB, in order to establish a more level playing field between it and the private sector. These actions would include eliminating the SMB’s monopoly over imports of certain categories of goods. 38. The authorities are reminded that the foreign exchange allocation system, including restrictions on repatriating profits and dividends, and external payments arrears constitute restrictions on current transactions under Article VIII, Section 2(a) that require Fund approval. The staff urges the authorities to remove these restrictions as soon as possible and in the meantime does not recommend their approval. 39. Seychelles’s provision of data to the Fund for the purpose of surveillance needs improvement. The authorities are encouraged to shorten the present delays in reporting data on the balance of payments, fiscal developments, and national accounts through additional resources and better coordination of reporting among government agencies. 40. It is proposed that the next Article IV consultation with Seychelles be held on the standard 12-month cycle. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17- Table 1. Seychelles: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 1997-2002 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 prov. Est. Pmj. l/ National income and prices Nmiml GDP (in dhom of Seychelles mpees) Real GDP 2 Real GDP per capita GDP deflator (1986=100) Retail price in&x 2l External rector Exports, f.c.b. (including reexports, in U.S. dollars) To&m receipts thmugh ccmmercial banks (ii U.S. dollars) Imports, f.o.b. Real effective exchange rate 31 Gcverament budget Total revenue Total expmdihue and net lending 4/ current expendihue Capital expenditure and net lending Money nad credit Net fcmign ansets Dome& credit Net claims cngcvemment Net claims on the rest cfthe economy Bmad money Velocity (GDP/average MZ) l&rent rate (six-month deposits; weighted average) Government budget Total revenue, excluding grants Identified expenditure and net lending current expmdihue Capital expenditure and net lending Gvemll balance, including grantn 41 Total domestic govemment debt 5/ External sector Cumnt account balance aPEr official WInsfen 61 Total extemal debt outstanding valued at. 71 End-cf-p&cd exchange rate Awumd market-clearing exchange rate Total w.temal debt cutetanding 71 Scheduled external debt service, less rescheduling Gwmll external balance Gross official reveres (end ofyear) In weelu ofprospective impcti, c.i.f In percent ofbmad money Estimated stock of external arrears Exchange rate Seychelles rupees per USgl (end of period) Seychelles rupees per USgl @eriod average) ,829.6 12.2 2.5 0.9 0.6 47.4 7.3 17.7 33.7 16.0 -9.4 0.6 -5.9 17.7 18.9 7.4 -18.8 -1.1 -0.7 8.6 -2.2 10.3 17.8 13.8 36.6 0.5 24.8 17.7 7.1 29.3 1.5 9.1 16.9 -3.0 28.1 5.1 45.2 56.4 48.3 8.1 -10.7 71.3 -11.1 5.0 4.9 24.8 3.1 5.8 5.12 5.03 (Annual percentage change, unless othenvw stated) $201.3 3,330.Z 3,402.4 5.7 -2.8 -5.4 1.7 -4.6 -7.1 7.0 7.1 8.0 2.7 6.3 6.2 12.3 7.1 -6.5 23.2 -13.5 0.0 13.1 -10.0 2.6 62.8 -23.0 -7.7 (Annual change in percent of beginning-of-period broad money, unless otherwise indicated) -8.6 32.0 29.5 2.5 16.4 1.3 8.3 0.7 -4. I 17.4 13.8 16.8 12.5 0.6 1.3 19.1 8.2 1.2 1.1 6.4 4.8 0.1 0.0 12.6 9.2 10.5 8.4 2.1 0.8 11.4 8.7 1.0 0.9 5.0 (In percent of GDP) 16.4 13.7 23.7 11.6 7.4 -3.4 1.2 -2.9 -4.8 -4.2 34.0 30.8 31.2 37.2 20.4 5.3 13.6 143 6.0 61 44.9 58.0 48.3 9.7 -22.7 95.0 46.2 42.3 59.7 58.5 45.0 45.2 14.7 13.3 -11.5 -18.8 98.0 109.4 42.2 43.6 53.4 54.4 47.0 47.8 6.4 6.6 -11.0 -10.4 122.9 131.9 -17.6 -17.1 -7.5 45.7 56.1 -25.5 -12.9 82.2 88.2 154.4 1,337.0 3.496.2 -8.1 -2.4 -9.8 -4.1 6.7 7.3 6.1 6.0 11.2 2.1 5.5 26 36.5 -7.1 8.8 -2 0 8.1 -10.4 6.7 21 6.5 -53.0 8.4 (I,, percent of exports of gwds and nc&ctor services) 67.6 72.0 93.9 5.4 6.3 9.6 17.7 (In n,illiom of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise indicated) -32.9 1.1 -28.3 -35.4 21.1 29.8 43.1 36.6 2.5 4.3 46 4.2 4.5 5.2 8.2 5.7 10.0 20.9 37.7 65.9 5.45 5.37 6.27 5.75 5.26 5.34 5.71 5.86 105.1 15.4 -38.0 36.6 4.4 5.3 103.9 Sources: Central Bank of Seychelles; Minisby of Finance; and staRestimates and projections. I/ under current policy stance 21 Annual averages. The oflicial retail price index is believed tc understate substantially the rate of inflation because the consumption basket cc,,tai,u a large pmp&icn of ccmmcdities whose prices are subject tc price ccntmls. 3/ Changes in the real effective exchange rate do not tiy retlect the underlying loss of competitiveness because ofthe weakness in the retail price index w a measure of underlying inflation. 41 hcbding unidentified expenditures. 51 b&ding gcvemment papers held by the Social Security Fund. 61 Including hm@am lease of ticrat? (equivalent tc 18 percent of GDP) in 2001. 71 Including mem. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 18- Table 2. Seychelles: Consolidated Government Operations, 1997-2002 11 1991 1998 1999 2000 2001 2001 2002 2002 PKW Budget Prov. Budget Proj. 21 Total revenue and grants 1,295 5 1,453 0 1,560 3 1,469.9 1,551.g 1,422.S 1.521.6 1537.4 Total revenue 1,280.2 1,438.0 1,538 6 1,438.l 1,536.2 1,408.g 1,493.7 1,523.0 TZ3X 911.4 1,072.7 1,142 0 1,115.3 1,189.2 1,187.5 1,259. I 1,224.O NOntax 302 8 365.3 396.7 262 8 346.9 221.3 234 7 284.7 External grants 15.3 15.0 21.7 31.8 158 140 27.9 14.4 Expenditure and net lending Current expenditure Of which: wages and salaries Interest Capital expenditure Net lendii Current balance (deficit -) 1,596.2 1,851.4 1,988.0 1,988.7 1,766 7 1,1x2.1 1 J66.2 1,545 3 I ,499.0 1,537.6 1,580.5 1.569.8 408.9 482.7 493 3 553.6 534 0 551.2 216.2 324 1 311.7 272.5 223 2 281 2 144.1 111.2 453.5 484 9 266.2 200.4 85.9 140.9 35.5 -33 7 -80.0 11.9 -86 0 -107.3 39.6 -99 5 -44.4 -161.0 1,756.O 1,616.8 299.4 219.3 -80 0 -123.1 1,901.5 1,671.5 573.2 309.2 2150 15.0 -148.5 Primary balance -24 5 -80.4 -1161 -246.3 8.4 -78.0 65 0 -54.9 Overall balance, commitment basis -300.7 -404.5 -427 7 -518 8 -214.8 -359.3 -234 4 -364.1 Arrears (net; reduction -) 0.6 4.1 150 16.7 0.0 23 7 0.0 00 Overall deficit cash basis -300.1 -400.4 -412.7 -502.2 -2148 -335 6 -234.4 -364.1 Less unidentitied expenditures 3/ 2.4 327.8 -30.1 138.1 -372.3 30.3 0.0 0.0 Overall balance afier ad]ustment -302.6 -728.2 -382.6 -640.2 157.5 -365.8 -234.4 -364.1 FlnanCing 302.6 728.2 382.6 640.2 -151.5 365.8 234.4 364.1 Foreign financing (net) 26 3 -51.7 -40.5 84 2 -157 5 -154.8 552.2 -362.7 Gross borrowing 75 7 28.8 35.3 117.2 1580 1.3 858.7 69.0 Amortmtion 41 -49 4 -80.5 -75.8 -33.0 -3155 -156.1 -306.5 -431.7 Change in anears on amortization 6.0 14.0 58.4 95.5 0.0 141.5 0.0 2186 Domestic tinanclng 270.3 765.8 364.7 460.5 0.0 379.1 -317.8 508.2 Banking system 302.7 649.7 416.4 381.3 00 347.9 -317.8 308.2 Other nonbank financing 4/ -32 4 116.1 -51 7 19.1 0.0 31.2 0.0 200 0 Sales of tinancial assets 00 00 00 0.0 0.0 0.0 00 0.0 Total revenue and grants 45.8 45.4 46.9 Total revenue 45.2 44.9 46.2 External grants 0.5 0.5 0.5 Expenditure and net lendiig 56.4 58.0 59.7 current expenditure 48.3 48.3 45.0 Of which’ wages and salaries 14.5 15.1 14.8 interest 9.8 IO.1 9.4 Capital expenditure 5.1 5.3 13.6 Net lendii 3.0 4.4 1.1 43 2 46.5 42.6 42.3 460 42.2 0.7 0.9 05 58.5 52.9 53 4 45.2 41.4 47.0 16.3 16.0 16.5 80 6.1 8.4 14.3 8.0 6.0 -I .o -2.4 04 44.1 43 3 08 50.9 46.9 8.1 6.4 -2.3 44.0 43.6 0.4 54.4 47 8 16.4 8.8 6.1 04 Primary balance -0 9 -2.5 -3.5 -7.2 0.2 -2.3 Overall balance, commitment basis -10.6 -12.6 -12.8 -15.2 -6.4 -I 0.8 Arrears (net; reduction -) 0.0 0.1 0.5 0.5 0.0 0.7 Overall balance, cash basis -10.6 -12.5 -12.4 -14.8 -6.4 -10.1 plus unidentfied expenditures 3/ 0.1 10.2 -0.9 41 -11.2 0.9 1.9 -1.6 -6 8 -10.4 00 0.0 -6.8 -10.4 0.0 0.0 Overall balance after adjustment -10.7 -22.7 -11.5 -18.8 47 -11 .o -6 8 -10.4 Before grants -11.2 -23.2 -12.1 -19.8 42 -I I .4 -1.6 -10.8 FtiClng External, excluding grants (net) Change in amean on arwxtization Domestic B2.llkX Nonbanks 41 Sales of financial assets 10.7 22.7 11.5 188 -4.7 11.0 0.9 -1.6 -1.2 2.5 -4.7 -4.6 0.2 0.4 18 2.8 00 4.2 9.6 23.9 11.0 13.5 0.0 11.4 10.7 203 12.5 Il.2 00 10.4 -1.1 3.6 -1.6 2.3 00 0.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 00 0.0 0.0 6.8 16.0 00 -9.2 0.0 10.4 -104 6.3 14.5 8.8 5.1 0.0 Memorandum item: Nominal GDP (in nullions of Seychelles rupees) 2,829.6 3,201 3 3,330 2 3.402.4 3,450 4 3,450.4 3,450 4 3496.2 (In milbons of Seychelles rupees) (In percent of GDP, unless otherwise mdicated) Sources- Ministry of Finance; Social Security Fund, Central Bank of Seychelles; and staff estunates 11 Includes the central government and the social security system. Z/Under current policy stance 31 This represents the dilkence between identfied budget revenues and expenditures, on the one hand, and the tkancing of the consolidated budget, on the other. 4/ Excludes government papen held by the Social Security Fund. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 19- Table 3. Seychelles: Monetary Survey, 19972002 ,997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 Prov. prov. hj. I/ Foreign assets, net 101.8 Central bank 114.3 Assets 127.2 Li.&ikU 12.9 Commercial banks -12.5 Domestic credit 2,294.g claims on gwemmenf net 1,835.5 Claims on public entities 71.8 claims on private sector 387.6 Money and quasi money (MZ) 2,205.g Money (MU 648.7 Qwi money 1.339.2 Pipeline Deposits I/ 2180 Giber items, net 191.8 Memorandum Item: Velocity 1.45 Foreign wets, net 8.5 Centi banL 27.6 Assets 28.0 Liabilities 0.4 Commercial banks -19.1 Domestic credit 422.3 claims 0” gcwemmenf net 302.2 claims on pubbc entities 3.1 claims on privxte sector 118.0 Money and quasi money (MZ) 499.9 Money WI) 198.8 Quasi money 400.2 Pipeline depositi I/ -99.1 0th items, net -68. I Dome#tic credit 22.6 clniml on go”emmenf net 19.7 claims on public entities 45 claims onpdvtttte sector 43.8 Money and quasi money (MZ) 29.3 MovW) 44.2 Quasi m00ey 42.6 Pipeline deposits 21 10.0 Foreign assets, net Domestic credit claims on gwmmen~ net Claims on public entities claims on private sector Broad money Other items, net 0.5 24.8 17.7 0.2 6.9 -4.0 Memorandum itemr: Nominal GDP Growth in nominal GDP (in percent) 8.4 Velocity (GDP/average broad money) 1.45 Exchange rate (Seychelles rupees per U.S. dollar, period av@ra& 5.03 Exchange rate (Seychelles rupees per U.S. dollar, end ofperiod) 5.12 (In millions of Seychelles lupees; end ofperiod) -87.2 -68.9 -194.6 -58.0 -51.0 -132.3 115.1 160.2 271.1 173.1 211.2 403.4 -29.2 -17.9 -62 3 3,OOl.l 3.447.6 3,868.7 2.485.2 2,901.6 3,282.g 55.9 42.6 20.2 460.0 503.5 565.6 2,567.l 3,056.g 3.306.4 780.6 1,071.Z 1,137.4 1,608.8 1,837.7 2,036.7 178.3 148.0 132.3 347.2 322.8 368.1 -190.4 -190.4 -162.6 -162.6 210.6 210.6 373.2 373.2 -27.8 -27.8 4,285.1 4,624.5 3,630,s 3,939.0 10.8 11.3 643.5 674.2 3,682.3 4,OQl.O 1,290.6 1,402.Z 2,264.1 2,471.l 127.7 127.7 413.4 433.1 1.34 1.18 1.07 (Annual changes in milliom of Seychelles rupees) 0.95 0.91 -188.9 18.3 -125.7 -172.2 7.0 -81.3 -12.0 45.1 110.9 160.2 38.1 192.2 -16.7 Il.3 -44.4 706.2 446 5 421 1 649.7 416.4 381.3 -15.9 -13.3 -22.4 72.4 43.5 62.1 361.8 489.2 249.5 131.9 290.6 66.2 269.6 228.9 199.0 -39.7 -30.3 -15.7 155.5 -24.4 45.9 (Allnual change in percent) 4.2 0.0 -30.3 0.0 -60.5 0.0 -30.2 0.0 34.5 0.0 4164 339.4 347.9 308.2 -9.4 0.5 77.9 30.7 375.9 318.7 153.1 Ill.7 227.4 207.0 -4.6 0.0 44.7 19.7 30.8 14.9 12.2 35.4 16.8 13.1 -22.1 -23.8 -52.6 18.7 9.4 12.3 16.4 19.1 8.2 20.3 37.2 6.2 20.1 14.2 10.8 -18.2 -17.0 -10.6 (AoNlal cbnnge in percent of beginning-of-period broad money) 10.8 7.9 10.6 8.5 -46.4 4.8 13.8 4.8 11.4 13.5 11.2 -3.5 8.7 8.7 9.1 0.0 -8.6 0.7 -4.1 0.1 0.0 32.0 17.4 13.8 12.6 9.2 29.5 16.2 12.5 10.5 8.4 -0.7 -0.5 -0.7 -0.3 0.0 3.3 17 20 2.4 0.8 19.1 8.2 11.4 8.7 7.0 -1.0 1.5 1.4 0.5 13.1 4.0 2.2 -1.9 48 1.34 1.18 I .07 0.95 0.91 5.26 5.34 5.71 5.86 5.45 5.37 6.27 5.75 Sources: Central Bank of Seychelles; and staffestimates and projections. I/ Under current policy stance. 21 The pipeline scheme for foreign currency allocation was introduced in April 1994. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 20 - Table 4. Seychelles: Balance of Payments, 19972002 (in ,dions of U.S. dollme, unless otbenviee indicated) 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 Retied Fmv. ROV. Pmj. I/ current account Goods Credit Of whwh: merchandise exports, Eo.b. Debit Of which. merchendiee imports, f.o.b. Of which: machinery end trawport impoti Of which: eircratl and ships SWJiCW Chdit -60.3 -188.5 115.0 73.3 -303.5 -288.2 125.8 255.0 122.4 -129.2 -123.5 -44.8 -229.0 -109.4 145.7 194.8 111.7 129.7 -374.6 -304.1 -361.4 -290.3 -101.6 -49.7 Of which: tourism income through comma&4 banke Debit Of which: conekuction servicen, including East Coast Reject (YECP III) and airport Income, net Compensation of employees, net lnvetierd income, net Of which: scheduled interest payments Of which: penalty interest paymente current traInfen -5.8 -0.1 -5.8 -15.7 -100.3 -228.2 123.4 90.6 -351.6 -342.6 134 0 277.0 1109 -143.0 -1.7 -15.7 -2.7 -13.0 -19.6 Generdl gO”emment, net other sectors, net a.2 9.6 14.6 17.3 -6.4 -7.7 126.7 93.7 275.9 269.3 1116 105.0 -149.2 -175.6 -14.9 -18.0 -24.9 -31.6 -1.1 -3.3 -23.8 -28 4 -25.0 -33.0 0.0 0.0 3.6 2.6 10.5 a.7 -6.8 -6.1 -145.4 -78.7 -198.6 -164.6 216.6 221.0 161.8 168.4 -415.1 -385.7 -402.8 -374.2 -153.4 -115.1 -1019 -29.4 67.2 95.1 282 0 289.3 110.8 113.6 -214.7 -194.1 -25.4 -10.0 -17.4 -13.8 -2.9 -3.0 -14.5 -10.8 -19.1 -15.7 0.0 -4.3 3.3 4.7 9.1 9.5 -5.8 -4.8 Capital and timmciel account cqiti account Financial account Direct inveetment, net Portfolio inveebnent, net other inventment Assets Li&ilitiee Central Bank of Seychelles, net Government borrowing, net Disbursements Of which : ECP Amortization Pamet& loans, net Financial lease-purchase of aircr& other sectors, net private sector, net B&e, net 42.4 86.2 114.4 84.4 99.0 6.8 21.7 16.5 8.8 9.4 35.6 64.6 97.9 75.6 89.6 38 4 39.9 46.2 13.8 21.6 3.0 2.1 0.5 0.9 1.2 -5.8 22.6 51.2 60.8 66.9 -12.7 -5.7 -13.0 -14.9 -8.8 6.9 28.3 64.1 75.7 75.7 -10.2 20.6 11.4 41.8 a.5 -5.3 -5.5 29.9 24.4 -31.8 7.5 10.5 48.5 38.0 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 00 -12.8 -16.0 -18.7 -13.6 -31.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 3.3 -16.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 119.9 -0.6 1.4 -0.5 0.0 0.2 14.9 9.5 16.4 -1.5 -2.1 a.1 2.3 7.0 7.6 -2.3 40.7 10.0 30.7 12.0 0.9 17.8 -8.0 25.8 -25.0 12.0 -37.0 54.8 0.0 0.0 -2.0 -2.0 Net encore end omiseiooe 22.9 -18.8 10.3 -67.9 11.0 0.0 Ovdl balance 4.9 -32.9 I.1 -28.3 -35.4 -38.0 Fmanciel and ovemll balance Net reserve assets of which: Oross Reserve Assets Increase in public sector arrears 21 -4.9 -4.9 -5.0 32.9 -1.1 28.3 35.4 38.0 32.9 -1.1 II6 7.2 0.0 3.7 -8.7 -13.4 6.6 0.0 16.7 28.2 38.0 Memorandum items: official resmes In weeks ofprospective imports, c i.f. In weeks ofimp&e, c.i.f. Net official reserves 31 In weeks ofpmepective importe, c.i.f. Outstanding etock of public arrears 4/ of which: areare on public debt ofwhich: nondebt public errears Nomiml GDP Current account balance (in percent of GDP) 51 External public debt service Extenm, debt service/ exports ofgoode and nonfactor eenwee (in percent) Extemal debt service/ GDP (ii percent) 24.8 21.1 3.1 2.5 3.8 2.9 22.3 -10.6 2.8 -1.3 10.0 587.6 608.4 -10.3 -165 18.6 21.6 5.0 5.4 3.2 3.5 29.8 43.2 36.6 36.6 4.3 4.6 4.2 4.4 4.2 6.8 4.1 4.9 -9.5 -21.1 -28.3 -28.3 -1.4 -2.2 -3.2 -3.8 20.9 37.7 65.9 103.9 15.4 26.5 53.6 91.6 5.6 11.1 12.3 12.3 623.3 595.5 569.7 607.8 -19.8 -7.5 -25.5 -12.9 26.7 44.5 88.2 78.6 6.3 9.6 17.7 15.4 4.3 7.5 15.5 12.9 Stock of external public debt (including arrears) Public external debt (excluding arrears and f%v.ncinl lease of aircraft) Financial leeee of Air Seychelles 154.1 .., 155.5 285.1 333.9 264.1 296.3 468.3 536.1 282.6 312.3 119.9 119.9 Stock of external public debt/exports of goods and nonfactor eewices (in percent) Stock of external public &bt/ODP (in percent) Stock of extemel public debt/GDP (in percent) valued at 67.6 72.0 93.9 45.7 56.1 82.2 assumed market-clearing exchange rate 61 Assumed market-clearing exchange rate (end of period) 154.4 11.0 105.1 88.2 Sources: Central Benk ofSeychelles; and eta!Teetimates. 11 Under c-t policy stance. 2, Reliable data me available only on public meme. It is likely ulat pri”ete sector enears are large and have increased over the last two years 88 foreign exchange shortagee have grown worse and companies are forbidden f?om rep&em dividends, management fees, etc. 3/ Gross resewee less tick of liabilities of the Centml Bank of Seychelles. 4/Ti,e stock ofprivate sector mrears wee &mated at USI 42.1 mdlion at end-1999. 5/ lncludin~ long-term leeee of aircraft (equivalent to 18 percent of GDP) in 2001. 6, only the stock of debt is valued at assumed market exchange rate. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-21- Table 5. Seychelles: Public Sector Debt and Arrears, by Major Creditor Group, (In millions of U.S. dollars; at-end-2001) Amount Percent of total Outstanding stock of public sector debt Multilateral Bilateral Commercial Outstanding stock of public sector arrears Multilateral Bilateral Commercial 284.3 100.0 49.0 17.2 66.9 23.5 168.4 59.2 53.9 100.0 14.7 27.3 33.0 61.2 6.2 11.5 Sources: Central Bank of Seychelles; Ministry of Finance; and stalf estimates. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 22 - Table 6. Seychelles: Scheduled Public Sector Debt Service, by Major Creditor Group, 2002-07 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 Scheduled debt service l/ Multilateral of which: African Development Bank World Bank (IBRD) Bilateral of which: Abu Dhabi government Government of the United Kingdom Government of China Commercial of which: Citibank N.A. ABN Amro Bank The Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi, Ltd. 71.0 84.9 7.5 6.9 5.5 4.9 0.5 0.5 10.1 9.7 1.8 2.0 1.1 1.0 0.5 0.9 53.4 68.4 16.8 13.1 10.6 29.9 6.2 6.1 (In millions of U.S. dollars) 34.9 30.4 25.7 17.9 5.9 5.1 4.8 4.0 3.3 2.7 2.6 2.1 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 9.6 10.8 10.3 8.2 1.9 1.9 1.8 1.3 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 2.1 4.1 4.0 3.9 19.4 14.6 10.5 5.8 -- 3.0 5.7 -_ 3.0 5.4 _- _- 2.9 2.9 2.6 -_ (In percent of exports of goods and nonfactor services) Scheduled external debt service 15.4 24.6 19.2 19.5 14.7 12.7 Sources: Central Bank of Seychelles; Ministry of Finance; and staff estimates and projections. li Totals may not add, due to rounding. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-23 - Table 7. Seychelles: Indicators of External Vulnerability, 1997-2001 (In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated) 1997 1998 1999 2000 Prov. 2001 Est. Sources: Central Bank of Seychelles; Ministry of Finance; and staff estimates. l! For 1999-2001 includes public sector external debt valued at end-of-period-exchange rate. 21 Including long-term lease of aircraft (equivalent to 18 percent of GDP) in 200 1. 31 Including arrears; in percent of exports of goods and nonfactor services. 41 In percent of exports of goods and nonfactor services. Financial indicators Total public sector debt li Broad money (percent change; 12-month basis) Claims on government (net percent change; 12-month basis) Interest rate (six-month deposits; weighted average) External indicators Exports, f.o.b. (including reexports, in U.S. dollars) 47.4 7.3 17.7 33.7 11.2 Imports, f.o.b. 17.7 18.9 7.4 -18.8 36.5 Terms of trade 6.4 8.9 -1.6 -12.4 -13.3 Current account balance after official transfers 21 Gross official reserves (end of year, in millions of U.S. dollars) In weeks of imports, c.i.f. Total external debt outstanding 31 Scheduled external debt service 4/ Seychelles rupees per US$l (period average) -11.1 -17.6 24.8 21.1 3.8 2.9 5.0 5.0 5.4 5.3 -17.1 -7.5 -25.5 29.8 43.2 36.6 4.2 6.6 4.0 67.6 72.0 93.9 6.3 9.6 17.7 5.3 5.7 5.9 71.3 95.0 143.7 165.5 205.1 29.3 16.4 19.1 8.2 11.4 19.7 35.4 16.8 13.1 10.6 9.1 8.3 6.4 4.8 5.0 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 24 - Table 8. Seychelles: Medium-Term Projections, Current Policy Scenario, 2001-07 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 Est. Fmj. Proj. Pmj. Pmj. Proj. Proj. Nathal Income and prkes Nommd GDP (ii nulbons of Seychelles rupees) Red GDP Red GDP per capita GDP deflator (1986=100) Retail price index I/ Exports, f.o.b. (including reexports, in U.S. dollars) Tourism receipts through commercial bank, (ii U.S. dollars) Imports, tab. Real effective exchange rate 2l Government budget Total revenue Total expenditure and net lending 31 current expenditure Capital expenditure and net lending Money and mdlt Net foreign assets Domestic credit Net claims on government Net claims on the rest of the economy Broad money Velocity (GDP/average MZ) Interest rate @x-month deposits; weighted average) Savings and investment Gross national savings Ofwhich : govemment savings Gross investment Ofwhich : government investment Government budget Total revenue, excluding 8ra.nts Id&i&d expen&tw and net lending current expenditure Capital expenditure and net lending Overall balance, including 8ra& 3/ Total domestic government debt 4/ External rector Current account balance aPm official transfers Y Total external debt outstandm8, valued at: 61 End-of-p&d exchange rate Assumed market-clearing exchange rate Total extend debt outstanding 61 Scheduled extemal debt service Overall external balance Gross official resetves (end of year) In weeks of prospective imports, c.i.f In percent of broad money Estimated stock of external arrears Exchan8e rate Seychelles rupees per US$l (end of period) Seychelles mpees per US$l (period average) 3,337.0 3,496.Z 3.736.3 4,042,s 4,393.0 4,795,s 5,236.7 -8.1 -2.4 -0.6 0.9 1.4 1.8 1.9 -9.8 -4.1 -2.3 -0.8 -0.3 0.1 0.2 6.7 7.3 7.5 7.2 7.2 7.2 7.2 6.1 6.0 6.0 60 6.0 6.0 6.0 112 5.5 36.5 8.8 2.1 3.0 3.7 38 2.6 3.2 3.1 25 -7.1 -5.2 2.5 2.5 .,. 36 3.7 2.6 2.4 2.5 2.5 .,. -2.0 -10.4 2.1 -53.0 8.1 7.1 6.9 6.5 6.7 8.8 9.1 10.7 6.5 8.8 9.0 10.7 8.4 8.7 10.1 10.6 (Annual change in percent of beginning-of-period broad money, unless otherwise indicated) 6.8 6.9 9.7 9.8 9.5 9.7 11.1 11.1 0.1 12.6 10.5 2.1 11.4 0.95 50 0.0 9.2 8.4 0.8 8.7 0.91 0.0 0.0 11.9 11.9 10.7 10.6 1.2 13 11.2 11.1 0.88 0.86 .,. (In percent of GDP) 0.0 0.0 13.2 13.6 11.8 12.1 1.4 1.4 12.3 12.7 0.84 0.81 0.0 13.8 12.5 1.4 13.0 0.79 11.6 7.4 14.7 15.6 17.0 19.0 20.9 -4 8 -4.2 -5.0 -5.9 -7.7 -8.7 -9.8 37.2 20.4 20.5 20.6 21.8 23.9 25.5 6.0 6.1 6.3 6.4 6.5 6.6 6.7 42.2 43.6 43.6 43.1 42.3 41.4 40.5 53.4 54.4 55.4 55.8 56.9 57.1 57.4 47.0 47.8 48.7 49.0 49.9 50.1 50.3 6.4 6.6 6.7 6.8 6.9 7.1 7.2 -11.0 -10.4 -11.3 -12.3 -14.2 -15.4 -16.6 122.9 131.9 138.9 143.7 148.9 153.6 158.4 -25.5 -12.9 -5.8 -5.0 86.7 83.6 195.9 203.4 -4.8 -4.9 -4.6 82.2 88.2 154.4 184.0 80.3 76.9 73.4 209.4 214.0 217.0 (In percent of exports of goods and nonfactor services) 93.9 17.7 105.1 107.0 108.0 109.4 15.4 24.6 192 19.5 (Inmillions ofU.S. dollars, unless otherwise indicated) 111.0 112.4 14.7 12.7 -35.4 -38.0 -97.2 -69.5 -86.3 -61.4 -47.4 36.6 36 6 36.6 36.6 36.6 36.6 36.6 4.2 4.4 4.3 42 4.1 4.0 3.9 5.7 5.3 4.7 4.3 3.8 3.4 3.0 65.9 103.9 201.0 270.5 356.8 418.2 465.6 5.75 5.86 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... (Annual percentage change, unless otherwise stated) Sources: Cenbal Bank of Seychelles; titry of Finance; and staff estimates and projections. I/ Annual averages. The offinal retail price index is believed to understate substantially the rate ofinflation because the consumption basket contains a large proportion of commodities whose prices are subject to ptice contiols 2J Changes in the red effective exchange rate do not truly reflect the underlying loss of competitiveness because of the weakness in the retail price index as a measure of underlying inflation 3/ Including unidentiiied expendihues. 4i Including 8OV~~t papers held by the Social Security Fund. 5/ Including long-term lease of aircraft (equivalent to 18 percent of GDP) m 2001. 6l bIcludm8 ancars Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 25 - Table 9. Seychelles: Medium-Term Projections, Illustrative Adjustment Scenario, 2001-07 2001 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 Est Proj PTOJ. PrOJ. hj. fiOJ ROJ Proj - (Annual percentage change, unless otherwise stated) National income and prices Nomml GDP (ii millions of SeycheUes rupees) Real GDP Real GDP per capita GDP deflator(1986=100) Reti pnce index (RPI) li 3.337.0 3,337.0 3,921,s 4,207.7 4,499.0 q800.6 5,087.6 5,392.Z -8.1 -8.1 -0 5 1.2 28 3.6 3.9 39 -9.8 -9.8 -2 2 -0.5 1.1 19 2.2 22 6.7 6.7 18 1 60 4.0 30 2.0 20 6.1 61 10.4 6.0 4.0 3.0 20 2.0 External sector Exports, f o b. (including reexports, in U S dollars) Tourism receipts through commercial banks (III U.S. dollars) Imports, fo.b. -11.6 -10.6 8.1 4.5 6.4 50 Real effective exchange rate 21 11.2 5s 36 5 88 2.3 4.1 4.2 47 41 5.4 6.0 60 -135 -5 0 4.0 5.0 Government budget Total revenue Total expend~tie and net lending 31 current expendlure Capital expenditure and net lending -2.0 -33.6 280 19.6 8.2 57 6.0 5.6 -10.4 -10.4 23.6 6.4 2.5 19 5.4 5.4 2.1 2.1 28.2 6.5 2.9 12 5.1 5.1 -53.0 -53.0 -10.5 58 -1.8 93 a.7 88 (Annual change in percent of be-g-of-period broad money, unless othenwse indicated) Money and credit Net foreign assets Domestic credit Net claims on govemment Net claims on the rest of the economy Broad money Velocity (GDP/average MZ) Interest rate (six-month depoats, weighted average) 0.1 01 12.6 12.6 105 10.5 21 2.1 11.4 11.4 0.95 0 95 5.0 5.0 -3.7 0.5 2.3 2.7 3.1 13.9 34 6.5 64 5.3 10.8 16 4.3 40 3.0 31 1.7 22 2.4 2.3 12.8 38 83 8.7 80 1 00 0.99 1 00 0.98 0 96 (In percent of GDP) Ofwhich: government investment 11.6 11.6 119 24.6 30.6 33.8 36.8 39.5 -4.8 -4.8 -5 3 0.3 2.8 4.8 5.2 5.4 37.2 37.2 21.5 23.5 26 5 28.5 30 5 31.5 60 60 2.9 39 4.0 4.1 4.2 4.3 Government budget Total revenue, excluding grants IdenIiEed expend~tie and net lending Current expenditure Capital expenditure and net lending Overall balance, including grants 31 Total domesticgovernment debt 4J 42 2 42.2 46.0 51.3 51.8 51.3 51.3 51.1 53 4 53 4 56.2 55.7 53.4 51.0 50.7 50.4 470 47.0 51.3 50 9 49.0 46 5 46.1 45.7 64 6.4 4.8 48 4.4 45 46 4.7 -11.0 -11.0 -9.8 -4.0 -0.9 1.0 1.3 1.4 122.9 122.9 1127 111.9 110.7 107.6 104.5 99.6 External sector Current account balance aAer official transfers 51 Total external debt outstamIng, valued at: 61 End-of-penod exchange rate Assumed market-clearing exchange rate -25 5 -25.5 82 2 82.2 154.4 154.4 -9.6 11 4.1 5.3 105.9 122.7 105.1 85.4 105.9 122.7 105.1 85.4 (In percent of exports ofgoods and nonfactor se~ces) 63 8.0 66 4 52.3 66.4 52.3 Total external debt outstandmg 61 Scheduled external debt service 93.9 17.7 93.9 17.7 94.9 a2 4 69 3 56.6 15.1 22 2 16.4 15.5 (In mdlions of U S. dollars, unless otherwise indxated) 44.1 349 115 8.2 Overall external balance Gross official reserves (end of year) In weeks ofprospeclive impolts, c 1.f. In percent of broad money Estimated stock ofexternal arrears Exchange rate -35.4 -35.4 -6.0 -3 3 18.3 20.6 38.3 63.9 36 6 36 6 40.7 443 52 6 63.2 76.2 1022 42 42 5.3 5.5 6.2 7.1 82 105 5.7 5.7 110 12.3 13.5 15.1 16.8 20 a 65 9 65 9 75.9 82.9 72 9 62.9 379 0.0 Seychelles rupees per US$l (end of period) 5 75 5.75 Seychelles rupees per USSl (period average) 586 5.86 46 62 5.0 5.7 3.3 09 2.4 8.6 0.94 Sources: Central Bank of Seychelles; Mintstry of Finance; and staff esbmates and projechons I/ Annual averages. The officd retail pnce index is bebeved to understate substantially the rate ofinflation because the consumption basket contams a large proportmn of commo&txs whose prices are subject to price controls 21 Changes in the real effechve exchange rate do not truly reflect the underlying loss of competitiveness because of the wealoless III the retad price index as B measure ofunderlying inflation. 31 Including unident&d expenditures. 4i Including government papers held by the Social Security Fund. 51 Including long-term lease of aucmft (equvalent to 18 percent of GDP) in 2001. 61 Including arrears. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 26 - I- I I I Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public\ Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 28 - Figure 3. Seychelles: Exchange Rate Indicators, 1998-2002 130 120 110 100 90 80 120 100 80 60 40 20 0 Bilateral Exchange Rates vis-&is the U.S. Dollar, January 1998 -April 2002 (Average, 1998=100) SO&I Africa 100 80 60 40 20 ‘IO 1998 1999 Source: IMF, International Financial Statistics 2000 2001 2002 Real and Nominal Exchange Rates, January 1998 - March 2002 (Average, 1998=100) /“- Real effective exchange rate . -- ._ I _ c - _ 1. -- - - -- __ I -- -. - - -’ 1998 1999 Source: IMF, Information Nohce System. 2000 2001 2002 10 8 6 Bilateral Exchange Rates: Seychelles Rupees per U.S. Dollar, U.K. Pound Sterling and Euro, Jauuary 1998~April2002 U.K. Pound Sterling Euro , ” ” 1 ” ” j ” ” c 1 ” ” “““‘1 ” 1’ ” s ‘I ” ” ‘1 130 120 110 100 90 80 10 8 6 1998 1999 Source: IMF, International Financial Statistics. 2000 2001 2002 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 29 - 8 0 N 2 I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I 0 2 I Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicI I I I I I 1 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public\ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 32- APPENDIX I I. II. III. IV. V. VI. VII. VIII. Ix. Seychelles: Relations with the Fund (As of June 24,2002) Membership Status: Joined 6/30/77; Article VIII General Resources Account Quota Fund holdings of currency Reserve Position in Fund SDR Department Net cumulative allocation Holdings Outstanding Purchases and Loans: SDR Million 8.80 8.80 0.00 SDR Million 0.41 0.02 None Quota % 100.0 99.99 0.01 % Allocations 100.0 3.97 Financial Arrangements: None Project Obligations to Fund (SDR million; based on existing use of resources And present holdings of SDRs): None Exchange Rate Arrangement: The Seychelles rupee is pegged to a trade- and tourism-weighted currency basket As of end-April 2002, the rate was US$l = SR 5.6339 Article IV Consultations: Seychelles is currently on a 12-month consultation cycle. The 2000 Article IV consultation was concluded by the Executive Board on November 3,200O. Technical Assistance (1995- March 2002): Department FAD STA/AFR STA Head of Mission Mr. Schiller Mr. Dublin Mr. Pritchett Subject Review the revenue system. Assess statistical databases. Advise on government finance statistics. Date July 1995 March 1999 March 2000 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-33 - APPENDIX I Department MAE FAD MAE Head of Mission Mr. Ouanes Subject Date Advise on liberalizing the foreign exchange system; introducing indirect instruments of monetary management; strengthening prudential regulations; and restructuring the domestic debt. June 2000 Mr. Sunley Review indirect taxes, including customs duties. June 2000 Ms. Brenner Conduct Module 2 June-July assessment of offshore 2002 financial center and review measures to combat money laundering and the financing of terrorism. X. Resident Representative None Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-34- APPENDIX II Seychelles: Relations with the World Bank Group (As of June 30, 2002) Seychelles joined the World Bank (IBRD) in 1980, the International Finance Corporation (IFC) in 198 1, and the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA) in 1992. Given the country’s small size and its access to commercial lending sources, the IBRD has had only a modest assistance program in Seychelles, mainly in infrastructure rehabilitation and environment protection, and it has provided technical support in building institutional capacity in the preparation of the multiyear public investment programming. The IFC has extended loans to investors in Seychelles in the hotel and tourism industry, and in the fishing and banking sectors. MIGA does not yet have any exposure or applications for guarantees in the Seychelles. The status of IBRD and IFC operations is summarized in the attached tables, The World Bank’s main objectives in Seychelles are to (1) assist the government in restoring macroeconomic balance and create an environment conducive to improving economic prospects in the medium and long term, and (2) provide support for environmentally sustainable economic activities and the preservation of the environment. To this end, the World Bank has cooperated with other donors on macroeconomic policy advice, including technical support in the preparation of the Seychelles Macroeconomic Plan for 2000-04 and on environment protection through GEF (Global Environment Facilities) grants. In this regard, a World Bank team visited Seychelles in June-July 2000 to advise the authorities on developing a privatization program; encouraging private sector development; and liberalizing the domestic and foreign trade system. The mission recommended that the government consider the following measures: 0 Remove entry restrictions, price controls and operating constraints. Where applicable, develop direct public assistance programs to replace subsidies implicit in price controls. 0 Formalize competition law, government ethics, and business-friendly labor and land regulations. a Carry out privatization plans for individual public enterprises, including sales to strategic investors, public offerings, asset sales, and liquidations. The World Bank stands ready to provide technical and financial assistance for a strong reform program and could provide support for economic liberalization to enhance economic growth and competitiveness. A mission visited Seychelles during May-June 2002 to update information and explore possibilities for renewing the policy dialogue with the authorities. The IFC’s focus is on (1) supporting the hotel industry, which requires modernization in terms of facilities, services, and management; (2) supporting the financial sector; and (3) helping small and medium-sized local entrepreneurs. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-35- APPENDIX II Seychelles: Relations with the World Bank Group I. Statement of the World Bank Loans and IDA Credits (as of June 30, 2002) Loan Number Year No current loans Year Company Loan 1995 AEF Acajoux 0.36 1995 Beau Vallon 1.72 1996 AEF Sea Harvest 0.50 1998 Nouvobanq 6.05 Total commitments 8.63 0.00 0.00 8.63 Total disbursement 8.63 0.00 0.00 8.63 2001 Approved pending commitment SSL Purpose World IDA Undisbursed Bank (in millions of U. S. dollars, less cancellations) Total 10.70 0.00 Of which : repaid 9.20 Total outstanding 1.30 II. Statement of IFC Investments (as of March 28, 2002) Equity Participation (in millions of U. S. dollars) 0.15 Total 0.36 1.72 0.50 6.05 0.15 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-36- APPENDIX III Seychelles: Statistical Issues The quality of economic and financial statistics reported to the IMF is not satisfactory. There are long time lags (up to 12 months) between the end of a year and the first available estimate of GDP for that year. Even longer delays, ranging from one to three years, have arisen for statistics on government finance, and the balance of payments. The mission discussed these issues with the authorities and stressed the importance of reporting data more promptly. The authorities indicated that efforts are under way to improve the timeliness with which national accounts and trade statistics are reported to the Fund by the Management and Information Systems Division (MISD). Real sector National accounts data are prepared on a calendar-year basis. Currently, national accounts at constant prices use 1986 as a base year. There are considerable delays in compiling GDP deflators, so that the most recent official estimate of real GDP is for 1999. Data on average monthly earnings by sector and employment by sector are collected on an annual basis by the MISD. Tourism statistics are compiled monthly and reported to the IMF in a timely fashion. The retail price index @PI) is calculated on the basis of prices mandated by the government and, therefore, takes no account of prices in the parallel market. The base year used is 1993. But in light of the recent 1999-2000 household survey, which showed that the representative consumer basket has changed considerably since the last survey in 1986, a new RPI series will be issued during 2002, using the last three months of 2001 as the base period. Government finance Annual transaction data on consolidated central government transactions are reported for publication in the Government Finance Statistics (GFS) Yearbook. Quarterly data on central government budgetary operations are also reported to the Fund for publication in International Financial Statistics (IFS). However, the quarterly data are reported with a delay of more than one year. The government finance statistics are recorded on a cash basis. An STA mission that visited Victoria in March 1999 concluded that the methodology used to consolidate fiscal data (i.e., central government and Social Security Fund) was broadly consistent with the Government Finance Statistics Manual ( 198 6). Monetary accounts Monetary data are reported regularly for publication in IFS, albeit with some delay. Data for the Central Bank of Seychelles are available with at least two-month lag, while those for Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-37 - APPENDIX III commercial banks become available with a minimum lag of five months. The monetary and credit aggregates are generally consistent with the Fund’s methodological standards. Balance of payments The authorities have made substantial progress in adopting the balance of payments methodology outlined in the fifth edition of the Balance of Payments Manual. Trade data are reported on a quarterly basis, but with a delay of more than one year. Balance of payments data are reported on an annual basis, currently with a more than two-year delay. However, the CBS has posted balance of payments data for 2000 on its web site. The quality of the data has been hampered by the thriving foreign exchange parallel market, which diverts substantial transactions away from the banking system. However, during the past two years the authorities have made considerable progress in collecting data on public sector debt, debt-service obligations, and arrears. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-38- APPENDIX III Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-39- APPENDIX IV Seychelles: Social and Demographic Indicators GDP (2001) Total (in million of U.S. dollars) 595.9 Per capita (in U.S. dollars) 7,338.5 Area (sq. km.) Of which : agricultural (in percent) Population characteristics (1999; in percent, unless otherwise indicated) Life expectancy at birth (years) Male Female Child death rate (aged l-4) Population under age 15 Median age (years) Education Primary school enrollment, population aged 6- 13 (2000; in percent) Pupil-to-teacher ratio (2000) 455.3 Density (1999; per sq. km.) Total 22.2 Of which : agricultural Health (1999) 72.4 67.4 78.2 2.0 26.8 26.0 Population per physician Population per hospital bed Infant mortality rate (1999; per thousand births) Access to safe water (1997 census; in percent) Urban population Rural population 88.0 14.6 Nutrition (1980-86) Per capita daily calorie supply Per capita daily protein supply (in grams) Population Total (mid-200 1) Growth (percent a year, average 1996-200 1) 81,202 1.3 773.0 760.8 773.0 181.0 10.3 90.0 80.0 2,3 17.0 49.0 Sources: Management and Information Systems Division (MISD); and World Bank. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 40 - APPENDIX V u Notice EXTERNAL RELATIONS DEPARTMENT Public Information Notice (PIN) No. 02/- FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE International Monetary Fund 700 lgth Street, NW Washington, D. C. 20431 USA IMF Concludes 2002 Article IV Consultation with Seychelles On [July 31, 20021, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded the Article IV consultation with Seychelles.’ Background Seychelles’s economic performance has deteriorated markedly since the late 1990s with estimated real GDP falling more than 15 percent from 1998 to 2001. Much of the decline in GDP can be traced to the manufacturing, construction, and distribution sectors, where a growing scarcity of foreign exchange has sharply constrained imports by the private sector. Tourism earnings have grown slowly, although revenues have increased since mid-2001 with the opening of new five-star hotels. During 1999-2001, the official retail price index rose at an annual rate of more than 6 percent, despite price controls. However, retail price inflation slowed to an annual rate of less than 4 percent during March-April 2002. The fiscal sector has been characterized by large budget deficits that have led to the accumulation of massive public debt. The deficit on consolidated government operations has equaled at least 10 percent of GDP since 1996, and reached 11-12 percent of GDP during 1999-2001. Government expenditure has averaged more than 50 percent of GDP since the early 1990s reflecting large outlays for wage, salary, and interest payments, generous social programs, and heavy spending for public works. The tax effort has remained steady at 33-35 l Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial information, and discusses with officials the country’s economic developments and policies. On return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report that forms the basis for discussion by the Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the country’s authorities. This PIN summarizes the views of the Executive Board as expressed during the [July 31, 20021 Executive Board discussion based on the staff report. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-41 - APPENDIX V percent of GDP, but non-tax revenue fell from about 11 percent of GDP through 1999 to 7-8 percent in 2000-01, reflecting smaller dividends and profit transfers from state enterprises and the Central Bank of Seychelles. Total domestic government debt has risen steadily and exceeded 120 percent of GDP at end-2001. Net credit to government accounts for almost 85 percent of domestic credit and has risen at an annual rate of more than 10 percent in recent years. The rapid growth of net credit to government has, in turn, represented the main source of monetary expansion, which averaged more than 12 percent annually during 1999-2001. Interest rates on government securities and minimum deposit rates are subject to controls, although ceilings on lending rates were eliminated in November 2001. In addition, the commercial banks are required to hold a minimum (currently 50 percent) of their assets in government securities. Most banks hold a larger share, in view of weak loan demand from private firms. Seychelles’s external sector is characterized by an extensive foreign exchange allocation system and a non-market-clearing official exchange rate, supported by administrative controls on prices and interest rates and by extensive trade restrictions. The current account balance has registered large deficits in recent years, with the deficit averaging 17 percent of GDP during 1999-2001. At end-2001, outstanding public sector debt equaled about 82 percent of GDP, including public sector arrears. Most debt is owed to commercial lenders on short-to-medium terms. Scheduled debt service on public sector obligations has mounted steadily in recent years and reached 17 percent of exports of goods and nonfactor services in 2001, of which less than 70 percent was actually paid. Debt service is scheduled to peak in 2003 at nearly 25 percent of anticipated exports of goods and nonfactor services. The official exchange rate was revalued during early 2001 and has moved little since. The real effective exchange rate, which also appreciated in 2001, has depreciated slightly since mid-2001 but remains above its level at end- 2000. During 2001, the authorities intensified existing restrictions, in an effort to ensure the availability of basic consumer goods and provide foreign exchange for government debt service and capital projects. In addition, in November 2001, the authorities established a new program to provide each citizen with foreign exchange (currently US$400 per person) for foreign travel. The state- owned Seychelles Marketing Board (SMB), which enjoys a monopoly on importing a number of basic consumer goods, appears to have increased its share of foreign exchange under the new system; meanwhile, the private sector is facing significantly greater constraints. Executive Board Assessment Public lnformafion Notices (PINS) are issued, (i) at the request of a member country, following the conclusion of the Article IV consultation for countries seeking to make known the views of the IMF to the public. This action is intended to strengthen IMF surveillance over the economic policies of member countries by increasing the transparency of the IMF’s assessment of these policies; and (ii) following policy discussions in the Executive Board at the decision of the Board. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-42- APPENDIX V Seychelles: Selected Economic Indicators 1997 1998 1999 2000 Prov. 2001 Prov. Domestic economy Real GDP Retail price index (period averages) GDP deflator External economy Exports, f.o.b I/ imports, f.o. b.2/ Current account balance (in percent of GDP) Capital and financial account balance Gross international reserves of the banking system (end of period) (in months of prospective imports, c.i.f.) External debt, including public sector arrears (in percent of GDP) Scheduled debt service (in percent of exports of goods and nonfactor services) Change in real effective exchange rate (in percent) 3/ Financial variables Total revenues, excluding grants Identified expenditures and net lending Consolidated government fiscal balance 41 Total domestic government debt 5/ Change in broad money (in percent) Interest rate (in percent) 61 (Annual percentage change) 12.2 5.7 -2.8 -5.4 -8.1 0.6 2.7 6.3 6.2 6.1 0.9 7.0 7.1 8.0 6.7 (In millions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise indicated) 115.0 123.4 -303.5 -351.6 -60.3 -100.3 -11.1 -17.6 42.4 86.2 24.8 21.1 0.7 0.6 5.0 -1.1 5.4 -0.7 145.7 194.8 -374.6 -304.1 -123.5 -44.8 -17.1 -7.5 114.4 84.4 29.8 43.2 1.0 1.1 45.7 56.1 6.3 9.6 8.6 -2.2 216.6 -415.1 -145.4 -25.5 99.0 36.6 1.0 82.2 17.7 8.8 (In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated) 2/ 45.2 44.9 46.2 42.3 42.2 56.4 58.0 59.7 58.5 53.4 -10.7 -22.7 -11.5 -18.8 -11.0 71.3 95.0 98.0 109.4 122.9 29.3 16.4 19.1 8.2 11.4 9.1 8.3 6.4 4.8 5.0 Sources: Seychelles authorities; and IMF staff estimates and projections. I/ Including reexports. 2/ Including the acquisition of aircraft and ships. 3/ Trade-weighted period averages. A negative sign signifies a depreciation 4/ Including grants. 5/ Including government securities held by the Social Security Fund. 6/ Weighted average rate on six-month deposits. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public