DOCUMENT OF INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND NOT FOR PUBLIC USE ARCHIVES ROOM IS1 l-400 0450 FOR AGENDA sM/o1/9 CONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION January 8,ZOOl To: Members of the Executive Board From: The Secretary Subject: Sierra Leone-Staff Report for the 2000 Article IV Consultation Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staff report for the 2000 Article IV consultation with Sierra Leone, which is tentatively scheduled for discussion on Monday, January 22,200l. A draft decision appears on page 23. At the time of circulation of this paper to the Board, the Secretary’s Department has not received a communication from the authorities of Sierra Leone indicating whether or not they consent to the Fund’s publication of this paper; such communication may be received after the authorities have had an opportunity to read the paper. Questions may be referred to Mr. Kakoza (ext. 365 14) and Mr.Tharkur (ext. 38539). Unless the Documents Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the WTO Secretariat on Wednesday, January 17, 2001; and to the African Development Bank, the European Commission, and the Islamic Development Bank, following its consideration by the Executive Board. Att: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public. CONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND SIERRA LEONE Staff Report for the 2000 Article IV Consultation ’ Prepared by the Staff Representative for the 2000 Article IV Consultations with Sierra Leone Approved by Anupam Basu and Anthony Boote January 8,200l Contents Page Executive Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 I. Introduction ................................................................................................................. 5 II. Background and Recent Developments.. ................................................................... .6 III. Report on the Discussions.. ...................................................................................... .12 A. Fiscal Policy.. .................................................................................................. .13 B. Monetary Policy.. .............................................................................................. 16 C. External Sector Policies and Medium-Term Outlook ...................................... 17 D. Structural Measures ......................................................................................... 18 E. Technical Assistance.. ..................................................................................... .18 F. Exchange Restrictions.. ................................................................................... .19 IV. Staff Appraisal ......................................................................................................... .20 Text Boxes 1. The Civil War Impact on the Economy. .................................................................... .7 2. Changes in Indirect Taxation.. ................................................................................. .14 3. List of Potential Structural Reform Areas, 200 l-2003 ............................................ .19 Figures 1. Effective Exchange Rate Developments, Jan. 1990-Sep. 2000 ................................ 24 2. Selected Economic Indicators, 1992-2000 .............................................................. .25 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2- Tables Contents Page 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. Quantitative Performance Benchmarks .................................................................... 26 Structural Performance Benchmarks Under the Emergency Post-Conflict Assistance Policy, 1999-2000 ......................................................... .27 Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 1996-2003 ......................................... 28 Central Government Financial Operations, 1996-200 1 ........................................... .29 Monetary Survey, December 1996-December200 1 ................................................. 30 Balance of Payments, 1996-2003 ............................................................................ .3 1 Medium-term Balance of Payments Assumptions, 1999-2003 ............................... .32 Nominal and Net Present Value (NPV) of External Debt Outstanding at End-1999.. ....................................................................................................... -. .. .33 Use of Fund Credit, January 2000-December 2002.. ............................................... .34 Appendices I. Relations with the Fund ............................................................................................ 35 II. Relations with the World Bank Group .................................................................... .38 III. Selected Social and Demographic Indicators ........................................................... 39 IV. Statistical Issues.. ..................................................................................................... .40 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3- . EXECUTIVE SUMMARY Recent Developments Despite a difficult security situation, economic developments and performance during 2000 under a program supported by the.use of Fund resources under the emergency post-conflict assistance policy have been quite satisfactory. The majority of the program benchmarks and indicative targets have been met. A modest but sustained economic recovery was recorded. Inflation fell substantially and the external gross reserves target was attained. There was a significant improvement in the operations of the foreign exchange market, following the introduction of a foreign exchange auction. Real GDP is estimated to have increased by about 3.8 percent, close to the program target, notwithstanding the delayed recovery in the agricultural sector due to the delay in implementing the peace process. Fiscal policy remained prudent. Government revenue performance substantially exceeded the program target. Tight expenditure controls kept the strong pressure on domestic spending in check. The overall budget deficit (excluding grants) rose to an estimated 2 1 percent of GDP; nevertheless, bank financing of the budget deficit was sharply reduced, thanks to increased external budgetary aid. The external current account deficit (excluding official transfers) also rose to 17 percent of GDP. The implementation of structural reforms started slowly due to administrative constraints; the pace of policy implementation picked up during the second quarter and by the end of the year the majority of the planned policy actions had been taken or were being implemented. There was delay, however, in implementing key measures in the civil service reform area. The authorities have an advanced draft of a preliminary I-PRSP. They have initiated work on a medium-term expenditure framework, and preliminary work has started on a debt sustainability analysis (DSA). Policies for the 2001 program The authorities have earned their policies for 2001 in a medium-term context, and expect that Sierra Leone would make the transition to a medium-term program that can be supported under the poverty reduction and growth facility (PRGF) during 2001. Sierra Leone’s medium-term prospects are dominated by the current weakness in the export sector, the large resources requirements for rehabilitation and reconstruction, heavy external indebtedness, and a desperate poverty situation. Restoring the peace in Sierra Leone has proved harder than initially envisaged. Nevertheless, with a firm commitment fi-om the United Nations, the United Kingdom, ECOWAS, and the international community at large, significant progress has been made, and continues to be made in sustaining the peace process, which, nevertheless, remains fragile. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4- The authorities have elaborated their policies for 2001 in the context of a medium-term framework. The policies for 200 1 strike a judicious balance between the need for continued macroeconomic stability and the urgent requirements for rehabilitation and reconstruction. The overall budget deficit (excluding grants) rises significantly in 2001 and is expected to be financed largely by external assistance, and domestic bank financing of the budget deficit is to be significantly reduced. The external current account deficit is also projected to increase and would be financed by concessional external aid. The staff proposes to continue to work with the authorities during 2001 in putting together a medium-term program that could be supported under the PRGF. Depending on a continued improvement of the security situation, negotiations on a program supported under the PRGF could be concluded by mid-2001. In the event that the security situation results in a delay in the transition to a medium-term program, further additional support to Sierra Leone could be considered under the Fund’s emergency post-conflict assistance policy. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-5- I. INTRODUCTION 1. The 2000 Article IV consultation discussions with Sierra Leone were held in Freetown during October 15-30,200O.’ The Sierra Leonean representatives included Dr. James Jonah, Minister of Finance, Dr. Kadi Sesay, Minister of Development and Economic Planning, Mr. Mohamed Swarray-Deen, Minister of Mineral Resources, and Mr. James Koroma, Governor, Bank of Sierra Leone (BSL). The mission was received by the President, His Excellency Alhaji Ahmed Tejan Kabbah. The mission also met representatives of the financial sector and nongovernmental organizations (NGOs).’ 2. On July 7, 1999, the government and the Revolutionary United Front (RUF) signed a peace agreement in LomC, Togo, followed by a cease-fire and the implementation of programs designed to sustain the peace. These programs include the disarmament, demobilization, and reintegration (DDR) program intended for ex-combatants; and the reintegration, rehabilitation, and reconstruction @RR) program aimed primarily at the displaced population. To oversee the peace process, the United Nations Security Council authorized the deployment of UN peacekeepers (UNAMSIL) in Sierra Leone. The UNAMSIL, originally 6,000 strong, was subsequently raised to its current authorized level of 12,500. 3. In early May 2000, the cease-fire was broken when the RUF rebels seized UN peacekeepers as hostages and threatened to attack Freetown. In response, the government mobilized many of the ex-combatants who had been previously disarmed. With firm support from the UN, the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the United Kingdom, and other countries, the hostages were subsequently released and the threat to Freetown averted. A fragile unofficial cease-fire generally followed in most parts of the country, although sporadic acts of violence continued to occur. The rebels continue to control a large part of the national territory, including the diamond and other mining areas. Military and diplomatic support from the United Kingdom has been a critical factor in deterring rebel attacks and in training the restructured Sierra Leone Army (SLA). On November 10,200O in Abuja, Nigeria, the government and the RUF announced a 30-day cease-fire brokered by the UN and ECOWAS. Further discussions were expected to be held later. Nevertheless, despite the cease-fire in Sierra Leone, the RUF is alleged to be heavily involved in military attacks on Guinea, which has threatened refugees in that country and provided a wider regional dimension to the Sierra Leone conflict. ’ The mission comprised Messrs. J. Kakoza (head), M. Tharkur, K. Oku-Afari, and L. Bandiera (all of AFR), Mr. D. Menchikov (MAE), and Ms. M. Lansanah Richardson (Assistant-MED). Mr. B. Walle-an MAE consultant-worked with Mr. Menchikov on bank supervision issues. ’ The mission collaborated closely with parallel missions from the World Bank (WB), the African Development Bank (AfDB), and the Department for International Development (DFID) of the United Kingdom. The mission also met with Ambassador Oluyemi Adenije, the Special Representative of the Secretary General of the United Nations in Sierra Leone. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-6- 4. The last Article IV consultation with Sierra Leone was concluded by the Executive Board on May 5, 1997. At that time, Directors welcomed the transition to democratic rule and commended the authorities for maintaining stabilization policies in the context of a difficult security situation. Since then, continuing security problems have prevented the holding of regular consultation discussions with the country. Sierra Leone is on a regular 12-month consultation cycle and accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2,3, and 4 of the Fund’s Articles of Agreement in December 1995. 5. On December 17, 1999, the Fund approved the use of Fund resources by Sierra Leone under the emergency post-conflict assistance policy in the amount of SDR 15.56 million (15 percent of quota) in support of an economic stabilization and recovery program for 2000. The program was formulated in the context of a concerted international effort to provide financial and technical assistance to support the peace process for Sierra Leone. On September 8,2000, the Executive Board approved a second tranche under the emergency post-conflict assistance policy in the amount of SDR 10.37 (10 percent of quota), following satisfactory progress under the program. This purchase raised total emergency post-conflict assistance to Sierra Leone to SDR 37.5 million (36.2 percent of quota).The World Bank has provided emergency assistance through the Community Reintegration and Rehabilitation Project (CRRP, for US$25 million) and the Economic Rehabilitation and Recovery Credit (ERRC, for US$30 million). 6. Sierra Leone’s statistical databases remain weak. Data on the national accounts and on social indicators are particularly weak, owing, in part, to the inability of the data-collecting agencies to gain access to many parts of the country. Data on prices reflect developments only in Freetown, although efforts are under way to start regular price surveys in other areas. Monetary data need to be improved to facilitate better policy analysis. Public finance statistics are generally good, and have improved significantly due to external technical assistance from the European Union (EU) and the Department for International Development (DFID) of the United Kingdom. The quality of balance of payments data is adversely affected by smuggling activity. For the macroeconomic analysis in the report, the staff has had to make estimates and adjustments to official data to fill existing shortcomings in the database. 7. Sierra Leone’s relations with the Fund and the World Bank are summarized in Appendices I and II. Selected social and demographic indicators are provided in Appendix III. Statistical issues and core statistical indicators are presented in Appendix IV. II. BACKGROUNDANDRECENTDEVELOPMENTS 8. The protracted civil war, general insecurity, and poor governance adversely affected Sierra Leone’s economic performance during the greater part of the last decade, leading to a collapse in confidence, a sustained contraction in output, and a substantial increase in poverty. After some progress in the early 199Os, reform efforts were frustrated by recurrent outbreaks of violence and political instability. As a result, during 1995-99, real GDP declined, per capita GDP and consumption fell even faster, inflation rose again, and the physical and social infrastructure was substantially destroyed (see table below). A summary of the impact of the war is provided in Box 1. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-7- Box 1. The Civil War’s Impact on the Economy’ Tbe human and material cost of the protracted civil war in Sierra Leone has been enormous. Even though a full assessment is difficult. owing to a lack of comprehensive information, available data clearly show the extensive cost in human life and material terms. Atrocities were particularly brutal during the nine month of military rule in 1997, and during and immediately after the rebel invasion of Freetown in January 1999. These periods were character&d by savage killing, mutilation, and a trademark severing of limbs of thousands of civilians, including children. The scale of destruction of life and property during the ten-year war spans all sectors, including rural settlements, educational structures and institutions, health facilities, urban dwellings, provincial administrative infrastructure, roads and bridges, and water transport systems. Between 1991 and 1999, the war claimed over 75,000 lives. The number of young children abducted by the rebels was about 4,000. In Freetown alone, about 5,000 people were reported killed. Over 2,500 villages and towns were devastated throughout the country, with more than half of the country’s 4.6 million population displaced internally or as refugees in other countries, and about 6,000 private homes destroyed or burned down during the January 1999 rebel invasion. Nationwide, an estimated 10,000 houses were damaged at a cost of US$150 million. Those living below the poverty line increased from about 80 percent in the early 1990s to 90 percent in 1999. Mainly because of occupation by rebels of the productive economic settlements since 1991, real output declined by 43 percent cumulatively to 1999. This contributed to a 28 percent decline in per capita income over the period to about USSl42 in 1999. Life expectancy at birth fell from 42 years in 1991 to 38 years in 1999, below the average of 45 years in sub-Saharan Africa. The violence perpetrated by the rebels, including abductions and rapes, has caused a marked increase in sexually transmitted diseases including HIV/AIDS. Meanwhile, overcrowding in Freetown and Kenema, as well as in refigee camps, has also increased the incidence of other communicable diseases. Between 1994 and 1999, the number of children per thousand dying before age 5 increased from 77 to 316. The large-scale population displacement and infrastructure damage has badly affected the key agricultural sector, on which many depend for a livelihood. Agricultural production declined by 38 percent from the early 1990s to 1999. With rebels continuing to occupy the major rice-growing areas in the northern region, self-sufficiency in rice, the main staple, dropped from 69 percent in 1991 to 26 percent in 1999. The inadequate food supply is indicated by the low caloric supply, estimated at I.888 per capita in 1999, compared with an average intake of 2,663 per capita in developing countries. Schools and college infrastructure and equipment were either demolished or burned down by the rebels, leading to widespread displacement of teachers and pupils in overcrowded refugee camps or towns thought to be safe. Of the 2,682 public educational institutions, over 50 percent require extensive rehabilitation or reconstruction. About 50 percent of all health care units were reportedly destroyed, including medical equipment and supplies. The telephone and electricity infrastructure in the towns that are provincial headquarters was destroyed or damaged. Rural water supply and sanitation systems were affected by either physical damage, long periods of abandonment, or contamination by dumped dead and decaying remains. In the transport sector, many feeder roads and trunk roads, including bridges and rural water transport systems, have been destroyed. Initial estimates in 1999 showed that 58 percent of agricultural infrastructure was destroyed. In October 1999, total physical damage to business, hotels, bomes, and government buildings was put at USS796 million, or 120 percent of GDP. Total private businesses losses, excluding the hotel and tourism sector, were put at US$33 million. About 80 percent of the losses occurred in Freetown alone. The unemployment situation, which was already bad, worsened as the private sector was forced to lay off about 5,141 persons in 1999 (18 percent of total labor force). lo the mining sector, rebels remain in control of the lucrative diamond fields, although fighting within the country has abated. Reflecting the large scale of illegal diamond mining and economic loss, data show official production falling from 243,000 carats in 1991 to 8,500 in 1998; meanwhile, recorded Belgian diamond imports from Sierra Leone rose from 33 1,000 carats to 770,000 carats (at a value of over $150 million) over the same period. Mainly due to continued security risks, the rutile and bauxite mines remain closed following attacks on those plants in 1995. These closures have resulted in an estimated loss of IO percent of national income, 14 percent of total employment, and 90 percent official exports. ’ Damage assessmentS are mostly based on those carried out in late 1999, and it is worth noting that the impact in nearly half of the country is still unclear since those areas are still held by rebels. Although some damage was incurred during the disturbances in May 2000, the impact was more psychological than physical. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-8- Sierra Leone: Selected Economic Indicators 1990-99 (In percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated) Average 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 Average 1990-94 1995-99 GDP capita (U.S. dollar) per 195.3 193.4 207.0 183.8 143.8 142.1 174.0 Real GDP (annual changej percentage -2.8 -10.0 5.0 -17.6 -0.8 -8.1 -6.3 Consumer prices (annual average percentage change) 65.1 26.0 23.1 14.9 35.5 34.1 26.7 Overall fiscal balance (excluding grants) I: -9.3 -9.8 -6.8 -7.5 -12.8 -14.9 -10.4 Domestic primary fiscal balance I/ I.4 -5.3 -1.6 -4.1 -3.8 -5.5 -4.1 External current account balance (excluding grants) 2/ -14.9 -10.7 -17.2 -3.2 -9.0 -8.0 -9.6 Reserves (in months of imports) I.7 3.1 2.2 2.8 3.1 2.0 2.6 Military spending 3.1 4.5 6.5 1.4 3.0 3.9 Sources: Sierra Leonean authorities; and Fund staff estimates. !I For 1990-92, &ta refer to fiscal years ended June. 2! Includes exports of unrecorded diamonds estimated from partner-country trade data. 9. Following the signing of the peace agreement in July 2000, the government, in collaboration with the staff of the Fund and the Bank, elaborated an economic recovery and rehabilitation program for 2000. The program was designed to stabilize the economic situation, in the context of coordinated efforts to implement the peace process. The program aimed at a growth rate of 4.2 percent, inflation of 15 percent by end- December 2000, and gross external reserves equivalent to 1.6 months of import cover. Under the peace process, the disarmament and reintegration of 45,000 ex-combatants were envisaged, together with the resettlement of the displaced population, estimated at about half the population of 4.7 million, in their communities. A revised macroeconomic framework was agreed, following consultation with Fund and World Bank staff and major donors in Accra in June 2000, that reflected higher expenditure requirements, which were broadly matched by higher-than-projected revenue and augmented external budgetary support. 10. In response to the improvement in economic management and prospects for peace, the economy recorded a modest recovery during 2000, whose momentum was hampered by the slow pace in implementing the peace process, which, in turn, delayed theresettlement of the displaced population and the recovery in agricultural production. The delayed recovery in agricultural output was, however, partially offset by the better-than-envisaged rebound in services, commerce, and industry, which benefited from the improved availability of foreign exchange. On this basis, real GDP is projected to rise by 3-4 percent in 2000, or close to the original program target (Table 3). Reflecting tighter financial policies, an increase in the supply of imported commodities, and the Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-9- appreciation of the exchange rate against the U.S. dollar,’ the end-period rate of inflation fell from about 35 percent in December 1999 to 2 percent by end-September 2000; it is projected to amount to no more than 10 percent by end-December 2000. Gross external reserves have moved in line with the program projections and are expected to attain the programmed level by end-December 2000. 11. Overall performance through September 2000 was generally satisfactory. The benchmarks for end-March 2000 were met, except for the one relating to the reduction in domestic arrears. Similarly, the indicative program targets for end-June were met, except for ones relating to domestic arrears and the wage bill. With respect to the latter, the wage bill target was exceeded, owing to a decision taken by the government for security reasons to put back on the payroll ex-SLA soldiers until they could be retired or absorbed in the restructured army. With respect to the former, there was increasing pressure on the government to pay off domestic arrears to suppliers in order to support the recovery in private sector activity. The indicative program targets for end-September were met, except for the one relating to net bank credit to the government, which was exceeded owing to a technical delay in the disbursement of external budgetary support. 12. Fiscal policy has been generally prudent. Revenue performance has exceeded the original 2000 program projection by 1.7 percent of GDP. This performance has been due to the surge in customs duty receipts generated by a substantial increase in imports; increased reliance on presumptive income taxes; and improvements in tax administration, including a vigorous drive to collect tax arrears. On the expenditure side, fiscal discipline has been reinforced by the implementation of a computerized expenditure monitoring and control scheme that incorporates an expenditure commitment and accounting system, and computerized payroll and pension control systems. There has been strong pressure during the year to increase outlays, reflecting (i) demands for higher allowances to civil servants to cover higher transport costs occasioned by the increase in petroleum product prices; (ii) an increase in the wage bill on account of the reinstatement of unemployed ex- SLA soldiers on the payroll; (iii) for outlays on defense and security; and (iv) transfers to educational institutions. These pressures have been partially accommodated by raising expenditure ceilings, financed by higher-than-programmed revenue and external budgetary support. 13. The implementation of the RRR programs was significantly slower than envisaged under the program, mainly owing to the refusal by the RUF to disarm; consequently, related expenditures also were substantially less than budgeted. Of the 45,000 ex-combatants targeted for reintegration under the DDR program, 24,285 (54 percent) had been demobilized by May 2000, mostly non-RUF personnel. After the disruption of the peace process by the 3 The leone appreciated significantly against the U.S. dollar, the intervention currency, following the introduction of the foreign exchange auction in February 2000 and the increase in external aid that followed. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- lo- RUF in early May, many demobilized soldiers were mobilized again, and the DDR program became inactive. As a result of the slow progress with the DDR program, substantial external financing commitments were not mobilized. The RRR program suffered from similar problems. Without disarmament by the RUF, RI-JP-controlled areas remained insecure and inaccessible to the displaced population. Similarly, capital outlays were much lower than budgeted, owing to the inaccessibility of projects in rebel-controlled areas. 14. The 2000 overall budget deficit (including grants) is estimated at 10.9 percent of GDP (2 1 .O percent, excluding grants). The implementation of the budget for 2000 has been greatly facilitated by the generous amount of external budgetary assistance obtained from donors. The total amount of grants and loans mobilized has amounted to an estimated US$85 million (13.6 percent of GDP), or substantially above the initial program projection. As a result, net bank financing is projected to be markedly reduced to about 1.6 percent of GDP (6.9 percent in 1999). 15. The growth of broad money has slowed considerably from about 41 percent in 1999 to about 21 percent in 2000 (Table 5). Credit to the private sector has risen by an estimated 16 percent. Reflecting improved confidence and declining inflation, interest rates have eased significantly, with the 91-days treasury bill rate falling from 34.7 percent at end- December 1999 to 18 percent by end-September 2000, followed broadly by market rates. The spread between deposit and treasury bill rates is still large (15-20 percent), which has allowed banks to remain highly liquid and profitable, but vulnerable to interest rate declines.4 Despite the pickup in economic activity, commercial bank lending to the private sector is still only a small proportion of bank assets (8 percent). Nonperforming loans have risen significantly to about 57 percent of gross loans, although this represented only about 4 percent of total bank assets. While banks consider their provisioning policies adequate, taking into account collateral, sharp price swings in real estate values and lengthy court procedures for debt recovery have made banks vulnerable. The new Banking Act, adopted May 3 1, provides for tighter capital adequacy requirements, at 15 percent of risk-weighted assets. Implementing regulations have, however, not yet been issued by the BSL. 16. The external current account deficit, excluding transfers, has widened to an estimated 17 percent of GDP in 2000 from 8 percent in 1999 (Table 6). The increase in the current account deficit has reflected the sharp increase in commercial as well as in donor-fmanced humanitarian and rehabilitation imports following the ending of hostilities in July 1999. The deficit also reflects the limited level of exports as r-utile and bauxite production has been suspended owing to the continuing occupation of the mining areas by the rebels. In June 2000, the UN put an embargo on imports of Sierra Leone diamonds without official certification. The certification program started in October 2000. The impact of the certification program on official diamond exports so far has been limited, as not all of the 4 Treasury bills and bonds account, on average, for about 40 percent of commercial bank assets and 49 percent of their income. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- ll- diamond-importing centers have formally announced compliance with the UN ban, and export licenses had not yet been issued.5 The external current account deficit in 2000 has been financed by an increase in grants and concessional loans, following the resumption of external balance of payments assistance. Gross reserves have increased from US$38.3 million at end-December 1999 to US$42 million (about 1.4 months of import cover) at end- December 2000. 17. There was a marked improvement in the operation of the foreign exchange market following the introduction, with technical assistance from MAE, of a foreign exchange auction in February 2000.6 As a result, market segmentation has been substantially reduced, and the spread between the official and parallel market exchange rates has narrowed from 35 percent in February 2000 to about 5-7 percent in December 2000. Commercial banks have not always complied with foreign currency exposure limits as required under the auction and prudential guidelines, leaving them vulnerable to potential adverse movements in exchange rates. The auction-determined leone exchange rate appreciated significantly (17 percent) against the U.S. dollar in nominal terms following the introduction of the foreign exchange auction; it has subsequently stabilized within a narrow band through November 2000. The appreciation has helped to revive consumption and spur the growth of commercial imports. In real effective terms, the leone has appreciated by 9 percent against a basket of its trading partners between end-December 1999 and end-October 2000 (Figure 1). 18. Although the implementation of structural measures was initially slow, the pace picked up during the second quarter; near the end of the fourth quarter, most of the measures envisaged under the 2000 program have been enacted. Because of administrative constraints, the action plans for the civil service reforms have not been fully elaborated during 2000 as envisaged. The government was able to undertake considerable capacity building with support from many donors, including the introduction of a foreign exchange auction and the extension of the expenditure control mechanisms to line ministries. Tbe implementation of the payroll and pensioners’ verification systems has identified many “ghost” workers and pensioners, leading to significant savings on the wage bill. Ministries have been resupplied with vehicles, computers, and other equipment, although these generally still remain inadequate. The government’s capacity for policymaking and planning in various ministries has been strengthened in part through the use of external technical assistance. A restructuring 5 The new arrangements for diamond exports call for the licensing of qualified exporters. Government is trying to interest many reputable diamond dealers which accounts for the delay in issuing licenses. In the meantime, licenses to export are being issued as and when diamonds are presented for certification. 6 Sierra Leone maintained a flexible exchange rate system based on an interbank foreign exchange market. However, by 1999 the interbank foreign exchange market was not operating efficiently and there were some cases of administrative foreign exchange allocation for some essential commodities. This ended with the introduction of the auction. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12- of the police and prison forces has been under way, with support from the DFID to reinforce the law enforcement function. Also, work on an interim poverty reduction strategy paper (PRSP) is expected to be completed soon. A workshop was held with support from the World Bank to discuss the plan for further privatization. Meanwhile, preparations were made for changes in the external tariff to become effective in 2001. The World Bank provided assistance to the administration of the Multidonor Trust Fund for the DDR program, as well as for the implementation of the RRR program. In addition, the World Bank assisted the authorities in elaborating a new privatization strategy. Furthermore, the Bank supported the rehabilitation of the power sector, which was at a point of near collapse. 19. Sierra Leone has a relatively heavy debt burden. As at end-December 1999, Sierra Leone’s external debt was estimated at US$1,214 million, equivalent to 178 percent of GDP. The stock of outstanding domestic debt, including debt to the domestic banking system, amounted to an estimated Le 787 billion (equivalent to US$394 million), or 59 percent of GDP. The bulk of the foreign debt is owed to multilaterals (59 percent), with the balance accounted for by bilaterals (32 percent) and the private sector (9 percent), III. REPORTONTHEDISCUSSIONS 20. Discussions took place in the context of cautious but increasing optimism that a peace process could be put back on track. These hopes were reinforced by the agreement reached between the government and the RUF on the cease-fire on November 10,2000, subsequently unofftcially extended. The return to peace should allow not only a rise in the growth rate of economic activity, but also the full-scale launching of resettlement, rehabilitation, and reconstruction activities in areas previously controlled by the rebels. On that basis, real GDP is projected to increase by 5 percent in 2001, reflecting higher output in the agricultural sector and a more broad-based recovery in other sectors. Inflation is to be contained at an average annual rate of 8 percent, while the external current account deficit is projected to rise substantially on account of higher defense outlays and reconstruction and project imports, financed by an increase in external assistance. Exports are, however, expected to remain depressed through 2002. In particular, t-utile exports are not expected to resume at least until the second half of 2002, while bauxite production is not expected to resume until after that year. Assuming that the diamond export certification program is fairly successful, the volume of diamond exports going through official channels should increase, leading to a more productive utilization of diamond export proceeds instead of financing rebel activities. Agricultural exports (coffee and cocoa) should also start going through official channels as peace returns to the country. 21.. Against this background, it was recognized that peace would bring with it increased pressure and demands on government resources, and that it would be essential in that context to maintain macroeconomic stability as a basis for orderly rehabilitation and reconstruction and as a foundation for high and sustainable economic growth over the medium term. The enormity of Sierra Leone’s social and developmental problems, however, requires a comprehensive medium-term program to enhance growth and promote poverty alleviation. A Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13- discussion with the government and donors of the authorities’ draft interim PRSP provided a useful guide to the still-evolving government strategy for fighting poverty and the major elements of structural reforms that would need to be implemented to attain the strategic objectives envisaged. The authorities considered 200 I as the first year of their medium-term program and wished to elaborate policies for that year in that context. They were hopeful that a Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF)-supported medium-term program could be put in place in 2001 and that Sierra Leone would also become eligible for assistance under the Initiative for Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC Initiative) at that time. A. Fiscal Policy 22. Over the medium term, the authorities intend to pursue policies that would raise the revenue to GDP ratio without increasing the average tax burden. On the expenditure side, under the planned medium-term expenditure framework, expenditure policies are to target increasing the share of expenditures directed at poverty alleviation and the rebuilding of the economic and social infrastructure. They expect those objectives to be facilitated by the winding down of the war, and by the anticipated access to assistance under the HIPC Initiative. 23. Consistent with the government’s commitment to fiscal prudence, the budget for 2001 is designed to maintain macroeconomic stability while promoting economic rehabilitation and reconstruction and initiating a reform of indirect taxes. The budget targets an overall deficit, excluding grants, equivalent to about 36 percent of GDP (15 percent of GDP, including grants), a primary budget deficit of 6 percent, and net bank financing of the budget deficit at 1 percent of GDP. As explained below, the sharp increase in the overall deficit in 2001 is explained by a marked increase in the budget for capital and rehabilitation outlays (up by about 12 percent of GDP), and by a onetime purchase of military equipment (5.3 percent of GDP). 24. The principal reform on the revenue side in 200 1 is the restructuring of the external tariff described in Box 2. This revenue-neutral adjustment in the tariff follows recommendations made by an FAD technical assistance report. The report recommends a reduction in the top rate from 40 percent to 30 percent, the raising of rates on selected goods subject to 5-20 percent bands to 30 percent (but exempting them from the excise duty), a reduction in the scope of excise duty in the customs tariff, and the rationalization of the sales tax and its application to services. The reform introduces many of the changes recommended but does not, for now, reduce the scope of excise duty in the tariff or extend the sales tax to services. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14- Box 2. Changes in Indirect Taxation Pre-reform indirect tax system The external tariff The existing customs tariff was introduced effective January 1, 1994 and is based on the Harmonized System of Customs Classifications. It has four ad valorem rates: 5 percent for raw materials and capital goods; 15 percent for rice and baby food; 20 percent for intermediate goods and some consumer goods; and 40 percent for final consumer goods. Import duty is based on the cost of goods plus insurance and freight (c.i.f.). Excise duty is charged at a rate of 30 percent on a broad range of imports and domestically produced goods. The base of the excise duty is the c.i.f. value plus the customs duty for imports and the ex-factory price for domestic goods. The sales tax The sales tax is payable at a single rate of 20 percent of the ex-factory price for domestic goods or c.i.f. value, plus customs duty plus excise duty, if applicable, for imports. Baby foods and capital goods are exempted from sales tax. The sales tax paid on inputs by domestic producers is creditable against sales tax payable on domestically produced goods. There is no sales tax on domestic services. The new indirect tax regime The external tariff The highest tariff rate was reduced from 40 percent to 30 percent, and codes were adjusted to eliminate inconsistencies and to raise rates previously at 5 percent to 20 percent. Hence, the new rates are 15 percent, 20 percent, and 30 percent. The special rate for rice and baby food is retained at 15 percent. The excise duty remains at the same rate. It is applied to four-wheel-drive cars over 2,000 cubic centimeters. The breadth of excise duty application is, however, not reduced as recommended in the earlier FAD report. This will be the subject of a future review. Sales tax The sales tax remains at the same rate. Sales tax will apply to domestic companies with an annual turnover of Le 300 million (US$l42,000) or more. Services remain outside the sales tax net. As a result of these changes, the average import tariff rate has declined from 25 percent to 20 percent. 25. The authorities agreed that i%rther reform of the tariff and other indirect taxes was necessary and would be continued. Furthermore, the authorities explained that they were making preparations to introduce the longer-term reforms recommended by the FAD report. These include the introduction of a unified revenue authority and the replacement of the sales tax by a value-added tax (VAT). The World Bank has provided technical assistance in the preparation of the unified revenue authority. The government plans to introduce this authority in 200 1, although the staff considered that more time was needed to make adequate Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 15- preparations. The authorities plan to request technical assistance in designing and implementing the VAT. 26. Regarding expenditures, the budget is dominated by capital outlays and defense expenditures. The capital budget includes rehabilitation projects necessary for the rapid reestablishment of administrative and social service centers in rebel-held areas. The government’s contribution to the capital budget is largely to fund these projects, as the bulk of Sierra Leone’s foreign-financed projects requires no domestic contribution. The capital budget for 2001 assumes that, with a return to peace, most of the projects previously suspended will come back on track.7 The bulk of development projects is in the power, water, health and education, and transport sectors, and for resettlement and rehabilitation. The surge in expenditure on defense is due to a onetime charge for material and equipment for capacity building in the restructured SLA. 27. The authorities had wished to grant a general wage increase of about 30 percent in light of the very low wages and salaries in the civil service and the recent erosion of real wages by inflation. However, it became clear during the discussions that, given expenditure demands and priorities, there was virtually no room for a general wage increase.8 The government, nevertheless, expressed its wish to revisit the question of a general wage increase later in the year if government revenue performed better than projected. The staff emphasized the need to expedite work on the civil service reform in order to provide a basis for wage policy over the medium term. 28. In line with its objectives of starting a broad-based poverty alleviation program, the government budget for 2001 has initiated planning within the context of a medium-term expenditure framework (MTEF), with assistance from the DFID, and targeted reforms in certain key social areas. In the education sector, the government is to introduce universal free primary education starting in January 2001, In health care, the government is to provide free 7 Of the US$105 million in foreign-financed projects included in fiscal year (FY) 2001 capital outlays, about 45 percent are financed by IDA and about 3 I percent by the EU. Bank staff were able to review and scale down IDA projects included in the 2001 budget to a more realistic level in the field. In October 2000, the World Bank Executive Board approved amendments to development credit agreements with a view to facilitating faster disbursements and raising disbursement shares to 100 percent of foreign and local expenditures. * Between 1996 and 2000, the average annual wage of civil servants increased by 66 percent from Le 977,805 (US$l,O62) per annum to Le 1,623,342 (US$738). However, this increase was eroded by inflation, which rose by 130 percent over the same period. As a result, wages and salaries are too low to attract an adequate number of highly skilled people into the civil service. This is a problem that, however, cannot fully be resolved quickly outside the context of a medium-term plan to restructure the service. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 16- consultation and drugs to all pregnant women and children under the age of 5, as well as free basic primary care to all school children. In agriculture, to support the rebuilding of farm communities, the government will provide free basic farm tools and inputs, and increase the proportion of the population with access to safe water. A plan to assist “street kids” and abandoned children is to be initiated. Finally, the government has established a modest noncontributory social safety net for the war-affected elderly. The DDR expenditures assume a significant revamping of the program intended, in part, to reduce operational costs. A review of the DDR program has been completed, and a donors’ conference on the DDR is scheduled for January 2001. The new DDR program is to be guided by the following considerations: (i) all parties must demonstrate a clear commitment to the peace process; (ii) a monitorable commitment to disarmament must be shown by all parties; (iii) the process must be less donor driven; and (iv) greater emphasis must be placed on the reintegration process. 29. Current expenditure control measures are to be continued and extended. In this connection, the government plans to link the computerized expenditure control and accounting system to more line ministries. Also, the payroll and pension verification systems will be extended to the liberated areas. Funding for these reforms, provided by the EU, is expected to be renewed soon. B. Monetary Policy and Financial Sector Issues 30. The authorities intend to maintain a tight stance of monetary policy during 2001. They were, nevertheless, concerned that the commercial banks might not provide the required increase in bank credit in support of the economic recovery. In this regard, they welcomed the recent decline in the treasury bill and other interest rates, which they hoped would encourage banks to switch from government securities to commercial loans. The fragility of the banking system, however, suggests that banks would find it prudent to continue to exercise caution. Banks need to increase their capital base not only as a bulwark against bad loans, but also because the current capital base levels severely limit the size of bank loans to large clients. The staff urged the authorities to proceed expeditiously with the issuance of new regulations and guidelines under the new Banking Act, and to strengthen bank supervision in order to enforce prudential regulations. These actions would be particularly important in enabling commercial banks to expand their private loan portfolios without aggravating their delicate financial situation. 31. The monetary program for 200 1 seeks to contain inflation while facilitating the recovery in economic activity. Broad money is projected to increase by about 13 percent, reflecting in part the strengthening of the central bank’s external reserve position. Credit to the private sector is projected to rise by about 21 percent, which would raise the credit- deposit ratio to 21 from 19 in 2000. The net domestic assets of the BSL are projected to increase by about 9 percent of beginning-period broad money. The government is working with the governments of The Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Liberia, and Nigeria to introduce a Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17- monetary union by 2002. Sierra Leone, like other prospective monetary zone countries, is far from meeting the prescribed convergence criteria. C. External Sector Policies and Medium-Term Outlook 32. The medium-term outloiik is dominated by the challenge to attain a lasting peace; the large resource requirements for rehabilitation, reconstruction, and poverty alleviation; the current weakness of the export sector; and the heavy debt burden. Key assumptions underlying the medium-term projections are provided in Table 7.9 Gross investment is projected to rise strongly to cover infrastructure needs as well the investments in mining, fishing, and other sectors. The projected investment ratios during 200 l-2003 are very ambitious, but by no means unrealistic given the large requirements for reconstruction in every sector. A large number of projects had been previously suspended, for which financing has been committed by donors for some time. With the implementation of appropriate structural reforms, growth is projected to rebound strongly, particularly in 2002 when r-utile mining and exports are expected to resume. While the recovery of exports is expected to be slow, imports are expected to rise sharply with the increase in rehabilitation and reconstruction activity. In addition, the external debt-service burden is projected to rise significantly, attaining its peak in 2003. Reflecting these trends, and the general assumptions of the most recent World Economic Outlook, the revised balance of payments projections indicate that the current account deficit (excluding official grants) will remain high, though declining, through 2003 in the range of 34-24 percent of GDP. Including official transfers, the current account deficit will lie in the range of 11-16 percent. 33. Sierra Leone, therefore, would continue to depend heavily on concessional external financing to cover the high current account deficits. The external financing gaps, before debt relief, are projected at US$290 million in 200 1, and at an average of US$45 million during 2002-03. The gap in 2001 assumes the clearance of a large stock (US$242 million) of external debt-service arrears to official bilateral creditors at the beginning of a medium-term program. If appropriate policies are maintained, the external financing gaps would be expected to be covered by donors, including those who have been reluctant to provide assistance during the ongoing hostilities. 34. An external debt sustainability (DSA) analysis is being conducted by World Bank and Fund staff.” A very preliminary analysis done by the Fund mission suggests that Sierra 9 The projections prepared by the staff remain tentative pending a full elaboration of the government’s poverty reduction strategy and the associated macroeconomic and structural measures. Substantial work remains to be done in these areas as well as on the data bases. lo Preliminary work on the DSA was initiated by AFR staff. The Bank sent a team to Freetown in October 2000 to look at the debt statistics. It is planned to start a joint Bank- Fund staff evaluation of Sierra Leone’s debt shortly. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 18- Leone’s net present value (NPV) of debt-to-exports ratio at end-1999 was in excess of 800 percent, well above the 150 percent threshold under the HIPC Initiative. At the same time, the NPV of debt-to-GDP ratio was about 125 percent, and the NPV of debt-to- government revenue ratio was 1,753 percent. The current preliminary assessment indicates a sharper deterioration in Sierra Leone’s debt sustainability compared to the analysis done in 1995, which projected a decline in the NPV of debt to exports ratio to below 200 percent by 1998. The deterioration has been due largely to the collapse of the export sector and the impact of the general decline in economic activity on government revenue. 35. A flexible exchange rate policy will be maintained in the context of a liberal trading and exchange system. The authorities plan to continue with the foreign exchange auction as the main vehicle of the flexible exchange rate policy. They agreed with the staffs view that measures should be taken to develop an interbank foreign exchange market, especially the enforcement of compliance with foreign currency exposure limits by banks. The authorities also plan to continue with external tariff reform, possibly in the context of a further restructuring of indirect taxes. The BSL plans to raise its external gross reserves to 2.2 months of import cover by 2003. D. Structural Measures 36. The authorities have been preparing, in collaboration with donors, a comprehensive set of structural and sectoral reform measures that would form the basis of a medium-term program. In many cases, these measures are part of programs whose implementation was interrupted by the civil war and are being revived. A summary of some of the key structural reforms envisaged is provided in Box 3. The key areas, apart from the DDR and RRR programs, include fiscal reform, civil service reform, privatization and regulatory reform, and cap&y building in many areas. The interim poverty reduction strategy paper, expected to be finalized in early 2001, will provide a more detailed outline of the envisaged reforms. The World Bank’s transitional support strategy will continue to support the economic recovery and medium-term development and poverty reduction. In this regard, the Bank is expected to continue to play a key aid-coordinating role, together with the DFID and the UN. The Bank’s sectoral work has been largely in the areas of energy, water, health and sanitation, and transport. The Bank plans to launch new operations in education and capacity building. E. Technical Assistance 37. In response to donors’ requests to outline Sierra Leone’s technical assistance requirements, the authorities have made a comprehensive list of their needs. This list was discussed with some donors who were in Freetown in October. The authorities’ request for technical assistance is for institution building and the provision of technical personnel and training. The main areas where assistance has been requested are in public sector management, including revenue and expenditure management, project appraisal and monitoring, poverty analysis and monitoring, collection and analysis of economic and social databases, and civil service reform. The World Bank has been, and is planning to continue, Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 19- providing technical assistance in many of these areas, including the reform of public enterprises, strengthening public sector management, poverty analysis, the establishment of the unified revenue board, and sectoral development programming. For the Fund, the main areas where assistanc.e might be requested include the Central Statistics Office and related data issues, bank supervision, foreign exchange operations, the payments system, and the reform of the indirect tax system,.including the design and establishment of the VAT. The donor community has also been requested to indicate areas in which they are willing to provide assistance. Box 3. Potential Structural Reform Areas, 2001-03 Public finance The following reforms are envisaged in this area: l Reduce tariffs (up to ECOWAS levels). l Strengthen tax administration. l Introduce unified revenue authority. l Introduce VAT. l Outline and implement civil service reform. l Establish medium-term expenditure tiework. l Undertake public expenditure review. l Plan for settlement of cross debts with public enterprises. l Plan for settlement of domestic arrears. l Improve central tender board procedures. Public enterprises With respect to public enterprises, the authorities aim to: l Develop and implement a divestiture plan; and l Improve operations of enterprises remaining in the public sector Financial system The following financial system reforms are envisaged: l Improve bank supervision. l Review foreign exchange market operations and develop an interbank foreign exchange market. a Improve the payments, particularly in the provinces. In the area of regulatory reforms, legal and judicial reforms will be undertaken to improve the climate for private investment. Natural resources management In this area, the authorities aim to . implement a certification program for diamond exporters; l strengthen the government valuation office for diamonds and other minerals (GDDO); and . implement a licensing policy for mineral exporters. F. Exchange Restrictions 38. Sierra Leone maintains an exchange restriction subject to Fund approval under Article VIII, Section 2(a) in the form of a tax clearance certificate required for payments and Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 20 - transfers for certain types of current international transactions. The authorities had wished to eliminate the requirement for a tax clearance under the recently amended Income Tax Act; however, the amendment was inadvertently omitted. They plan to effect this amendment in the coming months. IV. STAFFAPPRAISAL 39. Restoring peace in Sierra Leone has proved harder than initially envisaged. Nevertheless, with a firm commitment from the UN, the United Kingdom, ECOWAS, and the international community at large, significant progress has been and continues to be made in sustaining the peace process. The renewal of the formal cease-fire in November 2000 and the continuing discussions between the RUF and the government on more durable arrangements to sustain the peace augurs well for the future of the war-ravaged country. The war has been a major factor in the aggravation of the poverty situation in Sierra Leone, and its resolution remains an important first step in any program designed to enhance growth and to promote poverty alleviation. The peace process, however, remains fragile. The expected increase in the size of the UNAMSIL, and the growing strength and quality of the restructured Sierra Leone army could provide the stabilizing forces necessary for a long- lasting peace. 40. Despite the continuing difficult security situation, the Sierra Leonean authorities have persisted in implementing their 2000 program to stabilize the macroeconomic situation and initiate social and economic reconstruction. The objectives and targets specified under this program have been broadly attained. As a result of these efforts, the economy has begun a modest recovery after many years of sustained decline. Inflation has been sharply reduced. At the same time, the trade and exchange systems have remained liberal, and the exchange rate has stabilized, following a significant appreciation brought on by the introduction of the foreign exchange auction and an increase in official gross external reserves. The improvement in macroeconomic management has inspired a cautious recovery in confidence that, in turn, has helped to sustain the economic upturn in spite of a fragile security situation. Measures have also been taken to enhance capacity building in several areas. These efforts will be continued. 41. The authorities have sought to elaborate their policies for 2001 in the context of a medium-term framework. In this regard, they have produced a preliminary draft of an interim PRSP. With technical assistance from the United Kingdom, they have initiated the development of an MTEF. They have also worked closely with the Fund and Bank staff on the debt sustainability study under way. 42. Peace, when it comes, should usher in a period of great opportunities that will have to be managed skillfi.tlly. The prospects for peace and the desperate social situation will no doubt raise expectations that could be difficult to satisfy, such as the demand for higher wages in the public sector, for an expeditious restoration of essential services, and for greater employment opportunities. The authorities are aware that the maintenance of macroeconomic Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2l- stability and the implementation of appropriate structural reforms are the best way to address these expectations. 43. In this context, the policies adopted by the authorities for 200 1 strike a judicious balance between the requirements for macroeconomic stability and the urgent needs of economic and social rehabilitation and reconstruction. The budget deficit (excluding grants) for 2001 is projected to rise markedly, reflecting the substantial increase in capital outlays and a one-off expenditure on defense, which will almost entirely be financed by foreign grants and concessional loans. Consequently, the budget provides for a reduction in net bank financing of the budget deficit to about 1 percent of GDP in 2001 from 1.6 percent ,in 2000. 44. Nevertheless, there are considerable risks to the successful execution of the budget, concerning which the authorities are urged to remain vigilant, The main risk relates primarily to the general uncertainty in which the budget was elaborated. Outlays related to defense and army restructuring, and to the administrative costs of restoring government control to rebel- held areas, were difficult to assess and could be difficult to keep within budgeted amounts. The authorities are encouraged to continue to rely on firm expenditure controls and to resist pressure for a general wage and salary increase until the plan for civil service reforms is clearly mapped out and the prospects for government revenue and external financing more firmly established. 45. Monetary policy would need to be maintained appropriately tight to contain inflation, especially as the prospects for economic recovery are likely to increase the demand for bank credit. As the banking system remains fragile, urgent measures need to be taken to strengthen bank supervision and enforce prudential regulations and guidelines, including the new capitalization requirements and limits on foreign currency exposure. The Bank of Sierra Leone is urged to act expeditiously in issuing new regulations and guidelines implementing the new Banking Act. Without these measures, the health of the banking system could deteriorate further as banks increase lending to the private sector. 46. The medium-term economic outlook would improve because of the peace prospects. Nevertheless, the near-term external prospects remain particularly difficult: exports are expected to recover only slowly, but imports are projected to surge as a result of the envisaged rehabilitation and reconstruction activity. Extemal,policies should continue to be centered on the maintenance of a flexible exchange rate policy and a liberal trade and payments system. The appreciation of the exchange rate during 2000 partially reversed the depreciation that occurred during war-affected 1999, and is fueled in part by large official and private inflows. Nevertheless, the authorities would need to calibrate their intervention via the foreign exchange auction so as to avoid a further appreciation of the Leone which appears unwarranted in light of the economy’s long-term export prospects. Sierra Leone faces difficult challenges ahead, including a critical poverty situation, enormous requirements for the reconstruction of the social and physical infrastructure, and a heavy debt-service burden. These challenges can be addressed only in the context of the medium- term poverty alleviation and growth enhancement program being prepared by the authorities. The staff commends the authorities for the progress made in advancing the interim PRSP and in developing appropriate structural reforms and poverty alleviation strategies. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 22 - 47. The staff has worked closely’with the authorities in the preparations for Sierra Leone’s transition to a medium-term program that could be supported under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF). Although more work remains to be done, the staff believes that sufficient progress has been made by Sierra Leone in stabilizing the economic situation and in capacity building to continue discussions on a medium-term program. The staff will continue to work closely with the authorities and other donors to assist in articulating a comprehensive medium-term program that could be supported by a PRGF arrangement and in putting in place the institutional capacity needed to implement such a program. The authorities have been working hard to make this transition and other donors have generally been moving in the same direction. Given the country’s indebtedness, the staff will also continue with the DSA and start preparation of a preliminary HIPC document, which, all being well, could perhaps be submitted for discussion by the Bank and Fund Boards at the same time as a possible PRGF arrangement. 48. The staff proposes to continue during the first half of 2001 negotiations on a medium- term program that could be supported by a PRGF arrangement. Provided there is sufficient progress in restoring peace and government control over key areas of the country (such as diamond mining areas) and in rebuilding institutional and policy implementation capacity, these negotiations may be concluded by mid-2001. The staff believes that, given the poverty levels now existing in Sierra Leone and the high levels of domestic and external debt that the country has accumulated, and assuming the above conditions are met and the authorities propose a strong medium-term program, the PRGF is the most appropriate vehicle for Fund support to Sierra Leone. The World Bank Executive Board approved on December 14 a new transitional support strategy for Sierra Leone for the following 12 months. This strategy will, first, continue to support economic recovery and reconstruction through a follow-up to the ERRC. Second, the strategy aims to shift support to longer-term development issues and objectives, if the security situation and economic performance continue to improve. 49. In the event that the above-mentioned progress, the restoration of territorial control, and capacity building is delayed or inadequate, an alternative option for continued Fund support to Sierra Leone could be granting the country further access to Fund resources under the emergency post-conflict assistance policy. Total Fund assistance to Sierra Leone under this policy now stands at SDR 37.5 million (36.2 percent of quota); consideration could be given to raising the amount outstanding under this policy to the maximum amount allowable of 50 percent of quota which would provide an additional SDR 14.3 million. 50. The staff urges the authorities to take steps to improve their databases, so as to permit a more accurate assessment and monitoring of economic and social developments. To this end, the authorities would require substantial technical assistance from the Fund and other donors. 51. In view of the authorities’ intention to eliminate the current restriction under Article VIII, Section 2(a), the staff recommends approval of the retention of this restriction until January 3 I, 2002. 52. The next Article IV consultation with Sierra Leone is to be held on the regular 12-month cycle. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 23 - Proposed Decision 1. The Fund takes this decision relating to Sierra Leone’s exchange measures subject to Article VIII, Section 2(a) in light of the 2000 Article IV consultation with Sierra Leone conducted under Decision No. 5392-(77/63), adopted April 29, 1977, as amended (Surveillance over Exchange Rate Policies). 2. Sierra Leone maintains an exchange restriction subject to Fund approval under Article VIII, Section 2(a) in the form of a tax clearance certificate required for payments and transfers for certain types of current international transactions. In view of Sierra Leone’s intention to eliminate this exchange restriction, the Fund grants approval of the retention of this measure until January 3 1,2002. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public18( 16E 14c 12c 1oa 80 60 40 20 0 Figure 1. Sierra Leone: Effective Exchange Rate Developments, January 1990 - October 2000 (Index, 1990=100) Real effective Nominal effective exchange rate I I I , 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 Source: IMF, Information Notice System. . Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public75 65 55 45 35 25 15 5 -5 -15 -25 0 -2 -4 -6 -8 -10 -12 -16 -18 -20 - 25 - Figure 2. Sierra Leone: Selected Economic Indicators, 1992-2000 Output and Prices Consmner price index Consmner price index a a _- -- .- . .-- . ’ ’ \ . ‘. ’ ’ . . ’ ’ ’ \ ’ \ ‘. . ‘. . ’ ’ ’ ’ . ” - . ” - ,.’ ,.’ ’ ’ -.; -.; ’ ’ ’ ’ . . . ’ . ’ * .” * .” Real GDP Real GDP L ’ L ’ \ ’ \ ’ 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 Balance of Payments z (In percent of GDP) ” P ’ . / Overall balance / ’ / Current account balance . (including official transfers) --..-.._ ---- I... balance (excluding official \ transfers) 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 40 30 20 10 0 -10 -20 -30 150 100 50 0 -50 -100 Fiscal Developments (In percent of GDP) / / / Total expenditure Total expenditure J’ J’ --- --- /- /- ----. ----. . . A ” A ” A\~,$Z+c revenue ,,/ A\~,$Z+c revenue ,,/ ‘./ ‘./ ,,’ ,,’ --... --... Domestic pv balance Domestic pv balance *. I , ‘-. -. : -.__ -.- . . . . - -._ _.” ’ 11 --._ ,.--.. --. --.‘. . -. I *-._ Overall balance : -. . (including grants) /’ -. Overall balance . (excluding grants) 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 Monetary Developments l/ (Percent change) r:,FJet domestic assets / ‘\ Broad money \ , r \ i ‘\ ;J’. \ ,...’ I\ \ . . \ *’ . . . “; A I \ \ 0\ ‘<./ \ ‘0 ’ \ f4;, \ I \ 1 ‘1: \ I Net foreign \ ! ‘1 1 I assets ‘\ / Net credit tothe ‘/ ’ government \ / ‘I Sources: Sierra Leonean authorities; and staff estimates and projections. l! In percent of broad money at the beginning of the period. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public74.RIl 74.817 82.810 I5.W 6.846 .3O,JoO lo.900 24.95, 23,949 29.432 2.026 2.026 3.181 wwo 28,oW 21.346 lR.662 79.520 131 IO3.9oS 121 11.516 3,362 .,4.379 12, 8.289 12.346 JA.263 ID 10.272 8.900 8.900 -59.078 16.187 4.670 -50.885 -89,471 -89.473 46.131 -23.51 I .23.51 I -7.140 -3R.MR -38.068 Il.055 -50.808 -4I.Od2 4M2 -22.171 61.251 -98.34a -99,630 -7.978 -7.978 -8.873 -100 -7w .932 .2,200 -2.200 -1.519 -2,200 -2.851 -2.851 426 -2.2cm -16.052 .17.086 JJ -21 I -5.2 -10, 46 .I 5 63 -59 141 -5.7 -7 4 -8 3 -183 -3 2 00 00 0.0 0” 0.0 00 84.812 85.819 73,235 73.032 I 13.908 58,028 5 I.026 51.026 59.180 19.289 15,810 21.126 21,126 4,406 94.619 42.158 29,wo 29.900 54,774 0.0 00 00 00 0.0 u.0 26.155 26.155 37.116 23.641 23,642 21.319 00 00 51.132 43,815 102.344 42.231 60.093 00 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 00 0.” 00 00 0.0 00 0.0 -9 0 .2 3 0.0 “0 0.0 0.0 15.132 79.679 81.060 107.701 107.702 119,007 I i6.975 I37.097 43.835 46.44 I 64,027 7 I.680 11.680 70.529 8WlO 96,919 102.011 97.994 14,.396 149.870 88.580 97.118 7 13.973 244.*35 42.251 25,344 61.37, 38.354 0 6.662 67.216 67.232 5v.8lMl ,2,6SO 84.020 111.516 88.580 90.526 fA6.757 177,403 3.4 00 0.0 155226 93,985 I 192.734 12.462 1110.272 I Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 27 - Table 2. Sierra Leone:-Structural Performance Benchmarks Under the Emergency Post-Conflict Assistance Policy, 1999-2000 Measures Test Dates Status Implementation of a new method of calculating the official exchange rate at the November 30, 1999 Implemented November Bank of Sierra Leone (BSL) 8, 1999 Reactivation of the Net Domestic Financing Committee h’ovember 30, 1999 Implemented November 19,1999 Reaching of an agreement with public enterprises, including on timetables for the settlement of cross debts, to regularize financial relations with the government and public enterprises December 31, 1999 In progress Ii Completion of a study on tax and duty exemptions Passage of a new Banking Act by parliament December 3 I, 1999 In 21 progress December 3 1, 1999 Implemented February 16.2000 Provision of income and expenditure and balance sheets of public enterprises on Continuous from a quarterly basis December 1999 Passage by parliament of the budget for 2000 Introduction of foreign exchange auctions at the BSL January 3 1.2000 January 1,200O April 30,200O Passage by parliament of a new Income Tax Act Completion of the verification of pensioners June 30,200O Ongoing 3/ Implemented April 28, 2000 Implemented February 9,200o Implemented April 6, 2000 41 In progress 51 Adoption of a plan of action and targets for civil service reform September 30,200O Rationalization of the indirect tax system and harmonization of the tariff system January 1,200 I In progress 61 I! Cross-debt positions between the government and parastatals have been prepared. A three-year settlement plan has been proposed, and a final agreement between parties is awaiting cabinet approval. 2i A Department for International Development (DFID) consultant has submitted a final report, and duty exemptions with respect to nongovernmental organizations are also being addressed in line with the consultant’s recommendations. 31 Twelve public enterprises have submitted their returns, and thirteen enterprises have been identified for the monitoring of financial and performance indicators. 41 The tax clearance certificate required for payments of certain international transactions has not been removed. 5/ The European Commission is providing assistance. 6/ An IMF FAD mission provided technical assistance in 1998. Owing to the security setbacks, a follow-up FAD mission scheduled for 2000 to develop a revenue-neutral package has been postponed. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 28 - Table 3. Sierra Leone: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators. 1996-2003 I996 1997 1998 I999 2000 2001 2002 2003 ACI. ACL. Rev. Prog Rd. Est. Proj. hOJ PrOJ. lncomc and expenditure Real GDP GDP deflator Nomd GDP Consumer prices (end of period) Consumer prices (annual aucragc) 5.0 -176 -0.8 -a. I 3.0 3.8 5.0 5.5 5.5 26.3 16.5 27.0 25.0 10.0 6. I 8.0 5.0 5.0 32.6 -3.8 26.0 14 9 13.3 10.0 13 4 I 0.8 10.8 6.4 66.9 -5.7 36.7 IO.0 100 a0 5.0 5.0 23.1 I4 9 35.5 34 I 10.0 50 a.0 5.0 5.0 Money and credil Broad money (mcludmg foreign currency deposits) 28.3 47.1 Il.3 (excludmg foreign currency deposits) il.8 55.9 4.3 Velocity (level) 12.0 7.4 8.9 Domestic credit li 39.4 57.5 17.6 Govemmenr 11 33.2 50.9 16.7 Private secmr I/ 62 6.2 I2 (annual percentage change) 22.8 24 6 5.8 Reserve money 17.7 109.0 -20.4 lnlcresl me 2I 20.0 a.8 34.4 Extemal sector Exports (U.S. dollan) 3.2 -160 -26 2 lmpow (U.S. dollars) 53.1 -56. I 49 terms of trade (- deterioration) -3.2 -1.0 49 Real efI?ct~vc exchmge rate (- depreciation). end-period 11.7 24.3 -27.7 Cansumplton Government Private 3/ Gross investment Governmen! Private Gross nal~onal savmg Gross domestic savmg Government Private Currenl account balance. mcluding oflicial lrsnsfers Current account balance. excludingoflicial transfers Goods and nonfactor services (net) Unxequ~ti private transfers and factor ~rwccs (net) 103 7 1043 101.9 III.9 90 a.9 92 a 95.3 93.0 II 0 .2.4 5.3 33 1.5 4.9 7.7 -3 9 0.4 0.2 -3 J -1.0 -3 7 -4 3 -1.9 -08 -3.6 -1.6 -2 9 -0.7 -0.3 -108 -1.0 -6.3 -17.2 -3.2 -9. I -14.7 -I 9 -7.2 -2.5 -1.3 -1.9 Overall balance of payments Govcmmcntrcvcnuc 4i Total expenditure and nn lending 4/ Of which : current crpcndilurc 41 Overall fiscal balance 4/ (commitment basis, cxcludmg grants) (commitrwnr basis, mcludmg grants) Domcs”c pmnary fiscal balance 41 5’ Dom. pmn. bal. excl. exp on md. eqwp Domcsuc linancing 41 External debt 6/ -2.9 -3.6 -7.1 IO.1 5.4 ?3 16.9 13.0 20.1 13.6 II.5 15.2 .6.8 -7.5 -5.1 -7.0 -1.6 -4.1 2.7 4.3 I la.5 134.6 -12.8 .lO.4 -3.8 4.0 175.7 Debt service due 7: 38.3 30.7 External interest due 7; 12.7 8.7 (In pacmr oferpons of goods and nonfactor services) 47.8 58.3 55.0 58.2 15.7 18.0 16.5 14.9 (In millions of U.S. dollars. unless otherwise mdicaIcd) Hcmorandum stems. External curem account balance. cxcludmg 0lXcial mmnsfers Gross international reserves (I” months of Imports) 8: GDP (billloos of leoncs) -161.6 26.8 2.2 867. I -27.5 38.5 2.8 834.5 981 9 -608 -53 0 -117.4 -1122 43.5 38 3 36.G 42.0 3.1 20 I.5 I4 2.0 1,051 3 I ,207.7 1.368.3 1.330 3 1,507.g I.565 4 l,al9.3 2200.0 2.200.0 Exchange rue (Imncs per U.S. dollar) 920 7 (Annual percentage change. unless othcrww indxalcd) 40 8 La.3 20 7 47.5 14.4 I I.0 6.9 6.9 6.9 56.2 16.5 13.1 5g.a 14.1 IO.8 -2.6 2.2 2.1 -12.6 17.6 16.4 39.0 17.1 6. I 34.7 19.0 21.0 -5.6 21.6 -16.9 68.0 -4.0 -1.1 2.1 2.8 (in ptrccni of GDP) 105.7 108.5 11.5 I49 94.3 93.6 0.3 7.8 2.4 6.6 -2.1 1.3 -2.5 0.8 -5.7 -8.5 -4.4 -4.8 -1.3 -3.6 -2.8 -7.1 -8.0 -18.9 -6.0 -16 3 -2.0 -2.6 -5.7 -2.2 7.1 100 22.0 35 2 19.5 27 9 -14.9 -9.5 -5.5 7.4 178.2 .I5 2 -21 .o -36.2 -28.6 -24. I -13.5 -10.9 -15.2 -11.1 -9.2 -7.2 -7.5 -11.5 -4.7 -3.9 -7.2 -6 4 -6. I -4.7 -3 9 2.0 1.6 I.0 0.6 0.2 281.7 206.6 231.2 171.3 147.0 15.1 58.0 -8.9 9.0 109.0 113.2 IOB.0 103.7 16.7 21.0 14.9 14.2 92.3 92.2 93. I 89.5 a.0 24.3 21.5 21.6 6.3 17.9 18.5 17.1 1.7 6.4 3.0 4.5 -0.8 6.1 7.8 9.4 -9 0 -13.2 -8.0 -3.7 -5. I -8.7 -2.5 -1.8 -3.9 -4.5 -5 5 -1.9 -8.0 -15.8 .l2.l -11.0 -16.9 -34.2 -27.7 -24 6 -17.0 -32.7 -26.3 -23.0 -1.4 -1.5 -1.5 -1.6 -1.4 11.7 32.6 25.6 -0.2 -0.4 1.5 12.3 12.4 12.4 48.6 41.0 36.5 30. I 22.3 19.3 -245 3 60.0 12.6 7.7 I4 5 13.0 10.4 II0 6.9 6.9 6.9 88 6.3 3.4 6.3 3.5 I.3 2.5 2.8 2.1 20.9 21.3 14.3 12.9 10.5 105 15.0 13.0 130 9.2 16.3 19.7 67.8 -4.7 3.7 2.9 2.6 I.1 58.1 13.7 58.7 II.8 57.4 9.5 -210.4 64.0 2.1 I ,670.r -197.6 67.0 2.2 1,850.4 Sources: Sierra Leoncan authorities; and staff allmales and projccuons. I/ Changes u a ptr+tagc of bcgmnmg-of-period money stock (mcludiog forelgn currency deports). 21 Treasury bill rate (end of palod) 3! For 2001, prwatc investment rellccts planned direct invslmcnt of USS40 million in utile mining. 4: Cslendar-year dau. 5! Domesuc revenue minus total expendlure and net iendmg, excluding mtcresl paymenls and exmally tioanced capital expcndnure and DDR program 6: lncludcs arresrs. 7: Before debt rebel. &’ In months of mpor~~ of goods and services of subsequent year. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 29. -. Table 4. Sierra Leone: Central Government Financial Operations, 1996-2001 II 1996 1997 I998 1999 .2ooa 2000 Prov. OurNm 2001 Act. Act. Act. PrOV. Rev. Rag. Proj. Total revenue and grants 101.953 Domestic ICYen”e 87.334 Income Tax Department 14,380 Customs and Exclsc Department 63.219 Mines Department I SJ7 Other departments 5,054 Road user charges 3,124 Grants 14,619 Total expenditure and net lending Recurrent cxpcnditurc Wages and salaries Goods and services Security-related expenditures Defense ECOMOG 2: Democrabzation and DDR 31 Other Grants to educational instlNtions Transfer to Road Fund Socially orimted outlays (microcredit) herest payments DomestIc Foreign 146.33 I 117,581 40,090 24.90 1 26,482 17,119 341 9.022 . 3,306 3,124 1,321 18,357 9,419 8,938 Capital expenditure and net lending Development expendiNre Foreign Loans Grants Domestic Ofwhlch : emergency relief to education Lending minus repayments 28,750 28,750 26,607 23,875 2,732 2,143 0 . Overall balance (commitment basis) Excluding grants Including grants -58,997 -44.378 Total financing Foreign Borrowing Project Program Amortization Debt relief Domestic Bank Nonbank Privatlzation receipts Change in arrears Domestic Foreign Unaccounted Financing gap 4! Memorandum items: 44,378 32.413 4 1,695 23,875 17,820 -12.888 3,606 23,543 20.559 2,984 1.611 -13.189 -13.189 0 0 0 Nominal GDP Recurrent expendlrures on: Education Health Defense 867,073 15.944 8.139 30,509 Domestic revenue Total expenditure and net lending Overall tiscal balance (commitment basis) Including grants . Excluding grants 10.1 16.9 Domestic primary balance 5i Domestic prim. bal. (excl. cxp. on mil. equip.) 6/ Current balance -5.1 -6.8 -1.6 -3.5 50,003 45,333 5,970 33.124 0 6,239 4,670 108,223 96.037 34,439 27.588 13.188 13,136 52 0 3,134 55 17,633 9.047 8.586 12.186 12,186 11.213 11,138 75 973 0 -62.890 -58.221 58.221 I 1,702 22,932 11.138 11,794 -11,229 35,752 43,829 -8,077 1.513 7,885 -3.210 I 1,095 1,368 0 834,499 5.4 13.0 -7.0 -7.5 -4. I -Q.‘l 102,286 151.210 297,400 65.000 128,867 186,499 288,970 502,929 77.199 85.819 137.097 37.1 I7 78,427 119,007 155,226 185.841 13.32 1 22.145 24,147 7,402 18,968 31.%5 40,394 45.438 54,383 53,871 98.2 17 24,662 48.781 73,l I5 98,066 123,418 I.551 492 1.410 920 1,098 1,206 1,362 2.244 5,083 6,494 8,945 2.696 7,352 9.497 10.566 8,872 2,860 2.817 4,378 I.437 2,228 3,224 4,838 5,869 25,087 65.391 160,304 27.883 50.44 1 67,492 133,745 317,088 211,524 159,384 50,753 32,853 14,200 7,429 4,370 2,40 1 7.428 2,860 646 50,644 22,822 27,822 265,604 48 I.740 85,471 172.121 276,789 434,338 732.287 235.939 381,328 73,027 143,654 22 1,995 340, I83 454,012 73.032 96,919 U 21,319 46.450 70,529 93,985 95.3 18 22.865 60,856 I 1,068 23.312 36,923 65,855 82,264 55.620 114,872 12,223 2478 12 38.367 76,995 162,797 30.672 28,190 4,734 10.912 21,419 45.083 116,578 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 15.870 73.682 5,206 9.777 10.1 I2 18,912 29.532 9.078 13.000 2,283 4,123 6,836 13.000 16.687 8.87 I I 1,523 2,125 4.250 7,142 11.524 13,219 2.8 I7 4,378 1,437 2.708 3.513 4,838 5.869 2.495 2,000 0 0 139 2,000 3.000 70,238 90,780 24,854 42,062 65,382 84,986 91.545 43.933 54,700 13,409 25,573 38,72 I 51,530 53,140 26.305 36,080 11,445 16,489 26,66 I 33,456 38,405 52,139 29.666 100,412 12,444 28.446 54.794 94,155 273,275 51,812 28,967 89,901 11.512 24.980 44,017 83.644 270,165 43,376 27.547 81.841 Il.155 22,852 40,825 75.585 255,238 40,745 19,654 60,655 8.215 17.151 34,337 56,337 161,483 2,153 I 7,893 21,186 2,940 5.70 I 6,488 19,248 93,754 8,437 1,420 8,060 357 2,128 3,192 8,059 14.927 6,757 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 327 698 IO,51 I 932 3,486 10,777 IO,51 1 3,110 -134.325 -I 79,786 -344,643 -48354 -109,238 -I 14,395 -184,340 -20,471 109,238 114.395 184,340 20.47 1 14,323 -14.674 120,546 25.903 50,269 20, I84 166,172 42,452 40,745 19,654 76.495 8.215 9,524 530 89.677 34.237 -35.946 -34,837 -45,626 - 16,549 0 0 0 0 41.561 88.807 28,000 -23.3 13 21.129 82,810 28,000 -30,500 20.432 5.991 0 7,187 150 176 2,020 0 36.293 33,799 33,774 22.509 -6,879 -8,873 - 16.052 -932 43.172 42,672 49,826 23,441 16.91 1 6,287 0 0 0 0 0 -4,627 -93.694 -157,782 -27931 I2 -546,446 43.253 -90,290 -145,368 -229,358 43,253 90.290 145,368 229,358 30,745 37,374 92.601 175,510 51.388 68,574 134.574 230,732 17,151 34,337 56,337 161,483 34,237 34,237 78,237 69,249 -20,643 -3 1,200 -41.973 -55,222 0 0 0 0 -3,999 21,544 2 1.346 15,000 -23,950 3,187 21.346 I s,ooil 19.95 1 18.357 0 0 22 22 22 2.020 25,916 38,339 31,399 -563,072 -554 -1,779 - 17.086 -10,000 26,470 40,l I8 48.485 -553,072 0 0 0 0 -9,430 -6,988 0 599.899 I .05 I.335 1.207.72 1 1.368,348 1.447.212 1,368,348 1.368.348 1.507.921 31.128 44,301 8.670 6,787 14.695 36,626 . . 8.5 I .330,3 19 11.7 . . . 7.3 20.1 -10.4 -I2.8 -3.8 -7.8 (In percent of GDP) 7.1 10.0 2.6 22.0 35.2 5.9 -9.5 -13.5 -1.4 -14.9 -25.2 -3.3 -5.5 -7.2 -0.5 -12.4 -17.8 -2.5 5.6 12.2 12.3 48.6 -3.1 -6.7 -1.4 . -4.6 19.9 32.6 -6.5 -10.9 -II.3 -21.0 -3.0 -7.5 -6.4 -7.4 -13.9 -15.2 -36.2 -11.5 -6.1 -17.8 (In millions of leones. unless otherwise indicated) DomestIc bank financmg 2.4 5.3 2.0 6.9 2.0 -2.1 -1.6 0.4 Sources: Sierra Leonean authorities; and staff estlmatcs and projections. II lncludcs the DDR program. which LS managed outside the budget by a private firm hind by the DDR donors. 21 Economic Community of West African States Monitoring Gmup. 3/ Disarmament, demobilisation. and reintegration. 4! For the 2001 program, the financing gap includes US6242 million of arrears and a residual gap of USS6.71 million. S/ Domestic revenue minus total expenditure and net lending. excluding interest payments and externally financed capital expenditure and the DDR program. 6/ This excludes defense expenditure of Le 9.0 billion and 80.5 billion for 2000 and 2001. funded from grants of US$6.73 million and USa33.5 million. respectively. 1.6 1.0 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 30 - Table 5. Sierra Leone: Monetary Survey. December 1996.Decembcr ZOOI (In millions of Icones. unless othcwx indicated) I996 1993 Dec. Da: 1998 DCC. Act. 1999 DCC Act. March JUIX Act Acl. 2000 Sep Rev Prog. Act. Dec. Rev. prog. Prcl. 2001 DCC. Proj. Monelary swcy Net fonlgn assets -159.031 -169.571 -~07.598 -318.323 -289.006 -261,630 -282,650 -276,713 Net domestic assets 245.095 296.205 348,496 516.690 Domcstlc credit 451.663 501.145 523.372 602,619 Claims on government (net) 429,695 473,524 494,653 11 577.463 Claims on nontimaxial public enterpnscs 233 538 76 I34 Claims on private rector 21.736 27.083 28,644 25.022 Other items (net) -206,568 -204,940 -174.876 .85,929 Broad money 86.064 126,633 140,898 198,367 MOnCY 53.208 83.612 89,744 134,078 QUUI money 32,856 43,02 I 51.155 64,288 -177.110 .I90.423 -238,153 -359.176 -330,850 -297,849 27.065 53.047 83.092 97,589 96.587 77,662 -204,175 -243,470 -321,245 456.765 -427.437 -375,510 Net domestic assets Claims on govcmmat (net) Claims on nonfinanaal public enterprises Claims on prwaw sector Claims on dcposrt money banks Other items (net) 220,658 281.432 310,568 413.326 466.404 458,552 II 203 203 13 1.031 2.577 1,749 I.173 495 I.049 -195,076 -188.246 -150.794 43,548 91.009 72.415 36.186 57,260 61.491 5,956 31.891 8,546 1,406 1,857 2,378 459.803 519362 66 788 I.336 -62,148 Rcsclve money Currency ourslde banks Reserves of deposit money banks Other IW.621 82,815 14.348 3,464 Dcposlt money banks Net foreign assets Foreign assets Fowgn liabdities 18.079 20.852 30.555 18,079 20.852 30,555 0 0 0 29.581 41,267 46,215 16,369 7,121 36,102 30 335 63 20,705 24,506 26.895 5.926 26240 8.088 .13.448 - 16.934 -24.932 47,660 62,119 76,770 34,042 48.419 53.692 13,618 13,701 23,078 40,852 40,852 0 Net domcstzc ass& Claims on govcmmnt (net) Claims on nontinanc~al public enlerprixs Clmms on prwate sector RCSCWCS Other items (net) 65,633 58.102 68 24,234 23229 40,ooo Total dcporlts Local currency dcporils Foreign curxncy deposits 106.486 81,912 24,534 Memorandum items Nominal GDP Annual percentage cbqcs Claims on private sector Broad money Raervc money Contributron to growth of broad money (in percent of beginnmg-of-penod M2) Net foreign assets Net domestic asscu Clams on gowmmenl (net) ClSlms on pnvacc sector Broad money/reserve money 41 Velocity (GDP/broad money) 41 Rcscrvesldeposlts (in percent) 4/ 867.073 834,499 I .05 I.335 22.8 24.6 5.8 28.3 47.1 Il.3 17.7 109.0 -20.4 I v207.72 I 1.447.212 1.368.348 1,368,348 1.330.3 I9 -12.6 1.0 13.5 11.1 4.3 40.8 15.7 13.0 13.5 14.7 39.0 -18.4 0.2 20.5 I.9 -28.6 -12.2 -30.0 -78.6 14.8 28.6 56.9 59.4 41.3 II94 -20.7 -29.8 33.2 509 16.7 58.8 13.6 55.6 6.2 6.2 1.2 -2.6 I I I .2 1.7 1.2 I.6 1.7 1.7 I.7 12.0 7.4 8.9 69 8.8 8.2 17.5 65.9 15.9 17.5 12.1 15.6 475.636 457.577 632,074 715,590 604,426 687,799 365 425 27,283 27,366 -156.438 -258,013 186.630 194,947 128.633 130.280 57,957 63,668 481.616 477.001 743.1 I7 742.172 714,273 714,936 445 579 28.398 26,658 -261.500 -265,171 198,966 201.118 137.717 125.690 64.93 1 75,428 427,657 397,045 548,565 627,704 I3 I3 1.295 1,564 495 1,245 -122.71 I -233,482 96,807 99,196 84,352 84,537 9,093 12,188 2.961 2,471 -3 18.870 -324.693 60.176 64.529 -379,046 -389222 425,717 415.061 656,376 648.165 13 I3 I.564 1266 1.245 1,161 -233,482 -235.544 106,847 90.3367 94.939 78,472 8,924 9,032 2,984 2,863 41.844 36.219 36,219 47.980 41,844 36,219 36.219 47,980 0 0 0 0 56,175 69.969 62,022 67,602 55.861 60,094 57.897 66,771 352 412 432 566 25,988 25.802 26,834 25.392 11,340 15.725 8.924 9,795 -37.365 -32,064 -32,064 -34.922 98.019 105,188 98.241 116,412 74,953 78,060 77.597 80,537 23.067 27,128 27,128 35,875 18.0 21.0 -17.7 -20 0 1.3 1.3 I.6 8.0 11.5 24.7 32.4 3.8 -6.4 -11.7 8.8 69.3 31 14.1 10.8 31 6.3 0.8 2.2 2.1 2.5 I.8 1.7 I .8 I.8 8.1 6.9 6.9 6.9 II.2 13.8 12.6 12.6 -269241 -254.143 -245.163 503.945 493,559 514.643 769.647 762.864 783.948 739.747 733,093 748,093 466 636 636 29,433 29.135 35.219 -265.702 -269,305 -269.305 234,704 239.417 269,480 156.925 149.396 168.560 77,779 90.02 I 100,920 -305.461 -302.123 -293.144 72.21 I 87.100 123.205 -377.672 -389,222 -416.349 423,294 408.918 413.739 655.353 642,022 21 646.589 I3 I3 13 1.564 1266 I.519 I245 1.161 I.161 -234.882 -235,544 -235.544 Ill.833 106,7% 120.595 101.777 90,978 102.402 13.005 12.466 14.016 3.051 3,352 4.177 36,219 47.980 47.980 36219 47,980 43,980 0 0 0 93,657 97.106 114,920 84394 91,071 101.504 453 623 623 27,869 27,869 33.700 13.005 12,466 14.016 -32,064 -34,922 -34,922 129.876 145.086 162.901 93,978 98,640 Ill.565 35.898 46,447 51.336 1.368.348 1.330.319 1.507.921 17.6 16.4 20.9 18.3 20.7 12.6 17.1 6.1 12.9 Exchange rate (Iconcs per US dollar) 5! 909. I 1,333.3 1.587.3 2,276 3 2.280.0 2,005.9 2,005.9 2,098.7 2,005.9 2,005.9 6/ 2,005.9 6/ Sources: Sierra Leonean authormcr. and sraffcstmva~u and proJections I/ UK’s budgetary asrwance ofLe 12. I bdhon was nxlassilied from forago liabdaics to govcmmcnt deposits. 21 New spaal nanmteresr-beanng govcmmen! smcks rotaling Le 134.3 hilhon were issued by the Bank of Slcrra Leone in January and May to cover valuation losses 3/ Excludmg the non-interest-baring govcmmcnt stocks held by the BSL. 41 Excludmg foreign currency deporlts 5/ End of period. 61 For the revised 2wO program and projections for 2Wl , the exchange rate used 1s actual for endJune 2000 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 31 - Table 6. Sierra Leone: Balance of Payments, 1996-2003 (In mdlions of U.S. dollars, unless orherwlsc indicated1 1996 I997 1998 I999 2Mlo 2000 2001 2002 2003 Act. ACI. ESL Est. Rev. prog. Prel. Est. Proj. PmJ. Pmj. Current accouni balance -101.8 -8.6 -42.2 -18.3 -43.9 -53.0 -I 13.8 -92.2 -88.7 Trade balance -80.0 7.0 -20. I -6.9 -65. I -70.9 -175.9 -139.9 -123.5 Expom. f.o.b 104.9 88. I 65.0 61.3 79.0 14.5 82.2 98.7 123.8 Rutilc 3.0 1.4 0.0 I.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.9 8.8 Diamonds Ii 86.5 78.5 60.2 56.3 66.9 72.0 77.0 89.7 104.4 Other 15.4 8.2 4.8 3.9 12.1 2.5 5.1 8.2 9.5 Impom, Tab. -184.9 -81.1 -85. I -68.2 -144.1 -145.4 -258.1 -238.7 -247.2 P&OlC~ -16.6 -I I.8 -15.6 -8. I -33.4 -25.9 -31.9 -33.3 -35.2 RlCe -59.0 -18.8 -28.0 -14.3 464 -18.6 -22. I -24.8 -21.9 Other -109.3 -50.5 41.5 -45.8 64.3 -lM).Q -204.2 21 .I80.6 -190.1 Services -81.9 -lo.7 -45.9 -52.7 -59 3 -49.7 -77.6 -78.9 -82.9 Tionfacior services (net) -58.5 -23.0 -28.4 -33.1 -36.3 -31.9 -58.7 -59.4 -61.4 Recenpn 59.4 24.0 29.5 30.9 344 31.6 33.8 36.1 38.0 Pa~lllClltS -I 17.9 -47. I -58.0 -64.0 -70.7 -63.5 -92.5 -95.5 -99.4 Inlerest payments (due) -20.9 -9.8 -14.9 -16.6 -16.4 -15.8 -15.9 -15.9 -15.4 Investment income (net) -2.5 -7.9 -2.6 -3.0 -6 5 -1.9 -2.9 -3.6 -6. I Transfers 60. I 25. I 23.8 41.3 804 67.6 139.6 126.6 117.6 Official 59.8 19.0 18.6 34.7 73.6 59.2 131.5 118.2 108.9 Private transfers (net) 0.3 6.1 5.2 6.6 6.8 8.3 8.2 8.5 8.8 Current account balance Excluding &&I transfers -161.6 -27.5 -60.8 -53.0 -117.5 -210.4 -197.6 Capital account Medwn- and long-term capital inet) OffZ2.l Drawings Amortzaion (due) Private capital (net foreign direct Investment) Shon-term capital 4; 74.2 -22.0 -5.2 -19.3 30.4 5.7 -0.9 1.9 -20.9 55.0 6.0 -0.9 -1.7 -22.6 54.0 44.7 23.7 28.7 2.2 74.8 -38.7 -24.7 -30.3 -24.9 -20.8 -0.3 0.0 3.5 I.7 1.0 68.6 -21.1 -7. I 1.6 -24.6 89.3 101.1 86.8 96.5 66.8 63.6 90.2 88.3 -23.4 -24.7 2a.o 32.9 2.6 4.6 Overall balance -27.6 -30.6 -47.4 -37.6 -13.5 -2.9 12.4 Financmg Change L” arrears (t HLTcase) Mulrhtcral and bilateral (excl. IMF) Commercial debt buyback Other (incl mihtaryj Debt relief (forgiveness and rcschedulmg) Bilateral creditors Commercial debt buyback Otbcr creditors Net Fund credit Gross reserves (- increase) Commerual banks 27.6 30.6 47.4 37.6 -17.6 23.2 36.3 17.4 -II.6 II.3 24.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 -6.0 II.9 I I.9 25.5 12.2 0.0 0.0 25.5 II.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.5 0.0 19.7 -4.7 11.2 20.3 19.2 -4.7 11.2 20.3 II.4 7.0 16.1 9.6 1.8 -11.7 -5.0 10.7 0.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 13.5 22.7 . -22.8 -22.8 -25. I 2.3 0.0 -I 12.2 -245.3 43.5 112.6 43.6 112.8 41.6 72.8 62.2 95.7 -20.6 -22.9 2.0 40.0 31 00 -0.2 -9.4 -1.2 94 I.2 24.9 -24 I .9 0.0 0.0 Change m net foreign asws (- increase) Central bank -15.4 46.7 -15.4 -46.7 -11.7 -28.7 -3.7 -18.0 0.0 0.0 2.9 -12.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 -44.0 -56.0 -44.0 -56.0 4.0 -53.0 40 -3.0 0.0 0.0 Financmg gap 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 13.6 0.0 289.S 46.9 43.6 Possible sources of financing IMF Orher 13 6 0.0 00 0.0 289.8 51 ,.. 46.9 43.6 Memorandum wms: Current account balance (m percent of GDP) Excludmg oftic~al transfers Gross otlicial reserves Gmss ollicial reserves (in months of Imports) 6/ -10.8 -1.0 -6.3 -2.8 -7.1 -17.2 -3.2 -9.0 -8.0 -18.9 26.8 38.5 43.5 38.3 36.0 2.2 2.8 3.1 2.0 1.5 -8.0 -15.8 -16.9 -34.2 42.0 60.0 1.4 2.0 58.2 58. I 32.3 31.1 665.2 718 I 2.200.0 -12.1 -11.0 -27.7 -24.6 64.0 67.0 2.1 2.2 Debt-serwce ratm. rncludmg the Fund 71 38.3 30.7 47.8 58.3 55.0 Debt-service ratio. excluding the Fund 71 35.3 29.4 46.2 41.8 30.7 58.7 57.4 27.9 24. I t+mmal GDP Exchange rate (Icone per U.S. dollar) 942 850 672 664 622.0 920.8 981.9 1,563.6 1.819.3 2,200.o 759.3 804.5 Sources: Sierra Leonean authonties; and stalTesrimatcs and projcctlons Ii Export data mcludc unrecorded dnmond exports esumated from partner-country data. zi Includes 533.5 mllhon in mdltay equpment purchased with bilateral ad. and imports related to rchabilitatmn and reconstruction programs. 31 Assume dlrcct investment of $40 mlllion m 2001 m rule mmmg prqect. 4! includes capital outflow associated wih unrecorded diamond expons. change in trade credit. and ermrs and omissions. 5! Includes rcschcdulmg of cxnnaI arrears of 1242 mlllmn durmg 200 I. 6: In months of impons oftalal 8oods and sauces of subsequent year. i! In pcrcen~ oicrpons of goods and nonfactor services. before debt r&f Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 32 - Table 7. Sierra Leone: Medium-Term Balance of Payments Assumptions, 1999-2003 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 Rev. Est. Prel. Proj Proj Proi. Economic growth and prices (Annual percentage change) Real GDP Inflation, average GDP deflator Inflation of main trading partners (in U.S. dollar terms) Export deflator (local terms) Import deflator (local terms) Relative inflation of Sierra Leone and main trading partners -8.1 3.8 5.0 5.5 5.5 34.1 5.0 8.0 5.0 5.0 25.0 6.1 8.0 5.0 5.0 -1.0 -5.5 0.8 2.5 2.5 15.0 14.5 Il.8 4.5 4.5 20.9 25.8 8.6 1.8 3.4 35.4 11.1 7.1 2.4 2.4 Balance of payments (In billion of leones, unless otherwise indicated) Exports of goods and nonfactor services (GNFS) (in millions of US. dollars) Exports of goods and nonfactor services (3-year mvg. avg.) (in millions of U.S. dollars) As a percent of GDP Imports of goods and nonfactor services (in millions of U.S. dollars) Current account, excluding grants (in millions of U.S. dollars) Current account, including grants (in percent of GDP) (in millions of U.S. dollars) Aid flows (in million of U.S. dollars) Project loans Program loans Project grants Program grants Overall balance (in millions of US dollars) Overall financing gap (in millions of U.S. dollars) Gross official reserves (in million ofU.S. dollars) Gross offtcial reserves (in months of GNFS imports) I/ Export volume growth (percentage change) Import volume growth (percentage change) Terms of trade (percentage change) Oil prices (US$ per barrel) 2/ 167.8 233.5 279.6 333.1 409.4 92.2 106.1 115.9 134.8 161.7 169.2 213.1 252.7 293.9 348.0 93.0 96.9 104.6 119.0 137.5 14.0 14.6 15.4 16.7 18.1 240.6 459.6 845.6 825.7 877.3 132.2 208.9 350.6 334.2 346.6 -96.5 -246.9 -591.6 -5 19.8 -500.1 -53.0 -112.2 -245.3 -210.4 -197.6 -2.8 -8.0 -15.8 -12.1 -11.0 -18.3 -53.0 -113.8 -92.2 -88.7 58.9 135.0 227.1 208.3 197.1 0.0 28.0 67.0 55.4 55.0 24.2 47.8 28.7 34.8 33.3 3.9 14.1 49.9 73.2 63.7 30.8 45.1 81.6 45.0 45.2 -37.6 -9.4 -1.2 -2.9 12.4 0.0 0.0 699.0 115.8 110.3 0.0 0.0 289.8 46.9 43.6 38.3 42.0 60.0 64.0 67.0 2.0 1.4 2.0 2.1 2.2 1.3 21.0 8.1 17.8 22.9 -2.9 62.9 79.1 -7.0 2.7 -4.9 -8.9 2.9 2.6 I.1 18.0 29.0 28.0 25.0 24.6 Net Present Value (NPV) of external debt as percent of gross exports of goods 878.6 774.1 681.3 555.4 428.3 NPV external debt as a percent of GDP 124.6 139.1 129.6 113.4 96.7 NPV debt as a percent of domestic revenue 1,753.2 1.192.0 1,051.7 911.7 777.6 Memorandum items: Nominal GDP In billions of leones Percentage change In millions of U.S. dollars Government revenues In billions of leones In millions of U.S. dollars GDP per capita (in U.S. dollars) Population estimate (millions) 1,207.7 14.9 663.8 (In units indicated) 1.330.3 1,507.9 1,670.4 10.2 13.4 10.8 665.2 718.1 759.3 1,850.4 10.8 804.5 85.8 155.2 185.8 207.8 230.1 47.2 70.6 77.0 84.1 90.9 142.1 138.6 145.7 150.0 154.8 4.672 4.799 4.928 5.061 5.198 Sources: Sierra Leonean authorities; staff estimates and World Economic Outlook projections. I/ In months of imports of subsequent year. 2/ Based on oil price baseline of September 13, 2000. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 33 - Table 8. Sierra Leone: Nominal and Net Present Value (NPV) ofExternal Debt Outstanding at End-1999 Debt before Rescheduling 11 Nominal Debt h-FT’ of Debt uss mioions Percent of total uss minictu Pcrcmt of total Total 1.213.7 100.0 817.3 100.0 Multila!erals 713.3 58.8 420.7 52.5 Afritan Development Fmd 127.9 10.5 56.7 6.9 BADEA 12.9 1.1 8.7 1.1 Commonwealth Development Corporation 5.7 0.5 52 0.6 European Union/Cornmision 16.7 1.4 9.7 1.2 European lnvxment Bank 16.6 1.4 14.0 1.7 World Bank Group 299.4 24.7 138.4 16.9 Interlntemational Dcvelopmmt Association 299.1 24.6 138.1 16.9 International Bank for Reconstruction and Dcvelopmmt 0.3 0.0 0.3 0.0 Im 194.8 16.1 169.6 20.7 Intcmational Fund for A&xltural Dcv&pment 26.2 2.2 14.3 1.8 Islamic Dmlopmmt Bank 2.2 0.2 1.3 0.2 OPEC Fund 11.0 0.9 10.9 1.3 Bilateral creditors 390.0 32.1 278.2 34.0 Parts Club 320.9 26.4 233.0 28 i Post-cutoff date 74.0 6.1 54.6 67 of which: ODA 24.6 2.0 17.1 2.1 Pre-cutoff date 246.9 20.3 178.4 21.8 of which: ODA 178.8 14.7 106.3 13.0 AusUia Belgium France 21 Gumany u Japan Italy Nctbcrland 21 Norway Switzerland United Kingdom United States 0.4 0.0 0.2 0.0 18.7 1.5 13.7 1.7 23.9 2.0 25.9 3.2 13.5 1.1 14.7 1.8 77.1 6.4 32.3 4.0 55.3 4.6 43.0 5.3 27.5 2.3 30.1 3.7 9.7 0.8 9.4 1.1 21.9 1.8 14.8 1.8 5.8 0.5 3.7 0.5 67.1 5.s 45.2 5.5 Non-Paris CM 69.1 5.7 45.2 5.5 Post-cutoff dale 56.3 46 32.5 4.0 of which: ODA 56.3 4.6 32.5 4.0 Pre-cu1off date 12.8 1.1 12.7 1.6 of which: ODA 12.8 1.1 12.7 1.6 ChiM Kuwaiti Fund for Devcloprnmt and Agriculture Saudi Dmlopmmt Fond Morocco 44.3 12.1 1.3 11.5 3.6 32.5 4.0 1.0 9.8 1.2 0.1 1.2 0.1 0.9 11.5 1.4 Commercial debt 110.4 9.1 110.4 13.5 of which: hlitaty Debt 22.9 1.9 22.9 2.8 Sourccr: Sierra Leone’s authorities: and Fund statTcstimatts. 11 Before full use of traditional debt relief mechanisms. ZNPVs are higher than nominal values due to high interest rates to be paid in the future. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicTable 9. Sierra Leone: Use of Fund Credit, January 2000-December 2002 I! Outstanding 2000 2001 2002 as of Jan. Apr. - Jul. Oct. Jan. Apr. - Jul. - Oct. _ Jan. . Apr. - Jul. - ocr. - Dec. 3 I, 1999 Mar. JU”. Sep. DK. MN Jun. Sep. Dec. Mar. Jun. s=P. Dec. (In millions of SDRs) Total transaclions (nel) -9.1 -0.5 1.3 -0.5 -Y.l -1.8 -9 I -1.8 -10.5 -43 ‘IO.5 4.8 Transactions under banche policies Drawings Repayments 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0:o 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Transactions under special facilities Drawings Repayments 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Transactions under emergency post-conflict assistance Drawings Repayments 0.0 0.0 0.0 10.4 10.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 00 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 -I 4 0.0 -1.4 -1.4 0.0 -1.4 -1.4 0.0 -1.4 -1.4 0.0 -1.4 Transactions under adjustment facilities -9. I -0.5 -9. I 0.5 -9. I -I 8 -9. I -1.8 -9.1 -2.8 -9. I .3.3 Structural Adjustment Facility (SAF) -2.1 0.0 -2.7 0.0 -2.7 0.0 -2.7 0.0 -2.1 0.0 -2.7 0.0 Drawl”gs 0.0 00 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Repayments -2.7 0.0 -2.7 0.0 -2.7 0.0 -2.7 0.0 -2.7 0.0 -2.7 0.0 Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF) -6.4 -0.5 -6.4 -0.5 -6.4 -1.8 -6.4 -1.8 -6.4 -2.8 -6.4 -3.3 Drawings 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 00 0.0 0.0 Repayments -6.4 -0.5 -6.4 -0.5 -6.4 -I 8 -6.4 -1.8 -6.4 -2.8 -6.4 -3.3 Total Fund credit outstanding 142.0 132.9 132.4 133.7 133.2 124.2 122.4 113.3 III.5 101.0 96.7 86.2 81.4 Under tranche policies 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Under special facilities 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 00 00 0.0 0.0 0.0 Under emergency post-conflict assistance 27. I 27.1 27.1 37.5 37.5 37.5 37.5 37.5 375 36. I 34.6 33.2 31.7 Under SAF 24.3 21.6 21.6 18.9 18.9 16.2 16.2 13,s 13.5 10.8 10.8 8.1 8.1 Under PRGF 90.5 84.2 83.6 17.3 76.8 70.4 68.6 62.3 60.5 54. I 51.3 44.9 41.6 Total Fund credit outstanding 136.9 128.2 127.7 128.9 128.5 119.7 118.0 109.3 107 5 97.4 93.3 x3.1 18.5 Under tranche policies 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Under special facilities 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Under emerge”cy post-conflict assistance 26.2 26.2 26.2 36.2 36.2 36.2 36.2 36.2 36.2 34.8 33.4 32.0 30.6 Under SAF 23.5 20.8 20.8 18.2 18.2 15.6 15.6 13.0 13.0 10.4 10.4 78 7.8 Under PRGF 87.3 81.1 80.7 74.5 74.0 679 662 60.1 58.3 52.2 49.5 43.3 40.1 (In percent of quota) Source: IMF, Treasurer’s Department. I/ Only includes drawings to end of 2000. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 35 - APPENDIX I Sierra Leone: Relations with the Fund (As of September 30,200O) Membership Status: Joined 9/l O/62; Article VIII. General Resources Account: Quota Fund holdings of currency Reserve position in Fund SDR Million 1.03.7 141.19 0.02 SDR Department: Net cumulative allocation Holdings SDR Million 17.45 5.38 Outstanding Purchases and Loans: SDR Million Structural Adjustment Facility arrangements 18.91 Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility arrangements 77.29 First credit tranche 37.5 1 Financial Arrangements: TYPe Approval Date Expira- tion Date Amount Approved (SDR Million) ESAF 3/28/94 5/04/98 101.90 96.85 SAF 3/28/94 3/27/95 27.02 27.02 SAF 1 l/14/86 1 l/13/89 40.53 11.58 % Quota 100.0 136.2 0.0 % Allocation 100.0 30.8 % Quota 18.2 74.5 36.2 Amount Drawn (SDR Million) Projected Obligations to Fund (SDR million; based on existing use of resources and present holdings of SDRs): Principal Charges/interest Total Overdue Forthcoming 09/30/2000 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 0.0 0.5 21.7 30.1 39.6 28.7 0.0 0.8 3.1 2.9 2.3 1.4 0.0 1.3 24.8 33.0 41.9 30.1 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-36- APPENDIX 3 Exchange rate arrangement Since April 25, 1990, the exchange rate has been market determined. Commercial banks may buy and sell foreign exchange from/to individual customers, as well as trade between themselves or with the Bank of Sierra Leone (BSL) on a freely negotiable basis. The BSL calculates an official exchange rate every Friday morning as the weighted average of the auction rate, commercial banks’ mid-rate, and bureaus’ mid-rate in the previous week, for customs valuation purposes and for official transactions. As of end-June 2000, the BSL rate was Le 2,098.66=US$l. With effect from December 14, 1995, Sierra Leone has accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4. However, Sierra Leone maintains exchange restrictions subject to Fund approval under Article VIII, Section 2(a) in the form of(i) a tax clearance certificate required for payments and transfers of certain types of current international transactions, (ii) limitations on the availability of foreign exchange for the payment of external debt obligations, as evidenced by some external payments arrears, and (iii) a multiple currency practice arising from the contemporaneous application of the official rate and commercial bank rates. Article IV Consultation The 1996 Article IV consultation (EBS/97/68; 4/9/97) was concluded by the Executive Board on May 5, 1997, together with Sierra Leone’s request for the third annual arrangement under the Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility. Sierra Leone is on the standard l2-month cycle for Article IV consultations. Technical Assistance Mission CBD advisory mission on financial rehabilitation MAE operations advisor MAE accounting advisor LEG mission to advise on tax legislation Date June 14-27,199O June-July 1990 October-November 1990 April 1992 (interrupted by change of government) Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-37 - Mission MAE monetary policy advisor STA mission to review monetary statistics MAE banking supervision expert STA mission to assess Sierra Leone’s macroeconomic database FAD mission to advise on taxation MAE mission to assess banking situation and advise on foreign exchange mechanism MAE mission to assist in the introduction of weekly foreign exchange auctions at the BSL MAE mission to conduct financial sector review and and assess the status of bank supervision. Resident Representative APPENDIX I Date August 199 1 -September 1996 October-November 1996 November 1996-May 1997 June 1998 November 1998 October 1999 January-February 2000 October 2000 A Fund resident representative was stationed in Freetown until May 1997. Depending on the security situation, a resident representative could be assigned to Sierra Leone in 2001. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 38 - APPENDIX II Sierra Leone: Relations with the World Bank Group The World Bank’s Transitional Support Strategy for Sierra Leone over the next twelve months was discussed by the Board on December 14,200O. The strategy proposes a two- pronged approach. First, continued support to economic recovery and rehabilitation, via a follow-on quick-disbursing Econom.ic Rehabilitation and Recovery Credit (ERRC) in the amount of US$30 million, and a supplement to the ongoing ERRC in the amount of US%10 million. The second instrument is the Bank’s support to the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process via its administration of the Multi-Donor Trust Fund for DDR, as well as the continued implementation of the Community Reintegration and Rehabilitation Project Pw. The ERRC will help finance the 2000-01 portion of the NRRP. The ERRC will provide critical balance of payments and budgetary support to finance part of the foreign exchange and budgetary costs of the program. The ERRC was approved on February 17,200O and became effective in February 2000. The first tranche of US$l 5 million was disbursed in March 2000, and the second tranche was disbursed in October 2000. The CRRP aims to support the social and economic reintegration of ex-combatants, internally displaced people, and refugees; the CRRP was approved on December 2 1, 1999. The Public Sector Management Support II Project will continue to help build capacity with a focus on strengthening economic management and revenue mobilization, establishing a procurement agency, instituting the regulatory framework for the recently liberalized petroleum sector, and building capacity for local government. Sierra Leone: Financial Relations with the World Bank Group (As of December 15,200O; in millions of U.S. dollars) Commitments Of which: IBRD IDA Undisbursed IBRDLIDA lending operations Transportation sector 0.00 35.00 Freetown infrastructure 0.00 26.00 Roads and rehabilitation maintenance 0.00 45.00 Public sector management 0.00 10.00 Urban water supply 0.00 36.00 Health sector 0.00 20.00 Power. Sector Rehabilitation 7.00 21.00 Community Reintegration and Rehabilitation 0.00 25.00 Economic Rehabilitation and Recovery Credit 0.00 30.00 Total 7.00 248.00 Total disbursed (IBRD and IDA) 18.70 371.01 Of which: repaid 18.16 16.49 21.56 2.35 3.39 0.02 12.62 7.16 5.20 13.47 4.59 70.36 Source: World Bank Group. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 39 - APPENDIX III Sierra Leone: Selected Social and Demographic Indicators Area 72,326 square kilometers Population and vital statistics (1999, unless otherwise indicated) Total population (in millions) Population growth rate (in percent) Urban population (in percent of total) Population density (per square kilometer) Population age structure (in percent, 1996) O-14 years 15-64 years 65 andabove Infant mortality rate (per thousand) Life expectancy at birth (years) 4.7 3z 85 44.7 52.2 3.1 164 38 GDP per capita (in U.S. dollars) 142 Health and nutrition (1999, unless otherwise indicated) Access to safe water (in percent of population) Total Urban Rural Daily per capita calorie supply Percent of requirement 34 58 21 1,888 83 Labor force (1999, unless otherwise indicated) Percent of formal labor force (1997) Female Agriculture Industry Services 31.5 60.8 17.1 22.1 Education ( 1999) Percent of age group enrolled in: Primary school Secondary school Tertiary education Adult literacy rate 42 16 31.: Source: Central Statistical Office, Draft: “Sierra Leone 2000 National Human Development and Related Indicators, 2000.” Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 40 - APPENDIX IV Sierra Leone: Statistical Issues 1. Owing to the prolonged civil war, Sierra Leone’s macroeconomic databases have serious deficiencies, particularly in the areas of the balance of payments, national accounts, and key social indicators. From the May 1997 coup to March 1998, the statistical compilation virtually collapsed because of institutional damage and the departure of key skilled personnel from the administration. Since April 1998, however, the authorities have endeavored to rehabilitate the data collection and compilation systems. The authorities are fully cooperative in providing data to the Fund for purposes of policy formulation and program monitoring, and available data are provided to the Fund in a timely manner. The authorities are trying to disseminate economic and financial data to the public on a regular basis. 3 d. A major and sustained improvement in the coverage and timeliness of economic data will require the restructuring of the institutional framework along the lines recommended by the 1998 STA macroeconomic statistics mission. Budgetary resources remain scarce for the main statistical unit, the Central Statistics Office (CSO); this situation most adversely affects the compilation of national accounts and price statistics. Cooperation and coordination between the main statistical agencies also need to be improved. National accounts 3. National accounts data are prepared by the CSO on the basis of information received from government ministries and agencies and public enterprises, as well as through its own occasional surveys of public and private sector activity. A major project to improve the system of national income and social accounts was undertaken with Fund/United Nations Development Program (UNDP) technical support. As a result, a set of revised national, accounts for the period 1986/87- 1994/95 was published in December 1995. The main revisions dealt with adjusting trade figures to reflect illegal diamond mining and fishing activity. However, large adjustments were also made to the exports of nonfactor services, for which the CSO was unable to provide sufficient explanation. Generally speaking, data on the exports and imports of services still need further improvement, despite ongoing efforts to strengthen direct estimation techniques. Fund missions continue to make their own estimates and projections of key national accounts aggregates, as well as adjustments to historical data on the basis of available information. Prices 4. ’ The consumer price index (CPI) for Freetown is prepared monthly by the CSO and published with a lag of about three weeks. The CPI covers the capital city only, although with the onset of peace the CSO intends to extend coverage of the CPI to towns and selected rural areas. At the moment, extensive use is being made of the CPI to deflate national account estimates at current prices. A wholesale price index, which has remained dormant for many years, needs to be reestablished. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4l- APPENDIX IV Government finance statistics 5. The budget reporting system was established with technical assistance provided under the Fund/UNDP technical assistance project. Monthly data on central government revenue, current expenditure, and financing are being provided, with appropriate disaggregation. The European Commission (EC) is providing technical assistance to the Accountant General’s Department, that will improve the timeliness and quality of fiscal data. Data on capital expenditure are very poor and need to be improved urgently. Monetary statistics 6. The main components of the central bank balance sheet are available on a daily and weekly basis. This provides an early warning system on key financial targets. The full monetary survey is prepared with a lag of about six weeks, with comprehensive coverage of commercial banks. For the most part, differences between data on budget financing from the Ministry of Finance and credit to government from the Bank of Sierra Leone (BSL) are now easily reconciled. 7. The BSL is compiling monetary data using a compilation system prepared by the 1996 STA mission, which has been used for data reporting to AFR and STA. Most of the mission’s recommendations have been implemented, resulting in substantial improvements in the quality of the monetary data. However, there are sometimes data problems resulting from mispostings in the balance sheet of the BSL and misclassifications of new accounts. Balance of payments statistics 8. Sierra Leone’s external transactions are characterized by a large volume of activity in the informal sector, owing principally to the smuggling of diamonds. A considerable portion of imports is financed by these unrecorded exports. As a result, official balance of payments statistics tend to substantially understate transactions. The staff has been addressing this problem through the use of third-country (principally EC members) import data. 9. Information on official program grant and loan receipts is relatively good and is prepared by the staff on the basis of contact with the Sierra Leonean authorities and donor agencies. In contrast, data on private capital flows are very poor. Some information on private banking flows can be derived from the monetary survey. Other private capital flows, especially those linked to the informal diamond trade, are effectively captured only in errors and omissions. Data on the gross and net official reserves positions of the BSL are provided morithly to the Fund with a short lag. 10. Information on public external debt is good. A comprehensive debt-reporting system has been in operation, monitoring official external debt and related interest payments. Data on the present stock of private sector external debt are satisfactory, following the verification exercise made in connection with the July 1995 commercial debt buyback operation. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicSierra Leone: Core Statistical Indicators (As of December 22,200O) Central Bank Balance Sheet Overall Govern- ment Balance External Debt/ Debt Service Intema- Exchange tional Reserve1 Base Broad money Money Consumer Current Interest Rates Price Index Exports/ Account Imports Balance GDP/ GNP Rates Reserves Date of latest observation 1 o/30/00 1 o/o0 9100 9100 9100 9100 9100 1 o/o0 8100 1999 1 O/l 6/00 Mission M A M V A A C c, v C C M A 1999 10/16/00 Mission 9100 I 1/23/00 11/30/00 11 I29100 12/20/00 12/20/00 12/20/00 1 o/23/00 11/30/00 Date received Frequency ofdata 11 Frequency of reporting I / Source of update 4 D’ M 21 M 31 M A M M 31 M 21 M M A A E, C E, C C C M M W M I W M A A C C, T C ‘f C C M M A E C M A E C V A c, v C M A C, M C M Mode of reporting 51 E, C E, C C C W M m with staff visits. Confidentiality 61 Frequency of publication 11 W M M A I-i 11 D-daily, W-weekly, M-monthly, A-annual, \ r-regularly in conjunc 2/ Weekly estimates provided in Bank of Sierra Leone’s “Trends in Monetary Variables.” 3/ Daily estimates provided in Bank of Sierra Leone’s “Daily Indicators.‘* 4/ A-direct reporting by the authorities. 5/ C-cable or facsimile, E-electronic data transfer, T-telephone, M-mail, V-staff visits. 6/ C-for unrestricted use. . . Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public