DOCUMENT OF INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY FOR AGENDA SM/03/322 September 17,2003 To: Members of the Executive Board From: The Acting Secretary Subject: Oman-Staff Report for the 2003 Article IV Consultation Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staff report for the 2003 Article IV consultation with Oman, which is tentatively scheduled for discussion on Friday, October 6,2003. At the time of circulation of this paper to the Board, the Secretary’s Department has not received a communication from the authorities of Oman indicating whether or not they consent to the Fund’s publication of this paper; such communication may be received after the have had an opportunity to read the paper. Questions may be referred to Mr. Fasano, MED (ext. 36972). Unless the Documents Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the WTO Secretariat on Thursday, September 25,2003. This document will shortly be posted on the extranet, a secure website for Executive Directors and member country authorities. Att: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicINTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND OMAN Staff Report for the 2003 Article IV Consultation Prepared by the Staff Representatives for the 2003 Consultation with Oman Approved by George T: Abed and Martin Fetherston September 17,2003 0 The 2003 Article IV consultation mission held discussions in Muscat from June 2-l 6, 2003, The staff team consisted of Messrs. Fasano (head), Erbag, Wilson, and Davoodi (all MED). A Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) was completed in the first half of 2003. Mr. El Qorchi (MFD) participated in the policy meeting with the Central Bank of Oman (CBO) to discuss the FSAP’s recommendations. 0 The mission met with the executive president of the CBO, the secretary general of the ministry of national economy, the ministers of labor and oil and gas, and the head of the economic committee at Oman’s State Council, as well as undersecretaries and directors of the ministries of commerce; housing, electricity, and water; finance; national economy; education, and oil and gas, and senior management at the CBO. It also met with representatives from the capital market authority, the private sector, the financial system, pension funds, and academics from Sultan Qaboos University. 0 At the conclusion of the 2002 Article IV consultation on October 2, 2002, Directors were encouraged by the country’s favorable fiscal performance, the general soundness of the financial sector, and the progress recorded as a result of its development efforts. They saw scope for further nonhydrocarbon revenue enhancing measures, and encouraged the authorities to modernize the tax system and improve the budget structure by reducing nonproductive spending. Directors also encouraged the authorities to deepen financial intermediation, rely on market-based instruments and supply-side policies to guide labor reforms, and adopt internationally accepted classification of government spending. D Oman’s statistical base is adequate for surveillance purposes. Data issues are discussed in Appendix III. D Oman accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4, and the proposed fourth amendment of the Articles of Agreement. It also maintains an exchange system free of restrictions on the making of payments and transfers of current international transactions, as well as an open trade regime and liberal capital flows. . As has been the case since 1998, the authorities intend to issue a PIN following the Executive Board’s discussion of Oman’s 2003 Article IV reports. , This report represents a team effort led by Mr. Fasano. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2- Contents Page Executive Summary. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . , . . . . .3 I. Background and Recent Developments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .4 II. Macroeconomic Outlook and Risks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7 III. Policy Discussions .................................................................................................... .9 A. Macroeconomic policies ............................................................................... .9 B. Financial sector.. ........................................................................................... .14 C. Structural reforms ......................................................................................... .15 D. Statistical issues ............................................................................................ .17 Iv. Staff Appraisal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17 Text Box 1 Fiscal Policy and Fiscal Rules in Oman . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15 Figure s 1. Macroeconomic Developments, 1996-2002 ............................................................ .20 2. Fiscal Developments, 1996-2002.. ............................................................................ 2 1 3. GCC Countries: Selected Indicators .......................................................................... 22 4. Monetary and Financial Sector Developments 1996-2002.. .................................... .23 5. Medium-Term Baseline Scenario, 1990-2008 ......................................................... .24 Tables 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. Selected Economic Indicators, 1998-2003 ............................................................... .25 Balance of Payments Summary, 1998-2003 ............................................................ .26 Government Finances, 1998-2003 Baseline Scenario.. ............................................ .27 Monetary Survey, 1998-2003.. ................................................................................. .28 Vulnerability Indicators, 1998-2003 ........................................................................ .29 Medium-Term Baseline Scenario, 200 l-2008 ......................................................... .30 Appendices I. Fund Relations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ,. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 1 II Relations with the World Bank Group . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33 III. Statistical Issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35 Iv. Public Information Notice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3- Executive Summary Oman’s macroeconomic performance has been strong since the period of 1999- 2000. This reflected relatively high oil prices, improved business climate, as well as rising public consumption and investment in infrastructure and liquefied natural gas (LNG) development. Moreover, the authorities devoted overall budget surpluses to reducing debt and accumulating foreign assets, while nonhydrocarbon growth was robust in the past few years. However, oil output of the main oil producer in the country, Petroleum Development Oman, has been in a downward trend since 2001 as a result of aging oil fields. The near-term outlook remains favorable despite lower oil output. The expected rise in oil prices in 2003 is likely to offset the likely further decline in oil output, while the overall fiscal and external current account balances probably will record surpluses-albeit lower than in 2002. Medium-term growth prospects are also encouraging but there are risks. Growth is expected to be supported by rising public and private investment in gas-based industries, tourism, port activities, and LNG. Nevertheless, the economy remains vulnerable to volatile oil prices, and continued weaknesses in the global economy could undermine efforts to attract foreign direct investment. In contrast, the fiscal position is likely to deteriorate over the medium term, reflecting projected lower oil revenue and pressing investment needs to reverse the fall in oil output. To maintain a strong fiscal position, the authorities will need to strengthen fiscal institutions, broaden nonhydrocarbon revenue through, for instance, a broad-based value-added tax, and cut nonproductive spending. In addition, the financial health of the government pension system should be addressed. To further strengthen Oman’s financial system, the Financial Sector Assessment Program has recommended improvements in several areas. These include credit assessment and risk-based supervision, securities supervision, government financial support programs for small- and medium-sized enterprises, and supervision and regulation of the insurance sector and pension funds. Increasing private investment and attracting foreign direct investment are key to supporting Oman’s diversification efforts. To this end, it will be highly desirable to make further progress in establishing a level playing field between domestic and foreign investors, as well as streamlining regulations governing the functioning of labor, product, and financial markets. Human capital development is one of the most appropriate policies to address the challenge of creating job opportunities for a rapidly growing labor force. Meanwhile, enforcement of mandatory administrative measures, such as quotas for nationals in the private sector, should remain flexible and pragmatic, taking into account labor market conditions. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4- 1. BACKGROUNDANDRECENTDEVELOPMENTS 1. Oman is a small, open economy highly dependent on limited oil resources. Thus, the authorities’ long-term objectives are to reduce oil dependency and diversify the economic base. This will involve reshaping the role of the government and encouraging private sector development. In this context, the exploitation of the country’s natural gas resources has stimulated, in the past few years, a diversification drive based on the development of gas- based industries, such as fertilizers and 900 petrochemicals, while expanding the service r~ Daily Crude 61 Output I/ 21 ~~~ 1 (In thousands of bamels) ~ 850 b sector.’ Several important projects have been already completed: a container port (majority-owned and operated by the private sector), a liquefied natural gas (LNG) plant (49 percent owned by foreign partners), and a domestic gas pipeline infrastructure and industrial port. Information ~ 800 750 700 :---- AL ~ ~~ 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 Source: Ministry of oil and gas. I/ Only Petroleum Development Oman (PDO), excluding condensates. 21 Through April 2003. technology, tourism, and entrepot activities are being further developed as well. Recent problems related to declining oil output of the country’s main producer, Petroleum Development Oman (PDO), owing to aging oil fields, have added to the urgency of further diversifying the economy. 2. Oman’s macroeconomic performance has been strong since 1999-2000, owing, in particular, to relatively high crude oil prices and rising LNG exports. Average crude oil prices rose by almost 6 percent to $24.3 per barrel in 2002 from a year earlier, remaining significantly above the low levels achieved in 1998-99 (Table 1). LNG export receipts reached close to $1.2 billion last year (equivalent to 15 percent of crude oil exports), with output of 6.5 million tons-up from 2.2 million tons in 2000, the first year of exports-most of it sold to some Asian countries through long-term contracts. As a result, total exports have remained stable at about $11.3 billion in the past few years, despite the fluctuation in oil prices and the fall in output (Table 2). In this context, the overall fiscal and external current account balances have recorded surpluses since 1999-2000, averaging 13 percent and i During the 199Os, the manufacturing sector (excluding LNG and oil refining) accounted, on average, for about 3.5 percent of GDP. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-5- 4.5 percent of GDP, respectively, through 2002 (Figures 1 and 2). Oman has also performed well vis-&-vis other countries belonging to the Cooperation Council for the Arab States of the Gulf (GCC) (Figure 3).2 3. This strong performance has led to a sharp improvement in the government’s net financial assets position. Since 2000, this position-defined as government external and domestic financial assets minus liabilities, excluding unresolved liabilities to the civil service employees pension fund-has become positive, reaching almost 11 percent of GDP two years later (Table 3). This improvement reflected the government’s policy to devote budgetary surpluses to reducing debt and accumulating foreign assets.3 After a sharp deterioration caused by higher spending, particularly in 2000, the nonhydrocarbon fiscal deficit4 has remained stable at about RO 2 billion (some 25 percent of GDP)-a level about in line with Oman’s estimated permanent income out of its hydrocarbon wealth.5 Nonetheless, with the wage bill and defense accounting for a large part of the increase in spending since 2000, the expenditure structure has become less flexible at adjusting to shocks. 4. Oman’s nonhydrocarbon growth performance has been robust in the past few years. It reached almost 6 percent a year on average between 2000 and 2002, underpinned by higher public consumption and investment (Table 1). In contrast, aggregate real GDP grew 2 Oman, together with Bahrain, Kuwait, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, and the United Arab Emirates, is a member of the GCC, which was created in the early 1980s to promote economic and financial integration. A single common external tariff set at 5 percent (the same tariff already in effect in Oman for some years) has been in effect since January 2003, and a common currency will be adopted by January 2010. 3 Government foreign assets have been mainly accumulated in the State General Reserve Fund (SGRF)-a government savings fund established in 1980. A relatively small amount of assets has also been accumulated in the Oil Fund--created in 1993 to finance hydrocarbon projects (for more details, see Tables 30 and 3 1 in the forthcoming Oman’s 2003 Selected Issues Paper and Statistical Appendix report). 4 This indicator is defined as the overall fiscal balance, excluding oil and gas revenue and the government’s share of PDO oil investments. This is a more useful indicator of underlying fiscal trends because it abstracts from the volatility in hydrocarbon revenue and oil-related capital spending. 5 Under the reasonable assumption of maintaining Oman’s total oil and gas wealth constant in real terms over time, and a long-run oil price of $22 per barrel (average in the period 2004-08 in line with WE0 projections), the country’s permanent income from this wealth is estimated at RO 1.96 billion a year. However, if the long-run price is assumed to be $18 per barrel, as the authorities projected in the current five-year development plan that runs through 2005, Oman’s permanent income is estimated at RO 1.5 billion. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-6- by about 2 percent over the same period, mainly because of lower oil output. Strong growth in nonhydrocarbon activities translated into high private sector employment growth (about 5.3 percent a year on average in the period 2000-02). But available information indicates that the public sector has continued to account for about half of the jobs provided to Omani nationals-reflecting the segmentation of the labor market between national and expatriate workers along skill, sector, and remuneration lines (Figure 1).6 5. Broad monetary expansion was moderate in 2002. With the government also using part of the overall fiscal surpluses to reduce domestic debt, the banking system’s net domestic assets dropped by 15 percent by end-2002 from a year earlier (Table 4 and Figure 4). As a result, broad money growth decelerated to 5 percent despite the sharp increase in net foreign assets of the CBO (to the equivalent of almost five months of imports in 2002) and commercial banks. In line with declining import prices, the consumer price index (CPI) fell by about 1 percent in 2002-the third consecutive year of a small negative change-while the average CPI-based real effective exchange rate (REER) depreciated by 4 percent, just about offsetting the appreciation experienced in 2000-01 (see below). 6. Commercial banks’ performance improved significantly last year. After four consecutive years of a decline, profits recovered sharply-with this trend continuing into early 2003 (Figure 4). This improvement was mainly due to lower provisioning charges as a result of the sharp slowdown in the increase of the ratio of nonperforming loans (NPLs) to total credit of commercial banks. The slowdown, in turn, reflected tightened central bank regulations to reduce banks’ exposure to a single borrower-including the requirement to obtain audited financial statements from individuals or corporations that borrow RO 250,000 or more from any bank, or RO 500,000 from the entire banking system-and a more cautious approach to private sector credit taken by commercial banks.7 At the same time, higher banks’ profits have contributed to a strengthening in market sentiment since 2002, with the Muscat Securities Market (MSM) index-in which financial sector shares weigh heavily- increasing by almost 50 percent from end-2001 to end-June 2003, after several years of negative or low growth (Figure 1). 7. Progress has also been made since the late 1990s in adopting structural reforms to support the diversification strategy. In particular, regulations to enhance the business climate have been streamlined, governance strengthened, and key sectors, such as education 6 Available labor statistics only include Omani workers employed in the private sector who are registered with the Public Authority for Social Insurance (PASI), as well as public sector employees (excluding military and security personnel). However, not all Omanis working in the private sector are registered with PASI. Thus, the share of this sector in providing jobs to nationals could be higher than currently reflected in the official statistics. 7 For further details on measures taken to address the deterioration in NPLs, see the staff report for the 2002 Article IV consultation with Oman (SM/O2/242). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-7- and power, opened to private and FDI. In the past year, the authorities have mainly focused on broadening the privatization program, encouraging foreign direct investment, and accelerating the Omanization of the labor force (see Section III. C). II. MACROECONOMICOLJTLOOKANDRISKS 8. Despite the expected decline in oil output, Oman’s outlook for 2003 remains favorable. The projected increase in average Omani crude oil prices (by 14 percent to close to $28 per barrel in line with WE0 projections) is likely to offset the expected further fall in the volume of crude oil exports (about 8.5 percent), resulting in stable oil export receipts. Nevertheless, the external current account surplus will probably narrow to some 7 percent of GDP, owing to higher imports resulting from the increase in private and public investment. The overall fiscal balance is also expected to record a surplus of about 3 percent of GDP, with the government’s net financial assets rising to 13 percent of GDP (Tables 5 and 6). Aggregate real GDP growth is likely to remain at 2 percent, as lower oil output would be offset by an acceleration in nonhydrocarbon growth (to 6 percent from 5 percent in 2002), on account of higher investment in power stations and the initiation of industrial projects, including fertilizer and methanol plants and a second refinery.’ The CPI is estimated to increase by 1 percent in 2003, mainly reflecting higher import prices associated with the depreciation of the U.S. dollar in international markets. 9. Prospects for nonhydrocarbon economic growth over the medium term remain encouraging. With public and private investment rising due to ongoing and planned industrial and service sector projects (such as an aluminum smelter plant), annual nonhydrocarbon real GDP is projected to keep growing at about 6 percent through 2005, before slowing to some 4.5 percent on average toward the end of the projection period (Table 6 and Figure 5). In contrast, real hydrocarbon GDP growth is projected to remain subdued through 2005, owing to the expected slow recovery in crude oil output, and to accelerate in the following two years, as an additional 3.3 million tons of LNG are expected to be produced by 2007, with a large part of this production already sold through long-term contracts to a European country. 10. Even with these encouraging growth prospects, a number of factors are likely to contribute to a significant deterioration over the medium term in Oman’s government financial position. These factors include: 0 relatively lower crude oil output during the five-year period from 2004 through 2008 (on average about 6 percent lower than during the previous five-year period); 8 The effects of the war in Iraq on Oman’s economy have been contained, except in the tourism sector, which accounted for about 1 percent of GDP in 2002. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-8- the need for additional investment of about $4.1 billion in the period 2004-06 to gradually bring PDO’s oil output capacity up (excluding condensates) to at least 800,000 barrels per day by 2007 from close to 720,000 barrels during the first four months of 2003;9 the sharp increase in the average cost of oil per barrel from about $3.70 in the past few years to at least $6.00 over the long run (this cost has already increased to $4.60 per barrel in 2002), reducing the net intake from oil receipts; and the expected fall in Oman’s crude oil prices to about $22 per barrel on average during the projection period, with LNG prices also following the downward trend in oil prices. As a result, total export receipts are likely to increase by only 2 percent from 2003 to 2008, despite higher LNG volume and other export receipts. 11. The overall fiscal balance will, therefore, probably record persistent deficits over the medium term. This deficit will peak at 4.2 percent of GDP in 2006, before declining slightly in the next two years as a result of rising natural gas revenue and lower oil-related investments (Figure 5). The authorities will have to borrow and/or liquidate some SGRF assets to finance the fiscal imbalance. As a result, the government’s net financial assets will most likely drop from a positive holding in 2003 to a negative position of 1.6 percent of GDP by 2008 (Table 6). Moreover, the nonhydrocarbon fiscal deficit is expected to rise to RO 2.3 billion by 2008-becoming out of line with Oman’s permanent income. In parallel to fiscal developments, the external current account balance is also expected to record deficits during the projection period, averaging almost 2 percent of GDP. 12. There are possible downside risks to the medium-term outlook. The economy is expected to remain vulnerable to volatile oil prices, since oil export receipts will more than likely continue to account for a large part of government revenue and exports. The resumption of Iraqi oil gi?bo exports and the planned rebuilding of $j$ 3 5 55 its oil industry could put downward pressure on global oil prices over the medium term, unless world demand recovers significantly. Moreover, continued weaknesses in the global economy could undermine efforts to attract FDI to support the diversification strategy. GCC Countries: Oil Dependency l/ (Avaage for the period 1998-2002) l h . Saudi Arabia G.C.C. ’ Qatar . Bahrain. Kuwait U.AE l ’ As a result of this investment, the recovery rate-which is currently relatively low-is also expected to increase, with crude oil reserves likely to last for another 20-25 years. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-9- 111. POLICY DISCUSSIONS 13. Against this backdrop, the fiscal situation dominated the discussions, which also covered the progress made in structural reforms to address Oman’s main challenges: promoting employment opportunities for a rapidly growing local labor force and diversifying the economy. The decline in oil output-together with the potential risks to the outlook mentioned above, as well as the need to achieve fiscal convergence among GCC countries to support the planned monetary union-has highlighted the importance of maintaining prudent macroeconomic policy and further streamlining regulations governing the labor, product, and financial markets to sustain long-term growth. 14. The Omani authorities indicated that they value the policy dialogue with the Fund. In this context, the authorities have taken important steps in the past few years to promote the stability of the financial sector, open up the economy to FDI, and strengthen human capital development. In addition, they have implemented recommendations made by technical assistance (TA) missions from the Monetary and Financial Systems Department (MFD) and the Statistics Department (STA) (Appendix I). However, reforms to increase the flexibility of fiscal policy by adopting indirect taxation and improving the composition of government spending have lagged behind. The authorities emphasized that political and social consensus weigh on the pace of structural reforms and policy changes, along with increasing participation of the civil society in the decision-making process (first-time elections for the Consultative Council-open to all Omani citizens-are scheduled for October 2003). A. Macroeconomic Policies Fiscal policy 15. The strengthening of fiscal institutions remains essential to supporting a sound and predictable fiscal policy and, in turn, long-term growth. This includes, in particular, adopting a modem tax system, improving the budget structure, strengthening budget preparation, monitoring, and execution process, as well as addressing the financial health of the civil service employees pension fund. The mission also recommended that the authorities adopt a medium-term budget framework to make expenditure policy less influenced by short- term oil revenue fluctuations. Within this framework, the authorities should aim for at least a balanced budget at conservative long-run oil prices, with actual deficits and surpluses mainly reflecting oil price changes. In addition, they should also consider complementing this medium-term framework with fiscal rules, such as restrictions on nonhydrocarbon fiscal deficit, to ensure intergenerational economic equity objectives (Box 1). The mission also encouraged the authorities to participate in the Fund’s fiscal transparency exercise. 16. Several measures could be considered to maintain a strong fiscal position over the medium term. On the revenue side, although private consumption accounts for more Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-lO- Box 1. Fiscal Policy and Fiscal Rules in Oman’ Fiscal policy in many oil-producing countries tends to be procyclical. This implies that government spending or deficit tends to co-move with rising and falling oil (hydrocarbon) prices or revenues ( “oil cycle”). Procyclical fiscal policy tends to propagate oil price volatility to aggregate demand with potential adverse impacts on nonhydrocarbon growth and private sector investment. It can also create a built-in deficit bias as rising expenditures during temporary oil booms become long term commitments that cannot be easily rolled back during downturns in oil prices. Cuts in capital investment therefore become the first line of defense during downturns. There has been evidence of a procyclical fiscal policy in Oman since 1990. There have been two large spending increases in 1992 and 2000 (of about 20 and 16 percent, respectively, from the previous year), which tended to impart procyclicality more than in other years. As a result, these two years have been analyzed separately. The figure below shows that as hydrocarbon revenue increased between the two sub-periods, so did spending and the nonhydrocarbon fiscal deficit. The composition of government spending has also varied over the oil cycle in Oman. During years of rising hydrocarbon revenues, for example in the 1990s and through 2002, current spending has not only increased but it has actually grown faster than capital investment. During downturns, capital spending, unlike other oil-producing countries, has not been cut and has increased significantly, while current spending has seen only a moderate decline in growth. The wage bill (including wage-related benefits) as well as subsidies and transfers have not generally been cut over the cycle. Indeed, during periods of rising hydrocarbon revenues, these categories of current spending have grown two to three times as fast as increases during periods of falling hydrocarbon revenues. In contrast, defense spending has been highly resilient, as it has maintained its share of total government spending over the cycle. To strengthen fiscal management, Oman may consider (a combination of) the following options. First, implement a medium-term budget framework. A medium-term budget based on conservative oil price assumptions would make spending less affected by volatile oil revenue. It would clarify the mix of fiscal adjustment and financing or contingency plans in the face of large deviations from budgetary assumptions, and allow for recurrent cost implications of past investment decisions. Second, complement the above framework by adopting fiscal rules. These could include restrictions placed on nonhydrocarbon fiscal deficit, debt, expenditure growth, as well as a floor on government net financial assets. In the context of oil-producing countries, these rules should be guided by intergenerational economic equity considerations. Third, broaden the tax base and build in automatic stabilizers. Broad-based taxes that are linked to consumption and income would make fiscal policy less procyclical and reduce Oman’s fiscal vulnerability to oil price fluctuations. Oman Hvdrocarbon Revenues and Selected Fiscal Oman Hydrocarbon Cycle and the Compasltmn of 24 20 16 ldicators (Annual average percent change for the period) 24 24 Government Spendmg (Annual average percent change 20 c for the permd 1992-2002) 20 LB 1992-99 I q Years of nsme hvdrocarbon revenues 16 16 I _ ~Years offalling hydrocarbon revenues 12 12 8 8 Hydrocarbon Expenditures and Nonhydrocarbon EW”M net lending deficit Sources: Omani authorities; and Fund staff estimates 24 20 16 8 l/ For further details, see Chapter I in the forthcoming Oman 2003 Selected Issues and Statistical Appendix Report. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- ll- than 40 percent of GDP, it is currently lightly taxed.” Thus, following recent Fiscal Affairs Department (FAD) TA on implementation of a broad-based value-added tax (VAT), the staff encouraged the authorities to lay the groundwork to adopt this tax over the medium term. In line with the experience in other countries, a broad VAT (assuming a 5 percent rate) could provide, when fully in place, the equivalent of at least 1 percent of GDP. 17. In addition to a VAT, other revenue enhancing measures could be adopted. Given the 2-3 year period needed for the preparatory work to introduce a VAT, excise taxes could be placed on luxury goods-as was done in 1998-99 but later reversed. Moreover, a simple system of property taxation could replace the current scheme of taxation for rental agreements, which discriminates in favor of owner-occupiers and is simple to evade (i.e., by not registering the rental agreement). l1 Although natural gas-related revenue will most likely continue to increase in the period ahead, the authorities might also need to consider adopting personal income taxes to increase the share of nonhydrocarbon revenue in total revenue. All these revenue measures will require strengthening the administrative capacity of the tax authorities. 18. There is also ample room for further rationalization of government expenditure. The mission recommended restraining the growth of the wage bill (by limiting both the net intake of civil servants and nominal salary increases) and expenditure on outlays on goods and services, as well as keeping flat in nominal terms subsidies throughout the projection period. In addition, in line with objectives outlined in the current five-year development plan, defense spending should be reduced by 16.5 percent to RO 800 million by 2005 from its peak in 2002. As a result of these proposed measures, spending (including net lending) is projected to grow by 1 percent a year on average from 2004-08 (in line with the forecasted inflation rate), leading to lower expenditures in percent of GDP (see table below). Furthermore, the nonhydrocarbon fiscal deficit would be kept in line with Oman’s estimated permanent income of RO 1.96 billion (based on a projected long-run oil price of $22 per barrel as indicated above), while the government net financial assets position would remain positive throughout the projection period. l2 lo The association agreement under negotiation between the GCC countries and the European Union (EU)-an important trade partner of GCC countries-will require the dismantling of customs duties on imports originating in the EU, creating a potential loss in customs duties revenue. ” In other countries, property taxes have yielded on average about 0.5-l percent of GDP. i2 Chapter II in the forthcoming Oman 2003 Selected Issues and Statistical Appendix report makes a number of simulations to assess the sustainability of current fiscal policy over the next 25 years. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12- Oman: Government Finances Adjustment Scenario, 2000-08 (In percent of GDP; unless otherwise indicated) Prel. Est. Projections 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 Revenue and grants Of which New tax measures li Expenditure and net lending 21 Of which Wages and benefits Defense Overall balance Excluding hydrocarbon revenue 31 (In millions of OR) Memorandum items: Capital expenditure 41 Current expenditure Net government financial assets 40.8 38.8 36.6 35.4 35.2 34.3 34.0 . . . . . . 0.2 0.7 37.1 35.7 35.7 36.2 9.2 8.9 9.1 9.2 9.0 8.8 12.3 11.2 10.1 9.4 9.0 8.5 3.7 3.1 0.9 -0.9 -0.9 1.9 -25.0 -24.2 -23.0 -21.9 -21.5 -20.0 -1,954 -2,024 -1,925 -1,866 -1,916 -1,872 7.2 7.8 8.2 8.7 8.9 6.8 7.1 29.6 27.6 27.1 27.2 26.9 25.3 25.0 10.7 13.2 14.1 12.9 11.5 12.8 14.0 0.8 1.0 1.5 36.1 32.4 32.4 8.7 8.3 1.7 -19.3 -1,869 Sources: Ministry of finance; and Fund staff estimates and projections. l/ Reflects the impact of excise taxes (2004 through 2006), property taxes (beginning in 2005), and VAT (beginning in 2007). 21 As in the baseline scenario, part of the decline in spending in 2007 reflects the decline in oil-related capital spending. 3/ Also excludes the government’s share of PDO oil investments. 41 Assumed to be the same as in the baseline scenario. 19. The authorities agreed with the staff policy recommendations. They pointed out that work will begin in the coming months on developing a medium-term budget framework. Furthermore, they highlighted that some revenue-increasing measures (such as a toll on vehicles exiting to neighboring countries) were already taken earlier this year-though their impact on the budget is expected to be small. The authorities stressed that these measures and the request for a Fund TA mission on a VAT reflected the serious consideration they were giving to alternative ways to broaden the revenue base in the period ahead. However, they emphasized that progress in implementing indirect taxation, including a VAT, will require harmonization or coordination with other GCC countries to avoid unfair competition.13 On subsidies, the authorities indicated that they would like to see the impact of efforts underway to improve the efficiency of electricity and water services before deciding on any increase in I3 The adoption of a VAT is also under consideration in two other GCC countries that have already received FAD TA on this matter. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13- the tariff to consumers in the near term, but they saw some room for cutting defense spending in line with the improvement in the regional situation. Finally, the authorities clarified that the government is currently considering using profit and production sharing agreements with foreign partners to significantly reduce or eliminate the need for government financing of the crude oil investment program. 20. The financial health of the civil service employees pension fund must be addressed to avoid potentially large deficits. Indeed, following the wave of early retirements in the mid- 199Os, the operational surplus of the pension fund has practically disappeared. The authorities recognize the importance of addressing this issue as soon as possible. To this end, they noted that an actuarial study is under way (most likely to be completed by the end of the current year) to verify the size of the fund’s potential financial gap over the medium term, and that additional transfers will continue to be made to avoid a further decline in the fund’s assets. The staff recommended that resources be allocated to recapitalize the fund beginning with the 2004 budget, while determining whether or not there is also a need for greater contributions from both the government and employees. Meanwhile, progress in the consolidation of several government pension funds covering security, military, and civil personnel has remained slow. Negotiations have been protracted owing to difficulties in agreeing on harmonizing benefits across these funds. Monetary and exchange rate policies 21. Monetary policy has continued to be geared toward preserving the credibility of the pegged exchange rate arrangement, maintaining price stability, and enhancing the soundness of the financial system. Free capital mobility and the fixed exchange rate regime limit the CBO’s discretion to conduct an active monetary policy. As a result, the spread between U.S. and comparable Omani government bonds has remained fairly narrow. Given that a few ministries still have direct access to the banking system to cover (temporary) financing needs, the mission encouraged the authorities to eliminate this practice to facilitate coordination of liquidity needs between the government as a whole and the financial system itself. The staff also noted that the margin between average deposit and lending rates in local currency has widened in the past few years (Figure 3). The authorities explained that lending rates have been slow to decline, given the large provisions that banks have made in the past few years to address rising NPLs. However, they expected the slowdown in the increase in NPLs observed since 2002 to provide room for lowering lending rates in the 150 - ---” --_--- Average Real Effective Exchange Rates period ahead. 140 130 (Index 1990=100) 22. The exchange rate peg has served Oman well, both in terms of stabilization and development, by providing a nominal anchor in the 80. face of volatile crude oil prices. 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 Oman’s REER has remained Source: IMF, Information Notice System. stable during much of the 199Os, and the most competitive in the GCC area, reflecting the country’s relatively low inflation. Wage Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14- moderation in the nongovernmental sector in line with productivity growth (about 2.0 percent on average over the period 1997-2000) has also contributed to maintaining the country’s competitiveness. In this context, average export receipts growth of re-exports and locally produced goods (such as chemical and plastic products) remained robust from 1997 to 2002 (11.9 percent and 7.5 percent, respectively), particularly to other GCC countries. The staff also highlighted the need to sustain a strong fiscal position and a sound banking system to support the peg, while promoting human capital development and structural reforms to enhance the economy’s competitiveness and flexibility. B. Financial Sector 23. According to the assessment of the FSAP, Oman’s financial system appears sound. Banks are well-capitalized and provisioned. The regulatory framework is also well developed. Moreover, the country is largely compliant with most of the principles of the five international standards and codes assessed, including AMLCFT, while it has strengthened significantly the rules of governance in the corporate and banking sectors. However, although systemic risk is currently low, vulnerabilities remain-particularly credit and interest rate risk-owing to the concentration of bank lending in a few large business groups that dominate the economy.14 24. To further strengthen the financial sector, the FSAP has recommended improvements in several areas. In particular, the authorities should focus on strengthening credit assessment and risk-based supervision, and commercial banks and the CBO should continuously monitor credit and market risks. In addition, it was suggested that further efforts were required to improve securities supervision, and insurance supervision and regulation. Moreover, policy and practice in loan classification should be clarified and broadened to include the nonbank financial sector. There is also a need to enhance transparency for market efficiency. To this end, it is important that the CBO avoids regulatory forbearance and improves transparency practices in the areas of monetary policy by publishing more data and information on CBO responsibilities and operation as well as more detail on market activity, such as inter-bank transactions. The FSAP also recommended that, based on relevant international experience, the authorities reassess the overall framework of government financial support of small and medium-sized enterprise projects, since the high level of NPLs of these projects at the government-owned Oman Development Bank (ODB) raises doubts as to their effectiveness in achieving development objectives.15 In addition, the FSAP recommended im roving regulation and supervision of pension funds to address their financial health. ‘I? l4 The increase in NPLs in the past few years has reflected in part the exposure of a number of commercial banks to a local business group that experienced financial difficulties. l5 The authorities are considering recapitalizing the ODB with RO 20 million. I6 For further details on the financial sector in Oman, see forthcoming FSAP reports. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 15- 25. The authorities broadly agreed with the FSAP assessment and recommendations. In fact, several recommendations are being implemented, while a committee has been established to follow up on those remaining. The CBO has instructed commercial banks to reinforce their credit assessment and review function, and adopt comprehensive risk management policies, practices, and procedures in line with international best practices. It has hired experienced international staff to strengthen risk-based supervision. Moreover, the CBO intends to issue a circular shortly to harmonize loan classification in the financial sector and expects to put in place an upgraded early warning system in the second half of 2003. The authorities clarified that several steps have been taken to reform the government programs of subsidized loans to small- and medium-sized enterprises, with approval procedures being strengthened and collection of NPLs enforced through the court system. Although these steps are in the right direction, the staff urged the authorities to regularly assess whether the allocation of resources through these programs contributes to enhancing economic efficiency, as well as to work closely with banks to gradually transfer to them the responsibility of assessing and financing projects of small- and medium-sized enterprises. C. Structural Reforms Private sector development 26. Increasing private investment and attracting FDI are key to supporting Oman’s diversification strategy. The power sector has been successful in attracting FDI since the authorities initially favored full private ownership of new ventures-four independent power projects (IPP) are already in operation. However, with the corporatization of existing generation, distribution, and transmission assets recently completed, the authorities plan to fully privatize existing assets over coming years. Important decisions are also contributing to revitalizing the privatization program in other areas. The public telecommunications monopoly, Omantel, will be split into three separate corporate entities (under a holding company) to facilitate privatization, and the government expects to sell early next year one- third of its share in Omantel in the local stock market, in which foreigners can also invest. Moreover, foreign companies will be allowed to compete in the mobile telephone sector in the coming months. The partial divestiture of the government’s shares in two listed manufacturing companies is scheduled for later this year-estimated to bring about RO 10 million in additional resources to the budget. The staff welcomed all these steps to broaden the privatization program. 27. The authorities intend to further unify the treatment of private domestic and foreign capital to attract FDI. To this end, the company and foreign capital investment laws are under review to eliminate the remaining income tax bias against foreign corporations- though already one of the lowest biases in the GCC area-and facilitate foreign firms’ operations in the country without local venture partners. In line with WTO commitments, full foreign ownership of companies in the information technology sector has been allowed as of this year. The authorities expect that a recently established free zone around the industrial port, together with improvement in the one-stop investment shop, will encourage investment. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 16- They also envisage allowing foreign ownership of real estate in the near term through long- term leases. The staff indicated that further progress in establishing a level playing field for domestic and foreign investors will likely encourage investment in Oman. The labor market 28. The authorities are faced with a double-edged problem: the rapid growth of the labor force over the medium term (about 6 percent a year) and the low level of employment of Omani nationals in the private sector. To address this situation, they have taken steps to accelerate the 7--- - ~--~ Share in Percent of Total Employment, 2002 I 100 80 c 60 :. 40 c 20 0 1 I Total Employment Public Sector Private Sector Employ meat Employment 0 Share of expatriates I Share of Ormni nationals replacement of expatriates with national workers (“Omanization” of the labor force). These included the setting up of joint committees with representatives from both the government and the private sector to formulate five-year Omanization plans for various sectors (including oil and gas, information technology, and tourism), with the recently created ministry of manpower playing a supporting and coordinating role. Each plan has established different medium-term quotas on the proportion of nationals to be employed by companies in each sector by 2007.17 The authorities also seek to gradually fully Omanize selected economic activities currently performed by small firms in the service sector. To this end, they are encouraging self-employment opportunities for Omanis by supporting small projects through financing and training, while banning expatriate workers from some activities, basically in retail trade. In this context, the mission urged the authorities to apply the quotas with flexibility and pragmatism, taking into account labor market conditions, and to regularly assess their impact on job-creation. 29. The staff commended the authorities for the renewed strong emphasis on developing human capital to accelerate the Omanization of the labor force. To this end, they are strengthening, modernizing, and restructuring educational and vocational training programs to improve the qualifications and skills of nationals in line with the requirements of the labor market. Government vocational training is being augmented with private vocational training capabilities, and the supervision and monitoring of the quality of programs offered l7 The new labor law, approved in this first half of 2003, has, however, established fines (Article 114) to levy on companies that do not comply with the proposed quotas. A ministerial decree is expected to be issued soon that will clarify the conditions and procedures of the application of fines. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17- by private institutions are being strengthened as well. Basic and secondary education is in the process of major revisions geared toward the development of practical and vocational skills of the students. These supply-side policies, together with the economic diversification strategy, will likely help promote employment opportunities for nationals and, in turn, enhance productivity growth. The staff stressed that wage flexibility should also remain an essential policy to promote long-term job creation. D. Statistical Issues 30. Oman’s statistics are satisfactory for surveillance. The mission commended the authorities for their ongoing efforts at improving data quality, transparency, and dissemination. The latest efforts include completing the household expenditure survey, computerizing CPI data collection, and improving balance of payments (BOP) statistics. In this context, during the mission, the staff prepared, in collaboration with the CBO, a draft International Investment Position (IIP) statement that includes available data on the public and private sectors. The authorities were encouraged to further develop the IIP by collecting external debt data on the private nonbank sector and improving data on investment flows through surveys, initially covering the largest corporations in the country. The CBO pointed out that a survey will be conducted next year to improve the collection of data on direct investment. As in previous Article IV consultations, the authorities were urged to publish available information on Oman’s external debt and a consolidated position of the general government accounts, including data on the financial transactions of the SGRF, Oil Fund, and public pension funds. Although these data were provided to the staff, the authorities remained noncommittal in publishing them. The mission welcomed the authorities’ decision to improve labor statistics, including developing data on unemployment. To this end, they are planning to conduct a labor survey biannually beginning in 2004 after the completion of the 2003 census. IV. STAFF APPRAISAL 31. Oman’s macroeconomic performance has been strong in the past few years. This reflected several factors, including relatively high crude oil prices, rising public consumption and investment in infrastructure, natural gas development, and an improved business climate. Thus, despite greater government spending, notably on defense and the wage bill, the overall fiscal and external current account balances have recorded surpluses since the period of 1999-2000 and, amid price stability, nonhydrocarbon real GDP has been robust. In addition, the government reduced its debt significantly while accumulating foreign assets. 32. Over the medium term, nonhydrocarbon growth prospects remain favorable, but the fiscal position is likely to deteriorate significantly. This deterioration is expected to be brought about by, in particular, the projected decline in global oil prices, slow recovery in crude oil output after falling in the past few years due to aging oil fields, and pressing public investment needs to reverse this decline. Thus, the authorities are encouraged to Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 18- maintain a strong fiscal position to further boost confidence and sustain long-term growth. A strong fiscal position is also needed to support the fixed exchange-rate peg to the U.S. dollar that has served Oman well over the past decades. 33. The authorities should, therefore, implement bold measures to broaden the revenue base. With private consumption currently taxed lightly despite its large contribution to domestic demand, the authorities should consider adopting a broad-based VAT on imports and locally produced goods and services. Since the preparatory work for this tax would require time and the coordination of policy among the GCC countries, the authorities could adopt excise taxes on luxury goods and services in the meantime. Moreover, they could also implement a simple property tax to replace the current scheme of taxation of rental agreements. However, in the long run, despite the expected increase in natural gas-related revenue, the authorities might also need to consider adopting personal income taxes to achieve their long-term goal of significantly increasing the share of non-oil revenue in total revenue. Tax administration will need to be modernized accordingly. 34. There is also ample room for further rationalizing government expenditures to sustain a strong fiscal position. The staff recommends restraining the growth of the wage bill (mainly by limiting the net intake of employees and salary increases) as well as outlays on goods and services, keeping subsidies constant in nominal terms, and, in particular, cutting defense spending in line with objectives set in the authorities’ current five-year development plan. Over the medium term, these proposed expenditure and revenue measures are likely to keep the nonhydrocarbon fiscal deficit in line with Oman’s estimated permanent income out of its hydrocarbon wealth, ensuring intergenerational economic equity, and facilitating Oman’s fiscal convergence vis-&vis other GCC countries in the road toward the creation of the monetary union. 35. The staff welcomes the authorities’ assurances that they stand ready to take all necessary measures to maintain a strong fiscal position. It also welcomes both the decision to cast fiscal policy in a medium-term framework in light of high oil revenue uncertainty, as well as efforts underway to restore the financial health of the civil service employee pension fund. In this context, the authorities should consider complementing this framework with fiscal rules, such as restrictions on the nonhydrocarbon fiscal deficit. Budgetary resources should also be allocated to recapitalize the pension fund beginning with the 2004 budget, and considerations should be given to increasing contributions, while the consolidation of the several government pension funds should be completed as soon as possible. 36. Oman’s key medium-term challenges remain the creation of job opportunities for a rapidly growing local labor force and diversification of the economy. Overall, the structural reforms and development strategy currently underway to address these challenges are moving in the right direction, but further product-market reform will be critical to enhancing productivity. Oman has been a leader in the privatization of the power sector in the region. The authorities should therefore maintain the momentum for further progress in Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 19- liberalizing and privatizing other areas, and achieving, as soon as possible, a level playing field between domestic and foreign investors. Building public support will be critical to facilitate the political and social consensus needed to implement planned structural reforms. 37. Long-term job creation should mainly rely on robust nonhydrocarbon growth, human capital development, as well as wages flexibility. In this context, the authorities are to be commended for their current strong emphasis on modernizing the education system and improving training in line with private sector requirements. However, although they are relying on a participatory approach with the private sector to achieve medium-term quotas for Omani nationals in several sectors, the staff urges them to implement these quotas with flexibility and pragmatism taking into account labor market conditions, and to regularly assess their impact on long-term job creation. 38. Although Oman’s financial sector appears strong, it could be further strengthened in line with FSAP recommendations. Thus, credit-assessment and risk-based supervision will need to be improved together with the financial sector’s legal framework, securities supervision, and insurance supervision and regulation. In this context, the CBO should be commended for its compliance with international standards and ongoing review of policies that will address most FSAP recommendations within the central bank’s influence. Moreover, the staff welcomes the steps taken to improve government programs to support small-and medium-sized enterprises in light of their large NPLs. Nonetheless, it urges the authorities to regularly assess the economic efficiency of these programs, as well as to work closely with commercial banks to gradually transfer to them the responsibility of assessing and financing projects of small-and medium-sized enterprises. 39. The staff commends the authorities for their ongoing efforts at improving data quality, transparency, and dissemination. In this context, it welcomes the decision to begin conducting surveys regularly to improve labor market statistics and collecting information on foreign investment. The authorities are urged to publish available information on Oman’s external debt, as well as the country’s IIP statement with updated data on the public and private sector. To improve fiscal transparency, the authorities should publish the consolidated position of the general government accounts, including data on financial transactions of the SGRF, the Oil Fund, and public sector pension funds. 40. It is proposed that the next Article IV consultation with Oman take place on the standard 12-month cycle. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 20 - 40 30 20 10 0 -10 -20 -30 Figure 1. Oman: Macroeconomic Developments, 1996-2002 (In percent of GDP; unless otherwise indicated) Strong crude oilpnces have contnbuted to mamtarning overallfiscal and external surpluses since 1999-2000, whrle... Fiscal and External Balance Oil Prices (Us per barrel) I Current account balance E3 Overall fiscal balance 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 government debt dechnrd, oficial assets increased raprdly 50 45 Total Government Debt and Foreign Assets 3 40 35 30 25 20 15 10 5 0 Government debt I Official foreign assets 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 20 ‘.’ butprivate znvestment has remained low, and 18 Private and Public Sector Investment c / 12 /’ ‘\ x Public / \ I ‘,------- -. 0 1 I 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 Sources: National authorities; and Fund staff estimates. real nonhydrocarbon growth has remained robust 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 wrth confidence returning to the stock market since 2002 200 Muscat Stock Market 150 100 50 0 -50 100 1 I 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 the public sector hasprovided employment to about half of Omani nationals entering the laborforce since 1999. 1 (In percent of total jobs created for Omanis) I,1 i,l iI 1998 1999 2000 200 1 2002 c1 Private sector 21 E Public sector 31 l/ Includes central bank reserves, and SGRF and Oil Fund foreign assets 2/ Only including Omanis registered with the PAX. 3/ Excluding military personel (datanot available). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2l- 3,000 2,900 2,800 . 2,700 . 2,600 - 2,500 - 2,400 - 2,300 - 2,200 - Figure 2. Oman: Fiscal Developments, 1996-2002 (In millions of rials Omani; unless otherwise indicated) Despite rising expenditure m nominal terms.. Total Expenditure (In nominal terms; (In percent of GDP; 1:::: I 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 an improvement in the overallfiscal balance, 1,000 Overall Fiscal Balance 20 800 16 600 12 8 4 0 -4 -8 44 42 40 38 36 34 32 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 Sources: National authorities; and Fund staff estimates. rapzdly increasing oil revenue contributed to... 3,000 Revenue 2,500 - 2,000 - 1,500 - 1,000 - Nonhydrocarbon )-N / 500- -- -,-) 01 -1,000 -1,500 -2,000 -2,500 -3,000 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 but the nonhydrocarbon deficit deteriorated sharply in nominal terms. 3,000 2,500 2,000 1,500 1,000 500 0 -23.0 Nonhydrocarbon Fiscal Balance 21 (In nominal terms; \, (In percent of GDP -- -23.5 -~ -24.0 ~~ -24.5 ~~ -25.0 ~- -25.5 -- -26.0 ’ -26.5 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 l! Includes crude oil, natural gas, Iiquified natural gas, and refining products. 2/ Excluding government’s share in capital investment by PDO. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 22 - Figure 3. GCC Countries: Selected Indicators (Average in the period 1998-2002; unless otherwise indicated) 7 2.0 6 1.5 5 1.0 4 0.5 3 0.0 2 -0.5 1 -1.0 ” -1.5 1 I Saud1 Bahrain Oman Qatar Kuwait U.A.E. Arabia 25 , I 20 15 Overall Fiscal Balance l/ (In percent of GDP) -10 1 I 0 -5 -10 -15 -20 -25 -30 -35 -40 -45 Kuwait Qatar Saudi Arabia OltltUl Bahrain U.A.E. Nonydrocarbon Fiscal Deficit 21 (In percent of GDP) Saudi U.A.E. Qatar Bahrain Oman Kuwait Bahrain U.A.E Kuwait Qatar Saudi OIIli3ll 25 120 20 15 External Current Account Balance (In percent of GDP) 100 80 10 60 5 -10 Bahrain Saudi OlKiIl Qatar U.A.E. Kuwait Arabia Sources: National authorities; and Fund staff estimates. Arabia Arabia Total Government Gross Debt 31 (In percent of GDP) U.A.E. Oman Bahrain Kuwait Qatar Saudi Arabia l/ Includes government investment income. 2/ Total spending minus nonhydrocarbon revenue, including investment income on government foreign assets, 3/ Gross external and domestic debt at the end of 2002. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-23 - 1.0 0.5 0.0 -0.5 -1.0 -1.5 Figure 4. Oman: Monetary and Financial Sector Developments, 1996-2002 (In percent; unless otherwise indicated) Lower import prices have contributed to price stability in thepastyenrs while... Annual Average CPI A ‘L-l L 1996 1991 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 1996 1991 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 and broad money and private sector 25 20 15 IO 5 0 100 90 80 70 60 50 40 30 20 10 0 . 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 and bankr’net profits recovered sharply in 2002, as... Commercial Banks’ Net Profits (In million of rials Omani) 11 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 1991 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 nominal interest rates have continued to decline, 14 Annual Average Interest Rates 12 - 10 - Lending rates _ _ _ _ _ _ ---_- /-- A’ --__ ‘. 8 - 6 - Time deposit rates 4 - 2 1 2500 2000 1500 1000 500 Bankr’ netforeign assets rosejiuther, Commercial Banks’ Foreign Assets and Liabilities (In million of U.S. dollars) Liabilities _/I----- --_ -. /’ Assets 1996 1991 1998 1999 2000 200 1 2002 12 11 10 9 8 I 6 the growth in the ratio of NPLs slowed down significantly. NPLs ratio (In percent of total loans) Source: National authorities. l/ AAer taxes and provisions for doubtful debts. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 24 - Figure 5. Oman: Medium-Term Baseline Scenario, 1990-2008 (In percent of GDP; unless otherwise indicated) Non-oil GDP growth should remain robust on account of ongoing and planned industnal and service sector projects... resultrng m hrgher mvestment, but 14 , Projections Projections c Real GDP Growth 12 25 Gross Investment 10 _ ;I Nonhydrocarbon ’ . 20 - Total investment 10 - Private investment *.. ,’ . ,-. . I ,_- . 5 - p___I’ .-.-- .-.___- 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 external current account balances are Irk& to move rnto dejctts, owing to lower otl prices and output External Current Account Balance and Oil Prices II \ Projectmn \ \ . ‘- . ..the overallfscal and 12 10 _ Overall Fiscal Balance 8 - 6 - 30 25 20 15 IO 5 0 40 35 30 25 20 15 10 5 0 -5 -10 -15 -20 -25 \ /. / \ I \-\ \ / -/ ’ /I ’ / ‘/ p-\ Current account (left scale) Oil prices 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 \ b 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 45 35 25 15 5 --1--- 9,000 8,000 7,000 6,000 5,000 4,000 3,000 2,000 Total Government Debt Projections 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 Sources: National authorities; and Fund staff estimates and projections Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-25 - Table 1. Oman: Selected Economic Indicators, 1998-2003 Prel. Est. - - 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 National income, production, and prices Nominal GDP (RO millions) Gross domestic investment (percent of GDP) Of which: Private sector Real GDP (percent change) Hydrocarbon GDP l/ Non-hydrocarbon GDP Crude oil production (000 barrels per day) Excluding condensates Average oil export prices (USWbarrel) Liquefied natural gas (LNG) production (million tons) Consumer prices (Muscat) Central government finances Total revenue and grants Ofwhich : Oil revenue Total expenditure Ofwhichc Current expenditure Overall fiscal balance Excluding oil/LNG revenue and PDO investment Government debt Net government financial assets 21 Money and credit Broad money Net foreign assets Domestic assets Ofwhich: Claims on private sector Balance of payments Exports Of which Crude oil LNG Imports, f.o.b. Current account balance In percent of GDP Official foreign assets In percent of GDP Central bank reserves In months of imports 31 Government foreign assets 4/ In percent of GDP Total external debt 51 (In percent of GDP) Exchange rate (RO/U.S. dollar) 5,416 24.0 9.8 2.7 -0.1 4.4 899 899 11.92 0.0 -0.5 35.9 23.4 40.8 33.0 -5.0 -25.1 32.3 -10.1 4.8 -34.1 41.8 18.1 5,521 3,588 0 -5,215 -3,055 -21.7 4,066 28.9 2,007 4.1 2,216 15.7 5,662 40.2 0.384 (Percent change, unless otherwise indicated) 6,041 7,639 7,668 7,804 14.9 11.9 12.6 13.7 5.0 4.4 4.4 4.8 -0.2 5.5 9.3 2.3 -0.4 9.4 9.3 -2.5 -0.1 3.3 9.3 5.1 905 958 956 897 889 893 882 825 17.35 26.71 23.00 24.29 0.0 2.2 5.8 6.5 0.5 -1.2 -1.0 -0.7 (In percent of GDP at market prices) 38.3 44.1 40.7 40.8 28.3 36.6 31.9 29.9 37.6 34.4 36.9 37.1 30.4 27.8 28.8 29.6 0.8 9.7 3.8 3.7 -24.7 -24.4 -26.3 -25.0 26.7 20.0 20.3 16.0 -7.2 5.8 9.6 10.7 (Annual percent change) 6.4 6.0 9.2 26.8 -6.7 -5.4 -2.6 13.4 16.2 8.6 0.9 6.8 (In millions of U.S. dollars) 5.2 58.0 -15.2 0.4 7,240 11,334 11,113 11,256 5,404 8,742 7,578 7,497 0 480 1,203 1,154 -4,299 -4,593 -5,311 -5,633 -228 3,523 2,211 2,026 -1.5 17.7 11.1 10.0 4,195 6,268 7,008 7,290 26.7 31.5 35.1 35.9 2,836 2,448 2,446 3,173 5.5 4.2 4.0 4.8 1,614 4,229 5,108 4,595 10.3 21.3 25.6 22.6 5,919 5,939 5,395 4,515 37.7 29.9 27.1 22.2 0.384 0.384 0.384 0.384 8,367 16.6 5.2 2.2 -4.9 6.0 821 747 27.75 6.6 1.0 38.8 28.7 35.7 27.6 3.1 -24.2 13.6 13.2 3.4 14.2 -4.4 2.0 11,580 7,467 1,384 -6,555 1,507 6.9 7,928 36.4 3,475 4.6 4,931 22.7 4,272 19.6 0.384 Sources: Omani authorities; and Fund staff estimates. l! Includes crude oil, refining, natural gas, and LNG production. 21 Based on available information on total government domestic and foreign assets and liabilities 3/ Goods and services imports in following year. 4/ Includes Oil Fund and State General Reserve Fund. 5/ Includes foreign liabilities of commercial banks. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 26 - Table 2. Oman: Balance of Payments Summary, 1998-2003 (In millions of U.S. dollars, unless otherwise indicated) 1998 1999 2000 2001 Prel. Proj. 2002 2003 Trade balance Exports Oil and gas products, of which: Crude oil Liquefied natural gas (LNG) Other exports Re-exports Imports, f.o.b. Of which LNG-related Income (net) Of which Official receipts Official payments Services (net) Current transfers (net) Private 306 2941 6741 5802 5623 5025 5521 7240 11334 11113 11256 11580 3720 5533 9391 8918 8689 9147 3588 5404 8742 7578 7497 7467 0 0 480 1203 1154 1384 518 524 645 692 679 721 1283 1183 1298 1503 1888 1712 -5215 -4299 -4593 -5311 -5633 -6555 -375 -104 -105 -80 -4 -50 -495 -541 -571 -644 -740 -855 206 -185 -1399 -1467 -1467 Current account balance -3055 (In percent of GDP) -21.7 Capital account Financial account Official capital (net) Of which Government loans Development bonds SGRF assets -5 2740 962 307 -55 596 Non government capital (net) Hydrocarbon sector Of which Direct investment Oman LNG foreign assets Gas sector loans New project loans Commercial banks Other capital 1778 968 91 0 706 0 750 60 Errors and omissions 148 (In percent of GDP) 1.0 Overall balance -172 Change in central bank reserves (- = increase) 172 -879 346 -21 -650 -301 148 252 267 204 92 -159 -169 -165 -100 -49 -1191 -1196 -1415 -1254 -1093 -1438 -1451 -1532 -1602 -1570 -1438 -1451 -1532 -1602 -1570 -228 3523 2211 2026 1507 -1.5 17.7 11.1 10.0 6.9 -3 8 -10 0 0 668 -3110 -1501 -762 -914 -142 -2888 -1417 -402 -841 -309 -116 -443 -598 -559 13 -27 16 -51 55 676 -2606 -99 1 336 -336 810 -223 -84 -360 -73 13 -58 -494 -735 274 11 9 8 13 268 0 -140 -190 71 50 416 183 0 -68 -80 0 0 0 0 497 373 -243 107 -376 -126 424 79 303 751 -221 442 -767 -679 -615 -292 2.8 -3.9 -3.4 -3.0 -1.3 879 -346 21 650 301 Sources: Central Bank of Oman; and Fund estimates and projections. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 27 - Table 3. Oman: Government Finances, 1998-2003 Baseline Scenario (In millions of rials Omani ) 1998 1999 2000 Budget l/ Prel. Budget l/ Est. 2001 2002 2002 2003 2003 Revenue and net grants 2/ 1,942 2,317 3,369 3,118 Revenue 1,944 2,318 3,365 3,122 Oil revenue 1,268 1,708 2,792 2,447 LNG-related revenue 0 0 0 59 Non-oil revenue 676 610 573 616 Taxes 149 159 129 140 Non-tax, of which 527 450 444 476 Public services and utilities 129 131 145 145 Investment income 3/ 135 62 94 128 Grants (net) -1.6 -1.2 3.1 -3.6 Total expenditure 2,218 2,247 2,600 2,744 Current 1,789 1,835 2,124 2,212 Civil 1,024 1,069 1,237 1,195 Wages and benefits 550 570 671 651 Goods and services 310 324 374 376 Subsidies and transfers 63 77 85 74 Interest payments 102 99 107 94 Defense 676 687 809 933 PDO operations 89 78 78 84 Investment 429 412 476 532 Civil 234 236 277 321 PDO capital 179 170 191 199 Gas development 16 6 8 13 Net lending and equity -8 22 28 85 Overall balance 4/ (In percent of GDP) -269 47 741 290 -5.0 0.8 9.7 3.8 Financing Foreign loans (net) Bonds with domestic nonbanks (net) Bonds abroad (net) Oil Fund SGRF (-: accumulation) Banking system, excl. SGRF deposits Privatization proceeds Discrepancy 4/ (In percent of GDP) 269 -47 -74 1 -290 118 -119 -45 -170 -46 -2 -22 15 -21 5 -10 6 -30 -38 -65 -56 252 82 -796 -346 128 -28 15 193 -133 -2.5 53 181 0.9 2.4 69 0.9 Memorandum items: Total expenditure and net lending (annual change in percent) Nonhydrocarbon balance (In percent of GDP) Excluding PDO capital outlays (In percent of GDP) Total government debt (In percent of GDP) Domestic External 2,211 2,269 2,628 2,829 -3.9 2.7 15.8 7.7 -1,536 -1,661 -2,052 -2,216 -28.4 -27.5 -26.9 -28.9 -1,357 -1,491 -1,860 -2,018 -25.1 -24.7 -24.4 -26.3 1,748 1,612 1,525 1,554 32.3 26.7 20.0 20.3 9.5 8.2 6.0 8.5 22.8 18.5 13.9 11.7 2,502 2,486 1,820 89 576 131 446 155 82 16.0 2,832 2,257 1,300 649 478 64 110 871 86 575 315 218 42 34 -364 -4.7 364 3,185 3,183 2,332 113 739 158 581 149 213 2,591 2,59 1 1,837 92 662 148 514 164 110 0.0 2,962 2,359 1,329 694 480 59 95 938 92 603 315 241 47 29 -400 -4.8 400 150 150 3,249 3,249 2,402 135 711 157 554 164 133 1.8 0.0 2,874 2,312 1,257 716 391 80 70 958 97 562 342 201 19 2,962 2,310 1,258 744 396 70 48 938 114 652 350 255 47 23 29 288 3.7 258 3.1 364 0 -288 -230 69 -20 -53 114 -134 -35 -0.4 100 0 0 -258 -215 25 0 0 -129 51 10 0 0.0 2,866 2,896 2,99 1 2,991 2.4 3.2 -2,274 -2,156 -2,329 -2,279 -29.1 -27.6 -27.8 -27.2 -1,954 -2,024 -25.0 -24.2 1,250 1,135 16.0 13.6 7.7 8.4 8.3 5.2 Sources: Ministry of finance; and Fund staff estimates. l/ Budgets include unclassified allocations which are “assigned” to goods and services. 2/ Actuals include oil revenue “assigned” to SGRF and Petrolume Reserve Fund (Oil Fund). 3/ Includes investment income of SGRF (including realized captial gains or losses) and Petroleum Reserve Fund (Oil Fund). 4/ Fiscal balance is on a cash basis. Discrepancy is due to timing differences, check floats and differences in coverage. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 28 - Table 4. Oman: Monetary Survey, 1998-2003 Est. End of period 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 Broad money Money Currency outside banks Demand deposits Quasi-money l! Of which Foreign currency deposits 2,131.3 2,267.5 2,404.O 2,625.5 2,763.0 2,856.3 502.8 509.5 533.9 694.7 769.2 840.0 244.3 273.5 276.8 275.9 289.7 310.0 258.5 236.0 257.1 418.8 479.5 530.0 1,628.5 1,758.0 1,870.l 1,930.8 ,993.8 2,016.3 261.0 204.2 221.9 202.9 324.7 340.9 Foreign assets (net) 654.1 829.3 773.8 731.7 1,156.2 1,320.7 Central Bank 771.2 1,090.o 941.0 939.9 1,219.g 1,335.7 Commercial banks -117.1 -260.7 -167.2 -208.2 -63.6 -15.0 Domestic assets 1,477.2 1,438.2 1,630.2 1,893.g 1,606.8 1,535.6 Claims on Government (net) 8.2 -220.3 -4.5 201.5 90.3 141.6 Central Bank (net) 102.6 -238.8 -21.5 60.0 9.6 9.2 Claims 159.6 3.8 4.5 79.4 25.7 25.7 Deposits 21 57.0 242.6 26.0 19.4 16.1 16.5 Commercial banks (net) -94.4 18.5 17.0 141.5 80.7 132.4 Claims 198.0 334.6 323.0 427.0 357.1 432.4 Deposits 2/ 292.4 316.1 306.0 285.5 276.4 300.0 Claims on public enterprises 0.0 4.1 16.3 28.1 46.0 55.0 Claims on private sector 2,563.l 2,783.3 2,809.2 3,001.4 3,012.7 3,073.o Other items (net) -1,094.l -1,128.9 -1,190.g -1,337.2 -1,542.2 -1,734.0 Central Bank 31 -629.5 -577.7 -642.7 -724.0 -939.7 -1,034.9 Commercial banks 3/ -464.6 -55 1.2 -548.1 -613.2 -602.5 -699.1 Memorandum items SGRF deposits CBO Certificates of Deposit 37.8 238.1 37.7 25.1 2.0 1.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 27.8 119.0 144.4 Broad money 4.8 Net foreign assets -34.1 Domestic assets, ofwhich 41.8 Claims on private sector 18.1 (In millions of rials Omani) (Annual percent change) 6.4 6.0 9.2 26.8 -6.7 -5.4 -2.6 13.4 16.2 8.6 0.9 6.8 5.2 3.4 58.0 14.2 -15.2 -4.4 0.4 2.0 Sources: Central Bank of Oman; and Fund staff estimates. l/ Includes foreign currency deposits and deposits relating to letters of credit. 2/ Includes State General Reserve Fund (SGRF) deposits. 3/ Includes CBO certificate of deposits (CDs) Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 29 - Table 5. Oman Vulnerability Indicators, 1998-2003 (In percent; unless otherwise indicated) Prel. Est. -- 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 External sector indicators Total external debt (in millions of US dollars) l! (In percent of GDP) (In percent of exports of goods and services ) Short-term debt (in millions of U.S. dollars) 2/ (In percent of exports of goods and services ) External debt service/exports of goods and services REER (CPI based - period average) 3/ Public sector indicators Government debt (in percent of GDP) Debt service/total revenue Interest payments/total revenue Government debt by holders, ofwhich. Nonresidents Pension funds and domestic nonbanks Oil and gas revenue/total revenue Net government financial assets (in percent of GDP) External liquidity indicators Official foreign assets (in millions of U.S. dollars) Central Bank of Oman In months of imports 41 State General Reserve Fund (SGRF) In percent of GDP Oil Fund assets Commercial banks NFA (in millions of U.S. dollars) Foreign assets Foreign liabilities Oil and gas exports/total exports Banking sector indicators Nonperforming loans/total loans Net profits of local banks (RO millions) Private sector credit/GDP Average time deposit rates (on RO deposits) 5/ Average lending rate (on RO loans) 5/ Market assessment MSM index (percent change, end period) 6/ Moody’s investor services rating 7/ 5,662 5,919 5,939 5,395 4,515 4,272 40.2 37.7 29.9 27.1 22.2 19.6 98.9 79.5 51.4 47.9 39.4 36.4 2,225 1,952 2,336 3,746 2,053 1,778 38.9 26.2 20.2 33.3 17.9 15.1 17.8 13.6 5.7 8.8 20.7 6.4 -0.1 -1.8 2.0 2.6 -4.0 -10.3 32.3 26.7 20.0 20.3 16.0 13.6 7.1 7.1 3.8 4.0 3.2 2.7 3.7 2.8 1.9 1.9 1.2 0.7 70.6 69.4 69.8 57.9 52.1 38.4 9.0 9.6 8.7 9.5 17.3 21.3 65.2 73.7 83.0 80.3 76.8 78.1 -10.1 -7.2 5.8 9.6 10.7 13.2 4,066 4,195 6,268 7,008 7,290 7,928 2,007 2,836 2,448 2,446 3,173 3,475 4.1 5.5 4.2 4.0 4.8 4.6 2,059 1,359 3,820 4,562 4,117 4,453 14.6 8.6 19.2 22.9 20.3 20.5 158 255 410 546 478 478 -305 -678 -435 -541 -165 -39 1,223 992 1,216 998 1,242 1,287 1,527 1,670 1,650 1,539 1,407 1,326 67.4 76.4 82.9 80.2 77.2 79.0 6.4 71.0 47.3 7.7 9.7 -52.5 9.5 -19.6 -24.4 26.2 Baa2 Baa2 Baa2 Baa2 Baa2 6.0 7.5 10.6 11.3 60.1 51.9 4.9 61.9 46.1 36.8 39.1 38.6 36.7 8.1 7.6 6.0 3.3 2.9 10.5 10.1 9.5 8.5 8.5 24.2 Sources: Omani authorities; and Fund staff estimates. li Includes foreign liabilities of commercial banks. 2/ On remaining maturity basis. Includes amortization of medium- and long-term debt due in the next period 3/Based on data through May 2003. 4/ Goods and services imports in the following year. 5/Latest observations are for 2003.Ql. Lending rates are average returns on entire loan portfolio. 6/Through June 2003. 7/ Long-term bonds and notes. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3o- Table 6. Oman: Medium-Term Baseline Scenario, 2001-08 Prel. Est. -- Projections 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 National income, production, and prices Nominal GDP (in millions of RO) Real GDP Hydrocarbon sectors Non-hydrocarbon sectors Consumer price index (Muscat) Crude oil output (000 barrels per day) li Average oil export prices (US$/barrel) LNG production (million tons) National accounts Gross investment Gross national saving Government finances Revenue and grants Of which Oil revenue LNG revenue Expenditure and net lending Of which Current expenditure Capital expenditure Overall balance Excluding hydrocarbon revenue 2/ (In millions of RO) Government debt Net government financial assets 3/ Balance of payments Exports Of which Crude oil LNG Imports, f.o.b. Current account balance (In percent of GDP) Official foreign assets In percent of GDP Central Bank reserves In months of goods and services imports Government foreign assets 4/ Total external debt (in percent of GDP) 5/ Debt service (in percent of current account receipts) 7,668 7,804 8,367 8,378 8,531 8,927 9,363 9,693 9.3 2.3 2.2 4.8 4.8 7.5 5.3 3.0 9.3 -2.5 -4.9 1.3 1.3 12.6 6.8 0.1 9.3 5.1 6.0 6.5 6.3 5.2 4.6 4.4 -1.0 -0.7 1.0 1.1 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 956 897 821 829 836 869 901 901 23.00 24.29 27.75 24.82 22.88 21.42 20.93 20.93 5.8 6.5 6.6 6.6 6.6 8.5 9.9 9.9 (Percent change, unless otherwise indicated) (In percent of GDP; unless otherwise indicated) 12.6 13.7 16.6 19.8 21.3 19.2 15.4 16.9 23.9 22.7 23.6 19.4 16.3 16.6 15.7 15.7 40.7 40.8 38.8 36.4 34.6 34.2 32.9 31.9 31.9 29.9 28.7 25.9 23.6 23.2 22.3 21.7 0.8 1.4 1.6 1.4 1.3 1.5 1.6 1.6 36.9 37.1 35.7 37.0 38.4 38.4 34.9 35.1 28.8 29.6 27.6 28.5 29.4 29.2 27.8 6.9 7.2 7.8 8.2 8.7 8.9 6.8 3.8 3.7 3.1 -0.6 -3.8 -4.2 -2.0 -26.3 -25.0 -24.2 -24.5 -24.8 -24.8 -23.9 -2,018 -1,954 -2,024 -2,053 -2,116 -2,217 -2,238 20.3 16.0 13.6 15.4 18.1 20.6 20.9 9.6 10.7 13.2 12.6 8.5 3.8 1.6 (In millions of U.S. dollars) 11,113 11,256 11,580 10,853 10,460 11,140 11,575 11,835 5,920 1,561 -8,208 -302 -1.2 7,578 7,497 7,467 6,748 6,281 5,939 5,862 1,203 1,154 1,384 1,239 1,148 1,379 1,561 -5,311 -5,633 -6,555 -7,389 -8,014 -7,993 -7,684 2,211 2,026 1,507 -100 -1,119 -603 52 11.1 10.0 6.9 -0.5 -5.0 -2.6 0.2 7,008 7,290 7,928 8,167 7,746 7,398 7,228 35.1 35.9 36.4 37.5 34.9 31.9 29.7 2,446 3,173 3,475 3,455 3,231 3,111 3,121 4.0 4.8 4.6 4.2 3.9 3.8 3.6 5,108 4,595 4,931 5,190 4,993 4,765 4,585 27.1 22.2 19.6 23.8 28.7 32.4 33.2 8.8 20.9 6.4 5.4 6.1 7.0 7.6 6,737 26.7 3,061 3.3 4,154 34.4 8.5 27.7 7.1 -3.1 -24.1 -2,333 21.6 -1.6 Sources: National authorities; Fund staff estimates and projections. l/ Includes condensates. 2/ Also excludes the government’s share of PDO oil investments. 3/ Government total financial assets less liabilities. 4/ State General Reserve Fund (SGRF) and Oil Fund. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicI. II. Membership Status: Joined December 23, 197 1 Accepted Article VIII, June 19, 1974 General Resources Account: SDR million Quota 194.00 Fund holdings of currency 105.35 Reserve position in fund 88.71 Financial Transaction Plan transfers (net) 7.00 III. SDR Department: SDR million Net cumulative allocation 6.26 100.00 Holdings 7.17 114.47 IV. V. VI. VII. VIII. IX. Outstanding Purchases and Loans: None Financial Arrangements: None Projected Obligations to Fund: None Implementation of HIPC Initiative: Not applicable Safeguards Assessments: Not applicable Exchange Rate Arrangements -3l- Oman: Fund Relations (As of July 3 1,2003) APPENDIX I Percent quota 100.00 54.30 45.73 Percent allocation The rial Omani has been pegged to the U.S. dollar since January 1986 at a rate of RO 1 = US$2.6008. The central bank maintains fixed buying/selling rates for the U.S. dollar: these are RO 1 = US$2.5975/2.6043. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 32 - APPENDIX I Oman’s exchange system is free of restrictions on payments and transfers for international transactions. The authorities have provided documentation to evidence their compliance with Article XIV requirements. X. Article IV Consultations Oman is on an annual consultation cycle. The previous consultation discussions were held from May 20-June 2,2002. The staff report (SM/02/242) and the Statistical Appendix (SM/02/243) were discussed by the Executive Board on September 24, 2002. XI. FSAP Participation, ROSCs, and OFC Assessments FSAP missions visited Oman in February and May, 2003. XII. Technical Assistance (since 1996) MAE-Government debt management MAE-Government debt management MAE-Monetary operations MAE-Economic policy MAE-Banking supervision FAD-Income tax system FAD-Scope for mobilization and reform of non-oil reserve sources STA-Balance of payments STA-GDDS FAD- Value Added Tax XIII. Resident Representative: None December 1996 November 1997-November 1998 September-November 1998 April 1999-April2000 November 2000-November 200 1 February-March 1997 August-September 1997 March 2001 September 200 1 March, 2003 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 33 - APPENDIX II Oman: Relations with the World Bank Group (As of August 2003) Loan portfolio 1. The last Bank loans to Oman were in 1987, and most have since been repaid. 2. IFC holds investments of $625,000 in a leasing company; and $12.4 million in the United Power Corporation (the first independent power project in the Gulf). V. TECHNICAL COOPERATION A report on public expenditures in the health and education sectors was transmitted to the government in August 1994. A Country Economic Memorandum (CEM) was issued in May 1994 (Report No. 1299-OM). In 1995, the Bank provided support in preparation for the Vision 2020 Conference. Some of its recommendations were incorporated in the Fifth Five-Year Development Plan (1996-2000). In 1997, a general study was carried out on the impact of privatization on the economy, focusing on electricity and water. In July 1999, a presentation was made to the Omani Ministerial Privatization Committee on privatization experiences with telecommunications and electricity. In April 2000, a study on the cost effectiveness of the health sector was conducted for the government. In 2000.43, studies on the Omani labor market and on the cost effectiveness of the education sector, were submitted to the Government. The Technical Assistance relationship between the World Bank and the Government of Oman was revived in 2001, with various projects jointly identified. A Bank mission visited Muscat in February 2002 on development of small and medium enterprises (SMEs). This was followed by another mission in June 2003 to begin the analysis of specific aspects of the business environment and to assess existing SMEs programs and institutions. The Bank staff reviewed and submitted comments on a draft poverty study prepared by the ministry of national economy. Staff visited Muscat in July 2003 to discuss some conceptual issues and advise on scope of planned work. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 34 - APPENDIX II l The Bank has submitted a draft report on Oman’s debt market development to the Capital Market Authority. A presentation is planned for end September or early October 2003. There are possible projects stemming from a joint IMF/WB FSAP mission in Oman that took place in June 2003. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 35 - APPENDIX III Oman: Statistical Issues This appendix reviews the overall status of statistical issues by sector and summarizes latest data availability for core statistical indicators. Background 1. The coverage, quality, frequency, and timeliness of Oman’s economic data are adequate and meet the basic requirements for the surveillance, economic analysis, and policy formulation. The authorities regularly publish all data provided to the staff, except for information on the State General Reserve Fund (SGRF), the Oil Fund, and external debt. As a framework for statistical improvements, the authorities have participated in the Fund’s General Data Dissemination System (GDDS) since 2002, and their Metadata are posted on the IMF’s webpage. National accounts 2. National accounts data are prepared by the Directorate General of Economic Statistics in the Ministry of National Economy (MONE) on the basis of information received from government departments and agencies and annual surveys of private and public establishments. The current national accounts series-available in current and constant 1988 prices-were last revised in 1996. Recent improvements in these data include the publication of GDP by expenditure at constant and current prices-albeit with some delay in constant prices. The authorities are currently working on improving the alignment of these data with the 1993 SNA by producing a detailed breakdown of national accounts by main sectors, such as households, private businesses, and government sector. National accounts and other data are posted, and kept current, on the MONE website, along with the latest issue of Oman’s Statistical Yearbook. Price statistics 3. In May 1999, MONE began a three-year household expenditure survey that will provide a more accurate basis for consumer price indices (CPI), household consumption patterns, and the value added in some sectors. The survey has been completed and the results will go into publication later this year. 4. In addition to the monthly CPI, which currently is based on surveys only in the Muscat area, MONE compiles other price indices, such as the wholesale price index (WPI), the Construction Materials Index, and the Building Cost Index, and import unit values. The current CPI was introduced in 1997 using weights based on the 1991 household expenditure survey. Using results from the latest household survey, the authorities intend to introduce a new CPI that would cover, in addition to Muscat, the two largest cities in each of Oman’s five regions, as well as rebase it to the year 2000. Following technical assistance from the Swedish Statistical Office, the authorities plan to publish a new set of price indices, including Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 36 - APPENDIX III those of producer prices and trade. Through the same technical assistance program, electronic and long-distance CPI data collection became operational in 2003. Two pilot projects with World Bank input include collection of data on foreign direct investment, and compilation of price data intended for calculation of purchasing power parity. A broader survey of inbound and outbound tourism is being developed. The authorities also are developing supply and uses of resources tables for the national accounts. Labor statistics 5. Published data on labor markets remain incomplete. Regular information on civil service (except security and defense personnel), public sector enterprise, and private sector employment, including the breakdown between nationals and expatriates, are available. The authorities expect to publish the results of a recent household survey, which would provide up-to-date and more accurate information on wages and unemployment (data on unemployment are not currently collected). This survey is expected to be updated twice a year beginning in 2004. They recently introduced a registration system for jobseekers that would help monitor more closely developments in the labor market. Government finance statistics 6. The authorities provide an analytical presentation of the budget for the consultation process, which includes the accounts of municipalities and the regional administrations. The official budget presentation does not cover all fiscal activities, as it excludes data on operations of the publicly-administered social security funds, and transactions of the SGRF and the Oil Fund, including their income. There are also some difficulties with reconciliation of fiscal outcomes with government financing items, resulting in large discrepancies in some years. Recently, however, the Central Bank of Oman (CBO) and the ministry of finance (MOF) have established a joint committee to examine these discrepancies. 7. The budget and fiscal outcomes are published annually in considerable detail. Fiscal statistics are also provided for the Fund’s Government Finance Statistics Yearbook. Both the budget and annual fiscal accounts are posted in timely fashion on the MOF website. Quarterly data (in less detail) are available in the Quarterly Statistical Bulletin of the CBO. The public is provided with projected fiscal activity of the central government through the five-year development plans. 8. The authorities provide the staff with comprehensive information on the government’s domestic and external debt, including breakdowns by maturity and debt holders. Monetary and financial statistics 9. Monthly monetary data on the CBO, the deposit money banks, and other financial institutions are published in the CBO’s Monthly Statistical Bulletin and Quarterly Statistical Bulletin, usually with only a short lag. These bulletins are also posted on the CBO Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 37 - APPENDIX III website. Monetary and financial data are reported to STA on a regular basis. The stock market index and other stock market data are provided on the Muscat Securities Market’s website on a daily basis. Balance of payments, external debt statistics, and official reserve assets 10. Data for most BOP entries are quite complete, a reflection of cooperation provided to CBO staff by other entities in the government. The CBO has, for several years, published Oman’s BOP statistics following classifications per the fifth edition of the Balance of Payments Manual (BPM.5). Omani compilers also capture information on capital transfers (the “capital account” in BPMS) and publish this detail. Financial accounts transactions of the nonbank private sector are incomplete, a problem which afflicts many countries. Owing to the increased importance of the tourism sector, the authorities have recently started to conduct regular surveys on tourism to determine payment flows associated with this activity. Information on Oman’s external debt includes the central government, and partial data on nongovernment entities, but including important actors such as Oman LNG. No data are currently compiled on external debt of the nonbank private sector. Publication of Oman’s foreign official assets was recently revised in conformity with BPMS. However, external assets of the government (which are assigned to the SGRF) are still reported “below the line” as reserves in the BOP. 11. BOP statistics are submitted for use in the IMF’s Balance ofpayments Statistics Yearbook. Oman does not publish data on its international investment position (BP), although data are made available to Fund staff on the government’s external assets and liabilities. The 2003 consultation mission worked up a prototype IIP statement that was discussed with staff from the CBO, with a recommendation to regularly update it and publish it. 12. Data on components of foreign assets held by the CBO are available in the two bulletins published by that institution, usually with only a short lag. These components are: gold, IMF reserve assets, balances with banks abroad, and securities. Foreign liabilities of the CBO are negligible. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 38 - APPENDIX III Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 39 - APPENDIX IV Public Information Notice (PIN) No. FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE International Monetary Fund 700 lgth Street, NW Washington, D. C. 20431 USA IMF Concludes 2003 Article IV Consultation with Oman On [October 6, 20031, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded the Article IV consultation with Oman.” Background Oman’s macroeconomic performance remained strong in 2002-a trend that is expected to continue in the current year. Real nonhydrocarbon GDP growth accelerated to 6 percent, underpinned by rising public consumption and investment, though aggregate real GDP grew by only 2 percent, as oil output (including condensates) fell by 6.2 percent, mostly owing to aging oil fields. In line with declining import prices, the consumer price index (CPI) fell by about 1 percent in 2002-the third consecutive year of a small negative change. The overall fiscal and external current accounts recorded surpluses last year, as has been the case since 1999-2000. LNG export receipts reached close to $1.2 billion in 2002 (equivalent to 15 percent of crude oil exports), with output of about 6.5 million tons-up from 2.2 million tons in 2000, the first year of exports. As a result, total exports have remained stable at some $11.3 billion since then, despite the fluctuation in oil prices and, more recently, the fall in oil production. After a sharp deterioration caused by higher government spending, particularly in 2000, the nonhydrocarbon fiscal deficit (excluding hydrocarbon revenue and oil-related capital spending) has remained stabled at about RO 2 billion (some l8 Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial information, and discusses with officials the country’s economic developments and policies. On return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the country’s authorities. This PIN summarizes the views of the Executive Board as expressed during the October 6, 2003 Executive Board discussion based on the staff report. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 40 - APPENDIX IV 25 percent of GDP). However, with the wage bill and defense accounting for a large part of the increase in spending, the expenditure structure has become less flexible at adjusting to shocks. The government has devoted budgetary surpluses in the past years to lowering debt and accumulating foreign assets. The repayment of domestic debt contributed to a fall in the banking system’s net domestic assets by 15 percent at end-2002 from a year earlier. As a result, broad money growth decelerated, even though net foreign assets of both the Central Bank of Oman and commercial banks increased sharply. Commercial banks’ performance improved significantly in 2002. After four consecutive years of a decline, profits recovered last year-with this trend continuing into early 2003. This improvement was brought in part by the sharp slowdown in the increase of the ratio of nonperforming loans to total credit of commercial banks, owing to tightened central bank regulations to reduce banks’ exposure to a single borrower, and a more cautious approach to private sector credit taken by commercial banks. At the same time, higher banks’ profits have contributed to a strengthening in market sentiment since last year, with the Muscat Securities Market index-in which financial sector shares weigh heavily-rising by almost 50 percent from end-2001 to end-June 2003, after several years of negative or low growth. Meanwhile, progress has been also made since the late 1990s in accelerating the adoption of structural reforms to support the government’s diversification strategy. In the past year, these reforms have mainly focused on broadening the privatization program, encouraging foreign direct investment, and accelerating the Omanization of the labor force by modernizing the educational and training system and establishing quantitative targets through a participatory approach with the private sector. Executive Board Assessment <Begin Typing Here> Public lnformafion Notices (PINS) are issued, (i) at the request of a member country, following the conclusion of the Article IV consultation for countries seeking to make known the views of the IMF to the public. This action is intended to strengthen IMF surveillance over the economic policies of member countries by increasing the transparency of the IMF’s assessment of these policies; and (ii) following policy discussions in the Executive Board at the decision of the Board. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4l- APPENDIX IV Oman: Selected Economic Indicators, 1998-2002 l! 1998 1999 2000 2001 Prel. 2002 (Percent change, unless otherwise indicated) Production and prices Nominal GDP (RO millions) Real GDP (percent change) Hydrocarbon GDP 2/ Non-hydrocarbon GDP Crude oil production (000 barrels per day) Liquefied natural gas (LNG) production (million tons) Consumer prices (Muscat) 5,416 2.7 -0.1 4.4 899 0.0 -0.5 Financial variables Total revenue and grants Ofwhich : Oil revenue Total expenditure Ofwhich: Current expenditure Overall fiscal balance Excluding hydrocarbon revenue and PDO investment Government debt 35.9 23.4 40.8 33.0 -5.0 -25.1 32.3 Charge in broad money 4.8 Charge in net foreign assets -34.1 Charge in net domestic assets 41.8 Charge in claims on private sector 18.1 External sector Exports Of which Crude oil LNG Imports, f.o.b. Current account balance In percent of GDP 5,521 3,588 0 -5,215 -3,055 -21.7 Central bank reserves In months of imports 3/ Total external debt 41 (In percent of GDP) Average real effective exchange rate (percent change) 2,007 4.1 5,662 40.2 -0.1 6,04 1 7,639 -0.2 5.5 -0.4 9.4 -0.1 3.3 905 958 0.0 2.2 0.5 -1.2 (In percent of GDP) 38.3 44.1 28.3 36.6 37.6 34.4 30.4 27.8 0.8 9.7 -24.7 -24.4 26.7 20.0 (In percent) 6.4 6.0 26.8 -6.7 -2.6 13.4 8.6 0.9 7,668 7,804 9.3 2.3 9.3 -2.5 9.3 5.1 956 897 5.8 6.5 -1.0 -0.7 40.7 40.8 31.9 29.9 36.9 37.1 28.8 29.6 3.8 3.7 -26.3 -25.0 20.3 16.0 9.2 5.2 -5.4 58.0 16.2 -15.2 6.8 0.4 (In millions of U.S. dollars) 7,240 11,334 11,113 5,404 8,742 7,578 0 480 1,203 -4,299 -4,593 -5,311 -228 3,523 2,211 -1.5 17.7 11.1 2,836 2,448 2,446 5.5 4.2 4.0 5,919 5,939 5,395 37.7 29.9 27.1 -1.8 2.0 2.6 11,256 7,497 1,154 -5,633 2,026 10.0 3,173 4.8 4,515 22.2 -4.0 Sources: Omani authorities; and Fund staff estimates. 1/ Official data available as of May 2003. 2/ Includes crude oil, refining, natural gas, and LNG production. 31 Goods and services imports in following year. 41 Includes foreign liabilities of commercial banks. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:58 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public