DOCUMENT OF INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND AND NOT FOR PUBLIC USE SM/O1/116 CONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION April 19,200l To: Members of the Executive Board From: The Acting Secretary Subject: Guatemala-Staff Report for the 2001 Article IV Consultation Attached for consideration by the Executive Directors is the staff report for the 2001 Article IV consultation with Guatemala, which will be brought to the agenda for discussion on a date to be announced. At the time of circulation of this paper to the Board, the Secretary’s Department has not received a communication from the authorities of Guatemala indicating whether or not they consent to the Fund’s publication of this paper; such communication may be received after the authorities have an opportunity to read the report. Questions may be referred to Mr. Arbulu-Neira (ext. 37685) and Mr. Dehesa (ext. 36141). Unless the Documents Section (ext. 36760) is otherwise notified, the document will be transmitted, in accordance with the procedures approved by the Executive Board and with the appropriate deletions, to the WTO Secretariat on Friday, April 27,200l; and to the European Commission, the European Investment Bank, and the Inter-American Development Bank, following its consideration by the Executive Board. Att: (1) Other Distribution: Department Heads Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicDownload Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the PublicCONTAINS CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND GUATEMALA Staff Report for the 2001 Article IV Consultation Prepared by the Staff Representatives for the 2001 Consultation with Guatemala Approved by Miguel E. Bonangehno and G. Russell Kincaid April 18,200l l Discussions for the 2001 Article IV Consultation were held in Guatemala City during November 27 to December 14,2000, and in Washington, D.C., January 25-26,200l. l The staff team comprised Messrs. Arbulu-Neira (Head), Bailen, Dehesa, Fuentes, and Santana (all WHD). Mr. Silvani (FAD) joined the mission for the first days to discuss with the authorities issues on tax policy and administration, Mr. Leone (MAE) joined the mission to discuss the findings and recommendations of the Bank-Fund Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) mission during the final discussions with the authorities. Mr. Su&rez, Advisor to the Executive Director for Guatemala, participated in the final discussions with the authorities in Guatemala and in the discussions in Washington. a The mission team met with the minister of finance, the president of the central bank, the minister of energy, other senior government officials, and representatives of the private sector, NGOs, civil society, and academics. The staff coordinated its work closely with the UN verification mission in Guatemala (MINUGUA) and staff of the World Bank, IDB, and UNDP. l Guatemala is on the standard 12-month cycle and has accepted the obligations of Article VIII, Sections 2, 3, and 4 of the Articles of Agreement, and maintains an exchange system that is free of restrictions on current payments and transfers. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2- Contents Page Executive Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 I. Introduction ..,,................................... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5 II. Background and Recent Economic Developments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6 III. Policy Discussions .......................................................................................................... 9 A. Fiscal Policy ............................................................................................................ 9 B. Monetary Policy .................................................................................................... 11 C. External Sector ...................................................................................................... 15 D. Poverty Alleviation ................................................................................................ 17 IV. Structural Policies .,,..........,.........................,......................... .*.........................*.....*...... 18 V. Medium-Term Outlook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..*........*...... 18 VI. Staff Appraisal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..~......................... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20 Text Boxes 1. Law on Free Negotiation of Foreign Exchange ............................................................. 12 2. Financial Sector Stability Assessment-Main Conclusions ............................................ 13 3. The Social Security System ........................................................................................... 19 Figures 1, Latin America and the Caribbean: Central Government Expenditure on Education and Health and Total Revenues, 1999 ...................................................................... 23 2. Real GDP Growth Rates ............................................................................................... 24 3. Public Sector Indicators ................................................................................................ 25 4. Monetary Sector Indicators .......................................................................................... 26 5. External Sector Indicators ............................................................................................ 27 6. Exchange Rate Developments ....................................................................................... 28 7. External Vulnerability Indicators in a Regional Perspective, Liquidity Indicators .......... .29 8. External Vulnerability Indicators in a Regional Perspective, Solvency Indicators.. ........ .30 9. External Vulnerability Indicators in a Regional Perspective, Solvency and Other Indicators ....................................................................................................... 31 10. Real Effective Exchange Rates Within the Central American Region.. .......................... .32 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-3- Tables 1. Comparative Social Indicators ...................................................................................... 33 2. Macroeconomic Flows .................................................................................................. 34 3. Operations of the Combined Public Sector .................................................................... 35 4. Central Government Expenditure by Function ............................................................... 36 5, Summary Accounts of the Monetary Authorities ........................................................... 37 6. Summary Accounts of the Banking System ................................................................... 38 7. Summary of the Structure and Performance of the Financial Sector ............................... 39 8. Indicators of External Vulnerability ............................................................................... 40 9. Summary Balance of Payments ..................................................................................... 41 10. Summary of Public External Debt ................................................................................. 42 11. Medium-Term Projections, Passive Scenario ................................................................ .43 12. Medium-Term Projections, Active Scenario .................................................................. 44 Appendices I. Fund Relations .............................................................................................................. 45 II. Relations with the World Bank Group .......................................................................... 47 III. Relations with the Inter-American Development Bank .................................................. 49 IV. Statistical Issues ........................................................................................................... 51 V. Press Information Notice (PIN) .................................................................................... 54 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4- Executive Summary Background: Since assuming office in January 2000, the administration of President AKonso Portillo has sought to restore macroeconomic stability and advance the implementation of the donor supported Peace Accords. Macroeconomic policies so far have promoted greater stability, but at the cost of curbing public sector capital outlays in social and basic infrastructure, and crowding out the private sector. The government has been unable to raise tax revenue in line with the Peace Accords and relied on expenditure cuts to reduce the deficit of the combined public sector (including the central bank). The central bank stepped up its open market operations to maintain inflation under control and, in view of the still high public sector deficit, to strengthen the net international reserves position and stabilize the exchange rate. The current policy mix of macroeconomic policies is unsustainable over the medium term and has begun to impact adversely on economic activity. Moreover, the effect of the policy mix would be aggravated further by the need to deal with the carrying costs of closing nonviable financial institutions. Three commercial banks have been intervened by the authorities since February 2001 and others may have to be intervened in the f&u-e. Policy discussions: The challenge facing Guatemala in 2001 and over the medium term is to increase tax revenue to raise social expenditure as agreed under the accords, make room for noninJlationary$nancing of carrying the costs of bank restructuring, and ease the tight stance of monetary policy while preserving macroeconomic stability. Under this policy mix, the exchange rate should reflect market conditions, except for market smoothing. In the fiscal area, the staff recommended limiting the public sector deficit to 1% percent of GDP in 2001 (2% percent of GDP in 2000). An up-front increase in taxes based on a few, strong measures would boost the tax revenue from 9.6 percent of GDP in 2000 to 11.3 percent of GDP in 2001 setting the stage for achieving the 12 percent of GDP targeted in the accords. In addition, the authorities should keep the wage bill under control, and phase out revenue earmarking and the electricity subsidy. In the monetary area, the objective should be to target inflation in the 4-6 percent range while allowing a f%rther recovery in the NIR position. The tight stance of monetary policy should be maintained until appropriate fiscal measures are in place and the situation in the financial system improves. Monetary developments should be monitored closely, as the effectiveness of monetary policy could be impaired by the increased volatility of demand for money resulting from allowing the constitution of foreign currency deposits and f?om the intervention of some banks. In the financial system, the authorities should implement the recommendations of the FSAP mission. They should liquidate without delay insolvent financial institutions, including those already intervened, make a comprehensive examination of other banks, reform the payments system and the lender-of-last-resort facilities, and address many of the current legal shortcomings through new laws on central bank, banking sector, and banking supervision. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-5- 1. INTRODUCTION 1. Despite some improvement in economic performance and structural reforms since the early 199Os, Guatemala continues to face serious problems of poverty and income distribution (Table 1). Nearly 60 percent of the population lives below the poverty line, the income received by the richest quintile is 30 times the income of the poorest quintile, and 2% percent of farms take up 65 percent of agricultural land. The 1996 Peace Accords set a social agenda to address ingrained inequalities, institutional failures, and social barriers through a substantial increase in public sector investment in social and basic infi-astructure to be fmanced by higher tax revenue and donor support. However, implementation of the accords has suffered from weak execution capacity and lack of domestic resources due to scant political support (Figure 1). The main problem has been the insufficient tax revenue effort, with the tax ratio currently around g3/4 percent of GDP, well below the 12 percent of GDP for 2002 targeted in the accords.’ 2. At the conclusion of the Article IV consultation with Guatemala on December 16, 1999, Directors emphasized that the critical challenge facing the administration slated to take office in January 2000 was to increase taxes to reduce the public sector deficit while increasing peace related expenditure. Tax measures together with implementation of social and institutional programs under the accords were needed to secure assistance from the international community. Directors also encouraged the authorities to continue the tight monetary policy implemented since August 1999, but stressed that reliance on tight monetary policy without a reduction of the fiscal deficit would undermine the achievement of high and sustainable economic growth. In addition, Directors recommended strengthening the supervisory oversight of the financial system and implementing a general framework to deal with insolvent fmancial institutions. 3. Guatemala’s statistical system is barely adequate for surveillance and analysis, and, as discussed in Appendix IV, there is room for significant improvement in the quality, frequency, and timeliness of data. National accounts are compiled using an outdated base; information on the operations of the public enterprises and the social security system is available only irregularly; problems exist in reconciling the fiscal balance ti-om above the line with fmancing flows from below the line; data on short-term private external debt is incomplete; and data on offshore financial activities is lacking. The authorities are working to improve the quality of national accounts, prices, and monetary accounts with technical ’ Difficulties of raising revenue to the level envisaged in the original peace program (12 percent of GDP in 2000) led the authorities to negotiate with international donors a revision of the program to achieve the objective by 2002. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-6- assistance from the Fund, and of the fiscal sector as part of the Integrated Financial Management System (IFMS).2 II. BACKGROUNDANDRECENTECONOMICDEVELOPMENTS 4. Beginning in 1995, Guatemala implemented demand and structural policies aimed at accelerating real economic growth and reducing poverty; as part of these policies, Guatemala has maintained a managed float exchange rate system. However, uneven policy implementa- tion and external shocks prevented Guatemala from achieving the rapid sustainable growth needed to help address its poverty and income distribution problems. Following two years of tight demand policies, in 1997 the authorities loosened fiscal and monetary policies in an attempt to promote faster economic growth. The increase in domestic demand led to an acceleration of GDP growth, but also to pressures on the external current account and the foreign exchange market that prompted the central bank to sell dollars in the foreign exchange market. In 1998 and 1999 the external balance also was affected by adverse terms of trade and weather conditions (including Hurricane Mitch), sharp volatility in capital flows as a result of the international financial turmoil, and political uncertainty associated with the electoral process. By mid-1999, the external current account deficit widened to over 6 percent of GDP, the net international reserves position fell to slightly over two months of imports of goods and services, and the quetzal depreciated by about 11 percent during the year through July 1999 in both nominal and real effective terms, despite heavy selling of U.S. dollars by the central bank. To help stabilize the quetzal while strengthening the net international reserves position, the central bank began to tighten monetary policy in August 1999; however, as fiscal policy remained expansionary, high domestic interest rates began to constrain economic growth. 5. Since assuming office in January 2000, the administration of President Alfonso Portillo has sought to restore macroeconomic stability and advance the implementation of the donor supported Peace Accords. Real GDP growth slowed to 3 percent in 2000 (3% percent in 1999) reflecting the tight stance of monetary policy, cuts in public sector investment, and the effect of adverse terms of trade (Figure 2). Inflation remained at about 5 percent-the lower end of the central bank’s target range of 5-7 percent-as the effect of a deceleration of aggregate demand and currency stability, noted below, more than offset rising oil prices, The external current account deficit narrowed to 4% percent of GDP in 2000 (5% percent in 1999) owing to slower economic activity and, the effect with a lag of the large real quetzal depreciation in 1999. The capital account surplus rose to 8% percent of GDP on the strength of private capital inflows attracted by high domestic interest rates and renewed 2 The IFMS is a computerized system aimed at modernizing key areas of budgeting, cash management, auditing, and procurement in the public sector. So far it covers the central government, and some decentralized agencies only. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-7- confidence in the quetzal, and on account of the second installment of receipts I?om the privatization of the state telecommunication company (TELGUA), equivalent to 0.7 percent of GDP (Table 2). 6. The overall deficit of the combined public sector (including the central bank) narrowed to 2l% percent of GDP in 2000 (3 percent of GDP in 1999) due to cuts in central government capital outlays, including in basic and social infrastructure, to 3% percent of GDP (5% percent of GDP in 1999) (Tables 3 and 4). Public sector savings fell to 2 percent of GDP in 2000 (2.8 percent of GDP in 1999), mostly on account of rising current expenditure associated with a 10 percent across-the-board increase in wages, a higher interest bill (including on open market operations), and the cost of the subsidy on electricity consumption.3 Tax revenue rose to 9.6 percent of GDP (9.3 percent in 1999) reflecting improved tax administration and the effect of tax measures introduced in June 2000. Such measures included: increasing the top income tax rate from 25 percent to 31 percent; widening the VAT base to include custom duties; and phasing out some exemptions4 From the financing side, external financing slowed reflecting lower capital outlays and the public sector had to draw down deposits at the central bank, notwithstanding the proceeds from privatization (Figure 3). 7. The central bank has maintained a tight stance of monetary policy since August 1999. In January 2000, pressures on the quetzal rekindled and the new authorities were concerned that, following the steep quetzal depreciation in 1999, a depreciation-inflation spiral was in the making. Such a development would have had a more damaging effect on the balance sheets of the corporate and financial sectors than an increase in domestic interest rates. Therefore, the central bank stepped up its placement of securities maintaining their average interest rates at above 23 percent (compared with 14% percent on the eve of tightening monetary policy in August 1999). Thereafter, as confidence in the quetzal improved, higher private capital intlows put upward pressure on the quetzal, which prompted the central bank to buy U.S. dollars and to mop up the resulting liquidity through open market operations. In all, the net domestic assets of the central bank fell in 2000 by about 70 percent of the currency issue at the beginning of the year despite a continuous fall, albeit at a slow pace, in the average interest rate of open market certificates to about 18 percent by year’s end (Figure 4). 3 Residential users. consuming up to 300 kw a month (92 percent of residential users, which are mostly in urban areas) are charged only half of the cost for electricity services. The subsidy is reflected in lower revenues to the public energy company (INDE) and was estimated at the equivalent of 0.2-0.3 percent of GDP in 2000. 4 These measures are expected to yield some 0.4-0.5 percentage point of GDP on an annual basis, but their full effect will be felt starting in 2001. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-8- 8. As a result, usable net international reserves rose by US$725 million in the year,’ bringing the stock to the equivalent of 117 percent of base money in December 2000 (Figure 5). In 2000 the quetzal appreciated by about 5 percent in both nominal and real effective terms (Figure 6). Private sector financial savings rose by about 23 percent in the year, but credit to the private sector rose moderately, because of the tight monetary policy and a cautious credit policy on the part of banks (Tables 5 and 6). 9. The financial sector remains quite fragile and there is an urgent need to cope with various weaknesses and vulnerabilities. The financial system reform in the early 1990s included liberalizing interest rates, unifying legal reserve requirements, reducing barriers to entry, and expanding financial services.6 This reform led to rapid credit growth to the private sector, but as prudential regulations and supervisory oversight have remained inadequate- and noncompliant with nearly all internationally accepted financial standards-loan portfolios are weak and concentrated on related parties. Nonperforming loans stood at 13 percent of total loans at end-2000, with a substantial underprovisioning (provisions amounted to about % of nonperforming loans). Full provisioning would leave some banks with severe capital shortages. Furthermore, capital adequacy ratios and profitability have deteriorated. The recent FSAP mission found that five small financial institutions (representing about 10 percent of total deposits) were clearly insolvent, and that a larger bank showed underprovisioning, to some extent, relied on public sector deposits. Subsequently, the government has intervened three of these banks. The size of the problem is probably larger as an important segment of the fmancial sector consisting of offshore and off-balance-sheet operations (estimated to be about the same size of the regulated system) are outside the reach of the official supervision and regulations. In addition, deposits fkom the public sector, especially the social security system, are supporting financial institutions that are under serious risk of insolvency (Table 7). 10. Indicators of external vulnerability improved in 2000 (Table 8). These indicators include: a narrowing of the external current account deficit, a recovery of export growth to above 10 percent, and a decline of the external debt to GDP ratio to 17% percent. Regarding the indicators of liquidity, net international reserves grew strongly, the ratio of net international reserves to M2 rose to 35 percent, and the ratio of net international reserves to the stock of short-term debt (on remaining maturities) plus the external current account deficit less the net foreign direct investment rose to about 90 percent (about 50 percent in 1999). However, figures on the liquidity position have to be interpreted with caution since an important part of the international reserve recovery in 2000 reflected the repatriation of savings held abroad, which have proved to be very volatile as shown by the outflow of private ’ Usable net international reserves exclude claims on Nicaragua, which are part of the official published data on international reserves. 6 W/98/95: Guatemala-Recent Economic Developments, May 11, 1998. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-9- capital in 1999. Furthermore, the improved liquidity indicators are needed given the h-agile situation of the financial system. 11. Comparing external vulnerability indicators for Guatemala with those for other Central American economies indicate that while the external fundamentals of Guatemala remain favorable, external liquidity indicators are weaker. The ratios of net international reserves with respect to both short-term debt, and short-term debt plus external current account deficit less net foreign direct investment are both below average for the region. By contrast, Guatemala compares favorably to other countries in the region regarding both the public external debt and short-term debt to GDP ratios (Figures 7-9). III. POLICY DISCUSSIONS 12. The authorities’ objectives for 2001 are to accelerate real GDP growth to about 4 percent and maintain inflation within the 4-6 percent range while strengthening further the foreign exchange position and the financial sector. To this end, they are targeting to narrow the combined public sector deficit to 2 percent of GDP and maintain the tight stance of monetary policy during the year. The staff noted that, as the budget approved by congress does not include new tax measures and the carrying cost of financing the bank restructuring under way, the core of the fiscal adjustment will continue to fall on capital outlays. Moreover, the authorities’ planned reduction of the deficit will be insufficient to bring the fiscal position to a sustainable level over the medium term, which the staff projected to be about X-1 percent of GDP, The government could maintain temporarily a higher deficit by increasing foreign commercial borrowing, but it probably would come at a high cost, which in turn would limit resources needed to increase social expenditure, finance banking restructuring, and recapitalize the central bank. In 2001 the public sector gross borrowing requirement would amount to about 8 percent of GDP, and only the use of privatization proceeds to finance the deficit would preclude the monetization of the fiscal imbalance. Deficits of the same magnitude in mture years would expose the economy to excessive funding risks. In addition, the tight stance of monetary policy and resulting high domestic interest rates would dampen economic recovery and negatively affect the already weak position of a segment of the financial system. ZTierefore, the mission concluded that the critical challenge facing Guatemala in 2001 and over the medium term is to increase tax revenue to raise social expenditure as agreed in the Peace Accords, make room for noninjlationa~financing of the carrying costs of bank restructuring, and ease the tight stance of monetary policy somewhat while preserving macroeconomic stability. Under the proposed policy mix, the exchange rate should reflect market conditions but intervention would be appropriate to maintain orderly conditions. A. Fiscal Policy ii The staff stressed the need to put in place without delay a strong revenue package e uivalent to 1% percent of GDP) with the aim of reducing the public sector deficit to about 1% percent of GDP in 2001, while increasing capital outlays to above 4 percent of GDP Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-lO- (as opposed to the decline to 3% percent of GDP envisaged in the authorities’ budget), financing the expected cost of closing insolvent banks, and easing the burden on monetary policy. In this regard, the staff proposed measures to boost the tax ratio to 11% percent of GDP in 2001 and to 12 percent of GDP in 2002 through: (a) increasing the VAT rate by 3 percentage points to 13 percent (this would yield about 1.3 percent of GDP); (b) broadening the VAT base by eliminating most exemptions and zero rated items except for export products (l/4 percent of GDP); and (c) eliminating the VAT credit against the income tax (1/ percent of GDP). The staff noted that there was a need to begin building a fund to cover the cost of closing banks7 and to recapitalize the central bank (which has a negative wealth estimated at 7-8 percent of GDP in 2000) as recommended by the FSAP mission, and reform the social security system. In addition, the staff encouraged the authorities to continue improving tax and custom administration by introducing stiffer penalties for tax evasion and speeding up the collection of tax arrears. 14. The authorities reiterated their commitment to reach the tax ratio of 12 percent of GDP in 2002 from a projected 9.8 percent in 2001, and said that they would make an assessment of the political feasibility of the revenue actions suggested by the staff within a framework of an envisaged agreement with the civil society. Such an agreement would include, in addition, the implementation of programs to meet the social targets of the Peace Accords. The authorities also said that they were not in a position to recapitalize the central bank because of a strict interpretation of the constitutional prohibition against central banks’ financing of the government’ and budget considerations. 15. The mission found that there was room to improve the quality and targeting of public sector expenditure. The authorities need to reduce unproductive expenditure extending the use of the scheme under the IFMS to other public sector agencies, and keep the wage bill under control by limiting wage increases to those specifically authorized in the 2001 budget.g In addition, targeting of expenditure should be improved by phasing out some 7 Staff projections assume that the cash needed to repay depositors is equivalent to 2 percent of GDP over 2001-02 to be financed equally by domestic and external resources; the operation is recorded “below the line” and as such is not reflected in the projected public sector deficit. The corresponding carrying costs were projected by the staff at 0.1 percent of GDP in 2001, which is recorded “above the line” and in the projected public sector deficit. ’ This interpretation precludes recapitalizing the central bank with a government bond as this bond would be recorded as a credit to the government in the balance sheet of the central bank. ’ The 200 1 budget includes a 10 percent general wage increase and a 1 ‘/z percent increase in the number of civil servants. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-ll- revenue earmarking” and the subsidy on electricity that benefits the urban middle class. The authorities stressed that they would make efforts to cut unproductive expenditure, but did not rule out further wage increases in 2001 within the context of the agreement with the civil society noted above. They also said that they would examine the possibility of reducing the subsidy on electricity and phasing out earmarking of revenue, except those specified in the constitution, B. Monetary Policy 16. The central bank plans to maintain a tight stance of monetary policy. The monetary program approved in January 2001 targets inflation in the 4-6 percent range and, as a secondary objective, an increase in net international reserves of US$l75 million (to the equivalent of 120 percent of base money in December 2001). The authorities said that until appropriate fiscal measures were in place, they were ready to maintain the tight stance of monetary policy or tighten it further as needed to protect the external position, The staff prepared monetary projections for 2001 assuming the fiscal adjustment recommended by the staff (i.e., limiting the public sector deficit to 1% percent of GDP). Furthermore, the projections assumed that private financial savings increase slightly faster than nominal GDP after taking into account the introduction of foreign currency deposits noted below. These projections suggest that there may be some room for a reduction in the stock of outstanding open market certificates and a pick up in the growth of private sector credit to 11 ‘/z percent by year’s end.” The authorities were in general agreement with these projections and said that they would continue to monitor the currency issue, which is projected to increase by 10 percent by year’s end, as the intermediate policy target. The authorities noted that they would follow monetary developments very closely as the effectiveness of monetary policy in 2001 could be impaired by the increased volatility of the demand for money resulting from the introduction of foreign currency deposits in banks’ books (see below) and the intervention of some commercial banks. As noted below, the central bank’s assistance to intervened banks by end-March 2001 was equivalent to 19 percent of the currency issue as of end-2000. 17. In December 2000, congress approved a law allowing residents, as of May 1,2001, to use foreign currency in transactions in addition to the quetzal (Box 1). Accordingly, residents and nonresidents will be allowed to hold assets and liabilities in foreign currency in lo Central government expenditure has a significant degree of rigidity stemming from the earmarking of revenue (SM/99/283, Guatemala-Staff Report for the 1999 Article IV Consultation). l1 The projections assume that deposits in local and foreign currency are subject to the same legal reserve requirement. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 12- Box 1. Law on Free Negotiation of Foreign Exchange As of May 1,200 1 Guatemalan residents will be allowed to use foreign currency in domestic transactions. Unlike in El Salvador or Ecuador, the domestic currency will remain the exclusive legal tender and unit of account so that residents can always honor a financial obligation in quetzales. In addition, taxes and wages would be denominated in domestic currency unless otherwise agreed. The law explicitly allows financial institutions to accept foreign currency deposits and grant foreign currency credits. Currently, some financial institutions de facto undertake foreign currency intermediation by registering foreign currency operations with residents in related offshore banks, but these operations are not supervised or regulated by the superintendency of banks or the central bank. No offtcial information exists on the amount of these operations, but market participants have indicated that they could be as large as that of domestic currency intermediation in Guatemala (Box 2). the domestic banking system.12 The authorities saw benefits in terms of improved transparency as they expected that operations currently registered in the books of related offshore banks would be registered in the corresponding domestic bank. The staff noted that while the macroeconomic effect of this measure is uncertain, rapid increase in foreign-currency deposits might put pressure on the exchange rate and would inevitably have major implications for future exchange rate policy. While the authorities agreed on the uncertainty of future macroeconomic effects, they were of the view that pressures on the exchange rate would be limited as most of the foreign currency operations were already registered in banks’ related offshore operations. The staff, noting the increased vulnerability of the financial system that might result, encouraged the authorities to press ahead with their plans to introduce beforehand prudential regulations limiting banks’ unhedged exposure to exchange risks along the lines of the recommendations of the Basle Committee, and to require that bank credit in foreign currency be limited to borrowers with revenues in foreign exchange. In addition, the introduction of foreign currency deposits adds urgency to the need to introduce money laundering legislation, which the authorities said would be ready to go to congress for approval by mid-200 1, l2 Some financial institutions have been intermediating in foreign currency with residents and registered such operations in related offshore banks. These operations are outside the control of the Superintendency of Banks and of the central bank. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 13 - Box 2. Financial Sector Stability Assessment-Main Conclusions Guatemala volunteered to participate in the Joint Bank-Fund Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP). The FSAP mission visited Guatemala City in July and September 2000, to assess financial sector vulnerabilities and risks, the observance and implementation of supervisory standards and best practices, and transparency in monetary and financial policies. On the basis of the work of the FSAP missions, a Financial Sector Stability Assessment (FSSA) was prepared and accompanies this staffreport for the 2001 Article IV consultation. The main conclusion of the FSSA report is that, overall, the fmancial system in Guatemala is quite fragile, and that there is an urgent need to develop a comprehensive strategy to cope with the various weaknesses and vulnerabilities identified by the FSAP mission. A combination of factors has contributed to this situation, of which the most important are: large swings in macroeconomic policies, significant capital flows in the context of weak banking supervision and prudential regulation, adverse terms of trade and weather conditions, a vulnerable payments system, lack of transparency for the conduct of monetary and financial policies, and an inadequate legal and institutional tiamework for the resolution of insolvent financial institutions. Looking ahead, serious risks remain deriving from the continuing deterioration ofthe fiscal stance, increasing liquidity assistance to troubled banking institutions, and continuing political pressures to increase private sector credit. Financial information indicates an increase in nonperforming loans, insufficient provisioning, and a deterioration in capital adequacy. The magnitude of the problem is probably larger as nonperforming loans may have been transferred to the offshore system or recorded as other unsupervised onshore financial activities (including those of related credit card companies). The weak position of the financial system reflects mostly a number of structural weaknesses in prudential regulation compounded by poor supervisory practices. Banking supervision is structurally weak because of governance problems that affect regulatory powers, enforcement capacity, decision-making process, and the superintendency of banks’ (SB) autonomy, As a result, compliance with Base1 Core Principles (BCPs) is poor. No BCP was found to be fully complied with while onlytwo BCPs were found to be partially complied with (see Section II of accompanying FSSA). The Guatemalan payments system is mainly check-based and the Bank of Guatemala (BANGUAT) implicitly guarantees that clearinghouse balances will be settled. This poses risks for both the implementation ofmonetary policy and the financial position of the BANGUAT. Payment default in the clearinghouse could lead to the intervention ofthe defaulting bank as the BANGUAT cannot grant automatic overdrafts since 2000; but the BANGUAT would have to assume the unpaid balance. There is a risk in the settlement of foreign exchange transactions because checks in quetzales are certain to be collected because of the implicit BANGUAT’s guarantee of the clearinghouse balance, while checks in dollars may be refused because of lack of funds. There is also a risk in the settlement oftrade in securities as the bank that receives the payment has the assurance that the BANGUAT will honor the check in the clearinghouse, while the final customer may not have sufficient funds in his account to honor the related payment. Guatemala does not comply with the draft core principles for systemically important payments systems. The institutional and legal framework for the conduct of monetary and financial policies is inadequate. The role and responsibilities ofthe monetary board (MB) and the BANGUAT are clear, but neither is accountable to a higher authority. In addition, the MB comprises representatives of the political and private corporate sectors (including the banking sector), giving rise to conflicts of interest as the MB plays a prominent role in formulating monetary policy and as the MB exerts excessive influence over the SB’s areas of responsibility (reflecting the lack of clarity in the role, responsibilities, and objectives of the SB). Moreover, the transparency of monetary policy is weakened by inappropriate accounting practices. In all, the Code of Good Practices on Transparency in Monetary and Financial Policies is only partially observed. The legal and judicial framework for bank restructuring and resolution is inadequate. The system for early correction of troubled banks is weak, as there is no namework for early regularization and enhanced supervision of these institutions. Lender-of-last-resort facilities and government deposits are inappropriately used to keep insolvent institutions alive. The intervention of banks requires authorization of the MB and the liquidation has to be declared by a judge, resulting in a late mechanism to address problems and increasing fiscal costs. The Law for the Protection of Savings (FOPA) represents a powerful tool for intervention, although it entails risks, particularly due to potentially unlimited access to BANGUAT resources. Other legislation aimed at modernizing monetary and financial policies is expected to be approved shortly, including a new Organic Law for the BANGUAT, a banking sector law. and a bankine sunervision law. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 14- 18. The mission expressed concern regarding the large amounts of open market certificates falling due in midyear.13 The authorities said that they plan to smooth out the effect of this bunching by using part of the privatization proceeds (US$350 million in May). In any event, they stressed their readiness to raise domestic interest rates as needed to roll over part of the certificates falling due. 19. Guatemala participated in the FSAP in conjunction with the Article IV discussions.‘4 The FSAP recommended to develop a strategy to quickly act on various weaknesses and vulnerabilities of the financial system. Such a strategy includes: (i) seek the immediate exit of five insolvent institutions; (ii) monitor closely a larger bank showing under-provisioning to seek its recapitalization by its owners or, if necessary, intervene it; (iii) undertake a careful assessment of the conditions of banks; (iv) finalize new financial sector legislation, particularly on central banking, banking sector, and banking supervision; and (v) reform the payments systems. In addition, within the next year the authorities should resolve outstanding deficiencies in banking supervision (including consolidated supervision of onshore and offshore activities); resolve the weaknesses of the lender-of-last-resort facilities; and improve instruments of monetary policy. The authorities said that they found the FSAP exercise very valuable as it represented the frost comprehensive review of the Guatemalan financial system, which incorporated major macroeconomic, institutional, and systemic factors. They were already cognizant of the structural weaknesses in prudential regulations compounded by poor supervisory practices, and in this regard they were working to strengthen the legal and institutional fkamework with assistance from multilateral organizations. Technical assistance from the Fund and the Bank intensified after the FSAP mission on the payments systems, on legal issues related to the central bank, banking sector, banking supervision, and on bank resolution. 20. In line with the FSAP recommendations, the authorities intervened three small banks (with a deposit base equivalent to 6% percent of the total banks’ deposits) in early 2001. The authorities, concerned about the possible negative effect on the confidence of the banking system’s depositors, decided to retimd in full depositors of these three banks.” To l3 Most of the stock of open market certificates outstanding at end-2000 are due in 2001, with a concentration of amortization in May (US$120 million or 0.6 percent of GDP) and June (US$225 million or 1 .l percent of GDP). l4 The findings of the FSAP mission are provided in the accompanying FSSA report, which is summarized in Box 2. l5 A limited deposit insurance applicable only to passbook savings accounts was created in 1999 but it is not yet operational, because some banks have not agreed to establish the trust arrangement that creates the deposit insurance fund. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 15- bridge the financing needs, the central bank extended a Q 1.5 billion (1 percent of GDP or 19 percent of the currency issue as of December 2000) line of credit to these banks. The central bank has so far sterilized the monetary effect of this line of credit by stepping up its open market operations. In this regard, monetary control would be seriously compromised in case a larger bank needs to be intervened or liquidity conditions in the banking system deteriorate. Fund and Bank staff recommended the liquidation of intervened banks as soon as possible to avoid a further deterioration in the value of these banks’ assets and, hence, minimize fiscal costs. Moreover, the staff stressed that the cost of the intervention be assumed by the government rather than the central bank. The authorities were mustering political support to unwind intervened banks by transferring the liabilities and good assets to another bank, and then submitting the residual balance sheet to judicial liquidation. 21. The authorities said that they would continue intervening insolvent banks and make a comprehensive examination of other banks to assess the need for additional actions to strengthen their balance sheets, The authorities were preparing new laws for the central bank, banking sector, and banking supervision; however, the drafts under consideration by the monetary board so far have failed to address many of the legal shortcomings identified by the FSAP mission and subsequent Fund and Bank missions. These drafts subject onshore and offshore activities to different prudential regulations, maintain loopholes in the consolidated supervision of financial groups, and maintain the process of judicial liquidation which is legally insecure and inefficient. Also, the central bank has begun to deal with current deficiencies of the payments system to improve the effectiveness of monetary policy. Adequate reforms to the fmancial system’s legal fkamework, the payments system, and the lender of last resort facilities are key to the strengthening of the financial system and keeping a sound macro- economic environment. C. External Sector 22. Assuming the recommended stance of fiscal policy, the staff projects a slight decline in the external current account deficit to about 4% percent of GDP. An increase in investment related imports would be more than offset by an increase in nontraditional exports associated with the trade arrangements noted below, and a nonrecurring interest revenue associated with the privatization of the public telephone company.16 The capital account surplus would moderate to about 5 percent of GDP in 2001, reflecting an across the board weakening in net external i&lows, particularly to the private sector, which are expected to return to historical levels following the steep increase in 2000 (Table 9). As a result, the overall balance of payments would record a surplus equivalent to about 1 percent of GDP and the external public debt would remain at 17% percent of GDP in 2001 (Table 10). l6 Proceeds from the privatization of GUATEL have been paid in three installments with interest accruing each year on the unpaid portion of such proceeds. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 16- 23. Despite the real effective appreciation of the quetzal and additional worsening in the terms of trade in 2000, there has been strong growth of nontraditional exports and a narrowing of the external current account deficit. As measured by the real effective exchange rate, since 1995 Guatemala’s external competitiveness has deteriorated but it has not lost ground compared with that of other countries in the region (Figure 10).17 Nonetheless, the mission urged the authorities to monitor the evolution of indicators of external competi- tiveness closely in view of the still high external current account deficit and the currently low coffee prices.18 The staff advised the authorities to permit the exchange rate to reflect market conditions and refrain from intervening in the foreign exchange market, except for market smoothing. The maintenance of a flexible exchange rate policy should be backed up by tight fiscal and monetary policies, wage restraint, and increased productivity through the development of human capital and investment in infrastructure. In this regard, the staff noted that the government’s decision to raise the private sector legal minimum wage by 16 percent in 2001 would undermine external competitiveness. According to the authorities, the increase in the minimum wage may have a limited effect on the average wage, as the minimum wage is nonbinding. The authorities expressed satisfaction with the current exchange system and said that since August 2000 intervention in the foreign exchange market has been limited, following a period of heavy buying of dollars to counter upward pressures on the quetzal beyond the degree of adjustment needed in light of underlying fundamentals. They added that full dollarization (as in Ecuador or El Salvador) was not in their agenda and that the situation in the fiscal and banking sectors precludes moving in that direction. 24. Guatemala has a relatively open trade regime with a trade restrictiveness index of 4 on the Fund’s scale, roughly similar to other countries in the region and with an effective tariff rate of 43/4 percent in 2000 (5l/2 percent in 1999). Guatemala’s obligations under the Central American Common Market were fulfilled in January 1999, when the maximum common external tariff was reduced by 2 percentage points to 15 percent and no further reductions are l7 Using data reported by the social security system (covers about 25-30 percent of the labor force) the real unit labor cost has risen by 2 percent since 1995, as compared with a decline of 7% percent in Mexico during the same period and a fall of more than 15 percent in El Salvador during 1995-99 (latest information available). Thus, cost competitiveness during the period was worsened by lo-17 percent against these two countries. l8 The external current account has been affected negatively since 1998 by external shocks (Hurricane Mitch and deterioration of terms of trade) and nonrecurring imports associated with a large rural electricity project. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 17- envisaged.‘g Starting in October 2000, exports of maquila, particularly textiles and apparels, began to enter Ii-ee of duties to the U.S. market under the Caribbean Basin Initiative. In March 2001, a free trade agreement between Mexico and the Northern Triangle (Guatemala, Honduras, and El Salvador) became operational reducing import tariffs and barriers to capital and labor mobility among these countries. The staff favors bilateral and regional trade arrange- ments for Guatemala as long as they do not impede the multilateral trade liberalization process. D. Poverty Alleviation 25. Despite rising per capita income in the 199Os, Guatemala has one of the lowest per capita incomes in the region and poverty continues to be a serious problem. Social indicators remain among the lowest in Latin America: based on official household surveys, about 60 percent of the population is still below the poverty line, with a quarter of the population living in extreme poverty; average life expectancy is the lowest among Central American countries; close to half of the children under five years suffer from malnutrition; and about one-third of the population is illiterate. In addition, the National Statistical Institute estimates that while the average rate of open unemployment was low (4% percent) in 1995-99, the average rate of underemployment was high (42 percent). 26. The authorities are fully aware that poverty reduction and improvement in basic education and preventive health should raise labor productivity and strengthen human capital, while helping to achieve a gradual integration of the population into the market economy. Guatemala has increased public sector expenditure in the social sector from 4% percent of GDP in 1995 to about 6 percent of GDP in 2000, but, in part because of lack of domestic resources, it remains below the 9 percent of GDP suggested in the Peace Accords. With technical assistance from the Inter-American Development Bank, the authorities are now preparing a new Poverty Reduction Strategy (PRS), which would redefine the role of social funds and target efforts in improving access to basic services. With assistance from the World Bank, the authorities are updating the set of poverty maps to better target public expenditure on municipalities with high or extremely high poverty indices. Moreover, the World Bank would provide technical assistance for the formulation and implementation of the PRSP. l9 Tariffs higher than 15 percent account for 27 percent of total tariff lines (some food products, textiles, and shoes). Quantitative restrictions in the form of tariff quotas apply to beef, poultry, apples, rice, corn, wheat, and wheat flour. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 18- IV. STRUCTURALPOLICIES 27. On modernization of the public sector, the staff encouraged the authorities to extend the IFMS to other public sector entities, such as the municipalities, and to public debt management. The staff also recommended that the authorities move ahead with plans to privatize the remaining government shares in the power state company (EGSSA), and services of ports (Puertos Barrios, Santo Tomas, and Quetzal) and of two international airports (Guatemala City and Tikal). 28. The social security system (IGSS) continues to register a surplus, reflecting mainly favorable demographics and a relatively new pension system (it was established in 1977) (Box 3). In 2000 contribution rates to the pension scheme were increased from 4% percent to 5% percent and the retirement age will be extended in steps from 60 to 65 years by 2008. However, the latest official actuarial analysis suggests that, in the absence of additional corrective measures, the system would begin to register cash deficits by 2010-15. The mission noted that in the short run, the IGSS should reduce administrative costs, streamline benefits, and improve transparency of its investment criteria to ensure legitimacy and sustainability.20 Moreover, making the system viable is essential and the authorities should consider moving f?om the existing pay-as-you-go system to privately funded individual payments. Staff calculations suggest that the transition cost would be moderate and has included it in the medium-term projections discussed below. V. MEDIUM-TERMOUTLOOK 29. Economic prospects over the medium term hinge critically on the success in strengthening economic policies and human capital. To this end, the authorities should mobilize additional tax revenue to finance social programs, assume the carrying cost of restructuring the financial system, implement the reform of the social security system, and increase investment in basic and social infrastructure while maintaining a strong external position. 30. In the absence of tax measures and assuming that the tax ratio is at about 10 percent of GDP over the medium term, government spending in social sectors would remain constrained by limited domestic resources and, because of the slow implementation of the Peace Accords, limited access to external financing (Table 11). The fiscal deficit would be increasingly financed by domestic credit, which would put pressure on interest rates and international reserves, and on the already weak banking system. Gross domestic investment would be sluggish and real GDP would grow by less than 3 percent a year (about the 2o Currently, the IGSS maintains resources equivalent to 0.5 percent of GDP deposited in the fmancial system, including in some of the nonviable banks that have been intervened. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 19- Box 3. The Social Security System The social security system is operated by the Guatemalan social security institute (IGSS), which began operations in 1977. Benefits under the system are under two schemes: the medical, and the pension and disability. The cash flow of the IGSS has been in surplus, because of demographics (the replacement rate is currently at eight contributors for one pensioner) and the relatively recent creation of the IGSS. As a result, the IGSS has increased its portfolio in government bonds, and in assets in the banking system, including open market certificates, which by end-2000 were equivalent to US$700 million (20 percent of total banks’ deposits as of end-2000). Looking ahead, the latest official projection suggests that in the absence of corrective measures, the IGSS would not be able to cover its expenditures by 2010-15. Contributions: (i) for the medical scheme are 10 percent of salaries and are paid by the employee. Services are provided in facilities of the IGSS, and, at a cost for the IGSS, in facilities of the ministry of health and of the private sector (including, in a few cases, in hospitals overseas); and (ii) for the pension and disability scheme are 5.5 percent of salaries (excluding bonus), with the employer paying 3.83 percent of salaries and employees 1.67 percent of salaries. The retirement age has been increasing in steps t?om 60 years in 2000 to 65 years by 2008. population growth rate). Export growth would be constrained by lack of infi-astructure and low labor productivity. The external current account deficit would narrow on account of limited external financing and gross reserves would fall to 1% months of imports by 2006. 31. The staff prepared a medium-term scenario assuming the adoption of significant measures in 2001 to set the stage for reaching the tax ratio of 12 percent of GDP in 2002 (Table 12). Beyond 2002, the scenario incorporates additional tax measures to achieve a tax ratio of 13 percent of GDP by 2006 and the combined public sector deficit would narrow throughout the period to 0.5-l percent of GDP. In this scenario, domestic investment would rise reflecting higher public investment in social and basic infrastructure (supported by higher public savings), and an increase in private investment resulting from better social conditions and lower domestic interest rates. The latter would be induced by a reduction in the public sector domestic debt (including open market certificates) during most of the period.21 The 21 The scenario assumes that the banking system is restructured at a cost of 2 percent of GDP in 2001-02, the central bank is recapitalized at a cost of 6 percent of GDP in 2003, and the (continued.. .) Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 20 - external current account deficit relative to GDP would narrow as productive capacity and external competitiveness improve. Such deficits would be more than financed by disbursements from multilateral agencies and bilateral donors and private capital inflows. Gross usable international reserves would remain at about 3% months of imports of goods and services. VI. STAFF APPFUISAL 32. The administration that took office in 2000 has stressed its intention to advance in the implementation of the Peace Accords and restore macroeconomic stability. Policies in 2000 resulted in greater financial stability as inflation remained in the single-digits, the public sector deficit narrowed, and the balance of payments position strengthened considerably. However, to contain the public sector deficit, the authorities curtailed public sector capital outlays, including on basic and social inhastructure. Moreover, the fiscal adjustment was insufficient to reduce the public sector deficit to a sustainable level over the medium term and fmancing of the public sector deficit required that the government draw down deposits at the central bank, notwithstanding sizable proceeds Ii-om privatization, To maintain inflation under control and to help rebuild the foreign exchange position, the central bank stepped up its sales of certificates in the open market, which has crowded out the private sector and is beginning to hamper economic growth. 33. The challenge facing Guatemala in 2001 and over the medium term is to raise social expenditure as agreed under the Peace Accords, deal with the cost of restructuring the banking system, and ease the stance of monetary policy, while fostering macroeconomic stability. Such a challenge, however, would not be addressed with the current macro- economic policy mix and to that end it is essential that the authorities strengthen tax policy as soon as possible. 34. Tax initiatives should focus on a strong set of measures that would increase the tax ratio to over 11 percent of GDP in 2001, thereby setting the stage to achieve the tax ratio of 12 percent of GDP by 2002 as agreed under the Peace Accords. The staff has recommended, increasing the VAT by 3 percentage points to 13 percent, eliminating most VAT exemptions and zero-rated items except for export products, and eliminating the VAT credit against the income tax. In addition, the authorities should step up efforts to improve tax and customs administration, including by further strengthening the tax code to facilitate the application of sanctions. On the expenditure side, every effort should be made to maintain a strict control on social security system is reformed at a cost of 6 percent of GDP in 2005. The cost of recapitalizing the central bank in 2003 is lower than its negative wealth in 2001, noted above, reflecting the projected accumulation of net international reserves and lower interest rates of open market certificates during 200 l-03. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-2l- nonsocial outlays. In this respect, tight control over the government wage bill is essential, and the staff recommends the elimination of revenue earmarking and the subsidy of electricity services that benefit mainly the urban middle class. 35. A tightening of fiscal policy would ease the burden on monetary policy and allow the central bank to achieve the objective of maintaining inflation in the 4-6 percent range and maintaining the usable foreign reserves at the equivalent of 120 percent of monetary base in December 2001. The current situation calls for continued monetary restraint to contain inflationary pressures arising from financing of the public sector deficit and a bunching of amortization of open market certificates in midyear and liquidity assistance to intervened banks. Once the fiscal situation is strengthened with no need of domestic financing by the public sector and the situation of the banking system improves, the conditions would have been established for the easing of monetary policy. In addition, the authorities should be cautious and monitor monetary developments closely because of the possible increased volatility of demand for money that may result from allowing the constitution of foreign currency deposits as of May of this year and fi-om the intervention of some banks. 36. The financial sector is quite fragile and requires urgent action by the authorities to address weaknesses and risks identified by the FSAP mission. The authorities are to be commended for taking decisive actions after the FSAP mission. The development of a sound and competitive fmancial system will require measures to deal promptly with any other insolvent financial institutions and liquidate without delay nonviable institutions, while strengthening the capital base of weak but viable banks. At the same time, the authorities should strengthen prudential regulations and supervision, which is particularly urgent with the increased vulnerability of the fmancial system that may result from the constitution of foreign currency assets and liabilities in the domestic banking system. In this regard, the authorities should press ahead with their plans to introduce regulations to limit banks’ unhedged exposure to exchange risk along the line of the recommendations of the Basle Committee, and limit the exposure of bank credit in foreign currency to borrowers with revenues in foreign exchange. In addition, the authorities should step up efforts to introduce money laundering legislation. Moreover, they should take steps to enhance transparency and good governance in the financial system, including by recapitalizing the central bank. In addition, the new drafts of laws on central banking, banking, and banking supervision under consideration by the monetary board contain changes that are steps in the right direction. Nonetheless, the authorities should strengthen these drafts, particularly in the areas of prudential regulations of offshore activities, consolidated supervision of financial groups and liquidation of insolvent banks along the line of the Fund-Bank recommendations, before submitting the drafts to congress. 37. Despite the real appreciation experienced by the quetzal since 1995 performance of nontraditional exports has continued strong. Over the medium term, a sustained strengthening of Guatemala’s competitive position hinges critically on keeping the fiscal balance under control, strengthening human capital, and expanding the country’s infrastructure. For the period ahead, the staff recommends allowing the exchange rate to Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 22 - reflect market conditions backed up by tight fiscal and monetary policies, with the central bank refraining f?om intervening in the foreign exchange market, except for market smoothing. 38. Over the last years the authorities made progress in the modernization of the public and external trade sectors. The staff encourages them to move decisively with their plans to privatize services of ports and airports, and to consider privatizing the remaining government shares in the power company (EGSSA). In addition, in order to ensure long-term viability of the pension system, the government should reform the pension system, including by allowing private sector participation. 39. Guatemala’s statistical system is barely adequate for surveillance and analysis, with significant room for improvement in the quality, frequency, and timeliness of economic and financial data. In particular, the authorities are encouraged to reduce delays and correct deficiencies in the provision of information on the public sector outside the central govern- ment, balance of payments, and the financial sector. 40. It is proposed that the next Article IV consultation with Guatemala be held on the standard 12-month cycle. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 23 - Figure 1. Latin America and the Caribbean: Central Government Expenditure on Education and Health and Total Revenues, 1999 (In percent of GDP) Argentina l 6 Bolivia e 0 Mexico l Nicaragua Jamaica l Chile Venezuela El Salvador Paraguay l l . Peru 6 Honduras 6 A l Q&j&,.+ 1 J,q,c,,,a” w Guatemala Ecuador ’ Brazil I I I I I I 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 Central Government Total Revenues Source: Fund staff estimates. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 24 - .., : 5)::::: ..I. . .//// I::::::.:::. . . . . . .../ Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 25 - Figure 3. Guatemala: Public Sector Indicators Combined Public Sector Balance : : .‘. :;il;iii.li:.jl:ll;.. (In percent of GDP) .: : ::.::.. :.:..j. : : : : : : : : :. : :. : : 1, :. .: o- ,.. .,.:. :...,.:: :.:.:. Combined Public Sector Balance : : .‘. :;il;iii.li:.jl:ll;.. (In percent of GDP) .: : ::.::.. :.:..j. : : : : : : : : :. : :. : : 1, :. .: ,.. .,.:. :...,.:: :.:.:. 16 22 Central Government (In percent of GDP) 20 18 16 8 6 Social expenditure _L [::;;,:.~.::“il Author,~~~::i:.li:.:.::.i’: .:.i :.:,. -:::.:. : :.jj ::j;j.::::. .: :..:‘:” .:-:.::: ::. ‘1:: . . . . . 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 1994 1995 1996 1991 1998 1999 2000 2001 1995 1996 1991 1998 1999 2000 2001 3, ............ Combined Public Sector Balances Combined Public Sector Balances : : : : ......... ..:., :,.:,:,:: ..: :,.:,:,:: .;:‘:::::“: .;:‘:::::“: (In percent of GDP) (In percent of GDP) : ,:.j:..‘:‘::,:’ : .:.j:...:.::.:. ....... .... ....... ..... 2- ..“. ‘..‘. : ..... : ..... : : : .... : : : ‘:‘. ........ .: .. .......... ........ ..... .: .......... .:. ..... ... Rest of the Rest of the :: ........... :: .... ....... .:. ........ .:. .:..: .:. :..:.: .: ..: .:. :..: .: I- 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 Public Debt (In percent of GDP) : : : : : : : Debt service .: .:::: _::.: ..:y,;. \ Sources: Bank of Guatemala; and Fund staff estimates and projections. l/ Data assumes adjustment recommended by staff Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 26 - Figure 4. Guatemala: Monetary Sector Indicators 100 80 Central Bank indicators 60 - (12-month growth percentage change) h -60 -I -Currency issue \ -80 pNDAl/ -100 “;/ Jan- May- Sep- JiUl- May- Sep- Jail- May- Sep- JEUl- May- Sep- Jail- May- QIJ- JZUI- May- Sep- 95 95 95 96 96 96 97 97 97 98 98 98 99 99 99 00 00 00 50 Credit to the private sector (12-month growth percentage change) -Banking sector credit to private sector 40 - zo za = Interest rate for loans ~ Broad money 21 30- 20 - 10 - 0 ’ 28 24 16 12 8 Jan- May- Sep- Jan- May- sep- Jatl- May- Sep- Jan- May- Sep- JElll- May- Sep- Jail- May- Sep- 95 95 95 96 96 96 97 97 97 98 98 98 99 99 99 00 00 00 Interest rate (In percent 1 :S ~ Bank loans -Open market operations 31 Jan- May- Sep- Jan- May- Sep- Jan- May- Sep- Jan- May- Sep- Jan- May- Sep- Jan- May- Sep- 95 95 95 96 96 96 97 91 97 98 98 98 99 99 99 00 00 00 Sources: Bank of Guatemala; and Fund staff estimates. l/ 12-month net domestic assets flows as percentage of currency issue. 2/ Includes M 1, savings and time deposits, and financial obligations. 3/ Data refer to the weighted interest rate of open market paper. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 27 - Figure 5. Guatemala: External Sector Indicators (In millions of U. S. dollars) 2000 1800 1600 1400 1200 1000 800 600 400 200 0 Net international reserves (NIR) 11 Net international reserves (NIR) 11 -NIR -NIR _---__ _---__ NIR, excl privatization proceeds NIR, excl privatization proceeds 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 5000 , , 8 I Current Account “_.” . - 4500 Irnports,cif ,,*-I_---“--__“-_ Current account deficit (left axi!). 9 * ’ 4000 (in percent of GDP, right axis) , * ’ ” 3500 3000 i 2500 I 2000 - 1500 - 1000 - 500 - OI / /-* : F :::::. *c-“-“-^“_^ ,* ‘.‘.‘.‘.‘,~ ** ” _< ;::, *’ Exports, fob :::. ::::. jl - ‘.‘.’ .,.:.‘.‘_‘. ::. . . . . . *.:. s-- ;;i ‘:::.:.: I ...I .:$j n-tra&& $\/$;\: . 26:-:-: :..1;1:1 (;yZs,- ;;;;;;;:;i; ‘.‘.‘.‘.‘. Y ~::::: :. :.:::: . . ::::. e-6 ., ::. -- .:.:.:.:.:. .,.,., ,..,.. :. ‘.‘.’ .:. r;;c- ..A’. ::. :. ::: ‘.’ :: ‘. :.I’. .:. ., :. .::. ..‘.‘. .‘. . . . . . .:.,,. ‘.. : ‘.‘. .::. :. :,::: ‘.‘. .:.::. .:. :::. :::. : :::. : .. :::.:.:. ‘. .:: :: ‘.‘. :: ‘.‘.’ ‘... 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 -- 6 -- 4 ! 2 0 Sources: Bank of Guatemala; and Fund staff estimates and projections. l/ Exclude the central bank’s credit position with neighboring countries. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 28 - Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 29 - Figure 7. Guatemala: External Vulnerability Indicators in a Regional Perspective l/ Liquidity Indicators 7 6- Gross international reserves, end-2000 (In months of imports of goods and services) Costa Rica El Salvador Guatemala Honduras Nicaragua 400 350 300 250 200 150 100 50 0 Net international reserves, end-2000 (In percent of short-term debt) 2/ Costa Rica El Salvador Guatemala Honduras Nicaragua 600 500 - Net international reserves, end-2000 ’ (In percent of short-term debt and current account balance net of FDI) 21 400 300 200 100 I Costa Rica El Salvador Guatemala Honduras Nicaragua Sources: International Financial Statistics; and IMF staff estimates. l/ In each chart, the weighted average of the sample is represented by a line. 2/ Short-term debt on a remaining maturity basis. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public36 32 28 24 20 16 12 8 4 0 - 30 - Figure 8. Guatemala: External Vulnerability Indicators in a Regional Perspective l/ Solvency Indicators 300 250 200 150 100 50 0 (In percent of GDP) Costa Rica El Salvador Guatemala Honduras Nicaragua Costa Rica El Salvador Guatemala Honduras Nicaragua 14 Short term debt, end-2000 31 12 10 8 6 4 2 0 (In percent of GDP) Costa Rica El Salvador Guatemala Honduras Nicaragua Sources: International Financial Statistics; and IMF staff estimates. l/ In each chart, the weighted average of the sample is represented by a line. 2/ Data refer to 1999 outstanding public external debt. 3/ Short-term debt on a remaining maturity basis. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 31 - Figure 9. Guatemala: External Vulnerability Indicators in a Regional Perspective l/ Solvency and Other Indicators 400 350 300 250 200 150 100 50 0 Costa Rica El Salvador Guatemala Honduras Nicaragua 50 Real effective exchange rate appreciation, December 1995-December 2000 (In percent change) Costa Rica El Salvador Guatemala Honduras Nicaragua 18 16 - 14 - Growth in exports of goods and services in U.S. dollar terms, average 1998-2000 (In percent) Costa Rica El Salvador Guatemala Honduras Nicaragua Sources: International Financial Statistics; and IMF stti estimates. l/ In each chart, the weighted average of the sample is represented by a line. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 32 - Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-33 - Table 1. Guatemala: Comparative Social Indicators Average for Latin America Guatemala Nicaragua Honduras El Salvador Costa Rica and the Caribbean Rank in UNDP Human Delopment Index (Out of 174 countries) (2000) 120 GDP per capita in U.S. dollars (2000) 1,680 People not expected to survive to age 40 (ln percent of population) (1998) Life expectancy at birth (years) (1998) 15.3 64.4 Infhnt mortality (per 1000 live births) (1998) 41.0 Population without access to safe water (1990-98) 32.0 Population without access to health services (198 l-93) 40.0 Population without access to sanitation (1990-98) 13.0 Adult illiteracy (1998) 32.7 Primary school net enrolhnent (1997) (percent of relevant age of the population) 73.8 Secondary school net enrolhnent (1997) (percent of relevant age of the population) 34.9 50.5 36.0 36.4 55.8 65.3 Ratio of the per capita income of the richest 20 percent to the per capita income of the poorest 20 percent of the population (1987-98) 30.0 Percentage of population below the poverty line (1989-98) l/ 58.0 116 470 12.2 68.1 39.0 22.0 n.a. 15.0 32.1 78.6 13.1 na 113 990 11.3 69.6 33.0 22.0 38.0 26.0 26.6 87.5 17.1 53.0 104 2,150 10.7 69.4 30.0 34.0 n.a. 10.0 22.2 89.1 16.6 38.0 48 . . . 4,100 3,820 3.9 9.7 76.2 69.7 14.0 32.0 4.0 22.0 3.0 aa. 16.0 29.0 4.7 12.3 91.8 93.3 13.0 n.a. 11.0 n.a. Source: UNDP Human Development Report 2000. l/ Uses the national poverty line of individual countries based on a local basket of basic goods and services. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 34 - Table 2. Guatemala: Macroeconomic Flows Average PreL 2001 1990-95 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 Ah. stat-f l! Income and prices Real GDP GDP deflator Consumer prices (end of the year) Consumer prices (average) 4.1 3.0 4.4 5.0 18.3 8.9 8.3 9.5 19.3 10.8 1.1 7.5 20.2 11.0 9.3 6.6 22.3 7.5 13.5 19.4 23.2 13.7 15.5 13.3 15.4 13.3 9.6 10.8 8.9 15.1 12.6 6.6 11.1 -4.2 26.5 24.6 0.6 -9.8 6.8 6.0 . . . . 12.8 8.1 -4.5 (Lo percent of GDP, unless othexwise indicated) 3.6 3.0 2.8 3.0 5.2 5.9 5.8 6.0 4.9 5.0 5.9 6.5 5.3 6.0 6.0 6.3 Monetary sector Credit to private sector 2/ Liabilities to private sector 21 Interest rate (annual rate, time deposits) 3/ 11.6 5.1 9.5 24.2 17.9 15.3 7.1 7.8 11.6 10.3 . . . . . . External sector Export volume Import volume Terms of trade Real effective exchange rate 4/ 8.8 14.8 -3.3 5.4 -11.5 -4.8 -6.0 4.9 9.1 9.1 5.6 6.1 0.7 0.7 . . . . . Current account (including official transfers) -5.0 -2.9 -3.5 -5.3 -5.6 -4.5 -4.2 -4.3 Trade balance -8.3 -5.8 -7.1 -9.3 -9.1 -9.4 -9.5 -9.7 Exports 13.9 14.2 14.6 14.7 15.2 16.2 16.4 16.3 Imports -22.2 -20.1 -21.7 -24.0 -24.9 -25.6 -25.9 -26.0 Factor payments (net) -1.2 -1.3 -1.3 -0.9 -1.0 -1.0 -0.6 -0.6 Current transfers (net) 2.8 3.4 3.4 3.6 3.9 4.4 4.3 4.2 OtbCI 1.6 0.9 1.4 1.3 1.2 1.5 1.6 1.8 Capital account 5.1 4.1 5.2 6.6 4.9 8.3 5.1 5.2 Public sector 0.4 -0.1 1.4 1.4 1.7 1.3 0.9 1.0 Private sector 4.9 3.8 3.3 4.9 2.8 6.6 3.7 3.8 offbal transfers 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 Net official reserves (in U.S. dollars) (increase -) Gmss domestic investment Public sector Private sector National savings Public sector Private sector External saviugs -122.4 -176 -287 -243 125 -725 -175 -175 16.1 12.7 14.0 17.4 17.4 15.4 15.1 16.3 2.5 3.2 4.1 5.1 5.5 4.1 3.8 4.6 13.6 9.5 9.9 12.3 11.9 11.3 11.3 11.7 10.8 9.8 10.5 12.1 11.8 10.9 10.9 12.0 1.5 3.1 3.1 2.8 2.8 2.0 2.2 3.8 9.3 6.7 7.4 9.3 9.0 8.9 8.7 8.2 5.3 2.9 3.5 5.3 5.6 4.5 4.2 4.3 Combined public s&or balance (iucludig central bank losses) -1.9 -0.1 1.1 0.1 0.1 0.0 0.0 95,495 -0.6 -1.8 -2.9 -2.4 -2.0 -1.2 0.2 -1.5 -2.6 -2.0 -1.3 -0.5 0.6 1.8 2.9 2.4 2.0 1.2 1.9 1.6 2.6 1.1 0.9 1.0 -1.3 -2.8 -0.6 0.5 -0.6 -1.5 0.0 3.0 0.9 0.8 1.8 1.7 (Annual percentage change) Overall balance of the nonfiiancial public sector (defEit -) Financing External fioancing Domestic fwiug Privatization proceeds Memorandum items: Nominal GDP (in bins of quetzales) -0.6 1.9 0.9 1.0 0.0 . . . 107,873 124,023 135,214 147,488 160,588 160,848 Nominal GDP (in millious of U.S. dollars) 15,675 17,777 19,409 18,272 19,080 19,976 20,008 Sources: Bank of Guatemala; Ministry of Fhauce; and Fund staff estimates. l/Assumes additional fmcal adjustment. 2/ In relation to the stock of liabilities to the private sector. 31 End-period. 4/End-period ; a positive change indicates au appreciation. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-35 - Table 3. Guatemala: Operations of the Combined Public Sector (In percent of GDP) Prel. 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 Proj. 2001 Auth. Staff 11 Total revenue Tax revenue Direct taxes Indirect taxes Tax measures Nontax revenue and traosfers Total expenditures Current expenditures Wages and salaries Goods and services Interest Transfers Capital expenditure Of which Fixed capital formation L Central Gove-nt Operations 9.2 9.2 9.6 8.7 8.8 8.7 2.1 2.2 1.9 6.6 6.7 6.8 0.5 0.4 1.0 9.4 10.1 11.9 6.7 6.2 7.3 2.8 2.7 3.0 0.8 0.9 1.1 1.2 0.8 1.1 1.9 1.8 2.1 2.7 3.9 4.6 1.3 I .7 1.7 2.5 3.0 2.2 -0.2 -0.5 -2.3 0.2 0.5 2.3 0.5 2.1 1.5 -0.3 -1.6 -2.3 0.0 0.0 3.1 IL Combined Public Sector Operations 10.3 10.3 10.7 9.3 9.6 9.8 2.2 2.5 2.6 7.2 7.1 7.0 1.0 0.7 0.9 12.2 11.3 2.6 8.7 1.5 0.9 13.3 12.4 12.4 13.1 8.1 8.7 8.8 8.8 3.2 3.5 3.5 3.5 1.1 1.3 1.4 1.4 1.3 1.2 1.3 1.3 2.4 2.6 2.5 2.5 5.2 3.8 3.5 4.3 1.8 I .s 1.8 2.2 Current account balance (deficit -) 2.2 1.6 1.9 3.4 Overall balance (deficit -) 2/ -3.4 -2.4 -1.7 -0.9 Fblancing 3/ External (net) Domestic (net) Sale of assets 3.4 2.4 1.7 0.9 2.5 1.1 1.0 1.0 0.9 0.6 -1.0 -1.8 0.0 0.7 1.7 1.7 Combiid public sector balance -0.1 -0.6 -1.8 -2.9 -2.4 -2.0 -1.2 Current account 3.1 3.1 2.8 2.8 2.0 1.9 3.8 Nonfinancial public sector 1.1 0.2 -1.5 -2.6 -1.9 -1.3 -0.5 central government -0.2 -0.5 -2.5 -3.4 -1.4 -1.7 -0.9 Rest of the nonfmancial public sector 1.3 0.6 0.7 0.6 0.5 0.4 0.4 Bank of Guatemala losses -1.2 -0.8 -0.3 -0.3 -0.4 -0.7 -0.7 Combined public sector financing 0.1 0.6 1.8 2.9 2.4 2.0 1.2 External (net) 0.1 1.9 1.6 2.6 1.1 0.9 1.0 Foreign loans (net) 0.3 0.5 1.2 1.5 0.4 0.2 0.2 Foreign grants 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.2 0.3 External arrears (net change) -0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Bonded debt -0.1 1.4 0.3 0.9 0.5 0.5 0.5 Domestic (net) 0.0 -1.3 -3.0 -0.6 0.6 -0.6 -1.5 Banking system 0.0 -0.6 -2.8 0.4 0.7 -1.1 -2.0 Bank of Guatemala -0.6 -1.5 -2.5 0.6 0.9 -1.0 -1.9 Commercial banks 0.5 1.0 -0.3 -0.2 -0.2 -0.1 Bonded debt -0. I 0.9 -0.4 -0.1 -1.0 -0.1 0.5 0.5 Change in floating debt -0.9 -0.3 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Sale of assets 0.0 0.0 3.1 0.9 0.7 1.7 1.7 Memorandum item GDP (in millions of quetzales) 95,495 107,873 124,023 135,214 147,488 160,588 160,848 Sources: Ministry of Finance; Baok of Guatemala; and Fond staffestimates. I/ Assumes additional fiscal adjustment. 2/ Includes statistical discrepancy. 3/ Includes bond financing amounting to 1 percent of GDP in 200 1 to finance the restructuring of the banking system, Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 36 - Table 4. Guatemala: Central Government Expenditure by Function 1996 1997 1998 1999 Prel. 2000 Total 8,937 10,917 14,780 17,969 18,317 General public services 1,790 1,617 2,571 2,981 3,528 Internal security 301 418 684 983 1,092 Defense 1,061 801 793 819 1,086 Social sectors 4,043 5,726 7,134 8,265 8,722 Current 2,540 3,144 4,235 5,100 6,245 Capital 1,097 1,669 2,899 3,165 2,477 Education 1,505 1,900 2,063 2,558 2,849 Health 806 1,106 1,110 1,385 1,502 Social security and welfare 633 782 1,052 1,193 1,524 Housing and community services 694 1,025 1,572 1,749 1,916 Social funds 407 913 1,335 1,319 931 Education 68 190 386 524 504 Health 82 181 68 209 56 Other expenditures through social funds 257 541 882 646 371 Economic services 1,517 2,257 2,976 3,891 3,224 Agriculture 259 320 399 604 465 Transportation and communications 1,134 1,795 2,077 2,445 1,975 Electricity 114 119 119 176 437 Other I/ IO 23 382 66.5 348 Other 225 97 623 1,030 665 Total 9.4 10.1 11.9 13.3 12.4 General public services 1.9 1.5 2.1 2.2 2.4 Internal security 0.3 0.4 0.6 0.7 0.7 Defense 1.1 0.7 0.6 0.6 0.7 Social sectors 4.2 5.3 5.8 6.1 5.9 Current 2.7 2.9 3.4 3.8 4.2 Capital 1.1 1.5 2.3 2.3 1.7 Education 1.6 1.8 1.7 1.9 1.9 Health 0.8 1.0 0.9 1.0 1.0 Social security and welfare 0.7 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 Housing and community services 0.7 1.0 1.3 1.3 1.3 Social funds 0.4 0.8 1.1 1.0 0.6 Education 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.3 Health 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.2 0.0 Other expenditures through social funds 0.3 0.5 0.1 0.5 0.3 Economic services 1.6 2.1 2.4 2.9 2.2 Agriculture 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.4 0.3 Transportation and communications 1.2 1.7 1.7 1.8 1.3 Electricity 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.3 Other l/ 0.0 0.0 0.3 0.5 0.2 Other 0.2 0.1 0.5 0.8 0.5 (In millions of quetzales) (In percent of GDP) Sources: Ministry of Finance; and Fund staff estimates. I/ Includes industry and commerce, tourism, and petroleum derivatives and mining. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 3.1 - Table 5. Guatemala: Summary Accbunts of the Monetary Authorities Prel. 2001 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 Auth. staff 11 Exchange rate (Quetza1esDJ.S. dollars) 6.0 6.0 6.0 8.0 8.0 8.0 8.0 Net offkial reserves 2/ (In millions of U.S. dollars) Net domestic assets Net claims on nonfinancial public sector Bank of Guatemala losses Net credit to banks Open market operations 3/ Medium- and long- term foreign liabilities Other assets (net) Currency issue Net offkial reserves 2/ (In millions of U.S. dollars) Net domestic assets Net claims on nonfinancial public sector Bank of Guatemala losses Net credit to banks Open market operations 3/ Medium- and long- term foreign liabilities Other assets (net) Currency issue (Stocks in millions of quetzales) 4,019 5,741 7,197 670 957 1,200 800 -265 -890 -3,100 -5,836 -8,083 -7,354 -6,572 6,983 -9,564 7,815 -10,536 8,223 8,603 9,141 -4,294 10,294 -5,538 10,222 -4,379 -2,684 -4,211 -3,037 -3,037 -2,392 -242 -387 -482 -6,109 -6,106 -5,062 -1,232 -976 -794 4,837 4,512 4,528 4,820 5,476 6,307 (Flows in millions of quetzales) 1,058 1,721 1,456 176 287 243 -698 -1,065 -625 -1,496 -2,736 -2,247 738 783 -2,993 -3,964 1,139 832 409 379 538 1,154 1,081 -463 -1,244 1,159 1,695 -1,527 1,174 1,174 -360 2,150 -144 -91 -5,627 3 1,047 180 257 182 174 121 84 84 303 -324 16 222 -303 0 0 361 656 831 2,122 -214 822 822 8,591 14,393 15,793 15,793 1,074 1,799 1,974 1,974 -163 -6,179 -6,757 -6,757 -852 -73 1 -647 -647 2,607 2,303 2,303 2,303 8,429 8,214 9,036 9,036 -1,005 5,802 1,400 1,400 -126 725 175 175 3,001 -6,016 -578 -578 (12-month percentage change over the stock of currency issued at the beginning of the period) Net domestic assets -17.1 -22.1 -11.4 47.6 -71.4 -7.0 Net claims on nonfinancial public sector -36.7 -56.8 -41.0 11.7 9.3 -36.4 Bank of Guatemala losses 27.9 17.3 7.5 6.0 6.4 14.0 Currency issue 8.8 13.6 15.2 33.6 -2.5 10.0 Memorandum item: -7.0 -48.3 13.2 10.0 Total open market operations 4/ 4,532 3,011 2,265 2,649 8,632 8,629 7,585 Sources: Bank of Guatemala; and Fund staff estimates. l/ Assumes additional fiscal adjustment. 2/ Excludes claims on Nicaragua amounting to US$145.7 million up to 1999 and US$75.7 million in 2000. 3/ Includes open market placements with the private sector (financial and nonfinancial). 4/ Open market placements with the private and public sectors. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 38 - Table 6. Guatemala: Summary Accounts of the Banking System 1996 1997 1998 1999 Prel. 2000 2001 AUth. Staff 11 Exchange rate (Quetza1esRJ.S. dollars) Net foreign assets 21 Net domestic assets Net claims on nonfinancial public sector Bank of Guatemala losses Credit to private sector and other investments Other assets (net) Medium- and long-term foreign liabilities Liabilities to the private sector Money Quasi-money Net foreign assets 2/ Net domestic assets Net claims on nonfinancial public sector Bank of Guatemala losses Credit to private sector and other investment Other assets (net) Medium- and long-term foreign liabilities Liabilities to the private sector Money Quasi-money 6.0 6.0 6.0 (Stocks in millions of quetzales) 2,167 3,567 4,407 24,616 26,922 29,786 -2,475 -4,182 -7,436 6,983 7,815 8,223 17,268 20,700 26,395 2,840 2,589 2,602 1,361 1,120 903 25,422 29,369 33,290 8,764 11,293 12,914 16,658 18,076 20,376 (Flows in millions of quetzales) 452 1,400 840 2,417 2,306 2,863 -982 -1,707 -3,254 1,139 832 409 1,667 3,432 5,695 593 -25 I 13 -197 -241 -217 17 3,066 3,947 3,920 1,094 3,174 2,529 1,621 1,701 1,973 1,418 2,300 1,473 8.0 8.0 8.0 8.0 5,168 32,372 -6,888 8,603 30,284 32,107 35,512 372 1,336 3,228 1,061 944 860 860 36,479 44,978 50,219 14,614 49,659 17,665 19,761 21,865 19,761 27,313 30,458 29,898 -699 4,897 1,699 1,699 3,803 3,485 3,458 2,898 548 161 -2,993 -4,248 379 538 1,154 1,081 3,860 1,823 3,405 3,732 -1,158 963 1,892 2,333 10,065 11,764 35,857 39,315 -6,727 -9,719 9,141 10,294 -117 8,499 3,051 5,448 -84 -84 5,241 4,681 2,096 2,096 3,145 2,585 (12-month percentage change over initial stock of liabilities to the private sector) Net domestic assets 10.8 9.1 9.7 11.4 Net claims on nonfinancial 9.6 public sector -4.4 -6.7 -11.1 Credit to private sector 7.5 13.5 19.4 1f.Z 5.: Liabilities to the private sector 13.7 15.5 13.3 9:5 Money 23:3 4.9 9.9 8.4 Quasi-money 8.8 5.6 ;:; 2 14.9 Memorandum item: Credit to private sector and . . (12-month percentage change) 11,764 38,755 -10,974 10,222 35,839 3,669 7.7 6.4 -6.7 -9.4 7.6 8.3 11.7 10.4 4.7 4.7 7.0 5.7 other investments 10.7 19.9 27.5 14.7 6.0 10.6 11.6 Sources: Bank of Guatemala; and Fund staff estimates. I/ Assumes additional fiscal adjustment. 2/ Excludes claims on Nicaragua amounting to US$145.7 million up to 1999 and US$75.7 million in 2000. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 39 - Table 7. Guatemala: Summary of the Structure and Perfomance of the Financial Sector l/ 1996 1997 1998 1999 Prel. 2000 Number of banks Majority state-owned (in percent of total assets) Majority foreign-owned (in percent of total assets) Foreign branches (as a percent of total assets) 33 35 34 34 32 6.1 5.1 6.5 8.8 8.5 0.1 0.1 0.3 0.5 0.6 2.5 2.6 2.9 3.0 3.5 Number of banks accounting for at least 25 percent of total assets 3 3 3 3 3 75 percent of total assets 15 15 15 14 14 Total assets of banks (in percent of nominal GDP) 26.6 29.1 29.1 29.0 33.9 Credit to private sector (in percent of nominal GDP) 18.0 19.1 21.3 22.4 21.8 Foreign currency-denominated assets (in percent of total assets) 10.1 9.2 10.3 10.3 11.2 Contingent and off-balance sheet accounts (in percent of total assets) Of which 13.1 13.5 16.6 13.2 29.6 Foreign currency.denominated (in percent of total assets) 5.4 3.7 4.5 2.9 2.7 Central bank credit to banks (end of period) 2/ 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.6 0.5 Average pretax return on total assets (in percent) 1.5 1.3 1.0 1.4 1.1 Average financial spread 21 11.6 10.5 10.8 9.3 9.1 Interest rate spread in interbank market (in percent) 11.9 8.0 7.7 6.8 6.3 Loans that are nonperforming, substandard, or of lower quality (in percent of total loans) 3/ 9.8 7.2 8.5 12.7 12.8 Total provisions for loan losses (specific plus general) In percent of nonperfonning loans 3/ In percent of total loans 12.8 22.8 23.7 28.0 27.8 1.3 1.6 2.0 3.6 3.6 Risk-weighted capital/asset ratio 13.8 13.3 12.4 14.0 14.2 Ba2 Foreign currency debt rating 4/ Ba2 Ba2 Ba2 Sources: Superintendency of Banks; Bank of Guatemala; and Fund staff estimates. l/ The Guatemalan financial system consists of the central bank, 32 comercial banks, including two branches of foreign banks and one majority foreign-owned bank, and 44 nonbank financial intermediaries. In addition, there are credit unions, leasing, and factoring companies, and credit card companies. 2/ Spread between lending and deposit interest rates calculated from the income statement and the balance sheet data of commercial banks. 3/ Includes repossessed collateral. 4/ Moodys rated Guatemala for the first time in July 1997 for long-term currency bonds placed in the Euromarket. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 40 - Table 8. Guatemala: Indicators of External Vulnerability 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 Prel. 2000 Financial indicators Broad money (12-month percentage change) 14.7 13.7 15.5 13.3 7.5 21.2 Private sector credit (12-month percentage change) 33.2 10.7 19.9 27.5 14.6 6.0 Central bank paper yield (nominal) l/ 22.2 18.0 9.2 11.8 24.0 17.9 Central bank paper yield (real) 12.6 6.5 2.0 4.0 18.2 12.2 Domestic public sector debt (in percent of GDP) 2/ 5.4 6.1 3.1 2.5 2.4 5.8 External Indicators Merchandise exports (12-month percentage change) Merchandise imports (12-month percentage change) Terms of trade (12-month percentage change) Current account balance (in percent of GDP) Capital account balance (in percent of GDP) Net international reserves 3/ In millions of U.S. dollars In percent of M2 In percent of base money In percent of base money and central bank paper In percent of base money, central bank paper, and government debt with nonresidents In percent of short-term external debt on a remaining maturity basis 4/ In percent of short-term external debt on a remaining maturity basis plus current account balance less FDI 4/ Gross international reserves 3/ In months of next-year’s imports of goods and services Commercial banks foreign assets (in millions of U.S. dollars) Commercial banks foreign liabilities (in millions of U.S. dollars) Public sector external debt (in percent of GDP) 5/ External interest payments in percent of exports of goods and services 27.9 3.4 18.4 -4.4 15.4 -9.8 -4.1 -2.9 2.8 4.1 493.5 669.9 15.1 18.3 36.8 46.9 29.3 36.7 27.3 34.6 84.4 83.7 44.4 57.1 1.8 2.0 56.0 76 266.0 385 16.0 15.2 4.6 5.0 External amortization payments in percent of exports of goods and services 9.3 5.7 Public sector and financial sector external debt (in percent of GDP) 18.8 17.7 Real effective exchange rate depreciation (-) -4.6 12.8 16.4 9.6 -2.3 10.9 22.4 20.7 -2.0 7.1 6.8 6.0 -11.5 -5.0 -3.5 -5.3 -5.6 -4.5 5.2 6.6 4.9 8.3 956.8 1,199.5 1,073.9 1,799.l 21.9 26.4 26.3 35.0 56.4 78.8 77.5 117.0 55.1 75.9 74.2 75.7 49.4 65.5 59.4 63.4 92.5 92.8 85.4 138.8 60.6 72.5 53.2 91.7 2.2 2.8 2.3 3.6 70 59 72 103 421 474 500 644 14.7 14.9 18.1 17.5 4.3 3.9 3.7 4.8 11.8 10.1 9.5 13.8 17.3 17.0 20.2 20.3 8.1 -4.5 -6.0 4.9 Sources: Bank of Guatemala; and Fund staff estimates. I/ End of period interest rates for 180-&y bonds. 2000 data refer to end-October. For 1999 and 2000 data refer to open market operations weighted interest rates. For 2/ Includes central government debt with residents and open market certificates of the Bank of Guatemala. 3/Excludes claims on Nicaragua amounting to US$145 million, or equivalent to 0.8 percent of 2000 GDP up to 1999, and US$75.7 million in 2000. 4/ Short-term debt on a remaining maturity basis as recorded by the BIS. End of period, second quarter for 2000. 5/ Includes central government, public enterprises, and Bank of Guatemala. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-4l- Table 9. Guatemala: Summary Balance of Payments 1996 1997 1998 1999 Prel. 2001 2000 Auth. Staff I/ Current account Trade balance Exports, f.o.b. Imports, c.i.f. Services Factor services (net) Of which Interest on public debt Other Nonfactor (net) Current transfers (net) -450 -914 2232 -3 146 -64 -211 -141 -71 147 528 Capital account 590 Official transfers 59 Public sector 21 -71 Private sector 31 602 Balance of payments support 48 Overall balance Change in net official reserves (-increase) Exports, f.o.b. Imports, c.i.f. Current account Trade account Exports, Eo.b. Imports, c.i.f. Services Of which Interest on public debt Other factor payments Private transfers -2.9 -3.5 -5.3 -5.6 -4.5 -4.2 -4.3 -5.8 -7.1 -9.3 -9.7 -9.4 -9.5 -9.7 14.2 14.6 14.7 15.2 16.2 16.4 16.3 -20.1 -21.7 -24.0 -25.0 -25.6 -25.9 -26.0 -0.4 0.1 0.3 0.3 0.5 1.1 1.1 -0.9 -0.8 -0.7 -0.7 -1.0 -0.7 -0.7 -0.5 -0.5 -0.1 -0.3 0.0 0.1 0.1 3.4 3.4 3.6 3.9 4.4 4.3 4.2 Capital account 4.1 5.2 6.6 4.9 8.3 5.1 5.2 Official transfers 0.4 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 Public sector 21 -0.1 1.4 1.4 1.7 1.3 0.9 1.0 Private sector 3/ 3.8 3.3 4.9 2.8 6.6 3.8 3.8 2.0 2.2 2.8 2.3 3.6 3.7 3.7 Memorandum items: Gross reserves as percentage of imports of goods and services 41 Nominal GDP 15,673 17,771 19,409 18,272 19,080 19,976 20,008 Sources: Central Bank of Guatemala; and Fund staff estimates. I/ Assumes additional fiscal adjustment. 2/ Includes bond financing amounting to 0.5 percent of GDP to finance the restructuring of the banking system. 3/ Includes errors and omissions. It also includes privatization-related flows equivalent to 3.1 percent of GDP in 1998,O.g percent in 1999,0.8 percent in 2000, and 1.7 percent in 2001. 4/ Excludes claims on Nicaragua amounting to US$145.7 million up to 1999 and US$75.7 million in 2000. 188 -176 -630 -1,036 -1,016 -862 -840 -866 -1254 -1804 -1780 -1,803 -1,905 -1,931 2598 2847 2780 3082 3,269 3,269 -3852 -465 1 -4560 -4885 -5174 -5200 13 63 49 101 215 215 -228 -169 -181 -183 -119 -119 -140 -140 -88 -29 241 231 611 705 890 1,249 85 71 222 234 582 944 -131 -49 229 715 891 68 306 517 30 30 0 -190 28: 840 1,587 70 254 1,263 0 -142 3:: 850 1,015 70 183 762 0 -142 23 334 850 1,041 70 202 769 0 289 243 -125 725 175 175 -287 -243 125 -725 -175 -175 (Annual percentage change) -2 16.4 22.4 2;:; (In percentage of GDP) -2.3 10.9 -2.0 7.1 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-42- Table 10. Guatemala: Summary of Public External Debt 1996 1997 1998 1999 Prel. 2000 Proj. 2001 (In millions of U.S. dollars) Outstanding debt l/2/ Medium- and long-term debt Public sector Of which Bonds CORFlh’A Bank of Guatemala 2,319.9 2,620.2 2,886.S 3,304.7 3539.8 3,490.4 2,200.4 2,369.l 2,598.4 2,847.5 2,869.2 . 1,581.9 1,820.8 2,094.Z 2,369.7 2,406.g . . . 39.4 189.4 378.8 377.8 239.7 170.5 Short-term debt 179.5 251.1 Public sector 3/ 70.0 163.1 Bank of Guatemala 30.3 9.8 Arrears of interest 79.2 78.2 248.2 204.1 232.6 372.0 371.2 370.9 132.2 106.6 91.4 288.4 457.2 470.6 186.9 355.9 381.7 23.3 23.1 10.7 78.2 78.2 78.2 Debt flows Drawings Public sector Bank of Guatemala BOP support 139.5 634.9 624.3 744.4 761.6 91.5 603.6 594.1 744.4 761.6 0.0 1.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 48.0 30.1 30.2 0.0 0.0 Scheduled debt obligations 302.9 523.0 499.8 469.3 741.8 Interest 140.6 140.2 139.7 131.4 190.2 Public sector 99.8 119.4 125.2 121.4 181.3 CORPINA 20.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Bank of Guatemala 20.6 20.8 14.5 10.0 8.9 Principal 162.3 382.8 360.1 337.9 551.6 Public sector 114.7 297.0 305.9 312.0 536.4 CORFlNA 1.7 2.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Bank of Guatemala 45.9 83.8 54.2 25.9 15.2 Memorandum items: Stock of arrears, end of period 4/ Interest Principal 104.3 78.3 26.0 103.2 103.2 103.2 103.2 . . . 78.1 78.1 78.1 78.1 . . . 25.1 25.1 25.1 25.1 . . Outstanding debt Medium term Short term Of which Bank of Guatemala Debt flows Drawings Scheduled debt obligations Interest Principal Memorandum items: Stock of arrears, end of period Interest Principal Total debt service 10.9 16.5 Interest 5.1 4.4 (In percent of GDP) 15.2 14.7 14.0 13.3 1.1 1.4 2.0 1.4 0.9 3.6 3.2 4.1 4.0 3.4 1.9 2.9 2.6 2.6 3.9 3.4 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.7 1.0 0.7 1.0 2.2 1.9 1.8 2.9 2.7 0.7 0.6 0.5 0.4 0.2 0.1 14.9 13.4 1.5 1.1 0.5 0.4 0.1 14.5 4.0 10.4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 686.3 686.3 0.0 0.0 677.7 142.0 135.0 0.0 7.0 535.7 525.2 0.0 10.5 18.1 17.5 17.5 15.6 15.0 . . . 2.5 2.5 . . . 1.0 0.9 . . . 0.6 0.4 0.1 13.7 3.8 9.8 0.5 0.4 0.1 19.5 5.0 14.5 . . . . . . . . . 16.6 3.5 13.1 Principal 5.9 12.1 Sources: Bank of Guatemala ; and Fund staff estimates. I/ Includes arrears and valuation adjustments. 2/ In 2001 includes the equivalent to 0.5 percent of GDP to finance the restructuring of the banking system. 3/ Includes bonded debt. 4/ Includes CORFINA (Spain). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-43 - Table 11. Guatemala: Medium-Term Projections Passive Scenario Prel. Projections 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 Real GDP growth htlatiin ICOR 2.9 10.8 4.4 4.4 5.1 3.5 3.0 7.1 7.5 4.9 5.9 3.2 3.4 5.0 5.1 (In percent of GDP) 3.0 2.9 2.8 2.7 2.6 2.6 6.2 6.0 6.0 6.0 6.0 6.0 5.0 5.1 5.1 5.1 5.1 5.0 Savings and investment Gross domestic investment Public Of which Central govemment Private 12.7 14.0 17.4 17.4 15.4 15.0 14.6 14.2 13.8 13.4 13.0 3.2 4.1 5.1 5.5 4.1 4.3 4.0 3.7 3.4 3.1 2.8 2.7 3.9 4.7 5.3 3.8 4.2 3.9 3.6 3.3 3.0 2.7 9.5 9.9 12.3 11.9 11.3 10.7 10.6 10.5 10.4 10.3 10.2 National savings Public Of which Central government Private 9.8 10.5 12.1 11.8 10.9 IO.8 10.8 10.6 10.6 10.4 10.4 3.1 3.1 2.6 3.0 2.0 1.4 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.3 1.3 2.5 3.0 2.2 2.3 1 A 1.4 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.3 1.3 6.7 7.4 9.5 8.8 8.9 9.4 9.4 9.3 9.3 9.1 9.1 public sector Overall balance combined public sector Financing External (net) Domestic (net) Sale of assets -0.1 -0.6 -2.1 -3.1 -2.4 -1.9 -1.9 -1.8 -1.8 -1.7 -1.4 0.1 0.6 2.1 3.1 2.4 1.9 1.9 1.8 1.8 1.7 1.4 0.1 1.9 1.6 2.6 1.1 0.6 0.4 0.4 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.0 -1.3 -2.7 OS 0.6 -0.4 1.5 1.4 1.5 1.5 1.2 0.0 0.0 3.1 0.0 0.7 1.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Central government Revenues Of which Tax revenues Expenditures Of which Social and other peace related 9.2 9.2 9.6 10.3 10.3 10.7 10.6 10.6 10.6 10.6 10.6 8.7 8.8 8.7 9.3 9.6 9.8 9.8 9.8 9.8 9.8 9.8 9.4 10.1 11.9 13.3 12.4 12.3 12.3 12.3 12.3 12.3 12.0 3.2 4.3 5.8 6.3 5.9 58 5.7 5.6 5.5 5.3 5.0 External sector Current account Of which Exports, f.o.b. lmpoxts, c.i.f. Capital account Official capital and transfers Private sector -2.9 -3.5 -5.3 -5.6 -4.5 -4.1 -3.8 -3.6 -3.2 -3.0 -2.6 14.2 14.6 14.7 15.2 16.2 16.3 16.6 16.5 16.5 16.5 -20.1 -21.7 -24.0 -25.0 -25.6 -25.7 -25.6 -25.3 -25.0 -24.8 4.1 5.2 6.6 4.9 8.3 4.9 2.6 2.6 2.5 2.4 0.3 1.9 1.8 1.9 1.3 0.7 0.5 0.5 0.4 0.3 3.8 3.3 4.9 3.0 7.0 4.2 2.1 2.1 2.1 2.1 Gross international reserves I/ 2.0 2.2 2.8 2.3 3.6 3.6 2.9 2.3 1.9 1.6 16.6 -24.5 2.2 0.3 1.9 1.5 Source: Fund staBestimates. I/ In months of imports of goods and services. Excludes claims on Nicaragua amounting to US$145.7 million, up to 1999 and US$75.7 million in 2000. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 44 - Table 12. Guatemala: Medium-Term Projections Active Scenario Prel. Projections 1996 1991 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 Real GDP growth Inflation ICOR Savings and investment Gross domestic investment Public Ofwhich Central government Private National savings Public Of which Central gownment private Public sector Primary balance Overall balance combined public sector Financing External (net) Domestic (net) Sale of assets Central government RWZllUeS Of which Tax revenues Expenditures Of which Social and other peace related Interest payments External se&w Current aCCO”“t Of which Exports, f.o.b. hports, c.i.f. Capital account Official capital and transfers Private sector Gmss international reserves I/ Total public debt 21 External Domestic 2.9 10.x 4.4 4.4 7.1 3.2 5.1 1.5 3.4 3.5 3.0 4.9 5.9 5.0 5.1 (In percent of GDP) 3.0 4.0 4.7 5.1 5.5 5.5 6.0 4.3 3.9 3.5 3.2 2.8 5.4 4.3 3.7 3.5 3.3 3.4 12.7 14.0 17.4 17.4 15.4 16.3 17.0 17.5 17.9 18.3 111.5 3.2 4.1 5.1 5.5 4.1 4.7 5.4 5.7 5.8 5,s 5.x 2.7 3.9 4.1 5.3 3.8 4.3 5.0 5.3 5.4 5.4 5.4 9.5 9.9 12.3 11.9 11.3 11.6 11.6 11.g 12.1 12.5 12.7 9.8 10.5 12.1 11.8 10.9 12.0 12.9 13.4 13.9 14.5 15.0 3.1 3.1 2.6 3.0 2.0 3.x 4.8 5.1 5.2 5.2 5.3 2.5 3.0 2.2 2.3 1.6 3.4 4.1 3.9 4.0 4.0 4.1 6.7 7.4 9.5 8.8 x.9 8.2 8.1 x.3 8.7 9.3 9.7 2.5 1.1 -0.4 -1.3 -0.3 1.1 1.2 1.2 1.4 1.9 1.9 -0.1 -0.6 -1.x -2.9 -2.4 -1.2 -0.7 -0.4 -0.4 -0.3 -0.3 0.1 0.6 2.1 2.9 2.4 1.2 0.7 0.4 0.4 0.3 0.3 0.1 1.9 1.6 2.6 1.1 1.0 1.4 0.9 0.9 0.9 0.9 0.0 -1.3 -2.1 0.3 0.6 -1.5 -0.7 -0.5 -0.5 -0.6 -0.6 0.0 0.0 3.1 0.0 0.7 1.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 9.2 9.2 9.6 10.3 10.3 12.2 12.8 13.1 13.3 13.6 13.8 8.7 8.8 8.7 9.3 9.6 11.3 12.0 12.3 12.5 12.x 13.0 9.4 10.1 11.9 13.3 12.4 13.1 13.7 14.4 14.7 14.9 15.1 3.2 4.3 5.x 6.3 5.9 6.4 7.0 7.3 7.7 1.7 7.9 1.2 0.X 1.1 1.3 1.2 1.3 1.3 1.8 1.6 2.0 1.X -2.9 -3.5 -5.3 -5.6 -4.5 -4.3 -4.1 -4.1 -4.0 -3.x -3.5 14.2 14.6 14.7 15.2 16.2 16.3 17.5 18.6 19.5 20.5 21.5 .20.1 -21.1 .24.0 -25.0 -25.6 -26 .O -26.6 -27.2 .27.1 .28.5 .29.1 4.1 5.2 6.6 4.9 8.3 5.2 4.7 4.9 4.x 4.9 4.4 0.3 1.9 1.8 I .9 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.0 1 .o I .o 1.0 3.8 3.3 4.9 3.0 7.0 3.8 3.2 3.9 3.8 3.9 3.4 2.0 2.2 17.x 14.7 3.1 2.8 2.3 3.6 3.7 3.7 22.2 17.5 4.7 3.7 3.7 3.7 3.7 21.3 15.2 6.1 17.5 20.5 23.3 22.5 15.0 18.1 17.5 17.5 2.5 2.4 5.8 5.0 27.4 25.6 29.1 27.6 17.0 16.5 15.9 15.4 10.4 9.1 13.8 12.2 Source: Fund staff estimates. I/ In months of imports of goods and services. Excludes claims on Nicaragua amounting to UW45.7 million, up to I999 and lJS$75.7 million in 2000. 2/ Assumes an increase of 1 percent of GDP in 2001 and in 2002 to finance the cost of banking sector restructuring, an increase of 6 percent of GDP to capitalize the central bank, and an increase of 6 percent in 2005 to refer the social security system. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-45 - APPENDIX I I. II. III. IV. V. VI. Guatemala: Fund Relations (As of February 28,200l) Membership Status: Joined: December 28, 1945, Article VIII General Resources Account: SDR Million Percentage of Quota Quota 210.20 100.00 Fund holdings of currency 210.21 100.00 SDR Department SDR Million Percentage of Allocation Net cumulative allocation Holdings Outstanding Purchases and Loans: Financial Arrangements: VPe Stand-by Stand-by Stand-by Approval Expiration Date Date 12/l 8192 03/l 7194 10126188 02/28/90 0813 l/83 1213 l/84 27.68 100.0 7.52 27.2 None Amount Amount Approved Drawn (SDR Million) (SDR Million) 54.00 0.00 54.00 23.16 114.75 57.38 Projected Obligations to the Fund (SDR million; based on existing use of resources and present holdings of SDRs): Charges/interest Total Overdue Forthcoming 01/31/2001 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 0.0 0.9 0.9 0.9 0.9 0.9 0.0 0.9 0.9 0.9 0.9 0.9 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 46 - APPENDIX I VII. Exchange Rate Arrangements Since March 1994, Guatemala has an arrangement based on an interbank foreign exchange market in which authorized financial institutions buy and sell foreign exchange at market-determined rates. Financial institutions authorized to operate in the foreign exchange market include commercial banks, finance companies, and exchange houses. The central bank is supposed to intervene in the market only to moderate exchange rate fluctuations as well as to purchase foreign exchange to service its own external debt and on behalf of the public sector. As of March 20,200l the exchange rate in the interbank market was Q 7.70 per U.S. dollar. VIII. Last Article IV Consultation The last Article IV consultation was concluded by the Executive Board on December 16, 1999 (EBM/99/133, the relevant documents were SM/99/283 and SM/99/284). Guatemala is on the standard 12-month consultation cycle. Ix. Technical Assistance In September 1998, an STA mission assisted the Bank of Guatemala to improve the methodology and procedures for compiling the accounts of commercial banks. In March 1999, an STA mission provided technical assistance on national accounts and prices. In May 1999, an MAE mission assisted the authorities on assessing banking soundness. In June 2000, an STA mission assisted the authorities in developing a new CPI. In July and September 2000, a joint World Bank-IMF mission under the FSAP assisted the authorities in identifying the linkages between macroeconomic developments and performance and the health of the financial system, as well as strengths, risks, and vulnerabilities in the financial system. In October and December 2000, a joint World Bank-IMF mission visited Guatemala to help prepare draft legislation on central bank, banking sector, and banking supervision. In December 2000 an FAD mission provided technical assistance on tax policy and administration. In December 2000 an MAE mission provided assistance on payments system issues. On February 2001, MAE provided assistance on bank restructuring. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 47 - APPENDIX II Guatemala: Relations with the World Bank Group (As of February 28,200l) I. FINANCIALRELATIONS A. IBRD/IFC Relations (In millions of U.S. dollars) Disbursed Undisbursed Agriculture Education Electric power and other energy Of which Chixoy Environment Finance Structural adjustment Public sector management Social protection Telecommunications Transportation Urban development Water supply and sanitation Total IBRD 8.4 18.6 74.5 8.9 194.8 0.0 116.6 0.0 6.9 24.1 16.8 0.0 120.0 0.0 34.3 85.3 66.4 33.1 69.2 0.0 84.6 41.6 34.1 0.0 3.6 0.0 713.6 211.6 IFC investments 71.3 0.0 B. IBRD Loan Disbursements 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 Total net disbursement 55.9 4.3 15.2 56.0 38.2 5.9 Gross disbursements 68.9 16.5 29.5 70.5 51.4 8.3 Principal repayments 13.0 12.2 14.3 14.5 13.2 2.4 Source: World Bank. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-48 - APPENDIX II II. RECENT IBRD ACTIVITIES The last Country Assistance Strategy Report (CAS No. 18036) was prepared in June 1998, and focused on coordination with international donors to support the peace process. The report covered issues on: poverty reduction, enhanced economic growth, improved social cohesion for decision making, and modernization of the public sector. The most recent economic report is the Public Expenditure Review (No. 19617, February 2000). In the area of poverty reduction, a report is anticipated in August 200 1 based on a living standard measurement survey (LSMS). As of February 28,200l the IBRD portfolio contains 11 investment projects for a total disbursed balance of US$125.8 million. The portfolio is relatively new, as all projects have been approved after 1997. For FY 2001, the Basic Education project is currently under preparation. There are three projects under discussion for FY 2002: the Natural Resources Management Project, Social Infkastructure and Safety Nets, and the Integrated Financial Management System III (SIAF). Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public1. Sector - 49 - APPENDIX III Guatemala: Relations with the Inter-American Development Bank (As of March 8,200l) I. IDB Current Portfolio as of March 8,ZOOl (In millions of U.S. dollars) Social sectors 493.7 260.2 Community development 297.9 136.2 Credit to micro-enterprises 10.0 2.2 Environment 54.6 52.2 Housing 60.3 9.0 Education 15.4 5.1 Health 55.4 55.4 Physical infrastructure 305.0 158.4 Agriculture 33.8 31.8 Reform loans 147.8 23.2 Infrastructure and investment 82.6 1.7 Health 38.6 0.2 customs 1.4 0.3 Justice 25.0 20.8 Trade 0.3 0.3 Emergency assistance 40.0 2.7 Technology development 10.7 10.7 Total IDB loan disbursements Approved 1,030.9 Undisbursed 486.9 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 Disbursements 42.8 37.3 96.9 131.7 169.6 68.0 Amortization 36.2 47.1 42.6 54.7 46.4 46.0 Interest and charges 30.0 35.0 30.0 48.6 42.1 46.0 Net cash flow -23.4 -44.8 24.3 28.4 81.1 -24.0 Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 50 - APPENDIX III 2. Recent economic and sector missions The most recent economic strategy document on Guatemala (Country Paper) is scheduled to be discussed by the IDB Board of Directors in April 2001. The Bank’s priority, outlined in this document, is to help the government to reduce poverty. The Bank’s implementation strategy focuses on three pillars: (i) economic growth, macroeconomic stability, and competitiveness; (ii) human capital development, social protection, and equity; and (iii) modernization of the state and governance. In the last two years, the Bank approved loans to support technology development (US$l 1 million), to modernize the road system (US$150 million), to help municipal development (US$20 million), and to improve health services (US$55 million). The Bank has also supported the implementation of the Fiscal Pact, approved in May 2000, through a comprehensive technical cooperation program. About 90 percent of these projects are current, and are expected to meet their development objectives. In 2001, the Bank is preparing operations to support financial sector reform (USS 100 million), to strengthen the ministry of economy (US$5 million), to improve the environment in the Lake Atitlan area (US$20 million), and develop watershed management of the Lempa river (US$6 million). Other operations in preparation include programs in the areas of rural electricity, water in rural areas, watershed management, urban poverty reduction, housing, social protection, and micro- credit. Nonfinancial activities include the Bank’s coordination of the Consultative Group meetings with the next meeting tentatively scheduled for the first semester of 2001. The Bank is coordinating with the authorities a strategy to reduce poverty. 3. Tentative schedule of disbursements 2001 2002 2003 l/ Disbursements 115.4 130.0 140.0 Amortization 48.0 43.8 55.8 Interest and charges 47.0 72.0 74.0 Net cash flow 20.4 14.2 10.2 l/ Projected in the pipeline. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public-51- APPENDIX IV GUATEMALA-STATISTICALISSUES The Guatemalan authorities have made efforts to improve the macroeconomic statistical systems and are very cooperative in providing data to the Fund. However, important deficiencies remain in the areas of government fmance, balance of payments, money and banking, and national accounts and price statistics. As mentioned below, except for government finance, the authorities are beginning to address problems with help from STA. National accounts statistics Guatemala’s national accounts are produced by the central bank based on the 1953 U.N. System of National Accounts (SNA) with 1958 as the base year. The coverage of national accounts statistics is limited to (1) GDP at constant (1958) prices by sector; and (2) GDP at both constant and current prices, by components of the final demand. Data are published annually with preliminary data available with a lag of about three months. With the assistance of a U.N. statistical advisor, the central bank is implementing the 1993 SNA with 1998 as the base year. In this area, STA provided technical assistance in August 1997 with follow-up missions in January 1998, March 1999, and June 2000. With respect to the CPI, the NSI introduced a new CPI based on weights from a consumer expenditure survey conducted in 1999, and publication of the new CPI began in February 2001. Monetary authorities Data on the monetary authorities, commercial banks, and other financial institutions are being compiled on a monthly basis and sent regularly to the Fund for publication in the IFS. In 1998 a technical assistance mission recommended to the Bank of Guatemala measures to improve the data compilation of the financial system. Such measures included: (i) the compilation of monetary statistics for savings and credit cooperatives, and warehouses with financial activities; (ii) the revision of the composition of currency in circulation and quasi- money to include financial instruments that are registered as off balance items; (iii) the classification of domestic institutional units into central and local governments, nonfinancial public enterprises, and the financial corporations sub-sector (central bank, depository corporations, and other financial corporations), which will improve the coherence of monetary data with data from the balance of payments, fiscal sector, and national accounts; and (iv) the breakdown between residents and nonresidents in the monetary accounts. The central bank is currently in the process of implementing the recommended measures. Government finance statistics There are problems in reconciling the government public sector balance as measured I?om above the line from that as measured ti-om the financing flows (below the line). While progress has been made in adopting the new accounting framework for the budget, little work has been made in improving statistics of the social security and public enterprises. In fact overall public sector data are not compiled on a regular basis by the ministry of finance. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 52 - APPENDIX IV Balance of payments The balance of payments statistics are based on reports of foreign exchange transactions fi-om commercial banks and customs but with considerable lags. Guatemala follows the methodological guidelines of the fourth edition of the balance of payments manual and consequently the breakdown of the statistics is too aggregated preventing the recording of items such as the important portfolio investment transactions. The staff of the Bank of Guatemala is currently being trained to apply the methodology of the Fifth Edition of the Balance of Payments Manual. The authorities are implementing the recommendations of the 1997 and 1998 STA missions in the following areas: (i) improving the accuracy of the foreign exchange records by both the Bank of Guatemala and the reporting banks; and (ii) obtaining import, freight, and insurance data directly from customs documents. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 53 - APPENDIX IV Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 54 - APPENDIX V International Monetary Fund 700 lgth Street, NW Washington, D. C. 20431 USA Public Information Notice (PIN) No. FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE IMF Concludes Article IV Consultation with Guatemala On [May 2, 20011, the Executive Board of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) concluded the Article IV consultation with Guatemala.’ Background Despite some improvement in economic performance and structural reforms since the early 199Os, Guatemala continues to face serious problems of poverty and income distribution. Nearly 60 percent of the population lives below the poverty line, the income received by the richest quintile is 30 times the income of the poorest quintile, and 2% percent of farms take up 65 percent of agricultural land. The 1996 Peace Accords set a social agenda to address ingrained inequalities, institutional failures, and social barriers, through a substantial increase in public sector investment in social and basic infrastructure to be financed by higher tax revenue and donor support. However, implementation of the accords has suffered from weak execution capacity and lack of domestic resources due to insufficient political support. The main problem has been the insufficient tax revenue effort with the tax rate currently around 9% percent of GDP, well below the 12 percent of GDP for 2002 targeted in the accords. ’ Under Article IV of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement, the IMF holds bilateral discussions with members, usually every year. A staff team visits the country, collects economic and financial information, and discusses with officials the country’s economic developments and policies. On return to headquarters, the staff prepares a report, which forms the basis for discussion by the Executive Board. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Managing Director, as Chairman of the Board, summarizes the views of Executive Directors, and this summary is transmitted to the country’s authorities. This PIN summarizes the views of the Executive Board as expressed during the [Month, dd, yyyy] Executive Board discussion based on the staff report. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 55 - APPENDIX V Since assuming office in January 2000, the administration of President Alfonso Portillo has sought to restore macroeconomic stability and advance the implementation of the donor- supported Peace Accords. Real GDP growth slowed to 3 percent in 2000 (3’% percent in 1999) reflecting the tight stance of monetary policy, cuts in public sector investment, and the effect of adverse terms of trade. Inflation remained at about 5 percent-the lower end of the central bank’s target range of 5-7 percent-as the effect of a deceleration of aggregate demand and currency stability, noted below, more than offset rising oil prices. The external current account deficit narrowed to 4% percent of GDP in 2000 (5% percent in 1999) owing to slower economic activity and, the effect with a lag of the large real quetzal depreciation in 1999. The capital account surplus rose to 8% percent of GDP on the strength of private capital inflows attracted by high domestic interest rates and renewed confidence in the quetzal, and on account of the second installment of receipts from the privatization of the state telecommunication company (TELGUA). The overall deficit of the combined public sector (including the central bank) narrowed to 2% percent of GDP in 2000 (3 percent of GDP in 1999) due mostly to cuts in central government capital outlays to 3% percent of GDP (5% percent of GDP in 1999). Public sector savings fell to 2 percent of GDP in 2000 (2.8 percent of GDP in 1999) mostly on account of rising current expenditure associated with a 10 percent across-the-board increase in wages, a higher interest bill (including on open market operations), and the cost of the subsidy on electricity consumption. Tax revenue rose to 9.6 percent of GDP (9.3 percent in 1999) reflecting improved tax administration and the effect of tax measures introduced in June 2000. Such measures included: increasing the top income tax rate from 25 percent to 31 percent; widening the VAT base to include customs duties; and phasing out some exemptions. The central bank has maintained a tight stance of monetary policy initiated in August 1999. In early 2000, the central bank stepped up its placement of open market securities maintaining to strengthen the international reserves position Thereafter, as confidence in the quetzal improved, higher private capital inflows prompted the central bank to buy U.S. dollars and to mop up the resulting liquidity through open market operations. As a result, usable net international reserves rose by US$725 million in the year, bringing the stock to the equivalent of 117 percent of base money in December 2000 and the quetzal appreciated by about 5 percent in both nominal and real effective terms. Private sector financial savings rose by about 23 percent in the year, but credit to the private sector rose moderately. The financial sector remains fragile and there is an urgent need to cope with various weaknesses and vulnerabilities, which result from inadequate prudential regulations and supervisory oversight. Nonperforming loans stood at 13 percent of total loans at end-2000, with a substantial underprovisioning. Full provisioning would leave some banks with severe capital shortages. Furthermore, capital adequacy ratios and profitability have deteriorated. The recent Bank-Fund Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) mission found that some financial institutions were insolvent. The size of the problem is probably larger as an important segment of the financial sector consisting of offshore and off-balance-sheet Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 56 - APPENDIX V operations (estimated to be about the same size of the regulated system) are outside the reach of the official supervision and regulations. In addition, deposits from the public sector, especially the social security system, are supporting financial institutions. The authorities intervened three small banks in early 2001 and the monetary board has been discussing new drafts of laws of the central bank, banking sector, and banking supervision. Executive Board Assessment <Begin Typing Here> Public hformafion Notices (PINS) are issued, (i) at the request of a member country, following the conclusion of the Article IV consultation for countries seeking to make known the views of the IMF to the public. This action is intended to strengthen IMF surveillance over the economic policies of member countries by increasing the transparency of the IMF’s assessment of these policies; and (ii) following policy discussions in the Executive Board at the decision of the Board. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public- 57 - APPENDIX V Guatemala: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators (Annual percentage change) 1996 1997 1998 1999 Prel. 2000 Real economy (change in percent) Real GDP Consumer prices (end of period) National savings (in percent of GDP) Gross domestic investment (in percent of GDP) Public finance (in percent of GDP) Combined public sector deficit Central government deficit Money and credit (end-year, percent change) Net domestic assets I/ Of which Net claims on nonfinancial public sector Credit to private sector Liabilities to private sector Interest rates (end of period) Deposit rate (time deposits) Lending rate External sector (in percent of GDP) Trade balance Current account Change in net international reserves (in millions of U.S. dollars, increase -) Net international reserves (in millions of U.S. dollars) 2/ Gross reserves (in months of next year’s imports of goods and services) 2/ External public debt (as percentage of GDP) Real effective exchange rate (percent change, end-period; appreciation +) 2.9 4.4 5.0 3.6 3.0 10.8 7.1 7.5 4.9 5.1 9.8 10.5 12.1 11.8 10.9 12.7 14.0 17.4 17.4 15.4 -0.1 -0.6 -1.8 -2.9 -2.4 -0.2 -0.5 -2.3 -3.4 -2.4 10.8 9.1 9.7 11.4 11.0 -4.4 -6.7 -11.1 1.6 0.4 7.5 13.5 19.4 11.6 5.0 13.7 15.5 13.3 9.5 23.2 13.3 9.6 10.8 17.9 15.3 22.5 16.4 18.1 20.6 20.1 -5.8 -7.1 -9.3 -9.7 -9.4 -2.9 -3.5 -5.3 -5.6 -4.5 -176 -287 -243 125 -725 670 957 1200 1074 1799 2.0 2.2 2.8 2.3 3.6 15.2 14.7 14.9 18.1 17.5 12.8 8.1 -4.5 -6.0 4.9 Sources: Bank of Guatemala; Ministry of Finance; and Fund staff estimates. I/ In relation to the stock of liabilities to the private sector at the beginning of the period. 21 Excludes claims on Nicaragua amounting to US$145.7 million up to 1999 and US$75.7 million in 2000. Download Date: 9/25/2017 - 3:57 PMCurrent Classification: Available to the Public